A 77-year-old male patient was referred to our hospital after a computed tomography (CT) scan performed during a follow-up after prostate cancer surgery at another hospital revealed a gradually enlarging mediastinal tumor. He had a history of hypertension, no recurrence after prostate cancer surgery, right inguinal hernia surgery, no medications, occasional drinking, and smoking 20 cigarettes per day. Blood test results revealed the following: total cholesterol, 283 mg/dL; low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, 191 mg/dL; triglyceride (TG), 44 mg/dL, tumor-related marker carcinoembryonic antigen, 6.2 ng/mL; alpha-fetoprotein, 3.9 ng/mL; squamous cell carcinoma antigen, 1.9 ng/mL; cytokeratin 19 fragment, 4.5 ng/mL; soluble interleukin-2 receptor, 429 U/mL; pro-gastrin releasing peptide, 63.9 pg/mL; thyroid stimulating hormone, 1.770 μIU/mL; and human chorionic gonadotropin beta subunit, ≤ 0.1 ng/mL. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a cephalocaudally continuous multifocal cystic lesion from the posterior mediastinum to the retroperitoneum at the level of the 8th thoracic vertebra to the 2nd lumbar vertebra. The tumor was approximately 20 mm in maximum size, tortuous throughout, but about 180 mm in linear distance, with a predominantly fatty component inside, septal and partly contrast-enhanced components . Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a high-intensity T2-weighted image, which led to a radiological diagnosis of lipoma or well-differentiated liposarcoma . In addition, CT in the prone position showed that gravity widened the thoracic cavity, allowing resection from the thoracic cavity to the caudal side of the tumor; therefore, we decided to perform bilateral thoracoscopic surgery in the prone position . The patient underwent surgery in the prone position, with surgical monitors placed on the left, right, and caudal sides. Because the head end of the tumor was on the right side, a right thoracoscopic surgery was initiated. We placed a 12-mm port in the 7th intercostal space above the posterior axillary line, a 5-mm port in the 9th intercostal space, and a 12-mm port (camera) in the 8th intercostal space above the inferior scapular angle line. The tumor was continuous from the caudal side of the tracheal bifurcation beyond the diaphragm. The intraoperative diagnosis of thoracic duct cyst was made based on the presence of a thicker membrane structure than that of lipoma and hyperdifferentiated liposarcoma, firmer palpation with forceps, and the fact that it coincided with the location of the thoracic duct often seen during esophageal surgery. To prevent chyle leakage, a vessel-sealing system was used to dissect the area around the tumor, and inflow vessels were clipped as needed. All intercostal arteries adjacent to the tumor were preserved to maintain the blood flow to the Adamkiewicz artery. The right side of the diaphragmatic leg aortic hiatus was opened, and the tumor was dissected circumferentially to the point, where it continued to the left side of the aorta, completing the approach from the right thoracic cavity. The tumor was mostly located on the right side of the mediastinum; however, the most caudal side of the tumor in the abdomen was on the left side of the abdominal aorta. The right-sided approach had a poor view of the most caudal side, and we thought that it was necessary to add a left-sided approach due to ensure a better view of the most caudal side of the tumor for reliable clipping. Next, we performed a left thoracoscopic surgery. A 5-mm port was placed in the 7th intercostal space above the left midaxillary line, a 12-mm port in the 9th intercostal space, and a 12-mm port (camera) in the 8th intercostal space above the inferior angle of the scapula. The left side of the diaphragmatic leg aortic hiatus was opened, and the tumor was detached from the vertebral body and aorta to reach the caudal margin. At the caudal margin, the patient was clipped to the contiguous left cisterna chyli, and the dissected specimen was removed. A drain was placed at the midaxillary line of the 9th intercostal space on the patient's right side, and the surgery was completed . The operation lasted 4 h 30 min, and there was minimal blood loss. The excised specimen was a segmental tumor approximately 20 × 180 mm in size, and the surgical findings were suggestive of a thoracic duct cyst rather than a lipoma . Histopathological examination revealed a cystic structure with a fibrous wall and smooth muscle stained with alpha-smooth muscle actin around the cystic structure . The tumor appears to be segmented; however, the interior of the tumor was highly degenerated and no valves inherent to the thoracic duct were histopathologically observed. The cystic fluid was milky white with a high TG level of 1310 mg/dL. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of a thoracic duct cyst was made. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged 4 days postoperatively. A CT performed 13 months after surgery showed no recurrence.