A 74-year-old female presented from her skilled nursing facility after development of dark tarry stool from her ostomy and one episode of dark red hematemesis about two hours prior. She denied any abdominal pain. On arrival she was found to be hypotensive with mean arterial pressure of 50 millimeters of mercury and heart rate in the 120s. The patient had a complicated past medical history, including autoimmune hepatitis, AAA mesh repair in 2015 complicated by pulseless electrical activity arrest, fourth thoracic vertebrae infarct resulting in paraplegia, and neurogenic bladder requiring a chronic indwelling catheter. She also had a left hemicolectomy secondary to ischemic colitis, requiring an ostomy. The patient took 81 milligrams aspirin daily, and otherwise was not on any blood thinners. She had no history of peptic ulcer disease and was not on chronic nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications.
Immediately on arrival the patient was given one liter crystalloid with no improvement; therefore, one unit whole blood was given, followed by multiple units of emergency release packed red blood cells. While in the emergency department (ED), the patient’s ostomy bag was changed multiple times due to it being filled with dark red bloody stool. A CT abdomen and pelvis with intravenous (IV) contrast was performed but did not identify any obvious source of acute GI bleeding or acute pathology. Clear identification of the aortic graft occurred but showed no contrast extravasation or fistula ( and ).
After consultation with gastroenterology, the patient was admitted and rapidly transferred to the medical intensive care unit (ICU). By that time, she continued to have intermittent output from her ostomy. Shortly after admission she was administered vasopressor; her mental status declined, and she was intubated. The patient became too unstable for esophagogastroduoden-oscopy (EGD), and so CTA was performed. The CTA showed no active extravasation, but there was contrast within the distal colon and within parastomal hernia from the original contrasted study on pre-contrast images of the CTA . Interventional radiology was consulted, but they deferred arteriography given lack of active extravasation on CTA.
Hours later, the patient had increased pressor requirements, and there was renewed concern for active bleeding. While preparing for EGD, the patient’s metabolic acidosis worsened. Lactate increased to 12.5 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (reference range 2–4 mmol/L), white blood cell count 33 (4.5–11 × 109/L), and arterial blood pH 7.24. Vascular surgery consult voiced concerned for AEF. By this time the patient had rapidly declined in her course of illness and surgery was no longer a viable option. Due to decompensation with multisystem organ failure, further discussions were held with the patient’s two daughters, and the decision was made to move her to comfort care.