A 80-year-old Caucasian man presented to our hospital with acute right lower quadrant and periumbilical abdominal pain. He had no history of previous alcohol abuse, cholelithiasis, abdominal trauma or surgery, nor ingestion of raw food or medications. On admission, hematological tests revealed normal hematocrit and platelet counts, and an increased white blood cell count of 23,800 mm-3 (reference range: 4,000 to 10,000 mm-3) with 37.8% lymphocytes. The biochemical test results were within the reference range: ALT: 11 U/L (0 to 35), AST: 12 (0 to 35), glucose: 123, urea: 49, and creatinine: 1,1, Na: 142, K: 4.9, and serum amylase: 3157 UI/L (10 to 110). A computed tomographic (CT) abdominal scan was performed revealing necrosis over 30% of the pancreas and the presence of liquid in the peripancreatic cavity . With this finding, it was decided to perform an endoscopic ultrasound. The pancreatic parenchyma showed a slightly abnormally structured and irregular mass-like aspect on the head, compatible with an inflammatory process. The pancreatic body reflected a homogeneous pattern with an irregular and slightly dilated main pancreatic duct. In the neck of the pancreas, a cystic lesion with a dense aspect of 42.2 × 35.1 mm was revealed, probably related to a pseudocystic versus postnecrotic cavity. A gallbladder with hyperechogenic foci without an acoustic shadow floating inside, which is compatible with microlithiasis, was described. Endoscopy ultrasound fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA; by using lineal equipment and a 22G needle puncture) was performed over the injury in the pancreatic head . Samples obtained were submitted for cytohistological and microbiological evaluation. Pathology results showed small fragments of pancreatic parenchyma without evidence of malignancy surrounded by areas of necrosis and inflammation. Microbiological analysis reveals a monoculture isolating Citrobacter freundii by biochemical testing with an API 20E system (API Biomerieux SA, Marcy I'Etoile, France yielded the numerical code 1604572 for the isolate. According to the API 20E database, this represented a "very good identification" for C. freundii. An analysis using 16SrRNA gene by PCR-Sequencing method was performed to confirm the pathogen identity. 16SrRNA gene of strain and Citrobacter freundii (FN997639) has the nearest kinship and are located in the same phylogenetic tree.
Experiments with this bacterium in cell lines (cytopathic effect) and rats (i.p. injection) were performed and showed vacuolization of the cells as well as development of acute pancreatitis in the rats, demonstrating high levels of virulence of the strain. Susceptibility testing showed intermediate susceptibility to cefuroxim, although it was completely susceptible to ciprofloxacin. Oral ciprofloxacine (500 mg × 2) was administrated over six weeks. During treatment our patient progressed satisfactorily. A week after starting the treatment, he felt well and the abdominal pain gradually decreased. With the diagnosis of an acute necrotizing pancreatitis complicated with a pseudocystic percutaneous, he was discharged and referred to our Pancreatobiliary Unit. An abdominal ultrasound performed six months later revealed a complete resolution of the previous inflammatory process.