A 68-year-old female patient presented to the Emergency Department of our hospital with the chief complaint of abdominal pain and bloody stool for four days, worsening for two days.
Prior to admission, there was no obvious cause for abdominal stabbing pain, which continued to worsen and changed to dull pain in the left lower abdomen. She had experienced two episodes of dark red bloody stools (approximately 200 mL each time). After defecation, there was no improvement in abdominal pain, and these symptoms were accompanied by abdominal distension, nausea, and low back pain. The patient had no fever, vomiting, or other symptoms over the course of the disease.
The patient had a history of spontaneous epistaxis for 20 years and intermittent rectal bleeding for 10 years, which had been previously neglected in terms of sufficient attention and medical intervention.
Some of her family members also had a long-term history of spontaneous epistaxis .
During the physical examination, capillary dilatation was identified in the patient’s lips. The patient’s abdomen was distended with tenderness in the lower left quadrant with no signs of rebound tenderness. Bowel sounds were 10 times per minute. No other identifiable abnormalities were found.
The routine blood examination revealed hemoglobin of 115 g/L (normal range: 110-150 g/L), white blood cell count of 8.7 × 109 [normal range: (4-10) × 109], and 81.6% neutrophils (normal range: 50%-70%). A fecal occult blood test was positive. Coagulation function indexes showed varying degrees of decline.
A gastroscopy revealed scattered congestion and edema of the duodenal descending and transverse mucosa, while a colonoscopy showed a blue venous aneurysm or varicose in the ileum at 10 cm from the ileocecal valve. The cecum and ascending colon showed migrated veins and varicose veins . The mucosa was cracked and scale-like . Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of abdominal vessels revealed early mesenteric venous perfusion in the arterial phase that involved the right lower abdomen and left middle abdominal superior mesenteric veins. In the venous phase, there were tortuous vessels around the right upper abdominal intestine, which were connected to the superior mesenteric vein. Tortuous vessels were also visible in the posterior central abdomen . CT showed patchy contrast enhancement in multiple parts of the drainage/supply area of the superior mesenteric artery, mainly involving the jejunal and ileal branches . Whole-exome sequencing was conducted and a comprehensive analysis of the data was performed .