A 52-year-old male patient presented with a chief complaint of dyspnoea for several days and visited a neighbouring hospital with oedema in both lower legs 7 days before the surgery. He underwent PCI for a mid-right coronary artery lesion 13 years ago in the context of acute myocardial infarction and was administered antiplatelet drugs, including aspirin at 100 mg and prasugrel at 3.75 mg, without anticoagulant agents. He also was diagnosed with diabetes, dyslipidaemia, and hypertension. Echocardiography revealed no significant valvular disease or any formation of LV thrombus and marked cardiac function deterioration (EF: 30%). Coronary angiography was performed to find the cause. The CAG showed a new stenosis of mid-left anterior descending artery (LAD) and right coronary artery without elevated troponin or ST-segment on electrocardiography (ECG) ( and ). The laboratory results were as follows: creatinine 1.17 mg/dL (normal: 0.65–1.07 mg/dL), blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 40.6 mg/dL (normal: 8–20 mg/dL), d-dimer 2.0 μg/mL (normal: <1.0 μ/mL), protein C 117% (normal: 64–146%), and protein S 74% (normal: 67–164%). He was administered diuretics and β-blockers for acute heart failure. Elective PCI was initially planned, but on the following day of CAG which was 6 days after the hospitalization in the neighbouring hospital, transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed three mobile LV thrombi with normal LV size (LV internal end-diastolic and end-systolic diameters of 52 and 39 mm, respectively), moderately to severely reduced LV systolic function (EF of 44%), severe hypokinesis–akinesis of the inferoposterior wall (base–apex), severe hypokinesis of the anteroseptal–lateral wall (mid–apex), and diffuse hypokinesis of the LV free wall. The TTE demonstrated no signs of LV aneurysm. The thrombi were sized 35 × 10, 26 × 11, and 13 × 12 mm, respectively. He was transferred to our hospital for surgical consultation. Preoperative computed tomography showed three pedunculated thrombi ( and ). Monitoring the thrombi’s progress with oral warfarin was considered; however, given their extreme mobility and protruding nature, there was a high risk of embolism. Therefore, surgery was decided as the best course of action. We planned for two-vessel CABG and LV thrombectomy with VAC (STORZ IMAGE1 H3-Z, HOPKINSⅡ TELESCOPE, KARL STORZ, Germany). Cardiopulmonary bypass was established through median sternotomy using standard aortic and bicaval cannulation. The left atrium was accessed via the transseptal approach. An endoscope was used to confirm the apical thrombi, but owing to the difficulty in visualization, the approach was abandoned. Subsequently, the ascending aorta was transversely incised, and three LV apical thrombi were confirmed endoscopically using a transaortic approach . The thrombi were carefully removed with forceps. The thrombi were fragile and were easily detached from the LV wall. Coronary revascularization was achieved by grafting saphenous vein grafts and the left internal mammary artery to the posterior descending artery and LAD, respectively. Postoperative pathological examination showed fresh thrombi with no signs of organization. No neoplastic changes or malignant findings were observed. Oral anticoagulant (OAC) therapy was initiated with warfarin [target international normalized ratio (INR) = 2–3]. On POD 7, we confirmed the complete removal of the LV thrombi by TTE and computed tomography , and the patient was discharged home in an ambulant condition at 16 POD. He is currently under follow-up care at his previous hospital. Ejection fraction was improved (LVEF: from 30 to 48%), and LV diastolic and systolic diameters were reduced (from 54/47 to 51/40) 3 months postoperatively, with no new intraventricular thrombosis.