A 7-year and 2-month-old Chinese boy was the second child of nonconsanguineous, healthy parents. The family history of the patient was unremarkable. The patient was born at 40 weeks of gestation with a birth weight of 3.6 kg, a body length of 50 cm and a head circumference of 31 cm. His motor development was slightly delayed. He began to gain head and neck stability at 4 months old and rolled over at 10 months old, and he could walk alone at the age of 18 months. His speech development was severely delayed. Several facial anomalies, including a broad forehead, short philtrum, micrognathia and prominent lobule of the ear, were observed .
At the age of 9 months, the patient was occasionally observed to have paroxysmal shaking of his head and limbs with transient duration immediately after waking. Because there was no obvious abnormality in Electroencephalogram (EEG) and brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), the observation was not considered serious, and no special treatment was given. At the age of 1 year and 10 months, the patient’s head nodding movements became increasingly obvious, and he was admitted to our department. A four-hour sleep-deprived EEG revealed hypsarrhythmia and typical epileptic spasms . Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with West syndrome. A slight expansion of the left lateral ventricle was observed in the brain MRI; however, no further abnormal findings were noted. Vitamin B6 was administered intravenously at a dose of 10 mg/kg.d for 7 days, but its effect was insufficient. Because adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) and Vigabatrin could not be acquired, vitamin B6 was substituted for a gradual titration of valproate (VPA) at an initial dose of 10 mg/kg.d, increasing to 30 mg/kg.d. The epileptic spasms were completely controlled over the following 8 months. However, 8 months later, epileptic spasms recurred in the patient, and tonic seizures were monitored by video EEG at the same time . Because ACTH treatment was refused by his parents, levetiracetam (LEV), at an initial dose of 10 mg/kg.d, increasing to 50 mg/kg.d, along with the previous VPA therapy were begun, but their effects were insufficient. One and a half month later, ACTH was administered intravenously; however, serious oedema prompted discontinuation of the treatment. Because the seizures were persistent, LEV was substituted for a gradual titration of both topiramate (TPM), at an initial dose of 1 mg/kg.d increasing to 8 mg/kg.d, and clonazepam (CZP), at an initial dose of 0.03 mg/kg.d increasing to 0.2 mg/kg.d. The seizures were gradually controlled 5 months later. By the time the patient was 3 year and 5 month old, epileptic spasms recurred, and, subsequently, a ketogenic diet was administered. Instead of the expected improvement, we observed an increase in the seizure frequency to 10 series per day during the waking period. Due to lack of efficacy,the parents refused the ketogenic diet 1 month later, and other antiepileptic drugs such as zonisamide or lamotrigine were also refused by the parents. VPA and TPM combined with CZP therapy were continued complying with medication regimen, but the seizures were out of control till now. Neurodevelopmental plateauing or regression was accompanied by frequent epileptiform activity. He had mild hypotonia and severe intellectual disability, at present, the patient can’t take care of himself and he can’t pronounce two meaning words until now. At the age of 7 years and 2 months, epileptic spasms, tonic seizures and atypical absence status epilepticus were monitored by video EEG , and V-EEG monitoring showed electrical status epilepticus during sleep (ESES). In this patient, changes in EEG monitoring eventually suggested Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS).
Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA)、hole-exome sequencing (WES) and Sanger sequencing were performed by Running Gene Inc. (Beijing, China) using their standard process, which is available in a previous report . In our case, the CMA was normal, the variant c.3605G > C (GRCh37/ hg19, NM_020952) of TRPM3 was identified in the patient, the mutation was absent in the parents, suggesting that this mutation was de novo. This variation would cause a substitution, p.S1202T. Since this variation is a de novo variation carried by neither of the parents (PS2) and is also a variation that is absent from controls (PM2), it was classified as “likely pathogenic” according to the ACMG guidelines.