In 1999, a 62-year-old hypertensive Caucasian man was referred to our out-patient endocrinology clinic following the finding of reduced TSH levels: 0.1 µU/ml (n.v. 0.27-4.2) associated to slightly decreased FT4 levels: 0.6 ng/dl (n.v. 0.7-1.7) during routine follow-up examinations for asthenia. The general practitioner had advised a 99Tc-pertechnetate thyroid scan, which showed a left autonomous nodule with inhibition of the surrounding parenchyma, and a thyroid ultrasonography (USG), which revealed a multinodular goiter (nodule diameter range: 15-25 mm). The patient's anamnesis was unremarkable apart from right cryptorchidism (only the left testis was palpable in the scrotum). Given the hormonal findings, a general basal assessment of pituitary function was performed. This revealed partial hypopituitarism (HYPO): hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (undetectable LH <0.5 IU/L and reduced FSH: 1.5 IU/L levels, undetectable testosterone levels: <0.2 ng/ml (n.v. 3-9)) and confirmed secondary hypothyroidism (reduced TSH levels: 0.2 µIU/ml associated to slightly decreased FT4 levels: 0.6 (n.v. 0.7-1.7) and low-normal FT3 levels), and undetectable GH with markedly reduced IGF-I levels: 15 ng/ml (n.v. 100-250 ng/ml for patient's age). Cortisol levels were normal: 14 µg/dl, whereas PRL levels were increased: 182-200 ng/ml (monomeric form) (n.v. 3-20). Given the clear diagnosis of partial hypopituitarism by means of baseline hormonal evaluation, dynamic pituitary assessments were not performed. Contrast-enhanced MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) examination of the brain showed a large pituitary macroadenoma (vertical diameter 2.2 cm), which invaded the right cavernous sinus, the sphenoidal sinus and the optic apparatus . Visual field examination was normal. Owing to the possible discrepancy between PRL levels and the volume of the tumor, serial dilution of the patient's serum was performed in order to avoid the hook effect, and a final PRL level of 1773 ng/ml was obtained. A diagnosis of HYPO secondary to a large macroprolactinoma was eventually made. A targeted anamnesis ascertained erectile dysfunction and a reduction in libido over the previous two years. In agreement with the neurosurgeon, medical treatment with cabergoline at the initial dose of 1 mg/week was begun. In addition, replacement therapy with L-thyroxine (75 µg/day) and parenteral depot testosterone (250 mg i.m./3 weeks) was started, which normalized FT4 and testosterone levels over time. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of thyroid nodules disclosed a cytological pattern compatible with goiter. PRL levels two months after the start of therapy were significantly reduced: 377 ng/ml (Δ%: −78%) in comparison with the baseline, and MRI showed a slight shrinkage of the macroadenoma (not shown). Cabergoline was progressively increased over time, up to a maximal dosage of 4 mg/week; PRL levels declined further but did not normalize (range: 63-99 ng/ml). Libido and sexual capability improved. MRI documented a progressive significant reduction in the pituitary mass (intrasellar remnant) over the first two years ; thereafter, the intrasellar remnant enlarged slightly (PRL levels at that time were 99 ng/ml). Cortisol levels (14-18 µg/dl, normal) and IGF-I levels (<30 ng/ml, reduced) remained unchanged. The combination of (slight) tumor enlargement and lack of normalization of PRL levels on medical therapy prompted us to perform stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) (total dose 2000 cGy). A few months later, thrombocytopenia occurred (35000-47000/mm3). Bone marrow evaluation by means of iliac bone biopsy showed normal hematopoiesis; antiplatelet autoantibodies were negative. Thrombocytopenia was managed conservatively with short-term cortisone therapy. The platelet count increased over time, but remained low (last value: 98000/mm3). Over the 5 years following SRS, PRL levels progressively declined, approaching normalization (last PRL levels: 22 ng/ml), on high-dose cabergoline (3 mg/week), and the tumor volume remained stable . Since high-dosages of the dopamine-agonist drug were used, an echocardiogram was performed; this proved normal. Cortisol levels remained normal as well as FT4 and FT3 levels on L-thyroxine replacement therapy. Thyroid USG did not show significant variations in thyroid nodule volume over the years. At the end of 2007, thyroid hormone assay on L-thyroxine 75 µg/day surprisingly showed FT4 levels in the upper normal range: 1.7 ng/dl (n.v. 0.7-1.7), increased FT3 levels: 5.8 pg/ml (n.v. 1.8-4.6) and suppressed TSH levels: <0.01 µIU/ml. The patient also complained of palpitations. Although L-thyroxine was tapered to 50 µg/day, FT3 levels were unmodified two months later; the drug was therefore withdrawn and moderate FT3 (5.4 pg/ml) hyperthyroidism (with FT4 levels in the upper normal range: 1.5 ng/dl) was confirmed; thyroid auto-antibodies and anti-TSH-receptor antibodies were negative. A thyroid scan showed the initial picture (seen 8 years earlier) of a left autonomous nodule . As the patient refused surgery or radioiodine therapy, low-dose (5 mg/day) methimazole was started. This normalized FT3 levels, whereas TSH levels remained low. The patient is scheduled for regular hormonal and morphological follow-up.