The patient was a 19-year-old male who was born late preterm at 36 + 5 weeks of gestation to healthy non-consanguineous Taiwanese parents. His birth weight was 3,410 grams, and his Apgar score was 8 at 1 min and 9 at 5 min. Multiple congenital abnormalities, including left thumb polydactyly, webbed neck, and facial dysmorphism, were detected at birth. A series of ultrasound examinations showed 5-mm patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and left ectopic kidney located at the left side of the pelvis. The patient underwent surgical ligation for hemodynamic significant PDA smoothly without complications.
The patient had neurodevelopmental delay with intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder. Several examinations were performed during his early childhood to determine the possible underlying causes. Chromosome analysis revealed a 46, XY karyotype. The results of tandem mass screening for metabolic disease and fragile X syndrome were normal. The patient had a healthy older sister and a family history of thalassemia. No chromosomal abnormality, neurodevelopmental disorder, autoimmune disease, or liver disease were noted among his family members. Throughout his childhood, especially before 10 years of age, the patient was admitted multiple times to our hospital, mostly because of bronchopulmonary infection. Laboratory examinations during these hospital stays revealed mild increases in his aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) levels, which first became apparent when the patient reached the age of 3 years . Therefore, ceruloplasmin levels were assessed and found to be within the normal range at 30.8 mg/dl (normal range: 18–45 mg/dl). As he grew older, he was less frequently hospitalized; however, after he turned 13 years old, he began to experience unexplained pruritus. Over the past two years, mild postural tremor and ataxia were also observed.
The patient was brought to our hospital in 2022 because his liver enzyme levels were discovered to be elevated during health checkups. Upon examination, he was found to be anicteric, and his spleen and liver were discovered to be enlarged on palpation. Abdominal sonography was therefore arranged. The sonography report revealed hepatosplenomegaly with a coarse liver and globular changes in the liver indicative of liver cirrhosis. The patient was referred to our gastrointestinal department for further examination. The results of the liver function tests were as follows: AST level, 105 U/L (normal: ≤34 U/L); alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level, 66 U/L (normal: ≤36 U/L); gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) level, 670 U/L (normal: <71 U/L); ALP level, 237 U/L (normal: <122 U/L); total bilirubin level, 1.1 mg/dl (normal: <1.2 mg/dl); direct bilirubin level, 0.5 mg/dl (normal: <0.4 mg/dl); albumin level, 3.7 g/dl (normal: >3.5 g/dl); and ammonia level, 84 µg/dl (normal: <123 µg/dl). The prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time were normal. The patient's white blood cell count and differential count revealed nonspecific findings. The results of virological tests, including those for hepatitis A–C viruses, Epstein–Barr virus, and cytomegalovirus, were negative. His alpha-1 antitrypsin, ceruloplasmin, and ferritin levels were normal. The likelihood of drug-induced liver injury appears to be extremely low after a comprehensive review of the patient's medication history. Given the presence of an unidentified hepatitis with cholestasis complicated by liver cirrhosis, the patient was admitted to our ward for further evaluation.
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) was performed to diagnose possible biliary tract disease. The MRCP revealed masses occupying both lobes of the liver, indicating the presence of severe macronodular cirrhosis. The patient had no bile duct stricture or dilatation and no steatosis. Moreover, the large vessels were patent without any obstruction. Triphasic liver computed tomography accompanied by a thorough study of tumor markers indicated a low possibility of hepatocellular carcinoma. Although the patient had severe liver cirrhosis, he did not display clinical or imaging features of portal hypertension. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed no esophageal varices. Immunoblot analysis to detect autoimmune liver diseases revealed negative results for circulating autoantibodies, including AMA-M2, anti-soluble liver antigen/liver–pancreas antibodies, anti-liver cytosol type 1 antibodies, anti-liver-kidney microsome type 1 antibodies, anti-smooth muscle antibodies; antinuclear antibodies; and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies. Immunoglobulin (IG) tests revealed slightly elevated IgG levels (1,840 mg/dl, normal: <1,600 mg/dl), with an IgG1 predominance (1,190 mg/dl, normal: <1,011 mg/dl). The patient's IgG4, IgM, and IgA levels were normal. Tests to diagnose Wilson's disease (WD) revealed an increase in the patient's 24-h urinary copper levels, with levels of 57 µg/day and 1,290 µg/day being detected before and after the penicillamine challenge test, respectively (normal: ≤40 µg/day). His serum copper level was also elevated (159 µg/dl, normal: <140 µg/dl). Ophthalmological examination revealed no Kayser–Fleischer rings. Further sequencing of the ATP7B gene revealed normal findings, indicating a low possibility of WD. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed increased signal intensity on T1WI over the bilateral globus pallidus, indicative of hepatocerebral degeneration, which may be caused by cholestasis- and liver cirrhosis-related manganese deposition. The serum manganese level was therefore measured and was found to have slightly increased to 2.6 µg/L (normal: <2.4 µg/L).
Due to the lack of an accurate diagnosis, a liver biopsy was performed. Pathological examination revealed advanced liver cirrhosis with a paucity of interlobular bile ducts; this finding was confirmed by the results of immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for CK7 and a marked increase in copper deposition in the periportal areas . On the basis of these findings, the patient was considered to have stage IV PBC according to the Ludwig classiﬁcation. Although diffuse and abundant copper deposition was also noted, WD could be ruled out as it is not associated with marked bile duct loss. Interface hepatitis was also noted. Additional IHC staining for CD138 revealed clusters of positive cells (plasma cells) in several portal tracts. Staining for CD20, CD4, and CD8 revealed a moderate-to-marked increase in positive cell infiltration in the portal tracts. These findings were suggestive of significant inflammatory activity and coexisting AIH. However, when progressing to advanced cirrhosis, histopathological findings from different diseases may exhibit similar characteristics. As a result, whole exon sequencing was conducted, which did not identify any pathogenic variant loci associated with potential monogenic hereditary cholestatic liver disorders upon analysis, including the JAG1 and NOTCH2 gene for Alagille syndrome, and the ABCB4 and TJP2 gene for progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3 and type 4.
After the diagnosis was made, the patient was administered 13 mg/kg/day ursodeoxycholic acid and 0.5 mg/kg/day prednisolone. Follow-up examinations revealed marked improvements in both cholestasis and liver enzyme levels after 1 month of treatment; these levels have been maintained to date (i.e., one year after the initial treatment). A decrease in the serum copper and manganese levels was also observed . Clinically, the patient demonstrated improvement in postural tremor, ataxia and pruritus. Notably, repeated testing of circulating autoantibodies revealed that the patient was positive for AMA-M2 4 months after the treatment. Nevertheless, he was again negative for AMA-M2 6 months after the treatment . To determine the possible underlying causes of his multiple congenital abnormalities, array comparative genomic hybridization was performed. The results revealed a 3.89 Mb de novo deletions of 14q24.1q24.2, including 22 Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) genes: RAD51B, ZFP36L1, ACTN1, DCAF5, EXD2, GALNT16, ERH, SLC39A9, SUSD6, SRSF5, SLC10A1, SMOC1, SLC8A3, COX16, SYNJ2BP, ADAM21, ADAM20, MED6, TTC9, MAP3K9, PCNX1, and SIPA1L1.