A 65-year-old woman was diagnosed with bladder cancer 6 years earlier, for which she had undergone transurethral resection six times. Oophorectomy for a right ovarian cyst and total hysterectomy for endometriosis had been performed under general anesthesia at the ages of 30 and 35 years, respectively. During the current surgery, she underwent radical cystectomy with creation of an ileal conduit and removal of pelvic lymph nodes. Her past history of multiple laparotomies resulted in intestinal adhesions and massive intraoperative bleeding. The total blood loss during surgery was 5340 ml. She received 1200 ml of autologous blood transfusion, and subsequent transfusion of 560 ml of red cell concentrates and 1200 ml of fresh-frozen plasma in the operation room. The surgical time was 6 h and 49 min. Administration of the antibiotic isepamicin (ISP: 200 mg) was started to treat a fever of 40 °C immediately after moving her to the ward. However, she developed a shock state 16 h after the operation . Her systolic blood pressure decreased to approximately 70 mmHg and urine output was less than 25 ml/h. Infusions of Ringer’s solution, albumin preparations, immunoglobulins, and vasopressors were started because we suspected septic shock. Administration of imipenem/cilastatin sodium (IPM/CS: 500 mg) was added to ISP because we thought that more intensive empiric antimicrobial therapy was necessary. Two days after the operation, she was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) because of deterioration in her respiratory and circulatory condition. Soon after moving her to the ICU, a subcutaneous hemorrhage-like skin rash appeared and extended rapidly over her left side . On admission to the ICU, blood tests indicated severe metabolic acidosis, liver and renal dysfunction, and signs of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) . Her APACHE II (Acute physiology and chronic health evaluation) and SOFA (Sequential organ failure assessment) scores at this time were 24 and 14, respectively. An X-ray examination and computed tomography (CT), which was performed on postoperative day 2, indicated uninterrupted massive emphysematous tissue from her left chest to lower abdomen . Suspecting necrotizing fasciitis or gas gangrene, we performed emergency fasciotomy. Subsequently, multidisciplinary treatment, including mechanical ventilation, hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT), polymyxin B-immobilized fiber column direct hemoperfusion (PMX-DHP), and continuous hemodiafiltration (CHDF), was started. Antibiotic therapy was changed to clindamycin (CLDM: 900 mg), vancomycin (VCM: 1000 mg), and IPM/CS . Gram-positive bacilli, but not Gram-negative bacteria, were detected by microscopic examination of blister fluid aspirated from the skin rash. Moreover, a culture test detected Clostridium perfringens (C. perfringens) in a wound abscess that was removed during the emergency fasciotomy. Based on these observations, she was diagnosed with gas gangrene. HBOT was performed on the first and second ICU days. We had to abandon plans for a second fasciotomy because the area that required treatment was too large. CHDF was continued through her ICU stay, although PMX-DMP was performed only once on the first ICU day. Her APACHE II and SOFA scores continued to be flat during the first 2 weeks, indicating that the initial treatment prevented further clinical deterioration . However, she suffered from secondary infection from the 3rd week onward due to infection with multiple pathogenic bacteria, including Candida albicans and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, as shown in Table . Finally, she died of sepsis 38 days after the operation in spite of prompt diagnosis and intensive therapy for the gas gangrene.