A symptomatic 69-year-old woman (NYHA functional class III) underwent a transthoracic echocardiographic (TTE) examination to assess her left ventricular function. Her past history included hypercholesterolaemia, hypothyroidism and paroxystic atrial fibrillation. A DDD type pacemaker had been implanted due to sick sinus syndrome one year previously. She had marked limitation of physical activity. She was comfortable at rest but breathless on mild exertion. Physical examination revealed a pansystolic murmur of grade 3/6 audible in the mitral area. An electrocardiogram was completely normal. Laboratory examinations were as follows: haemoglobin 12.3 g/dl, glycaemia 72 mg/dl, urea 37 mg/dl, creatinine 0.9 mg/dl, calcium 8.7 mmol/l, phosphate 3.4 mmol/l, serum cholesterol 217 mg/dl and tryglicerides 148 mg/dl.
TTE revealed an echodense spherical, tumour-like mass (3.0 × 3.5 cm) located in the peri-annular posterior region close to the atrial side of the posterior mitral leaflet with an internal echolucent area, without acoustic shadowing . On Doppler colour flow mapping, moderate to severe mitral regurgitation was seen in the left atrium, but no obstruction to the diastolic transmitral flow was found . The left ventricle was hypertrophic (interventricular septum at end of diastole was 16 mm, left ventricular posterior wall at end of diastole was 14 mm) without wall motion abnormalities. The left atrium was dilated (anteroposterior diameter 48 mm). The right ventricle and right atrium were normal and the pacemaker lead was confirmed as inserted normally. The aortic valve was tricuspid and showed some calcification with mild stenosis and regurgitation.
Transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was performed to better evaluate the mass. TEE confirmed the previous findings, contributing more precise and detailed imaging regarding the internal echolucent area and showing the absence of systolic flow in the cavity. A multislice computed tomography (CT) scan of the heart was also performed, and the presence of a calcified round mass corresponding to the mitral valve was confirmed. The patient, being over 50 years old, underwent coronary angiography to exclude coronary artery disease, and then underwent cardiac surgery.
At surgery, the nodular mass was lanced with a longitudinal section along the mitral annulus for all its length, and the caseous white material that filled the centre of the mass was drained. Posterior ring annuloplasty with a GORE-TEX® tube was performed with the aim of improving valve competence.
Repeat TTE, performed 7 days after surgery, showed a smaller round mass with calcified walls and a smaller internal anechogenic area as a result of the drainage . Trivial mitral regurgitation was seen . The patient was discharged after seven days with symptomatic improvement and was sent to a rehabilitation facility. Further follow-up study will be necessary as periodic assessment is important in this condition.