A 71-year-old woman was referred to the clinic for persistently isolated elevated serum AST which was first detected 6 months ago during work-up for gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and hepatosteatosis. She complained of reflux and dysphagia and was being successfully treated for grade A erosive esophagitis with proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) and bismuth oxide. She did not have any abdominal pain, myalgias or jaundice and her clinical exam was otherwise unremarkable. She had no history of alcohol abuse. Her past medical history included hypertension, dyslipidaemia, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and spinal osteoarthritis. She was taking the following medications: Esomeprazole, Pancreatic enzymes, Bismuth oxide, Itopride, Silymarin, Valsartan/Hydrochlorothiazide, Valsartan/Amlodipine, Rivaroxaban, Zopiclone, Vinpocetine, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), Nitrofurantoin as needed for urinary tract infection (UTI), “Aterolip” (herbal medication for dyslipidaemia).
Her laboratory work-up showed elevated AST at 578 U/l (reference interval ≤40 U/L), while alanine aminotransferase (ALT), gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT), alkaline phosphatase (AP), creatine kinase (CK), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and bilirubin test results were normal. Coagulation work-up and albumin were not indicative of any abnormalities. Earliest medical records revealed that 10 years ago the activity of AST was normal, but 6 months ago markedly increased at 118 U/l, and continued to increase up to 653 U/l over the following 2 months . The rest of patient’s laboratory work-up was unremarkable: complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, ferritin, myoglobin, ceruloplasmin, creatinine, sodium, potassium and ionized calcium were normal. Work-up for autoimmune hepatitis included antinuclear antibodies and antimitochondrial antibodies which were both negative and hepatitis C serology, as well as, hepatitis B surface antigen were negative. Tissue transglutaminase antibodies for celiac disease were negative. Faecal test for occult blood was negative. Urinalysis and urine sediment microscopy were normal. Radiographic studies included abdominal ultrasound which showed signs of hepatic and pancreatic steatosis but was otherwise unremarkable. Liver elastography was also done and was consistent with hepatosteatosis, the results were as follows: 4.0 kPa, CAP – 249 dB/m, IQR/med – 15%, IQR – 0,6. A trial of ursodeoxycholic acid proved to be ineffective. Discontinuation of PPI and herbal medication “Aterolip” also had no effect on AST activity.
Following extensive work-up with mostly negative results, macro-AST syndrome was hypothesised. AST activity in serum was evaluated spectrophotometrically using an enzymatic International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine (IFCC) (NADH, pyridoxal-5’-phosphate) method by Architect i2000SR (USA, Illinois, Chicago). The sample was also assessed for the presence of macro-AST using PEG assay. 25% PEG solution was mixed with patient’s serum in equal parts and vortex mixed for 1 minute. After mixing, centrifugation was performed at 554 x g for 10 minutes using Sigma 1-14 microcentrifuge (Germany, Osterode). Finally, supernatant was carefully removed from precipitate and used for post-PEG AST activity assay. Simultaneously, 100 µl of serum was mixed with 100 µl physiological saline solution and the AST activity was measured. Patient’s AST activity was 653 U/l, post-PEG precipitation AST activity (ASTactivityPEG) was 10 U/l and AST activity in saline diluted sample (ASTactivitySAL) was 562 U/l. Effect on PEG precipitation can be defined by the recovery after precipitation :
Recovery (%) = ( ASTactivity PEG/ ASTactivity SAL) × 100 = (10/562) x 100 = 1,78%
% PEG precipitation activity (%PPA) was also calculated:
%PPA = 100 × [(ASTactivitySAL – ASTactivityPEG)/ASTactivitySAL] = 100 × [(562-10)/562] = 98,22%
Post-PEG precipitation AST activity, PEG recovery and PPA results indicated presence of macro-AST.