A 35-year-old woman presented with a 1-year history of a progressively growing painless mass in the left temporal area. Physical examination revealed a firm, nontender palpable mass in the left temporal area just superior to the zygomatic arch. The lesion exhibited no superficial ulceration or cutaneous erosion. All laboratory data were normal. Initial work-up with ultrasound (US) (Accuvix XG; Medison, Seoul, Korea) revealed a somewhat ill-demarcated, lobulated hypoechoic mass 3.0 × 2.5 × 1.5 cm in dimensions located subcutaneously in the left temporal region . Color Doppler US revealed moderate internal vascularity, without pulsatility . To further evaluate the lesion, the patient was examined using a 3.0-Tesla MR scanner (Verio; Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) 10 days later. The mass yielded a hypointense-to-isointense signal relative to that of the adjacent muscles on T1-weighted imaging , and a heterogeneous mixture of isointense and hyperintense signals (with a central dark spot) on T2-weighted imaging . After intravenous administration of gadolinium contrast material, the mass exhibited heterogeneous intense enhancement with the nonenhancing portion indicating internal necrosis . The mass was located in the left temporal scalp, between the temporal fascia and the temporalis muscle, and had a multilobulated margin. T2-weighted and contrast-enhanced imaging revealed diffuse, high-level signaling abnormalities extending from the mass into the surrounding soft tissue, spreading along the temporal fascia and the temporalis muscle. However, there was no evidence of bone or bone marrow involvement.
On the basis of the clinical and radiological characteristics, the lesion was considered to be a malignant tumor originating from soft tissue. An incisional biopsy was performed. Histologically, the tumor cells were aggregated in nodules exhibiting central necrosis, thus appearing pseudogranulomatous in nature . The tumor cells were epithelioid, with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, vesicular chromatin, and small nucleoli . Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the tumor cells stained positive for both mesenchymal markers [smooth muscle actin and cluster of differentiation (CD) 34 glycoprotein ] and epithelial markers [cytokeratin (CK) and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) ]. The tumor cells were not immunoreactive for CD 31, S-100 protein, Melan-A, MyoD1, desmin, or CD 68. The lesion was pathologically diagnosed as an epithelioid sarcoma.
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT (18FDG-PET/CT) (Biograph Truepoint 40; Siemens, Berlin, Germany) was used to stage the tumor and revealed focally intense FDG uptake but no regional lymph node or distant metastasis. The patient underwent total surgical resection of the tumor followed by postoperative irradiation. In cross-section, the tumor was a pale gray solid mass containing hemorrhagic and necrotic portions. There was no evidence of recurrent disease during the follow-up period of 18 months. The present study was approved by the institutional review board of Chonbuk National University Hospital and written informed consent for the publication of the case was obtained from the patient.