A 44-year-old woman with one child conceived a second child naturally. The patient had a prior history of GDM; however, her medical history was otherwise unremarkable. During her most recent pregnancy, she was evaluated at periodic prenatal visits. At 24 weeks gestational age, her 50-g glucose challenge test (GCT) at 1 h was 133 mg/dL (cut-off for GDM diagnosis ≤ 140 mg/dL at the study site), and haemoglobin A1c was 5.6 g/dL. She had no perinatal complications, and other glucose metabolism disorders were not detected.
The woman gave birth to a female infant at 37 weeks of gestation by vaginal delivery. The infusion fluids administered to this mother during delivery contained 5% glucose at most. The neonate’s length was 48.5 cm (71.6th percentile, + 0.57 standard deviations [SD]); weight, 3086 g (89.7th percentile, + 1.26 SD); and head circumference, 33.0 cm (59.1th percentile, + 0.23 SD). She was classified as an appropriate-for-gestational age infant. The neonate’s APGAR scores at 1 and 5 min were 9 and 10, respectively, and no interventions were required other than routine care. Her umbilical artery pH was 7.360, and base excess was -0.7 mEq/L. On examination 1 h after delivery, the baby was lethargic, pale, hypotonic, and rarely cried. Considering her clinical features, an emergent systemic evaluation was performed, revealing a blood glucose level of 11 mg/dL and an insulin level of 2.7 µU/mL (> 1.0 µU/mL ). While preparing for a glucose infusion, she was fed 10 mL of formula milk for the first time at 1 h of age. Her mother was not ready for breastfeeding, hence, formula feeding was preceded. The baby’s clinical condition immediately improved, and she became awake and active. Following enteral feeding, an intravenous glucose infusion was started (glucose infusion rate of 3.3 mg/kg/min). Her blood glucose level increased to 78 mg/dL 3 h after delivery. The hypoglycaemia did not recur after the intravenous infusion was stopped the next day. As the mother was not ready for exclusive breastfeeding, considering her condition, the baby began breastfeeding on the 2nd day of life and was discharged on the 6th day. She had no developmental delays at the 6-month check-up. Informed consent was documented and obtained from the mother for the anonymized publication of this patient’s details.