A 67-year-old Caucasian man presented to the outpatient department with intermittent frank hemoptysis of 2 months duration. He denied chest discomfort, fever, dyspnea, weight loss or recent travel. He smoked cigarettes for 80 pack years. His past medical history was significant for ischemic heart disease and he was taking aspirin. He was exposed to mycobacterium tuberculosis in the distant past. He worked as a film producer and had no known asbestos exposure. He had recently commenced carpentry classes. On examination he looked well, had no clubbing, but was noted to have mild hyperinflation of the chest with decreased breath sounds. A full blood count, renal and liver chemistries and resting electrocardiograph were all normal. Sputum cytology was also negative.
A chest radiograph revealed a large, well circumscribed mass projected over the right hilum, the so called hilum overlay sign. A subsequent computed tomography (CT) -thorax with intra-venous contrast confirmed a 9.0 × 5.5 cm mass arising from the apical segment of the right lower lobe. It demonstrated homogenous contrast enhancement with no evidence of calcifications or necrosis. The mass abutted the pleura with no sign of invasion. There was no evidence of lymphadenopathy, pleural effusions or osseous metastases. The liver and adrenal glands appeared normal. A positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) demonstrated increased fludeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake within the mass with standardized uptake value (SUV max 22.1) and no evidence of nodal involvement or distant metastases.
A CT-guided biopsy showed a non-small cell primary lung carcinoma with marked necrosis and poor cell differentiation. The subtype could not be more accurately determined. Mediastinoscopy for nodal sampling was negative for nodal metastases. A right pneumenectomy revealed a 9 cm large necrotic mass replacing most of the medial and posterior segments of the right lower lobe. It was a biphasic tumour composed of malignant glandular tissue with sub-nuclear vacuoles, associated with a pleomorphic stromal malignant blastematous component .
The malignant glandular component was diffusely positive for the epithelial marker Cam 5.2 , and for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and negative for vimentin, while the stromal blastematous malignant component showed reverse expression (negative Cam5.2 and TTF-1, positive for vimentin . The protein beta-cathenin were observed in both components . Findings were diagnostic of classic biphasic pulmonary blastoma.