In April 2019, a 60-year-old man presented with a rapidly growing mass on the right eye which was associated with pain, tearing, redness, and loss of vision of 4 months duration. There were no other masses in any other parts of his body. He was diagnosed HIV-positive 2 years prior to presentation and had been regular on fumarate/lamivudine/efavirenz (TDF/3TC/EFV) fixed dose anti-retroviral combination therapy. The presenting visual acuity (VA) was perception of light (PL) in the right eye and counting fingers (CF) at a distance of 3 m in the left eye. VA in the left eye improved to 6/24 with refraction. He had a right-sided superotemporal orbital mass that extended inferolaterally. The right globe was inferonasally displaced and frozen in place [Figure -]. The cornea was hazy, the anterior chamber shallow, and the lens cataractous with no view of the fundus. Examination of other systems revealed no signs of metastasis.
Computer tomography (CT) scan of the brain could not be done due to financial limitation. A plain skull X-ray showed an ill-defined orbital mass in the right orbit with preservation of orbital lines . Orbital ultrasound of the right globe revealed a mass on the superior and inferior lateral aspects of the globe with globe compression and invasion. At presentation, he had Centers for Disease Control (CDC) stage 2 HIV disease with a CD4 count of 442 cells/mm. A pre-operative diagnosis of advanced conjunctival squamous cell carcinoma with ocular/orbital invasion was made.
A lid-sparing orbital exenteration was performed 3 weeks after presentation, which revealed a well-circumscribed mass firmly attached to a distorted globe . Immediate post-operative course was uneventful and by 4 weeks thereafter he was referred for adjuvant radiotherapy. Subsequently, the patient was followed up every 2 months.
Histopathological examination of the specimen revealed a well-circumscribed tumour measuring 2.5 × 2 × 1.5 cm, greyish white, firm with tiny cystic spaces. It had a thin fibrous capsule overlying distinct nests of epidermoid, intermediate, clear, and mucinous cells. The malignant epithelial cells showed moderate-to-marked pleomorphism, prominent nucleoli, occasional mitosis, and increased nucleocytoplasmic ratio [Figures –]. A cut section of the globe showed a distorted globe with a dumb-bell tumour extending from the conjunctiva into the globe. The tumour displaced the lens and ciliary body posteriorly but did not infiltrate these structures. The optic nerve, periorbital fat, and adjoining tissues were free of tumour. Lymphovascular invasion was not identified. A diagnosis of high-grade MEC (pT2NxMx), most likely of lacrimal gland origin, was made according to the 8th American Joint Committee on Cancer Staging System of salivary gland MEC.
By the 7th month after surgery, the patient was yet to receive the recommended adjuvant therapy as he was unable to afford the cost of radiotherapy. Following further deterioration in vision of the left eye with maturation of the cataract, he had a manual small incision cataract extraction and a posterior chamber intraocular lens implantation with an early post-operative VA of 6/12 and 6/6 at 6 weeks and had been on 3-monthly review. At 15 months following the primary surgery, there was no clinical evidence of local recurrence or distant metastasis and the patient is still yet to receive adjuvant radiotherapy.