Our patient is a 57-year-old white man of German and Nicaraguan descent with high myopia and previously diagnosed CAD. He works as a mechanical engineer with no significant past medical history, family history, or environmental history. His CAD was diagnosed 4 years prior, when he was experiencing cold-induced changes in his fingers, nose, feet, and with episodic dark urine when exposed to cold. A physical examination was significant for acrocyanosis and splenomegaly. His initial laboratory results included a total bilirubin of 5.3 mg/dL (reference ≤ 1.0 mg/dL), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 587 IU/L (reference ≤ 180 IU/L), creatinine 0.85 mg/dL (reference ≤ 1.30 mg/dL), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 23 U/L (reference ≤ 63 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 27 U/L (≤ 34 U/L), hemoglobin 11.0 g/dL (reference 14.0 to 18.0 g/dL), hematocrit (HCT) 39.5% (reference 42.0 to 52.0%), mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 93.8 fL (reference 80.0 to 94.0 fL), reticulocyte 5.2% (reference 0.4 to 2.5%), and cold hemagglutinins 40960. He was treated for 4 weeks with rituximab 375 mg/m2 weekly, to which he responded favorably. Since then, he has required a second course of rituximab for worsening of his disease, to which again he had a favorable response.
He presented to our ophthalmology clinic 7 months after his most recent rituximab treatment with symptoms of glare and decreased visual acuity and elected to undergo cataract surgery. At the time of presentation, he still had signs of acrocyanosis and splenomegaly and vital signs were within normal limits. During routine and uncomplicated surgery, it was noted that the temperature environment produced by intermittent flow of BSS over his eye induced a change in blood flow within the conjunctival vessels. Whereas under normal circumstances, RBCs are separate from their contiguous neighboring cells, our patient’s RBCs began to agglutinate, producing an unconventional finding of interrupted RBC collections or cassettes within the vasculature (see Fig. and Additional file 1). The irregular clumping of RBCs, characteristic of CAD, was easily observable under a surgical microscope. We identified some degree of stasis in which the smaller vessels, particularly near the corneal limbus and anterior conjunctiva, did not show nearly as much flow as the posterior, larger vessels. The cataract surgery was otherwise uneventful and our patient had no complications during the intraoperative or postoperative period. At follow-up, he continued to have symptoms of CAD such as acrocyanosis and other temperature-induced skin changes. He is expected to undergo a third round of treatment with rituximab with the addition of high-dose prednisone for refractory CAD.