A 33 year old Caucasian female was admitted to the medicine service at our institution with an 18 hour history of abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Patient had a strong family history of Crohn's disease including a sister that had onset of the disease at a similar age. Gastroenterology was consulted and a computed tomography scan was obtained showing edematous small bowel within the pelvis and a questionable internal hernia. Patient was treated medically for a small bowel obstruction including bowel rest, intravenous fluids, and nasogastric decompression without symptomatic relief. A repeat computed tomography scan was obtained four days after admission showing a possible transition point for her small bowel obstruction and mass like opacity possibly representing intussusception versus an internal hernia .
Surgery was consulted for evaluation and patient was counseled regarding risk, benefits, and alternatives of diagnostic laparoscopy, possible bowel resection, and laparotomy. The patient was taken to the operating room on hospital day five and underwent a diagnostic laparoscopy with specific attention to the right lower quadrant. Initial access was obtained via an open cutdown technique at the umbilicus. Three additional 5 mm ports were placed. Running of the small bowel was started at the cecum and progressed proximal from the ileocecal valve. Just proximal to the ileocecal valve an area of obstruction was identified, possible relating to an internal hernia . This area of obstruction was unable to be reduced laparoscopically so the cecum was mobilized laparoscopically. At this time a small 5 cm incision was made infra-umbilically and the cecum was elevated into the wound. A small bowel intussusception (ileal-ileal) was identified in the terminal ileum . The intussusceptum invaginated approximately 7 cm into the intussuscipiens and was partially reduced to allow a small bowel resection with an end to end stapled anastomosis approximately 6 cm from the ileocecal valve. Pathology revealed prolapsed small bowel consistent with intussusception with a well circumscribed firm tan-white submucosal nodule measuring 1.6 × 1.2 × 1.2 cm consistent with a submucosal fibroma.
The patient tolerated the procedure well and was discharged home on postoperative day four with normal bowel function tolerating a regular diet. Patient was seen in follow-up doing well and without complaints