A 50-year-old incarcerated male presented with chronic patella alta sustained from a chainsaw injury 12 years before. On physical exam, he was found to have a well-healed scar over the right knee, a high riding patella, and an inability to extend the right leg. X-ray demonstrated a high riding patella . The X-ray showed a small bony fragment of the lower pole of the patella, representing an inferior patella pole fracture non-union with marked patella alta and an IS ratio of 2.75. Due to the chronic nature of the injury, severe contracture of the quadriceps muscle, and severe high riding patella, the surgeons elected to use an Ilizarov frame for the gradual distraction of the patella to its anatomical location. It took approximately 3 months, at a rate of 1 mm/day, to distract the patella to anatomic position . The frame consisted of a 205 mm TSF (Smith and Nephew, Memphis, TN) full RING and 2/3 205 ring. The 2/3 ring was mounted orthogonal to the femur with two Ilizarov wires inserted into the patella using fluoroscopy to verify their position. The proximal full ring was mounted to the femur. Ilizarov threaded rods were used for gradual distraction. During the distraction phase, the patient developed a deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolus (PE), requiring medical treatment before surgery.
The second stage of the reconstruction was performed after the patella reached its anatomic station. The patient underwent patellar tendon reconstruction with an Achilles tendon allograft connecting a bone tunnel in the tibial tubercle to three bony tunnels in the patella and reinforced by wrapping the patellar tendon around the quadriceps. Intraoperatively, the patient was found to have a significant amount of scar tissue around the patella and severely osteoporotic bone. Despite severe patella osteoporosis, the patient had no wires cut out or loosening during the distraction phase. Initially, suture anchors were used for the repair of the extensor mechanism; however, due to the patient’s severe osteoporosis they did not hold. Therefore, the authors switched to bone tunnel tendon repair for the proximal site. The patient was immobilized in a long-leg cast. He was discharged on post-operative day 6. The patient was allowed weight-bearing as tolerated for 6 weeks.
The cast was removed 7 weeks post-operative and physical therapy with gentle range-of-motion (ROM) training was begun . At 11 months post-operative, the patient returned after hearing a “pop” and new extensor lag. On X-ray, the two tibial screws were intact, but there was increased patella alta compared to the previous films . The re-rupture of the patella tendon was attributed to a lack of adherence to physical therapy and loss of knee range of motion. The patient was scheduled for revision surgery.
The patient underwent revision surgery with a new Achilles tendon allograft supplemented with an IT band autograft secured to bony tunnels in the patella with Krackow sutures. Intraoperatively, the patient was found to have graft failure with all hardware still in place. At 3 weeks post-operative, he had a ROM of 5–60°, the ability to hold a straight leg raise, and intact active knee extension. X-rays showed intact hardware and improved patella alta . Over the next 2 months, the patient achieved 5/5 strength, ROM from 0 to 100°, and only a 10° extensor lag with physical therapy. At 5 months postoperatively, the patient had stopped attending physical therapy due to lack of improvement, his active ROM was 10–95°, passive ROM 0–110°. X-ray demonstrated a well-healed knee with all hardware in place. At 22 months post-operative, the patient reported an upward migration of the patella confirmed by X-ray showing the patella 2.5 cm proximal to the femoral condyles . An MRI demonstrated a partial disruption of the patellar tendon at the inferior pole of the patella. He was encouraged to continue weight-bearing as tolerated and quadriceps strengthening exercises with physical therapy. At 32 months post-operative, the patient was functioning well without the use of assistive devices. He had an active ROM of 0–90° . An X-ray showed changes compared to previous studies (IS ratio 2) ( and ).