A 53-year-old male presented with 1 month history of abdominal pain, anorexia, and nausea. His medical history was positive for coronary artery disease and coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery was performed on him, about 45 days prior to admission. He was relatively well when he developed abdominal pain accompanied by anorexia and nausea. The patient had sought medical attention for his abdominal discomfort, and bilateral large solid adrenal masses were detected in his abdominal ultrasonography. He also mentioned an unintentional weight loss and generalized darkening of the skin during this period.
He was admitted to the under study hospital with the impression of adrenal failure. Serum sample for basal cortisol and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) was taken in the basal state, and then, after giving 250 μg of synthetic ACTH, serum cortisol was measured again. He responded to administration of high doses of intravenous hydrocortisone with remission of symptoms. On admission, clinical examination revealed low blood pressure (90/60 mmHg), body temperature 37°C, the pulse rate 88 beat/minute, and respiratory rate of 18 breath/ minute. He looked well and was in no acute distress. There was generalized increased pigmentation of the skin. No Cushingoid appearance was detected and there was no palpable lymph node. Physical examination of lungs and heart were unremarkable and his abdomen was flat without palpable mass or hepatosplenomegaly. Laboratory investigations revealed normal liver function test, hemoglobin 11.1 g/dL, white blood cell 8.5 × 103, with normal differential count and platelet 200 × 103. Blood chemistries showed Na 125 mEq/L, K 5.2 mEq/L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 35 mg/dL, creatinine (Cr) 1.8 mg/dL, normal blood sugar, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 1277 U/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 110 mm/hour, and normal lipase and amylase levels. The ultrasound of the abdomen revealed bilateral large solid adrenal masses without lymphadenopathy or organomegaly.
A contrast-enhanced computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen with adrenal protocol demonstrated bilateral large heterogeneously enhancing adrenal lesions, 8.5 × 6.5 cm in the Rt. and 7.5 × 5.7 cm in the left adrenal, without calcification .
The masses were non-homogeneous and their precontrast Hounsfield score was 65 in the left and 73 in the right side. Also, there was no significant washout of the contrast agent and no other pathology was detected. Since adrenal metastasis from an unknown malignant disease was suspected, CT scan of the chest and pelvis was performed and no primary tumor was found. His upper endoscopy and colonoscopy also revealed no abnormal finding. Further biochemical evaluation showed normal alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), prostate-specific antigen (PSA), cancer antigen (CA) 19-9, U/mL, β-hCG, and CEA, and low dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEAS) levels and 24-hour urine metanephrines were 4.1 μg/day (0 - 350 μg/day).
Clinical suspicion of primary adrenal insufficiency was confirmed by an elevated baseline plasma ACTH of 99 pg/mL, a low plasma cortisol of 0.7 μg/dL (normal value of 12 - 25 μg/dL) and insufficient peak cortisol response of 1.9 μg/dL to ACTH stimulation (normal value of > 18 μg/dL). Bone marrow examination revealed no abnormality.
The patient was treated with high doses of intravenous hydrocortisone and rehydrated with sodium chloride infusion resulting in complete remission of symptoms and normalization of biochemistry. Subsequently, a CT-guided biopsy of the mass lesion was performed and microscopic examination of the material revealed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
Immunohistochemistry was positive for CD43, CD79, leukocyte common antigen (LCA), and Pax.5, but did not stain for CD3, CK, CK20, and cytokeratin (AE1/AE3). The proliferative fraction detected by Ki-67 was high and the diagnosis of B-cell lymphoma was confirmed .
Chemotherapy was started on him. At the end of the third cycle, there was a transient clinical improvement despite no change in size of the tumors. But, the patient worsened thereafter and died 5 months after starting the chemotherapy.