A 2-year-old girl was presented for short stature. She was a preterm baby born at 24 + 1 gestational weeks with appropriate weight and length. She was the second daughter of Iranian, unrelated parents. She had many complications in the postnatal period; among others she suffered from a congenital glaucoma and underwent several eye surgeries. The last surgery was in August 2020. After each surgery, she was treated with dexamethasone eye drops for a few weeks in decreasing doses. Up to the first consultation at our clinic in November 2020, she received 4 dexamethasone eye drops (1.3 mg/ml) per day (3 drops left, 1 drop right eye), corresponding to 0.3 mg dexamethasone per day. She presented with short stature (−5.52 SDS) and was dystrophic with a reduced body mass index (14 kg/m2, −1.42 SDS). Target height corresponded to the tenth percentile (−1.3 SDS) . Pediatric endocrine examination excluded hypothyroidism, growth hormone deficiency, bone mineralization deficiency, malabsorption, nephropathy, hepatopathy, anemia, and chronic inflammation. The bone age was age appropriate. The chromosome analysis and array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) were unremarkable. A cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a hypoplastic corpus callosum, periventricular leukomalacia, and a normal pituitary gland.
Cortisol serum concentrations were undetectable, throughout and low ACTH serum concentrations were measured . The adrenal insufficiency was confirmed by ACTH stimulation (cortisol serum concentration at 0 minutes < 14 nmol/L and after 60 minutes 50 nmol/L) and by corticotropin-releasing hormone stimulation . Within 4 weeks we reduced the dosage of dexamethasone eye drops to 0.15 mg/days. The serum concentrations of dexamethasone measured 1.02 nmol/L by LC–MS/MS indicating a clearly relevant resorption of dexamethasone. Four weeks later a normal serum steroid profile was detected by LC–MS/MS indicating regular endogenous glucocorticoid biosynthesis within the adrenals .
Eight weeks later, the girl presented with catch-up growth (height velocity by 4 SDS) after tapering the dosage of dexamethasone eye drops (0.15 mg/days) and appetite improved . The diurnal cortisol secretion determined in saliva was normal . Both families have given their written informed consent to publish their case (including publication of images).