An 87-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with heart failure and was diagnosed with severe aortic valve stenosis (AS) shown by transthoracic echocardiography (TTE). While her medical history included cerebellar infarction 4 years ago and left anterior descending artery stenosis with percutaneous coronary intervention performed 1 month ago, she had no clinical symptoms on admission. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm and no conduction disturbance. TTE showed an ejection fraction of 72%, good left ventricular wall motion, mild left ventricular hypertrophy, very severe AS (aortic valve area: 0.49 cm2, maximum velocity: 5.5 m/s, and mean pressure gradient: 81 mmHg), and trivial aortic valve regurgitation (AR). Computed tomography (CT) revealed a highly calcified aortic valve and scattered calcification in the aortic arch, descending aorta, and abdominal aorta . We planned transfemoral TAVI with a self-expandable valve (Evolut PRO +) under monitored anesthesia.
Administration of dexmedetomidine was maintained at 0.4 μg/kg/h, and propofol and fentanyl were administered as needed . An arterial blood pressure (ABP) line was inserted into the left radial artery, and a temporary pacemaker was placed through the right internal jugular vein. We used bispectral index (BIS) for evaluation of the level of anesthesia depth and monitored cerebral regional oxygen saturation (rSO2) for evaluation of cerebral blood flow and oxygenation. Heparin was administered, and activated clotting time was maintained at 250 s or more. Pre-dilatation was performed under rapid pacing at 180 bpm. There were no ECG changes, pericardial effusion, or exacerbation of AR. As the delivery catheter system passed through the aortic valve and the position was being adjusted, complete atrioventricular block (CAVB) occurred, and ABP dropped significantly. The pulse wave of the pulse oximeter attached to the left hand became undetectable. However, femoral artery pulsations were palpable. Immediately, ventricular pacing was started; noradrenaline was administered as a bolus followed by a continuous infusion. Additionally, 50-μg adrenaline was administered. During CAVB, left ventricular wall motion was normal in TTE, but right ventricular wall motion could not be examined. Abnormal coronary artery flow during CAVB was also not detected by intraoperative coronary angiography. ABP was improved, but BIS and bilateral rSO2 decreased (left: 85 to 50, right: 80 to 42). A self-expandable valve was implanted, and the surgery was completed. CAVB reverted to normal sinus rhythm. However, recovery of consciousness was delayed, and her extremity movements were inadequate. Furthermore, her left hand was pale and felt cold. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple embolic infarcts in the bilateral frontal, parietal and occipital lobes, and cerebellar hemispheres . However, angiography showed no treatable vessel occlusion.
On postoperative day 1, ST-T depression in II, III, and aVF was observed, and high-sensitivity troponin T (hsTnT) was increased compared to preoperative value (hsTnT: 0.0212 to 0.348 μg/mL).
The left-hand ischemia gradually improved, but the right upper extremity paralysis due to stroke persisted.