A 22-year-old female without any particular past medical history presented to us in October 2012 with the chief complaint of dyspnea and frequent choking for 1 month. Traced back her clinical course, she had suffered from suboccipital pain, dizziness, and blurred vision for 6 months; about 2 months prior to the visit, she experienced dysarthria and intermittent swallowing disturbance. On admission, she was clear and ill-looking. Her neurological examination revealed left vocal cord palsy, weak gag reflex, tongue fasciculation, and horizontal nystagmus in the right side gaze. She had neither motor nor sensory disorder of her extremities and her Babinski's sign was negative on both sides. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of brain was performed, which demonstrated a mass lesion about 3.2 × 3 × 2.6 cm in size located in the inferior fourth ventricle with extension to foramen magnum, causing mild dilatation of fourth ventricle. This tumor showed heterogeneous enhancement with several foci of cystic change in postgadolinium enhancement study . The tentative diagnosis was medulloblastoma with the differential diagnosis of ependymoma.
Under general anesthesia, she was put in prone position and underwent a bilateral suboccipital craniotomy and C1 laminoplasty with the removal of the tumor. A midline longitudinal incision was made from external occipital proturbance to the spinal process of C2, then a Y shape incision was made on the exposed dura of cerebellum and upper cervical spinal cord. Reflected the dural flaps to expose the cerebellar hemisphere and upper cervical cord. After the arachnoid membrane was opened and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was drained, bilateral tonsils and the superficial part of the tumor was exposed. Grossly, the tumor was soft and gray-red , quite circumscribed but the margin between the tumor and the dorsal side of medulla was not very clear. Internal decompression of the tumor was done first to gain more working space, then dissected the tumor from the neighboring structures with extreme caution and finally this tumor was removed in piece-meal fashion with the aid of Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator (CUSA). Intraoperative frozen section of the specimen reported “malignant tumor”, therefore, we tried to achieve maximum tumor resection. Histology examination showed that the specimen composed of sheets of large anaplastic cells divided by delicate fibrovascular septa with small lymphocytes . Mitosis and necrosis were present. The immunohistochemistry results of neoplastic cells revealed positive for CD117 and placenta alkaline phosphatase , but negative for CD3, CD20, and synaptophysin immunostains. Germinoma was diagnosed based on the morphology of the tumor cells and the result of immunohistochemical stains. Based on the histological diagnosis of the tumor, whole spine MRI was checked, which disclosed no evidence of abnormal enhancing mass lesion. Although her immediate postoperative brain MRI showed no evidence of abnormal enhancing mass lesion, or abnormal leptomeningeal enhancement in the brain , we administered postoperative adjuvant radiotherapy as following dosage: Total 45 Gy on the tumor bed and total 30.6 Gy on the ventricle system. Chemotherapy was not recommended by the oncologist because the patient's α-fetoprotein (AFP) and human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) levels were within normal limits, and there was no dissemination of the tumor cells.
She is doing well except having left vocal cord palsy, which occurred before surgery. Her dyspnea and choking were much resolved after the operation. The latest brain and whole spine MRI done 12 months after the surgery showed no abnormal enhancing tumor in the whole axis and is on regular follow-up at our out-patient department.