A 48-year-old woman presented to our hospital complaining of loss of vision in her right eye. Her VA at the time of initial examination was measured at RV = (0.03), LV = (1.5), RT = 12 mm Hg, LT = 11 mm Hg. No abnormalities were observed in the anterior segment, optic media, and fundus of her left eye. However, in the fundus of her right eye, a grayish-white choroidal tumor-like lesion, 7 disc diameters in size, was observed from the macular region to the temporal side . With the fundus findings in mind, we diagnosed CM in the right eye after examination by B-mode ultrasonic scan and MRI. We therefore performed GK therapy on the tumor with 3 shots from an 8-mm collimator using a marginal dose (the lowest tumor dose) of 30 Gy, and a maximum dose of 60 Gy (50% isodose). Although the tumor gradually shrank after GK treatment, hard exudates began to appear around the tumor at 6 months postoperatively . Fundus fluorescein angiography revealed a retinal nonperfusion area in the inferior quadrants, and laser photocoagulation was performed upon diagnosis of radiation retinopathy. Although the corrected VA of her right eye improved from (0.01) to (0.03) and stabilized after laser photocoagulation, further deterioration of vision in that eye began to occur at 8 years after the initial treatment.
Upon examination, we found that a bullous retinal detachment with fixed folds had occurred in the superior-nasal quadrants of her right eye , and that the corrected VA was light perception. Scarring was found to have occurred around the tumor lesion, and laser scars from radiation retinopathy were also observed in the inferior quadrants. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) findings revealed a partial thinning of the macular retina, with the formation of a retinal inner break caused by traction resulting from the formation of preretinal membrane and posterior vitreous detachment . The outer retinal break was not clearly detectable. Serum levels of 5-S-cysteinyldopa (5-S-CD), a tumor marker for CM, were within the normal range of 2.1 nmol/L, MRI findings showed no increase in tumorous lesions , and 123I-IMP SPECT imaging showed no photon accumulation , thus indicating that there was no tumor activity. The patient's VA was extremely poor, so it was determined that there was no indication for vitreous surgery, and we decided to follow her progress.