A 32-year-old Japanese man with Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) developed fever during chemotherapy with dasatinib and doxorubicin with dexamethasone for treatment of ALL relapse approximately 3 months after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. The patient’s blood culture was positive for E. faecium, and, as he was allergic to vancomycin, teicoplanin therapy was initiated. Dasatinib and doxorubicin were discontinued immediately. The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of various antibiotics are listed in Table (EFM01). Although the MIC of teicoplanin for the E. faecium strain was ≤2 mcg/ml, and the patient’s serum teicoplanin trough was maintained between 20 and 22 mcg/ml, E. faecium was consistently detected in his blood cultures for more than 3 weeks. In addition, the patient was neutropenic during this period, with neutrophil counts between 300 and 830 neutrophils/ml.
After consulting the infectious disease service for recommendations on treating the persistent E. faecium infection, the treatment plan was modified to include gentamicin therapy (1.3 mg/kg every 12 h), and imaging studies and an endoscopy were ordered to identify the nidus of the persistent E. faecium bacteremia. A transthoracic echocardiogram subsequently revealed a vegetation, measuring a few millimeters in size, on the patient’s aortic valve. Meanwhile, chest and abdominal CT scans detected a thickened colon wall, but no other lesions, and a PET scan failed to identify a potential source of the infection. A colonoscopy, however, revealed erosion throughout the colonic mucosa, which was considered consistent with graft versus host disease and was considered the likely entry site of E. faecium into the bloodstream.
As the E. faecium bacteremia persisted for 2 weeks after initiation of the gentamicin therapy (gentamicin MIC was 16 mcg/ml) in combination with teicoplanin, the patient was switched to 10 mg kg−1 day−1 DAP [DAP; Etests indicated that the MIC of DAP for the E. faecium strain was 4 mcg/ml as in Table (EFM01)]. After initiation of DAP therapy, the patient’s fever subsided and subsequent blood cultures were negative. As a result, after receiving the initial dose of DAP for 18 days, the dose was reduced to 6 mg kg−1 day−1. However, 1 day after reducing the dose, the patient developed fever again and his blood culture tested positive for E. faecium (DAP MIC, per Etest: 256 mcg/ml). The MICs for other antibiotics are listed in Table (EFM02). DAP was therefore discontinued, and treatment with intravenous linezolid (600 mg every 12 h) was initiated. While blood cultures were negative after 2 days of linezolid therapy, the patient unfortunately passed away owing to exacerbation of the ALL at 26 days after initiation of treatment with linezolid.
Molecular analysis of the daptomycin-susceptible (EFM01; isolated prior to the initiation of DAP) and daptomycin non-susceptible E. faecium (DNSE; EFM02) isolates was conducted in the Pathogenic Microbe Laboratory at the Research Institute of the National Center for Global Health and Medicine in Tokyo, Japan. The strains were cultured in brain heart infusion (BHI) broth overnight, and genomic DNA was purified using a DNeasy Blood & Tissue kit (Qiagen, Venlo, Netherlands). The genomes of the two isolates were then subjected to MiSeq sequencing using Nextera XT library kits (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Approximately 1 million pair-end reads (301 base pairs [bp] × 2) were obtained from each genome and analyzed using CLC Genomics Workbench software (CLC bio, Aarhus, Denmark). The reads from each isolate were trimmed by screening for base quality (quality score limit = 0.05; reads that contained greater than two ambiguous nucleotides or that were less than 15 bp in length were removed), and then used to generate de novo genome assemblies, respectively. Meanwhile, the contigs were used as the reference genome. The reads from each isolate were then mapped to the reference genome, and variants were detected using CLC Genomics Workbench program that is based on the algorithm developed by Smith and Waterman (1981) . For these analyses, the following detection parameters were used: 95 % coverage and more than 10 overlapping reads. Because the settings used can yield false-positive variants, each putative variant was manually confirmed by examining the mapping results. The resulting sequencing data were registered with the DNA Data Bank of JAPAN (DDBJ, accession number DRA03513). Furthermore, to annotate variants that were unique to the strains examined in this study, the genome sequence of E. faecium Aus0085 was used as a Ref. .
The MICs of multiple antimicrobials for the two E. faecium isolates, as well as the antimicrobial resistance genes encoded by these organisms, as identified by analysis of contigs using the ResFinder program , are summarized in Table . Comparison of the EFM01 and EFM02 genomes at SNP level based on whole genome sequencing indicated that EFM02 was derived from EFM01. While EFM02 contained 40 variants that were not present in EFM01, each of the variants identified in EFM01 were present in EFM02. The variants that resulted in amino acid substitutions within the genome of EFM02 compared to that of EFM01 are summarized in Table .
Notably, by comparing the genomes of the two E. faecium isolates, we detected mutations that were present in the genes encoding the DNA repair proteins MutL (mutL) and RecJ (recJ) of the DNSE strain, but not the DAP-susceptible parental strain. We, therefore, investigated whether the disruption of these genes affected the frequency of mutations in the E. faecium genome. For these analyses, each strain was cultured overnight in 2 ml of BHI broth. The following day, 2 μL of the resulting cultures was used to inoculate 2 ml of BHI broth, respectively. The cultures were again incubated overnight, diluted in fresh broth, and plated on BHI agar. Subsequently, 11 distinct colonies of each strain (EFM01 and EFM02) were harvested, and whole-genome sequencing of these isolates was conducted, as described above. The reads obtained from each isolate were mapped to the respective parental genome and analyzed for the presence of newly acquired variants. Because the settings used can yield false positive variants, any variants that were also present in the parental genome were excluded, and each putative variant was manually confirmed by examining the mapping results.
There was only one newly acquired variant identified after analysis of the genomes of the 11 daptomycin-susceptible E. faecium (EFM01) after the bacteria had undergone 9.2 generations. Conversely, analysis of the genomes of the 11 DNSE (EFM02) isolates detected 49 variants after the bacteria had undergone 9.4 generations. These findings indicate that the observed alterations to the mutL and recJ genes may have resulted in a significant increase in the frequency of mutations in the EFM02 genome.