A 21-year-old man with no previous medical history presented to the emergency department (ED) with sudden right lower quadrant (RLQ) pain for 3.5 hours. The pain was constant and radiated to his scrotum, with reported pain when the scrotum was touched. He had the urge to defecate at onset, with increased flatulence, and multiple episodes of diarrhea. He denied frequency, urgency, penile discharge, and dysuria. He was not sexually active.
The presenting vital signs were blood pressure of 128/71 millimeters of mercury, heart rate of 92 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, temperature of 36.6° Celsius, and oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. His documented exam included mild RLQ tenderness to palpation without rebound or guarding. His physical exam was otherwise marked as normal, with no genitourinary exam documented.
The physician’s assistant ordered tests from triage, including a urinalysis, complete blood count with differential, comprehensive metabolic panel, intravenous (IV) fluids, pain control, and a CT of the abdomen and pelvis with IV contrast. The patient was given 15 milligrams (mg) of ketorolac, 4 mg of morphine sulphate, and 1 liter (L) of normal saline. Laboratory tests showed white blood cell (WBC) count of 11.6 x 109 cells/L (reference range [RR] 3.8–11 x 109 cells/L), normal serum electrolytes, urinalysis with 3 WBCs per high powered field (hpf) (0–5/ hpf), negative leukocyte esterase and nitrite (RR negative), and no bacteria (RR none/hpf). Urine polymerase chain reaction tests for gonorrhea and chlamydia resulted negative the following day.
A CT of the abdomen and pelvis with IV contrast was ordered to evaluate for appendicitis. The radiology report of the abdomen and pelvis (, ) was as follows: “unremarkable CT of the abdomen and pelvis. The appendix is not discretely identified; however, no inflammatory changes are seen in the right lower quadrant to suggest acute appendicitis.” There was no comment on the scrotum in the report. The patient’s symptoms were documented as improved upon re-evaluation and he was discharged home.
The patient’s symptoms continued, and roughly 48 hours later he was seen in urgent care. There, he had a testicular ultrasound showing no arterial or venous flow in the right testicle. He was sent to the same ED, and re-evaluation was documented as “phallus circumcised without lesions. Right testis is high riding, exquisitely tender and mildly edematous. Left testis is normal and non-tender.” A urologist was consulted for emergent right orchiectomy and left orchiopexy. The operative report documented a necrotic right testis, and the surgeon noted 540 degrees (1.5 rotations) of spermatic cord torsion. Pathology report confirmed, “hemorrhagic infarct of the testicular and epididymal parenchyma consistent with torsion. Spermatic cord with vascular congestion. No evidence of malignancy.”