A 27-year-old Latino male with HIV presented to the emergency department complaining of a 6-month history of constant, non-radiating, left upper quadrant abdominal and epigastric pain, with associated nausea and vomiting. Besides HIV, the patient’s past medical and surgical history was unremarkable. The exact date of HIV diagnosis was not available in the patient’s medical record, but at the time of presentation, the patient was not on antiretroviral medication. Social and environmental history were remarkable for a 2-pack-year history of tobacco use and less than one alcoholic drink per week. His family history was only notable for diabetes and hypertension in several relatives. Physical examination revealed diffuse abdominal tenderness. Respiratory and cardiovascular examinations were within normal limits. There were no skin lesions. Neurologic examination revealed no focal neurological deficits. Vitals were notable for mild tachycardia to 105 beats per minute. Temperature was 37°C and blood pressure was 124/64 mmHg. The patient had no significant abnormal lab findings other than an elevated total protein of 9.4 g/dL (6.0–8.3 g/dL), elevated total bilirubin of 1.5 mg/dL (< 1.2 mg/dL), and high HIV viral load of greater than 100,000 copies/mL. Complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, and transaminases were normal at presentation.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis at initial presentation demonstrated a large hypodense retroperitoneal mass encasing the aorta, celiac axis, superior mesenteric artery (SMA), and right adrenal gland, with associated mass effect on adjacent organs and vessels. Additionally, splenomegaly and a small right anterior chest wall subcutaneous soft tissue nodule were noted. Core needle biopsy of the retroperitoneal mass performed 2 weeks after presentation demonstrated Schwannian stroma and scattered mature ganglion cells. The tumor stained strongly positive for S100, consistent with ganglioneuroma.
During his stay, the patient was started on 1 elvitegravir-cobicistat-emtricitabine-tenofovir tablet daily for HIV, melatonin 5 mg tablet nightly as a sleep aid, acetaminophen 650 mg tablet every 4 hours for pain, and ondansetron 4 mg tablet every 8 hours for nausea as needed. His antiretroviral medication was continued at discharge.
After multidisciplinary review, chemotherapy and radiation were not recommended. Because of extensive vascular encasement, the tumor was initially deemed to be unresectable; however, after deliberation, the decision was made to attempt resection as it was the only viable therapy. Three months after presentation, colorectal, vascular, and hepatobiliary surgery performed an exploratory laparoscopy and eventual resection of the mass, along with a partial gastric resection, partial pancreatic resection, right adrenalectomy, periportal lymphadenectomy, and splenectomy. The tumor was indistinguishable from the adrenal gland, which was its likely origin. Histology of the resected lymph nodes showed metastatic ganglioneuroma, which was determined to be clinically insignificant because of favorable histology . Immediate post-operative recovery was uneventful, and the surgery was curative.
In the years following surgery, the patient experienced chronic diarrhea and frequent lower abdominal pain without a discernible cause despite extensive gastrointestinal workup.