A 37-year-old man presented to the Department of Oncology in our hospital with a 3-month history of progressive low-back and sacrococcygeal-pain, with occasional pain radiating bilaterally to the legs. He did not have fever, headaches, cough, or night sweats. Additionally, he had no history of AIDS, diabetes, tuberculosis, leukaemia, lymphoma, or immunosuppressive treatment. He initially visited a local county hospital, where lumbar vertebra magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. Findings showed osteolytic lesions of the S2–S4 vertebral body accompanied by paravertebral soft tissue masses, with mixed hyperintense signal on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI), and low signal intensity on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI). His preliminarily diagnosis was a sacral tumour, and he was referred to another hospital for further treatment.
His clinical examination on admission revealed local tenderness and percussion pain in the low back and sacrococcygeal region. When tapping the lumbosacral regions, pain occasionally radiated to both legs, particularly the right side. The lumbar spine’s movement was normal, with no abnormal strength or sensation in both lower extremities. Routine blood tests revealed white blood cell count of 11.2 × 109/L (normal 3.5–9.5 × 109/L) with 88% neutrophils (normal 40–75%), 6% lymphocytes (normal: 20–50%), and 0.2% eosinophils (normal: 0.4–8%). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 22 mm/h (normal 0–20 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 116.98 mg/L (normal 0–6.0 mg/l). Tumour markers were not elevated, and all other test results were normal. Radiographs revealed a patchy osteolytic lesion in S2–S4 with an unclear boundary, without periosteal reaction and rim sclerosis . Computed tomography (CT) of the sacrococcygeal vertebra showed some irregular osteolytic lesions in the sacrum, which were surrounded by several cystic low-density soft tissue masses of unequal size, the larger one in the anterior-right was approximately 52 × 84 mm . MRI illustrated abnormal patchy signals in the sacrum, hyperintense signal on T2WI and low signal intensity on T1WI . Moreover, attached cystic soft masses were seen in the presacral space . A contrast-enhanced fat-suppressed T2-weighted MRI demonstrated a thickened and enhanced soft cystic wall . Except for sacral lesions, no other abnormalities were found on the contrast-enhanced CT of the chest and whole abdomen. A radioisotope bone scan illustrated increased tracer uptake in the sacrum .
Imaging and blood test results were characteristic of inflammatory changes and suggestive of sacral tuberculosis. Therefore, the patient was transferred to the Department of Orthopaedics for further treatment. He received a four-drug combination antitubercular therapy. After about one week of antitubercular therapy, the low back and sacrococcygeal pain worsened, and the patient developed persistent radiating pain and numbness in the legs, and night-time fever (38.3–39.5 ℃). For further diagnosis, we performed a CT-guided puncture biopsy of the sacral lesion and a blood culture. Hematoxylin and Eosine staining of pathologic samples revealed granulomatous inflammation with massive macrophage infiltration . Acid-fast staining was negative and Grocott’s methenamine silver staining showed numerous black stained, small yeast-like organisms . Periodic acid-Schiff staining showed a large number of spheroids with red outer membranes of varying sizes . Based on these pathological findings, fungal infection was highly suspected. However, as the blood culture was negative, we did not perform microbial culture on the puncture specimen at that time. To identify the fungal species, we conducted a galactomannan detection test (GM-test) and tried to detect cryptococcal antibodies in serum; the GM-test result was normal. Owing to facility issues, we could not complete the cryptococcal antibody test.
The patient underwent surgical sacral debridement and negative drainage through the anterior approach under intravenous titration of fluconazole. Intraoperatively, we observed that the anterior cortical bone of the sacrum had multi-point destruction, and the lesion was unequal in size and depth. Moreover, several honeycombed abscesses filled with weak pus were observed in the presacral space. The sacral nerve roots were compressed by cystic abscesses. Samples from the abscesses were sent to the laboratory for pathological examination, microbial culture, identification, and drug susceptibility tests. Postoperatively, the persistent radiation pain and numbness in the legs resolved. The postoperative pathological examination revealed granuloma formation containing large quantities of multinucleated giant cells, with some round, slightly stained, thin-walled Cryptococcus in the cytoplasm, surrounding transparent voids, and partial budding . Moreover, the sample was inoculated in Sabouraud Dextrose Agar supplemented with chloramphenicol (0.5 g/l). After 5 days of culture at 37 ℃, yellow colony growth was observed, in which microscopic examination showed round or oval thalli with budding cells but without pseudo mycelium. The pathogen was identified as Cryptococcus neoformans using the BRUKER MALDI-TOF Biotyper mass spectrometry system. Antifungal susceptibility testing performed using ATB FUNGUS 3 system revealed sensitivity to fluconazole. Ultimately, the patient was definitively diagnosed with Cryptococcal neoformans sacral osteomyelitis and was treated with fluconazole for 12 weeks (4 weeks of intravenous fluconazole 400 mg/day, then 8 weeks of oral fluconazole, 400 mg/day). At the follow-up, the low back and sacrococcygeal pain had progressively alleviated. Six months after surgery, his back pain completely resolved, and his ESR, CRP level, and blood cell count were normal. The patient recovered completely without radiological evidence of relapse at the 8-month follow-up .