In January 2021, a 39-year-old middle-eastern female presented to our hospital with a one-month history of increasing dyspnea and left shoulder discomfort. Her dyspnea aggravated with sleep, but was not accompanied by fever, chest discomfort, nausea, vomiting, or weight loss. Except for a prior rhinoplasty, the patient’s previous medical history was insignificant. In addition, there was no history of smoking or cancer in the family. The patient’s vital signs and oxygen saturation were normal upon initial evaluation. Lung auscultation indicated diminished breathing sounds at the base of the left lung. The remainder of the physical examinations were normal. The initial laboratory examinations demonstrated an increase in white blood cell (WBC) count (19.9 × 109/L), hemoglobin level of 10.9 g/dl, platelet count of 521 × 109/L, blood urea nitrate level of 10 mg/dl, creatinine of 0.8 mg/dl, blood sugar of 120 mg/dl, sodium of 141 mEq/L, and potassium of 4.3 mEq/L.
Chest x-ray revealed opacification of the left lung and computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest showed left-sided pleural effusion, and minimal pleural thickening, without accompanying parenchymal abnormalities . Electrocardiography and echocardiogram showed no cardiac abnormalities. Subsequently, the patient underwent therapeutic and diagnostic thoracentesis. The findings of the pleural fluid analysis demonstrated a total count of 3100 cells with presence of malignant cells and red blood cell count (RBC) of 2400, WBC count of 700 (lymphocyte 40% and neutrophil 60%), fluid lactate dehydrogenase 299 IU/L, negative adenosine deaminase and culture.
For further investigation of the malignant cells seen in cytology analysis, pleuroscopy was done by a pulmonologist, and multiple creamy nodular lesions were found on the visceral and parietal pleura. Multiple biopsies were taken, pleural effusion was drained, and a chest tube was inserted. After chest tube removal, the patient was discharged and instructed to visit the pulmonologist whenever the biopsy results were ready; However, five days later, the patient was readmitted to our hospital due to development of dyspnea with accompanying chest pain.
The second chest CT showed no signs of pulmonary emboli or pneumonia. However, the pleural effusion had been reaccumulated. Moreover, the level of carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA-125) was elevated. Histopathological and IHC evaluation of the biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of PEHE, which was positive for CD31, CD34, CK, factor 8-R-antigen, and vimentin .
The patient was started on MAID regimen chemotherapy (Mesna, Adriamycin, Ifosfamide, Dacarbazine); However, despite the chemotherapy, the patient underwent extrapleural pneumonectomy duo to involvement of the adjacent lung, severe adhesions and thick pleura seven months later. The surgery was performed via left posterolateral thoracotomy, and the patient’s condition was acceptable after surgery .
Unfortunately, during the disease course in November 2021, the patient developed multiple peritoneal metastasis, pericardial effusion, and ascites and died due to the complications of the disease. The result of abdominal paracentesis demonstrated a total count of 3400 cells, RBC 300, WBC 400 (lymphocyte 71% and neutrophil 29%), fluid sugar 89 mg/dl, protein 3.8 g/dl, albumin 2 g/dl, with a serum albumin of 3.2 g/dl.