The patient was a 10-year-old boy, born by a cesarean section at term to consanguinity-unrelated parents. The child was found to have a ventricular septal defect that was soon repaired by surgery at 7 months old. At age of 1.5 years old, thrombocytopenia was found (Plt 8 × 109/L). The anti-glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa test was positive, indicating severe bleeding . The bone marrow biopsy was normal, excluding the possible myeloid or lymphocyte-derived deformation. Based on the clinical features and cellular characteristics, immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) diagnosis was made. The symptoms were mitigated in response to glucocorticoid therapy (2 mg/kg bodyweight daily for 4 weeks). The patient unfortunately relapsed at 33 months of age and progressed to chronic refractory ITP. He suffered from splenomegaly at 6 years of age (5 cm below the left costal margin), after which massive lymphadenopathy was noticed. At 7 years of age, the patient developed neutropenia (0.15 × 109/L) with low hemoglobin levels (99 g/L). The patient had a notable speech impediment and growth retardation. Computed tomography examination indicated a decreased thymus volume . Serum IL-10 (8.28 pg/ml, reference range 1.2–4.55 pg/ml) was above the normal range, while parathyroid hormone was lower than normal (8.9 pg/ml, reference range 10.2–50.5 pg/ml). The ratio of lymphocyte subsets was abnormal , with noticeably decreased naive T cells and elevated DNT cells (naive T cells, 9.5%, reference range 39.72%–65.59%; DNT cells, 4.4% of CD3+ T cells, reference range 0.82%–2.91%). The patient initially received first-line treatment for ITP (high-dose dexamethasone and intravenous immunoglobulin) with a poor response that did not last long. After monotherapy with sirolimus, the platelets and neutrophils recovered to a relatively normal level along with the disappearance of other clinical manifestations such as enlarged spleen and expanded lymph nodes.
Whole-exome sequencing (WES) revealed the presence of a de novo heterozygous 2.520 Mb deletion on 22q11.21 chromosome (18893867–21414817) . To confirm the size of the missing area, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis was performed with the standard MLPA kit (P250, MRC-Holland). The results revealed a 50% decrease relative to the reference bar height, indicating a heterozygous deletion .
The proportion and the absolute number of naive CD4 T cells were markedly decreased (proportion, 9.5%, reference 39.72-69.59%; cell number, 32 cells/μl, reference 294-683 cells/μl, ). Determination of T-cell receptor (TCR) repertoires by flow cytometry revealed that the TCR repertoires of the patient were diverse and normally distributed in CD4 and CD8 T cells . We then assessed the in vitro proliferative response of CD4 and CD8 T cells of this patient. Upon TCR ligation with anti-CD3/anti-CD28 antibodies, CD4 and CD8 T cells exhibited a retained potentiality of T cell division . The patient was followed up for 1 year after sirolimus treatment, and the platelet count was recovered without any other hematologic abnormality being found. Consistent with the clinical improvements, his DNT cells decreased (from 4.4% to 3.2%) along with an elevation of regulatory T cells (Tregs, from 3.7% to 5.2%).
Based on the medical history, clinical presentations (ventricular septal defect, thymus dysplasia, velopharyngeal hypoplasia, and delayed language development), genetic findings (chromosome 22q11.21 deletion), and laboratory data (decreased parathyroid hormone and reduction of naive T cells with a normal TCR Vβ repertoire), the patient was diagnosed with partial DGS.
The patient presented with elevated DNT cells (≥2.5% of CD3+ cells) and chronic (>6 months), nonmalignant, infection-free lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly, which are commonly seen in other ALPS-like disorders. Indeed, the patient had autoimmune cytopenias (hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia) and hypoparathyroidism. Considering his autoimmune and lymphoproliferative symptoms, ALPS-like diseases such as activated PI3K-kinase delta syndrome (APDS) or CTLA-4 haploinsufficiency with autoimmune infiltration (CHAI) were considered . However, the WES results did not reveal defined variations associated with ALPS-like diseases. The WES results indicated that DGS, if not solely, would be the main contributor to ALPS-like phenotypes of the patient. In light of the clinical ALPS-like manifestations, sirolimus therapy was initiated (1.5 mg/m2, actual blood concentration range: 4.0–5.2 ng/ml) without the addition of other immunosuppressive agents. After 1 month of sirolimus treatment, the whole blood cell counts were gradually restored , with a decrease in the severity and frequency of infections and bleeding episodes. Lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly were rapidly alleviated in this patient. The enlarged spleen shrunk from 5 cm below the left costal margin to 1 cm, highlighting encouraging results as early as 3 months from the start of sirolimus monotherapy.