A 65-year-old male presented to the emergency department with the chief complaint of insidious onset, colicky, moderately severe, and non-radiating abdominal pain for 1 week followed by 5 days of obstipation and a lump in the right side of the abdomen. He also provided a history of a non-bloody diarrheal episode about 2 weeks back. His appetite was reduced with an unintentional weight loss of 10 lbs. but he denied any history of fever, nausea, vomiting, hematochezia /melena. His family history was non-contributory and he had no significant past medical history. Social history of occasional alcohol consumption and tobacco use were positive. The patient denied any illicit drug use.
On examination, the patient was alert and his vital signs were normal. He was afebrile with a blood pressure of 110/80 mmHg, pulse rate of 80 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and SpO2 of 97% in room air.
On abdominal examination, mild tenderness was elicited on right lower quadrant without rebound tenderness and guarding. An ill-defined soft, smooth mass could be palpated on the right side of the abdomen with an extension from the right lumbar region to the right iliac fossa. The abdomen was distended with increased bowel sound without any sign of peritonitis. All the hernial sites were intact. On digital rectal examination, no mass could be felt but the glove was stained with blood. Other systemic examinations were found to be normal.
Laboratory investigations were within normal limits with hemoglobin of 12.3 g/dL , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , total leucocyte count of 10,000/μL, platelets of 359,000/μL, serum sodium of 146 mEq/L, serum potassium of 4 mEq/L, random blood sugar level of 5.1 mmol/L, urea of 3.3 mmol/L, and creatinine of 76 μmol/L.
An abdominal X-ray revealed multiple dilated large bowel loops with few air-fluid levels suggesting large bowel obstruction . Ultrasonography of abdomen and pelvis demonstrated evidence of bowel within bowel appearance in the left upper quadrant of abdomen measuring 77 × 75 mm with target sign suggestive of intussusception of probably colocolic type along with fecal matter-containing dilated bowel loops in the right iliac fossa. Abdomino-pelvic CT scan showed left descending colon intussusception along with the classic target sign .
The clinical and radiological findings in the patient established that this was a case of colocolic intussusception causing closed-loop intestinal obstruction due to a competent ileocecal valve. The patient was then promptly administered intravenous fluids and anitbiotics and underwent nasogastric decompression. Emergency laparotomy was done and on exploring the abdomen, a large bowel loop invaginating into the descending colon with a large colonic mass as the lead point was revealed. The proximal bowel loops were dilated with the caecum being hugely dilated with impending perforation. The colonic mass was suspected to be malignant in origin. Thus, a standard subtotal colectomy with ileosigmoidal anastomosis with loop ileostomy was performed without initial intussusception reduction. During the procedure, the massively dilated caecum burst out for which abdominal lavage with warm saline water was performed.
On opening the specimen, an exophytic, friable mass of size 8.5 cm × 7 cm × 7 cm was seen arising from the posteromedial wall of the descending colon .
Histopathological examination of the cut sections from mass showed neoplastic tubular to cystic glands infiltrating the mucosal lamina propria, submucosa, muscularis propria, and perimuscular fibrous connective tissue. The glands were lined by pseudostratified columnar epithelium with loss of polarity and nuclear hyperchromasia. Mitosis constituted 5/10 HPFs and intraluminal necrosis was present. This led to the diagnosis of moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with 40% of mucinous components (T3 N0 Mx) .
The post-operative period was uneventful and the patient recovered well. On 6-month follow-up patient was doing well and disease free.