A 73-year-old woman presented with swelling of the right hypochondrium. The patient had a medical history of high blood pressure. Physical examination confirmed a subcutaneous mass in the right hypochondrium. No obvious tenderness or peritoneal signs were observed. Body temperature was 36.5 °C, blood pressure was 150/95 mmHg, and heart rate was 129 bpm. A blood test on admission showed an increase in inflammatory response with a white blood cell count of 19,200/mm3 and C-reactive protein of 8.3 mg/dL. All tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen 2.0 ng/mL, CA 19-9 9.9 U/mL, α-fetoprotein 3.0 ng/mL, and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist 9 mAU/mL) were within reference ranges.
A contrast-enhanced computer tomography (CT) scan showed a 68-mm mass lesion in the S5 of the right lobe of the liver. In the late phase, a strong enhancement effect was observed at the margin of the tumor. A 70-mm mass with poor contrast enhancement was found on the side of the abdominal wall. Because the mass was continuous with the liver, we suspected invasion of the abdominal wall by a hepatic malignant tumor such as intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma . Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a contrast-enhancing effect at the margin of the tumor in the right lobe S5 of the liver, and diffusion-weighted imaging showed high intensity inside the tumor. The finding was consistent with abdominal wall invasion by a malignant liver tumor . On positron emission tomography/computed tomography, abnormal uptake was observed in a liver mass and a continuous abdominal wall mass (SUV max 14.0 [early phase], 19.1 [delayed phase]).
Based on the imaging findings, an invasion of the abdominal wall by a malignant hepatic tumor was suspected. However, a liver abscess could not be ruled out. A needle biopsy was performed for diagnostic purposes on the 14th day of hospitalization.
A needle biopsy showed a white abscess in addition to liver tissue. Histopathological findings showed infiltrative growth of atypical ducts, and the patient was diagnosed with invasive cholangiocarcinoma with abscess formation . Percutaneous drainage was started the same day and the antibiotic tazobactam/piperacillin hydrate was administered for 14 days. A culture of the abscess detected Fusobacterium sp. but not actinomycetes. A hepatic abscess associated with hepatic actinomycosis was diagnosed because bacterial masses of actinomycetes (sulfur granules) were observed in the pathological histopathology . Tangled masses of branched and unbranched wavy bacterial filaments in Gram stain, which is characteristic of actinomycosis, were also observed . In this case, Fusobacterium was also detected in a culture of the liver abscess; however, from these pathological and bacteriological findings and the characteristic infiltrative CT image, we presume that actinomycosis was the main cause of the abscess. Given that the abdominal wall portion of the mass shrank by the 30th day of hospitalization, we assumed that the abdominal wall portion of the mass was an abscess rather than a tumor infiltration. To reduce the risk of forming a disseminated lesion associated with percutaneous needle biopsy, we performed neoadjuvant therapy. Four cycles of chemotherapy (gemcitabine and cisplatin) were administered to treat intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma from the 56th day of hospitalization and CT imaging was performed again. A contrast-enhanced CT image on the 155th day of hospitalization showed that the hepatic mass in the late phase shrunk considerably to 27 mm in size, although the contrast effect remained . Abnormal uptake in the mass disappeared on positron emission tomography/computed tomography. Contrast-enhanced MRI showed a contrast-enhancing effect on the mass in the early phase; however, no high-intensity regions were observed on diffusion-weighted imaging. Evaluating remnant intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma using imaging alone was difficult. On the 198th day of hospitalization, a hepatectomy was performed after receiving informed consent from the patient.
Central bisegmentectomy of the liver, cholecystectomy, and lymphadenectomy in the hepatoduodenal ligament (No. 12) were performed. Only mild adhesions were observed between the liver and abdominal wall, and no disseminated lesions were seen in the abdominal wall or the intraperitoneal cavity. A rapid pathological diagnosis of the No. 12 lymph node and intra-abdominal nodule confirmed the absence of cancer metastasis.
Histopathological findings showed an old inflammatory focus forming scars on the margin of the liver and a well-differentiated intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma measuring 1.8 × 1.5 cm that partially overlapped with inflammatory foci. No invasion into the surrounding liver parenchyma, vascular invasion, extension to the serosal membrane, or invasion into the bile duct were observed . No evidence of actinomycosis was observed in the resected liver tissue. The tumor was diagnosed as T1aN0M0 Stage IA in accordance with the Union for International Cancer Control tumor-node-metastasis classification stage (8th edition). The histopathological evaluation of the therapeutic effect was Grade IIa (i.e., 10% to 50% of tumor cells destroyed) by Evans classification and Score 2 (i.e., partial response: residual cancer with evident tumor regression, but more than single cells or rare small groups of cancer cells) by the College of American Pathologists.
The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged from hospital on the 214th day of hospitalization (or 16th postoperative day). The patient has been recurrence-free without adjuvant chemotherapy for 2 years and 9 months after surgery.