After obtaining informed consent from the patient’s parents, we report the case of an 11-year-old girl with consanguineous parents of Arab ethnicity referred to our Chronic Rhinosinusitis with Nasal Polyposis Multidisciplinary team. Clinical history identified upper respiratory airway recurrent infections from the first days of life, including persistent rhinitis with mucous and mucopurulent rhinorrhea and recurrent otitis media. At the age of 10 years, after an ENT evaluation with nasal endoscopy execution, bilateral CRSwNP was diagnosed, in the absence of apparent comorbidities, for which she had undergone functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS). Despite this, her symptoms persisted, including nasal obstruction, runny nose, and productive cough of recent onset.
Skin prick test (wheal ø 7 mm) and specific IgE (Dermatophagoides farinae, 1.67; Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, 1.45 kUI/L) identified an allergy to dust mites. Environmental measures, oral antihistamines, and nasal steroids got only mild improvement in nasal symptoms.
Basal spirometry revealed an obstructive pattern with forced vital capacity (FVC) 75%, forced expiratory volume (FEV1) 58%, maximal mild-expiratory flow (MMEF) 85%, and maximal expiratory flow (MEF50) 57% of the expected normal value; the bronchodilation test did not show a significant change in lung volumes. Work-up after routine examination included a chest computed tomography scan, showing two parenchymal thickenings with a simultaneous aerial bronchogram consisting of cylindrical bronchiectasis, corresponding to the lateral segment of the middle lobe and the upper lingular segment.
According to our CRSwNP protocol, we evaluated the PICADAR score , which was 3, and nasal nitric oxide (nNO) (NIOX VERO® nasal), significantly reduced at 18 nl/mi (the mean value between the two nostrils).
The sweat chloride test was negative (Cl 24 mmol/L), as were genetic evaluations for CF.
Nasal cytology revealed inflammatory rhinitis with neutrophilic cellularity and few non-degranulated eosinophilic elements .
Nasal fibroendoscopy documented hypertrophy of the lower and middle turbinates with polypoid formations originating from the middle meatus and abundant mucous secretions , with endoscopic Lund–Kennedy scores of 5 and 4 for the right and left nasal cavities, respectively. A paranasal sinus CT scan showed pansinusopathy with complete obliteration of the maxillary sinuses, sphenoid sinus and ethmoid cells, and hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates , with a Lund–McKay score of 10 for both nostrils.
An endoscopic procedure was performed, proceeding with an ethmoidectomy with bilateral sphenotomy and meatotomy, with revision of both maxillary sinuses. A histological examination of the excised material revealed polypoid formations with a ciliated columnar coverage associated with chorion edema containing rare small foci of mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate with rare figures of intraepithelial exocytosis. There was no evidence of eosinophilic granulocytes.
The cytomorphological examination of the material, obtained by “brushing” the nasal mucosa, highlights a hypocellular sample with widespread aspects of squamous metaplasia in which very rare ciliated cells are appreciated with predominantly immobile cilia.
An ultrastructural investigation (TEM) performed on nasal brushing evaluating the ciliated epithelial elements showed the presence of a normal structure of the ciliary axonemes. There were no evident Class 1 modifications of the few assessable axonemes.
Whole exome sequencing (WES) (Twist Bioscience) was performed on proband and his parents and sequenced with paired-end read (150bp) on an Illumina NovaSeq6000 platform. The target regions include the coding exons +/− 25 flanking bases (based on the RefSeq database). We obtained a targeted NGS assay that had a mean coverage of 150× for >97% bases, a specificity of 100%, and a sensitivity of 100%, with a quality score of ≥30. Sequencing data were filtered by a custom in silico panel of genes associated with PCD and a nonsense homozygous mutation was identified in a GAS8 gene: c.189G>A p.(Trp63Ter). Sanger sequencing was performed to confirm the homozygous status of the proband and that her parents were heterozygous carriers of the same mutation . The list of genes is available in and includes all genes associated with PCD based on the literature and the Online Catalog of Human Genes and Genetic Disorders (OMIM).
The variant is not present in the general population allele frequency database (gnomAD), nor is it described in the scientific literature. This variant can be classified according to the ACMG guidelines as probably pathogenetic (class 4) .
At the time of diagnosis, the possibility of performing immunofluorescence was not available in our laboratory. However, a protocol was subsequently developed, as previously reported by Shoemark et al. , and we were able to confirm the GAS8 deficiency in the current case .