A 17-year-old girl, G4P1, who received an abortion in a local hospital with relatively outdated medical technology two months ago, presenting with irregular vaginal bleeding post-operation, was admitted to the gynecology department on April 1st, 2022. The patient did not have regular β-hCG monitor and gynecological ultrasound post abortion. Pathologists in our hospital borrowed and reviewed the pathological sections of the first curettage and the diagnosis of complete hydatidiform mole was confirmed.
β-hCG plasma level was 7,584 IU/L when she was admitted to our hospital and a trans-vaginal ultrasound found a heterogeneous echogenic mass (4.3*3.2*3.2 cm) with abundant blood flow signal in the myometrium of left uterine horn . A pelvic MRI scan was arranged and reported a left cornual mass (2.9*3.2*3.9 cm) likely representing gestational trophoblastic neoplasm . Gynecological examination, chest CT scan and other image examinations did not find metastasis. According to the anatomical staging system and prognostic scoring system developed by the Federation International of Gynecology and Obstetrics , the patient was diagnosed with gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN) with a total score of 2 (1 point for pre-treatment serum β-hCG, 1 point for largest tumor size including uterus), stage I.
Systemic chemotherapy was commenced with methotrexate and folinic acid (methotrexate, 1 mg/kg intramuscular, every other day * 4 days, alternating with 15 mg of oral leucovorin* 4 days, repeated every 2 weeks). Although β-hCG plasma titer dropped significantly to 743.5 IU/L after the first course of chemotherapy, the patient still suffered from unexpected intermittent vaginal bleeding and her hemoglobin dropped to 55 g/L on May 5, 2022.
Reexamined trans-vaginal ultrasound showed enlarged mixed-echo mass (5.1*3.6*3.2 cm) on the left uterine horn . In order to control vaginal bleeding and relieve anemia, we decided to perform an explorative laparotomy and resect the described uterine mass. Open abdominal exploration revealed a round mass approximately 4 cm in diameter at the left uterine myometrium . The lesion was excised by a wedge resection and the uterus was repaired by sutures to the deeper layer and serosa .
The microscopic examination (standard hematoxylin and eosin staining) of the surgical specimen showed smooth muscle with hemorrhagic, necrotic tissues and several degenerated villi . A diagnosis of invasive hydatidiform mole was made because of the presence of villus in the resected mass. β-hCG plasma titer fell to 51.2 IU /L after the operation. The patient continued to receive the original regimen of chemotherapy and the β-hCG level dropped to negative at the end of the third course of chemotherapy. Additional 2 courses of chemotherapy were given to prevent relapse. During the 8-month follow-up period, she had no evidence of recurrence with regular menstrual cycle.