A 65-year-old male presented in our hospital in December, 2021, who had a lung solid nodular lesion incidentally found by a physical examination 20 days ago. The patient had no specific symptoms to complain and quit smoking for almost 20 years. Chest CT scanning showed a lobulated mass in the upper lobe of the left lung with size of 7.6 × 7.6 × 6 cm. The lesion was well circumscribed under the visceral pleura and no enlarged lymph node was detected. The patient underwent partial lobectomy of the left upper lung in January, 2022. Frozen section examination was performed during operation and a diagnosis of low-grade malignant tumor developed from mesenchymal tissue was made. The patient recovered well after surgery and no recurrence and metastasis was found after eight month’s follow up.
Gross examination revealed a tumor partly dissociated and partly demarcated sharply with the surrounding pulmonary tissue, with the largest dimension of 8 cm. The tumor was totally solid and showed white–grey on cut surface, with scattered foci of hemorrhage. Microscopically, the tumor consisted of regions with different morphology. At the periphery of the mass, the tumor showed the typical features of pulmonary sclerosing pneumocytoma . Distinct growth patterns such as papillary, solid and hemangioma-like were seen. Both the lining cuboid cells and the stromal round cells were bland looking and lack of mitotic figure. Immunohistochemical staining confirmed the diagnosis of PSP by positive staining of TTF-1and EMA in both types of cells. CK-pan was positive in only the surface cuboidal cells but not the stromal cells which expressed Vimentin strongly.
Most areas of the tumor were composed of sheets of compact tumor cells. While some of these cells were small round or polygonal, most of which were oval or spindled with fascicular and whorled growth pattern reminiscent of fibrous or fibroblastic tumors such as solitary fibrous tumor . In some areas, tumor cells appeared epithelioid with slight to moderate atypical nuclei, and focally bizarre nuclei and multinucleate tumor cells were identified. TTF-1 and EMA were diffusely positive for all these cells with different morphology including the spindle cells and the atypical epithelioid cells, while CK-pan was totally negative, consistent with the phenotype of the stromal cells of PSP. Hence these cellular areas virtually represented enlarged solid pattern of PSP exclusively composed of proliferative and polymorphic stromal round cells. The Ki-67 proliferation index in these areas was low with only slight increase compared to the typical PSP components, with 2–3% and 1%, respectively. Interestingly, the bizarrely shaped nuclei were totally negative for Ki-67, indicating that these cells were not mitotically active.
In several sections we found some sarcomatoid components amongst the cellular areas. These components were composed of monomorphic spindle cells arranged in long fascicles or storiform patterns, with moderate atypical and hyperchromatic nuclei and relatively prominent nucleoli. The borders of the sarcomatoid areas were irregular and the sarcomatoid cells intersecting with the surrounding tissue were easily seen. In some areas, metaplastic bones were found adjacent to the sarcomatoid spindle cells . Mitotic activity was fairly high with more than 20 mitotic figures per 10HPF (2mm2). For immunostain, the tumor cells were weakly positive for SMA and strongly positive for Vimentin, but negative for other markers such as AE1/AE3, CK7, CK18, CK19, CK5/6, p63, TTF-1, EMA, CD34, desmin and so on. Ki-67 proliferation index was almost 70%.