A previously healthy 19 month old boy presented with a 6 day history of fever accompanied by a diffuse macular erythematous rash that appeared 1 day after. The physical examination on admission revealed bilateral non-suppurative conjunctivitis, dry fissured and injected lips without “strawberry” tongue, diffuse macular rash on the trunk, face and limbs, swelling of the hands and feet, and right cervical lymphadenopathy (2 cm in diameter). Investigations revealed a total white blood count of 21 X 109 /L (neutrophils: 27.5%, lymphocytes: 58.4%, monocytes: 12.6%), hemoglobin: 11.9 g/dL, platelet count: 171X109/L. The peripheral blood smear revealed atypical lymphocytes. Laboratory investigations also showed elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) 8.5 mg/dl (normal reference ≤0.5 mg/dl), hypoalbuminemia (3 g/dl) and elevated transaminase levels: alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 132 U/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 375 U/L. Urinalysis was normal. Chest X-ray revealed peri-bronchial thickening without infiltrate. Serology for EBV and Cytomegalovirus (CMV) was ordered. Because of high suspicion of KD, an abdominal ultrasonography and echocardiography were performed. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed hydrops of the gallbladder with patent biliary tracts, enlarged porta hepatis lymph nodes up to 8.4 mm in diameter and enlarged spleen 3.5X10.5 cm in diameter. Doppler Echocardiography was normal without any evidence of CAA. Following fulfillment of all the clinical criteria, the diagnosis of KD was made and treatment with IVIG 2 g/Kg was administered along with oral aspirin (80 mg/ kg/day). However, despite the treatment, he remained febrile for an additional 2 days with persistent clinical manifestations such as conjunctivitis, red fissured lips, “strawberry tongue”, rash and peripheral edema; therefore he received a second 2 g/kg IVIG course with a favorable response. Repeated echocardiography on the fifth day from admission was normal. The patient was discharged after resolution of fever and improvement of inflammatory markers. The blood tests on discharge revealed CRP of 2.2 mg/dl, albumin of 2.93 g/dl, ALT of 258 U/L, ALP of 618 U/L, Gamma-Glutamyl Transferase (GGT) of 497 U/L. He remained afebrile for only 2 days. On the 14 day of illness the patient became febrile again and was readmitted. The physical examination revealed periungual desquamation of the fingertips and toes without the typical stigmata of KD he had prior. Blood examinations revealed remarkable leukocytosis up to 35.7 X 109/L with 87.3% lymphocytes, hemoglobin of 11.2 g/L, platelets of 233X109/L and CRP of 1.8 mg/dl. The blood smear revealed atypical lymphocytes and monocytes. The liver enzymes were still elevated, ferritin was 405 ng/ml (normal reference 7–142 ng/ml) and triglycerides were 223 mg/dl. The serology for infectious mononucleosis from his first admission revealed: IgM CMV (+), IgG CMV (−); IgM VCA EBV (+) IgG VCA EBV (−), IgG EBNA (−). Based on the clinical and laboratory manifestations, we conclude that the fever was attributed to the EBV infection rather than KD relapse and therefore he was not treated with a third dose of IVIG. To confirm infectious mononucleosis following the administration of 2 doses of IVIG, serum EBV PCR was performed and was positive (1.6X 103 cp/ml). Urinary CMV PCR was negative. The fever persisted for an additional 7 days. The patient was discharged with a low dose of aspirin. During the 3 months of follow-up, the patient remained completely asymptomatic and repeated echocardiograms were normal.