A 53-year-old gentleman with no co-morbidities presented to the outpatient department with complaints of noisy breathing for 20 days. He also gave history of progressive snoring and change in voice from 6 months. Examination revealed a smooth mass in the oropharynx extending inferiorly from the level of the base of tongue and superiorly beyond the level of the soft palate causing near complete obstruction of the oropharyngeal airway. A contrast enhanced computed tomogram (CECT) of the neck was done which was suggestive of a well-defined, non-enhancing fat density lesion in the retropharyngeal space measuring 8.2 cm craniocaudally, 4 cm antero-posteriorly and 6.2 cm transversely causing marked narrowing of the airway. The lesion is seen to compress the left carotid artery and displacing it laterally . It was seen extending from the base of skull to the level of C5 vertebrae .
As the patient was in stridor he was immediately shifted to the operation theatre where he underwent a tracheostomy under local anaesthesia. Tracheostomy secured the airway and relieved the respiratory distress. A trans-oral core biopsy of the lesion was done in the same sitting which was reported as a lipoma and the patient was planned for trans oral excision under general anaesthesia.
Patient was placed in the Rose position. Exposure of the lipoma was achieved using a Boyle Davis mouth gag. The soft palate was retracted to expose the superior limit of the tumour. A vertical incision was made over the posterior pharyngeal wall and the constrictor muscles exposing the lipoma. Dissection was carried out from above downwards with traction over the tumour, releasing its attachments by blunt dissection. The tumour was found anterior to the prevertebral muscles within the confines of the retropharyngeal space. The tumour was delivered per-orally as a whole .
Gross examination revealed a partly encapsulated tumour measuring 8x6x3.5cm with yellow fatty areas on cut section. Histopathological examination revealed a lipomatous hamartoma, which showed lobules of mature adipose tissue with skeletal muscle bundles, few nerves and fibrocollagenous tissue . Post-operative period was uneventful, the tracheostomy tube was decannulated on post operative day three. Patient was kept on Ryles tube feeds for a week.