An 8-year-old Caucasian male presented with a six-month history of increasingly severe headaches associated with physical exertion. Imaging studies revealed a cystic lesion with an enhancing mural nodule in the left occipital lobe . The patient underwent a subtotal resection 18.5 years ago, tolerating the procedure well with no neurological deficits (see for timeline). As shown in , the tumor was comprised of a low-grade astrocytic proliferation with scattered hyperchromatic nuclei. There was a small zone of necrosis and some endothelial proliferation; however, mitoses were not increased, and the MIB-1 index was low (less than 5%). On retrospective staining, the tumor was negative for BRAF V600E by immunohistochemistry. At the time, the tumor was thought to be most compatible with a pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (PXA), WHO grade 2 . Post-operative imaging revealed a residual solid/cystic nodule of tumor (3 cm), which remained stable during subsequent follow-up scans until one year later, when he had symptomatic enlargement of the mass (5.7 x 4.7 cm). At this time, he underwent a second resection. The tumor continued to show low-grade astrocytic features and was morphologically compatible with recurrent PXA . Again, the tumor was retrospectively stained for BRAF V600E, which continued to be negative. Several months later, he developed headaches again and an MRI showed a second recurrence at the site of prior resection. He underwent Gamma knife radiosurgery (18 Gy), which resolved his symptoms. Repeated imaging over the next 9 years showed continued but stable nodular enhancement (2.4-2.5 cm) within the tumor resection bed.
Sixteen years after his initial presentation, he returned with severe headaches and a right visual field deficit. Imaging revealed a 6 cm irregular, contrast-enhancing mass with solid and cystic components associated with the prior tumor site causing significant mass effect . A third resection was performed, showing a hypercellular glial neoplasm with marked atypia, palisading necrosis, and increased and atypical mitoses. . Immunohistochemical stains were positive for GFAP and the MIB-1 index was approximately 50% . Stains for BRAF V600E and IDH1 R132H were negative and ATRX was intact . Overall, the findings were most consistent with a glioblastoma, IDH-wildtype, WHO grade 4. Additional genetic testing was performed using the FoundationOne ®CDx panel, which showed an EWSR1 (NM_005243)-PATZ1(NM_014323) fusion, RB1 loss, SMAD4 loss, and a TP53 L330fs*15 inactivating mutation. The tumor was microsatellite stable and showed a low mutational burden (0 Muts/Mb). The patient received 6 weeks of external beam radiation with a total of 60 Gy along with temozolomide induction at 200 mg/day for 28 days. The patient then received 12 cycles of maintenance temozolomide therapy (cycle 1 at 150 mg/m day with dose-escalation for cycles 2-12 at 200 mg/m day). On clinical follow-up, the patient has done well with no new symptoms, and MRI has demonstrated stable enhancing foci in the surgical bed with no new abnormal enhancing foci on repeated imaging over the last 2.5 years since surgery .