A 38-year-old female with a history of smoking and a past medical history of recurrent haematuria presented to the emergency department with sore throat, shortness of breath, lower abdominal pain, and malaise. On examination, she was pyrexial at 37.8°C and hypotensive with a blood pressure of 98/60 mmHg, heart rate of 100 b.p.m., and oxygen saturation level of 100%. General abdominal tenderness and macroscopic haematuria were the clinical findings. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with inferolateral ST elevation . Laboratory blood tests revealed raised levels of C-reactive protein 243 mg/L (reference: <3 mg/L), troponin T 67 ng/L (reference: <14 ng/L), d-dimer 1.2 mg/L (reference: <0.25 mg/L), leukocytes 19.5 × 109/L (reference: 3.5–8.8 × 109/L), and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide 2790 ng/L ​(reference: <125 ng/L). COVID-19 RNA in nasopharyngeal swab and serum was negative. A consensus in the cardiology unit was to consider other diagnoses rather than acute myocardial infarction due to fever, elevated C-reactive protein, and mild troponin elevation. Hence, a coronary angiogram was not performed. Fulminant myopericarditis with the primary source likely arising from the abdomen was the working diagnosis. The differential diagnoses were pneumonia and pulmonary embolism due to dyspnoea and elevated d-dimer. Computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram revealed no evidence of pulmonary embolism or infiltrative lesions but 2 cm bilateral pleural effusion and an overloaded right ventricle (RV). An abdominal CT scan showed free abdominal fluid.
She was treated with 400 mg ibuprofen and 1000 µg colchicine. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) on Day 1 and on Day 3 (Video 1) showed preserved systolic left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 50–55%, dilated RV with reduced right ventricular ejection fraction (RVEF), reduced tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion, and a severe TR . The patient’s body temperature rose to 38.2°C, and she became more hypotensive with a blood pressure of 76/60, C-reactive protein increased up to 395 mg/L, and worsening renal function. Blood, nasopharynx, and urine cultures were taken, and the patient was administered intravenous (IV) Ringer’s acetate and piperacillin–tazobactam 4 g every 8 hours, quaque octa hora (q8 h) for a total of 9 days. Inotropic support and vasopressor support with levosimendan 0.05 µg/kg and norepinephrine 0.11 µg/kg/min were administered to improve the patient’s haemodynamic stability. A rheumatologic investigation was initiated to exclude Mediterranean fever, systemic lupus erythematosus, acute porphyria, myositis, and vasculitis. A wide range of microbiological and immunological tests was performed with no positive results. Endocarditis was excluded due to negative blood cultures and absence of echocardiographic findings suggesting endocarditis.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging showed dilated RV with reduced RVEF of 51%, LVEF of 47%, signs of PH including overloaded RV, severe TR, RV end-diastolic pressure higher than LV end-diastolic pressure, and signs of peri- and myocarditis with epicardial infusion and myocardial oedema (; , ). The focal structural changes were inferior and not accessible for biopsy wherefore an endomyocardial biopsy could not be performed. No signs of myocardial infarction amyloidosis or cardiomyopathy were seen. Due to the fact that the patient had been exposed to COVID-19 through a family member, MIS-A was considered. She was empirically treated by replacing colchicine with IV anakinra 100 mg q8 h, administration of immunoglobulin [intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG)] infusion at 1 mg/kg/day for 2 days, and IV solumedrol 1500 mg for 3 days . Over the next 24 h, clinical improvement was observed, and she was weaned off norepinephrine. COVID IgG spike antibodies came back positive, confirming the diagnosis of MIS-A. Right heart catheterization a few days later showed no abnormal findings. A new TTE before discharge showed a moderate TR and restored ejection fractions. The patient was discharged on the 12th day with oral prednisolone 30 mg/day, tapered over a month. She was followed up at our outpatient heart failure clinic and the rheumatological outpatient clinic. All laboratory values were restored, and a TTE 3 months after discharge showed only a mild TR remaining (, ).