A 63-year-old male with a reported history of primary HCC treated with surgery and interventional chemotherapy 2 years ago was admitted to our hospital. He suffered from shortness of breath, abdominal distention and palpitation for 1 month. On physical examination, a grade 3/6 systolic murmur over the pulmonary area was heard. Edema in both lower limbs was observed. ECG demonstrated sinus rhythm, ventricular premature contraction and complete right bundle branch block. Laboratory findings showed that his NT-proBNP level was 1769 pg/ml, CKMB was 27 U/L and TnI was 0.249μg/ml. He had no history of hepatic virus infection. Other findings were albumin33.7 g/L, GGT97U/L, BilT26.4umol/L, BilD10.7umol/L, uric444 umol/L and CRP114mg/L.
Positron emission tomography CT (PETCT) in other hospital showed that there was no nodule in the liver but some sporadic nodules in the lung. Large amount of pericardial effusion could also be observed. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a huge mass with moderate echogenicity in right ventricle (RV) which caused severe inflow obstruction. The mass blocked almost the whole cavity and showed little degree of mobility along with the cardiac cycle. The right ventricle outflow tract (RVOT) was also partially occupied, however, the speed of pulmonary artery (PA) remained normal (1.0 m/s). Contrast echocardiography (CE) demonstrated higher perfusion in the mass than in the myocardium after the administration of contrast agent. Cord-like vascular perfusion was observed in the mass. Color Doppler imaging showed fine and high velocity flow with the speed of 2 m/s in RV. Enlarged RV, RA and PA were also noted. Massive pericardial effusion was detected with enlarged IVC. Cardiac MRI confirmed that the huge mass had a size of 93x50x81mm and appeared lobular, and it seemed to have blurred the outline of anterior and lateral wall of RV. As his physical condition deteriorated rapidly, a cardiac surgery was operated to relieve the fatal obstruction. Fortunately, the patient was discharged one week after the surgery because of great improvement in his physical condition.