A 52-year-old man was admitted to the local hospital because of acute fever and poor general condition. By admittance he was septic with unknown focus of infection. He worked in the transportation business and mainly by transportation of cadavers, most often swine cadavers. He rarely used protective gloves. He had known ankylosing spondylitis since years and was treated with adalimumab injections every 14 days and ibuprofen. He had earlier experienced a reaction to penicillin with symptoms of urticaria. Five days before admission he got a cut on the volar side of the proximal inter phalangeal joint of the fourth finger on the left hand, but he could not remember how he got it. Two days later he had increasing pain in his finger and it swelled, but no pus was seen from the wound. The last 24 h before admission, he experienced fever with chills, increasing pain in the finger, nausea, diarrhoea and fatigue.
On physical examination at admission, his body temperature (after taking antipyretics) was 38.4°C, pulse rate was 93 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 20 per minute, and blood pressure was 147/92 mmHg. By auscultation the lung sounds were normal and there was no cardiac murmur. The abdomen was soft and free from pain by palpation. Examination of the fourth finger on the left hand showed a small, dry wound from the cut, some tenderness along the course of the flexor sheath, slightly flexed finger at rest, erythema and enlargement compared to the other digits.
Laboratory and imaging examinations showed white blood cells (WBC) 18.3 × 109/L, neutrophil granulocytes 16.4 × 109/L, haemoglobin 13.7 g/L, platelets 300 × 109/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) 15 mg/L, lactate dehydrogenase 287 U/L. Blood cultures (three bottles from one venipuncture) were sampled. The chest X-ray was normal and he had a normal urine dipstick test. In conclusion the patient fulfilled 4/4 systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) criteria and the most plausible explanation was sepsis due to a bacterial tenosynovitis in the fourth finger of the left hand. Based on this the patient was rapidly brought to the operating room.
In local anaesthetic ulnar and median nerve block an incision was made to reach the common synovial sheath 2–3 cm proximally to the basis of the fourth finger. Immediately accumulated fluid emptied the synovial sheath and a bacterial sample was collected. In accordance with Norwegian sepsis guidelines in patients allergic to penicillin, the patient was then given clindamycin and gentamicin intravenously. Furthermore, two incisions on the volar side of the proximal and distal interphalangeal joints through the synovial sheath were made and a drain tube was inserted into the sheath from the palm of the hand to the distal interphalangeal joint. The drain tube was connected to Ringer’s acetate that flushed the tendon sheath until the next day.
The day after the patient was feeling much better. He had no fever and did not appear septic. Laboratory examinations showed: WBC 19.7 × 109/L; CRP 73 mg/L. Three out of three blood cultures bottles were positive with gram-positive rods, and gram-positive cocci in clusters, probably staphylococci, were found in the sample from the synovial sheath. The patient was referred for transthoracic echocardiography to exclude endocarditis and the echocardiogram showed morphologically normal valves and chambers with no signs of vegetations. After 4 days of intravenous treatment with clindamycin 600 mg × 3/day and gentamicin 320 mg × 1/day, the patient was discharged in well-being. CRP had fallen to 11 mg/L and WBC to 9.3 × 109/L. He continued with clindamycin orally 300 mg × 3/day for 1 week. He was recommended to avoid the upcoming injection of adalimumab at discharge.
Five days after discharge, a transoesophageal echocardiogram was performed with no signs of valvular or endocardial manifestation of the disease. He was recommended to see his general practitioner for a clinical follow-up and removal of the stitches 1 week after discharge. At an outpatient control after three months and when we contacted him ten months after discharge, the patient reported no relapse of the infection and no persistent sequela.
A blood culture set including two aerobic bottles and one anaerobic bottle was sampled immediately at admission. Within the first 24 h of incubation in 35°C, all three bottles turned positive. The gram stain showed gram-positive rods . Due to characteristic V-formation when visualised in the microscope, they could easily be mistaken for Corynebacterium sp. Because of this we did an initial susceptibility test, directly from positive bottles, based on antibiotics used on Corynebacterium sp. according to Nordic Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (NordicAST) guidelines with disc diffusion method . The isolate was susceptible to penicillin, clindamycin, ciprofloxacin, linezolid and doxycycline and was resistant to gentamicin and rifampicin.
After six to eight hours there were signs of growth on agar plates, but not enough for further examination. After 24 h of incubation, there was growth on both aerobic and anaerobic agar plates. Identification of the isolate was achieved by automatically testing with BD Phoenix 100. It was identified as E. rhusiopathiae with 99% confidence value. Confirmation of the result by the Maldi-tof system was done at the regional university reference laboratory. Due to the patient’s history, the isolation of this bacterium was expected.
A second susceptibility test was done from cultured bottles to determine the minimum inhibitory concentration value of the antibiotics (MIC), using NordicAST guidelines on non-species related breakpoints. MIC-testing showed the isolate was susceptible to penicillins, cephalosporins, ciprofloxacin, clindamycin, erythromycin and imipenem. The isolate was resistant to gentamicin, trimethoprim-sulfa and vancomycin.
During surgery two samples from the synovial sheath were collected and these were also cultured. One sample was sterile, Staphylococcus aureus alone was found in the other. The isolate was, among others, susceptible to clindamycin and gentamicin. This bacterium was not detected in the blood cultures.