A 14-day-old male infant was admitted to our hospital with a 1-day history of skin lesions.
The infant was born at a gestational age of 38 wk and one day, with a birth weight of 2890 g. The mode of birth was cesarean section due to prior cesarean delivery, with no problematic events during the pregnancy, according to the mother. The baby was fed formula milk without attempting breastfeeding, at the mother’s discretion. The first dose of the hepatitis B vaccine, a routine global procedure, was administered on the day of birth.
No medical history or medication intake was recorded. Except for the complaint of skin lesions, the caregivers denied any abnormal symptoms.
No pertinent personal or family history was noted. Paternal and maternal history of human papillomavirus and/or hepatitis-related infections was denied.
On examination, the baby appeared well and active. Initial vital signs were as follows: Heart rate: 146 beats/min; respiration rate: 46 breaths/min; body temperature: 37.3 °C; and pulse oximetry saturation: 98%. His entire body was covered with erythematous papules , with annular or target-like lesions observed mainly on the lower extremities . The oral and anal mucosal membranes were intact. No other abnormalities were observed.
Multiple tests, including routine laboratory evaluations, were performed to identify the cause of skin lesions . Complete blood cell counts were as follows: White blood cell count: 7450/µL (segmented neutrophil 32.7%), hemoglobin: 12.0 g/dL, and platelet count: 649000/µL.
Serological tests for Immunoglobulin M for Toxoplasma, Rubella, Cytomegalovirus, Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV), and Epstein-Barr virus viral-capsid antigen were all negative. Multiple polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests for respiratory viruses and bacterial pathogens on nasopharyngeal swab specimens (including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) were negative (Anyplex II RV16 Detection and Allplex PneumoBacter Assay, Seegene, Seoul, Korea). Based on the possibility of neonatal HSV infection, PCR tests of serum and mucous membrane (conjunctivae, mouth, nasopharynx, and rectum) samples were conducted for HSV-1 and HSV-2, all of which were negative. Multiple PCR tests for gastrointestinal viruses and bacterial pathogens on stool specimens demonstrated evidence of rotavirus infection (Acute Diarrhea Virus and Bacteria Panel, Seoul Clinical Laboratories, Yongin, Korea). No growth was reported in the blood and urine cultures.