An 85-year-old bilingual ethnic Chinese woman with chronic bilateral hearing impairment and a history of transient ischemic attacks, characterized by left hemiparesis, experienced sudden intermittent musical hallucinations for three months. The patient was prescribed aspirin due to her history of cerebral ischemia. The hallucinations were perceived exclusively by her left ear and were described as a radio broadcasting of recognizable tunes frequently played during childhood. Vocal and instrumental music were performed in both Chinese, namely in Cantonese and Putonghua dialects, and English. Our patient heard segments of three songs of distinctly different musical genres including the Cantonese opera “The Flower Princess,” a Putonghua folk song “Su Wu, the shepherd,” and an English minstrel song “My Old Kentucky Home.” Initially she was convinced that the music was playing in the room, but soon realized they did not originate from an external source. The hallucinations were intermittent, occurring when the environment was quiet, and discontinued or reduced in volume when she was engaged in conversation. Each episode lasted for five to ten minutes and was not distressing. There were no symptoms indicative of epilepsy or any psychopathology.Psychometric testing revealed our patient to have left hemispheric language dominance. She also had intact general cognition, with only subtle memory impairment as reflected by a Montreal cognitive assessment score of 23 out of 30. Pure tone audiometry confirmed bilateral hypacusis characterized by severe left sensorineural hearing loss, at a threshold of 80dB, and moderate right sensorineural deficit at 45dB. Brainstem auditory evoked potentials were undetectable on her left, but were normal on her right. Electroencephalography did not identify any epileptiform activity. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed evidence of a right sublenticular lacunar infarct and diffuse cortical atrophy . Our patient was ambivalent to the presence of these hallucinations and refused antipsychotic drug treatment. Aspirin was continued and bilateral hearing aids were prescribed. Three months later her hallucinosis subsided.