A three-week old African-American male newborn, weighing 2.5 kg, was admitted to our unit with jaundice, abdominal distension and hepatomegaly. The pregnancy had been uncomplicated and there was no family history of metabolic or liver disease.
Laboratory studies for liver failure revealed a total serum bilirubin of 22.5 mg/dL, an international normalized ratio 4.9, aspartate aminotransferase 45 U/L and alanine aminotransferase 23 U/L. The boy had a serum iron of 157 μg/dL (normal 30-165 μg/dL), serum ferritin 994 ng/mL (normal 30-330 ng/mL), serum transferrin 103 mg/dL (normal 215-380 mg/dL) and transferrin saturation 109% (range 16%-60%). He had an elevated alpha-fetoprotein level (3289 ng/mL). Investigations for infectious and inherited metabolic pathologies were negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen was suggestive of iron deposition in the liver, with conventional, patent arterial and venous anatomy. NH was suspected and confirmed by minor salivary gland biopsy from the lower lip.
Medical therapy consisting of anti-oxidants and chelation with desferroxamine was initiated. As there was a progressive worsening of the boy's condition on medical therapy, his mother volunteered to be a living liver donor. After a standard expedited two-day donor-workup, the related living donor liver transplantation was planned. Pre-operative MRI showed that the mother's left lateral segment volume was approximately 200 cc3. We therefore decided to do a left lateral resection with back-table monosegmentectomy followed by transplantation.
Intra-operatively, after isolation of the mother's left hepatic artery, hepatic duct and portal branch, the hepatic parenchyma of segment IV was transected 5 mm to the right of the falciform ligament without blood inflow occlusion or graft manipulation. The segment II and III ducts united, just lateral to the umbilical portion of the left portal vein and the segment IV duct, then joined medial to umbilical portion. This confluence of segment II and III ducts was divided and used for anastomosis in the recipient. This was a thin 'pancake' left lateral segment that was transected using ultrasound guidance. On the back-table, a 2.5 mm endostapler with two, triple-staggered rows of titanium staples (Autosuture™GIA™UNIVERSAL stapler, US Surgical, Division of Tyco Healthcare Group LP, CT, USA) was used to staple and divide across the mid-portion of the left lateral segment just to the left of the secondary portal vasculature branching . The final graft consisted of the confluence of segment II and III bile ducts, left portal vein, left hepatic artery arising from left gastric artery and two in-proximity left hepatic veins, joined as one. This non-anatomically resected portion of the lateral segment was used for transplantation in standard piggy-back fashion with Roux-en-Y jejuno-biliary anastomosis. The discarded part was used for hepatocyte isolation . Heparin and aspirin were used in the first post-operative week to prevent vascular thrombosis. The patient was re-explored in the first week for clot evacuation around the transplanted liver segments, with no active bleeding on the cut surface or the stapled edge. Patient was discharged home after three weeks and continues to do well two years post-transplant.