An 18-year-old male patient sustained fracture at C1–C2 in a road traffic accident in 1998; he developed tetraplegia (American Spinal Injury Association grade A) at the C1/C2 level. This patient underwent phrenic pacer implantation for diaphragmatic breathing; he had stented tracheostomy and baclofen pump implantation for intrathecal administration of baclofen to control spasticity. He developed diabetes mellitus; he was managed in the community by 24-hour carers. Carers were advised to perform intermittent urethral catheterizations every 4 hours.
In July 2016, this patient developed recurrent episodes of autonomic dysreflexia during a week due to carers not performing intermittent catheterizations during every night, which led to over-distension of urinary bladder. Furthermore, he did not have regular 4 hourly catheterizations during the day, which resulted in distension of urinary bladder. The day before this patient’s demise, a carer performed routine catheterization; but it failed; blood pressure rose to 192/109 mmHg. Nifedipine 10 mg was administered. The patient was communicating normally; then he complained of “banging head”. Thirty minutes later, blood pressure was 181/113 mmHg; second dose of Nifedipine was not given. Forty minutes elapsed before a senior carer came and catheterized successfully. The patient developed pounding headache and became drowsy and was talking incoherently. Bowel evacuation was then performed. During this period, the patient had fluctuating level of consciousness. Blood pressure was 141/94 mmHg.
Four and half hours after unsuccessful catheterization, emergency services were contacted. In the Accident and Emergency, CT of the head was performed. CT head showed very large acute intracranial hemorrhage in the right frontal and parietal lobes. There was extension into the ventricular system with large amount of fresh blood present in the right lateral ventricle and fresh blood layering in the occipital horns of both lateral ventricles. There was fresh blood in the third and fourth ventricles . There was mild dilatation of the ventricular system; significant mass effect with global effacement of surface cerebral sulci and moderate midline shift to the left .
The patient was deeply unconscious. Neurosurgical team advised no surgical intervention in view of massive intracranial hemorrhage. He was declared “not for cardiopulmonary resuscitation”. Phrenic pacemaker supported breathing; otherwise, he was totally apneic. His wish was not to be permanently connected to artificial ventilator support. A second opinion from a neurosurgical colleague was sought on management of this patient. Mother (next of kin) and carers were aware of the very poor outcome. The patient was pronounced dead the following day.
Post-mortem examination was not performed. There was an inquest by Coroner. The Coroner concluded that the patient died of massive intracranial hemorrhage caused by autonomic dysreflexia, a known complication of a high spinal injury. Emergency protocols to manage this condition were not followed in the days leading up to his death.