A 4-year-old girl was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) of Peking University First Hospital as an emergency (day 1) with intermittent fever, convulsions, and abnormal mental behavior over 15 d of evolution.
Fever (In China, fever is diagnosed when a body temperature is ≥ 37.3 °C) occurred 15 d ago with the highest body temperature of 37.5 °C and without obvious inducement. The symptoms were accompanied by headache. The girl developed convulsions 10 d after the initial symptom onset, lasting a few seconds to 3 min with spontaneous remission occurring 2-3 times a day. Her parents sent her to a local hospital for treatment first. Routine blood tests were normal, and the serum immunoglobulin M antibodies against coxsackie virus and adenovirus were positive. Electroencephalogram (EEG) indicated a small number of low-medium amplitude spikes in the left parietal and central regions and midline during the sleep period. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed without obvious pathological findings. The patient was diagnosed with viral encephalitis and treated with antiviral drugs at the local hospital. During admission, the condition of the patient worsened on day 13 of symptom onset with intermittent psychiatric symptoms and behavioral changes, including agitation, pressured speech, and dyskinesias of the arms and legs. Thereafter, her parents took her to the outpatient department of pediatrics at our hospital, and she was admitted to the PICU as an emergency.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
There was no special personal or family history.
After admission, physical and neurological examinations were unremarkable except for a slightly higher temperature at 37.5 °C.
Routine laboratory tests were unremarkable. Tumor markers and autoimmune profiles were within normal limits. Blood and urine cultures revealed no findings of bacteria or other microorganisms. The detection of thyroid function was also normal.
Brain MRI was performed without obvious pathological findings. Brain MRI was re-examined on day 9 and demonstrated small flaps of T2 fluid-attenuated inversion recovery hyperintensity in the right frontal lobe. On day 12, abdominal-pelvic ultrasound revealed a 3.4 cm × 3.1 cm × 2.8 cm cystic tumor in the left adnexal region, suggesting ovarian teratoma.