A 47-year-old male patient presented to the surgical consultation with recurrent attacks of epigastric pain, melena, and epigastric fullness.
Upper and lower GIT endoscopies were performed during the first admission which showed no abnormal findings.
During the last presentation, the patient was admitted to the surgical unit.
The patients had negative drug history. The family history was negative for any genetic diseases, and the psychosocial history was negative.
The general examination revealed pale conjunctivae, palms and oral mucosa. There were no cyanosis or jaundice.
The blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg on admission, the pulse rate was 95 beats/minute, the temperature was normal and the body mass index was 38.
The abdomen was soft with no areas of tenderness. There were no dilated veins over the abdomen with no stigmata of chronic liver diseases.
Investigations were performed for the patient. The hemoglobin level was 8 gm/dl with normal serum electrolytes, normal liver and renal function tests. The patients received 2 units of compatible blood and arrangement was done to perform another endoscopy.
The endoscopy this time revealed a large pedunculated polyp with ulceration in the second part of the duodenum just distal to ampulla of Vater. .
CT-scan of the abdomen was normal with no abnormal findings.
Arrangement was done to perform surgical intervention, during surgery we adopt an upper midline incision, exploration of the abdominal cavity showed normal liver, spleen, and omentum, with no ascites and no dilated veins.
Mobilization (kocherization) of the duodenum was performed, the anterior wall of duodenum was opened, and a pedunculated polyp (about 4 cm in size) was found which was arising from the posterior wall of the duodenum just distal to the ampulla of Vater. , .
Excision of the polyp with its base was performed and was sent for frozen section examination during surgery which revealed a benign lesion with no signs of malignant activity.
The posterior and the anterior duodenal walls were sutured transversely in two layers by a slowly absorbable 3/0 suture material (polydioxanone). The inner layer with continuous full thickness suturing and the outer layer with interrupted seromuscular suturing.
The procedure was performed by two general surgeons who are specialized in the field of general surgery.
The final histopathology examination revealed a well-defined mass in the submucosa of the duodenum that showed tri-phasic endocrine components; i.e. carcinoid like cells in compact nests and trabeculae, spindle cells (Schwan cells), and ganglion type cells of varying proportions. The immunohistochemical analysis of the polyp showed that all cells stained positive for synaptophysin, Schwan cells stained positive for S100 marker, with focal expression of pankerain in the endocrine cells. The mucosa and the margins were free from the tumor. These features were consistent with the diagnosis of duodenal Gangliocytic paraganglioma. , .
The patient was admitted to the hospital for 5 days with smooth post-operative recovery and no postoperative complications.
No specific postoperative considerations were undertaken.