A 6-year-old boy was referred to our pediatric Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery department in March 2017 for presumed persistent left cholesteatoma. He had undergone surgery in 2015 at an outside institution. According to the operative report, keratin debris was encountered at the anterior-inferior portion of the external auditory canal in close proximity to the tympanic membrane. Faced with an uncertain diagnosis, the decision was made to abort the resection and refer the patient to a tertiary care institution. The post-operative audiogram (performed 6 months later) revealed normal right hearing and a mild left conductive hearing loss. In September 2016, he presented to the emergency department with a left sided painful cervical mass. CT scan revealed a lateral cervical abscess with para-pharyngeal extension. The abscess was drained shortly thereafter in the operating room, by both cervical and oral routes. The boy is otherwise healthy with no significant past medical history.
Physical examination at the time of initial consultation at our institution revealed normal tympanic membranes bilaterally. However, on the left side, a voluminous pre-tympanic cavity filled with ceruminous debris was observed. Computed tomography examination (CT scan) of the neck and temporal bones revealed a normal left middle ear with the presence of a bony canal in the deep portion of the tympanic bone originating from the pre-tympanic region. The canal lied in close proximity to the styloid process, which was eroded in its inferior portion, and was situated in between the carotid artery and the jugular vein . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a large left peri-tonsillar cyst measuring 3 × 1.7 cm, with regular and well-defined borders. Interestingly, there was no obvious cervical communication tract between the cyst and bony canal .
The surgery was performed in a single stage divided into three distinct parts: trans-oral robotic assisted parapharyngeal resection, an endaural approach (canaloplasty) and a parotidectomy approach. The surgery was performed under NIM facial nerve monitoring.
This step was robot assisted (Intuitive Surgical - da Vinci Surgical System Xi®, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Careful dissection of the voluminous parapharyngeal cyst was carried out using a combination of monopolar cautery, Harmonice ACE® curved shears (Ethicon Inc., Somervielle, USA), Maryland® bipolar forceps (Intuitive Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, USA) and microscissors. The deep surface of the cyst ended in a thin tract in close contact to the pterygoid muscles. The most distal visible part of this tract was doubly ligated and transected in order to remove the parapharyngeal portion of the lesion. .
A tympanomeatal flap was then elevated up to the level of the annulus, allowing the dissection of the cutaneous lining of the abnormal bony tunnel, originating from the inferior portion of the external auditory canal in close proximity to the annulus. Excision of about 1 cm of the cutaneous lining of the abnormal bony tunnel was then realized . A canaloplasty was performed by harvesting tragal cartilage and inserting it at the level of the opening of the bony tunnel. Biologic glue was applied over the cartilage as a seal.
A parotidectomy approach was then realized under NIM2 monitoring of the facial nerve. Excision of the inferior portion of the deep parotid lobe was carried out resulting in identification of the continuation of the previously described bony tunnel. The tunnel was located 1 cm deep (medial) to the facial nerve. Under the microscope, the tunnel was opened along the ¾ of its circumference using a burr drill in order to reveal the fistulous tract. The tract was followed until its visible connection with the previous ligation of the deep tract of the parapharyngeal cyst, thus confirming that our patient presented with a single lesion, which was unclear on preoperative MRI.
The patient’s post-operative course was uncomplicated. He was placed on a 7-day course of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid. The neck drain was removed on the second post-operative day. He was then discharged on the third post-operative day. Final pathology of the tissue excised from both the ear and parapharyngeal regions was consistent with the diagnosis of a first branchial cleft cyst, revealing cystic spaces filled with keratin debris and lined by stratified squamous epithelium containing pilosebaceous units . The patient was last seen over 1 year post-operatively; he remains asymptomatic with no clinical evidence of residual or recurrent disease and no facial paralysis. An audiogram was performed and revealed normal hearing.