A 2-year-old girl was seen for a 6-month history of intermittent limping and joint pain, previously treated with acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) with little benefit. The child was born preterm (27 weeks gestation), she suffered from mild bronchopulmonary dysplasia and bilateral renal dysplasia, and her mother reported a Still disease with lung involvement. In the previous months, an ultrasound of lower limbs’ joints had been performed, documenting a mild right hip effusion.
Physical examination showed moderate wrist swelling; objective chest evaluation, saturation values and a slit lamp eye examination were unremarkable.
Blood sampling showed average blood count, increased ESR, positive antibodies ANA and anti-CCP, hypergammaglobulinemia, hypercomplementemia and highly positive rheumatoid factor . Kidney function was normal, as well as urine analysis, without proteinuria or haematuria.
Due to the discrepancy between the mild articular involvement and the marked increase of rheumatoid factor and acute inflammation indexes, the girl was admitted in order to perform further testing.
Wrists’ US revealed a synovial thickening ; the hips and the abdominal US were regular. Other laboratory tests, carried out to rule out neoplasms and possible autoinflammatory pathologies, showed a mild increase of specific neuronal enolase (NSE) and a significant rise in interferon signature . Mantoux test, quantiferon, urinary homovanillic and vanilmandelic acids were negative. Due to the increased NSE, a chest X-ray was performed to exclude the presence of neuroblastoma. The X-ray indicated a diffuse interstitial disease, non-compatible with a diagnosis of neuroblastoma or bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Remarkably, the toddler did not show any sign of respiratory distress. A pulmonary CT highlighted severe interstitial pneumopathy with diffuse fibrosis, patchy ground-glass opacities, cystic areas, bronchiectasis and mediastinal lymphadenopathy .
The multi-system presentation, the family history, and the discrepancy between the very mild articular involvement and markedly increased rheumatoid factor prompted the suspect of a COPA syndrome. A genetic test proved a heterozygous mutation of the COPA gene in c.841C > T (p.R281W).
Janus kinase inhibitor treatment was started (baricitinib, 4 mg daily per os) with a remarkable improvement in limping and joint pain after two weeks.