A 38-year-old primigravid reported for a pregnancy screening after her normal gestation period of 28 weeks without hypertension and a normal blood and urine test. She had not experienced any problems during her pregnancy until then. However, later, she was admitted to our hospital of International University of Health and Welfare as an emergency case with a complaint of upper abdominal pain and headache at 29 weeks of pregnancy. On arrival, her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was E4V5M6. Her blood pressure at admission was 200/100 mmHg. Her blood biochemistry showed hypertransaminasemia with aspartate aminotransferase (AST) at 821 IU/L, elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) at 1895 IU/L, and a low platelet count at 4.3 × 105/μL. The patient’s serum bilirubin level was 1.7 mg/dl. Glucose, creatinine (Cr), and serum electrolytes were normal. According to HELLP syndrome for the diagnostic criteria , she was diagnosed with pregnancy–HELLP syndrome and was immediately scheduled for an emergency caesarean section. The new-born male weighed 975 g with an Apgar score of 7 at the first minute and 8 at the fifth minute. After the operation, the patient was administered intravenous corticosteroids, and nifedipine was continued to maintain her blood pressure below approximately 150/90 mmHg. Gabexate mesilate and anti-thrombin III were also infused to treat intravascular coagulation, which is often observed in patients with HELLP syndrome.
On the second postoperative day, she was assessed by a neurologist. She was conscious but very drowsy and could move her limbs and follow simple orders, and her GCS was E3V4M5. However, she occasionally presented with delirium, which is characterized by a fluctuating mental status. A brain MRI was immediately performed because of her drowsy and confused state on the neurological examination. MRI showed hypersignal intense lesions in the cortical and subcortical white matter in the occipital lobes, basal ganglia and callosal splenium in both the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) , but these lesions were not recognized in diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) . DWI was normal. These images were suggestive of PRES. The aforementioned treatment was continued. On biochemical analysis, it was observed that the liver function improved (AST 59 IU/L, LDH 932 IU/L); however, renal impairment deteriorated further (Cr 4.27 mg/dl). In addition, her urine volume decreased to approximately 400 ml/day. Subsequently, she received haemodialysis 4 times starting on the 5th postoperative day.
Subsequently, patient’s level of consciousness improved, and her renal functional also gradually improved. A complete resolution of the lesions was observed on the follow-up brain MRI performed in 2 weeks after caesarean section. The patient was kept in the hospital for 21 days, and throughout this period, all laboratory tests and imaging examinations returned to normal. The patient was then released, and outpatient follow-up was continued.