A 19-year-old Japanese female without known medical history was transported to our emergency department because of coma. She complained of fever over 39 °C and severe occipital headache the night before her family found her unconscious. Physical examination revealed that her Glasgow coma scale was 6 (E1V1M4) with blood pressure of 128/72 mmHg, heart rate of 88 beats/min, and respiratory rate of 19 breaths/min. Both pupils were 3.5 mm with a sluggish light reflex. Neurological examination found no motor laterality or pathological reflex, except for nuchal rigidity. A head CT scan revealed no focal region, but diffuse swelling of the brain. Her blood tests showed elevated leukocytes (21,100 cells/μL) and C-reactive protein (20.6 mg/dL). A lumbar tap was performed and turbid yellow spinal fluid was collected. Spinal fluid examination revealed protein 394 mg/dl, glucose 0 mg/dl and a cell count of 10112/mm3 (96 % polymorphonuclear leukocytes), which confirmed the diagnosis of bacterial meningitis.
She was intubated and admitted to an intensive care unit. Due to poor study of the gram staining, meropenem and vancomycin were administered right after IV dexamethasone. On day 8, N. meningitides was cultured from the spinal fluid collected on admission and antibiotic therapy was changed to ampicillin . Brain MRI study was performed on day 10 . Postcontrast T1-weighted imaging showed enhanced subarachnoidal space of the cerebellum, typically along the great horizontal fissure . Additionally, Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) found high intensity area and SWI revealed multiple low-intensity spots in subarachoid space along the great horizontal fissure . Since these spotty low-intensity areas in the cerebellum located nonlinearly and there were no enhanced spots in the axial contrasted T1-weighted imaging, we confirmed that these low-intensity signals were not telangiectasia, but microbleeds. Antibiotic management was successful and her clinical symptoms improved. She was discharged on day 24 without neurological deficits. A follow-up brain MRI was performed on day 42. SWI showed the regions of multiple low-intensity spots in cerebellum persisted, but were disappearing . She had no neurological deficits and complained no symptoms on day 42.
We reported a case of meningitis due to N. meningitides in which the patient’s SWI findings indicated diffuse microbleeds in the cerebellum. Despite an extensive literature search, we could not find a report of bacterial meningitis with microbleeds in the cerebellum or cerebral cortex identified by SWI.
The most common MRI findings in bacterial meningitis are intraventricular signal alterations, meningeal enhancement, and intraparenchymatous signal changes . In this case, postcontrast T1-weighted imaging revealed enhancement in subarachnoidal space of cerebellum, which is consistent with general MRI findings of bacterial meningitis. Interestingly, DWI showed high intensity areas and SWI revealed multiple low-intensity spots located with veins in subarachnoid space along the great horizontal fissure. On SWI, deoxyhemoglobin, hemorrhagic blood products, and methemoglobin of hemorrhagic lesions can be visualized as low-intensity signals . With the findings of DWI and SWI, we speculated that a collection of purulent exudate in subarachnoid space caused microbleeds on the surface of cerebellum. Animal experiments and a recent autopsy study of bacterial meningitis reported that both macroscopic and microscopic hemorrhages can be observed [, ]. In a pneumococcal meningitis mouse model, microscopic hemorrhages can be found in both the subarachnoid space and cortex . An autopsy study of pneumococcal meningitis by Vergouwen et al. also reported that the majority of microbleeds were located in the cortex and subcortex with no evidence of infarction. The mechanism of microbleeds is considered as pyogenic vasculitis following vascular wall injury or extravasation of red blood cells from congested small veins caused by severe inflammation . Microbleeds in meningococcal meningitis, however, has not been observed in human studies.
Other pathophysiology which can cause microbleeds detected by SWI are hypertsensive vasculopathy or amyloid angiopathy . This patient, however, had no history indicating these pathophysiologies.
The clinical significance of microbleeds in bacterial meningitis, however, is not well documented. In this current case report, the cerebellar microbleeds did not seem to cause any neurological deterioration. Further studies are needed to investigate the pathogenesis of microbleeds and their clinical significance.