A 51-year-old man was admitted to the emergency department with a sudden change in consciousness. His wife informed that he had lost the ability to identify his family members precisely several hours ago and started to produce obscure speech without any other significant symptoms. On examination, his vital signs were noted with a moderately low blood pressure of 85/57 mmHg, a regular pulse rate of 85 b.p.m., a temperature of 36.8°C, and an SpO2 of 100% on breathing ambient air. No focal neurology was found, and other signs were unremarkable. However, his emergency brain magnetic resonance imaging showed two foci of cerebral infarction on bilateral temporal lobes ( and ). Five months prior to this admission, he had been diagnosed with non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and hyperlipidaemia, for which he had been prescribed with metoprolol 50 mg o.d., clopidogrel 75 mg o.d., fenofibrate 145 mg o.d., and atorvastatin/ezetimibe 20/10 mg o.d., and his blood pressure levels had persistently drifted towards the lower end of normal range.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) displayed a normal sinus rhythm with some atrial premature beats, along with low QRS voltages at the limb leads, and 24 h ECG did not capture any atrial fibrillation (AF) . N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide level (971.58 pmol/L) was markedly elevated, while Troponin I level (0.58 ng/mL) was slightly increased. Considering the patient’s medical history of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with a disproportionately low QRS voltage on the current ECG and a low blood pressure, CA was highly suspected. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed thickened left and right ventricles, dilated left and right atria, a left ventricular ejection fraction of 53%, and a Grade 3 diastolic dysfunction with an E to A waves’ ratio of 3.11 and an average E/e′ of 18.1. Colour Doppler imaging revealed mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitations with a peak tricuspid regurgitation velocity of 2.84 m/s. Speckle tracking echocardiography revealed a distinctive ‘apical sparing’ or ‘cherry on the top’ pattern on the bull-eye plot and a reduced left atrial reservoir strain of 8% . A serum-free immunoglobulin analysis showed an increased lambda-free light chain (295.59 mg/L) with a reduced kappa/lambda ratio (0.08). Other testing parameters were consistent with a nephrotic syndrome with a total protein level of 12 g on a 24 h-urine collection. displays the patient’s comprehensive biochemical test results. Because AL-CA was highly suspected based on previous test results, a diphosphonate scintigraphy was not performed to rule out the transthyretin type. Based on the invasive criteria following current guidelines, AL-CA was confirmed by examining the histology of the abdominal fat-pad tissue , along with typical echocardiographic indices. Bone marrow biopsy was performed to subsequently confirm the diagnosis of multiple myeloma with a 15q22 deletion on G-band staining. Subsequent TEE demonstrated an elongated static thrombus on the left atrial appendage (LAA), which was reasonably likely to constitute the source of this embolic stroke and a mobile bouncing oval thrombus on the right atrial appendage (RAA), along with a spontaneous echo contrast in both atria and low emptying velocities in the LAA (0.25 m/s) and RAA (0.20 m/s) (, , ).
After consulting with a haematologist, a regimen with melphalan, dexamethasone, and thalidomide was initiated for the specific treatment of light-chain amyloidosis. Atrial appendages thrombi were managed with a full dose of dabigatran of 150 mg twice daily. The patient was discharged with a minor improvement in his neurologic condition. Two months later, another TEE was performed for evaluating the thrombus status, which showed a complete resolution without any residual thrombi in both atrial appendages. However, due to the persistent presence of spontaneous contrast and low emptying velocities in the atrial appendages on TEE, anticoagulation therapy was continued for the further prevention of thrombus reformation. The patient’s symptoms ameliorated, and he did not suffer from any secondary stroke on follow-up examinations.