A 27-year-old previously healthy Japanese woman presented to a local hospital with chest discomfort and vomiting (day 1). She had no family history of cardiovascular disease, was a social drinker, and had never smoked. Her systolic blood pressure was 70 mmHg, a cardiac troponin T rapid test gave a positive result, and an electrocardiogram (ECG) showed an ST elevation in broad precordial leads. Transthoracic echocardiography showed edematous left ventricular myocardium and a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 40% with diffuse hypokinetic wall motion. Myocarditis was suspected, and cardiac catheterization was performed after intubation and the insertion of an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP). Coronary angiography revealed no coronary artery stenosis and left ventriculography showed diffuse hypokinesis (Additional file 1: Movie 1). A right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy was performed at the same time. After catheterization, ventricular tachycardia suddenly appeared, her hemodynamics became unstable, and VA-ECMO was immediately employed (day 1). Regardless of ECMO support, her LVEF continued to decrease to 20% on day 2 and to 10% on day 3 (Additional file 2: Movie 2). She was transferred to our hospital on day 3.
Her Glasgow Coma Scale was 9 (E3VTM5), her pupils were 2 mm in diameter, and the bilateral light reflex was prompt. A physical examination revealed peripheral edema and coldness. Her mean blood pressure on admission to our hospital was 60 mmHg with the support of VA-ECMO, IABP, and intravenously administered noradrenaline (0.5 μg/kg per minute). The flow rate of ECMO was 2.8 L/minute (body surface area = 1.50 m2). The central venous pressure (CVP) was 15 mmHg regardless of right atrial venous drainage. Laboratory data on admission showed an aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level of 369 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level of 212 U/L, serum total bilirubin (T-Bil) level of 1.0 mg/dL, creatine kinase (CK) level of 7537 U/L, creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB) level of 87 U/L, and serum creatinine level of 0.38 mg/dL. An ECG showed an atrioventricular junctional rhythm, a heart rate of 51 beats/minute, and ST elevation in broad precordial leads with low voltage . A chest X-ray showed no remarkable cardiac dilatation or pulmonary congestion . Transthoracic echocardiography on the day after admission (day 4) revealed that her LVEF decreased to 5% and that an opening of the aortic valve was not observed (Additional file 3: Movie 3).
The clinical course of our patient is shown in Fig. . After admission to our hospital, we increased the VA-ECMO flow from 2.8 to 3.5 L/minute and intravenously administered noradrenaline was successfully reduced from 0.5 to 0.05 μg/kg per minute. However, her CVP continued to elevate from 15 to 24 mmHg accompanied by elevated T-Bil (1.7 mg/dL). A progression of biventricular failure was suspected, and a BiVAD implantation was performed on the next day (day 4). First, we implanted a NIPRO-VAD (NIPRO Co., Osaka, Japan) , a paracorporeal pulsatile flow pump, as a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) with an inflow from the left ventricular apex and an outflow to her ascending aorta. When we tried to wean her from cardiopulmonary bypass, a transesophageal echocardiography showed a small left ventricular size with an insufficient filling of the LVAD blood pump and high CVP (15 to 20 mmHg), implying that sufficient blood flow did not circulate to the left side of her heart because of right-sided heart failure. Second, we added a right ventricular assist device (RVAD) using ROTAFLOW (Maquet Japan Co., Tokyo, Japan) , a paracorporeal centrifugal pump. An inflow cannula was inserted into her right atrium, and an outflow cannula was inserted through the right ventricular outflow tract to her main pulmonary artery . The IABP was removed, and intravenously administered noradrenaline was stopped after the VAD implantation with 5 μg/kg per minute intravenously administered dopamine hydrochloride (DOA), 5 μg/kg per minute dobutamine hydrochloride (DOB), 0.25 μg/kg per minute olprinone hydrochloride hydrate, 0.1 μg/kg per minute carperitide (hANP), and 0.5 μg/kg per minute nitroglycerin (NTG). Intravenously administered immunoglobulin therapy (5 g/day) and intravenously administered pulse corticosteroid therapy (methylprednisolone 1 g/day) were administered on days 3 to 5. Her renal function was preserved throughout this clinical course.
A histopathological examination of her myocardium obtained from the left ventricular apex during a VAD operation was consistent with lymphocytic myocarditis: inflammatory cell infiltration composed mainly of lymphocytes, myocardial damage, myocardial disarray, interstitial edema, degeneration of myocardial cells, and the appearance of a contraction band. There were a few eosinophils and neutrophils without evidence of giant cells . The right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy findings of the local hospital were also consistent with lymphocytic myocarditis. Serological verification from paired samples showed no significant increase in serum viral antibody titers.
The transition of left ventricular systolic function was as follows: before VAD implantation on day 4, her LVEF was below 5% without opening of the aortic valve (Additional file 3: Movie 3). However, her LVEF improved to 40% on the third day after the VAD operation (day 7; Additional file 4: Movie 4). Her LVEF improved to 50% on day 6 after the operation with a complete opening of the aortic valve in every beat (day 10; Additional file 5: Movie 5).
The time course after the VAD implantation is shown in Fig. . Her T-Bil peaked soon after the VAD implantation on day 6 (peak T-Bil level = 2.6 mg/dL). She was extubated on day 6 and started oral intake from day 7. Her LVEF began to recover, and CK peaked on day 7 (peak CK level = 9376 U/L). The LVAD and RVAD flow gradually decreased, reflecting the recovery of native cardiac function. On day 10, we performed a BiVAD-off test with bedside echocardiography. The VAD flow before the test consisted of a 2.5 L/minute RVAD flow and 2.5 L/minute LVAD flow. Intravenous inotropes and vasodilators before the test included 2 μg/kg per minute DOB, 0.25 μg/kg per minute olprinone, and 0.5 μg/kg per minute NTG. We switched off the RVAD and then the LVAD after heparinization, and evaluated the left ventricular diameter on the BiVAD, LVAD, and without VAD support. The left ventricular diastolic diameter (LVDd), left ventricular systolic diameter (LVDs), and LVEF in each condition were as follows: LVDd/Ds = 43/32 mm and LVEF = 50% on BiVAD, 43/28 mm and 66% on LVAD, 44/27 mm and 69% without VAD support. The LVDd did not decrease even after the RVAD was switched off; implying that her right-sided heart function had recovered. The LVDd did not increase markedly after the LVAD was switched off, implying that her left ventricular function had recovered. No significant change of systemic blood pressure was observed during this process.
We performed a BiVAD removal operation on day 14 without a cardiopulmonary bypass. First, we switched off the RVAD after the redo median sternotomy. Intra-arterial blood pressure monitoring and a Swan-Ganz catheter revealed that her mean systemic blood pressure was 81 mmHg, mean right atrial pressure (RAP) was 11 mmHg, and the mean pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) was 19 mmHg without RVAD support. A close observation showed no significant changes for 10 minutes. Thus we removed the RVAD. Second, we performed a LVAD-off test. The mean systemic blood pressure was 69 mmHg, mean RAP was 8 mmHg, mean PAP was 20 mmHg, mean pulmonary artery wedge pressure (PAWP) was 14 mmHg, and cardiac index (CI) was 3.1 L/minute/m2 without LVAD support. Her hemodynamics did not show significant changes for 30 minutes, and the LVAD was removed. Echocardiography 12 days after the BiVAD removal (day 26) showed a recovery of cardiac function: LVDd/Ds = 40/26 mm and LVEF = 64%. She was discharged on day 32. During follow-up, she did not have worsening biventricular function over 4 years.