The patient was a 59-year old man, Caucasian type, without any specific medical personal or familial history. In October 2006, he underwent a pelvic ultrasonography (US) because he presented a "pressure sensation" in the rectum and rectal imperiosity for four weeks. Physical examination revealed no additional symptom, except the rectal examination that detected a 4-cm hard pre-rectal mass filling the right side of the pelvis. The WHO performance status was equal to 0. Ultrasonography (US) discovered a tumour located at the right side of the pelvis. Serum prostate-specific antigen levels were normal. The patient was thus referred to hospital.
Computed tomography (CT) of abdomen and pelvis revealed an 8-cm heterogeneous tumour predominantly located on the right side of the pelvis likely arising from the right seminal vesicle, reaching the median line and adherenting to the posterior bladder wall and the anterior rectal wall. Due to the rectal clinical symptoms and the suspicion of rectal adherence on CT scan, the core needle biopsy was CT-guided transperineal rather than transrectal. Pathological analysis revealed a well-differentiated leiomyosarcoma. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the presence of a mass centred on the right seminal vesicle, causing mass effect on the prostate and left seminal vesicle, without a cleavage plane with the right prostate and the right obturator muscle, suggesting invasion . Otherwise, MRI clearly showed fat interface between the mass, the posterior bladder wall and the anterior rectal wall without any sign of involvement. Complete clinical and radiological screening did not detect any lymphadenopathy or distant metastasis. Based on these data, the tumor was considered completely resectable, and surgery was decided.
Before surgery, the examination under general anesthesia revealed that the mass was difficult to mobilize. The treatment consisted of a radical vesiculo-prostatectomy with limited (ilio-obturator and hypogastric) bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy in January 2007, associated with resection of the internal obturator muscle. No anterior rectal resection was necessary. Excision was macroscopically complete. The post-operative course was uneventful. The pathological macroscopic examination of the surgical resection specimen showed a small prostate (4.5 × 4 × 3 cm) and an 8 × 8 × 6.5 cm well-limited hard white-tan mass, centred on the right seminal vesicle, tangent to the prostate base, pushing the vas deferens, the prostate and the left seminal vesicle. On cut section the mass showed a grey-white whorled appearance with foci of necrosis. Microscopic analysis confirmed the previous diagnosis by showing intersecting fascicles of atypical spindle cells with elongated blunt-ended nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm very reminiscent of smooth muscle differentiation. Immunohistochemical analysis showed strong positive staining of the tumour cells for smooth-muscle actin and H-caldesmone , and negative staining for pan-cytokeratin AE1/AE3, CD117. The mitotic rate averaged ten mitoses per ten high-power fields. Necrosis was present on less than 50% of the tumour surface. The tumour seemed developed within the wall of the right seminal vesicle. It was a well-limited and pseudo-wrapped with limited surgical margins, sometimes inferior to 1 mm. The retained diagnosis was moderately differentiated (FNCLCC grade 2) leiomyosarcoma of the right seminal vesicle. The fourteen removed pelvic lymph nodes were free of tumour. Moreover, an associated small (4 × 4 × 2 mm) prostatic adenocarcinoma was fortuitously discovered on the left apex of the gland, Gleason 6 (3+3), without any macro- and microscopical connection with the sarcoma. After surgery and because of closed margins for the leiomyosarcoma, the patient received adjuvant pelvic external beam radiation therapy achieved in April 2007 (56 Gy./31 fractions). No adjuvant chemotherapy was delivered. The patient was then regularly monitored at the clinical and radiological levels.
In April 2009, 29 months after diagnosis, he developed two subcutaneous nodules on the scalp. Surgical removal and pathological analysis confirmed the diagnosis of distant recurrences of leiomyosarcoma. At the same time, CT and TEP scans detected the presence of multiple asymptomatic liver and lung metastases. Performance status was excellent (WHO 0). First-line chemotherapy consisted of six cycles combining doxorubicin and ifosfamide, but metastases progressed (October 2009), and the patient was referred to our institution for second-line chemotherapy. We delivered a gemcitabine-docetaxel combination. After three cycles, CT scan showed stable lung and liver lesions, whose size decreased after the sixth cycle, then after the ninth cycle, with a 30% response when compared with October 2009 . Treatment was then interrupted, and the patient regularly followed. A last visit, in February 2011, 51 months after diagnosis of the primary tumour, and 22 months after the first metastasis, the patient is alive with excellent performance status, without any symptom, and with multiple stable lung and liver lesions.