A 30-year-old man presented with sudden onset of blurred vision and pain in the left eye 1 week before visiting our outpatient clinic. The patient had a history of chronic renal failure suspected as a consequence of childhood glomerulonephritis and complicated with hypertension. He was treated with oral furosemide, carvedilol, and nifedipine. Upon examination, he was high myopic with spherical refraction error of -8.50D in the right eye and − 6.75D in the left eye. His visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye and counting fingers in the left eye. The Ishihara color test was normal in the right eye and 0 out of 21 plates in the left eye; Moreover, the RAPD in the left eye was strongly positive. The intraocular pressure was normal and no abnormality was seen in the anterior segment and fundus examination in both eyes . Visual evoked potential (VEP) showed normal in the right eye and delayed response with small amplitude in the left eye . Visual field showed normal in the right eye but general depression in the left eye . Based on his clinical manifestations and features, he was admitted for further monitoring and started on methylprednisolone pulse therapy with 250 mg every 6 h for 3 days for the suspected demyelinating ON.
During admission, refractory hypertension with systolic blood pressure up to 190 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure up to 127 mmHg were noted even with multiple anti-hypertensive medications. Lab data showed poor renal function with serum creatinine level up of 3.27 mg/dL, anemia, and hyperlipidemia with cholesterol level of 259 mg/dL and LDL level of 170 mg/dL. Fluorescence angiogram was arranged but was cancelled due to poor renal function. Brain MRI revealed a focal high hyperintensity signal at the left optic nerve on the T2 DWI series . Furthermore, the hyperintensity area in the DWI series showed hypointensity in the ADC series . There were multiple patches of high signal intensities involving bilateral periventricular white matter on T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images, which were suspected to be related to hypertensive subcortical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy . Moreover, multiple small old intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) was also discovered in multiple areas including the pons, right basal ganglion, bilateral periventricular area, bilateral cerebellar, and cerebral hemisphere, thereby leading to a strong suspicion of hypertensive microangiopathy ICH . According to the findings, PION was highly suspected related to his poor control hypertension secondary to chronic kidney disease. Therefore, the patient was referred to our neurology and nephrology specialists for further management of his systemic disease and blood pressure. At 6 month follow up, left eye visual acuity improved to 20/400, the color vision improved to 2 out of 21 Ishihara plates and the optic disc showed pallor. His renal function improved with serum creatinine level reduced to 2.29 mg/dL after strict diet and blood pressure control for 1 year.