A 67-year-old Caucasian male was referred by his general practitioner to the internal medicine out-patient clinic because of hyponatremia (127 mmol/L) found at routine laboratory examination. He had consulted his general practitioner because of abdominal pains. His medical history revealed colon polypectomy, an inguinal hernia, skin cancer, and reflux esophagitis. Three years prior to this presentation his serum sodium level was 135 mmol/L. His family history was non-contributory; he lived with his family, had a regular job, and used to engage in physical activities daily. He stopped smoking cigarettes almost 20 years ago (after 25 pack years) and did not consume alcohol or drugs. No other symptoms or signs such as vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, altered mental status, focal neurological deficits, or palpitations were present. Besides omeprazole (40 mg daily) for reflux esophagitis he used no medication. On physical examination, he appeared euvolemic and no disorientation or abdominal tenderness was found. His blood pressure was 152/88 mmHg and his pulse rate was 72 beats per minute.
Serum analysis showed a sodium level of 129 mmol/L and osmolarity of 274 mOsmol/kg. Urinary osmolarity was 570 mOsmol/kg and urinary sodium level was 35 mmol/L. Other relevant laboratory results were in the normal range (see Table ). An abdominal ultrasound examination and a chest X-ray revealed no pathology.
Hypotonic hyponatremia in an euvolemic patient can be caused by thyroid dysfunction, glucocorticoid deficiency, SIADH, or drugs. Based on the above analysis, we concluded that SIADH due to use of omeprazole caused the hyponatremia. Omeprazole was replaced by an H2 receptor antagonist, ranitidine (150 mg daily). At a follow-up visit after 6 weeks, his sodium level had normalized to 135 mmol/L (see Fig. ). At this time, he reported persistent reflux complaints, despite ranitidine use. Therefore, ranitidine was discontinued and a different PPI, pantoprazole (40 mg daily) was prescribed. With this therapy, after 4 weeks his serum sodium level had dropped below normal again to 133 mmol/L. We concluded that both omeprazole and pantoprazole caused mild hyponatremia in our patient and considered this to be a PPI class effect.
After careful discussion of risks and benefits with our patient, PPI treatment was continued and after 5 months his serum sodium level declined slightly to 131 mmol/L. During long-term follow-up, his sodium levels were monitored regularly and stayed stable over time (see Fig. ), without any fluid restriction.