A 31-years old male patient with no medical comorbidity presented to our facility. Six years prior to this presentation he had an isolated left testicular mass detected on physical examination and CT which proved to be a malignant germ cell tumour. He underwent left orchiectomy but retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND) was not carried out as the CT showed no enlarged lymph nodes and histopathology showed the presence of a teratoma and yolk sac tumour. No further details however were mentioned. Accordingly, he received four cycles of chemotherapy (Cisplatin, Bleomycin, and Etoposide). He did well for six years, had no major complaints, and underwent only one follow up ultrasound which showed no suspicious abdominal swellings. He presented to us with on and off upper abdominal pain of six months duration, with no other associated symptoms. On physical examination he was vitally stable with a soft and lax abdomen but mild tenderness in the upper central part of the abdomen and a deep mass. Groin examination revealed signs of a left orchiectomy; the right testicle was in normal position with no swelling or other abnormality detected. Abdominopelvic US showed a large retroperitoneal semisolid mass measuring 8 by 6 cm, abating the body and tail of the pancreas. Chest and abdominopelvic CT scan with IV and oral contrast were carried out and showed two lesions, one abating the head of the pancreas (3 × 2 cm in size) and the other baiting the body and tail of the pancreas with clear separation distal . All tumour markers, including B-HCG, AFP, CA 19-9, CEA, and CA 19-9, were within the normal range. The patient underwent midline laparotomy and complete resection both retroperitoneal masses with preservation of the pancreas . The recovery was uneventful, and the patient was discharged five days postoperatively. Histopathology of the masses showed a metastatic germ cell tumour of the teratoma component in the background of lymphoid tissue . Thus, the tumour board diagnosed this as stage IV metastatic germ cell tumour of the teratoma, and recommended to commence the patient on chemotherapy (Cisplatin, Bleomycin, and Etoposide). The patient tolerated four cycles of chemotherapy. The follow-up PET scan at six months postoperatively showed no trace or recurrence of the tumour . Currently, the patient has been followed up with ultrasound for two years with no recurrence.