A 70-year-old, functionally independent female presented to the ED by emergency medical services after her son had found her on the floor. She reported that she had “blurred vision.” The visual disturbance and fall were reported by the patient to have occurred 10 hours prior to ED presentation with associated left-sided “tingling and weakness.” She had a past medical history of hyperlipidemia, uncontrolled type II diabetes, carotid artery disease, coronary artery disease, stage III chronic kidney disease and hypothyroidism. She acknowledged poor adherence with her home medications, which included insulin lispro, insulin degludec, sacubitril/valsartan, torsemide, spironolactone, and metoprolol extended release.
On arrival to the ED, she had fluent speech, was managing her own airway, and had good peripheral perfusion. Her blood pressure was 131/61 millimeters mercury, heart rate 67 beats per minute, respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute, temperature 97.5° Fahrenheit, and oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. The initial evaluation was most notable for a left visual field hemianopsia. She also had left-sided dyskinesia and dysmetria with a subtle left facial droop. She had no other strength deficits. Her National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 5 (age and month -1, mild left facial palsy – 1, hemianopsia – 2, limb ataxia – 1). The remainder of her physical examination was unremarkable.
Based on the focality of her neurological examination referable to a left posterior fossa lesion and being within the 24-hour window for mechanical clot extraction, our stroke team was mobilized. She underwent non-contrasted head computed axial tomography (CT), showing only mild atrophy. Being outside the window for systemic thrombolysis, she had a head and neck CT angiogram with perfusion study. This study revealed hyperperfusion of her left occipital lobe thought to be suggestive of an arteriovenous fistula (AVF). There were no apparent large vessel occlusions, infarcts, or penumbras. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) later that day offered similar findings without discrete evidence of an AVF.
Her initial laboratory studies in the ED included a white blood cell count of 11,800 cells per milliliter (mL) (reference range: 4000–11,500 cells/mL), hemoglobin of 14.5 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (12–18 g/dL), platelet count of 446 platelets/mL (125–415 platelets/mL). She had a serum sodium of 131 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (133–144 mmol/L), potassium of 4.5 mmol/L (3.4–5.1 mmol/L), chloride 91 mmol/L (101=111 mmol/L), bicarbonate ion of 27 mmol/L (20–30 mmol/L), a calculated glomerular filtration rate of 40 mL per minute (min) (reference: greater than 59 mL/min), and an elevated serum glucose of 583 milligrams (mg)/dL (82–99 mg/dL). Her urine toxicology screen did not show the presence of amphetamines, benzodiazepines, cannabinoids, cocaine, or opioids. Her electrocardiogram revealed non-specific ST-segment abnormalities.
Following initial stroke assessment, our patient was then admitted to the hospitalist service for in-patient evaluation of her unexplained neurological deficits and continued concern for an AVF. On hospital day two, due to persistence of the unexplained neurologic deficits the patient underwent a bedside electroencephalogram (EEG). This study revealed left occipital lobe focal status epilepticus. This prompted administration of levetiracetam 1500 mg loading dose intravenously and 750 mg orally twice daily. The following day, her left visual field deficit persisted. On day three of hospitalization, a cerebral angiogram excluded an arteriovenous malformation and revealed only several non-critical stenoses. A long-term EEG showed persistent left occipital lobe status epilepticus prompting the addition of lacosamide 200 mg twice daily during her hospitalization. She was then transferred to an in-patient rehabilitation facility for mobility and muscle conditioning.
Seven days following her initial presentation, physical medicine and rehabilitation documented that she had regained full visual fields with no dyskinesia or dysmetria. Unfortunately, 30 days following initial presentation, our patient was re-admitted to our hospital with acute cholecystitis. During that hospitalization, she had a downward course that included a large cerebral infarct culminating in withdrawal of support.