A 72-year-old male presented to our cardiology clinic at the request of his primary care physician for an asymptomatic murmur. The patient reported a past medical history of well-controlled hypertension and diet-controlled type two diabetes mellitus. He denied family history of heart disease, aortic disease, or sudden cardiac death. He reported being physically active daily without chest pain or dyspnoea. Physical exam revealed a blood pressure of 160/59 and a heart rate of 59. He had prominent head nodding. There was a Grade IV/VI diastolic murmur heard loudest over the left upper sternal border. There were prominent carotid pulsations but no jugular venous distention or peripheral oedema. Lung auscultation revealed no abnormalities.
Aortic regurgitation was suspected given the characteristics of the murmur auscultated, wide pulse pressure, De Musset’s sign, and prominent carotid pulsations. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a tricuspid aortic valve with severe aortic insufficiency (Video 1). The ascending aorta was severely dilated. The left ventricular systolic function was preserved with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 60%. Left ventricular external end-diastolic dimension was 4.3 cm, and left ventricular external end-systolic dimension was 3 cm. Spiral computed tomography (CT) of the thorax was obtained with intravenous contrast, which demonstrated a fusiform aneurysm of the ascending thoracic aorta, measuring 5.7 cm × 6.5 cm in the greatest dimension ( and ). Transoesophageal echocardiography was obtained, which revealed a central aortic insufficiency jet occupying a width of 60% of the left ventricular outflow tract.
He had no symptoms to suggest an underlying infectious aetiology. He had no risk factors for tuberculosis or syphilis. He had no symptoms or clinical features suggestive of an underlying vasculitis, connective tissue disease, or autoimmune disorder. He had no family history of autoimmune disease. His labs demonstrated a normal complete blood count with differential, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP).
The patient was referred to cardiothoracic surgery for evaluation. Pre-operative left heart catheterization revealed angiographically normal coronary arteries with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 60% by ventriculogram. He underwent aortic valve replacement with Carpentier-Edwards pericardial valve and supracoronary replacement of the ascending aorta with a Gelweave graft. The post-operative transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a normally functioning biological aortic prosthesis with trace aortic insufficiency and a mean gradient of 14.2 mm of mercury.
The intra-operative pathology revealed fibrosis and myxoid degeneration of the aortic valve leaflets. Biopsy of the ascending aorta demonstrated lymphoplasmacytic inflammation with some fibrosis, consistent with non-infectious ascending aortitis (, , and ). He was referred to rheumatology for further evaluation. Several months after his initial presentation, he developed morning stiffness and shoulder pain. His initial rheumatologic work-up was non-diagnostic. His ESR and CRP remained within normal limits. He was found to have a positive anti-nuclear antibody and rheumatoid factor. He was started on an oral steroid taper for a possible rheumatologic component in the setting of known aortitis. The patient's joint pain and morning stiffness responded well to steroid therapy. He continues to follow-up in both rheumatology and cardiology clinics. He will require follow-up on at least an annual basis to ensure no interval changes.