We present a case of a 21-year-old white woman who presented to our clinic in September 2013 complaining of weakness and fatigue. She had a history of FMF diagnosed at childhood. Genetic study had revealed homozygous mutation (type M694 V) of MEFV gene. She was taking colchicine 2 mg daily but still experiencing attacks.
Her family history was unremarkable; she was a student at university, she had no illicit drug history, and she was not taking medications other than colchicine. She did not smoke tobacco, she was a social drinker, and had a monogamous relationship with a male partner who was HCV-negative. We were not able to identify the source of HCV infection in this patient despite meticulous history taking.
A physical examination revealed blood pressure 100/70 mm Hg, pulse 68 beats per minute (BPM), body temperature 36.6 °C, and no organomegaly on abdominal palpation. No abnormalities were detected on neurological examination. Laboratory findings included alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 52 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 40 U/L, and normal gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bilirubin, creatinine, albumin, prothrombin, and positive HCV antibodies. An ultrasound detected splenomegaly (15.6 cm in length) and no hepatomegaly. Upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy revealed stomach ulcer, Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) positive, and no varices. Eradication therapy was started with first-line triple therapy (omeprazole, amoxicillin, clarithromycin for 10 days), which failed to achieve successful elimination of H. pylori, so we went on to prescribe second-line quadruple bismuth-based scheme (omeprazole, bismuth subcitrate, tetracycline, metronidazole for 14 days).
We have previously reported an effect of successful H. pylori eradication on attack frequency and severity in a series of colchicine-resistant cases . In this patient, the first attempt of anti-Helicobacter therapy did not produce any significant effect on attack pattern; however, she did report some attenuation of attack severity while on second-line treatment which led to successful eradication. This effect occurred without increasing the dosage of colchicine at that time; however, her attacks did not resolve completely.
The decision to start anti-HCV therapy was made based on the following considerations. Our patient had no fibrosis (F0) on shear wave elastography; she had genotype 3 HCV infection with viral load of 1.3 million IU/mL. She was started on pegylated IFN alpha-2a 180 mcg/week and ribavirin 800 mg/day, continuing intake of colchicine 2 mg/day. The duration of antiviral therapy was 24 weeks.
Over the course of treatment, drug side effects were minimal: she did not report flu-like symptoms or fever, and the extent of neutropenia and thrombocytopenia that occurred during treatment did not require dose reduction or withdrawal of medications. Following the protocol of response-guided treatment, HCV RNA counts were evaluated on weeks 4, 8, and 12 and at the end of the treatment (24 weeks), with undetectable viral load at end-of-treatment. She further showed 24-week and 48-week SVR, and virological cure was documented.
The remarkable finding was that during the whole course of treatment and subsequent follow-up (which now has comprised 3 years after the end of therapy) she remained FMF attack-free while taking colchicine in the same dosage as she did when presenting to our clinic and reporting attacks at a frequency of approximately 1 to 2 per month. The laboratory markers of inflammation, which were white blood cells (WBC) count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and CRP, have also remained normal throughout the course of follow-up (see Table for timeline).