A 52-year-old female presented with severe right upper quadrant abdominal pain without nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, or dysuria. Two months prior to presentation, she had flu-like symptoms and completed a course of empiric doxycycline for bronchitis. Of note, she reported prior dental issues and no dental care in the past 2 years. After admission, imaging demonstrated an acute right renal infarct. Cerebral computed tomography was negative for mass or infarct, and she was subsequently anticoagulated with heparin. On examination, she was found hypotensive (blood pressure 90/54 mmHg) and afebrile, with a heart rate of 80 b.p.m. and hypoxia (SpO2 of 79% on room air). A Grade 2 systolic ejection murmur was auscultated at the left upper sternal border. She had cyanotic fingers bilaterally, but no Osler nodes, Janeway lesions, or splinter haemorrhages. A dental exam revealed multiple carious root tips with the risk for infection. A laboratory analysis showed an elevated haemoglobin of 17.9 g/dL (reference range: 11.5–15.5 g/dL) and C-reactive protein of 2.2 mg/dL (reference normal value: <0.9 mg/dL). Lactate, white blood cell count, and creatinine were within reference ranges.
She had a history of unrepaired Type II TA with d-TGA, hypoplastic right ventricle (RV), unrestricted atrial septal defect (ASD), and ventricular septal defect (VSD) and sub-valvular as well as valvular pulmonic stenosis with a hypoplastic, bicuspid pulmonary valve (, ) She was diagnosed at birth and her parents opted for conservative management in childhood. Her baseline oxygen saturation levels were almost in the range of 77–79%. Two years prior to this hospitalization, she had an outpatient evaluation by our adult CHD team, at which time she was asymptomatic, working as a librarian, and able to conduct her activities of daily living without any significant limitations. She was struggling with poor dentition due to a lack of dental insurance, which she was actively attempting to acquire. Invasive cardiac testing was offered, but the patient deferred. The importance of oral hygiene and endocarditis prophylaxis were emphasized and the plan was to do a follow-up in 6 months with repeat non-invasive cardiovascular imaging and dental reassessment, but unfortunately, the patient was lost to follow-up until this hospitalization 2 years later. Her only home medication at this time was sertraline 100 mg twice daily.
Upon this presentation, cardiogenic vs. septic shock and an embolic event from either an intracardiac thrombus or endocarditis were part of the differential diagnosis. Blood cultures were drawn and empiric therapy with vancomycin was started. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed a large (2 cm × 0.5 cm) mobile mass on the lateral annulus of the mitral valve adjacent to the posterior leaflet consistent with a vegetation. During diastole, there was prolapse of the mass through the valve into the ventricle (, supplementary material). Left ventricular systolic function was normal with an ejection fraction of 57%. No significant mitral stenosis or regurgitation were noted. Blood cultures grew Streptococcus mitis-oralis. She was diagnosed with streptococcal native mitral valve endocarditis complicated by renal embolus.
The patient had a large, left-sided vegetation complicated by embolic phenomenon which formed a surgical indication. To assess her surgical risk and further define her haemodynamics, she underwent right heart catheterization which demonstrated normal filling pressures [right atrium (RA) 8 mmHg, left atrium (LA) 6 mmHg] and normal PA pressure (mPAP 16 mmHg). Given her unrepaired cyanotic CHD, cardiac surgery posed a significant risk of destabilization of her delicately balanced haemodynamics, as well as risk of stroke and renal injury. After a multi-disciplinary review of the patient’s case, conservative management was pursued.
Based on culture results, the antibiotic regimen was narrowed down to ceftriaxone. A repeat TTE 5 days after admission showed a decrease in the size of the vegetation and preserved mitral valve function ( and ). She was discharged home to complete a 4-week course of i.v. ceftriaxone via a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC). Given her single ventricle physiology, air filters were placed on her PICC line to prevent air embolism. Follow-up appointments were scheduled for dental extractions to ensure infection source control. The patient was asked to take antibiotic prophylaxis (single 2 g dose of amoxicillin) before future dental procedures and also schedule routine cleanings.
The patient was readmitted 1 month after discharge for subjective fevers and diffuse body aches. Blood cultures were negative and a repeat TTE showed resolution of the mitral valve vegetation. No clear explanation was identified and her symptoms resolved prior to discharge. She has not had any recurrence of symptoms at follow-up 9 months after her initial presentation.