The patient had a palpable lump in the left arm for > 3 years and numbness in the fingers for > 1 month.
A 16-year-old girl was admitted to the Bone Tumor Department of our hospital with left upper limb pain that had started 1 wk prior to presentation. The patient first noticed symptoms of left upper limb pain 3 years prior when she accidentally discovered a painless "walnut-sized" lump while bathing. However, she did not seek medical attention at that time. Over time, the lump size gradually increased. She had recently started to experience numbness in her fingers and decided to seek medical care at a local hospital. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left humerus revealed a 5-cm soft tissue mass surrounding the bone. A fine-needle aspiration biopsy was performed at the local hospital, and the pathological report indicated the possibility of a malignant soft tissue tumor.
The patient had been previously healthy.
The patient was transferred to our hospital for expert consultation and further treatment on June 23, 2023. Considering the immunohistochemical staining results from the original institution, along with the imaging findings, the diagnosis was consistent with spindle cell mesenchymal sarcoma. The differential diagnoses included synovial sarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, and other tumors with similar presentations.
No evident abnormality was identified in the personal and family history.
A firm lump was palpated on the anterolateral aspect of the middle segment of the left upper arm. It was immobile and approximately 5 cm × 3 cm in size. Mild tenderness and scarring from the previous punch biopsy were observed.
No evident abnormality in the serum tumor markers was detected.
Left humerus radiography , computed tomography , and MRI examinations revealed bone destruction in the middle segment of the left humerus, accompanied with the formation of a soft tissue mass.
On July 7, 2023, the patient underwent segmental resection of the left humerus with prosthetic replacement .