We report the case of a 3 year old Caucasian boy who first developed erythematous patches distributed over the whole body at the age of 5 months . A skin biopsy was performed, showing faint polymorphonuclear granulocytic infiltrates; a histopathologic diagnosis of probable autoinflammatory skin disease was made, which prompted further diagnostic evaluations into SAIDs (s. Table ). At 8 months of age, macroscopic haematuria, bloody diarrhoea and epistaxis were reported by the mother. Shortly after, recurrent episodes of fever up to 39.5 °C, 1–3 days duration, were reported to be occurring every 2 weeks, accompanied by an increase in erythematous skin lesions. From the age of 12 months, ulcerative skin lesions developing on previously intact skin primarily on the extremities, a sudden-onset unilateral facial swelling and transient anisocoria were seen . Deep skin defects developed after medical interventions such as bone marrow aspiration or immunizations, which were interpreted as representing a pathergy phenomenon. Subsequently, from the age of 18 months, palmoplantar bullous skin lesions occurred with rapid detachment of epidermal layers. One skin lesion on the foot healed with scar formation.
The boy was the youngest of several siblings of a family where both parents were part of the household and did not have connections to the health care sector, and who had no apparent psychiatric abnormalities.
A diagnosis of SAID was one of the first diagnoses suspected, and was first proposed by the dermatologists, as fever and skin symptoms are typical findings for these entities. However, extensive testing yielded negative results . Autoimmune diseases and primary immunodeficiencies were ruled out by these investigations. Primary dermatologic disorders such as congenital or acquired epidermolysis bullosa, bullous pemphigoid diseases and other blistering skin diseases were ruled out by skin biopsy. In total, six skin biopsies were performed over a time span of 2 years. All biopsies showed faint perivascular lymphocytic infiltrates associated with rare infiltrates of polymorphonuclear granulocytes, possibly caused by mechanical or medical irritation of the skin. Several imaging studies were performed including abdominal ultrasound, brain MRI and echocardiography, all with normal results. Eye exams did not show any inflammatory changes and an underlying cause for the episodic mydriasis was not seen. Metabolic diseases were also ruled out by extensive testing. Experts for childhood metabolic diseases speculated on the presence of a leukotriene-associated disorder, but there was no specific evidence to support this suggestion.
Due to suspecting a monogenic SAID like TRAPS or an undifferentiated SAID throughout the disease course, several treatments were implemented sequentially or in combination, including prednisolone up to 2 mg/kg/d, azathioprine (4 months of therapy), dapsone (3 months of therapy), anakinra, ibuprofen and/or hydroxychloroquine. However, most of the signs and symptoms described above persisted or recurred during treatment.
Subsequently, clinical investigations shifted increasingly to the search for external and/or toxic factors. Contaminants in the household were considered and actively investigated, and screening for heavy metal poisoning was pursued. In total five hospital admissions for diagnostic purposes took place.
As the extensive work-up performed continued to yield only negative results, it became increasingly apparent that intrinsic disease was unlikely and MBPS was suspected. However, during a 3-week hospital stay with intensified surveillance, no maternal interference, that might explain the patient’s signs and symptoms was observed, symptoms remained the same. During this time two findings in particular aroused suspicion, (1) reversible unilateral (otherwise unexplainable) mydriasis, not reactive to topical application of pilocarpine 1% and (2) the sudden appearance of bullous skin lesions in previously intact skin. A North American expert panel on child abuse was consulted by telephone conference and it was felt that this case was highly suspicious for MBPS. Ultimately, both parents were confronted with the probable diagnosis with participation of the youth welfare service and an attending psychiatrist. As the mother was the person most consistently involved in the care of the child and was always present during hospital stays, we suspected her rather than the father to be the perpetrator. The mother and patient were separated immediately and the patient was admitted together with his father. Within 2 weeks all signs and symptoms of disease resolved.
In the meantime, the parents had contacted the police to report, that a crime had been committed by an unknown perpetrator. After 6 weeks of hospitalization, the patient’s mother confessed in writing to having performed multiple actions that resulted in different signs and symptoms. These actions ranged from (1) erroneous reporting (fever; medication not given), to (2) interference of specimens (blood in urine/diaper; manipulation of thermometer), and (3) induction of symptoms (mechanical irritation; application of capsaicin, anti-wart patches, mydriatic eye drops and saliva/stool application to induce skin infection) .
Retrospectively, the primary care pediatrician reported abnormally frequent visits of the mother with her son to his medical practice, with up to 12 visits a month, possibly indicating secondary gain for the mother. However, no medical opinions beyond our center were accessed by the family. At the age of 3 years, a diagnosis of MBPS was firmly established with the evidence that separating mother and child led to spontaneous resolution of all disease symptoms and signs, along with the confession from the mother.