The patient was a 56-year-old woman who decided to donate a kidney to her husband. Patient was overweight (BMI = 28.4 kg/m2) and showed a previous history of cholecystitis and morbid obesity treated with open cholecystectomy and gastric bypass, respectively. She was cleared after full medical assessment, and a careful review of preoperative Computed Tomography angiography (CTA) revealed an infrarenal IVC located at the left side of the Aorta, crossing the midline to its right side at the level of the ostium of a single left renal vein in which both adrenal and gonadal veins drained . In addition, the length of left single renal artery and vein were measured as 3.88 cm and 3.49 cm (vs 2.68 cm in the right side), respectively. Therefore, left kidney removal deemed best by the living donor selection committee, and hand-assisted laparoscopic approach was selected for the planned nephrectomy.
Written informed consent was obtained prior to surgery from both donor and recipient. After Gelport® and trocar placement , the abdomen was insufflated to maximally 12 mmHg, showing multiple adhesions extending throughout the abdominal cavity including the left colon, liver, and spleen. The left colon was widely mobilized after gaining enough exposure through extensive laparoscopic adhesiolysis, thus providing a clear surgical field at the major retroperitoneal vessels.
The infrarenal IVC was identified on the left side of the Aorta and followed upwards until the renal hilum was fully exposed. Gonadal and adrenal veins were dissected and divided using LigaSure®. The ureter was released from its attachments and divided between clips. The main renal vein was located anterior to the course of the main renal artery, and its take-off was placed posterior to the infrarenal IVC . Both vascular structures were isolated and controlled using an endovascular stapler .
Blood loss was minimal and the left kidney graft was finally removed through the hand port. Warm ischemic time was 96 s. Status post-procurement was checked upon visualization in the back table, and the kidney graft flushed and preserved with cold Custodiol®-HTK solution. The transplantation procedure was completed in the left recipient´s iliac fossa in a standard fashion showing adequate perfusion and urine output.
Postoperative course of both donor and recipient was uneventful and they were discharged at postoperative day 4 and 5, respectively. Donor and recipient have maintained adequate renal function with no delayed complications and stable serum creatinine (1.13 and 1.31 respectively) at 4 months follow-up.