Erythema, blisters and erosions appeared on the face, neck, trunk and limbs 1 wk after combination therapy with toripalimab and lenvatinib.
Four weeks prior to presentation, a 39-year-old male began to receive combination therapy with toripalimab and lenvatinib, as well as radiotherapy, after being diagnosed with liver cancer with cervical vertebra metastasis. The oral administration dose of lenvatinib was 12 mg once daily. Toripalimab (240 mg) was administered intravenously every two weeks. One week prior to presentation, erythema, blisters and erosions began to appear on the face and neck, along with pain and fever. Rashes soon spread to the trunk and limbs, as well as the scrotum and oral mucosa. Therefore, the patient was admitted to the Dermatology Department of the Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine.
The patient experienced neck pain 2 mo prior to presentation at our clinic. The diagnosis of liver cancer with cervical vertebral metastasis was ultimately confirmed by PET-CT. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection was diagnosed at the same time, and the patient was then treated with entecavir. The patient had no other medical history, such as diabetes or hypertension.
The patient had no history of exposure to industrial poisonous substances and reported no habit of smoking or drinking alcohol. The family history was unremarkable.
The patient presented with typical erythema multiforme, slack bullae and epidermal peeling on the face, neck, trunk and limbs. Nikolsky’s sign was positive. Scrotal and oral mucosal erosion was observed. Skin injury covered more than 70% of the body surface area (BSA) . The patient weighed 71 kg.
Skin biopsy was performed. Prominent necrotic keratinocytes, hyperkeratosis, liquefaction of basal cells and acantholytic bullae were observed in the epidermis. Blood vessels in the dermis were infiltrated by lymphocytes and eosinophils . Direct immunofluorescence (DIF) staining was negative.
Serum albumin decreased to 33.6 g/L. CRP and procalcitonin slightly increased to 20.9 mg/L and 0.09 ng/mL, respectively. Random blood glucose was 11.23 mmol/L. Quantitative analysis of HBV DNA yielded a value of 3.57 × 103 IU/mL. The AFP value was 1497 ng/mL. The results of routine blood, blood coagulation function, liver and kidney function, routine stool, and routine urine tests, as well as of electrocardiography and chest radiography, were normal. Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, and Klebsiella aerogenes were cultured from the sites of skin erosion.