A 51-year-old arab man, known to have systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) complicated with lupus nephritis. He underwent renal transplantation twice in 1997 and 2019 and was maintained on prednisone 5 mg once daily and tacrolimus 1 mg twice per day. He also is known to have severe mitral valve stenosis secondary to rheumatic heart disease. His family history was unremarkable; particularly, there was no history of SLE or rheumatic heart diseases. He works as a businessman, is married, and has two children. He lives in a private house and does not consume alcohol or tobacco.
At the age of 45 years, a successful mechanical mitral valve replacement (MVR) procedure was performed utilizing Medtronic valve size 29 mm. He was maintained on warfarin 4 mg daily with a subtherapeutic internal normalization ratio (INR) due to noncompliance issues. Four years later, he was found to have a stuck mechanical mitral valve leaflet by a routine transthoracic echocardiography, which was confirmed by transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) and fluoroscopy. He was asymptomatic clinically, and his physical examination was remarkable for an audible click of the first heart sound (S1), normal second heart sound (S2), and a grade 2/6 pan-systolic murmur over his apical area. As a result, a redo MVR was performed utilizing a bioprosthetic valve (Epic St. Jude bioprosthesis size 31 mm).
One month later, he presented to emergency room complaining of subjective fever, reaching up to 39 °C, associated with chills for a 2-day duration. His heart rate was 86 beats per minute and blood pressure was 118/67 mmHg. His physical examination revealed a normal pulse and no splinter hemorrhages, Osler nodes, or Janeway lesions. His precordial examination revealed normal and audible S1 and S2 with grade 3/6 pansystolic murmur over his apical area that radiated to his axilla. His higher mental function and neurological examination were normal, and his ophthalmological examination excluded the presence of Roth’s spots. His dental examination revealed few dental caries, and he denied any recent dental or gingival procedures or manipulations. Blood cultures were obtained for investigations, and the patient was discharged on oral paracetamol 650 mg orally every 4 hours as needed. His blood cultures came back with a positive result of isolated P. stutzeri.
The patient was called back and admitted for urgent investigations, where he underwent a transthoracic echocardiography that revealed vegetations on the bioprosthetic mitral valve. Subsequently, a TEE was performed and revealed two medium-sized vegetations attached to both atrial and ventricular sides of the mitral prosthesis. They measured approximately 5 × 4 mm and 7 × 6 mm, respectively, morphologically consistent with prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE), rather than Libman–Sacks Endocarditis. Rheumatological investigations were negative, and he had stable and inactive SLE. The patient was treated as a case of PVE with intravenous piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g every 6 hours for 3 weeks as an inpatient and was discharged thereafter in stable condition on oral ciprofloxacin 400 mg twice a day to complete a total duration of 6 weeks, based on his blood culture sensitivity results .
Two months later, he again presented to emergency room complaining of fever, reaching 38.3 °C, and chills. His symptoms were associated with dysarthria and aphasia. His physical examination was notable for a heart rate of 87 beats per minute and blood pressure of 136/78 mmHg. A reduced power of grade 2 over 5 was noted in his right upper and right lower limbs. His cardiovascular examination was remarkable for a normal and audible S1 and S2 with a grade 4 over 6 pansystolic murmur over his apical area. There were no peripheral stigmata of infective endocarditis. While in emergency room, he lost consciousness and was intubated and placed on mechanical ventilation. Computed tomography (CT) scan of his brain revealed a completely occluded left middle cerebral artery (MCA); unfortunately, thrombolysis was not feasible because of a high INR level (4.9). Subsequent brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple brain and brainstem lesions, which were suggestive of underlying showering emboli.
His routine blood work-up was unremarkable, apart from leukocytosis of a 16.3 × 109 per liter and a positive blood culture growing the same organism, P. stutzeri. His hemoglobin level, platelet count, and renal and hepatic profiles were all within normal range. His serological markers were negative. Intravenous ceftazidime 2 g every 12 hours was started, and the patient underwent TEE, which revealed several mobile masses attached to the atrial side and coating the bioprosthetic mitral valve consistent with vegetations . The vegetations were extending to involve the aortomitral fibrosa and the aortic valve causing severe degree of aortic regurgitation and suggesting an ongoing abscess formation.
The case was discussed in a combined cardiology/cardiac surgery meeting, and the decision was made for the patient to undergo a second redo MVR. After redo sternotomy, dissection of adhesions, and cardiopulmonary bypass connection, the prosthetic valve was explored. The prosthetic mitral valve leaflets were thickened and coated with multiple gross masses consistent with vegetations ; similar masses were also noted on the aortic valve cusps. The prosthetic mitral valve was excised and replaced with a 33 mm bioprosthesis (Perimount Magna Ease); the aortic valve was also excised and replaced with a size 25 mm bioprosthesis (Perimount Magna Ease). The excised valves and masses were sent for histopathological examination, which confirmed the presence of vegetations, and the surgical cultures grew the same organism. The postoperative period was unremarkable, and the antimicrobials regimen were continued throughout his hospital stay.
The patient was seen at a follow-up visit 6 months after his surgery, where his sternal wound was intact and revealed no signs of active infection or inflammation. He had an intact higher mental function with no aphasia or dysarthria, and his right upper and lower limbs power was 4 over 5. His physical examination was otherwise unremarkable.