A 70-year-old man presented with a history of diminished vision, pain, redness, watering,
and photophobia after instillation of juice of datura in his right eye.
Based on his friend's advice, the patient had used the juice of datura
leaves in his right eye to treat his ocular problems, one day before his presentation. The
patient had foreign body sensation for the past two days in his right eye before the
instillation of datura juice. He had undergone cataract surgery with
implantation of intraocular lens three years earlier in his right eye and two years before
in the left eye. The review of previous records revealed that his postoperative follow-up
was uneventful. Visual acuity of the right eye was light perception. Slit lamp examination
was not possible until the instillation of 0.5% proparacaine hydrochloride drops that
allowed the patient to open his eye. The patient had a narrow palpebral aperture with
conjunctival and circumcorneal congestion. Epithelial and stromal corneal edema was present.
There were folds in Descemet's membrane [Figure 2(a)]. The pupil was dilated and did not
react to direct light. No reaction was noted in the anterior chamber. The posterior chamber
intraocular lens was in place. Corneal staining with fluorescein was negative. On
ophthalmoscopy, a faint glow was visible, but nothing more specific could be noted. Optic
disc and retinal vessels were not evaluable. The visual acuity in the left eye was 20/20
with a normal cornea and 3-mm pupil reacting to light. His systemic examination revealed
tachycardia (pulse rate 100/minute). The rest of the systemic examination was normal.
The patient was medicated with 0.5% moxifloxacin eye drops four times a day, topical
lubricants (Carboxymethylcellulose 0.5%, Refresh tear eye drop, Allergan India Pvt. Ltd.)
four times a day, cycloplegics (Homatropine 2%, Homide, Indico Remedies Limited, India)
three times a day, and dexamethasone 0.1% eye drops (Decolite, Intas Pharmaceuticals Pvt.
Ltd. India) six times a day. Systemic non-steroidal anti-inflammatory and analgesic agents
(Ibuprofen 400 mg and Paracetamol 325 mg, Combiflam, Sanofi India, Pvt. Ltd.)) were given
for pain relief. On day 3, the patient experienced symptom relief. Visual acuity improved to
20/200. However, slit lamp examination still showed stromal edema and folds in Descemet's
membrane. Intraocular pressure by applanation tonometry was 10 mm Hg in both eyes. Pulse
rate was 80 beats/minute.
The patient was followed up for six months. No improvement in the visual acuity was noted.
Corneal epithelial and stromal edema was still present. However, the epithelium was intact
[Figure 2(b)]. Right eye fundus at six months was faintly visible with a normal appearing
disc and retinal vessels. Foveal reflex could not be seen due to corneal edema. Due to the
non-availability of specular microscopy, endothelial cell count could not be performed.
Intraocular pressure was 10 mm Hg at six months of follow-up. The patient was referred for
penetrating keratoplasty. The corneal graft was clear and there were no signs of recurrence
at five months of follow-up.