A 56-year-old Chinese man with a history of portal hypertension due to HBV-related liver cirrhosis and known former recurrent esophageal varices bleeding status post Sengstaken-Blakemore tube tamponade was referred to our hospital for liver transplantation evaluation because of persistent EV bleeding with hypovolemic shock, even after medical and endoscopic therapies in a local hospital. On admission, he was hemodynamically unstable and was transferred to the intensive care unit for close monitoring. Grade I encephalopathy and mild ascites were noted during a physical examination, and the serum laboratory tests disclosed hemoglobin 10.2g/dL, total bilirubin 3.3mg/dL, albumin 3.4g/dL, ammonia 220ug/dL, and a prothrombin time of 33.6 seconds. As a result, liver cirrhosis with Child-Pugh class B function was diagnosed. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed F2 esophageal varices with a healed ulcer, M/3 to L/3, and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed the relatively small size of the portal vein in both hepatic lobes, which may have been due to the hepatofugal flow or stasis flow causing thrombosis . Besides, a computed tomography (CT) scan done in the previous hospital revealed the presence of a long segment of portal vein thrombosis .
Despite the use of vasoactive agents, and endoscopic hemostasis management, EV bleeding still occurred episodically with hypovolemic shock, which could not be reversed by blood transfusion or Sengstaken-Blakemore tube tamponade. Although liver transplantation was the optimal choice for our patient, he and his family still needed some time to consider and the evaluation for his liver transplantation was not yet completed either. As a result, the modified Sugiura operation was performed as an alternative treatment. In surgery, splenomegaly of about 22×12×9cm3 in size and engorgement of the vessels over the esophagogastric junction were found. Splenectomy was performed first and the operation was completed with the subsequent devascularization of paraesophagogastric and proximal gastric vessels with a total blood loss of 850mL .
His EV bleeding was under control after the operation, and 11 days later, all the necessary documentation was completed and approved by the medical ethics committee. He then received a living donor liver transplantation with the right lobe of liver (450gm) from his daughter. During the operation, he was found to have portal vein thrombosis, which was compatible with the CT and MRI findings and thrombectomy was performed with a total blood loss of 400cc. The postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged two weeks later. He had no evidence of recurrent EV bleeding during the six-month follow-up.