A 62-year-old man presented with paroxysmal right upper quadrant pain. The pain worsened the next day and was accompanied by a body temperature of 38.2°C. On physical examination, there was tenderness in the right upper abdomen, but no mass was palpable. The laboratory tests indicated that inflammatory indicators were elevated, AKP, CA-199 and CA-125 were slightly increased, and there were no measurable findings on the other laboratory tests. The abdominal pain eased after rehydration and anti-infection treatment.
The patient had had hypertension for 20 years that was managed with the help of antihypertensive drugs, but the blood pressure control was poor. Six months ago his left upper lung lobe was removed because of lung adenocarcinoma. No definite trauma history or other surgeries were detected prior to the onset of illness.
No abnormalities were found in the abdominal imaging scan six months ago . An abdominal computed tomography (CT) enhanced scan was performed for further diagnosis, and it showed that there was a 7.8 × 7.4 × 6.6 cm mass between the liver and right kidney space (–). The tumor was a cystic, solid mass with an irregular radiated and cotton-like osteoid composition located in the eccentric side, and the osteoid appeared ill-defined and inhomogeneous. The density of the tumor increased toward its center, where the CT value was 314 Hu. The right kidney was compressed but its cortex was not infiltrated. On enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) , intermediate or relatively low signals on T1WI were found, and there were no abnormal signals on DWI. The whole tumor was not enhanced in both CT and MR. The pararenal space was unclear with flocculent exudation, and the adjacent peritoneal adhesion was displayed. Excluding tumor bone, the rest of the tumor had a multilocular cystic structure with the septa dividing cystic spaces. No enhancement of the capsule, septa, and cystic components was discovered.
The tumor was located in the right posterior lobe of the liver and was more exophytic in its growth pattern. Excision of the tumor, which measured approximately 70 × 80 mm including the capsule, hard texture, and adhesion to the surrounding omentum tissue, was completed by performing a partial liver lobectomy. Intraoperative ultrasonography showed no obvious space-occupying lesions in the remaining liver and no distant metastases in the abdominal and pelvic cavity. Macroscopically, the round mass was cystic and solid with a complete capsule, and the cut surface had a firm, yellow-white appearance ( and ). Microscopically , most tumor cells in the field of view were fusiform, diffusely arranged with common mitotic figures. The neoplasm was composed of osteoid tissues and cystic spaces and lined with a single layer of columnar epithelium or cubic epithelium. Proliferation of spindle-shaped fibroblast/myofibroblast-like cells was seen in the cyst wall, and cartilage-like components were seen locally. Pathological diagnosis was osteoblastic sarcoma; however, more tests were required to determine whether the mass was primary or metastatic. This pathology result was affirmed by experts from Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center. The immunohistochemical analysis contains the following markers: CD34, CK7, Hepatocyte, Ki-67, CK19, GPC3, P53, CK (pan), CAM5.2, MOC31, MDM2 and CEA. Among these markers, percentage of Ki-67 was 20% and the rest were negative. Based on H&E morphology, immunohistochemistry, and molecular detection results, the opinion at the final consultation was hepatic ESOS (osteoblastic type). The AKP, CA-199 and CA-125 had returned to normal in postoperative laboratory tests.
No obvious abnormal fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake area was displayed except for the abdominal incision and tissues of the operative region . The patient had to undergo an adjuvant AP regimen (epirubicin 30 mg/m2 D1–3 and cisplatin 150 mg/m2 D2); however, the regimen was changed to albumin-bound paclitaxel 180 mg/m2 plus gemcitabine 1400 mg/m2 (D1, D8, q3W) on account of the slight return to normality of his renal function (increased urine output over 24 hours, slightly elevated creatinine, and reduced creatinine clearance rate). Currently, his condition is generally good, and he does not have any discomfort.