A 21-year-old Chinese man presented to our hospital with fatigue and wordlessness lasting for one year along with elevated transaminase levels for one month. One year before presentation, suffering from work and love problems, our patient had begun to complain of fatigue accompanied by wordlessness, low mood, occasional vomiting and anorexia. Subsequently, he had been diagnosed with depression disorder and had received anti-depression therapy in his native hospital several times, but to little effect. He turned to a native witch and ingested living earthworms and geckos for 10 days at her suggestion. One month before his admission to our hospital, a laboratory evaluation revealed that his transaminase level was elevated. He denied fever, jaundice, abdominal pain, melena, changes in bowel habits, chest pain, respiratory symptoms or visual changes. Furthermore, in the previous year he had unintentionally lost 25kg in weight. Nothing notable was found in his medical history or previous drug therapy.
His physical examination demonstrated malnutrition, scythropasmus and low voice. No skin eruption was observed. His heart, lung and abdominal examination showed no sign of any abnormality. A neurologic examination did not reveal any focal deficits.
Laboratory examination showed a white blood cell count (WBC) of 16.5 × 109/L, with 75.6% eosinophils, alanine transaminase (ALT) 143U/L, aspartate transaminase (AST) 112U/L, gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) 176U/L, total bilirubin (TB) 33.1μmol/L, direct bilirubin (DB) 19.0μmol/L and indirect bilirubin (IB) 14.1μmol/L. Multiple stool examinations detected Trichuris trichiura ova but no other parasite ova or larvae. A positive reaction in his serum to common parasite antigens was only detected against Paragonimus. An abdominal ultrasound (US) detected multiple small and hypoechoic nodular lesions . A bone marrow biopsy revealed obvious eosinophilia. An US-guided liver biopsy was performed and revealed marked edema of hepatocytes, local necrosis, sinusoidal hemorrhage and heavy eosinophil leukocyte infiltration of portal areas . No microorganisms were observed.
According to these findings, parasitic infection accompanied by VLM was suspected, combined with depression disorder. A course of albendazole was administrated at a dosage of 400mg once daily for 14 days. One month later, a laboratory examination was conducted and showed WBC 10.4 × 109/L, with 18.14% eosinophils, ALT 88U/L, AST 65U/L, GGT 95U/L, TB 31.2μmol/L, DB 16.0μmol/L and IB 15.2μmol/L. Abdominal US revealed the disappearance of the previous multiple hypoechoic nodular lesions . A repeated liver biopsy showed spot necrosis and partial cholestasis with some neutrophil and eosinophil leucocytes infiltration in the portal space .
A second course of anthelmintic treatment (albendazole, 400mg/day) was given for another 14 days. Six months after the second course, a laboratory evaluation showed: WBC 9.3 × 109/L with 10.6% eosinophils, ALT 45U/L, AST 42U/L, GGT 68U/L, TB 28.5μmol/L, DB 13.0μmol/L and IB 15.5μmol/L. No parasite ova or larvae were detected in a repeated stool examination. A repeated abdominal US and bone marrow biopsy were normal. A third liver biopsy showed hepatocyte edema accompanied by mild neutrophil and eosinophil leukocyte infiltration in the portal space, but no necrosis was observed .
A third course of anthelmintic therapy (albendazole, 400mg/day) was administrated for an additional seven days. Two weeks later, praziquantel was prescribed at a dosage of 1g twice daily for three days (120mg/kg, the fourth course). Two weeks after the fourth course, the laboratory examination results were almost normal except for slightly elevated eosinophil percentage (6.6%). Three months later, our patient presented with increased physical activities and his laboratory data all returned to a normal range (WBC 6.5 × 109/L with 4.0% eosinophils, ALT 27U/L and AST 25U/L).