The first child was a 10-year-old girl who presented with severe developmental speech delay until she reached 3 years old, at which point she began to speak minimally. At the age of 3 years, it was discovered that she suffered from short-term memory loss, although her long-term memories remained intact. At the age of 4 years, she began to lose sphincter control and was no longer able to control urination or defecation. She had shown normal motor development until 4 years of age, at which point she began to develop ataxia (fear of going downstairs) and weakness while walking. Atonic and myoclonic seizures also began to affect her at this age and could not be completely controlled despite the use of three anti-epileptic drugs (topiramate, levetiracetam, and valproate). Over the course of the subsequent year, her motor skills continued to decline, as she went from having difficulty walking to being limited to crawling. At 5 years old, she was completely unable to stand or sit, and was found to have very poor concentration and a very short attention span. Moreover, she had almost no expressive language, only vocalizing and echoing single words or screams with unclear sounds. She was incapable of imitating or playing with other children. At 5 years old, her mental age according to the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale was below the age of 2 years and her IQ was below 35.
She was born by spontaneous delivery after a healthy 40-wk pregnancy with a typical birth weight of 3.5 kg and no postnatal complications. The family consisted of consanguineous parents (first cousins), two affected children, four healthy progenies, and one deceased daughter . The daughter died at 8 years of age, was reported to have had a clinical presentation similar to that of the current two affected children, but was not diagnosed or tested genetically. Both affected children (sisters) had a similar clinical course and the same family history. There was no other relevant family history.
It is important to note that the patients had otherwise normal laboratory values. Complete blood count (CBC) test, liver function test, kidney function test, serum electrolyte test, and blood sugar test were all normal. Other tests included a serum amino acid profile, B12 level test, and thyroid function test.
A computed tomography (CT) scan at the time showed no abnormalities, and an electroencephalogram (EEG) showed a generalized spike and wave pattern. Subsequent brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed mild fronto-parietal brain atrophy.
Topiramate, levetiracetam, and valproate.
The second child was a 9-year-old girl who was born by spontaneous delivery after a healthy 38-wk pregnancy with a typical birth weight of 3.25 kg and no postnatal complications. She had normal gross motor, fine motor, hearing, speech, and social behavioral skills until the age of 4 years. At this age, her expressive language began to decline, although her concentration and attention span remained acceptable. When she reached an age of 4 years and 8 mo, her mental age according to the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale corresponded to an age of 2 years and 7 mo, with an IQ score of 47. She complained of some minor dizziness and imbalance while walking and was reported to have mildly decreased short-term memory. At this age, she was able to imitate children at play and was able to play with her siblings. She had no vision or hearing loss, and no loss of sphincter function.
It is important to note that the patients had otherwise normal laboratory values. CBC test, liver function test, kidney function test, serum electrolyte test, and blood sugar test were all normal. Other tests including a serum amino acid profile, B12 level test, thyroid function test, and a brain CT scan were also normal.
A subsequent brain MRI also showed no abnormalities. However, her condition progressively declined until she turned 8 years old, when she could no longer stand, had very poor short-term memory, very poor speech, and had lost the ability to control urination and defecation. She required three anti-epileptic drugs (topiramate, levetiracetam, and valproate) to help manage her intractable atonic and myoclonic seizures, which were confirmed by EEG showing a generalized spike and wave pattern. Currently, at 9 years old, her hearing and vision have continued to decline and she is beginning to have some difficulty recognizing her mother.
Both patients were initially thought to have a form of regressive autism [childhood disintegrative disorder (CDD)] due to their poor social skills and normal initial laboratory tests and imaging results. Interestingly, there do exist lysosomal storage disorders which are associated with CDD[-]. A neurodegenerative disorder was suspected when MRI results revealed mild brain atrophy in the older sister and when the disease in both siblings began increasing in severity.
Differential diagnoses included leukodystrophy, subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, tuberous sclerosis, and CDD. The first three differential diagnoses were ruled out based on history, examinations, and investigations. Specifically, leukodystrophy was ruled out based on MRI results, subacute sclerosing panencephalitis was ruled out since EEG recordings failed to show any periodic patterns, and tuberous sclerosis was excluded due to the absence of any skin manifestations. A diagnosis of CDD was therefore tentatively established. Eventually, when the opportunity arose to perform whole exome sequencing (WES) on a group of patients from our hospital, we selected these two cases given that we still had not yet obtained a final diagnosis. Not only did the WES results give us a definitive diagnosis, they also increased our awareness of the value of WES for similar cases.
WES was conducted on the proband III-6 using an Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform (Illumina) and Sure Select XT Human All Exon (Agilent). Sequencing reads were mapped to the Genome Reference Consortium Human Genome Build 37 (GRCh37) using BWA-0.5.10. Polymerase chain reaction duplicates were removed using samblaster. Single-nucleotide variants and small insertions/deletions (indels) were identified with freebayes and annotated with SnpEff-3.3 (Ensembl-GRCh37.73). Sequencing was performed in the Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics at Tübingen University in Germany using the pipeline megSAP. Variants that were located in the protein coding region (according to Ensembl database v68) were identified with at least 20X coverage and a mapping quality score ≥ 60.
The homozygous variant NM_017882.2:c.794_796delCCT;p.Ser265del was identified in the CLN6 gene. The variant was inspected visually with Integrative Genomic Viewer (IGV). The variant is homozygous in the second proband III-7 and segregates accordingly in the parents and in the non-affected siblings according to Sanger sequencing results . Despite reporting this variant as pathogenic, it is reported in Clinvar with conflicting interpretations of its pathogenicity.