A 39-year-old female patient was admitted to our Medical Center's surgical department with a 2 month history of altered bowel habits, perianal pain and rectal bleeding. Colonoscopy demonstrated a circumferentially developing ulcerated tumor 8 cm above the dentate line, extending 4 cm proximally. The colonoscope was advanced past the tumor, performing a total colonoscopy, while biopsies from the lesion were obtained and examined histologically, revealing a non-keratinized squamous cell carcinoma of the rectum. Abdominal computed tomography and chest radiograph were negative for metastatic disease. However, a transanal endoscopic ultrasound demonstrated the spread of the tumor beyond bowel's wall in the perirectal space, necessitating institution of neoadjuvant therapy. The patient underwent 1 session of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with 5-Fluorouracil (1000 mg/m2/d) plus Mitomycin and 5 sessions of radiotherapy (totally 20 Gy). Two days after the last session of radiotherapy a laparotomy was performed. Intraoperative findings included invasion of the posterior vaginal wall from the tumor and an abdominoperineal resection and a concomitant total hysterectomy-oophorectomy were carried out. Histology reported the presence of two ulcerated lesions (1 × 2 cm and 2 × 4 cm) in middle and lower rectum both squamous cell carcinoma of the rectum, invading the bowel wall and the adjacent vaginal wall. The surgical specimen contained 15 lymph nodes, all negative for metastatic disease (T4 N0 M0, stage IIb) and the resected margins were free of tumor. Postoperatively, adjuvant chemotherapy (1 session of 5-FU plus Mitomycin) and 23 sessions of radiotherapy (totally 45 Gy) were administered.
Five months after tumor resection, liver metastasis was demonstrated in a follow-up abdominal computed tomography and a central hepatectomy was performed. Histology confirmed the presence of a metastatic rectal squamous cell carcinoma to the liver . Adjuvant chemotherapy consisting of 6 sessions of 5-FU plus Cisplatin (100 mg/m2/d) was applied. Fortunately, the patient had an uneventful postoperative course and is alive 18 months after.