In January 2018, a 57-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to our hospital for hemoptysis. The patient was in good health and had no history of smoking, a family history of hereditary disease, or tumor. However, the current chest computed tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography (PET)-CT suspected left-sided advanced central-type lung cancer with multiple lymph node metastases in the mediastinum and hilar and pleural effusion . Blood tests show a significant elevation of tumor markers including neuron-specific enolase (NSE) and pro-gastrin-releasing peptide (Pro-GRP) than the normal. Fortunately, the brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no brain metastases. Then, she accepted the fiberoptic bronchoscopy and biopsy at the same time . Eventually, the diagnosis of ES-SCLC, cT2bN3M1a, stage IVa was given. Immunohistochemical analyses suggested “CD56 (+), CgA (±), Syn (+), CK (AE1/AE3) (perinuclear punctate +), CK5/6 (–), CK7 (-), NapsinA (-), TTF-1 (+), Ki-67 (80%+), and programmed cell death receptor ligand-1 (PD-L1) <5%.” The genetic testing demonstrated the tumor mutational burden (TMB) of 1.82 and microsatellite stabilization (MSS).
She was administered four-line systematic chemotherapies including etoposide and carboplatin (EC) , vinorelbine and ifosfamide (NI) followed by anlotinib , irinotecan and pobaplatin (IP) , and albumin paclitaxel combined with cisplatin (TC) . Otherwise, she also got radiotherapy during the initial treatment period. Her disease ultimately progressed while on these systematic therapies, although some lesions shrank or were even partially relieved within a short period.
Notably, the levels of NSE and Pro-GRP were rising, and the ultrasonography and CT scan showed that the left clavicle lymph nodes were enlarged. Then, she received the fifth-line treatment with albumin paclitaxel plus programmed cell death receptor-1 (PD-1) inhibitor toripalimab . In January 2020, she received radiofrequency ablation treatment for her metastatic supraclavicular fossa lymph node lesion. However, albumin paclitaxel had to be suspended for high brain natriuretic petide (BNP) level and cardiac toxicity. Afterward, she continued receiving toripalimab alone as the maintenance treatment .
In March 2020, the touchable swollen lymph nodes on the left side of the neck revealed that the disease may have progressed. Immediately afterward, she completed ultrasound examination of neck lymph nodes and blood tumor markers, and the disease was judged to have progressed again. Thus, she started the sixth-line treatment with etoposide plus carboplatin and tislelizumab . The following CT scan revealed that the lesion has slightly progressed and she newly acquired pleural and pericardial effusion. Additionally, the bone scan of the body showed multiple bone metastases.
From that time, she received the seventh-line gemcitabine plus tislelizumab . Unfortunately, owing to the coronary heart disease and percutaneous coronary intervention, she delayed receiving the tislelizumab monotherapy then .
With a PFS of 5 months, her left supraclavicular lymph node was evaluated to be larger than before revealed by the CT scan. As a result, a change to PD-L1 agents was determined considering the demand of the patient and her family. Fortunately, she benefited from the eighth-line anlotinib plus durvalumab therapy for up to 11 months . In March 2022, she died of acute heart attack.