A 66-year-old Japanese man became aware of a mass on his left posterior surface in March 2014. Within a month, the mass had increased in size, and he began to experience left femoral pain. His symptoms gradually worsened, and the mass was excised partially in May 2014. Histopathological investigation at that time resulted in a diagnosis of malignant fibrous histiocytoma. As computed tomography (CT) scans of the patient’s entire body showed multiple pulmonary nodules, he was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment.
The patient’s previous medical history included rheumatoid arthritis for 18 years and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease for 20 years, for which he was being treated with 5 mg/day prednisolone and 8 mg/week methotrexate. He was an ex-smoker, with a 60 pack-year history, and had been treated for 5 years with 1.0 L/min home oxygen therapy. He had a history of treatment with the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) loxoprofen.
On admission, the patient’s height was 164.5 cm and his weight was 57.4 kg. His blood pressure was 128/96 mmHg; his heart rate was 76 beats/min and regular; his oxygen saturation was 97% while receiving 1.0 L/min oxygen; and his body temperature was 35.6 °C. Physical examination showed no remarkable findings, except for the left femoral mass. Chest CT revealed an additional nodule in the right apical portion of the lung, with no change in size of the preexisting nodules . All the nodules were under 3 to 5 mm in size. Positron emission tomography showed accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose (SUVmax: 2.39) only in the nodule newly identified on CT .
The left femoral tumor was excised completely in July 2014. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. Because postoperative chemotherapy was indicated only if the newly developed nodule was a metastatic tumor, he underwent diagnostic wedge resection of the right upper lobe under video-assisted thoracoscopy in August 2014, with tissue samples obtained aseptically. However, this procedure was not able to excise all lung nodules.
Macroscopic findings revealed a black node with a yellowish white interior . Histopathological examination of the specimen showed that the lesion was a granuloma, with necrotic tissue and clumping of Aspergillus-like hyphae. Grocott’s staining and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining were performed. The periphery of the granuloma showed fibrotic changes and invasion of inflammatory cells, including lymphocytes, histiocytes and multinucleated giant cells. In addition, the thin granuloma layer was surrounded by necrotic tissue. There was no evidence of malignancy. These findings indicated a granuloma caused by fungal infection.
Tissue specimens were cultured microbiologically on potato dextrose agar medium at 37 °C. However, fungal growth was not observed, even after 4 weeks. Gene analysis using broad-range polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed to identify the pathogen. The 28S rRNA gene of stored tissue samples was amplified and sequenced. Analysis of the 28S rRNA gene of this specimen using the NCBI BLAST program comparing against the NCBI GenBank DNA database revealed 100% homology to P. sordida. The patient was diagnosed with pulmonary mycosis caused by P. sordida.
Because the nodule was not a metastasis of the malignant tumor, the patient underwent localized postoperative radiation therapy of his femoral region to prevent local recurrence. As no antifungal drugs have been tested against P. sordida, the patient is being carefully monitored every 2 months. Currently, 6 months after the lung surgery, there has been no evidence of exacerbation of lung nodules.