A 2-year-old girl (Patient 1) initially presented with severe diarrhea for 1 week. Peripheral blood showed severe pancytopenia, and profound hypocellularity of bone marrow without dysplastic changes and abnormal blasts were demonstrated pathologically. After the diagnosis of SAA was made, neutropenic fever with respiratory symptoms developed. Computed tomography (CT) of the lungs revealed consolidation in the left lower lobe . The serum GM was detected using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and the result was 9.75 (cut-off value <0.5). Therefore, a probable diagnosis of pulmonary IA was made. As the very low absolute neutrophil count, a combination of voriconazole and caspofungin was administered for their synergistic effects. The serum levels of GM continued to decrease, as shown in Fig. . The pulmonary lesion in the chest X-ray was improved significantly but did not disappear before HSCT. The patient then received peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (PBSCT) from a 6/6 HLA-matched unrelated donor. The conditioning regimen consisted of cyclophosphamide, fludarabine, and rabbit anti-thymocyte globulin. Cyclosporine and methotrexate were used for GVHD prophylaxis. It was interesting to note that the serum GM levels elevated soon after the administration of conditioning regimen. Although high serum GM levels persisted, there was no progress of the pulmonary lesion and no new lesion was found, either. After a successful engraftment, a peak GM level of 13.42 was noted at the time of adding methylprednisolone for her GVHD. High GM levels (>7.0) persisted during the use of steroid for GVHD but declined gradually after tapering steroids and cyclosporine. One month later, caspofungin was discontinued and voriconazole was shifted to oral form. Eventually, the GM level declined to the normal range (<0.5) and CT did not reveal any pulmonary lesions, either. The patient had a full recovery of hematopoietic function without any pulmonary sequelae.
Patient 2, a 12-year-old girl, was diagnosed with SAA due to severe pancytopenia in the peripheral blood and extremely hypocellular bone marrow. She received immunosuppressive therapy with rabbit anti-thymocyte globulin and cyclosporine after diagnosis, but the treatment failed. Four months later, she suffered from neutropenic fever along with respiratory symptoms. Chest CT revealed nodules in the right middle lobe and left upper lobe with the serum GM level of 2.24. A probable diagnosis of pulmonary IA was made, and voriconazole was given immediately. The use of voriconazole continued, but the GM levels increased to 3.57 . We performed PBSCT from a 6/6 HLA-matched unrelated donor for her, and the pulmonary lesions in the chest X-ray disappeared before HSCT. The conditioning regimen consisted of cyclophosphamide, fludarabine, and rabbit anti-thymocyte globulin. Cyclosporine and methotrexate were for GVHD prophylaxis. It was worth noting that the GM levels increased soon after the administration of conditioning regimen, to a peak level of 6.03 before recovery of neutrophil count. Then the GM levels decreased gradually, to the normal range 2 months after HSCT. She had a full recovery of hematopoietic function without pulmonary lesions in the follow-up CT scans. At present, these two patients are doing well with good quality of living. No medications, including antifungal agents, are needed.