A 78-year-old male patient with TA was referred to our hospital for the treatment of a BCA aneurysm. He had been treated for TA with 10 mg/day oral administration of prednisolone for 24 years. He was also treated for hypertension at a local hospital and had no history of cardiovascular diseases. He had moderate pulmonary emphysema due to a long history of smoking. Furthermore, though there were no obvious sequelae, he had a history of brain infarction. Computed tomography showed a BCA aneurysm measuring 32 mm in diameter with a thickened aortic wall ranging from the orifice of the BCA to the bifurcation of the right common carotid and right subclavian artery . Computed tomography also showed severely atherosclerotic changes in the arch vessels . C-reactive protein level was 0.2 mg/dl, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 6.0 mm/hour. Taking into consideration of the patient’s comorbidities as mentioned above, partial arch replacement with ICP was scheduled. Following median sternotomy, cardiopulmonary bypass was established with femoral artery cannulation and bicaval drainage with a low flow (0.5 L/min). When the cardiopulmonary bypass got stabilized, direct cannulation of bilateral carotid arteries was added with a proximal clamp not to flush debris to the distal site . Total cardiopulmonary bypass was gained by additional cannulation through the ascending aorta and an 8-mm graft anastomosed to the right subclavian artery . The chronic inflammation changes compatible with TA, such as wall thickening and increased hardness, were observed in the ascending aorta . When the body temperature reached to 25 °C, lower body circulatory arrest was introduced. The orifice of the right subclavian artery was closed with a continuous 4–0 polypropylene suture through inside of the aneurysm. The orifice of arch vessels presented with severe atherosclerotic changes. Partial arch replacement with 28 mm quadrifurcated graft (Triplex®, Terumo Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) was performed with an open distal anastomosis technique. After distal anastomosis, the neck vessels including right subclavian artery, right carotid artery, and left carotid artery, were reconstructed with each branch of the artificial graft individually . An artificial graft anastomosed to the right subclavian artery was used for branch reconstruction . Both distal and proximal anastomosis were reinforced with Teflon felt strips at inner and outer side of the aortic wall. Weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass was uneventful, and the patient recovered without any neurological deficits. The time of operation, cardiopulmonary bypass, aortic cross-clamp, cerebral perfusion, and circulatory arrest were 442, 229, 128, 133, and 60 min, respectively. There were no significant changes in the continuous bilateral cerebral regional oxygen saturation values between the right and left side during the surgery as monitored using INVOS™ Cerebral/Somatic Oximetry Adult Sensors. Postoperative brain imaging detected no significant cerebral infarctions. Postoperative computed tomography demonstrated no anastomotic aneurysms and no abnormal flow in the aneurysm . Pathological results reported that the intima of the aorta had focal and raised plaques. During the perioperative period, management with additional prednisolone infusion was done, and the patient has never experienced episodes of exacerbation of inflammation. The patient remained free from any major adverse aortic and cerebrovascular events 1 year after surgery.