A 63-year-old man with syphilis and a body mass index of 19.6 kg/m2 presented with a painful swollen knee 1 month after slipping. Radiographs revealed a semi-acute depression fracture of the tibia with comparatively large defect of bone and some intra-articular loose bodies considering the pain. He had deep tendon hyporeflexia, hypo pallesthesia, disturbance of deep sensibility, and decreased protective sensation due to tabes dorsalis. Therefore, his right knee was diagnosed as a Charcot joint disease. Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) using a conventional non-locking plate was performed . Varus deformity and delayed bone union gradually developed after the procedure. At this point, his clinical depression worsened and was accompanied by abnormal behavior. The results of the blood test TPLA 6600 (TLHA 5120 X) had deteriorated to TPLA 22000 (TPHA 10240 X). Tabes dorsalis had been treated with antibiotics (ampicillin). Despite the treatment, the patient had to be transferred to a psychiatric hospital because of aggravated neurologic manifestations. He was diagnosed with organic mental disorder caused by tabes dorsalis and was hospitalized for 2 months. 1 year later, ORIF metal removal was performed.
About 10 years after the first knee symptoms, the patient visited our hospital because of right knee pain and an abnormal gait. Clinical examination showed severe varus deformity and limitation of the range of motion. TKA was carried out with LCCK® (Zimmer Biomet, Warsaw, IN, United States) . The pain subsequently subsided and the patient had an improved range of motion in the knee.4 weeks after the surgery, the patient experienced a slight pain in his right heel while walking. Radiographs did not reveal any obvious fractures . After a 1-week period of observation, plain radiographs showed an avulsion calcaneal fracture . This right calcaneus fracture was successfully treated with ORIF using two cannulated cancellous screws and a cerclage wire (, , ). 3 weeks after the surgery, partial weight bearing was permitted with a vacuum-stabilized orthosis (VACOped®, OPED, Oberlaindern, Germany) that allowed for angle adjustments at five-degree intervals. Full weight-bearing was allowed at 7 weeks after surgery. The surgical wounds healed without complications. 6 months after ORIF, bone union was eventually achieved and metal removal was performed. At the final follow-up, the patient was able to walk without difficulty. There has been no early loosening of the prosthesis so far.