Informed consent was obtained from the individual participant in the study.
A 40-year-old woman who worked as a peasant farmer in Shandong province, 300 miles from Beijing, China, was referred to a dermatology clinic within that province because she had 3 patchy rashes . One year earlier, she had 3 large patchy rashes—1 on the hip and 2 on her lower limbs. The patch on the hip was wide, raised, and erythematous with well-defined margins sloping toward the center of the lesion. The erythematous patch on the dorsum of her foot had sharp edges with thick granular margins and small satellite lesions. A skin biopsy was performed and revealed a noncaseating epitheloid granuloma . On the basis of this observation, we diagnosed the patient as having cutaneous sarcoidosis. She was prescribed some herbal medicine for 1 month, after which she felt aggravated and visited the hospital again. Then a skin biopsy from the patch on her right leg was obtained. Similar to the previous biopsy, the result showed numerous noncaseating epithelioid granuloma cells consisting of histiocytes and giant cells surrounded by lymphocytes infiltrating the adnexa structures . Results of the Ziehl-Neelsen staining and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for Mycobacterium tuberculosis were negative, and routine laboratory screening test results for the hemoglobin level, leukocyte count, and liver and renal parameters were all within normal range. Because of the possibility of sarcoidosis, plasma dipeptidyltransferase and calcium levels were measured, and chest radiography was performed. All these test results were also normal. Consequently, leprosy was suspected, and the patient was referred to Beijing Tropical Medicine Research Institute (BTMRI) for a formal assessment.
By the time of referral to BTMRI, the 3 patches became asymmetrically distributed on the patient's hip and lower limbs, while no patches were founded on her trunk or scalp. All the patches were not sensitive to light touch, and the patient was unable to discriminate between hot and cold temperatures in these areas. The eye examination was normal, and there was no enlargement of the nervus auricularis magnus. Subsequently, SSS with acid-fast staining was performed at 5 different sites: both earlobes, both eyebrows, and the chin. Results of the microscopic evaluation were negative. Therefore, M leprae-specific real-time PCR and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay were also performed to detect serum antibodies against phenolic glycolipid (PGL)-I and leprosy IDRI diagnostic (LID)-1. The results of real-time PCR for an M leprae-specific target was positive, whereas the antibody responses against LID-1 and PGL-I mimetic NDO-BSA were positive but weak (OD >0.05) . On the basis of the patient's clinical presentation and results of the assays, we diagnosed the patient as having BT leprosy. Accordingly, we prescribed her with dapsone (100 mg daily) and rifampicin (600 mg monthly) for 6 months in accordance with the WHO recommendation for treating PB leprosy.
The skin lesion was markedly improved by completion of the 6-month multidrug therapy (MDT) , providing a retrospective conformation of the diagnosis of BT leprosy.