A 60-year-old homeless Hispanic man was transferred from a hospital to the University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB) at Galveston for workup and evaluation of an adrenal mass found on CT of his abdomen and pelvis. He presented with altered mental status. Past medical history, according to his records, revealed hypertension and alcohol abuse. No information could be elicited from our patient, as he only responded by mumbling, with no family members by his side. On physical examination, he was afebrile with a blood pressure of 163/90, pulse of 101, and oxygen saturation of 95% on room air. He was alert and oriented, and appeared to be cachectic with poor nutritional status. A dry and non-erythematous orophaynx was found on physical examination. On cardiovascular
examination, his heart beat was tachycardiac with normal first and second heart sounds with no murmurs, rubs or gallops. Bilaterally diffuse wheezing was heard throughout all his lung fields. His abdomen was soft to palpation.
Our patient was slightly anemic with hemoglobin level of 11.9 with no leukocytosis. All electrolytes were within normal limits. A repeat CT scan was performed. CT of the chest showed mild calcified pleural thickening at the right apex. Tiny sub-centimeter nodular densities were detected in the right upper and lower lobes. The left ventricular myocardium contained multiple hypodense lesions which bore close resemblance to metastases. A centrally hypodense (likely necrotic), enlarged (size 2 cm) sub-carinal lymph node was also seen. The liver, spleen, pancreas, and kidneys appeared normal. Bilaterally, the adrenal glands contained large hypodense lesions measuring 2.6 × 2.3 cm on the right and 4.1 × 3 cm on the left. No intestinal wall thickening or evidence of intestinal mass was identified. Small, centrally hypodense nodular foci were seen in the abdomen and pelvis. Two were located in the peritoneum near the tip of the liver, and another was seen adjacent to the left acetabulum along the iliac chain. The latter bore close resemblance to a necrotic lymph node. Innumerable metastatic foci were seen throughout the posterior paraspinal musculature, iliopsoas muscles and gluteus muscles. A 1.2 cm metastatic lesion was seen in the left iliacus muscle superiorly and appeared to violate the anterior aspect of the left iliac wing. Sacrococcygeal metastatic lesion was also seen. A biopsy of the adrenal lesions performed under CT-guided aspiration showed characteristics of metastatic adenocarcinomatous malignant cells .
Trans-esophageal echo was performed to evaluate structural abnormality of the heart. There was moderate left ventricular hypertrophy. The left ventricular ejection fraction was estimated at 50 to 55%. Overall left ventricular systolic function was normal, but there was diastolic dysfunction consistent with impaired relaxation. The left atrium was enlarged. The aorta was normal. There was a moderate sized pericardial effusion with prominence in the anterior aspect of the right ventricle, but there was no echocardiographic evidence of tamponade.
Soon afterwards, our patient died. His family decided not to pursue an autopsy. Because of the short amount of time, workup for the primary cancer including colonoscopy and prostate-specific antigen screening was not performed.