A 33-year-old man with a history of SCD and moderate overweight (BMI, 28.4 kg/m2) presented on March 24, 2020 to the Emergency Department of Tenon hospital (a referral SCD center in Paris, France), for a febrile dyspnea. Sickle cell homozygous disease (baseline hemoglobin [Hb] value 11.5 g/dl, HbF 2.5%, HbS 87%) was known since childhood, and he had suffered mild episodes of vaso-occlusive crisis, and two episodes of ACS. Red blood cell transfusions had been required only once in the previous 20 years. Regular follow-up of SCD at our center had revealed early ophthalmological (Goldberg's stage III retinopathy) and renal (GFR 120 mL/min and microabuminuria at 0.75 g/L) damage.
The symptoms first appeared 11 days before admission with cough and headache. Then, he developed fever and dyspnea. In the Emergency Room, physical examination revealed fever (39 °C) and signs of acute respiratory distress (RR 36 cycles/min, room air pulse oximetry 88%), without hemodynamic instability (BP 134/82 mmHg, HR 106/min). The patient had no history of recent medication, he reported a contact with his sick girlfriend. Chest X-ray showed bilateral alveolar and interstitial infiltrates predominating in the middle lobe . Blood analysis revealed moderate anemia, reticulocytopenia, moderate hemolysis, lymphocytopenia and a major inflammatory syndrome . Respiratory condition worsened rapidly requiring intensive care unit admission and intubation with mechanical ventilation.
A nasopharyngeal swab was positive for SARS-CoV-2 at D1. Samples of respiratory tract secretions were taken on the admission day and a broad-spectrum empirical antibiotic therapy was initiated. The patient did not receive any experimental treatment specific to SARS-CoV-2.
Hemolysis worsened and prompted early blood exchange transfusions (3 sessions) for maintaining HbS value below 40%. Bone marrow aspiration was performed on D3, because of a severe ACS associated with a drop in reticulocytes and a mild thrombocytopenia suggesting a spinal thrombosis. The bone marrow aspiration demonstrated normal structure and cytology without bone marrow necrosis. The PCR search for CMV, EBV, SARS-CoV and Parvovirus-B19 were negative. On D4, as D-dimer levels had increased markedly, anticoagulation was switched from prophylactic to therapeutic dosage (intravenous unfractionated heparin with a ratio of activated partial thromboplastin time target between 2 and 2.5). As shown in Table , this switch was associated with significant decrease of D-Dimers. In the acute phase, a search for thromboembolic events was done through a venous doppler ultrasound of the four limbs and a transthoracic cardiac ultrasound. This exploration was initially negative. Secondarily at the time of ECMO decanulation, in a septic context, cardiac ultrasound revealed a thrombus of the inferior vena cava. Fifteen days later, i.e. one month after admission, a thoracic angioscanner was performed, which no longer revealed this thrombus.
Despite neuromuscular blocking agents and repeated sessions of prone positioning, the respiratory condition progressed to severe COVID-19 with ARDS, with worsening pulmonary infiltrates and major hypoxemia (PaO2/FiO2 ratio of 54 with PEEP 10 cmH20 and FiO2 100%). There were no acute cardiac nor pulmonary vascular dysfunction (explored by repeated transthoracic cardiac ultrasound). Giving this refractory ARDS situation, a venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was installed on D5. Because of a significant increase in inflammatory markers, and clinical and radiographic degradation, we searched for respiratory infection and we maintained concomitantly a probabilistic antibiotic treatment.
A bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed on D9 to rule out bacterial infection or fat embolism (54 mL recovered from 150 mL instilled) revealing lymphocytic alveolitis (640,000 cells with 50% macrophages, 36% lymphocytes, and 13% polymorphonuclears). The bacterial culture and the search for other viruses were negative. Blood cultures and local samples from the catheterization were negative. Antibiotic prophylaxis was suspended on D10. Secondarily to an increase in inflammatory markers and clinical deterioration, a protected distal sampling allowed the diagnosis of pneumopathy acquired under late mechanical ventilation (E. Coli and E. Cloacae), treated with the adapted antibiotics at D16.
The evolution was then slowly favorable, allowing the ECMO to be withdrawn after 10 days. The patient was extubated at D25. A laryngeal edema complicated the extubation and was treated with corticosteroid aerosol, without systemic corticotherapy and quickly resolved. Following the extubation, we did not perform non-invasive ventilation or high flow oxygen therapy. Finally, the patient was discharged from ICU on D27 and then from hospital on D34 days after his admission.