A 59-year-old white female presented with complaints of decreasing vision and photophobia over the prior month. Her medical history was notable for hypertension and chemotherapy for ovarian carcinoma 5 years prior to presentation. On examination, her best-corrected visual acuity was 20/40 OD and 20/80 OS. The anterior segment examination was remarkable for a pigmented, vascularized iris mass lesion at the superior pupillary border in her right eye . Her intraocular pressures were normal. Funduscopic examination and color fundus photography (Topcon TRC-50XF; Topcon Medical Systems, Oakland, NJ) showed bilateral exudative macular detachments with multiple scattered darkly pigmented choroidal lesions . The extent of the pathology was better seen with ultra-widefield color images (Optos 200Tx; Optos, Scotland, United Kingdom) . RPE changes forming a ‘giraffe-pattern’ were noted in the posterior pole of both eyes. Ultra-widefield autofluorescence (AF) imaging (Optos 200Tx; Optos, Scotland, United Kingdom) highlighted and documented the full extent of this pattern with patches of hypo-AF alternating with intervening areas of hyper-AF . Fundus camera based ICGA (Topcon TRC-50XF; Topcon Medical Systems, Oakland, NJ) showed the scattered darkly pigmented choroidal lesions as well-circumscribed hypofluorescent areas .
SD-OCT (Heidelberg Spectralis: Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) showed areas of subretinal fluid and discrete hyper-reflective choroidal lesions that appear to be compressing the adjacent choriocapillaris. The choroidal lesions were highly reflective on near-infrared reflectance (nIR) . Enhanced depth imaging OCT (EDI-OCT) performed with the Heidelberg Spectralis showed diffuse choroidal thickening beneath the exudative macular detachments . Swept-source OCT (DRI OCT-1; Topcon Medical Systems, Oakland, NJ) of the right eye showed alternating RPE thickening and RPE loss that corresponded to the appearance of the “giraffe-pattern” seen on the AF .
The patient was referred back to her oncologist for further evaluation of a presumed recurrence of her ovarian carcinoma.