An 86-year-old man presented with syncope on a background of castration resistant metastatic prostate cancer. He had no pre-existing diagnosis of cardiovascular disease and no known intracranial or intracardiac metastases. He was enrolled in the TRITON-2 trial (NCT02952534; PR CO-338-052), receiving oral rucaparib 600 mg twice daily for 9 months prior to the index admission. His only other regular medication was paracetamol.
Baseline and serial electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring was not undertaken during the trial period and pre-existing prolonged QT on an earlier ECG from 2013 (QTc 465 ms) did not preclude him from enrolment in this trial. Left ventricular systolic function was preserved on transthoracic echocardiogram prior to enrolment. Following rucaparib initiation, he had no cardiac symptoms or hospital presentations until the index admission.
He presented with a collapse at home without a clear cause and no acute injuries. In the emergency department, he remained in sinus rhythm and was transferred to the ward on cardiac monitoring. Shortly after arriving on the ward, he developed TdP with altered conscious status requiring brief cardiopulmonary resuscitation (30 s) followed by a single direct cardioversion shock (200 J biphasic) and 20 mmol/L intravenous magnesium sulphate. Post-arrest, he appeared pale and cachectic with no jaundice, murmurs, or signs of fluid overload. He had a Glascow Coma Scale of 15, with no signs of asterixis. ECG showed a broad junctional rhythm at a rate of 52 b.p.m. (left bundle branch block pattern) with marked U waves in V2–V4 and severe QT prolongation (QTc 680 ms) . Rucaparib was discontinued immediately. An ECG performed 5 years prior to rucaparib initiation demonstrated first degree atrioventricular block and a long QT interval (QTc 465 ms) . There was no personal history of coronary artery disease or syncope and no family history of cardiogenic syncope or sudden cardiac death.
Notably, an ECG performed 3 months following rucaparib initiation showed marked QT prolongation (QTc interval 589 ms, ), in the absence of syncope. Rucaparib continued as QT interval, both pre- and post-enrolment, are not routinely monitored as part of the TRITON-2 trial and the marked increase in QT interval was not documented during the trial follow-up. The patient did not undergo ECG or Holter monitoring following rucaparib initiation.
No other QT prolonging agents were prescribed. The only other regular medication was paracetamol 1 g up to four times per day for pain management in the setting of bony metastases. There was no electrolyte abnormality detected [serum potassium 4.4 mmol/L (normal range 3.5–5.0 mmol/L) and serum magnesium 1.0 mmol/L (normal range 0.7–1.1 mmol/L)] and both renal and hepatic function were satisfactory. Isoprenaline infusion (2 μg/min) was introduced due to recurrent rate-related TdP in the context of bradycardia.
On day 3 of admission, isoprenaline was ceased and the QT interval was notably shorter (QTc interval 547 ms; ) with an intrinsic heart rate of 93 b.p.m. in atrial flutter. Consideration was given to permanent pacing given an initial projected life expectancy of >12 months, however, despite rhythm stabilization, he deteriorated precipitously while in hospital, likely as a consequence of oncological disease progression with refractory symptoms in addition to the physiological insult of resuscitation in an elderly, already frail, cachectic gentleman with limited reserve. The patient was palliated, and the family subsequently declined post-mortem genetic testing or familial screening for inheritable long QT syndrome (LQTS).