A 69-year-old woman complained about experiencing asthenia and dyspnea with dizziness and diaphoresis.
A 69-year-old woman arrived at the emergency department with a 15-d history of progressive asthenia, dyspnea on moderate exertion and progressive worsening shortness of breath associated with dizziness and diaphoresis.
The patient was diagnosed in 2005 with alcoholic cirrhosis, without any decompensation since 2011. She followed an adequate follow-up in the hepatology department of the hospital and she had been abstinent since the last decompensation. Her last abdominal Doppler-ultrasonography from May 2019 showed liver cirrhosis with signs of portal hypertension, mild ascites and cholelithiasis. Furthermore her last upper gastrointestinal endoscopy from June 2019 showed esophageal varices and portal gastropathy. She also received treatment with beta-blockers and diuretics with good tolerance and adherence. Thereafter, she had a biological aortic valve replacement for severe aortic stenosis in December 2018, and since then, she remained asymptomatic.
The vital signs were within range and the physical examination was fairly normal. She had no chest discomfort or palpitations, orthopnea or an increase in the perimeter of lower limbs. She also denied having fever, chills, cough or expectoration, abdominal distention or any weight loss. In addition, she had a regular cardiac rhythm without cardiac murmur or rub noted, and the jugular venous pressure was not elevated. Her lungs were clear on auscultation and the oxygen saturation was correct without oxygen therapy. Her abdomen was also soft, non-tender and had no hepatosplenomegaly or clear signs of ascites. Moreover, she had no leg swelling, bruising or petechiae. There was no clubbing or cyanosis of her feet or hands. Signs of liver cirrhosis were found on examination, such as spider angioma and mild palmar erythema.
The blood test at admission revealed an impaired renal function with a creatinine of 1.82 mg/dL and a glomerular filtration rate of 28 mL/min/1.73 m2, mild hyponatremia with sodium of 132.3 mmol/L, elevated pro-brain natriuretic peptide (923 pg/mL) and high D-dimer (917 ng/mL).
Her chest X-ray showed pathological signs. Due to the high suspicion of pulmonary embolism (PE) in a patient allergic to iodine, a ventilation/perfusion lung scan was performed, which did not exhibit any signs of PE. Contrasted echocardiography was requested to rule out portopulmonary hypertension or hepatopulmonary syndrome as the cause of the dyspnea of the patient. The test did not reveal signs of pulmonary hypertension nor shunts and showed a preserved systolic function (left ventricular ejection fraction [LVEF]: 58%) and a normally functioning prosthetic aortic valve. Unexpectedly, a mass at the posterior wall of the RA of 32 by 20 mm suggestive of an intracavitary thrombus was detected.
Magnetic resonance imaging was performed to confirm this finding due to its higher sensitivity and specificity. The mass inside the RA coming from the liver through the IVC was noted. This image was suggestive of an infiltrating HCC tumor thrombus (TT) . With the previous premedication, an abdominal multiphase CT was finally performed, thereby confirming the presence of a lesion in segment VIII with extension to segments V and I, suggestive of hepatocarcinoma . Left suprahepatic vein thrombosis with extension to the IVC until the RA and thrombosis in the left portal vein was noted, suggestive of tumor infiltration . On further work-up, her alpha-fetoprotein level was 6856.1 ng/mL.