A 48 year-old male of South Asian descent came to Emergency Room with pain and swelling of right RT leg and fever. He had suffered a road traffic accident 10 days ago and suffered trauma to RT leg. Patient was admitted in a General Hospital and treated. Above knee slab was applied. On the second day, patient developed blisters over the thigh, knee, and leg . He was advised amputation of RT leg. He came to our hospital for further management. On physical examination, his RT leg was edematous with multiple blisters. Pulse oximetry showed 98% saturation. Doppler study showed normal flow. Radiographs were taken and patient was found to have proximal tibia fracture Schatzker’s type VI Blood investigation showed marked increased in white blood cells, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP). There was increase in serum potassium andserum creatinine levels. Labroratory Risk Indicator for Necrotizing Fasciitis (LRINEC) score was found to be more than 8. Patient developed acute kidney injury and was required to undergo two cycles of dialysis. Patient was started on i.v. cefuroxime and gentamicin after culture sensitivity reports andrenal titration. Patient underwent surgical debridement and knee spanning external fixator . Plastic surgery opinion was taken for soft tissue reconstruction. Thorough debridement was done. A second surgical debridement was done by the plastic surgeon after 2 weeks . External fixator was removed as it was hindering with flap cover. Hence, two 4mm cannulated cancellous screws with washers were used to fix the articular fragments of proximal tibia and above knee slab was applied . Patient was shifted to plastic surgery department for flap cover after 1month of admission (March 2019). We were advised to wait for 4 months for the flap to mature. Patient again came with pain, swelling in RT leg and fever. ESR and CRP was found to be raised. Flap was raised along its margin necrotic tissue was removed and antibiotic (vancomycin 1.5g) cement spacer was kept and limb reconstruction system (LRS) was applied in July 2019 . LRS was applied spanning the joint as the joint was open. After 6 weeks patients ESR and CRP were repeated and found to be within normal limits. Antibiotic cement spacer was removed and bone grafting was done . Patient was reviewed every month for clinical and radiological evaluation. In March 2020 patients X-rays showed consolidation of the graft radiologically, dynamization of LRS was done . Patient was asked to partially weight bear with walker support. LRS removed in August 2020.At final follow–up, patient had an active knee flexion of 15 degrees.