An 8-year-old Moroccan girl presented to our institution with painful swelling of both forearms which initially appeared on her left forearm and 6 months later on her right forearm. Her family history and medical history were unremarkable. Given the exacerbation of the pain she consulted a doctor who obtained plain radiographs and noted a lesion in both forearms. She was then referred to us for further evaluation. She reported that despite daily use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications and narcotic analgesics, the pain in her forearms continued to progress. On physical examination she had no fever and had a good general condition. She presented a swelling in the upper third of her right forearm and the upper two-thirds of her left forearm with inflammatory signs . Laboratory studies found a moderate anemia (hemoglobin at 10 g/dL) and a white blood cell count of 11,210/μL with 80% neutrophils. Her C-reactive protein level was 60 mg/L. We obtained plain radiographs that showed: an osteolytic lesion of the upper one-third of the right ulna and osteolytic lesion of the upper two-thirds of the left radius. On both forearms, we did not note mineralized matrix production, but a cortical breakthrough and internal trabeculations were present. We therefore performed magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) which showed: an osteolytic lesion mass (arrow) of the upper one-third of her right ulna and the upper two-thirds of the left radius. The mass was invading her elbow joint whose matrix was in hyposignal T1 , hypersignal T2 , and short T1 inversion recovery (STIR) , containing septa and enhanced annularly after injection of gadolinium . The lesion began in the diaphysis and crossed the physis. A soft tissue mass and cortical breakthrough were noted. A soft tissue edema was also seen. A biopsy curettage of her left forearm was done. A histopathologic examination revealed a proliferation of histiocytes with an infiltration of eosinophils . These histiocytes were positive for S-100 protein and for CD-1a . No chemotherapy was necessary. Our patient’s symptoms disappeared after a short (5 days) period of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory therapy. A repeat X-ray was obtained and showed a partial improvement of the osteolysis. She remained asymptomatic after 6 months.