A 59-year-old man was referred to our hospital for the appearance of an abnormal shadow on a chest roentgenogram during a medical check-up. He had no symptoms and no history of neuroendocrine disorder. Physical and laboratory test findings were normal. Chest CT showed a 4.5-cm-diameter thymic tumour . PET/CT showed that the mass had marked uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose, with early maximum standardised uptake value (SUVmax) of 9.8 (A, B). The patient underwent total thymectomy via MS. The adhering left pleura with tumour invasion was excised. The tumour was limited to the thymus without extension to the pericardia and left hilum. Radical en bloc resection and lymph node staging were performed. Operation time was 119 min, and blood loss volume was 40 mL.
Histologic examination revealed that the tumour comprised spindle-shaped cells with a pale eosinophilic cytoplasm. Necrosis was absent, and mitotic figures were 7 per 10 high-power fields (10 HPFs). The MIB-1 index was 8.5%. Fat tissue and vascular invasion was frequently observed. Initially, histopathological diagnosis was type A thymoma with atypical features (A, B). Immunohistochemical staining revealed cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), CK19, CD56, synaptophysin, chromogranin, and c-kit positivity and CK7 and CK20 negativity of the tumour cells. Tumour cells arranged in the nests so-called zellballen surrounded by thin fibrovascular stroma and sustentacular cells highlighted by immunostaining for S100 protein . As the marker of neuroendocrine tumours and S100 protein were positive, differential diagnoses were carcinoid and paraganglioma. However, paraganglioma was ruled out because this tumour revealed positivity for cytokeratin and CK19. Although devoid of necrotic areas, mitotic rate was within 2–10 per 10 HPFs, the definitive diagnosis was atypical carcinoid of the thymus according to WHO classification of thymic neuroendocrine tumours . There was no lymph node metastasis. The postsurgical course was uneventful, and he was discharged on postoperative day 8. Postoperative radiotherapy was not performed.