A 70-year-old man initially presented to the emergency department with a 10-month history of a large left thigh lesion. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, this patient did not seek advice from his personal general practitioner. This lesion had started to rapidly increase in size and become painful in the past month with no previous history of trauma, fever, and weight loss. There was nothing to note in his medical history and his social history included chronic smoking only. The patient was referred to the orthopedic on-call team for review. He had a diffuse swelling measuring 40 × 40 cm over the medial aspect of the left thigh. The skin over the swelling was stretched and not discolored, there was no erythema, the swelling was tender, warm with ill-defined margins, not fluctuant, not pulsatile, and immobile. There was no palpable thrill and no bruit. There was no distal neurological deficit in his left leg. The dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulsations were palpable, and the left foot was well perfused and warm. An infective process such as an abscess was ruled out and a clinical diagnosis of a soft-tissue sarcoma was strongly considered as the underlying pathology. A plain radiograph showed a soft-tissue shadow in the medial aspect of the left thigh with no erosion or scalloping of the femur but some calcifications in the margins of the swelling ( and ). Then, an urgent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan booked as an outpatient.
While waiting for the MRI scan, he represented to the emergency department 2 weeks later with increased swelling size, bruising in the medial aspect of his left thigh, and overlying necrotic skin . The dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulsations were now not palpable, but the left foot was well perfused and warm. His blood tests showed a red blood count of 106 g/L. His urea and electrolytes showed a mild acute kidney injury that was treated with intravenous fluids. He, then, had an urgent same-day MRI scan ( and ) for a presumed expanding highly vascular soft-tissue sarcoma but was reported to be a pseudoaneurysm of both left superficial femoral (SFA) (size 19.6 cm × 16.1 cm) and popliteal artery (size 9.4 cm × 4.9 cm), as well as an incidental right popliteal pseudoaneurysm (size 7.4 cm × 5.3 cm). He was urgently transferred for surgery to the nearest vascular center as the left SFA artery was shown to be ruptured. This patient underwent an emergency left femoral-popliteal artery aneurysm exclusion bypass surgery, debridement, and drainage of the hematoma. He, then, had another operation for further wound debridement and a vacuum assisted dressing applied. He continues to have follow-up to monitor the vascular graft and up to his latest follow-up (15 months post-surgery); the vascular graft is patent and working well. The rehabilitation postoperatively for this patient included a multi-disciplinary team approach. Tissue viability nurses specializing in the treatment and management of wounds worked to monitor and care for the wound preventing further deterioration and to promote adequate healing. Physiotherapists also played an important role in helping him to regain strength and mobility in the affected leg through exercises that improve range of motion, muscle strength, and cardiovascular fitness. Follow-up with the plastics and vascular surgeons was also done to monitor the graft, ensuring proper healing, and to prevent complications. This patient is well, walking independently, and the thigh wound is healed. For the right popliteal pseudoaneurysm, he is currently on the waiting list for popliteal artery aneurysm repair.