The 75-year-old male patient suffered a trauma at the age of 20 years and all procedures were undertaken in the former German Democratic Republic. He fractured his pelvis, the femoral neck on the left side, and suffered a concussion. The fracture was initially treated with an osteosynthesis. The surgery failed creating a 5 cm leg shortening on the left side and distinct gluteal insufficiency with positive Trendelenburg sign. In 1971 he underwent a Smith-Petersen mold cap and subsequently a cementless total hip arthroplasty (1972). Leg shortening was successfully reduced to 1.5 cm but muscle atrophy, movement restriction of the left hip and painful flexion of the left knee initially remained. Range of motion has been recorded twice over the years: in 2011 extension/flexion 0°/0°/90°, abduction/adduction 15°/0°/35°, external/internal rotation 60°/0°/0° and in 2020 extension/flexion 0°/5°/75°, abduction/adduction 20°/0°/20°, external/internal rotation 40°/0°/0°. Further slight increase of muscle atrophy of the left leg was found as well as mild pain with higher loads and increasingly unsteady gait. No use of gait support is needed up to date. Of note, the patient reports having performed high intensity sporting activities throughout these years such as jogging and hiking. The patient visited our outpatient clinic in November 2021 after having read in the media that our research team focuses on metal ion release from total joints. During the consultation he reported no current medical treatment. He reported an ongoing active lifestyle and continues to be employed. No daily intake of any medication was reported. The patient still walked without any aids, was able to climb and descend stairs safely. Further physical examination was unremarkable. Radiographs of the pelvis and the left hip showed a firm and correct fit of the hip prosthesis .
The extremely long survival of the prosthesis combined with the specific metal-on-metal pairing of the prosthesis head and acetabular component raised questions about potential extensive metal abrasion within the joint. Therefore, we investigated levels of systemic metal ions in the patient’s whole blood . Levels of aluminium (Al), copper (Cu), zinc (Zn), lead (Pb), molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni) and titanium (Ti) were within normal ranges. Chrome (Cr) and cobalt (Co) levels were found to be minimally elevated with 1.40 µg/l and 1.00 µg/l, respectively, but were not considered clinically significant. The patient was advised to continue his active lifestyle and to attend for an annual check-up.