An 81-year-old man presented at our institution with right-sided groin pain since 2 months. He had no history of trauma, infection, or constitutional symptoms. Radiological examination on first admission revealed an expanding destructive lesion in the left superior pubic ramus. A technetium-99 m bone scan demonstrated activity in the left superior pubic ramus, and computed tomography (CT) revealed a mass encasing the left superior pubic ramus (Figure
). Needle biopsy of the pubic bone was then performed. Histological examination of the biopsy specimen revealed monomorphic small cells arranged predominantly as a diffuse sheet. The cells had round hyperchromatic nuclei, inconspicuous nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm. These findings were indicative of small round cell tumor (SRCT; Figure
A). On immunohistochemical staining, the tumor cells were positive for HMB45 (DAKO, Carpenteria, CA, USA; Figure
B), S100 (DAKO, Carpenteria, CA; Figure
C), and Melan-A (Novocastra, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne, UK; Figure
D), whereas they were negative for cytokeratin (AE1/AE3) and epithelial membrane antigen. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of the fusion signal of EWS located on chromosome 22q12 yielded negative results. BRAF (exons 11 and 15) mutation analysis by direct sequencing revealed the absence of mutations
. Although the biopsy specimen showed no obvious evidence of melanoma pigments, these findings suggested malignant melanoma or CCS. Whole-body CT, positron emission tomography (PET)/CT, and 67Ga-citrare scintigraphy were performed to exclude the possibility of metastases of malignant melanoma to the bone. The patient was referred to a dermatologist for evaluation of primary cutaneous malignant melanoma. All efforts to find a primary lesion elsewhere were unsuccessful. Eventually, we concluded that this was not a metastatic lesion of malignant melanoma but primary CCS of the pubic bone. Because of the patient’s advanced age, he and his family refused surgery as well as local radiation therapy; instead, they opted for chemotherapy. The patient was administered DAV chemotherapy (a regimen of dimethyl triazeno imidazole carboxamide, 1-[4-amino-2-methyl-5-pyrimidinyl]-methyl-3-[2-chloroethyl]-3-nitrosourea hydrochloride, the available substitute for bischloroethylnitrosourea, and vincristine)
[,]; however, he died of progressive disease.