A 92-year-old neglected female patient, living on her own, presented to our Department with a large ulcerated nodule on the left supraclavicular region that had been present for 10 months, growing progressively and consistently.
Physical examination showed a patient in poor general conditions with a 11 × 8 cm, ulcerated, cauliflower-like, with polilobulated margins, nodule in her left supraclavicular region. The lesion appeared to invade the clavicle bone and cervical lymphnodes were not palpable .
A punch biopsy was performed in order to assess the type of cutaneous malignancy, but unfortunately came back not diriment because of the large amount of necrotic tissue with rare isolated keratin pearl.
Then we decided to perform a surgical excision with two centimeters margins en-bloc with the periosteum of the clavicle, to which the lesion appeared to be adherent, under local anesthesia and sedation .
The loss of tissue substance was then reconstructed by direct closure performing a wide undermining of the wound margins in a subfascial plane, under the fascia of the pectoralis major muscle anteriorly and of the trapezius muscle posteriorly.
The choice of including a fascia in the direct closure of the wound has been made in order to give a better coverage to the clavicle bone, whose periosteum was previously removed .
A drain tube was positioned and the surgical wound was closed by direct suture .
The postoperative period was uneventfully, the drain tube was removed after 4 days and stitches was removed in two weeks.
The histopathological examination revealed large tumor cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and nuclei with finely dispersed chromatin and prominent nucleoli. Immunohistochemistry revealed positive stain for CK AE1-AE3 and CDX2, highlighting an epithelial differentiation and likely origin from large intestine. The tumor cells showed negative stain for TTF-1, CK7, Mammoglobin, P63, neuroendocrin markers (CD56, sinaptofisina) and S100 (, ). Final diagnosis was a cutaneous metastasis from an occult adenocarcinoma of the colon. All the resection margins were clear.
Two weeks after the surgery, a colonoscopy was scheduled and a large vegetative mass of the descending colon was found. A punch biopsy was performed that came back positive for moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma composed by cells with abundant cytoplasm, nuclei with dispersed chromatin and prominent nucleoli positive stain CK AE1-AE3 and CDX2 .
We then programmed a PET scan one month after surgery to assess the presence of the primary tumor, but unfortunately the patient died due to a myocardial infarction.