A 66-year-old man was referred to our hospital with a sudden onset of headache, diplopia, and left ptosis. He was suffered from rheumatoid arthritis for several years and had taken methotrexate (MTX) tablets regularly. Neurological examinations revealed left oculomotor and trochlear nerve palsy without other cranial nerve disorders. Head computed tomography (CT) and gadolinium-enhanced brain magnetic resonance image (Gd-MRI) showed the mass lesion around the left sphenoid bone extending both to the left temporal middle fossa and to sphenoid sinus [ and b]. Laboratory findings were white blood cell counts 7700/μl, red blood cell counts 516 × 104/μl, platelet counts 52.8 × 104/μl, lactate dehydrogenase 391U/l, soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) 808 U/ml, Epstein–Barr virus-viral capsid antigen antibody, immunoglobulin G (EB- VCA-IgG) over 20 times, EB-VCA-IgM under 10 times, and EB EBV nuclear antigen (EBNA) over 20 times.
We thought that pathological examination was necessary to rule out malignant tumors. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed multiple lesions in the left sphenoid bone, nasal cavity, bilateral humeri, and left femur . He was suspected as MTX-induced nonspecific lymphoproliferative disorder with rheumatoid arthritis or idiopathic lymphoma. Two weeks later, the tumor volume was increased compared as those of the previous study , so we performed partial removal of tumor by endoscopic trans- nasal transsphenoidal surgery under general anesthesia.
In spite of the cessation of oral MTX for rheumatoid arthritis for 2 weeks after the removal of tumor, the tumor regrowth was observed on the head CT. The patient was treated with R-THP- COP regimen (rituximab 375 mg/m2, cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m2, epirubicin 50 mg/m2, vincristine 2 mg/day, and prednisolone 100 mg/day) and two courses of intrathecal MTX therapy for central nervous system prophylaxis. After the eighth course of R-THP-COP, his Gd-MRI and FDG-PET showed the disappearance of the lesion [ and f], and his symptoms completely disappeared. The patient has stayed recurrence free after the start of the treatment at 3-year follow-up.
Histopathological examinations showed that large B cells with nuclei display prominent nucleoli that diffusely infiltrate the brain tissue in hematoxylin-eosin staining , cluster of differentiation (CD) 3(‒) , CD5(+) , CD10(‒) , multiple myeloma oncogene (MUM)-1(+) , Bcl-2(+) , Bcl-6(+) , and EBER (EBV-encoded small RNA) in situ hybridization (EBER-ISH) (‒) , thus the diagnosis was confirmed as diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). The tumor is classified as ABC type using the Hans classification based on MUM1, CD10, and Bcl6.