A 57-year-old man recently diagnosed with lepromatous leprosy was confirmed with skin biopsy and had been on treatment (rifampicin/clofazimine/dapsone) for 2 months before admission; he was presented to the hospital with complaints of abdominal distension, constipation, vomiting, and a 10-kg weight loss. On examination, the patient was vitally stable. He had evidence of peripheral lymphadenopathy with a distended abdomen and a positive shifting dullness. A computed tomography scan of his abdomen showed mural thickening of the terminal ileum with significantly enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes, mesenteric fat stranding, and intra-abdominal free fluid, suggesting abdominal granulomatous infection or neoplastic process.
Abdominal paracentesis was done and showed atypically large lymphocytes, suggesting high-grade lymphoma, and subsequent flow cytometry showed an abnormal CD4/CD8 double-negative T-cell population (38%) with multiple phenotypic aberrancies. A cervical lymph node biopsy confirmed high-grade peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL), not other specified, a subtype of NHL. A bone marrow examination showed no involvement of T-cell NHL. The patient was staged as a stage IV lymphoma.
He was started on dexamethasone with tumor-lysis syndrome precautions. However, he deteriorated clinically, requiring transfer to the medical intensive care unit (ICU) for severe sepsis. He required antibiotics and antifungals and stayed in ICU care for around 1 week. Once recovered, he was transferred to the national cancer center, where he was commenced on the EPOCH chemotherapy protocol (etoposide, prednisone, vincristine sulfate [oncovin], cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin hydrochloride [hydroxydaunorubicin]) for six cycles, along with CNS prophylaxis (intrathecal methotrexate). Upon assessment after four cycles, the patient responded well to chemotherapy and attained complete metabolic remission by positron emission tomography/computed tomography. However, his hospital course was complicated by multiple febrile neutropenia episodes and recurrent bacteremia.
During his admission, the neurology team was involved as the patient started to develop generalized weakness without sensory changes and no clear fatigability. On exam, power was decreased in all proximal and distal muscles (3/5), with no other abnormalities. Given the previous history of ICU admission, neurotoxic drug use, and malignancy, the differential diagnosis included critical illness myopathy-neuropathy, toxic neuropathy, and paraneoplastic syndrome.
Therefore, a complete neurophysiological electromyogram/nerve conduction study was performed. It showed normal distal latencies, normal compound muscle action potential, and normal conduction velocities along with normal F waves in all motor nerves studied. Sensory nerve studies revealed normal onset latencies, normal sensory nerve action potential amplitude, and normal conduction velocities. Needle electromyogram of proximal and distal muscles in the lower and upper limbs exhibited normal insertional activity, no spontaneous activity, and normal motor unit action potential, but with poor recruitment effects. Finally, repetitive nerve stimulation (at 30–40 Hz) showed a significant incremental response (see ), suggesting a presynaptic neuromuscular junction disorder (likely LEMS). VGCC antibodies were requested. Unfortunately, it was not done because of technical issues. The patient was started empirically on intravenous immunoglobulins for 5 days as a case of LEMS (as 3, 4-diaminopyridine is not available in our center), which resulted in significant improvement of his motor function. The patient could ambulate afterward, showing a dramatic response to treatment.
The patient was planned for consolidation by autologous bone marrow transplant. Unfortunately, with the recurrent bacteremia and sepsis that accompanied the patient’s course due to his immunocompromised state, he was re-admitted to the medical ICU for severe sepsis and multiorgan failure and passed away around 6 months after his initial diagnosis with NHL, despite maintaining a remission status.