A previously healthy 34-year-old woman suddenly lost consciousness and collapsed at her home . On admission to emergency department (ED), she was comatose, with Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 7 (e3v2m2), a little shortness of breath upon exertion, and flaccid in all extremities. Her family denied vomiting prior to the admission, or history of ingestion of other medications, trauma, neurological disease, and coagulopathy. However, her life signs became unstable, as evidenced by a high fever (39.5°C), a heart rate of 120 beats per minute, a blood pressure of 195/85 mmHg, and a respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute. Her pulse oximetric saturation (SpO2) was 98% on 3 L/min oxygen. Laboratory tests did not demonstrate any significant abnormality. The non-contrast brain computed tomography (CT) scan on admission revealed cerebellar vermis and right-sided acute large hematoma in the ventricular system. Also, blood in the ventricular system that resulted in a mild hydrocephalus was observed . Diagnosis of spontaneous cerebral hemorrhage was made.
An hour later, respiratory dysfunction was observed with shortness of breath, and coughing with pink-tinged, frothy sputum appeared while bilateral crackles were noted. SpO2 decreased to 70% despite administering continuous supplementary oxygen of 10 L/min. The diagnosis of NPE was made, with a severe CNS injury. The indwelling gastric tube was used for gastrointestinal decompression to avoid the risk of gastric aspiration. Prompt endotracheal intubation was performed and mechanical ventilation was given. In the course of patient's transportation from ED to the Neuroscience Care Unit (NCU), hypotension, tachycardia, and bradycardia occurred. Ringer's lactate, colloids, atropine, and norepinephrine were used to stabilize patient's life signs. When she was in NCU, her GCS deteriorated to e1vTm2. She also developed progressive and severe hypoxia, despite mechanical ventilation with an inspired oxygen concentration (FiO2) of 100% and a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 10 cm H2O during pressure control ventilation. Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis showed pH 7.27, PaCO2 46.5mmHg, PaO2 66.7 mmHg, HCO3−20.8 mmol/L, and O2 saturation 92%. Chest X-ray was immediately performed, and diffuse bilateral pulmonary infiltrates were observed . Electrocardiogram showed a sinus bradycardia of 52 beats per minute, but no ischemia. The neurosurgical team was consulted for the cerebellar haemorrhage and agreed that the best course of management was conservative for her unstable blood pressure and poor hypoxia. Thereafter, she received dobutamine to treat a possible cardiogenic component of the pulmonary edema. Although supportive measures were given including hyperventilation, repeated administration of mannitol and furosemide, and propofol sedation, the patient's condition exacerbated. A repeat chest X-ray exhibited bilateral ground-glass opacities and diffuse interstitial infiltrates . ABG analysis showed pH 7.40, PaCO2 40 mmHg, PaO2 70 mmHg, HCO3− 27 mmol/L, and O2 saturation 92% on bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) with 100% FiO2. The patient was in deep coma (GCS 3), and concomitant multiple organ dysfunction syndrome was diagnosed 24 h after hospital admission. The patient died 28 h later, and her family declined an autopsy.