We describe a 30-year-old woman with a history of cardiac surgery when she was 7 years of age in another center. Description of operation was not available, but probably she had undergone surgical closure of IVC type of sinus venosus ASD (SVASD) or a low ostium secundum type of ASD expanding down to the IVC. Regarding her parent’s ideas, the patient was taken to the operation room again immediately after the surgery due to unstable condition and then she was returned to the intensive care unit (ICU).
She was introduced to our clinic with complaints of dyspnea and cyanosis on exertion. She also had two episodes of cerebrovascular attack with acute-onset left-sided weakness and dysphasia and she was cured entirely. Her parents detected mild bluish discoloration of nails two years following surgery that was not looked into because she was asymptomatic. After the brain attacks, she was assessed frequent times at the local center and the echocardiography was done that showed intact atrial septal patch without other abnormality. Moreover, the patient was treated with rivaroxaban and acetyl salicylicacid (ASA). No rhythm abnormality has been observed as a reason of stroke.
On physical examination, the blood pressure and heart rate were in the normal limit. But oxygen saturation was 84% in the air room. On general appearance, the patient was well developed. The nailbeds, lips, and mucous membranes were cyanotic and mild digital clubbing was noted; there was not any respiratory distress at rest. The lungs were clear. Cardiac auscultation revealed a normal first and second heart sounds and a grade II/VI systolic murmur at the left sternal border, with no diastolic murmur or gallop. The rhythm was regular. There was no peripheral edema, but there was digital clubbing. The pulses were regular and symmetric. In laboratory data, hemoglobin (Hb) was 12.6 gr/dl with hematocrit (HCT) of 41%. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal regular and sinus rhythm with normal axis and deep S waves in I and augmented vector left (aVL) leads suggesting right ventricle (RV) overload, wide QRS duration [right bundle branch block (RBBB)], and ST-T changes in inferior leads and leads V1-V4. Chest X-ray (CXR) showed normal cardiothoracic ratio and normal pulmonary parenchyma and vascularity. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed normal left ventricle (LV) size and preserved systolic function [LV ejection fraction (LVEF): 50%-55%], mild LA enlargement, normal right atrial (RA) size, mild RV enlargement, and mild to moderate systolic dysfunction. Heart catheterization was performed for the patient. In catheterization laboratory, a 0.035 guide wire was sent along the IVC and was visualized directly into the LA. Next, the guide wire was switched for a pigtail catheter that was situated in the IVC just below the diaphragm. Contrast angiography was done in anteroposterior (AP) and left anterior oblique views which showed that the contrast was going into the LA straightly through the IVC via a small caliber tract from IVC adjacent to the LA without any fenestration or defect in the ASD patch, because the contrast did not fill the RA .
Angiogram in the superior vena cava (SVC) showed its normal drainage into the RA. At the first echocardiogram, we did not see the significant pathology, but after the catheterization, transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was done and showed that IVC was deviated toward LA, probably by eustachian valve and pericardial patch; thus, contrast injection from lower extremity showed opacification of LA .
In fact, TEE revealed that there was a small caliber tract from IVC adjacent to the LA (size: 7.5 mm) with continuous turbulent flow (maximum pressure gradient: 9 mmHg), and this was the only connection between LA and IVC .
Coronary computed tomography (CT) angiography, done based on congenital protocols, showed normal epicardial coronary arteries and presence of IVC with interrupted appearance in RA confluence, and a suspicious small caliber tract to LA in most cephalad part of IVC adjacent to interrupted part was seen . The patient was scheduled for surgery to redirect the IVC to the RA. At this time, she became pregnant and according to the pregnancy team consult, she was advised to abort the fetus. After the abortion of fetus, the patient underwent cardiac surgery.
When the surgeon opened the RA, he saw that the IVC was not draining into the RA and was draining into the LA with a significant stenosis. IVC was tunneled to RA and atrial septum was repaired using bovine patch.