This is a 66-year-old male with a medical history significant for hypertension, hyperlipidemia, hepatitis C virus infection, and atrial fibrillation chronically anticoagulated with apixaban. He was brought in by emergency services after a fall. The patient reported dizziness, then lost consciousness, and was found down by a family member. Primary trauma survey was negative with a Glasgow Coma Score of 15 no focal neurological deficits. Noncontrast CT of the head was significant for a 6 mm right frontal SDH with no shift, as well as a right medial orbital wall fracture. As the patient was neurologically intact, had minimal mass effect, there was no operative intervention recommended.
The patient was admitted to the surgical intensive care unit for serial checks. On the 2nd hospital day, he developed severe headache, and the head CT was repeated , which showed worsening of the SDH with associated mass effect and 2 mm midline shift. The patient remained neurologically intact; therefore, no surgical intervention was recommended. The patient was discharged to acute inpatient rehabilitation on the 6th hospital day with instructions to repeat the head CT in 2 weeks.
In rehabilitation, 6 days after discharge, the patient experienced a terrible headache for 3 days, which prompted a repeat neurosurgical evaluation. The patient was still neurologically intact at this time, and repeat CT head showed expansion of the hematoma to 15 mm, with increased mass effect and 8 mm midline shift. The patient underwent burr holes for evacuation of the SDH and placement of subdural drain. Following hematoma evacuation, the patient’s headache improved, and the SDH decreased in size on repeat CT head . His postoperative course was without complication. The drain was removed and the patient was discharged home on the 2nd postoperative day with levetiracetam for seizure prophylaxis.
On the 14th postoperative day, the patient was seen in the office for follow-up. The patient described a strange sensation in the right arm, as well as the feeling that he could not control the arm. Based on these symptoms, he was sent directly to the emergency room for further evaluation. In the emergency room, the patient developed a focal left arm seizure. He was treated for this seizure and started on electroencephalography (EEG) monitoring. He was then admitted. That night, the patient was found to be unresponsive; CT head showed no acute hemorrhage and EEG indicated status epilepticus. The patient was intubated for airway protection and transferred to the medical intensive care unit for further management.
As the patient’s initial presentation was hemorrhagic but thought to be traumatic, dedicated vascular imaging had not been obtained previously. During this third admission, cerebral CTA was obtained as his clinical course became suspicious for either an underlying lesion or vascular issue. The studies were negative for any pathology. This admission was complicated by ventilator-dependent respiratory failure, septic shock secondary to Pseudomonas bacteremia, and the patient received a tracheostomy and gastrostomy. The patient was eventually stabilized and discharged to long-term acute care hospital on day 29 with levetiracetam and oxcarbazepine for seizure control.
Four days after discharge, the patient was found to be less responsive and was transferred back for neurosurgical evaluation. The patient opened eyes to stimulation, localized with the right upper extremity, and had minimal movement of left upper and bilateral lower extremities, and cough, gag, corneal, and pupillary reflexes were all present. CT and CTA head showed right frontal intraparenchymal hemorrhage measuring 5.2 cm×3.3 cm but no vascular lesion or anomaly. Cerebral catheter angiography was then performed and [ and b] showed prominence of the anterior temporal branch of the right middle cerebral artery with early, rapid, shunting of blood through a cortical vein to the superior sagittal sinus. There was opacification of a capillary-like serpiginous tangle of vessels connecting the anterior temporal artery with the early draining vein, representing an AVM, which was Spetzler-Martin Grade 1 (Spetzler-Ponce Grade A). On the second postangiogram day, embolization of the AVM was performed using N-butyl- cyanoacrylate glue. The embolization was successful and no opacification of the early draining vein or AVM nidus were seen [ and d].
On the 8th day postembolization, the patient was taken to the operating room for resection of the AVM. The right pterional craniotomy was performed to access the AVM, which was separated from surrounding brain parenchyma using microdissection techniques. The feeding arteries, followed by the draining vein, were coagulated using bipolar electrocautery and resected. Following resection, intraoperative Doppler ultrasound indicated no arterial flow in the draining vein. The associated intraparenchymal hematoma was also evacuated. Postoperative angiography showed no residual AVM.
Postoperatively, the patient’s mental status progressively improved. On the 3rd postoperative day, the patient followed commands and tracked with his eyes. There was spontaneous antigravity movement of the right upper extremity, but still no movement of the left upper or bilateral lower extremities. The postoperative course was complicated by pseudomonas sepsis, which was treated in consultation with infectious disease. The patient was eventually discharged to long-term acute care on the 15th postoperative day.