A 29-year-old male patient (height 1.72 m; weight 74 kg; Body Mass Index 25) with a past history of juvenile idiopathic arthritis and chronic steroid use, underwent staged bilateral THA for arthritis secondary to avascular necrosis 10 years ago (2006). The postoperative course was uneventful and a good functional outcome was achieved. He could resume his normal day-to-day and recreational activities. He was regularly followed up for clinical assessment and radiographic evaluation. His blood levels of cobalt and chromium were serially monitored and were within acceptable limits. His radiographs prior to the primary surgery were unavailable.
He presented to us with a sudden onset of pain around his left hip while walking on the street, without any history of trauma. He was unable to bear weight following the onset of the pain. Radiographs obtained at the time of his presentation revealed a fracture at the level of the trunnion on the left side, with well-fixed femoral and acetabular components . Based on the information obtained from his prior reports, the prostheses used during the primary surgery included an uncemented articular surface replacement (ASR) acetabular component with an outer diameter of 54 mm (DePuy Johnson and Johnson, India), a fully porous coated uncemented size14 anatomic medullary locking (AML) A plus femoral stem (DePuy International, Leeds, England), and a cobalt-chrome alloy head of 47 mm diameter with + 6 mm neck offset. His inflammatory markers, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and leucocyte counts were within the normal range.
He subsequently underwent revision left THA. Both the femoral and acetabular components were revised. Intraoperatively, we found evidence of fretting corrosion at the fracture site . The trunnion fracture was oblique in pattern and extended superolaterally to inferomedially, exactly at the head-neck articulation. It suggested a stress riser effect and cyclic fatigue failure. The proximal part of the broken trunnion was still attached to the femoral head. We also found evidence of localized metallosis and soft tissue reaction. The femoral component was extracted by means of an extended trochanteric osteotomy and revised to a long cementless Wagner SL stem (size 14, Zimmer, Warsaw, USA). The acetabular component was extracted using an explant device and was revised to an uncemented continuum multi-hole cup (size 54 mm, Zimmer, Warsaw, USA) along with a Delta ceramic head (size 36 mm; + 7), UHMWPE liner (54 mm/36 mm), and acetabular screws. In addition, the postero-superior defect of the acetabulum was reconstructed using a Tantalum augment (size 54; thickness 15 mm). Following surgery, the patient had an uneventful recovery. Post-operative radiographs showed satisfactory alignment of the components . He continued to have a good functional outcome after 3 years, and the radiographs at the last follow up were as shown in Fig. a, b.