A 20-year-old female received the diagnosis EA at the age of 10 years after becoming short of breath while playing hockey. At rest, her oxygen saturation was 97% but with exercise it dropped to 78%. From age 12, she had migraine attacks, usually just before or during her period, accompanied by auras, slight headache and mild photophobia. One day in school at age 16, white, partly transparent, sometimes shimmering dots appeared in front of both eyes. At times, these dots looked like “a trembling image over distant warm asphalt.” Initially, the spots appeared several hours a day, but soon they were present from rising in the morning to bedtime, and were more noticeable in bright light, during sleep deprivation or alcohol ingestion but not with physical exertion. The spots were most pronounced in the peripheral field of vision and hardly visible in the center. She had some photopsia’s but no palinopsia (after-images). The patient has never squinted or received occlusion therapy. She never had ocular or other surgery and did not complain of diplopia or night blindness. She never needed glasses to see properly. She visited an ophthalmologist and a neurologist who found no abnormalities and had no explanation for her complaints. Her brain MRI was normal. Seven months before her arrival at our clinic, she noticed slight tremors, hypoesthesia, and loss of strength in her right arm for a week. She was right-handed. Her medical history otherwise was normal and in particular did not mention depression, epilepsy, loss of consciousness, tinnitus, dizziness or arrhythmia symptoms.
Her two younger brothers were healthy and there were no eye disorders in the family other than cataracts and mild refractive errors. Her mother had not noticed any abnormalities during pregnancy or birth. Other than oral contraceptives, she did not use any medications or drugs; she smoked 10 cigarettes and consumed four alcoholic drinks a day.
A cardiac MRI at age 10 and 18 years, showed no abnormalities like an abnormal cardiac vascular pedicle, aortic coarctation or a Chiari network in her right ventricle. Echocardiography in 2021, revealed an apically displaced tricuspid valve, typical of EA. Minor regurgitation was present at a low estimated ventricular pressure, given the absence of pulmonary hypertension. Systemic venous return was normal, as were respiratory collapse and central venous pressure and also antegrade pulmonary blood flow was normal. A small atrial septal defect led to left-right shunting at rest, that became bidirectional with exertional echocardiography, in which the oxygen saturation decreased from 97 to 80%, without increase in tricuspid regurgitant flow. Her blood pressure, kidney functions, hemoglobin, hematocrit, mean corpuscular volume, and platelet counts were normal.
Visual acuity was 1.25 in her right and 1.0 in the left eye, both with Sph + 0.25. There were normal anterior eye segments and clear lenses in both eyes, normal direct and consensual pupillary reactions with no relative afferent defect and normal optic discs with a vertical cup/ disk ratio 0.4 in both eyes. After mydriatic drops, the macula and retinal periphery were normal in each eye. Wide venules were visible as the only deviation on ophthalmoscopy. Below the right optic disc, a venule branched off at a right angle and there was no marked vascular tortuosity. Confrontational visual field testing was normal, as was the AO-HRR colour vision test, taken separately for each eye. Stereo vision with the TNO test was perfect with 60 arcsec. Optical coherence tomography was normal in both eyes. We calculated that the arterio-venous ratio (AVR) of the retinal vessel diameters was 0.684 in the right and 0.670 in he left eye . In addition to the already known migraine, we diagnosed dilatation of the retinal venules and visual snow syndrome.