A 50-year-old woman with no known past medical history was brought into the emergency department (ED) by her older sister for evaluation of generalized weakness. Initial history provided by her sister suggested that the patient had not seen a doctor in years, had a history of “psychiatric problems,” and had been feeling weak for the prior month or two. The patient’s weakness and fatigue had extended to a point where her brother had to carry her around the house. The patient denied any medical problems and denied taking any prescription or over-the-counter medications.
On initial exam, the patient was hypotensive with a systolic blood pressure of 75 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) and tachycardic to 110 beats per minute on arrival to the ED. The remainder of her vital signs were within normal limits. She had a normal mental status and was breathing comfortably on room air. At the time of evaluation the patient endorsed diffuse and profound weakness without focality for the prior month; the remainder of her review of systems was unremarkable. She reported she had been eating and drinking normally; however, family noted she would eat only dairy products and pudding.
On exam, she was a thin, ill-appearing person who was disheveled. Except for mild tachycardia, her cardiopulmonary exam was unremarkable. Her abdomen was benign. Her skin was hyperpigmented with multiple, scattered excoriations, and she had innumerable, wingless, dark-colored insects crawling in her hair and all over her body. One of the insects was isolated and inspected. It was noted to have a clear-tan shell with six legs and an elongated oval body, and was identified as a body louse.
While she was able to stand up straight and transfer herself to the exam bed from the wheelchair, according to the patient her weakness was too profound to attempt ambulation. On strength examination, she had diffuse, symmetric, upper and lower extremity weakness in the proximal to distal muscle groups. Apart from her profound weakness, there were no focal neurologic deficits, and the remainder of her exam was unremarkable.
Labs were collected, and an electrocardiogram (ECG) and radiograph were performed. For her hypotension, the patient was provided two liters of normal saline over one hour. Despite 30 cubic centimeters per kilogram of fluid resuscitation, her blood pressure and tachycardia persisted. Her labs were notable for lactic acid of 8.5 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (reference range 0.5–2.2 mmol/L). There were no severe electrolyte abnormalities. Blood urea nitrogen/creatinine and liver function tests were within normal limits. We considered adrenal insufficiency with Addisonian crisis, especially given her exam finding of hyperpigmented skin, and a random cortisol level was added to her labs; however given normal sodium, potassium, and glucose level, steroids were deferred.
The patient’s hemoglobin and hematocrit resulted critically low at 1.6 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range 12.0–15.5 g/dL) and 6.6% (36.0–46.5%), respectively . Given concern for error, the complete blood count (CBC) was repeated with similar results. Her white blood cell count was 14.0 thousand cells per cubic microliter (K/μL) (4.2–11.0 K/μL) and platelets were 355 K/μL (140–450 K/μL). A rectal exam was performed without findings of gross blood or melena. Both the patient and her family denied trauma and gastrointestinal or genitourinary blood losses, and she had entered menopause approximately five years previously. Broad spectrum antibiotics were empirically started given concern for sepsis. The patient was subsequently resuscitated with two units of un-crossmatched packed red blood cells (PRBC) given the critical hemoglobin level, while an additional two units of crossmatched PRBCs were prepared in the blood bank.
The patient was quarantined and decontaminated in the ED exam room. Given her relative stability despite a critically low hemoglobin level, a traumatic etiology was thought to be very unlikely, and her hemoglobin had likely dropped slowly over a lengthy period. The patient was subsequently admitted to the medical intensive care unit for further evaluation and management of profound anemia and hypotension.
In total, the patient received four units of PRBCs in the ED and did not require further transfusions during her hospital course. Following the transfusion, her morning hemoglobin was 7.5 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range 12.0–15.5 g/dL) and had a total of five stable hemoglobin levels on daily CBCs thereafter. She had an upper endoscopy and extensive laboratory workup led by hematology/oncology given the degree of her anemia; her subsequent workup did not reveal a source of bleeding, blood dyscrasia, or significant mineral or vitamin deficiency that would have contributed to her anemia. The patient responded very well to the PRBC transfusion, and after pediculosis was resolved her anemia did not return, which led us to believe her anemia was due to slow blood loss by chronic lice infestation.