A 73-year old female referred to surgery OPD with complaints of right hypochondrium pain along with abdominal swelling for the past 3 months. Physical examination showed mild tender and distended abdomen with icteric sclera. Relevant negative findings were also noted as no cervical or inguinal lymphadenopathy and breast lump found and there is negative history of postmenopausal bleeding. Blood investigation revealed mild anemia with elevated total bilirubin and liver enzymes. Biomarkers such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA19,-9 and Ca125 also came within normal limits. Chest X-ray was unremarkable. Ultrasonography (USG) of the abdomen revealed two heterogeneous enhancing space-occupying lesions (SOL) in the right lobe of the liver with normal study of uterus and bilateral ovaries. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) further confirmed two large multilocular cystic SOLs measuring 11.6 × 11.5 × 13.4 cm and 8.6 × 7.2 × 8.3 cm noted in the right lobe liver with multiple feeding vessels [Figure and ]. Gall bladder was normal and deviated to the left side. No lymphadenopathy was present. On the basis of these findings, three differential diagnoses were made: hemangioma, biliary cystadenoma, and hydatid cyst.
Right hepatectomy with gall bladder was sent for histopathological examination. Gross specimen showed markedly enlarged liver weighing 1.0 kg. The outer surface showed vague cystic nodules. The cut surface of mass mainly exhibited multiple cystic areas varying in size and filled with brownish black hemorrhagic fluid and necrotic material. A thin rim of normal brownish black liver parenchyma was also noted . Microscopy showed multiple cystic structures comprising tumor cells arranged in cords, acinar pattern, and papillaroid fragments along with large areas of hemorrhage and necrosis. Tumor was seen infiltrating into the normal liver parenchyma at the periphery. The tumor cells were round to oval nucleus exhibiting fine granular chromatin, conspicuous nucleoli, and moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm [Figure and ]. Further immunohistochemical (IHC) stain was applied on the viable tumor away from necrosis. IHC showed tumor cells positive for Panck, CK-19, Synaptophysin, and Ki-67 labeling index of 4% and negative for HepPar-1, CEA, arginase, CDX-2, CD-10, CK-7, CK-20, chromogranin, PR, and TTF-1 [Figure -]. Hence, finally on the basis of morphology and immunohistochemistry, a diagnosis to neuroendocrine tumor grade 2 was made.