A 58-year-old married woman was admitted to our hospital in August 2012 with a chief complaint of persistent fever (38°C), gradually progressive dyspnea on effort, and productive cough for over 1 month. She noticed that her symptoms recurred whenever she stayed in her house, but disappeared when she was outdoors. She had no remarkable medical history. She was a current smoker with a history of 10 pack-years and worked as a caregiver. Her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure of 108/70 mmHg, pulse rate of 89 beats/minute, temperature of 37.7°C, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 89% at room air. Physical examination was normal except for inspiratory late crackles in all lung fields bilaterally. Chest x-ray showed mild infiltration, predominantly in the middle to lower lung fields, with multiple scattered nodular lesions. Thoracic computed tomography (CT) revealed ground-glass opacities and abundant centrilobular nodules throughout both lungs, especially in bilateral lower lobes. Laboratory examination showed elevation of lactase dehydrogenase (291 IU/L), C-reactive protein (4.2 mg/dL), Krebs von den Lungen-6 (1270 IU/L), and surfactant protein D (135 IU/L) . Serum anti-Trichosporon asahii antibody was positive by enzyme immunoassay (1.91), and biopsied specimens obtained from transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) showed organization within the peribronchial area, with alveolitis accompanying lymphocytic infiltration , suggesting transbronchial spread. Based on these data, she was diagnosed with SHP. Her chief complaints and hypoxemia resolved spontaneously by the second hospital day, and she was discharged on the fifth hospital day to her home. Two weeks later, she was re-admitted to our hospital with a diagnosis of recurrent SHP. She was subsequently treated with oral prednisolone (0.8 mg/kg/day). After cleaning up her house with disinfectant and re-covering the floor, she was discharged again on the eighth hospital day with complete resolution of her symptoms. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing showed DR4, A11, A31, B54, B62, DQ4, and DQ8.
The same patient’s husband was a 63-year-old previously healthy man who was admitted to his local hospital with chief complaints of productive cough, dyspnea on effort, and fever of 38°C lasting for a few weeks from the beginning of August 2012. He had a smoking history of 25 pack-years and was diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease a few years previously. He worked as a stage director and had been in good health until then. The specimens obtained by TBLB performed at his local hospital showed organizing tissue within peribronchial area with alveolitis, suggesting bronchial spread. He was tentatively diagnosed with atypical pneumonia and was treated with antibiotics. His symptoms completely resolved within a week, and he was discharged to his home. However, on the day of discharge, 3 hours after returning his home, his symptoms recurred and he presented to our hospital. Initial examination indicated that he was quite ill; his vital signs showed a temperature of 38°C, and oxygen saturation has dropped to about 80% at room air. His physical examination showed inspiratory late crackles in the bilateral upper to middle lung fields. Chest x-ray and thoracic CT showed ground glass opacities in the upper lungs bilaterally. Based on his medical history together with the fact that his wife had already been diagnosed with SHP at the same time, he was diagnosed with SHP. This was confirmed by positive result of serum anti-Trichosporon asahii antibody on enzyme immunoassay (1.21), and he was successfully discharged to his son’s house on the seventh hospital day with no treatment. His HLA typing showed DR8, A2, A26, B35, B55, and DQ4.
We conducted environmental research at the two patients’ house. Tatami mats (a floor fitting made of straw that are peculiar to Japan) were present and were noted to be crumbled and in a decaying state . Beneath the tatami mats, numerous white-colored and malodorous particulates were recognized and culture of this material showed multiple soft nodules of white piedra on Sabouraud agar, suggestive of Trichosporon asahii . Those white colonies produced blue colored hyphae that disarticulated into rectangular arthroconidia with rounded ends on light microscopy, measuring approximately 5 μm on electron microscopy. Further analysis on slide agglutination tests using Trichosporon antigen (type II; known as T. asahii) and serum from the two patients showed a positive anti-T. asahii titer (2X). Further, the agglutination test using the strain of T. asahiii isolated from their house showed a positive result for anti-T. asahii titer both in the husband (4X) and in the wife (8X).
Fungal deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was extracted using the method of Makimura et al. and the intergenic spacer (IGS) 1 region was sequenced according to the method of Sugita et al. . Briefly, the Trichosporon IGS 1 region (approximately 500 bp) was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the oligonucleotide primers 26SF (5ÅL-ATCCTTTGCAGACGACTTGA-3ÅL) and 5SR (5ÅL-AGCTTGACTTCGCAGATCGG-3ÅL). The PCR products were sequenced with 26SF and 5SR using an ABI 3700 DNA sequencer with an ABI PRISM BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Based on these methods, the white colonies on Sabouraud agar identified as T. asahii.
Using the PubMed database, we identified and reviewed 22 studies with a total of 49 patients (including the two present cases) of family occurrence of SHP in Japan [-]. The mean age of affected patients was 36.1 ± 15.9 (mean ± SD [SD: standard deviation]), the age range was from 2 to 74 years, and the male to female ratio was 22:27. Among the 49 patients, 20 patients were married couples, and the other 20 patients had blood relationships. Among the 49 patients, the number of smokers and non-smokers was 13 and 22, respectively. Information regarding smoking history was not obtained in the other 14 patients. Thirty-five patients were assessed for specific anti-Trichosporon spp. antibody, of whom 31 patients (88.5%) had positive results. The presence of acute respiratory failure (defined as oxygen saturation of less than 90%) was observed in 22 patients with SHP (44.9%). HLA phenotyping was assessed in 11 studies (data not shown), and the present two cases described SHP-sensitive HLA phenotypes in both the husband (A2) and the wife (A11, DQ8). The geographic distribution of the 49 cases of Japanese SHP showed a predilection for the western and southern parts of the country, and the condition was more common in prefectures bordering the Pacific Ocean than in those facing the Sea of Japan . The most northernmost case of the disease was in Saitama Prefecture, located at a latitude of 36°C north, and the area with the most cases (six studies; 13 patients) was the Kanto plain (Saitama and Kanagawa Prefectures and Tokyo area). Based on the annual records of the Japan Meteorological Agency, the average temperature and humidity at the time of onset in individual cases was 25.9°C ± 2.2 (mean ± SD.) and 74.1% ± 4.1 (mean ± SD.), respectively. Ninety percent of all cases of familial SHP in this study occurred from July to September, which corresponds to the after rainy season with high temperature and/or high humidity in Japan.
Review of the 49 cases shows the following management strategies: oral prednisolone only (n = 20, 43.5%), avoidance of fungal exposure and house cleaning (n = 11, 22.4%), moving to a new house (n = 10, 20.4%), moving to a new house and oral prednisolone (n = 6, 12.2%), and unknown (n = 2, 4.1%). Eleven patients (22.4%) experienced recurrence, all of whom stayed in the house without moving. No recurrence was noted in patients who moved to a new house.