An 81-year-old woman presented with skin ulceration, swelling, erythema and severe pain of her left arm. The skin lesions developed some months earlier and progressed slowly. The patient reported no accidental injury and no fever. The patient lived in a rural area, had no outdoor hobbies and could not remember any insect bites at presentation. The initial lesion was only a point-shaped lesion. In the course, the primary lesion enlarged and developed into an ulcerous lesion. Concomitantly, the patient suffered from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and had been treated with on average 20 mg prednisolone daily for over twenty years by her primary care physician. She had never received any disease modifying anti-rheumatic drug (DMARD) therapy. She had no known allergies. She had not travelled for many years and had no close contact to any animals.
On examination, the left fore and upper arm exhibited several necrotic deep ulcerations, each approximately 6 cm in diameter. The lesions extended to the muscles and tendons . Regional lymphadenopathy involving the left axillary lymphnodes and cervical lymphnodes were present. The right leg showed the clinical signs of cellulitis. Inflammatory markers were elevated (CRP 280 mg/l, leucocytes 16/nl) and the differential blood count demonstrated an increased percentage of neutrophils. Biopsies and aspirates from several sites of the wound area and blood cultures were obtained and laboratory analyses including immunological parameters were performed. Intravenous piperacillin 3 × 4 g/d combined with sulbactam 3 × 1 g/d was initiated as empirical treatment of bacterial cellulitis and penicillin G 10 Mio. IE was added for presumed erysipelas of the right leg. A rapid improvement of the erysipelas was noted, but no change of the ulcerative cellulitis of the left arm could be perceived. Three pairs of blood cultures remained negative even after prolonged incubation for seven days. Rheumatoid factor (RF), anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies (ACPA), anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were all tested negative. Chest x-ray and abdominal ultrasound did not reveal any infectious focus. Histological analysis of skin biopsies (haematoxylin-eosin staining) displayed pyoderma. In addition isolated pale spherical structures could be identified, that were also detected by periodic acid-Schiff staining and initially believed to be most likely exogenous contaminations. A second biopsy showed signs of a cutaneous vasculitis consistent with cutaneous involvement of RA. Due to the assumed rheumatoid vasculitis (RV), our colleagues from the Department of Dermatology initiated an empirical treatment with systemic prednisolone. However, there was neither response to the antibacterial therapy nor to the systemic prednisolone in the clinical course. Finally, four weeks after admission, investigations on a third skin biopsy including periodic acid-Schiff and Gomori's methenamine silver stain revealed C. neoformans. This finding was subsequently verified by microbial culture. A wound aspirate from the region of the left elbow was also positive for C. neoformans. Retrospectively, one could identify C. neoformans as pale spherules in the first biopsy (haematoxylin-eosin staining). Because of these findings, the patient's serum was once tested for cryptococcal antigen with a negative result. A computed tomography (CT) of the lung revealed a peripheral round solid lesion approximately 1 cm in diameter of unknown etiology. Sputum cultures could not be performed because the patient had no cough. The radiologists judged the lung lesion unlikely to represent a cryptococcoma, but the written report did not specifically exclude this diagnosis from the differential diagnosis. The lesion was too peripheral for bronchoscopic guided biopsy and due to the general condition of the patient an open lung biopsy was not performed instead a follow-up CT scan in 3 month was recommended.
Antimycotic therapy with intravenous fluconazole (400 mg daily) was initiated and the empirical intravenous antibiotic therapy deescalated to ceftriaxone. The debris at the base of the ulcera cleared rapidly and after 10 days new formation of granulation tissue was noted on the base of all skin ulcers. The antifungal treatment with daily 400 mg fluconazole was continued orally for further 4 weeks. A follow-up CT scan of the lung after 6 weeks did not reveal any change of the pulmonary lesion. The dose of prednisolone was slowly tapered without a flare of the RA. Three month after the initial admittance and after 6 weeks of rehabilitation, surgical debridement of the necrotic area was performed, and the skin defect was successfully closed with a mesh graft.