We report a 28-year-old man who was suffering from carcinoma of tongue and underwent hemimandibulectomy and post-operative radiotherapy. A histological diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma was made. Three months later, he presented with multiple episodes of syncope to the emergency department. ECG showed CHB and a broad complex escape with left bundle branch block morphology . These episodes were sudden in onset with no preceding symptoms. On physical examination, the patient had bradycardia with a regular heart rate of 32/min and normal blood pressure. On auscultation the chest was clear and there were no murmurs heard. Routine blood investigations were normal with normal serum creatinine 1.1 mg/dL (0.6–1.4 mg/dL) and normal serum sodium and potassium of 4.1 meq/dL (3.5–5.5 meq/dL). Echocardiography was performed which showed normal left ventricular ejection fraction and no valvular abnormalities. However, there were hyperechoic areas and hypertrophy of interventricular septum and the posterolateral wall of left ventricle as well . The patient was paced using a temporary pacemaker as the patient was symptomatic with multiple episodes of syncope and had CHB on ECG with escape rate of 32 on ECG. The chest X-ray showed a large solitary nodule in the right upper zone. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan was performed and was suggestive of multiple metastasis in the interventricular septum, the right atrium, and the LV wall along with a large pulmonary metastasis . The patient also developed paraneoplastic syndrome in the form of hypercalcaemia with serum calcium of 14 mg/dL (normal range: 8.5–10.2 mg/dL) which resolved on administering fluids and zoledronic acid intravenously. However, the CHB persisted despite normal calcium levels, so a decision to implant a permanent pacemaker was taken. The patient was then taken up for permanent pacemaker implantation and an active fixation lead was positioned into the low septal position in order to avoid metastatic site on the mid septal region. An active fixation lead was chosen as it is the institutional protocol to use active fixation lead . A sensed R wave of 7 mV was achieved with a pacing threshold of 0.6 mV indicating a good position. Post-procedural ECG showed a ventricular paced rhythm. On the fifth day post-pacemaker implantation, the patient had massive haemoptysis. Crystalloids, and blood were transfused, but the patient succumbed before he could be taken up for bronchial artery embolization.