A 30-year-old male (170 cm/60 kg, BMI = 20.8) suffered the HBV-related cirrhosis complicated by portal hypertension. His model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score was 19. His liver anatomy was modal with a standard liver volume (SLV) of 1220cm3 . Transplantation was considered due to his deteriorated general and liver condition. His 34-year-old brother (170 cm/70 kg, BMI = 23.9) volunteered for living donation. He underwent a comprehensive living donor evaluation including MRCP and the CT image-based three-dimensional reconstruction (IQQA-liver, EDDA, US) for volumetric assessment and angiography. The volume of his right lobe (i.e. segments 5–8) without middle hepatic vein (MHV) was 672cm3, representing 54.3% of his entire liver. The graft to recipient body weight ratio (GRWR) was 1.32% and the liver remnant was 45.7% of the total liver volume, which fulfills the safety criteria for both recipient and donor. Donor’s hepatic vasculature anatomy was modal with the presence of portal vein bifurcation and a single right branch of a proper hepatic artery. MRCP showed normal biliary confluence with a single right hepatic duct. MHV tributaries in Segment 5, Segment 8 ventral and dorsal areas were ＞5 mm in diameter and need to be reconstructed for the recipient . Informed consent was obtained from both donor and recipient, which were characterized by a morbi-mortality of this complex procedure and the innovative nature of the pure laparoscopic technique. It’s decided that any incident occurring during the innovative procedure that might compromise the donor safety or graft integrity would prompt conversion to laparotomy. The procedure was approved by the ethics committee of our institute.
A surgical team (XM, HW, YX) with an experience of over 500 cases of laparoscopic major hepatectomy performed the donor procedure. The donor was placed in a supine position with right upper abdomen slightly elevated and right arm suspended. Four trocars were placed as shown in . A pneumoperitoneum was created and maintained at 13 mmHg. The cystic duct and artery were clipped and divided. The portal pedicle was opened with the right hepatic artery and right portal branch dissected free and taped, during which some small portal branches into the caudate lobe were suture-ligated and divided. After cutting the round and falciform ligaments, the right lobe was mobilized with sectioning of the short hepatic veins at anterior aspect of the inferior vena cava. The right hepatic vein (RHV) was then dissected and taped. 2 ml of ICG (0.5 mg/ml) was directly injected into the right portal branch through a scalp needle. The fluorescent territory of the right lobe was clearly visualized through the fusion image mounted on the laparoscopy system (Pinpoint, Stryker, US). The right hepatic artery and portal branch were briefly clamped to reveal the main portal fissure and to confirm the transection plane a–c. The intra-operative ultrasound (IOUS) was used to identify the course of MHV, which would be preserved for the left lobe. The liver capsule was opened using a harmonic scalpel. Parenchyma was divided tracing the fluorescence borderline of right lobe. A Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator (CUSA) was used for parenchyma dissection. Bipolar coagulation and clips were used for hemostasis. The Segment 5, 8 ventral and dorsal venous tributaries were double clipped and divided. When the right hepatic duct level was reached, 20 ml of ICG was bolus injected intravenously. The biliary confluence and right hepatic duct were then clearly visualized and sectioned. The liver section was then completed and the right hepatic vein was isolated. A 12-cm suprapubic incision without muscle sectioning was made allowing for the insertion of a retrieval bag. The right lobe was put into the bag before the right hepatic artery, portal branches and hepatic vein were a securely clipped and divided d–f. The graft was quickly retrieved to the back table and perfused with cold UW solution. Then the right hepatic ducal stump on the liver remnant was sealed by suture. The warm ischemia time was 6 min 20 s. The V5, V8v and V8d were recanalized on the back-table using cryopreserved iliac artery allografts . The recipient procedure and perioperative management followed our institutional protocol. The donor procedure took 420 min with a blood loss of 100 ml. The recipient procedure took 380 min with a blood loss of 450 ml. Neither required blood transfusion. The donor recovered uneventfully and was discharged from hospital on POD 7.