A six year old female child was brought to us with complaints of pain in her right leg since 15 days. She also had a swelling over the proximal part of her leg, which had increased in size rapidly since they first noticed it 15 days earlier. On examination, we found a bony hard, tender swelling extending over the anterior, medial and lateral aspect of the proximal leg. Range of movement of the knee joint was restricted with flexion up to 80 degrees, which was associated with pain. Radiographs showed an osteoblastic lesion over the metaphyseal region of proximal tibia. Sun burst pattern of matrix mineralisation was pronounced. A wide zone of transition was present. Codman’s triangle type of periosteal reaction was also visible. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed an expansile mass lesion in the metaphyseal region of proximal tibia. Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scan showed no evidence of increased uptake elsewhere in the body. Blood investigations showed alkaline phosphatase to be elevated. A core needle biopsy of the lesion was performed under fluoroscopic guidance, in line with the planned surgical approach for wide excision- medial approach. Histopathological examination showed marked atypia, pleomorphism, and disorganised woven bone formation in a lacy pattern, suggestive of conventional osteosarcoma. A diagnosis of central (intramedullary) conventional type of osteosarcoma of the proximal tibia was made.
She was started on chemotherapy as per European and American Osteosarcoma Study (EURAMOS) protocol. Pre-operative chemotherapy consisted of five week cycles of methotrexate, doxorubicin (adriamycin) and cisplatin. Two such cycles was given for 10 weeks. Two weeks after which, she underwent wide resection of right proximal tibia and reconstruction with free vascularised fibular graft. Fibula was harvested from the contralateral side, peroneal artery of the fibula graft was anastomosed to right anterior tibial artery. The joint was fused using a 16 hole locking compression plate and screws. The locking screws were inserted avoiding the distal femoral physis , enabling growth of the physis in future. The resected specimen on histopathological examination showed classical features of grade three conventional osteosarcoma, 15% tumor necrosis and margins to be free of malignancy.
Nine cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy were then given over 40 weeks. She was not permitted to bear weight over her right lower limb until two months after surgery, following which partial weight bearing was permitted for one month, and full weight bearing mobilisation was started three months after the surgery. Serial radiographs were taken on follow up . Harris growth lines were visible in follow up radiographs indicating growth to be occurring at the distal femoral physis. She was not found to have recurrence on last follow up four years after surgery. She was able to walk unaided and was rehabilitated to her normal routine and activities, with Musculoskeletal Tumor Society Score (MSTS) of 19. Once fusion of the fibula graft on both sides has occurred completely, plate removal has been planned. The growth of the distal femur physis needs to be followed up.