A 76-year-old Japanese woman presented with headache and nausea from 1 month previously. She had been diagnosed with a cerebellar tumor in her childhood, but the lesion was asymptomatic at that time, and there was no evidence of an increase in size, so it had been monitored without surgery. Her last magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed approximately ten years before her presentation. On admission, her consciousness was alert, and physical examination revealed no ataxia or gait disturbance. Computed tomography showed a heterogeneous cystic mass in the left cerebellum without calcification . MRI indicated a T1 hypointense and T2 hypertense mass in the left cerebellar tonsil and a T2 hypertense cyst in the cerebellar vermis [-]. Post-contrast T1 imaging showed an enhanced mural nodule in the cyst [ and ]. Cerebral angiography revealed no mass stain from vertebral arteries .
We performed tumor excision through posterior fossa craniotomy, incising the cyst and draining the xanthochromic fluid. The tumor was located within the cerebellar tonsil and was well-circumscribed from the surrounding parenchyma . Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the surgical specimen showed binuclear atypical ganglion-cell-like cells and proliferation of atypical glial cells showing mild pleomorphism between hyalinized vessels, eosinophilic granular bodies and Rosenthal fibers [-]. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for GFAP and Olig2. Synaptophysin and neurofilament protein-positive ganglion cells were observed [ and ]. V-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B (BRAF) V600E and CD34 were negative. The histopathological diagnosis was, therefore, ganglioglioma, the World Health Organization grade 1.
The patient’s headache and nausea improved after surgery. She exhibited no cerebellar symptoms postoperatively and had a favorable postoperative course, so she was discharged to home two weeks after surgery. At the 1-year follow-up, postoperative MRI showed total tumor removal, and there has been no recurrence [ and ].