The patient in this case report (Additional file : Figure S1), is a 62-year-old woman with a 35-pack year smoking history, who presented with an enlarging, non-tender right neck mass, hoarseness and a twenty-pound weight loss. The initial differential included primary head and neck cancer versus metastatic disease. A subsequent neck biopsy reveled adenocarcinoma consistent with primary lung disease : found to be positive for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and negative for p40 and thyroglobulin .
Molecular studies of the patient’s biopsy were ordered. Wild type EGFR and no ALK or ROS1 rearrangements were detected, precluding the patient from targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors. However, immunohistochemical (IHC) staining indicated that 80% of the patient’s tumor cells expressed PD-L1 , predicting a favorable response to immune checkpoint inhibition [, , ]. The patient was started on a three-week cycle of 200 mg pembrolizumab.
The primary mass on baseline staging was a 17 × 13 mm left upper lobe lesion consistent with primary lung cancer as well as multiple positron emission tomography (PET) avid lesions. PET/computed tomography (PET/CT) imaging for staging revealed multi-station mediastinal adenopathy, the right paratracheal region, the pre-carinal region, the right neck and the aortopulmonary window; left hilar adenopathy was also seen, and a single splenic lesion was also identified . The patient was therefore diagnosed with stage IV lung cancer (cT1aN3M1b).
The patient responded well to pembrolizumab and significant reduction in tumor burden was observed within ten weeks. Imaging showed reduction in size of the left upper lobe mass, the mediastinal lymphadenopathy and a reduction in the size of the splenic mass: collectively consistent with treatment effect for metastatic disease . Of note, after nine weeks of treatment, the patient’s thyroid function dropped precipitously, and the patient was diagnosed with hypothyroidism secondary to immunotherapy, necessitating levothyroxine treatment.
Regrettably, the patient experienced a second, more serious irAE, in the form enteritis, presenting in a clinically atypical form, without diarrhea. Constipation and abdominal discomfort developed around week eight of treatment. At that time, the patient presented to the direct referral unit at our center and imaging showed possible partial small bowel obstruction. The patient was hydrated and treated with metoclopramide; she declined an NG tube. Furthermore, she declined hospital admission. She progressively started to feel better for another four to five days after this discharge. An outpatient gastroenterology referral was placed, which the patient did not follow-up on.
The symptoms worsened significantly after the week ten-treatment cycle of pembrolizumab, forcing the patient to seek emergent medical care. The patient presented to the emergency department with anorexia, worsening continuous abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and tachycardia, lasting for about ten days. On physical examination, the patient had involuntary guarding and rebound tenderness in the lower abdominal quadrants. Laboratory results indicated an elevated total white blood cell (WBC) count of 15.1. CT imaging with contrast of the abdomen and pelvis showed signs concerning for mural thickening of the proximal to mid jejunum, in the area of the mid pelvic cavity, with mucosal and submucosal edema and enhancement, concerning for a target sign and suggestive of ischemic etiology. Additionally, the patient had a cluster of mesenteric vessels concerning for mesenteric volvulus or internal hernia in the midline region of the pelvic cavity . Several small foci of non-dependent extraluminal air adjacent to the bowel and a trace amount of free fluid were detected .
Exploratory laparotomy revealed one liter of purulent ascites. Part of the ileum was extremely erythematous and signs of perforation with significant inflammatory changes were evident. The concerning part of the small bowel was resected, and a primary anastomosis was created. The cecum, ascending colon, transverse, descending colon, sigmoid and rectum were without signs of injury. Surgical pathology of the resected portion of the small bowel showed focal, nonspecific, mesentery, non-caseating granulomatous inflammation, negative for tumor . Other commonly cited features were partially appreciated: there was indeed a lack of prominent intra-epithelial lymphocytes and crypt rupture; however, lamina propira expansion and villous blunting was not prominent .
Mesenteric vessels were negative for vasculitis and thromboembolism . Trichrome stain demonstrated loss of outer muscular wall due to ischemia and inflammation . Based on the pathological and surgical findings, the patient was diagnosed with pembrolizumab-associated small bowel perforation. Anti-TNF-α medications were not an appropriate treatment option due to fact that perforation of the bowel had occurred . The patient recovered well from surgery. After extensive discussions, and with consideration of the patient’s remarkable response to treatment and the fact that she was resuming working full time and preferred to avoid chemotherapeutic side effects, the decision was made to resume pembrolizumab. Immunotherapy was restarted on post-operative day twenty-eight. Currently, twelve months since the start of treatment, the patient is continuing her immunotherapy with ongoing partial response and is able to continue her full-time job.