A 4-year-old boy presented to his local hospital with persistent high fever following 3 weeks of pharyngitis, initially treated with 7 days of erythromycin. Physical examination demonstrated inflamed tonsils, and blood tests demonstrated elevated C-reactive protein. Symptoms resolved following 24 h of co-amoxiclav; however, 3 days later at ambulatory review, a new pan-systolic murmur, located at the apex of the child’s heart with no radiation, was noted. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed a large vegetation (11 × 14 mm) on the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve with suspected perforation and severe mitral regurgitation (MR) (, and ), with several jets directed both posterolaterally and anterolaterally thought to be from failure of coaptation and secondary to destruction of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve. The heart was otherwise structurally normal with a small PFO with a left-to-right shunt. Based on modified Duke criteria for infective endocarditis, the patient did not fulfil the criteria for infective endocarditis; however, there was a strong clinical suspicion based on evidence of endocardial involvement and the presence of fever and the subsequent development of vascular phenomenon in septic pulmonary emboli. He was transferred to our institution after intravenous antibiotics (flucloxacillin, amoxicillin, and gentamicin) were empirically started. Upon admission and after microbiology consultation, antibiotics were converted to vancomycin (15 mg/kg TDS), rifampicin (10 mg/kg BD), and gentamicin (1 mg/kg BD), as blood cultures remained negative. Formal examination of his dentition was unremarkable. Multi-disciplinary meeting concluded that surgical management was required over conservative medical management given the high risk of embolization; however, further cross-sectional imaging would be required to evaluate any embolization.
On Day 12, the patient deteriorated clinically with increased work of breathing, tachypnoea, and recurrent temperature spikes. Chest X-ray demonstrated new focal lesions. Thoracic computed tomography (CT) revealed small peripheral foci of consolidation suggestive of septic pulmonary emboli and no other possible sources of left-to-right shunts . Subsequently, it was believed that the source of the septic emboli was from the vegetation on the mitral valve with left-to-right embolus across the PFO. The patient underwent urgent open-heart surgery on Day 13 of presentation and Day 9 of triple therapy antibiotics. Intraoperative transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) demonstrated the large vegetation of the mitral valve, the absence of right-sided vegetation, and the presence of a PFO (, , ) On surgical inspection, there was destruction of the anterior mitral valve leaflet with gross vegetation and superimposition of thrombotic material on the vegetation. Mitral valve vegetectomy, resection of infected native anterior mitral valve leaflet, mitral valve repair and valvuloplasty replacing the body of the anterior mitral valve leaflet with mitral valve homograft, and re-implantation of the chordae to the head of the posterior mitral valve papillary muscle with PFO closure were performed. Although tissue culture from the resected valve was negative, 16 s rDNA sequencing PCR detected a sequence of Streptococcus pneumoniae, sensitive to penicillin.
The patient’s post-operative course was uneventful, and antibiotics were completed 6 weeks after initial presentation. At 12 months follow-up, his clinical examination was normal with only mild residual MR on TTE.