A 24-year-old Hispanic male with no prior medical or surgical history presented with a right-sided testicular mass and pain for 3 months. Upon presentation, the patient endorsed continued right-sided testicular pain and increased size of the testicular mass. Physical exam revealed an uncircumcised penis, normal phallus, bilateral descended testes with a large right testicular soft, tender, and mobile mass. Testicular ultrasound at this time showed an extratesticular 4 cm (cm) mass that, per radiologic interpretation, resembled an adenomatoid tumor. He was scheduled for surgery but lost to follow-up. Nine months later, he presented with continued pain and increased size of the right hemiscrotum with separately palpated and larger extratesticular mass on physical exam and ultrasound . Tumor markers were drawn: AFP and beta-hCG were within normal limits, and LDH was mildly elevated (634 units/liter). The patient, however, was unfortunately lost to follow-up again and his surgery was finally rescheduled 1 year and 4 months after his initial presentation. On final clinic follow-up before surgery, his right hemiscrotum had increased significantly in size, and there was growing suspicion for a malignant etiology of the tumor.
Intraoperatively, an inguinoscrotal incision was used to deliver the testicle within the spermatic fascia and a firm 8 cm paratesticular mass was palpated and concerning for malignancy. The testicle was indiscernible from the mass. A radical orchiectomy was performed.
Final histopathology revealed a 7.3 cm × 6.5 cm × 6.0 cm paratesticular mass arising from the parietal tunica vaginalis of the testicle and extending into the visceral tunica vaginalis and epididymis . The tumor did not extend outside of the spermatic fascia and margins were negative for malignancy. LDH subsequently normalized to 403 units/liter two weeks after surgery. A subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax and nuclear medicine bone scan showed no evidence of metastatic disease. Immunohistochemical stains showed the tumor cells to be diffusely positive for CD99 (membranous) and negative for keratin, WT1 and neuron specific enolase (NSE). FISH for EWSR1 gene rearrangement was positive, confirming the diagnosis. The patient is currently being treated with 7–8 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy (vincristine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide alternating with ifosfamide and etoposide). The patient remains free of metastases four months after initial diagnosis.