A 33-year-old man presented to the emergency department of our hospital with a twisting injury to his right knee and an open fracture of the left lower thigh that occurred while he was operating a rotary snow removal vehicle and his left lower thigh became trapped in the rotary blade. Physical examination revealed that the right knee joint was fixed at 30° flexion with a lateral shift of the patella. The contralateral open fracture was classified as grade 3A using the Gustilo–Anderson classifications ystem. No neurovascular injury to either leg was detected. Radiographic evaluation confirmed lateral dislocation of the patella and posterolateral subluxation of the knee .
On the day of injury, the open fracture of the left lower thigh was stabilized with an external fixator after debridement and the dislocated patella of the right knee was reduced. However, closed reduction for knee joint dislocation could not be performed successfully. Plain radiographs after manipulation showed widening of the medial joint space and tibial posterolateral displacement . The characteristic dimple sign was observed over the medial joint line . On the medial aspect of the injured knee, the medial femoral condyle was palpable just beneath the skin.
Two days after the injury, closed reduction was attempted under general anesthesia. The knee was flexed to 120° and valgus stress and internal rotation of the lower thigh were applied. The dislocated knee was reduced and the dimple sign disappeared. The posterolateral dislocation could be reproduced by external rotation at 100–120° flexion. After reduction, ligament instability tests were positive for valgus stress, with signs of posterior sagging in the posterior drawer test, and negative for the Lachman test, pivot shift test, extension recurvatum test, and dial test. A subsequent arthroscopic examination also revealed a complete midsubstance tear of the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) and a partial tear of the posterolateral bundle of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL), which were not reconstructed . A peripheral longitudinal tear of the lateral meniscus was repaired using the Fast Fix 360 Meniscal Repair System (Smith & Nephew, Andover, MA, USA) .
Thereafter, a 7-cm medial longitudinal incision was made to repair the medial collateral ligament (MCL). The medial retinaculum and capsule were torn along with the distal end of the vastusmedialis. The MCL was completely detached from the femoral footprint. Button holing of the medial femoral condyle through the medial retinaculum and the capsule could be reproduced by valgus stress and external rotation in the knee flexion position . In addition, the dislocation could be reduced by internal rotation of the lower thigh. The MCL was fixed to the femoral footprint using Suture Anchors (Mitek Products, Johnson & Johnson Company, Westwood, MA, USA). The medial retinaculum and the capsule were also repaired. Postoperative radiographs showed normal alignment . Range of motion (ROM) exercises was started after 3 weeks of immobilization with a cylinder cast. Full weight bearing with a knee brace was allowed 4 weeks after surgery. One year postoperatively, no knee symptoms were observed and the ROM was 0–145°. There was no ligament instability except for the PCL at grade II.