A 77-year-old man presented with 6 months history of continuous vertigo, unsteady gait and dysphagia, and these symptoms were not related to his head movement. He is a retired farmer and his social history included never smoking, socially drinking. There were no radiculopathy symptoms of the upper limbs. No positive sign was found on neurological examination. He had been treated with flunarizine and betahistine at the local hospital, but without benefit. The Dizziness Handicap Inventory (DHI) score was 82. Preoperative vertebral artery computed tomography angiography (CTA) examination revealed the V2 segment of the left VA was severely compressed at C4-5 level close to the left C4 transverse foramen with approximately 95% occlusion due to an anteromedially protruding left C4-5 facet joint originated large osteophyte . No uncovertebral joint originated bony compression was found . 50% stenosis of the V4 segment of the right VA was also found . Preoperative cranial magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed poor blood flow of V4 segment of the left VA, as well as 50% stenosis of the V4 segment of the right VA consistent with the CTA . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was then performed. During the procedure, we found there was occlusion of the V4 segment of the right VA , but not very severe relative to the preoperative CTA and MRA and no indication for angioplasty or stenting. Meanwhile, 95% occlusion of the V2 segment of the left VA at the level of C4-5 was confirmed, and no evidence of internal factors such as atherosclerosis and embolization was found . We did not find neck tumors through pre-operative CT and MRI. No evidence of cerebral infarction was found by brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The cause of his symptoms were determined to be hemodynamic insufficiency due to left VA compression. In order to prevent permanent neurological deficits caused by vertebrobasilar ischemia attack, left VA decompression surgery was indicated.
The surgery approach was basically the same as our routinely performed anterior cervical discectomy/corpectomy and fusion (ACDF/ACCF). After endotracheal intubation general anesthesia, the patient was kept supine on the operating table. After fluoroscopy localization, a horizontal incision was made in a natural skin crease between the midline and sternocleidomastoid muscle. After a careful soft tissue dissection, the platysma was longitudinally splited. The carotid sheath was retracted laterally, the esophagus and trachea were retracted medially. The left longus colli was splited and the anterior aspect of the vertebral body and left transverse process of C4 was exposed. Under the operating microscope, the anterior margin of the left transverse process and osteophytes origin from left C4/5 facet joint were carefully excised by ultrasonic osteotome instead of high speed burr to protect surrounding soft tissue. Then the fibrous adhesion around the VA was excised. After decompression , intraoperative indocyanine green (ICG) fluorescence angiography proved excellent blood flow of the left VA . Postoperative CTA revealed that the osteophyte and anterior margin of the left C4 transverse foramen was excised and no compressive lesion of the left VA . Surgery time was 3 h and 34 min.
Antiplatelet therapy was given after surgery. No Philadelphia collar was used, and the patient was allowed to move his head freely. The patient stated he felt significant improvement of his symptoms, with no neurological deficits and restriction of neck movement. Histologically, the removed tissue consisted of cartilage and bone tissue. The DHI score 1 week after surgery was 2. There was no recurrence of his vertebrobasilar symptoms and no symptoms of cervical instability at 12 months' follow-up. We did not consider invasive postoperative DSA because adequate vascular decompression had been proved by intraoperative ICG angiography and postoperative CTA, and the symptoms improved very well.