A 77-year-old man presented with sudden-onset headache and consciousness disturbance. His Glasgow coma scale was E3V4M5. Computed tomography (CT) showed massive subarachnoid hemorrhage in the posterior cranial fossa, especially around the medulla . CT angiography did not show any apparent ruptured aneurysms, although abnormal blood vessels around the right vertebral artery (VA) at the C1 level were detected [-]. The right VA angiography showed an AVF at the CCJ, which was supplied mainly by the right VA and the anterior spinal artery (ASA), and it drained into a radicular vein . On the other hand, the left VA angiography did not demonstrate vascular lesions . In detailed assessments of the vascular structures using super-selective angiography, the right lateral spinal artery (LSA) originated from the right posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) and was feeding the shunt [ and ]. Interestingly, a branch of the right occipital artery (OA) was also feeding the shunt [ and ]. On super-selective angiography with contrast agent injections from both the LSA and the OA at the same time, the flow of each was confirmed to supply the same shunt [ and ]. A radicular AVF at the CCJ was suspected from the imaging findings. Two-step treatment was planned: decreasing blood flow by endovascular embolization (first-step), followed by curative surgical shunt resection (second-step).
Endovascular embolization of the LSA and the OA feeders was performed using Onyx under general anesthesia. After embolization, the right VA angiography showed residual feeder flows from radiculomeningeal arteries of the right VA and spinal pial arteries of the ASA . The left VA angiography also confirmed the residual flows of the ASA . The day after first-step treatment, surgical shunt resection was performed via sub-occipital craniotomy with partial atlas osteotomy. Intraoperative photographs showed the PICA penetrating dura mater from the extradural space, and feeding arteries from the LSA were blackened by Onyx . The shunt was located behind the right C1 spinal nerve, although it was not fully exposed because bleeding was encountered when trying to peel it off. A red draining vein was confirmed at the cranial deep side of the C1 spinal nerve . On intraoperative indocyanine green angiography, the draining vein was visible in the arterial phase . Judging from all imaging and intraoperative findings, the AV shunt was located along the C1 spinal nerve, fed by radiculomeningeal arteries from the VA, spinal arteries from both the LSA and ASA, and branches of the OA, and it drained into a radicular vein. Therefore, the definitive diagnosis was a radicular AVF at the CCJ along the C1 spinal nerve. A clip was applied to the draining vein distal to the shunt . Motor evoked potential monitoring did not show any changes. Then, tiny vessels around the shunt and the draining vein were coagulated referring to the blackened arteries. Finally, disappearance of abnormal vessels was confirmed by repeat indocyanine green angiography. Postoperative cerebral angiography showed disappearance of the lesion . The patient was discharged without apparent neurological deficits and there has been no recurrence for more than 3 years.