A 61-year-old man with a 2-month history of hypertension presented with the sudden onset of left limb weakness for one day and was subsequently admitted to the local hospital on March 30, 2021. Head computed tomography (CT) scan revealed intracerebral hemorrhaging in the right basal ganglia–radiation crown and centrum semiovale. Emergency decompression craniotomy and hematoma evacuation were performed. The patient was then transferred to the intensive care unit, where he received mechanical ventilation and an indwelling catheter. On third postoperative day, the patient regained consciousness and was transferred to the general ward after withdrawal from the ventilator. On day 12 after operation, the patient developed a headache and fever with a maximum body temperature of 39.2 °C. After 10 days of anti-infection treatment with cefoperazone sulbactam (specific treatment information was not available), there was still no significant relief of symptoms, and no decrease in body temperature. Lumbar puncture results (including CSF culture results) suggested a white blood cell count of 320/μL, glucose level of 0.4 mmol/L, chloride level of 119.7 mmol/L, and protein level of 6.6 g/L, but the results of the etiological culture (blood and CSF) were negative for any pathogen.
On April 29, 2021, the patient was transferred to the emergency department of Guizhou Provincial People’s Hospital for further treatment. On admission, he was drowsy but lucid, complaining of severe weakness and a mild headache. Neurological examination revealed severe paralysis of the left limb (grade 1 muscle strength), with positive meningeal irritation. Head CT after admission showed a small amount of blood and fluid accumulation in the operative area after intracerebral hemorrhage , while lung CT showed no obvious signs of infection . Furthermore, ceftriaxone, vancomycin, and caspofungin were used in combination to ensure coverage of the common bacterial meningitis and bloodstream infections. Lumbar puncture was performed on the second day of admission, and the intracranial pressure was elevated to 270 mmH2O. The CSF sample reported a white blood cell count of 810/μL, glucose level of 0.28 mmol/L, chloride level of 114 mmol/L, and protein level of 1.32 g/L. Subsequently, the traditional culture of peripheral blood, urine, and CSF specimens was performed, as well as the mNGS analysis of the CSF sample. Aerobic and anaerobic bacteria cultures showed negative results; however, mNGS revealed a high burden of M. hominis.
As is the case for all patients with no improvement in clinical symptoms, the anti-infection regimen was changed on May 3, 2021, to only moxifloxacin (0.4 g intravenous drops quaque die) according to the mNGS guidelines. On the sixth day of treatment for M. hominis meningitis, the patient’s headache gradually disappeared and his body temperature returned to normal. Five lumbar puncture tests performed during hospitalization also indicated a gradual recovery of routine indicators . On the 16th day of anti-mycoplasma therapy, a CSF sample was collected for an additional mNGS assay, and the results suggested a reduced burden of M. hominis to two unique reads, which was attributed to effective treatment. After 22 days of moxifloxacin treatment, the patient was discharged on May 25, 2021, at the request of his family. Follow-up after 1 month indicated that the patient had no obvious neurological symptoms, such as fever or headache, except for left limb weakness.
The patient’s CSF sample was delivered to Guangzhou Sagene Biotech Co., Ltd. for unbiased pathogen detection. A magnetic bead extraction kit (Sagene, Guangzhou, China) was used to extract DNA, and the Nextera XT DNA Library Prep Kit (Illumina, USA) was used to construct a metagenomic library of approximately 400 bp, as determined by electrophoresis. After fluorescence quantification, sequencing was performed using the Illumina 550 DX platform. A total of 1424 reads were identified to correspond to the M. hominis genome, with a coverage of 3.7% ( and ). Without the human host DNA, the M. hominis reads contributed to 0.32% of the total microbial and unclassified reads.
To further verify the abundance of M. hominis, the target fragment was authenticated by sequence-specific PCR using the primers of M. hominis (F-TGACCCTGAATTTGAAATCGTTG and R-CAGTTAGTAGTACATGAAGCGCCT). ABI PRISM 3730 (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA) was used for sanger sequencing, followed by mapping to NCBI BLAST., The results suggested a 399-bp target fragment aligned with the reference sequences of M. hominis (GenBank: CP055144.1) with 99.73% identity, thereby indicating M. hominis infection in this patient .