A 69-year-old Chinese man with a history of myocardial and cerebral infarctions presented with gross hematuria without an apparent cause. He did not experience frequent urination, urgent urination, dysuria, fever, dizziness, or flatulence. He was treated with antibiotics, but the effect was unsatisfactory. Computed tomography-urography (CTU) revealed an enlarged soft tissue shadow along the pelvic segment of the right ureter and the continuous bladder trigone , which was suspected to be urothelial carcinoma by radiologists. CTU also revealed abnormalities such as dilatation and ureteral stones in the right upper ureter, a shrunken and hydronephrotic right kidney, bilateral renal cysts, and prostatic hyperplasia. Cystoscopic examination revealed an irregular, polypoid, lobulated, and pedicled lesion measuring 5 × 4 cm in the right ureteral orifice . The right ureteral orifice was not visible. There was no other noticeable abnormality in the rest of the bladder mucosa. Biopsies were obtained from the mass for histological diagnosis. Then, he underwent a laparoscopic nephroureterectomy and partial cystectomy without subsequent radiation or chemotherapy. The patient remained disease-free at 7 months after surgery.
A biopsy sample from the lesion showed a stromal–epithelial lesion . The urothelial epithelium lining the surface showed mild-to-moderate dysplasia, cell polarity disorder, and inconspicuous mitosis . These histological changes did not justify a diagnosis of urothelial carcinoma in situ, although the epithelium immunostained diffusely for p53 . The proliferation index of the epithelia was approximately 15% as determined by Ki67 staining in hot spots . We also initially observed an abnormal mucoid change of the stroma. However, no dense cellularity, significant atypia, or mitosis was detected there with a relatively low proliferation index . CD34, CD99, and Bcl2 were all negative in stromal cells. Finally, a diagnosis of dysplasia of urothelial epithelium with myxoid stroma was made.
Gross examination revealed a unilateral kidney, a ureter connected to the kidney, and two tumor fragments. The sizes of the tumor fragments were approximately 4 × 2.5 × 2 cm and 1.5 × 1 × 0.5 cm. The fragments were multi-nodulated with a solid, gray, and translucent cut surface. No bleeding or necrosis was noted in the lesion. Ureterectasis, ureteral stones, and right kidney atrophy were also noted.
Microscopic examination revealed a polypoid stromal–epithelial tumor arising from the mucosa. The tumor was arranged in a leaf-like and clefting pattern , which was reminiscent of a breast PT. There was no envelope around the tumor, but a relatively clear boundary was observed between the mass and the muscularis propria of the ureter .
The leaf-like structures consisted mainly of myxoid stroma, the periphery of which was lined by urothelium. The blue-stained stromal component was myxoid, and subepithelial condensation of stromal cells was noted . Stromal cells were spindle-shaped and stellate in appearance. No conspicuous cytological atypia or mitoses were found in the stroma .
Concerning the urothelial epithelium lining the stoma, varying degrees of dysplasia were observed. In areas with moderate-to-severe dysplasia, active mitotic activity , abnormal giant cells , and early infiltration were noted. At high magnification, the invasive carcinoma consisted of irregular nests of oval epithelial cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm .
Immunohistochemistry showed that the stromal cells were negative for a panel of markers, such as SMA , CD117, CD34, and Bcl-2, with a low proliferation index determined by Ki67 staining . The urothelium had a relatively high proliferation index determined by Ki67 staining . Diffuse immunoreactions of GATA-3 and p53 were also detected in the urothelium with severe dysplasia.