A 31-year-old Irish woman who resided in the midwestern USA developed progressive loss of left hand dexterity and rest tremor. Eight months later, she experienced episodes of pre-syncope triggered by going up or down stairs or by a hot environment. Her initial neurological examination revealed rigidity, bradykinesia, decreased left arm swing, and rest/action tremor in the ipsilateral hand but no pyramidal, cerebellar signs or objective orthostatic hypotension signs. Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale motor subsection part III (UPDRS III) score was 18 points. Results of routine blood examination, ceruloplasmin, and a cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan were normal. She was diagnosed as having early-onset idiopathic Parkinson's disease, based upon gradual onset asymmetric parkinsonism with rest tremor. She initially declined pharmacological treatment until her symptoms spread to her left lower extremity and right hand one year later. She was started on a dopamine agonist pramipexole 0.75 mg three times a day, with good results.
Six months later, she and her husband decided to have a child. We advised her and her husband that carbidopa/levodopa had been reported to be used safely in pregnant women with PD [,], but there was insufficient information about the safety of pramipexole in pregnancy. As a result, pramipexole was switched to levodopa/carbidopa. She had excellent response to levodopa/carbidopa with mild levodopa-induced dyskinesias at doses that provided optimal motor benefit, 900 mg levodopa/day. Five months after she started taking levodopa, her UPDRS III score decreased from 20.5 to 11 points and she became pregnant with her first child.
During her second month of pregnancy, she developed syncope after arising from a supine position. She noticed that she had less responsiveness to levodopa and her ON state total UPDRS score was 48 points with UPDRS III subscore of 30 points. She had marked symptomatic orthostatic hypotension with supine blood pressure 116/70 mmHg and standing blood pressure 70/50 mmHg. Her motor function worsened substantially, and by pregnancy week 30, her total UPDRS score was 56.5 points with UPDRS III subscore of 38.5 points. The dose of levodopa was not increased throughout her pregnancy due to potential exacerbation of orthostatic hypotension.
At age of 35, she gave birth to a full-term 2.9 kg girl with Apgar scores of eight at one minute and nine at five minutes by caesarean section, due to breech presentation. General and neurological examination of the baby revealed no abnormalities and the routine neonatal blood tests were normal. She did not breastfeed her child. At age five years, her daughter had developed normally except for recurrent strabismus and a dermoid cyst in the anterior neck. Given that MSA is usually considered to be a rare and sporadic disease , her daughter was not followed by a neurologist routinely.
One week after delivery, her total UPDRS score decreased to 37 points with UPDRS III subscore of 22 points on the same levodopa dose. Her blood pressure was 110/60 mmHg when lying and 100/62 mmHg when standing. Despite symptom improvement in the first post-partum month, she had subsequent worsening (with a UPDRS score of 60.5) necessitating escalation of levodopa. Entacapone was added after her orthostatic hypotension was improved with midodrine. She had good initial response, but developed marked motor fluctuations with increase OFF time, peak-dose/diphasic dyskinesias and orthostatic hypotension, despite multiple medication adjustments.
At age of 37, she received bilateral subthalamic nuclei deep brain stimulation (DBS) surgery uneventfully after an in-patient motor evaluation showing response to levodopa (OFF and ON states with UPDRS III subscore 62 and 20.5, respectively). A pre-surgical brain MRI scan revealed no atrophy or abnormal signal in the putamen or hot cross bun sign in the pons. However, she had very limited and transient benefit from subthalamic nuclei deep brain stimulation (STN-DBS) therapy despite multiple attempts of programming. She developed urinary incontinence, progressive dysarthria, dysphagia, and inhalatory/exhalatory stridor within a few months. Her dysarthria and dysphagia were worse after taking her medications, but she was still able to take food by mouth. Within a year, she required a wheelchair, assistance with all activities of daily living, an indwelling urinary catheter for urinary retention, and an augmentative communication device for levodopa-induced dysarthria. Her body mass index (BMI) was 20.5 two months prior to her death, compared to 23 when she was diagnosed PD. All these symptoms raised the possibility of MSA-P. Nearly eight years into her disease course, she died in her sleep possibly due to the laryngeal stridor.
Post-mortem macroscopic examination revealed markedly depigmented substantia nigra and locus coeruleus , and mildly atrophic brainstem and cerebellum. The two stimulation electrodes terminated in the subthalamic nuclei. Microscopic examination showed severe loss of neurons, gliosis, and extracellular pigment in the substantia nigra and locus coeruleus; there was also gliosis and neuronal loss in the basis pontis, medulla oblongata, and cerebellum. There were numerous α-synuclein-immunoreactive glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs), Papp-Lantos bodies in the substantia nigra , red nucleus, crus cerebri, striatum, pallidum, medulla oblongata, and white matter of the frontal lobe and cerebellum. Fewer GCIs were seen in the white matter of the temporal and parietal lobes, hippocampus, thalamus and subthalamic nucleus. There were numerous GCIs, few glial intra-nuclear inclusions (GIIs), dystrophic neurites (DNs), and scattered neuronal intra-nuclear inclusions (NIIs) and few neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (NCIs) throughout the pontine nuclei . Although there was no macroscopic atrophy noticed in the putamen, minimal neuronal loss, mild gliosis and numerous α-synuclein-immunoreactive GCIs were observed. No tau-positive pre-tangles or α-synuclein immunoreactive Lewy bodies were seen. These pathological features combined with her clinical presentation led to a diagnosis of MSA-P.