A 46-year-old female presented to the morning consultation clinic of the Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Department at our institute, complaining of progressive swelling and pain in her right pre-auricular area which had persisted for more than 2 years. The patient reported a history of traumatic incidents with a hard object in the same area, several months prior to the onset of symptoms. The intensity of pain had started to progressively increase, although it was partially responding to NSAIDs. The patient had undergone a TMJ washing procedure and had received an occlusal splint, but this had not alleviated the complaint.
A physical examination revealed a 4 × 2.5 cm swelling with a faded border in the patient’s right TMJ region. The overlying skin was normal in color . The swelling was firm and very tender to palpation. The patient’s ability to open her mouth was adequate, albeit with a slight deviation of the mandible toward the right-side. There was no clicking or other sound from the TMJ during examination. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a well-defined and circumscribed hypodense lesion measuring 13 × 8.6 mm with multiple hyperdense foci, surrounded by endosteal sclerosis, involving the articular eminence of the TMJ, and extending posteriorly to the mandibular fossa . A radiologist’s report of a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed a surrounding bone marrow inflammatory process and anterior dislocation of the TMJ disc. The patient was operated on under general anesthesia, and surgical access to expose the TMJ was achieved via pre-auricular incision with temporal extension according to Al-Khayat and Bramely’s approach . The capsule was incised, followed by retraction of the disc inferiorly after cutting through fibrous adhesions. The lesion was exposed and thoroughly curetted. Peripheral ostectomy of the cavity was performed and the TMJ capsule was sutured before closing the flap.
Histological examination demonstrated anastomosing trabeculae of osteoid and woven bone, lined by a rim of benign plumped osteoblasts in a loose fibrovascular stroma, and numerous multi-nucleated giant cells embedded in vascularized, fibrous connective tissue stroma . One week after surgery, the patient had complete pain relief and was able to open her mouth normally. At her most recent follow-up (March 2019), 24 months after the surgical excision, the patient reported inconsistent symptoms of occasional mild pain at the surgical site elicited by lateral jaw excursion, but this did not require the administration of analgesics. No significant or relevant findings were found upon examination, except for a slight tenderness when exerting pressure over the TMJ region during jaw movement; no clicking sounds or deviation of the mandible were noted. Imaging radiography using cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) illustrated a relatively hypodense zone at the site of the previous surgery, in the center of endosteal sclerosis involving the surrounding bones of the skull base and the head of the condyle. There was also evidence of sclerotic trabeculae having formed at the site of the nidus, along with a caudal cortical thickening .