A 47-year-old man was admitted to the emergency department for palpitations and epigastric pain. He had a history of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, had previously undergone two pharmacological cardioversions, and had a history of mild arterial hypertension for which he was not taking any medication. At physical examination, he showed no signs congestive heart failure and irregular tachycardia of heart sounds without murmurs.
His electrocardiogram (ECG) on admission showed high-rate atrial fibrillation (150 b.p.m.) and new left bundle branch block. His echocardiogram showed left ventricular dysfunction with ejection fraction of 35% (see , ). An urgent coronary angiography was performed and found no significant coronary obstructions. Laboratory exams [high-sensitivity troponin I and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP)] were in the normal range. At this point, the patient underwent a pharmacological cardioversion with amiodarone (5 mg/kg in 1 h and 50 mg/h for 24 h) and sinus rhythm was restored. The ECG acquired in sinus rhythm did not show the left bundle branch block, which was therefore attributed to a conduction aberrancy concomitant to the use of class IC antiarrhythmic drug propafenone, which the patient was taking at home.
A second transthoracic echocardiogram was performed once sinus rhythm had been restored, and it showed improvement of left ventricular systolic function (ejection fraction 57%). Furthermore, it showed a hypokinetic mid-apical segment of the anterolateral wall, corresponding to the site of a giant left atrial appendage aneurysm . To define better the LAAA, a transoesophageal echocardiogram was performed . It confirmed the aneurysmatic dilatation of the left appendage which appeared to have an oval-shaped neck (22 × 17 mm). No thrombotic formations were seen with normal velocity flow measured via pulsed-wave Doppler (see , ).
To conclude, the patient underwent a cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) which confirmed the kinetic alterations localized at the anterior wall of the left ventricle, where the LAAA (68 × 70 × 54 mm) was found .
Differential diagnosis with other conditions like pericardial cyst or lipomas was achieved by the analysis of the morphology of the mass, its anatomical relationship with the left atrium (LA), and the absence of enhancing at CMR T1-weighted imaging. The findings were discussed with the patients. The risks and benefits of the possible therapeutic options were clarified, and he expressed the preference not to undergo invasive open-heart surgery. Therefore, the case was discussed with the heart team of our hospital, and, in agreement with the patient’s will, strict follow-up was programmed. Moreover, due to the high risk of appendage perforation, transcatheter ablation for atrial fibrillation was deemed unsuitable. Finally, the patient was monitored using an implantable loop recorder.
Considering the history of mild arterial hypertension, we evaluated his thromboembolic risk to be higher than his bleeding risk; therefore, the patient started a direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC) (edoxaban) to prevent the formation of thrombi in the appendage and flecainide (50 mg bid) and metoprolol tartrate (25 mg bid) for rhythm control.
At a 1-year follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic with no further arrhythmic episodes found during the loop recorder interrogation.