A 59-year-old otherwise healthy Caucasian man was diagnosed with a mucosal melanoma during hemorrhoid evaluation in August of 2009. Histopathological examination revealed a polypoid tumor occupying lamina propria and submucosa of the anal canal with intraepithelial lentiginous component in the center of the lesion. The tumor cells were epithelioid and showed clear cell change. Immunohistochemical studies showed the tumor cells to be positive for S100 and Melan-A. A diagnosis of a 15-mm thick mucosal melanoma with ulceration, 6 mitotic figures per mm2 and perineural invasion in the anal canal was made . Molecular analysis showed the melanoma harbored a GNAQ mutation with wild-type BRAF, KIT and NRAS genes. The GNAQ gene mutation of the patient was the substitution of glutamine to proline in codon 209 (Q209P) which has been reported in uveal melanoma at a frequency of 20.8% but not in cutaneous melanoma or other subtypes of the disease [,].
The patient underwent a wide local excision of the primary melanoma with subsequent adjuvant radiation therapy. He was without relapse until January of 2010, when he had locally recurrent disease for which he underwent another wide local excision. He again remained free of disease until July of 2010 when he was found to have metastatic lesions in the perinephric lymph nodes, the liver, and lung, for which he received 2 doses of ipilimumab (3 mg/kg intravenous Day 1) and temozolomide (200 mg/m2 by mouth Days 1–4) with further disease progression and new metastatic lesions in hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes and in the right adrenal gland. Subsequently, he received two cycles of the combination of carboplatin, paclitaxel and bevacizumab before he had further disease progression in January of 2011. He started imatinib at 400 mg twice a day in February of 2011. Due to further disease progression with imatinib, ipilimumab (3 mg/kg) was re-introduced in April of 2011 and he completed 4 cycles of ipilimumab. However, his disease progressed further with multiple metastatic lesions and he expired in August of 2011.