A previously healthy 22-year-old female admitted to emergency department with abdominal pain which began two hours ago. There was no significant past history of medical illness. Her pulse was 70 beats/min, blood pressure 120/80 mm/Hg and body temperature was 36.5°C. On abdominal examination bowel sounds were normal, and she had left upper quadrant tenderness but neither defense nor rebound. Digital rectal examination was unremarkable. Hematological and laboratory values were within normal levels (hemoglobin 12.3 g/dL, hematocrit 38%, leukocyte count 7.91 × 103/uL, platelet count 274 × 103/uL). Urine analysis was unremarkable and βhCG was negative. An abdominal ultrasound was performed which revealed free fluid in Douglas pouch. Gynecological evaluation was requested and made a decision of observation in suspicion of tuboovarian cyst rupture. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan was planned on account of continuous pain and vomiting. Patient underwent computed tomography without delay. Since she was deteriorated, radiocontrast agent couldn't be given and survey was interrupted. After performing CT vital signs were evaluated as; blood pressure 60/30 mm/Hg, and heart rate 138/min. The new complete blood count resulted as hemoglobin 5,9 g/dL, and hematocrit 18, 9%, leukocyte count 8.360 × 103/uL, platelet count 207 × 103/uL. Rapid fluid resuscitation was started with isotonic saline solution and Gelatin polysuccinate 4%(Gelofusine). On the basis of abdominal CT; these images on the left of the spleen a heterogenous area with hypodense regions was observed. It was almost 100 mm in transverse diameter and probably in the form of free fluid collection. Diffuse free fluid was present in all quadrants of the abdomen . Then she was taken into emergency surgery. In the operation; massive blood collection within peritoneal cavity and retroperitoneal space at the left upper quadrant was detected. The source of bleeding was evident as rupture of splenic artery aneurysm which is located near hilus. Splenectomy is performed following the ligation of splenic artery proximal to lesion. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful and on the tenth day she was discharged from the hospital with complete recovery.