A 34-year-old white male patient was admitted in the Respiratory ward for severe dyspnea even at rest (RR = 30 breaths/min), persistent dry cough and night sweats. His medical history revealed progressive aggravating respiratory symptoms in the last two months and important weight loss of about 15 Kg in the last 12 months. The patient was a nonsmoker with professional exposure to toxic volatiles while working in a furniture factory. Four years before he underwent treatment for cavitary pulmonary tuberculosis that he correctly completed. Physical examination revealed a white male subject with a poor general status, peripheral cyanosis, pallor, dehydration and severe protein-caloric malnutrition (Body Weight = 42 Kg and BMI = 15.1). Lung auscultation revealed attenuated breath sounds on the left side and bilateral fine end-inspiratory crackles. Oxygen saturation on air was of 72%, partially corrected at 83-85% while receiving 5 L of oxygen on facial mask. Blood gas analysis revealed hypoxemia and hypercarbia with respiratory acidosis (PaO2 =54.8mmHg, PaCO2 =69.7mmHg and pH=7.26).
A chest CT scan performed 72 hours days earlier during a previous admittance in another hospital described bilateral patchy airspace disease (ground-glass opacities) with ill-defined nodular or confluent pattern, interlobular septal thickening, and often perihilar predominance .
The chest X-ray at admission showed bilateral diffuse alveolar opacities with a partial left pneumothorax. Laboratory investigations revealed a high hemoglobin count (18.56g/dl), 56.4% hematocrit and hyperleukocytosis of 24.1 x 109• L-1 (mainly neutrophils).
Provisory diagnosis at this point was diffuse interstitial pneumopathy of unknown etiology, left pneumothorax, severe respiratory failure and Cachexya.
The patient underwent a bronchoscopy and a bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) with 160 ml saline, with recovery of 110 ml of milky fluid, which contained large amounts of acellular eosinophilic lipoproteinaceous material and alveolar macrophages containing PAS positive inclusions .
At this stage, the diagnosis was defined more accurately: acquired pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP), left pneumothorax with severe respiratory failure, cachexia and secondary polycythemia. The consequent clinical course of PAP was marked by a progressive deterioration of the patient’s status and the unexpected association of left lung pneumothorax that worsened the pulmonary failure and postponed the appropriate therapeutic approach in acquired PAP - the whole lung lavage (WLL).
A sequential therapeutical approach was initiated, the first step being the surgical tube drainage of the pneumothorax. Significant pulmonary air leaks were observed following the procedure, along with an important and persistent bronchopleural fistula developing two months later. No improvements in the clinical state or lung expansion on chest X-ray images were recorded.
The surgical approach for the cure of pneumothorax was delayed due to the (supposed) poor pulmonary tissue integrity, this being the main reason for dehiscence of the sutures and high mortality rate in patients with severe hypoxemia and hypercapnia after exposure to general anaesthesia. After weighing the anaesthetic and surgical risks against the risk of infection and the lack of an alternative therapy, the decision was taken to suture the bronchopleural fistula located in the apical segment of the superior left lobe under total intravenous general anesthesia (propofol + remifentanyl + atracurium), with a short period of one lung ventilation. The patient recovered well from the anaesthesia, with slightly better values of arterial blood gases one hour later. The postoperative evolution was good, no air leaks were observed and full expansion of the left lung was recorded after thoracic seal aspiration . The thoracic drain was removed 7 days later.
Three weeks later a Whole Lung Lavage (WLL) of the left lung was performed using 15 liters of 0.9% sodium chloride solution until the return of a relatively clear fluid with no proteinaceous sedimentation. The procedure was well tolerated by the patient and recovery from the general anaesthesia took place in the OR. The values of the arterial blood gases recorded the next day showed PaO2 = 78.9 mmHg, PaCO2 = 43.6 mmHg and pH = 7.36 and SaO2 = 94.5% without supplementary oxygen. The latter CT scan also revealed an improvement in comparison with the former CT scan, showing diminished alveolar infiltrates in the left lung.
After two weeks, the right lung was washed with 25 liters of 0.9% sodium chloride solution. Measurements of arterial blood gases levels performed 24 hours later showed values of PaO2 = 87 mmHg, PaCO2 = 41.3 mmHg, pH = 7.422 and SaO2 = 96.8%. The chest X-ray performed 72 hours later revealed almost nonexistent pulmonary infiltrates .
After eight months follow-up, the CT scan control showed persistent ground-glass opacities in some of the pulmonary segments while the patient had a good exercise tolerance.