A 76-year-old man presented with right-sided paralysis. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging revealed a watershed infarction in the left hemisphere, and cerebral angiography revealed severe stenosis of the left intracranial ICA (distal cavernous-infraclinoid portion), without stenosis of the cervical ICA [ and 2a]. Collateral flow through anterior communicating artery was absent, but through posterior communicating artery was confirmed insufficiently. Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) demonstrated that his left cerebral hemisphere reserve was reduced. He immediately started conservative treatment with antiplatelet drugs and rehabilitation, and extracranial-intracranial bypass was planned within 3 months after the ictus. However, he presented with severe visual acuity disturbance in the left eye 1 month after onset, and ophthalmic evaluation revealed a central retinal artery obstruction in the left eye, and the ocular circulation time evaluated by arm retinal circulation time (A-R time) was prolonged.
Decreased blood flow to the ocular artery due to stenosis progression of the left ICA was suspected. Urgent cerebral angiography performed 2 days after the occurrence of visual impairment demonstrated that the left ICA was almost completely occluded, and the ocular artery was confirmed through anastomosis from the external carotid artery . Percutaneous angioplasty (PTA) was performed to improve visual acuity. The ICA flow improved immediately after PTA but decreased thereafter. After several attempts at PTA, an intracranial stent (Wingspan, Stryker Neurovascular, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA) was placed to maintain the improved flow of the ICA . After stent placement, the antegrade ocular artery flow recovered, and his vision improved immediately.
The A-R time was reduced from 54 s to 11 s, and retinal angiography also showed improvement in the visualization of blood vessels [ and ]. In addition, SPECT showed improvement in the left cerebral blood flow reserve [-], and he was discharged 2 weeks later without deficits. During the 1-year follow-up, his visual acuity and ICA flow remained stable.