A 67-year-old man with past history of Ivor Lewis esophagectomy 6 years previously for a Barrett's esophagus presented with dysphagia, recurrent cough, regurgitation and weight-loss. Endoscopy suggested a benign anastomotic stricture, for which he underwent dilatation. However his symptoms worsened and he continued to lose weight in spite of supervised dietary therapy. Aspiration was suspected and a barium swallow was performed. This demonstrated pharyngeal in-coordination, as the probable cause of aspiration. A repeat endoscopy was non-contributory. A feeding jejunostomy was inserted to prevent continued weight loss. In spite of this, he continued to have repeated chest infections resulting in extensive bronchiectatic changes in the right lower lobe.
A tracheostomy was planned at this stage to prevent aspiration. Whilst he was being intubated for the procedure, air was noted to escape from the right bronchus. A bronchoscopy revealed the presence of the GBF, with the bronchial opening in the right main stem bronchus located about 1 cm below the tracheal bifurcation and the gastric opening midway down the lesser curvature of the gastric conduit. The temporal sequence of events suggests that fistulation had occurred at the time of anastomotic dilatation, and thus the worsening of symptoms following the procedure. The fistula was however, difficult to diagnose in spite of extensive investigations leading to unexpected finding in the anaesthetic room.
Given his debilitated condition and poor respiratory function stenting was considered to occlude the fistula. However as the fistula was positioned in the middle of the gastric conduit it was not deemed amenable to stenting due to poor fixation of the stent and risk of migration. And similarly satisfactory stenting of right main stem bronchus was difficult to achieve due to short length of this bronchus and consequent tendency to migrate. Though associated with greater risk of morbidity and mortality, a surgical approach was deemed the best approach for this problem.
At operation a right-sided re-thoracotomy was performed and careful dissection carried out to display the anatomy of the GBF . The fistula was excised with a cuff of healthy gastric conduit and bronchial tissue. The gastric and bronchial openings were closed directly with absorbable stitches with interposition of bovine pericardium in between the two suture lines. The patient made an uneventful recovery from operation. A contrast study one-week later confirmed absence of leakage from the gastric conduit and feeding was started. Histopathological examination confirmed the presence of benign GBF in the resected specimen.
The patient was discharged home after two weeks and remains well six months later.