A 58-year-old man was admitted to our emergency department with an acute onset of headache. Computed tomography (CT) showed a diffused SAH . The patient was diagnosed with World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies Grade 2 SAH. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed a right-sided ruptured middle cerebral artery (MCA) aneurysm, 2.3 × 1.9 mm in size and a left-sided unruptured MCA aneurysm. He was offered surgery and coiling, but we considered simultaneous bilateral coiling for treatment. Under general anesthesia, a 5 Fr ASAHI FUBUKI Dilator Kit (Asahi Intecc, Nagoya, Japan) was inserted into the right femoral artery. The first activated clotting time (ACT) was 97 s. Following arterial access, 3000 U of heparin was injected, and an ACT of 144 s was achieved. The guiding catheter was inserted in the right internal carotid artery, and a three-dimensional DSA was performed to use the working projection (RAO 111, CAU 32) for separating the aneurysmal neck from the parent artery. After successful coil embolization, the aneurysm transformed into a neck remnant , with minimal possibility of rerupture.
After removing the microcatheter, a right internal carotid angiography (ICAG) revealed an occlusion at the proximal right MCA M1 segment . The ACT was 134 s, and an additional 3000 U of heparin was injected. We replaced the 5 Fr ASAHI FUBUKI Dilator Kit with the 9 Fr introducer sheath and 9 Fr balloon catheter (Tokai Medical Products, Japan). The right ICAG showed that the clot had migrated from the M1 to the M2 segment . The working projection was taken, and a 5MAX distal aspiration catheter (Penumbra, Inc., Alameda, California, USA) was placed in the right MCA. A microcatheter (Marksman, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) with a 0.014 inch outer diameter micro-guidewire (CHIKAI, Asahi Intecc, Nagoya, Japan) safely penetrated the distal M2. The stent retriever (Solitaire 4 × 20 mm, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was opened in the occluded vessel without covering the aneurysmal neck . The stent was withdrawn into the intermediate catheter under continuous mechanical aspiration, and the clot was removed using the stent retriever . The ICAG showed complete recanalization (Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction Scale 3), and the aneurysm was unaffected . The time between the onset of occlusion to the recanalization was 59 min. A follow-up CT scan showed no aneurysm rerupture . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed minimal intracerebral infarction and magnetic resonance angiography showed the remaining recanalization . Following rehabilitation, the patient had no neurological deficits (modified Rankin Scale 0) after 3 months.