This case describes the management of a 38-year-old Caucasian male prisoner, with a previous psychiatric history of borderline personality disorder and deliberate self-harm, who presented to the emergency department (ED) with a history of inserting multiple FBs into his urethra on 12 different occasions in the space of a 6-week period. Of these 12 attendances to the ED, 3 resulted in admission and 2 required transfer to the emergency operating theater for their removal under general anesthesia. Representative plain radiographs demonstrating the FBs are shown in .
On one occasion, the patient developed acute urinary retention necessitating emergency insertion of a suprapubic catheter (SPC). Subsequently, the patient deliberately dismantled the SPC and reinserted it into the urethra. Thereafter, attendances to the ED became more frequent. After consultation with the prison and psychiatry services, it was decided that, whenever possible, hospital admission and urethral catheterization should be avoided. Further management plan at that stage was for a future elective admission for removal of the retained SPC tip and associated FBs from the bladder under general anesthesia.
In the subsequent week, the patient presented to the ED three times after insertion of further FBs. On each attendance, the FBs were easily palpable in the urethra and their removal was effective using forceps. However, on each occasion despite there being no other palpable FBs in the urethra, the patient was adamant that he was unable to void, until a catheter was inserted.
On his next attendance, the third in 5 days, it was decided to use Isiris™, a single-use flexible cystoscopy device with built-in stent grasper , to remove the FBs and check the integrity of the urethra. The procedure was performed quickly within the ED, thus avoiding financial penalties for delay in discharge from the ED to a place of residence or to a hospital bed. The procedure only required intraurethral lubricant gel and two members of staff and it was well tolerated by the patient, only requiring basic oral analgesia. All remaining FBs that had been inserted over the previous 6 weeks were removed in this minimally invasive manner (See and ). The procedure allowed a confident endoscopic examination to reassure the patient that no significant urethral trauma had been sustained, that there were no residual FBs, and that ultimately no reason for him not to be able to void. The use of the Isiris system permitted a safe and cost-efficient intervention with discharge directly from the ED.