A 45-year-old male patient with known AFAP arrived scheduled for a total colectomy and ileo-rectal anastomosis due to the malignancy of one of the previously biopsied polyps of the upper rectum. During operation, multiple nodular tumors were found at the beginning of the jejunum, about 10 cm below the ligament of Treiz and within a length of 45 cm. These tumors were proven to be of mesenchymal origin in intraoperative frozen sections, with features compatible with GISTs, and an enterectomy and enteroanastomosis were performed. It is worth mentioning that a gastroduodenoscopy had previously been performed, and no polyps were revealed.
Results: Gross examination of the whole colectomy specimen revealed multiple polyps in the large intestine, which ranged in size from 0.3 to 2 cm, and a rectal adenocarcinoma that measured 3.5 cm at its greatest diameter. The latter, on histological grounds, corresponded to invasive low-grade colorectal adenocarcinoma, NOS, stage pT2N2a according to AJCC, 8th ed. In addition, one of the polyps showed invasion limited to the polyp head—level 1, based on the Haggitt classification.
Gross examination of the small intestine specimen showed 15 nodules located on the muscularis externa and serosa, measuring from 0.5 to 2.0 cm at their greatest diameter. Some of them were narrowed (A). Hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections from the nodules showed spindle cells with pale eosinophilic cytoplasm and elongated nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli (B). Mitoses were scarce, at up to 1 per 50 high power fields (HPF). Necroses and hemorrhages were absent. Upon immunohistochemical study, the neoplastic spindle cells were positive for CD34, CD117 (C), and DOG-1 (D) antibodies. A few cells were also positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA), whereas immunostains for S-100 and desmin were negative. Ki67 exhibited positivity in almost 2% of neoplastic cells. The findings set the diagnosis of multiple gastrointestinal stromal tumors of prognostic group I.
The patient’s postoperative course was uncomplicated.