A 76-year-old female was admitted with 2 weeks history of low-grade fever and generalized body aches. Further inquiry revealed 3-day history of gradual diffuse abdominal pain. The pain was markedly worse in the right lower quadrant. The patient had no other past surgical or medical problems. She denied any alcohol, tobacco or drug abuse. In the emergency department the vital signs revealed temperature of 38.5 °C, blood pressure of 149/87 mmHg, pulse of 117 bpm, and respiratory rate of 22 breaths/min. Systemic physical exam revealed pale conjunctivae and systolic ejection murmur of 2/6 over the apex of the heart. Examination of the abdomen revealed mild distention with tenderness all over the abdomen that was worse in the right and lower abdomen. The rest of the examination was within normal limits.
Laboratory results revealed white blood cell count of 18,500 per mm3, hemoglobin of 9.5 gm/dL, platelet count of 175 per mm3, calcium level of 7.3 mg/dL, albumin level of 2.6 gm/dL, creatinine level of 0.93 mg/dl, and C-reactive protein level of 13.3 mg/dl. All other laboratory values were within normal limits.
CT scan abdomen revealed intraperitoneal fluids. CT angiogram was unavailable, therefore, we proceeded with an abdominal aortic angiogram, which revealed a right omental artery aneurysm . Laparotomy revealed a large bleeding omental artery in the right side of the abdomen. This was resected. Other unruptured aneurysms were seen but were not resected. Histopathology revealed full layer thickness arteritis with widespread neutrophils infiltration and necrotizing vasculitis confirming a diagnosis of PAN . There was no evidence of fungal or bacterial elements in the vessel wall. Subsequent angiography revealed multiple aneurysms in the omental arterial system of the abdomen. The patient tolerated the procedure without complication and the abdomen was closed without problems.
Based on her histopathologic diagnosis of PAN the patient was started on intravenous steroids and cyclophosphamide postoperatively for systemic inflammation. During her hospitalization she had persistent low-grade fever; all her cultures were negative. After 10 days, the patient was discharged home in stable condition. Follow-up revealed a stable condition and no recurrence of her symptoms. Patient was lost for follow-up after 1 month.