A 46-year-old man was stabbed in the left chest with a knife and was transferred by ambulance to the emergency department of our hospital after 49 min. On arrival, his vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 78/56 mmHg; heart rate, 130 beats/min; respiratory rate, 36 breaths/min; and Glasgow Coma Scale score, 14 (E4V4M6). A 2.5-cm skin wound was identified at the left midclavicular line above the nipple . Focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) revealed pleural effusion in the left thorax. A chest drain was inserted and more than 700 mL of blood was drained. After chest drainage, FAST demonstrated pericardial effusion without echocardiographic signs of cardiac tamponade. Because of the patient’s unstable hemodynamic status, emergency Clamshell thoracotomy was started 23 min after arrival. A massive hemothorax in the left thorax, left lung posterior lobe injury, pericardial injury, and hemopericardium with blood clots were observed. A 10-mm defect was found in the right ventricle near the left anterior descending coronary artery . Fifteen minutes after thoracotomy, the patient went into cardiac arrest and recovered minutes after blood transfusion and intravenous adrenaline administration. After the return of spontaneous circulation, his heart rate was 160 beats/min and blood pressure was 160/80 mmHg. It was difficult to suture the defect directly because of a blood spurt from the injury site. Rapid intravenous administration of ATP (20 mg) was performed using a central venous catheter to induce chemical cardiac arrest. However, the chemical cardiac arrest was not induced after a single dose and ATP was infused repeatedly. After infusing four times (80 mg ATP), the patient’s heart rate fell to under 20 beats/min and led to pulseless electrical activity in 15 s. We repaired the cardiac wall by using a horizontal mattress suture . Approximately 15–20 s after ATP administration, cardiac function resumed spontaneously. After inserting the chest and pericardial drains, we ended the procedure by closing the wound.
Although repeated echocardiographic check-ups showed a septal injury, no symptoms of heart failure were observed. On the 13th postoperative day, the patient was discharged without complications.