A 10-year-old girl was admitted to the Department of Ophthalmology at West China Hospital, Sichuan University, on December 10, 2012, due to vision loss accompanied by redness, swelling, and pain in the right eye.
The patient started to suffer gradual vision loss with redness, swelling, and pain in the right eye 2 mo prior to hospital admission and was diagnosed with uveitis and secondary glaucoma in a local hospital. The prescribed treatment was dexamethasone ophthalmic, Azopt ophthalmic and atropine eye ointment. The symptoms were not relieved after treatment. The patient denied fever, headache, coughing, ulcer, skin diseases or arthropathy during the doctor visit.
There was no remarkable illness history.
There was no remarkable personal or family history.
At the time of hospitalization, the visual acuity of the patient’s right eye was hand movement; the visual acuity of the left eye was 20/20. Intraocular pressure of the right eye was 46.9 mmHg, and the left eye was 19.8 mmHg (1 mmHg = 0.133 kPa). The result of the ophthalmological examination was as follows: mutton-fat KP grading: ++; anterior chamber cell grading: +++. Multiple white, round nodules were found on the right eye near the pupillary margin on the surface of the iris . The dilated pupil size of the right eye was 5 mm with a slower response to light. The lens was clear, and the vitreous body was opaque. The optic cup/optic disc (C/D) ratio was approximately 0.55. Retinal edema with a bluish color was found in the right eye. The superior temporal retina was pale, with a portion of the vessels being occluded and line-like . No abnormalities were found in the anterior segment or the fundus of the left eye.
The white blood cell count was 13.02 × 109/L, and the percentage of segmented neutrophils was 65.8%.
The results of the B-mode ultrasound of the eyes suggested vitreous opacity and retinal edema in the right eye. No obvious space-occupying lesion was found intraocularly in the right eye . Ultrasound biomicroscopy examination found multiple ciliary body cysts . The results of computerized tomography (CT) scanning in the axial view and coronal view suggested normal findings in terms of eyeball shape. No space-occupying, intraocular or intraorbital lesions were found .
The pathological examination result was as follows: Cancer cells were seen by the liquid-based smear of the aqueous humor of the right eye. Immunocytochemical staining results found CD56 (+), Syna (+), CgA (+, but sporadic), PCK (-), Des (-), LCA (-), and 70% in terms of Ki-67 positivity.