A 65-year-old man presented with an erythematous rash on his left forehead and neuropathic pain for 10 days. He was diagnosed with HZO and was treated with 800 mg of acyclovir daily. Four days later, he had poor vision in his left eye with eye pain. Moreover, he had progressive binocular vertical diplopia. At the outpatient department, his vision was 20/30 in each eye. He had a red rash along his forehead . His intraocular pressures by applanation were 17 and 31 mm Hg, respectively. A slit-lamp examination revealed a mild injected conjunctiva with blepharitis on his left eye. Fine keratic precipitates with 1+ cells were observed. Ocular ductions were full. Versions revealed slight left inferior oblique overaction. The Parks-Bielschowsky three-step test was performed, revealing 8 prism diopters (PD) of left hypertropia in the primary position. This increased to 10 PD in the right gaze and 6 PD in the left head tilt, suggesting left superior oblique muscle paresis (shown in ). An excyclotorsion of 4° was detected.
Laboratory investigations included normal complete blood count (WBC 9,600/µL, PMN 71.1%, lymphocyte 22.9%, platelet 234,000/µL) and unremarkable C-reactive protein 0.8 mg/L. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 60 mm/h above the standard limit. A serological test for HIV was negative and nonreactive for VDRL and TPHA. A chest X-ray showed no abnormalities. A lumbar puncture showed a normal opening pressure of 16 cm H2O, with pleocytosis (RBC 100 cells/mm2, WBC 20 cells/mm2 with 100% mononuclear), and was negative for cytology. The cerebrospinal fluid polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for seven types of herpes revealed positive results for human herpesvirus 3 (HHV-3).
Magnetic resonance imaging of the orbit with angiography demonstrated hypersignal T2 with faint enhancement of the left cavernous sinus (axial view shown in and coronal view shown in ). The trochlear nerve was not well defined due to neuroimaging quality.
In this case, the diagnosis was herpetic corneal endotheliitis with TNP. After a neurology consultation, the patient received 600 mg of intravenous acyclovir every 8 h for 14 days, then prolonged oral acyclovir of 800 mg twice daily for 1 year. The oral prednisolone was started for anti-inflammation at a dose of 5 mg/tab for four tabs three times a day for 5 days and slowly tapered for 1 month. For herpetic corneal endotheliitis, topical 1% Prednisolone acetate twice daily and topical 0.5% timolol were selected to control the inflammation and ocular pressure, respectively. Topical eye drops were slowly tapered upon uveitis and glaucoma specialist recommendations. Vertical diplopia was eliminated by patching.
One month later, the uveitis improved. The vertical diplopia was lessening. The alternate-prism cover test revealed left hypertropia, measuring six PD at a distance and two PD nearby. Inflammation and intraocular pressure were well controlled. The patient adapted his head posture to lessen the vertical diplopia (shown in ).