A 41-year-old Sri Lankan man presented to our unit with progressive abdominal distension and discomfort for 3 months. He also noticed loss of appetite and loss of weight for the same period of time. There was no history of sudden epigastric or right hypochondrial pain, hematemesis, melena, per rectal bleeding, or altered bowel habits. Nor did he have any confusion or altered sleep pattern suggestive of hepatic encephalopathy. He was previously well with no prior diagnosis of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, or dyslipidemia. He was abstinent from alcohol and he was not a tobacco smoker; he denied any intravenous drug abuse, blood transfusions, sexual promiscuity, or past history of hepatitis. There was no family history of liver diseases or HCC.
On examination, he was not icteric or pale and there was no bilateral leg edema or peripheral stigmata of chronic liver cell disease. His cardiovascular system examination was normal with a normal blood pressure. His abdomen was distended with a palpable irregular mass in the left lobe of his liver without a bruit. There was no splenomegaly. A moderate amount of free fluid was present. A neurological examination revealed no signs of hepatic encephalopathy.
Initial basic investigations showed anemia and leukocytosis with normal liver and renal biochemistry . His blood picture showed normochromic normocytic anemia with mild to moderate rouleaux formation and mild neutrophilic leukocytosis. His inflammatory markers were high with an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 125 in the first hour and a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 155 mg/L (<6). His urine full report was normal. His fasting blood sugar (5.4 mmol/L) and lipid profile were normal. His lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was 669 U/L (230 to 460) and amylase was 68 U/L (22 to 80).
Hepatitis B serology (hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B surface antibody, and hepatitis B core antibody) and hepatitis C serology (HCV antibody and hepatitis C ribonucleic acid (RNA)) were negative as were human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serology and Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test. Serum iron studies were within normal range except for marginally elevated serum ferritin . His serum alpha-fetoprotein was 12 μg/L. The result of an antinuclear antibodies (ANA) test was negative and the ceruloplasmin level in the serum was normal.
An ultrasound (USS) scan of his abdomen showed a heterogeneous ill-defined area of 4.5 × 2.4 cm in the left lobe of his liver with irregular margins. The rest of his liver was normal with normal outline and uniform echogenicity without features of cirrhosis. His gall bladder and bile ducts were normal. His spleen was mildly enlarged (12.6 cm) and moderate ascites was present. A portal vein Doppler showed normal flow pattern with no evidence of portal vein thrombosis (portal vein diameter 0.98 cm and flow velocity 25 cm/second). There was no para-aortic lymphadenopathy. His pancreas, kidneys, and prostate were normal. A posteroanterior chest X-ray (CXR-PA) showed elevation of his right hemidiaphragm .
Contrast-enhanced triple-phase computed tomography (CT) showed a 7.5 × 6.5 cm lesion in the left lobe of his liver which enhanced during the arterial phase and showed a washout effect in the venous phase . The right lobe of his liver was normal. Intrahepatic and extrahepatic ducts were normal. There were no para-aortic masses. Gross ascites was evident .
A diagnostic peritoneal tap revealed the ascitic fluid to be slightly turbid and mildly blood stained. His ascitic fluid albumin was 40 g/L (serum-to-ascites albumin gradient = -03 g/L) and it contained 25 neutrophils/mm3, 160 lymphocytes/mm3, and 4000 red blood cells/mm3. His glucose concentration was 4.0 mmol/L: random blood sugar (RBS) 7.0 mmol/l. His adenosine deaminase level was 29 U/L: tuberculosis (TB) 92 +/– 45, non-TB 12 +/– 11. An analysis of 200 mL of ascitic fluid for cytology showed reactive mesothelial cells, histiocytes, and lymphocytes. There was no evidence of atypical cells. A Gram stain and bacterial cultures of ascitic fluid were negative. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and culture for TB were also negative.
Laparoscopic assessment revealed gross ascites, peritoneal deposits , and omental deposits with bowel adhesions. Ascitic fluid was drained and cytological analysis of 500 mL was negative for malignant cells. A liver lesion was seen at the left lobe of his liver and biopsies were taken from the liver lesion as well as omental and peritoneal deposits. TB culture, TB PCR, and GeneXpert for Mycobacterium tuberculosis in material retrieved from the liver lesion, omental deposit, and peritoneal deposit were negative. The biopsy from his liver showed nests and trabeculae of cells with vesicular nuclei and prominent nucleoli with sinusoidal pattern focally. Cytoplasmic bile staining and intranuclear inclusions were not seen. A biopsy from his peritoneum and omentum showed nests of similar cells infiltrating the desmoplastic stroma. These findings supported a diagnosis of HCC which was confirmed by immunohistochemistry.
He refused any surgical or oncological interventions and wished to be managed conservatively. He died 3 months later.