We report the case of a 65-year-old female who presented with complaints of painless proptosis of the right eye since 1 year followed by gradual progressive visual loss and restricted right eye movements since 3 months . There was no history of diplopia. The patient underwent a complete clinical, ocular, and radiological evaluation. Visual acuity of the right eye was found to be perception of light positive. Hertel’s exophthalmometer revealed a 3 mm proptosis of the right eye . The pupillary reaction was ill sustained. Fundoscopy revealed right eye optic atrophy.
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the orbits (plain plus contrast) revealed an intra-orbital, intra-conal, and heterogeneous contrast enhancing mass in the right eye . The lesion was causing displacement of the globe anteriorly and slightly inferiorly, resulting in proptosis . The right optic nerve was displaced inferiorly. The left eye and orbit did not reveal any abnormality. Intracranial structures were normal and there was no intracranial extension of the lesion.
Patient underwent total excision of the mass through supraorbital orbitotomy approach, using supra-brow incision. This approach allows an excellent exposure and optimal surgical operability in the orbit with minimal manipulation of the orbital structures, is not limited by tumor size, and has an excellent cosmetic result. Lesion was approached by a simple skin incision of 4 cm along the orbital rim. After detachment of the periosteum, the supraorbital nerve was dissected free and the periorbita was separated from the inner orbital roof. A single key burr hole was placed in the temporal fossa, at the frontosphenoidal suture just behind the zygomatic process of the frontal bone. An osteotomy of the middle part of the supraorbital rim was performed using a reciprocating saw and a small frontobasal trephination was carried out respecting the lateral border of the frontal sinus. The basal dura of the frontal lobe was pushed away and the orbital roof was removed. The tumor was identified after opening the periorbita .
Intraoperatively, the lesion was firm in consistency, encapsulated, well-defined with distinct borders and was excised completely. The right optic nerve, though compressed and displaced inferiorly, was free from the lesion . The mass was completely removed using standard microsurgical techniques and sent for histopathological evaluation. Mini plates were used on both sides of the orbital rim for orbital reconstruction.
Microscopic examination of hematoxylin and eosin slides showed a tumor which was comprised of meningothelial cells arranged in microcystic pattern with cob-web like background admixed with variable sized dilated vascular channels and focal lympho-plasmacytic cell aggregates. The meningothelial cells showed slender elongated nuclei with degenerative changes. The final histopathological diagnosis was “Meningioma-mixed microcystic angiomatous pattern, WHO Grade I” .
In the immediate postoperative period, patient’s proptosis and vision improved (finger counting at 2 feet) . At 3 months follow-up, patient’s vision in the right eye was 6/12 and there was no clinical or radiological evidence of recurrence .