A 59-year-old male with Type 2 diabetes mellitus, chronic liver disease, and chronic kidney disease presented to the outpatient department with pain and swelling over anterior aspect of the left leg since 3 weeks. He had on and off episodes of fever and was agitated on presentation. He had no recent intervention or trauma to his left leg.
On arrival, he was afebrile with vital signs within normal limits. The left leg was tender and swollen anterolaterally. The skin over the swelling was shiny and erythematous with no sinus. Distal pulse and sensations were intact. Laboratory investigations revealed elevated WBC count 15,000/mm3, ESR-103 mm/1st h, CRP-159 mg/L, HbA1C-12.6 %. Renal and liver function tests were abnormal (Creatinine-2.1 mg%, Bilirubin total-2.5 mg %). Urine culture showed no bacteriuria.
Radiological evaluation with X-rays revealed mixed lytic and sclerotic areas in the proximal metadiaphyseal region of left tibia, with multiple ovoid lucencies representing gas shadows in the tibiofibular interosseous space . Ultrasound of the left lower limb showed large collection in the posterior compartment of the left leg in intramuscular and intermuscular planes, with no evidence of deep vein thrombosis. Further investigation with MRI was done, considering the possibility of infection. MRI revealed marrow edema and intramedullary collection in the proximal tibial diaphysis showing air pockets within. There were cortical irregularity, focal cortical break of proximal tibia, and adjacent large intramuscular collection (with air pockets within) predominantly involving the muscles in the deep posterior compartment of leg . The findings were consistent with EO of proximal tibia with infective myonecrosis.
He was taken immediately to the operation theater for surgical decompression. Approx. 70 ml of foul smelling chocolate colored pus with air bubbles drained . The pus and the infected tissue were sent for culture sensitivity and histopathological evaluation. A cortical window was made over proximal tibia and medullary cavity was curetted. The medullary cavity and the adjuscent area around the bone were packed with Vancomycin + Gentamicin loaded absorbable calcium sulfate beads (STIMULAN) . The culture of specimens revealed heavy growth of K. pneumoniae. The histopathology of the specimen was consistent with features of osteomyelitis . Culture sensitive Piperacillin and Tazobactam was started intravenously. Over a period of 2 weeks, wound healed well. The general condition of the patient improved. His CRP came down to 1.2 mg/l, ESR-30/mm h, Creatinine to 1.2 mg%. The patient got discharged at 2 weeks after stopping the intravenous antibiotics.
He had regular follow-up in outpatient clinic. X-rays done 5 weeks postoperatively showed complete dissolution of calcium sulfate beads and near total resolution of air shadows. MRI done at 2-month postoperatively showed resolution of intramedullary air pockets and small residual collection (significantly reduced compared to preoperative MRI) in intermuscular plane surrounding the soleus muscle. On his latest follow-up at 4 months, the patient is totally asymptomatic and is walking full weight bearing without support .