A 36-year-old male patient with a 6-year history of chronic kidney disease of unknown etiology was brought to the emergency department due to neurological impairment that started during the previous hour characterized by altered mental status while he was walking down the street. On examination he was stuporous, with poor response to external stimuli. The patient was admitted to the hospital and vital signs and capillary glucose were determined. Glucose levels were 20 mg/dl and increased to 42 mg/dl after a 50 ml infusion of 50% dextrose. During his stay his mental status recovered after glucose levels were returned to normal parameters, requiring high doses of intravenous glucose. After his stabilization he was transferred to the internal medicine department. We confirmed that the patient was not taking medications that would cause hypoglycemia. On physical examination he was somnolent and pale, with slight oedema in both legs. A new episode of symptomatic hypoglycemia was observed while he was receiving an infusion of 20% dextrose. The infusion rate at that moment was 10.416 ml/hr. The infusion was not being weaned off or was an acute disruption. It caught our attention that although the patient was on a 20% dextrose infusion, he continued with hypoglycemia. Blood samples were taken and the results were abnormal .
Although hypoglycemia could be explained by chronic kidney disease, the diagnosis of insulinoma was considered, so a computed axial tomography with double contrast was taken but unfortunately there were no abnormal findings. During the patient's hospital stay he received several treatments that failed to achieve proper glucose control. We used ascending doses of diazoxide up to 600 mg/day with a poor response. In order to reduce episodes of hypoglycemia, we started with low doses of octreotide and found a good response that created tolerance quickly, so we decided to increase the dose by 0.1 mcg/kg/h always observing the same phenomenon. We decided to suspend this treatment when we reached 0.4. mcg/kg/h. Finally, we decided to maintain a continuous infusion of 50% dextrose with which we achieved serum glucose levels between 120 and 160 mg/dl. Magnetic resonance imaging and an endoscopic ultrasonography were performed but no conclusive data on any structural pancreatic disorder were obtained. In order to locate the tumor, we performed selective intra-arterial pancreatic stimulation with hepatic venous sampling at 0, 20, 40, and 60 seconds. High insulin levels were obtained after a selective injection of 0.025mEq/Kg calcium gluconate in the proximal splenic and gastroduodenal arteries . With these results, the patient was scheduled for surgery. During the procedure, bimanual palpation of the pancreas was performed, as well as a pancreatic ultrasound in which no tumor could be identified. The body and tail of the pancreas were resected. For two days the patient had an adequate glycemic control but after a couple of days, he presented with hypoglycemia again. The macroscopic pathology report did not show any tumor compatible with insulinoma; however, on microscopic examination pancreatic islets with elongated cells and clear cytoplasm compatible with nesidioblastosis were seen . Unfortunately, during his stay at the intensive care unit, the patient developed late-onset hospital-acquired pneumonia and, in spite of treatment, he developed sepsis followed by septic shock which ultimately caused his death.