A 17-year-old male was admitted to the Ophthalmology Department of Amiens-Picardie University Hospital on May 28, 2013. He described a 24-h history of loss of vision and pain after projection of a foreign metallic into the left eye following a perforating eye injury while performing housework. He did not present any notable medical history.
The patient presented elevated intraocular pressure and palpebral edema associated with pre septal cellulitis. Slit lamp examination revealed extensive chemosis with fibrin in the anterior chamber and hypopyon. The cornea was whitened and the iris and crystalline lens were not visible [Fig. ].
Vision was impaired to no light perception (NLP). All eye movements were grossly restricted, with mild proptosis and swollen lids. The patient was afebrile, but presented an elevated white blood cell count of 30,200 cells/mm3 and C-Reactive Protein (CRP) of 52.9 mg/L.
Orbital computed tomography (CT) showed an IOFB in the left eye [Fig. ]. A gas bubble was visualized, associated with periseptal and retroseptal soft tissue edema [Fig. -].
Examination under general anesthesia and primary repair were performed in the emergency room. Orbital cellulitis was diagnosed. The anterior chamber was full of a gelatinous substance, which precluded vitrectomy. A 3.2 mm clear corneal incision was performed and anterior chamber washout. The IOFB was removed with a magnet.
Samples of discharge from the site of injury, anterior chamber aspirate and vitreous tap were sent to the Clinical Bacteriology Department for examination. Intravitreal antibiotics were then administered (ceftazidime 2.25 mg/0.1 mL and vancomycin 1 mg/0.1 mL) following surgery.
Examination on postoperative day 1 found a slightly hypotonic globe; chemosis with considerable redness, and corneal infiltrate, while the fundus could still not be visualized. A diagnosis of panophthalmitis with lens expulsion was proposed [Fig. ].
B-scan ultrasound showed dense vitreous opacities with choroidal thickening [Fig. ]. Visual acuity remained NLP.
Gram stain of the corneal specimen in the Clinical Bacteriology Department revealed a large number of white blood cells and numerous gram-positive bacilli. On postoperative day 2, all culture samples yielded C. perfringens, which was identified by Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption-Ionization Time-of-Light Mass Spectrometry with a very good validity score of > 2 (2.2). The isolate was sensitive to a wide range of the antibiotics usually used for anaerobic bacteria.
On May 31, systemic imipenem 50 mg/kg every 6 h, metronidazole 500 mg 4 times daily and gentamicin 6 mg/ kg were then administered simultaneously. Anticoagulants were added to prevent septic thrombophlebitis. Gentamicin (8 μg) and ceftazidime were injected into the subconjunctival space daily.
Follow-up CT scan revealed orbital cellulitis with no cerebral thrombophlebitis or abscess. Despite treatment, the patient’s vision remained NLP with total hypopyon and no evidence of resolution of the infection was observed at this time. Loss of vision was rapid and complete with a flat electroretinogram of the left eye.
On June 3, the anterior chamber was washed out under topical anesthesia, but the thick cyclitic membrane could not be completely removed. Intravitreal ceftazidime and vancomycin were also administered simultaneously. Ceftazidime, vancomycin and gentamicin eye drops were administered postoperatively.
On June 4, inflammation had significantly decreased in response to intensive antibiotic therapy and topical steroids. The white blood cell count and CRP levels had decreased to 9700 cells/mm3 and 6 mg/L, respectively.
The patient continued to improve and was discharged from hospital on June 11 with oral amoxicillin 2 g, 3 times daily and metronidazole 500 mg, 3 times daily for 10 days. Evisceration was considered due to the loss of vision, underlying infection and inflammation. However, the patient declined this procedure and the infection was completely eradicated. Evisceration was therefore not performed.
An esthetic overlay prosthesis was performed 4 weeks later due to the phthisis bulbi caused by loss of consistency of the internal structures of the eye, [Fig. ].