Our patient, a previously well and independent 73-year-old Caucasian woman, presented to our Emergency department (ED) with subacute onset confusion. Her family reported worsening confusion in the preceding 2 weeks, which was associated with behavioral changes that were mainly related to visual hallucinations, waking up at night and talking to herself, looking for her late sister, and thinking that there were men around her bed. She had started experiencing vertigo and had fallen at home 2 weeks prior to admission, although she denied associated head injury. The onset of symptoms reportedly coincided with a family bereavement and our patient had recently been restarted on antidepressants by her general practitioner (GP) due to pervasive low mood. She had no infective symptoms. Her past medical history included hypertension, depression, and anxiety. Prior to admission, she lived alone and independently, with no concerns regarding cognition. She was taking prochlorperazine (vertigo), doxazocin, and paroxetine (depression) confirmed by her GP and Pharmacy medicines reconciliation; she denied any other previous or current drug or alcohol use and this was corroborated by her family. She did not smoke tobacco. She had no significant familial history and no children.
On admission she appeared alert, Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 15/15. Her Abbreviated Mental Test score (AMTS) on admission was 9/10. She was moderately hypertensive (160/63), with all other observations within normal range. Cardiovascular, respiratory, and abdominal examinations were unremarkable. However, abnormalities were seen on neurological examination. She appeared unsteady on standing with a wide-based gait, falling to the left side on attempted mobilization. Reflexes in her lower limbs were noted to be brisk (left>right) and on examination of her upper limbs there was left-sided intention tremor, dysdiadochokinesis, and past-pointing. Overall it was a predominantly cerebellar picture, with some upper motor neuron features.
Initial investigations were grossly normal (see below); she was admitted to our medical ward for further observation and investigations. During initial admission, a broad range of concurrent differential diagnoses were suggested to account for her recent behavioral changes and ataxia.
On admission, blood tests showed a mildly raised C-reactive protein (CRP) of 9.8 mg/L and mildly raised urea; otherwise a full blood count (FBC), urea and electrolytes (U&Es), bone profile, liver function tests (LFTs), and thyroid function tests (TFTs) were all within normal range. Specifically: white cell count (WCC) 6.0 × 109/L (reference range 3.8–10.8), hemoglobin (Hb) 126 g/L (117–155), platelets 220 × 109/L (140–400), sodium (Na) 135 mmol/L (136–146), potassium (K) 4.1 (3.5–5.1), creatinine 73 umol/L (45–84), urea 9.0 mmol/L (2.8–7.2), calcium (Ca) 2.42 mmol/L (2.2–2.65), inorganic phosphate 1.14 mmol/L (0.81–1.45), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 98 IU/L (30–120); albumin 40 g/L (35–52) and CRP 9.8 mg/L (0–7.9). A urine dipstick was negative and there was no growth from a midstream urine (MSU) test. A chest X-ray (CXR) revealed no abnormality. A computed tomography (CT) scan of her head showed no acute intracranial abnormality. On the initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) report, a few small nonspecific white matter lesions were noted, no intracranial abnormality correlating with our patient’s symptoms was identified. No comment was made on the thalamus or basal ganglia. Following later specialist review, this MRI scan was thought to be consistent with prion disease, with bilateral symmetrically increased signal intensity in the basal ganglia on T2-weighted imaging .
Electroencephalography (EEG) showed a background of intermixed delta activity at rate 2.5–3.9 Hz and theta activity at rate 4–5.5 Hz bilaterally through all channels, interrupted by prolonged runs of anteriorly dominant widespread triphasic waves – bilateral independent periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges (BiPLEDs) – occurring at 1–2 Hz and lasting from several seconds to a few minutes. These findings were reported as suggestive of bilateral cerebral/cortical dysfunction, with possible causes including prion disease, viral encephalitis, metabolic, and vascular.
A lumbar puncture was performed with the following results: cytology – no cells identified; viral polymerase chain reaction (PCR) – herpes simplex virus (HSV) deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), varicella zoster virus (VZV) DNA, enterovirus RNA not detected; oligoclonal bands – cerebrospinal immunoglobulin G (IgG) 32 mg/L (10–40); cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein 0.5 g/L (reference range 0.15–0.8); and CSF glucose 3.8 mmol/L (2.2–3.9). A CSF sample was sent to the National CJD Research & Surveillance Unit (NCJDRSU) in Edinburgh, which was found to be positive for 14–3-3 protein and real-time quaking-induced conversion (RT-QuIC) was positive. Raised levels of s-100b protein > 2.5 ng/mL (reference range < 0.41 ng/mL) were detected.
A definitive diagnosis of CJD is neuropathological, requiring brain biopsy or post-mortem analysis. Our patient’s family did not consent to post-mortem analysis and declined further genetic testing for familial CJD.
Within weeks following her admission to the ward, she underwent a rapid clinical deterioration. After 2 weeks she was unable to follow simple verbal commands, with worsening hypertonia bilaterally (although always more marked on the left than the right). There was difficulty following simple instructions and speech became slower and more fragmented. She developed abnormal eye movements, with hypometric saccades and impersistence of gaze. Her left arm was noted to be akinetic with abnormal posturing and spontaneous myoclonus, as well as hyperreflexia.
A month following admission, she was akinetic, mute, and unresponsive to external stimuli. She had extensive secretions requiring suctioning and was nasogastric tube fed with high risk of aspiration. Following discussion with her family and the palliative care team, a decision was made to start a compassionate care agreement and she died the following week.