In November of 2012, a 21-year old caucasian American woman was admitted to the university of Cincinnati medical center with tricuspid valve endocarditis secondary to methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus which was complicated by non-ischemic cardiomyopathy (ejection fraction 15%). She reported active use of intravenous drugs. The patient tested positive for antibodies to the hepatitis C virus (HCV), with initially undetectable HCV RNA and subsequent low-level viremia (174 - 902 IU/mL during hospitalization). The patient was anti-HBs positive, anti-HBc negative, and HBsAg negative consistent with her reported history of prior vaccination as part of a nursing training program several years prior to her hospital admission. Despite a persistently negative HBsAg, HBeAg was positive, and HBV DNA was detectable in three separate serum samples . During the course of the hospitalization, the patient seroconverted to become anti-HBc positive. She received no antiviral medications and, at follow-up six months later, she was found to be HBeAg negative and anti-HBe positive, and no longer had detectable HBV DNA, indicating that her occult HBV infection had resolved.
To investigate which factors may have contributed to the occult phenotype of the vaccine breakthrough infection, several laboratory analyses were performed. First, the patient’s serum was subjected to acid dissociation in order to separate antigen-antibody complexes . While both the dissociated and un dissociated samples were negative for HBsAg when utilizing the original clinical HBsAg assay, the dissociated sample was positive for HBsAg via the Biochain ELISA (Newark, CA, USA) . Taken together, these data suggest that, while immune complexes were present in the patient serum, sequestration of HBsAg in these complexes does not account for the lack of detectable surface antigen by the clinical HBsAg assay and the occult HBV phenotype.
Next, full-length HBV sequences were obtained using rolling circle amplification followed by PCR . Nine full-length HBV clones were sequenced as previously described . Sequence chromatographs were assembled and edited using CodonCode Aligner (CodonCode, Centerville, Massachusetts). Sequences were aligned in ClustalX with full-length GenBank references. The statistical robustness and reliability of these trees was determined using bootstrap analysis with 1,000 replicates. Additional phylogenetic inference was performed using a Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach as implemented in the Bayesian evolutionary analysis by sampling trees (BEAST) v1.8.0 program under an uncorrelated log-normal relaxed molecular clock and the Hasegawa, Kishino and Yano (HKY) model with nucleotide site heterogeneity estimated using a gamma distribution. The BEAST MCMC analysis was run for a chain length of 100,000,000 with sampling every 10,000th generation. Results were visualized in Tracer v1.5 to confirm chain convergence, and the effective sample size (ESS) was calculated for each parameter. All ESS values were > 200 indicating sufficient sampling. The maximum clade credibility tree was selected from the posterior tree distribution after a 10% burn-in using TreeAnnotator v1.8.0. Posterior probabilities > 90% were considered statistically significant.
All nine of the HBV clones from the patient were found to be genotype D3 . Genetic distances were calculated by pairwise comparison of nucleotide sequences using the Kimura method of MegAlign (DNASTAR, Madison, WI). The mean genetic distance between samples was 0.29%, with a range of 0.12% - 0.47%, indicating that all the intrapatient viral variants are closely related, and this may be indicative of recent infection. Examination of the “a” determinant, the region of HBsAg against which antibodies react, revealed no mutations associated with diagnostic failure or vaccine escape . As such, viral mutations are unlikely to play a role in either the ability of HBV to infect despite vaccination. The lack of surface antigen is also unlikely to be caused by failure of the diagnostic assay to detect HBsAg.