A 52-year-old lady presented to the surgical facility with a swelling in the right groin. Initially the swelling was reducible on lying down. However it used to increase in size while coughing and gradually increased in size over 2 years until it became irreducible. She also complained of a similar swelling in the left groin one year after recognizing the right sided swelling. However this swelling used to disappear on lying down. Patient is an established case of rheumatic heart disease diagnosed 30 years back. She also underwent coronary angiography for chest pain accompanied with newly diagnosed hypertension 10 years later. She was started on digoxin, anti-hypertensive medications, and penicillin. However, due to personal reasons she was lost to follow up. 8 years after this event, she followed up and was diagnosed as severe mitral and aortic stenosis with aortic regurgitation. She had a component of mitral regurgitation accompanied with tricuspid regurgitation and pulmonary hypertension. She subsequently underwent surgery for dual valve replacement. The patient was followed up as she was on anti-coagulants, anti-hypertensive and diuretics. She subsequently developed right sided heart failure leading to cardiac cirrhosis and asities. Multiple sessions of ascitic fluid tapping were done. With the development of an ascites, the groin swellings appeared and increased in size to attain the present size. Examination of the right groin revealed a well-defined lobulated cystic swelling below and medial to the right inguinal ligament. The left sided groin swelling was also cystic in nature below the medial end of the left inguinal ligament. It was reducible with a visible and palpable impulse on coughing . The patient was investigated for the groin swellings. A contrast enhanced CT scan was done which revealed fluid filled femoral hernia sacs on either sides. The swellings were located medial to the femoral vessels. The femoral hernia sacs were filled with fluid . The abdomen revealed the presence of asities and cirrhosis of the liver. The patient underwent elaborate cardiac work up which included blood test, ECG, and 2D echo for evaluation of the cardiac status. Blood thinners were stopped 3 days prior to the surgical procedure. She underwent the procedure of bilateral groin exploration under epidural anesthesia.
The right femoral swelling was approached by an infra inguinal or low approach after having marked the vessels and the entire extent of the swelling. The swelling was dissected from medial to lateral. The femoral vein was adherent to the swelling which was carefully dissected free. The swelling was dissected upwards to its origin from its femoral canal confirming the diagnosis of the hydrocele of the femoral hernia sac . The sac was transfixed and ligated as high as possible. The femoral ring was obliterated by interrupted polypropylene stitches approximating the inguinal ligament and the iliopectineal ligament. A drain was placed in the operative side in order to avoid reactive fluid accumulation in the dead space created by excision of the swelling. The drain was removed after 48 hours. Similarly on the left side, a low approach was adopted. The swelling was dissected free up to the femoral ring conforming the diagnosis of the hydrocele of the femoral hernia sac . The sac was transfixed, ligated, and excised on either sides. The femoral ring was obliterated by interrupted polypropylene stitches taken between the iliopectineal ligament and the inguinal ligament on both sides. The excised hernia sac from both sides was sent for histopathological examination which revealed peritoneal lining confirmed by the presence of mesenchymal cells. The fluid within the sac was amber colored and was sent for chemical analysis. It was sterile and rich in protein. Post-operative recovery of the patient was uneventful with no wound complications.