A 70-year-old male was referred to our hospital with anterior chest pain and a precordial mass in September 2004. He had undergone right radical nephrectomy in July 2002, and renal cell carcinoma, T1aN0M0, stage I, had been diagnosed. Medical follow-ups had been conducted routinely without any treatment. In May 2004, after he experienced anterior chest pain, computed tomography (CT) was performed. This revealed in the sternum a low density mass that gradually increased in size during the following three months. In September 2004, there was an 8 × 7 cm mass, and destruction of some of the cortical bone of the manubrium sterni had occurred, so a CT-guided percutaneous needle biopsy was performed. The mass was composed of clear tumor cells arranged in an alveolar configuration, and metastatic renal cell carcinoma was diagnosed histologically. We performed distant metastasis check up and check his physical function preparing for an operation. No evidence of other distant metastases was seen. We took a chest CT prior to the operation after an admission, the tumor shadow was the same comparing with previous chest CT before the biopsy. The patient underwent a partial resection of the sternal bone with wide margin including whole tumor tissue in November 2004. The postoperative clinical course was uneventful and the patient was discharged 11 days later. Pathological examination revealed only granulation tissue which composed of wide bleeding area and necrosis area with strong infiltration of inflammatory cells especially for fibroblasts. The entire resected tissue specimen was checked carefully, but no carcinoma cells were detected. We judged that a complete, spontaneous regression of metastatic renal cell carcinoma had taken place. The patient's medical history was taken in minute detail in relation to any kind of treatment for renal cell carcinoma, but he had received no such treatment and taken no medication, including alternative medicine, nor had he consumed any "health foods" at any time during the course of the disease. He is now receiving interferon therapy and is in good condition without recurrence for eight months after surgery.