A 68-year-old woman complaining of nausea was diagnosed with early gastric cancer at her local hospital and was referred to us for further evaluation. The patient had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status (ECOG PS) of 1. Her serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 were 11.7 ng/ml and 317.9 U/ml, respectively. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed an irregular and nodular tumor with ulcerative changes in the middle third region of the stomach . Endoscopic ultrasonography showed that the tumor had possibly invaded the muscularis propria. The pathological examination of the biopsied specimen indicated a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Although enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a thickening of the gastric wall in the tumor site, no lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis was identified . Consequently, the patient was clinically diagnosed with stage I gastric cancer (T2N0M0). One month after the first visit, we planned laparoscopic distal gastrectomy with D2 lymphadenectomy. However, multiple liver metastases were identified during the surgery. Therefore, we suspended curative gastrectomy, and chemotherapy was selected due to her satisfactory ECOG PS. After staging laparoscopy, enhanced CT and magnetic resonance imaging revealed multiple liver metastases in both liver lobes . Given the patient was diagnosed with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative stage IV gastric cancer, the patient received S-1 plus oxaliplatin (SOX) as first-line chemotherapy. The SOX regimen consisted of a 3-week course of S-1 (80 mg/body/day) orally on days 1–14, with oxaliplatin (130 mg/m2) intravenously on day 1. After 6 courses of the SOX regimen, the liver metastases were substantially reduced and new metastatic lesions were not detected . However, the patient had progression in the primary tumor site . Therefore, we changed the chemotherapy regimen to paclitaxel (PTX) plus ramucirumab (RAM) as the second-line chemotherapy. This regimen consisted of a 4-week course of PTX (80 mg/m2) intravenously on days 1, 8, and 15, with RAM (8 mg/kg) intravenously on days 1 and 15. After 6 courses of PTX plus RAM, enhanced CT indicated that the liver metastases had completely disappeared . However, EGD and enhanced CT showed enlargement of the primary tumor and lung metastases, respectively . According to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) , the patient had progressive disease. Accordingly, nivolumab was administered as the third-line chemotherapy. The patient received nivolumab at a dose of 3 mg/kg intravenously every 2 weeks and a dose of 240 mg/body intravenously every 2 weeks after September 2018. After 20 courses of nivolumab, EGD and enhanced CT revealed a dramatic shrinkage of the primary tumor and the disappearance of the lung metastases, respectively . Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography showed no abnormal uptake. Furthermore, the patient’s serum levels of CEA and CA 19-9 were within normal limits (CEA: 2.6 ng/ml and CA19-9: 8.3 U/ml). Given the patient had partial response based on the RECIST criteria , a surgical intervention was planned. The staging laparoscopy indicated no peritoneal dissemination and negative peritoneal cytology; thus, the patient underwent laparoscopic distal gastrectomy with D2 lymphadenectomy. The macroscopic findings of the resected specimen showed an ulcer scar at the primary tumor site . The pathological examination demonstrated that there were no residual tumors and no lymph node metastases . These findings indicated a pathological complete response, and the histological response of the primary tumor was categorized as grade 3. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged home on the eighth postoperative day. Currently, the patient is receiving nivolumab to control potential liver and lung metastases. The patient is alive at 41 months after the first-line chemotherapy, with no sign of disease recurrence at 3 months post-surgery.