A 10-year-old African-American girl with a history of asthma and eczema had 20/20 vision in both eyes until August 8, 2011, when she first noticed floaters in her OD. On August 10, 2011, the patient developed abrupt onset of visual loss in the OD. She presented to the emergency department (ED), complaining of unilateral visual loss in the OD. No other systemic complaints were reported. Patient was found to have visual acuity of light perception (LP) in the OD and 20/20 in the OS. Results of a slit-lamp examination of the OD showed clear cornea, trace conjunctival injection and a few cells in the anterior chamber. On fundoscopic exam of the OD, patient was found to have 1+ cells in the anterior vitreous as well as severe intraretinal hemorrhage, exudates, perivasculitis and posterior vitritis. The optic nerve could not be visualized . Examination of the OS did not reveal any abnormalities. Intraocular pressures in both eyes were within normal limits.
Chest x-ray and MRI of the brain did not reveal any abnormalities. Laboratory examination included complete blood count, complete metabolic profile, urinalysis, FTA-abs, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) panel, and serology for varicella zoster virus (VZV), herpes simplex virus (HSV) I/II and toxoplasmosis. Anterior chamber tap was also done to test the fluid for VZV, HSV I/II and cytomegalovirus DNA through polymerase chain reaction (PCR). We also tested the patient for ANCA associated vasculitides, rheumatoid arthritis factor (RF), ANA panel, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and angiotensin converting enzyme levels to evaluate for a non-infectious cause. All of the tests were unremarkable except for: elevated ESR at 32 mm/h (normal: <20), elevated ACE levels at 124 U/L (normal: 6–89) and elevated eosinophils at 8.5 % (normal: 1–5 %). Fluorescein angiography (FA) revealed vasculitic process with intraretinal hemorrhage blocking defects and there was retinal ischemic changes .
Patient was placed on long-term therapy with famcyclovir 500 mg for a presumed viral infection. We gave one mg gancyclovir three times 5 days apart each with 400 microgram dexamethasone intravitreal injections in OD starting on August 15, 2011. In addition to the injections, patient was started on oral Prednisone 50 mg daily. Over the next few weeks, retinal vasculitis continued to improve OD but her visual acuity remained poor at counting fingers (CF). Fundoscopic exam of the OD on December 1, 2011, revealed some optic nerve pallor with ischemic and narrowed vessels with resolution of retinal hemorrhage .
While the OD continued to stabilize, the AMHRV progressed to involve the OS. Patient reported decreased visual acuity in the OS starting November 29, 2011. Her visual acuity continued to deteriorate over the next few days and at the time of exam on December 1, 2011; patient’s visual acuity was CF. On fundoscopic exam, she was found to have severe intraretinal hemorrhage with retinal vein sheathing and whitening . Rheumatology was consulted. Per rheumatology recommendations, patient was admitted to the hospital for further evaluation and aggressive treatment. Patient underwent the prior mentioned laboratory evaluation again. In addition to the previous laboratory tests, we obtained serum lysozyme levels, IgG/IgM levels, CH50 levels and A-1-C enzyme levels. The work-up was unremarkable except for elevated eosinophils at 8.8 % (normal: 1–5 %), elevated sedimentation rate of 70 mm/h (normal: 0–20 mm/h) and low CH50 of 27 U/mL (normal: 31U/mL-60U/mL). On this occasion, her ACE levels were within normal limits.
Due to her poor vision of CF OD and new onset AMHRV OS with CF vision, she was aggressively treated with three infusions of rituximab (650 mg/m2), two of which were in December 2011 and the third in June 2012. She also received alternating six cycles of cyclophosphamide (1 g/m2)/methylprednisolone 500 mg (1 g/m2) intravenous infusions every 4 weeks from December 2011-June 2012. In addition to the infusions, patient was placed on Prednisone 60 mg a day that was slowly tapered over 7 months. B-cell depletion was monitored through flow cytometry. After the completion of the infusions and steroid taper, patient was placed on mycophenolate 1000 mg BID to prevent recurrence of retinal vasculitis. Patient’s visual acuity in the OS improved from CF to 20/80 within 1 month of initiation of aggressive immunosuppressive treatment and has remained stable. On the most recent fundoscopic exam of the OS in June 2013, the optic nerve appeared healthy without any evidence of vasculitis, hemorrhage or phlebitis . Although there was no ischemic changes at the onset of the disease, retinal ischemia developed later in FA during follow up. Functional improvement was also noted in the OD during the aggressive immunosuppressive course of therapy, resulting in visual improvement from CF to 20/200.