A 32-year-old male was hospitalized in the parent institution in November 2016, due to general symptoms of infection accompanied by pain in the left lumbal region, when duplex collecting system of the left kidney was diagnosed. CT urography, performed during the hospitalization indicated the existence of a duplex pyelocaliceal system of the left kidney with a duplicated ureter, dilation of the pyelocaliceal system of the upper pole of the left kidney grade 4, with the kidney parenchyma reduced to 1 mm, as well as the left ureter dilated (12 mm) and curved throughout its length, with ectopic ostium in prostatic urethra ( and ).
During the hospitalization, the patient was treated conservatively with a positive clinical effect. After the inflammatory parameters were stabilized and the pathogenic microorganism was eliminated from urine, the prophylactic antimicrobial therapy ensued, supplemented by further diagnostic procedures. Renal radionuclide imaging, as an integral part of nuclear medicine, provides substantial information on the actual renal function. Static kidney scintigraphy with Tc99mm (DMSA) indicated the absence of accumulation of radiopharmaceuticals in the upper third of the left kidney, except for the slightly preserved function of cortical activity in the marginal area of the upper pole of the left kidney. Dynamic scintigraphy was performed with Tc99mm (DTPA) and it indicated a lower amplitude of the renal curve above the left kidney (lower functional mass), with a relative left-kidney function of 35.3%, while the relative right-kidney function was 64.7%.The patient was surgically treated at the Urology Clinic of the University Clinical Centre of the Republic of Srpska in Banja Luka, in July 2017. Control Ultrasound examination indicated the existence of a duplex pyelocaliceal system of the left kidney with a duplicated ureter, dilation of the pyelocaliceal system of the upper pole of the left kidney grade 4, with the kidney parenchyma reduced to 1 mm, as well as the dilatation of the left ureter . Taking into account the clinical perspective, the degree of damage to the renal parenchyma of the upper pole of the left kidney which was not functional, the indication for nephron-sparing surgery was set, that is, for the partial nephrectomy and ureterectomy. Optimal renal perfusion provided by a hydration regimen of approximately 200 mL/h or more of crystalloids overnight was beneficial. Before positioning the patient for lumbar incision, an urethrocystoscopy was performed, detecting no ectopic ureter orifice in prostatic urethra. Afterwards, JJ stent was placed through the orthotropic left orifice, in order to accurately preserve the ureter for the distal two-thirds of the left ureter. After the patient was adequately positioned, a standard left side lumbar approach was performed, which provided excellent and rapid exposure to the kidney and the hilum. Optimal renal exposure is the key to a successful outcome. We identified the renal pedicle and defined the vasculature and ureter. Then, we isolated the renal artery and placed a vascular loop. After that, we excised the hydronephrotic upper pole with sharp dissection and put suture on the edge to ligate any bleeding vessel with 3-0 absorbable sutures with in situ techniques. Then, the ureter was released with blunt and sharp dissection to the distal third of it, as far as possible from the lumbar incision, the ureter was cut and preparations of the resected upper pole of the left kidney were removed continuously from the proximal 2/3 of the ureter. After that, the aspiration of the contents of the unresected distal third of dilated left ureter was performed and ligature was placed on it. The resected surface of the upper pole, approximately max 20x20 mm, was additionally cauterized with argon, covered with the Gerota’s fascia, the drain was placed, and the lumbar incision was closed by layers. The patient had a neat post-surgery course. PH findings indicated that there was a renal parenchymal dysfunction, nephritis interstitial chronica and ureteritic chronica. A control ultrasound performed after six months showed a regular post-surgery finding for the remaining distal two thirds of the left kidney, without the accumulation of fluid in the retroperitoneal space.