A 49-year-old Thai male was diagnosed with lcSSC according to the 1980 criteria of the American Rheumatism Association . His first presenting symptoms included sclerodactyly, symmetrical polyarthralgia, digital pitting scar and Raynaud's phenomenon without any chest symptoms.
Four years after diagnosis, our patient developed dyspnea on exertion. The dyspnea worsened in the following two years so further investigations were performed. His chest radiograph revealed interstitial infiltration in both lower lung zones and prominent pulmonary trunk . Pulmonary function showed a restrictive pattern; with a forced vital capacity (FVC) of 53%, and forced expiratory volume in one second/forced vital capacity (FEV1/FVC) of 105%. High resolution computer tomography (HRCT) of the chest presented minimal thickening of the interlobular septa with thickening of the pleura and mild bronchiectasis in both lower lungs . An echocardiogram detected mild concentric left ventricular hypertrophy without pulmonary arterial hypertension.
Since our patient's symptoms had worsened, the attending physician prescribed oral daily cyclophosphamide (100 mg per day) plus prednisolone (10 mg per day). Within three months, the clinical symptoms improved; however, the follow-up FVC was minimally decreased with an FVC of 45% and an FEV1/FVC of 90%. Cyclophosphamide was stopped after one year of treatment and the steroid tapered off during follow-up.
One year after stopping the cyclophosphamide--but while still on the prednisolone--the symptoms of dyspnea upon exertion returned. A radiograph and HRCT of the chest were therefore repeated to ascertain the cause of dyspnea. We observed increased thickening of the interlobular septa with sub-pleural emphysema and tubular bronchiectasis of his right lower lung . Supportive treatment with low-flow oxygen therapy and breathing exercises were prescribed because of the chronic pulmonary fibrosis.
Our patient was admitted because of a low-grade fever with pleuritic chest pain, progressive shortness of breath, and a productive cough of five days duration. On physical examination, he had tachypnea (28 breaths/minute) and a body temperature of 38.2°C. A lung examination revealed decreased breath sounds and vocal resonance of his right lung with a midline trachea position. The oxygen saturation of the room air at admission was 92%.
A complete blood count indicated a hemoglobin level of 14.2 g/dL, white blood cell count of 8,800 cells/mm3, and a platelet count of 247,000 cells/mm3. A chest radiograph revealed pneumothorax of his right lung .
Cloudy yellow-colored fluid was found after a chest tube was inserted. The exudative profile of the pleural fluid included red blood cell count 890 cells/mm3 and white blood cell count 1,890 cells/mm3 (polymorphonuclear cells 64%, eosinophils 30% and lymphocytes 6%). Indian ink, Gram stain and acid-fast stain of the pleural fluid and sputum were negative; however, the pleural fluid was positive for cryptococcal antigen. The respective culture of the pleural fluid and serum was positive for Cryptococcus neoformans, while the cerebrospinal fluid was negative.
Due to desaturation and large air leakage, oxygen supplementation and drainage of his chest were performed immediately. Oral fluconazole (400 mg per day) was prescribed after the presence of Cryptococcus was confirmed (three days after pneumothorax) and continued for six months. The fever, pleuritic chest pain and cough symptoms improved and the lung was re-expanded the third day after chest tube insertion without any complications. The oxygen line was removed seven days after treatment. A chest radiograph indicated improvement of pulmonary infiltration two weeks after treatment . Four weeks after treatment the serum cryptococcal antigen test and hemoculture for Cryptococci were negative. No recurrent pneumothorax was detected after anti-fungal therapy was discontinued.