The patient is a 3-year-old male who initially presented to his pediatrician's office with several weeks history of intermittent epistaxis. The subsequent work-up showed an initial white blood cell count of 515,000 and eventually led to a diagnosis of hematologic malignancy. Flow cytometric immunophenotyping confirmed T-cell ALL, marked by cell surface expression of CD3, CD4, CD8, and TdT. Subsequent bone marrow biopsy confirmed this diagnosis and revealed >95% blasts. The patient was neurologically intact until day 3 of admission, when he became progressively confused and somnolent. A noncontrast head computed tomography (CT) was performed revealing extensive bifrontal and left temporal intraparenchymal hemorrhages . Upon initial neurosurgical evaluation, the patient had a Glasgow coma score (GCS) of 9, opening his eyes and moaning in response to noxious stimuli, though moving all of his extremities purposefully. No clinical or historical evidence of trauma was detected, and laboratory studies revealed an International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 3.5 and platelet count of 66,000. The hemorrhages were presumed to be spontaneous and the diagnosis of DIC was made. The patient was given fresh frozen plasma and platelets to keep the patient's INR ≤1.3 and platelet count ≥100,000, respectively.
Although repeat imaging indicated radiographic stability of the intraparenchymal hemorrhages, the patient's exam continued to decline over the subsequent 24 h and a right frontal external ventricular drain (EVD) was placed. Routine CSF studies then showed >5 leukocytes and cytospin indicative of blasts in the CSF. The standard of care in T-cell ALL with CNS involvement at presentation is intrathecal methotrexate and 18 Gy of craniospinal radiation. Although traditionally reserved for refractory disease, hydrocortisone and cytarabine were added to the intraventricular methotrexate, due to the patient's extensive disease at presentation. All three of these chemotherapeutic agents were delivered weekly via the EVD. The patient's intracranial pressures were adequately controlled with approximately 50-100 ml of CSF output daily from the EVD (pop-off setting at 20 mmHg). However, within a few days of intraventricular chemotherapy administration, the patient's daily CSF output increased, ranging from 200 to 400 ml, while intracranial pressures remained relatively unchanged, indicating a possible mechanism of decreased CSF reabsorption.
After 21 days of elevated CSF output via external ventricular drainage, the patient was felt to be shunt-dependent, this was confirmed with radiographic evidence of ventriculomegaly and the decision was made to place a right-sided VP shunt. The patient's oncologist expressed the need for weekly chemotherapy delivered to the CSF space for at least 2 months and then every 1-2 months for the next three-and-a-half years, and a contralateral Ommaya reservoir was also placed.
The patient was taken to the operating room where the right-sided EVD was removed and a new antibiotic-impregnated ventricular catheter was placed. This was connected to a pediatric Codman Certas valve (DePuy Codman, Raynham, MA), which was set to 3 (approximately 8 mmHg). The distal catheter was placed in the peritoneal cavity. A contralateral Ommaya reservoir was then placed into the frontal horn of the left lateral ventricle. Postoperative head CT and plain head, thorax, and abdominal radiographs were obtained to confirm adequate placement of both the ventricular catheters and distal shunt tubing .
Weekly intraventricular methotrexate, cytarabine, and hydrocortisone were then administered via the Ommaya reservoir. Simultaneously, the valve was readjusted to approximately 29 mmHg (Certas setting 8) for 4 h, to allow dissemination of the chemotherapeutic agents throughout the CSF. Since the patient's highest ICP reading was 26 mmHg we were assured that the Certas 8 setting would virtually cease CSF flow through the shunt valve. Intraventricular chemotherapy administration and valve reprogramming were performed by the pediatric oncologist in the outpatient setting with on-site neurosurgery readily available. During the 4 h of “off time” the patient was allowed to rest or play quietly in the clinic. He was observed by the clinic staff and tolerated the clamping well without any overt signs of hydrocephalus such as somnolence or headache. The patient was also receiving concurrent systemic chemotherapy and has received whole brain and spinal radiation.