A 87-year old man with a presenting diagnosis of hypertensive cardiomyopathy, orthostatic hypotension, moderate aortic stenosis, permanent atrial fibrillation, left bundle branch block and preserved ejection fraction (EF) (home therapy: valsartan 80 mg, bisoprolol 2.5 mg) was admitted to our Clinic with Canadian Cardiovascular Society III angina, New York Heart Association (NYHA) III functional class and signs of pulmonary and systemic venous congestion .
Cardiac ultrasound documented left ventricle (LV) hypertrophy (septum 16 mm, posterior wall 15 mm, LV mass index 189 g/m2) with severe concentric remodeling (relative wall thickness 0.6), mildly reduced EF (50%), severely depressed global longitudinal strain (− 3.1%) with no relative apical sparing pattern and an average mitral annular Tissue Doppler S′ of 5.5 cm/sec. Second degree diastolic disfunction and severe biatrial dilatation were also apparent. A low QRS voltage-to-LV mass ratio by Sokolow-Lyon criteria was observed. Aortic valve evaluation revealed low flow-low gradient severe aortic stenosis (AS) (Vmax 2.6 m/sec, max/mean gradient 28/16 mmHg, indexed aortic valve functional area 0.4 cm2/m2, stroke volume index 21 ml/m2)(, confirmed by computed tomography scan (aortic valve calcium score 2500).
Following successful decongestion and clinical improvement with intravenous diuretics and vasodilators, coronary angiography revealed critical multivessel diffuse disease, which was treated with complete percutaneous revascularization (two drug-eluting stents on the left anterior descending and circumflex coronary arteries).
Based on the low-flow low-gradient AS phenotype in the background of severe concentric hypertrophy, biatrial dilatation, S′ wave depression, conduction abnormalities, low QRS-voltage-to-LV-mass ratio and history of orthostatic hypotension, a diagnosis of amyloid cardiomyopathy was suspected. Bone tracer scintigraphy was performed revealing high diffuse myocardial uptake (Perugini score 3), diagnostic - in the context of an absent monoclonal protein on serum and urine exams (the patient had negative serum and urine immunofixation, and negative serum free light chain assay) - for transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis (ATTR-CA) .
The patient was unsuitable for ATTR-CA specific treatment because of current national reimbursement policies.
A Heart Team evaluation was carried. In consideration of the high procedural risk (EuroSCORE II 11.4%) transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) appeared indicated for severe AS treatment. However, considering the patient frailty (Essential Frailty Toolset score of 4/5: pre-procedural anemia (1 point), hypoalbuminemia (1 point), lower-extremity muscle weakness (2 points) ), the presence of ATTR-CA cardiomyopathy-specific markers of adverse prognosis (Mayo Clinic ATTR-CA stage III: high-sensitivity troponin T = 280 ng/L, NTproBNP = 6500 ng/L ; echocardiographic parameters heralding poor prognosis in ATTR-CA with severe AS: reduced stroke volume, severely reduced global longitudinal strain, increased filling pressures ), considering the clinical stability on oral diuretics following decongestion and revascularization and the patient preference not to proceed to further invasive management during the current hospitalization, the decision was made to discharge the patient on heart failure medical therapy, with an indication for TAVR re-evaluation in case of further acute decompensation. At last (6-month) follow-up the patient is alive, with clinical stability on medical therapy (NYHA IIb, no angina) and no ensuing cardiac rehospitalizations.