A 42-year-old woman noticed irresistible sleepiness around noon. On the same day, she developed sudden onset of sleep several times while standing as she visited her child’s classroom. Each episode lasted for a few seconds. Excessive daytime sleepiness persisted throughout that day but resolved on the following day. The patient had quit smoking 10 years ago. The patient’s sleep habits were regular; she slept 8 h/night from 11 PM to 7 AM. The patient had been treated for migraine without aura for 24 years and had a history of surgical treatment for an ovarian cyst. The patient was not on regular medicine but took loxoprofen for migraine attacks. At the initial presentation, the patient was alert. The pupil sizes were asymmetric (right 4 mm, left 2.5 mm). The pupillary reflexes to light were normal, and left-sided ptosis was noted. There was no disturbance of sweating. Facial sensations and facial muscles were intact. No motor weaknesses or sensory disturbances were noted. Diffusion-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a high-intensity lesion restricted to the posterior part of the left hypothalamus . Magnetic resonance angiography showed no stenosis or occlusion in the main cerebral arteries. Atherosclerotic changes were unremarkable on carotid artery sonography. An electrocardiogram showed normal tracing. On transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography, a potential cardiac source of an embolism or the right-to-left shunt, including patent foramen ovale, was not detected. On laboratory exams, liver function, renal function, glucose, cholesterol, soluble interleukin-2 receptor, c-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, homocysteine, protein C, protein S, antithrombin III, prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time and D-dimer levels (0.8 μg/ml) were normal. The levels of pituitary hormones, such as thyroid stimulating hormone, adrenocorticotropic hormone, follicle stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, growth hormone, and prolactin, were normal. Anti-nuclear antibody, anti-SS-A/B antibody, MPO-ANCA, and β-2-glycoprotein I were all negative. CSF analysis was normal (2 mononuclear cells/μL and a protein level of 33 mg/dL). CSF orexin-A levels obtained on hospital day 3 were normal (337 pg/mL; normal > 200 pg/mL). Serum anti-aquaporin 4 (AQP4) antibody, CSF myelin basic protein and oligoclonal band were negative. Electroencephalography showed a background of 10–11 Hz alpha rhythms without epileptic discharges. A small infarction restricted to the hypothalamus was suspected, and the patient was treated with intravenous edaravone and argatroban, as well as oral clopidogrel. She did not complain of recurrence of sleepiness after admission. Her eye symptoms spontaneously improved on hospital day 2. Three months later, there had been no clinical relapse, and follow-up MRI was performed. Diffusion-weighted imaging was unremarkable , and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery MRI showed reduced intensity of the hypothalamic lesion . There was no new lesion suggestive of demyelinating disease or tumor.