A 69-year-old woman (141 cm, 45 kg) was scheduled to undergo transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TUR-BT) and laparoscopic left nephroureterectomy under the diagnosis of bladder cancer and ureteral cancer. She was treated with trichlormethiazide for hypertension and did not have any history of allergy or ACS. Preoperative ECG showed a flat ST segment. Routine laboratory investigations were normal. Within the past year, the patient had undergone TUR-BT twice under spinal anesthesia and once under GA using propofol, desflurane, fentanyl, remifentanil, and rocuronium. Cefazolin was administered intravenously during every surgery.
After placement of a thoracic epidural catheter, GA was induced with propofol, rocuronium, and fentanyl, and it was maintained with desflurane, remifentanil, and rocuronium. After the trachea was intubated, cefazolin was administered intravenously and TUR-BT started. Forty-five minutes after induction of GA, the resistance of the respiratory tract increased gradually under sufficient effect of rocuronium without any mechanical respiratory problem. Tidal volume in the mechanical ventilator decreased approximately from 350 to 250 ml under pressure-controlled ventilation. Percutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2) decreased from 100 to 94% with a fraction of inspired oxygen of 40% without wheeze. Sixty minutes after induction of GA, the ST segment in lead II of the ECG decreased to − 1.0 mV and isosorbide dinitrate was administered intermittently under the suspicion of ACS. Because of further progression of ST segment depression, we initiated continuous intravenous infusion of nitroglycerin and nicorandil. As the systolic blood pressure (SBP) dropped to 70 mmHg, continuous phenylephrine and intermittent ephedrine were administered to maintain SBP at 80 mmHg. Seventy-three minutes after induction of GA, TUR-BT was finished and the ST segment decreased to − 3.4 mV maximally. When the surgical drape was removed, an anaphylactic erythematous rash was observed on the abdomen, chest, arms, and legs. Then, we suspected anaphylactic reaction to an unknown agent of KS. Corticosteroid and chlorpheniramine were administered immediately.
Transthoracic echocardiography findings were within normal limits. The 12-lead ECG revealed ST depression in I, II, aVF, and V3–6. The laboratory findings for troponin and CK-MB were normal. As the patient responded well to the treatment for anaphylaxis, we were able to stop continuous phenylephrine administration 101 min after induction of GA and the ST depression began to return gradually. Subsequent left nephroureterectomy was postponed and ureteral stent insertion was carried out. When the ureteral stent insertion ended 166 min after induction of GA, blood pressure and the ST depression returned to almost normal with nitroglycerin and nicorandil support. The cutaneous symptoms diminished and SpO2 returned to 100% under the same oxygen concentration. Rocuronium was reversed by sugamadex and the trachea was extubated. The vital signs were stable and the patient was free of chest pain and respiratory discomfort. She was transferred to the ICU in order to observe any recurrence of anaphylactic reaction and stayed overnight uneventfully. Based upon the findings of normal coronary vasculature in coronary computerized tomography (CT) 4 days after TUR-BT, the cardiologist diagnosed the case as type 1 variant KS. Five days after TUR-BT, intradermal tests with all of the drugs used during GA were negative.
Eleven days after TUR-BT, laparoscopic left nephroureterectomy was performed under GA and epidural anesthesia. Since cefazolin was one of suspected causes of KS at that time, ciprofloxacin was administered in the ward before surgery and no reaction was observed. Preventative intravenous corticosteroid and chlorpheniramine were administered before GA, and continuous intravenous nicorandil was administered during surgery. GA was induced by thiamylal and suxamethonium and maintained with desflurane, fentanyl, and remifentanil. The minimum dose of rocuronium was administered intermittently to keep T1 of train-of-four under neuromuscular monitoring throughout the surgery. The surgery was completed uneventfully. The patient was discharged on the 18th day after the first operation. The intradermal test performed 8 months later proved that cefazolin was a trigger drug.