A 22-year-old healthy active-duty Caucasian female presented to her primary care clinic for removal of her implanted Nexplanon device approximately 1 year after placement at another facility. Palpation of her upper arm yielded no appreciable rod. Subsequent imaging of the upper arm and chest was concerning for the presence of a foreign body in the left lung field. CT imaging of the chest revealed the Nexplanon implant to be located in her left lower lobe . At no time did she express respiratory symptoms, pain, or decrease in physical stamina either at rest or while exercising. There was concern for a loss of perfusion and destruction of the parenchyma, however, previously reported asymptomatic cases like this one have safely left devices in situ per the patient’s wishes. This option would alleviate the need for surgery, but would also prevent her from bearing children. Though she had been asymptomatic, she expressed a strong desire to start a family imminently, and did not wish to leave the implant in place and wait for it to become hormonally inactive. Thus, the decision for removal was made and the patient was scheduled for an endovascular procedure.
The patient was taken to the interventional radiology suite, where she received a general anesthetic with endotracheal intubation. Interventional radiology attempted to remove the implant safely from the distal branch of the left pulmonary artery, via femoral vascular access. After numerous attempts there was a high suspicion that the Nexplanon had become encapsulated and was adhered to the wall of that artery, as the implant did not retract freely when snared . There was a concern for catastrophic bleeding should further attempts at endovascular removal be made. This new consideration led to the halting of this procedure and a discussion with the patient about how to proceed.
Thoracic surgery was consulted and the patient underwent a left VATS for exploration and left lower lobe basilar S7–9 segmentectomy . General anesthesia with a double lumen endotracheal tube was used to simultaneously allow for adequate respiration and isolated left lung deflation. The S6 superior segment of the left lower lobe was spared with preoperative and postoperative fiberoptic bronchoscopy. The procedure was uncomplicated, and the patient was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit for recovery. On post-operative day 1, she was ambulating and her pain was well controlled. She was transferred to a floor unit on post-operative day 2. On post-operative day 3, her chest tube was discontinued and she was discharged. At her 28-week and 45-week follow-up, she had continuing chronic left flank pain as well as chest pain with deep inspiration. She complied with her pain medication regimen and continued to follow up as needed.