A 58-year-old woman with medical history of hypertension presented with onset of headache, diplopia, and right sided weakness within 2 weeks. She was admitted to the Department of Neurosurgery (Bach Mai hospital) on 12 February 2018. Here, a cerebral computed tomography (CT) was performed, showing a hyperdense mass in the brainstem. CT angiography (CTA) revealed that a partially thrombosed aneurysm measuring 25 × 19 mm was located at the vertebrobasilar junction (AICA arises), causing mass effect on the pons . The radiologists found that endovascular treatment was a challenge for this aneurysm because of its wide neck and its compression on the brainstem. Our patient underwent the surgery on 28 February 2018 with combined transpetrosal approach.
The patient was in the supine position with the head turned right 80° and extended 30° . C-shaped incision was made from mastoid process to hairline on the left side . Temporal muscle was dissected to expose the temporobasal region as well as zygomatic root, and the lateral suboccipital region as well as the complete mastoid . The posterior petrosectomy was performed with high speed drill under the microscope to expose the atrium while preserving the semicircular canals, unroofing the sigmoid sinus, and a part of tranverse sinus until the presigmoid dura was exposed. A subtemporal craniotomy was performed for the exposure of Kawase triangle. The anterior part of the petrous bone was totally drilled until the posterior fossa dura and the inferior petrosal sinus were exposed. When the temporobasal dura was opened, the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was drained for the brain relaxation. Through the Kawase triangle opening, the posterior fossa dura was incised with two cuts crossing the superior petrosal sinus at anterior one-third and the cerebellar tentorium to its border. Transverse and sigmoid sinuses were retracted posteriorly, then the presigmoid dura was opened close to the inferior border of the superior petrosal sinus. The arachnoid was opened to expose the vertebrobasilar junction, the aneuryms, and the middle part of the basilar artery. One temporary clip was put on the proximal basilar artery through the posterior petrosal opening. The aneurysm wall was torn during the first clip application. Finally, the aneurysm was clipped with two long Yasargil clips through Kawase triangle opening. Dura closure was performed with the free flap of the temporal fascia, the abdominal fat tissue, and the biological glue.