A 25 years old male patient presented for examination. Several incidents of Grand Mal epileptic seizure were referred with the last one three weeks ago. After the last episode both shoulders' range of motion was regressed and pain was elicited with movement. The patient visited a hospital at that point and without radiographic control performed, the diagnosis of bilateral shoulder contusions was posed. About three weeks later and as the patient realised that his injury was irreversible, he presented to the emergency room of our hospital. Clinical examination made clear that bilateral anterior shoulder dislocation was the point. . No neurovascular injury was diagnosed in any arm. At the time of examination the patient was able to perform flexion and abduction of both arms up to 60 degrees as well as almost full external rotation with no pain restraint. From the patient's history no previous incidence of shoulder dislocation was referred. Radiographic control and Computed Tomography Scanning revealed the dislocations as well as a sizeable greater tuberosity fracture of the left humerus and Hill Sachs lesion at both sides. .
Bilateral reductions under general anaesthesia and internal fixation of the left greater tuberosity fracture were performed . The reductions were easy to perform and shoulders' stabilisation was not carried out. No post manipulation neurovascular deficit was observed. Ultrasonography performed 4 days post surgery confirmed the integrity of rotator cuffs in both shoulders. Broad arm polyslings in abduction and internal rotation were used for 2 weeks and progressive mobilization started with pendulum exercises, forward flexion and abduction. A physiotherapy program of muscle enforcement was added at 3 weeks. The recovery was successful and after 2 months the patient had regained a normal range of motion in both shoulders with a minor lack at the last degrees of flexion and internal rotation of the left shoulder. Four months post-operatively the range of motion was fully recovered bilaterally and at the final follow-up, 2 years post surgery, the patient had not undergone any recurrent dislocation.