A 37-year-old woman with a congenital diagnosis of transposition of TGA, ventricular septal defect, and pulmonary stenosis, who had undergone surgical correction during infancy with atrial switch procedure (Mustard operation), ventricular septal defect closure, and implant of a valved conduit between the left ventricle and the pulmonary artery, was not under specialized ACHD care. During follow-up, she developed a high-grade atrioventricular block, requiring a permanent transvenous PMK implant, which was performed at the local hospital. Shortly after the procedure, she presented with drug-resistant pneumonia, which was treated with i.v. antibiotics. After apparent full remission, the patient was discharged home, but she reported early recurrence of fever spikes, requiring hospitalization. Considering the history of complex congenital heart defect and the evidence of significantly raised inflammatory markers, the patient was referred to our ACHD centre for further diagnostic work-up and treatment. On admission, she was in critical conditions due to septic shock and severe acute respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation. She was therefore transferred to the intensive care unit. After stabilization of vital parameters, transthoracic and transoesophageal echocardiography with three-dimensional acquisitions demonstrated multiple mobile vegetations in the subpulmonary left ventricle attached to the PMK lead and to the mitral valve leaflets. Another mobile mass with maximal length of 1.7 cm was revealed in the right ventricular outflow tract, just below the aortic valve ( and ). Moreover, an intraventricular abscess in the systemic right ventricle was detected as an anechoic round-shaped mass attached to a papillary muscle ( and ). The patient showed signs of both systemic and pulmonary septic embolization: systemic embolization was initially suspected due to necrosis of the extremities . Total-body computed tomography (CT) showed small pleural-based peripheral thickenings with triangular morphology referable to areas of pulmonary infarction, hypodense ischemic areas in the spleen and in both kidneys. Cerebral CT revealed a large haemorrhage involving the left fronto-parieto-occipital region, with intraventricular extension into both frontal horns of lateral ventricles, into the third and fourth ventricles, with effacement of cortical sulci and midline shift of 11 mm . Blood cultures were positive for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), confirming the diagnosis of IE, according to modified Duke’s criteria. The patient was started on antibiotic therapy with daptomycin. Cardiac surgery was not deemed feasible due to haemodynamic instability. Infected PMK lead was extracted with a percutaneous procedure, and the patient received a temporary device implant. After CT, urgent surgical haematoma evacuation was successfully performed. Nevertheless, the patient developed severe refractory multiorgan failure and died few days later.