A 32-year-old man with tonsillar hypertrophy detected during a physical examination was referred to us. The physical symptoms first appeared three years prior. No inciting events were associated with the appearance of tonsillar hypertrophy. His vital signs were as follows: body temperature 36.5 °C, pulse 78 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and blood pressure 120/79 mmHg. His physical examination revealed nonspecific findings with the exception of tonsillar hypertrophy. He had no signs or symptoms of an autoimmune disease. His family history did not suggest the presence of any familial disease. No lymphadenopathy, POEMS syndrome, lymphoma, or other cancers were present. Tests were negative for anti-HCV antibody, treponema pallidum-specific antibody (TP-Ab) and HIV antigen/antibody. The test results for HBV indicators were as follows: HBsAg 0.23 (negative), HBsAb 30.78 (positive), HBeAg 0.38 (negative), HBeAb 0.23 (negative), and HBcAb 1.85 (negative). Other laboratory tests also revealed no abnormal findings.
Laryngoscopy revealed the following: tonsillar hypertrophy (right, grade 3; left, grade 2), an elongated uvula, and posterior pharyngeal wall lymphoid hyperplasia . The nasopharynx was smooth and symmetrical. Based on the physical examination and related laboratory tests, the initial diagnosis were tonsil hypertrophy and chronic tonsillitis. The patient underwent a low-temperature plasma tonsillectomy under general anesthesia. Two lesions were sent for pathological examination. The larger lesion was 3.4 cm × 2.0 cm × 1.5 cm, and the smaller lesion was 2.0 cm × 1.3 cm × 0.9 cm. Cut sections demonstrated a smooth, yellow-brown to red-brown, and waxy appearance that was not well demarcated.
Sections of the tonsillar mass revealed the characteristic findings of HVCD. Microscopic examination of permanent sections showed polypoid masses unseparated from the surrounding normal tonsil, which were covered by well-differentiated squamous epithelium. No tonsil crypt structure was observed. Lymphoid follicular hyperplasia was the main pathologic finding, a portion of which appeared to be a fusion of nodular hyperplasia (composed of lymphoid follicles of variable size and shape) . These distinctive follicles with atrophic hyalinized germinal centers (depleted of centroblasts and centrocytes) and a broad mantle zone of small lymphocytes formed concentric rings (a so-called onion-skin arrangement). Both single follicles and confluent follicles with a single mantle zone were observed . Medium-sized vessels and a plethora of capillaries were present in the center of lymphatic follicles, mantle zones, and interfollicular areas . A characteristic lollipop appearance was also observed due to the onion-skin arrangement of the expanded mantle zone lymphocytes with a vessel penetrating the germinal center .
To exclude the possibility of low-grade malignant lymphoma, a comprehensive immunostaining panel was performed. A meshwork of follicular dendritic cells in the germinal centers was highlighted by CD21 and CD23 staining . Cells constituting the expanded mantle zones expressed CD20 and CD79α . The B-cell population within both the follicles and interfollicular areas demonstrated polytypic expression of Ig light chains. The interfollicular areas were comprised predominantly of T-cells (immunoreactive for CD3, CD5, and bcl-2) admixed with scattered B-cells (immunoreactive for CD20, CD79a) . Bcl-2 staining also indicated small and mature lymphocytes in the mantle zone. The onion-skin arrangement was clearly visible via bcl-2 immunohistochemical staining . The small lymphocytes in the expanded mantle zone were negative for cyclin D1 . Ki-67 staining indicated proliferating cells, which were mainly observed in the germinal centers . Immunostaining with HHV-8 was negative . Epstein Barr virus (EBV) was not detected in the tonsillar lesion by in situ hybridization (ISH) for EBV-encoded small nuclear mRNA (EBER). EBER is an EBV-encoded small nuclear mRNA.
Based on these microscopic features and immunohistochemical findings, a diagnosis of HVCD was rendered. The patient was treated with local excision without any other therapy based on the diagnosis of HVCD. At the 7-month follow up, the patient had no recurrent symptoms or masses.