A 65 year old lady presented through the Emergency Department with a 1 week history of abdominal pain after being knocked down by a horse she was holding, which resulted in the patient falling onto a stony path and hitting the right side of her abdomen. She complained of continued epigastric pain following the incident, which radiated through to her back and right upper quadrant.
On examination the patient had a low grade temperature (37.5°C) and was hypotensive at 96/61 mmHg, with a pulse rate of 96. Abdominal examination revealed right upper quadrant tenderness with no localised peritonism. Bloods showed a normal full blood count, lipase and liver function but did however reveal a C-reactive protein of 451. Chest and abdominal radiographs were normal with no signs of free air. An abdominal computed tomogram (CT) was performed which showed a moderate amount of ascitic fluid in the perihepatic space, around the porta hepatis and extending down to the pelvis.
The patient underwent a laparotomy, which revealed a ruptured gallbladder with free bile. There was no evidence of any associated injuries to the surrounding organs. Due to the friable nature of the gallbladder and associated inflammation cholecystectomy would have been extremely difficult. Therefore the decision was made to perform a partial cholecystectomy, below the level of the tear, and drainage.
Unfortunately the drain came out unintentionally 3 days after the operation having drained almost 200 mls of bile in that period. There was continued leakage of bile through the drain site increasing in rate to approximately 300 mls per day for the next 48 hours. An abdominal ultrasound at the time showed a continued fluid collection in the pelvis.
Due to the continued bilious drainage the patient underwent an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) on day 6 post-op. During this procedure a sphincterotomy was performed and a pig-tail stent inserted to allow drainage of the gallbladder. Following this intervention the patient's post-op course was unremarkable apart from a small wound infection. She was eventually discharged home 26 days after admission and the stent was removed 2 months later.