We report a 31-year-old male patient who presented in our center for treatment of a complex cardiovascular malformation. Detailed evaluation of the history revealed that at the age of 6 7/12 years the patient had corrective surgery for atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD) and pulmonary stenosis. Pulmonary hypertension was present at that time despite the severely stenotic pulmonary valve. Repeat cardiac catheterization at the age of 21 years revealed pulmonary hypertension with a mean pulmonary arterial pressure of 32 mmHg and elevated pulmonary vascular resistance index (6.4 WE*m2). The systemic oxygen saturation was 98%. At that time he also required pacemaker implantation for treatment of symptomatic bradycardia caused by AV block type Mobitz II. A CT-scan performed prior to this procedure revealed a large anomalous vessel, connecting the portal vein to the right lower pulmonary vein . In addition the patient presented complex anomalies of the systemic veins suggesting disturbed embryonic lateralisation of the venous system: 1. Bilateral superior vena cava with drainage of the left superior vena cava into the coronary sinus; 2. Isolated drainage of the right internal jugular vein into the left superior vena cava via a brachiocephalic vein; 3. Interrupted left inferior vena cava with hemiazygos continuation to the left superior vena cava and a bridging vein to a suprarenal right inferior vena cava . Further, the liver parenchyma was inhomogenous and showed an inhomogenous nodular pattern.
Oral pulmonary vasodilative therapy was initiated with the PDE5 inhibitor sildenafil and extended by the addition of the endothelin receptor antagonist macitentan when systemic saturation dropped to 90%. Since hemodynamics remained unchanged despite dual pulmonary vasodilatative treatment the patient was admitted in our center. Reevaluation of the complex venous anatomy brought to our attention the previously described porto-pulmonary venous connection (PPVC). In this context we detected hyperammonemia with 103 µmol/l. Because of the combination of pulmonary hypertension, arterial desaturation and symptomatic hyperammoniaemia with impaired concentration we performed interdisciplinary discussion of the case and opted for an occlusion of the PPVC by an endovascular approach.
The intervention was performed under general anesthesia and full heparinization. To allow pressure measurements and angiography of the portal vein we started with retrograde catheterization of the portal vein from the right femoral artery via the left ventricle, left atrium, right inferior pulmonary vein and the abnormal PPVC. Since the shunt vessel was inaccessible for retrograde placement of a large sheath required for interventional occlusion we decided to perform the interventional occlusion via a transhepatic approach. Percutaneous transhepatic puncture of the portal vein was performed under sonographic guidance followed by insertion of a 4 French sheath. This access was subsequently dilated up to a 9 French sheath. Via this access we probed the PPVC and inserted a 0.035" extra stiff wire into the right lower pulmonary vein. Over this wire a 25 mm sizing balloon was inserted to perform temporary balloon occlusion of the abnormal vessel. The balloon diameter required for complete occlusion of the PPVC was 19 mm. Pressure measurements performed with the retrograde catheter inserted from the femoral artery revealed almost no change in mean portal venous pressure which increased under occlusion of the PPVC from 17 up to a maximum of 20 mmHg confirming the possibility of interventional occlusion of this abnormal vessel without subsequent portal hypertension.
Based on this information we decided to close the PPVC. The retrograde arterial catheter was withdrawn and an 8 French sheath was inserted and advanced into the PPVC up to its distal end at the right pulmonary vein. Via this sheath two large occluding devices (18 mm Amplatzer™ Septal Occluder and 16 mm Amplatzer™ Duct Occluder; Abbott Medical, Plymouth, MN, USA) were implanted successively into the PPVC .