An 86-year-old male with a history of seropositive rheumatoid arthritis for 30 years. The treatment for his rheumatoid arthritis included methotrexate initially, but due lack of control, adalimumab 40 mg subcutaneously every 2 weeks was added with excellent control of his arthritis of hands and feet. This lasted for few years. However, he later on experienced activity of disease and he was switched from adalimumab to Tocilizumab 162 mg subcutaneous injections every 1 week. His arthritis was controlled on the latter regimen apart from his shoulders. At this time his lab investigations were normal including complete blood panel (CBC), C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), Liver function test (LFT), Renal function test (RFT), and Bone profiles. He experienced an increasing pain and stiffness in his shoulders, in addition to an increasing limitation of shoulder movement in all directions. His other medical conditions include type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension. We are unaware of any history of adhesive capsulitis. His other medications are Methotrexate 10 mg oral once weekly, hydroxychloroquine 200 mg, alendronate 70 mg once weekly. X-rays of shoulders at the time (May 2012 and are shown in ). They showed punctate and linear calcification around the capsule. The patient received multiple intra-articular steroid injections with no notable benefit. Over the years of follow-up visits, his condition progressed, with increasing limitation of his shoulders movements. The Oxford Shoulder Score (OSS) were used to assess degree of pain and disability. Score for both shoulders were 7, indicating a great degree of disability. Repeated imaging on March 2017 was performed and is shown in and showed hypertrophic, global plaque-like calcification in the capsule. Meanwhile, X-ray of hands did not reveal any chondrocalcinosis or erosions and knee x-rays showed advanced osteoarthritis. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of left shoulder was done in November 2020 and is shown in and revealed severe arthritis with remoulding deformity with extensive capsular calcification, intra-articular loose bodies and large joint effusion resulting in dislocation. In addition, he had severe rotator cuff which atrophy reflects chronic complete tear with retraction and atrophy. The patient was offered surgical intervention, but he refused.