A 29 years old pregnant patient with singleton pregnancy at 38th gestational week (GW) was admitted to our obstetric emergency room for membrane rupture. She referred to be affected by a giant, congenital AVM of the left chest wall, extending from the third to the seventh thoracic interspace, involving the overlying thoracic muscles and the correspondent thoracic nerves, the rib cage, the parietal pleura, the transverse process of seventh thoracic vertebra and the scapular girdle, with severe neuropathic pain and reduced mobility in her left arm. She underwent to multiple embolizations to treat the lesion, with no or mild improvement of her pain despite she was taking 60 mg Oral Morphine Equivalents (OME) per day and pregabalin 300 mg twice daily. To treat her medically refractory neuropathic pain she was therefore referred for SCS system implant. A Model SC-1200 Precision™ Montage™ Magnetic Resonance Imaging (Boston Scientific) was successfully implanted, with electrodes at thoracic level and Implantable Pulse Generator (IPG) in the left buttock. The procedure led to a dramatic improvement of the symptoms and withdrawal of opioids and antiepileptic drugs in 8 weeks. One year later she obtained a spontaneous pregnancy. During pregnancy her pain control improved, leading to SCS deactivation through the period. Despite the absence of stimulation she reported her neuropathic pain “go into remission”. So she needed no other medications. Her pregnancy progressed normally until 38th GW. At admission just a pre-SCS implant Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) was available thus making unpredictable the location of her SCS leads, extensions, and IPG. An urgent cesarean section was planned because of the membrane rupture and the risk of severe bleeding due to a possible AVM rupture in case of vaginal birth, due to the increasing of thoracic pressure during pushing (urgent CS type 3 according to NICE classification) . To rule out a possible lesion to SCS system and to identify a safe lumbar interspace, a US assisted spinal anesthesia has been performed. No drugs have been administered before surgery. During anesthesiologic and surgical procedure standard hemodynamic monitoring has been provided for pregnant [Continuous Electrocardiographic monitoring (ECG), Pulse oximetry (SpO2), Non-invasive Blood Pressure (NIBP)]; fetal wellbeing has been registered by cardiotocographic monitoring. Supplemental oxygen has been provided by Venturi mask. In sitting position, after skin disinfection with surgical solution (ChloraPrep®, Carefusion, 244 LTD, UK) and using a broadband (5–8 MHz) convex probe, a left US paramedian sagittal oblique view has been obtained, starting at the sacrum and moving cephalad, to identify the L4-L5 lumbar interspaces . To identify the neuraxial midline, after rotating the probe 90° into a transverse orientation, a transverse interlaminar view has been obtained . No electrodes have been reported in that interspace. After local anesthesia with lidocaine 2% (5 mL) a 25-gauge Whitacre spinal needle has been used to perform a spinal anesthesia using hyperbaric bupivacaine 0.5% 10 mg plus sufentanil 5 mcg and morphine 100 mcg intrathecally administered. Surgical procedure started when T4 level has been reached. An uneventful cesarean section has been performed. A healthy 3395-g female baby was born (Apgar scores of 9–10 at both 1 and 5 min). A postoperative thoracic X-Ray confirmed the right placement of thoracic electrodes but with entry point of SCS leads at L2-L3 interspace . At postoperative day 3 patient has been discharged home.