A 36-year-old Caucasian woman presented with a 10-month history of progressive right calf pain and swelling that severely limited walking and standing. Her condition had been diagnosed as Achilles tendinitis but had not responded to treatment with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and physiotherapy. On examination, her right calf was swollen and tender with induration and thickening of overlying skin . In laboratory investigations, there was an elevated acute-phase response (erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 24 mm/hour and C-reactive protein of 15 mg/dl). Full blood count and levels of creatinine kinase, urea, and electrolytes were normal. Levels of anti-nuclear antibodies, extractable nuclear antigens, and anti-cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. The results of hepatitis B and C serologies were negative. A chest X-ray was unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging of the right leg revealed increased signal intensity in T2-weighted images and this was suggestive of extensive inflammatory changes of the gastrocnemius muscle and, to a lesser extent, the soleus muscle. Inflammatory changes of the subcutaneous tissues in the right lower leg were also found . Our patient underwent a biopsy of the involved skin, fascia, and muscles. Histopathology revealed mixed perivascular and interstitial inflammatory infiltrate predominantly of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and occasional eosinophils involving the deep fascial tissue, whereas the skin and subcutaneous fat were relatively unremarkable. Cutaneous changes could be secondary to tissue remodeling and edema due to the subjacent inflammatory process. In one fragment of muscle, there was small-vessel vasculitis with fibrinoid changes in the vessel wall and intense perivascular and focal mural chronic inflammatory changes. No granuloma was seen . Histopathological features were consistent with polyarteritis nodosa. Our patient declined treatment with oral steroids. She received four courses of ultrasound-guided injections of steroid (80 mg of Depo-Medrone, methylprednisolone) in the involved muscle and subcutaneous tissues at two weekly intervals. Azathioprine 50 mg once daily was added. After three months, our patient responded to treatment and no longer required analgesia when walking. A softening of the localized rash was also observed. Follow-up magnetic resonance imaging at five months revealed almost complete resolution of edema. Our patient showed no signs of recurrence or progression to systemic polyarteritis nodosa more than one year after finishing treatment.