The adolescent was 13-years-old female initially treated for right lower abdominal pain. When the patient came back to the hospital for a check, the ultrasound examination showed absent Mullerian derivatives and suspected testis in the inguinal area. Since then, it has opened a complicated visit for nearly 10 months (Supplementary Fig. ). The patient is the only child of healthy nonconsanguineous parents and was born through caesarean birth at 39 weeks of gestational age. The adolescent presented with breast in Tanner stage 1, undeveloped female external genitalia and suspected testicular tissue in double inguinal area. The External Genital Score (EGS) of the patient was 1, indicating that the patient's external genitalia is closer to that of female. The patient did not have symptoms or signs of adrenal insufficiency. The laboratory examinations suggested hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, 46,XY karyotype, and present SRY gene. The levels of AMH and inhibin B in this patient, evaluated by referring to the reference values in the literatures [, ], were significantly decreased. These clinical data supported the diagnosis as 46,XY DSD.
To obtain the molecular diagnosis, the subsequent genetic sequencing was performed. As chromosome microdeletion and microduplication are pathogenic factors associated with DSD, the copy number variation sequencing (CNV-seq) was performed firstly and the results indicated that there was no pathogenic variation in the patient at the chromosome level . Secondly, the targeting specific disease-causing genes (TRS) was implemented as previously reported . In brief, the exons and adjacent intron regions (± 50 bp) of 360 endocrine disease-causing genes (including DSD-causing genes; Supplementary Table ) were captured. The sequencing results were analyzed using the related software and then a NR5A1 variant the candidate variation was confirmed by Sanger sequencing from the adolescent and parental samples. Pathogenicity analysis identified a de novo c.64G > T (p.G22C) heterozygous and missense variant in NR5A1 that was absent in the parents . This novel variant replaced guanine with thymine at nucleotide 64 in exon 2, leading to a glycine (Gly)-to-cysteine (Cys) substitution at position 22 in the DNA-binding domain (DBD) . Gly22 resides is highly conserved in different species . Additionally, function prediction identified this variation in NR5A1 as harmful (Supplementary Table ). Therefore, these findings suggested the novel c.64G > T (p.G22C) variation in NR5A1 as the genetic cause of 46,XY DSD. In this present study, we implemented both the classic and new approach in parallel for the diagnosis of 46,XY DSD in an adolescent resulting from a c.64G > T (p.G22C) NR5A1 variant. The diagnostic process is shown in Fig. .
Following the molecular diagnosis, further investigations are warranted to determine a more accurate phenotype. The three-day human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) stimulation test and seven-day human menopausal gonadotropin (HMG) stimulation test were performed to further assess gonad function. Negative results indicated that both testicular endocrine function and ovarian endocrine function were poor.
Subsequent issues involved treatment and gender assignment/reassignment. Psychological assessment revealed that the gender identity of the patient was female, which coincided with the social gender. The multi-disciplinary treatment team of DSD in our hospital conducted extensive and in-depth counseling with the adolescent and parents. Following the family agreeing to surgery, exploration results revealed absent Müllerian derivatives with blind vagina and poorly developed testicular tissue in the inguinal region without spermatogenic cells, which were confirmed by intraoperative frozen pathology and postoperative microscopic biopsy . With the parents’ full knowledge and consent, the patient underwent bilateral gonadectomy. The surgical findings suggested that the patient had partial gonadal dysgenesis, which agreed with the clinical data. After careful consideration, the final decision of the family was that the gender of the adolescent to remain female.
The patient returned to our department for estrogen-replacement therapy (ERT) nearly 4 months after the surgery. We performed selective examinations of the patient at age 13 , which revealed the following: height of 161 cm (75th to 90th percentile of height for girls of the same age and the same ethnic group); weight of 64.3 kg (> 90th centile); BMI of 24.8; bone age of 12.5-years old. The blood pressure was normal at 111/73 mmHg. The patient was treated with a low dose of oral progynova (250 μg; Bayer Vital GmbH, Leverkusen, Germany). The breasts developed to Tanner stage 2, and estrogen levels increased after ERT. The patient received regular follow-up and ERT for > 9 months with no adverse drug reactions.
Like this case, the novel c.64G > T (p.G22C) variation in NR5A1 also aroused our interest. The differences in the structural conformations of the WT and NR5A1-Mut variants were evaluated using the NR5A1 structure (Protein Data Bank ID: 4QJR). Despite the G22C substitution, both WT Gly22 and NR5A1-Mut Cys22 form hydrogen bonds with threonine at position 29 (Thr29) (Supplementary Fig. ). According to the root-mean-square deviation between the WT and NR5A1-Mut (0.126), the results suggested that the G22C variant results in minimal alteration of the three-dimensional conformation of NR5A1.
What’s more, in vitro functional verification experiment on the novel c.64G > T (p.G22C) variation in NR5A1 were conducted. 293 T cells (ScienCell, Carlsbad, CA, USA), Myc-NR5A1 WT (WT) and Myc-p.G22C (NR5A1-Mut) plasmids, were used to conduct the NR5A1-overexpression system. qRT-PCR analysis showed no difference in NR5A1 mRNA levels between cells transfected with WT or NR5A1-Mut plasmids . Western blot analysis subsequently confirmed that the protein of both WT and NR5A1-Mut groups was expressed at the same size (~ 53 kDa) and nearly the same level . Immunofluorescence results revealed that WT and NR5A1-Mut localized exclusively to the nucleus , suggesting that the G22C substitution did not affect NR5A1 subcellular distribution. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) were performed to determine the DNA-binding properties of the mutant. The results showed that the G22C substitution decreased the DNA-binding affinity of NR5A1 . To determine transcriptional activity, the dual-luciferase reporter assay was performed using NR5A1 responsive promoter fragments of the human AMH gene. As shown in Fig. E, transactivation activity of the p.G22C mutant was clearly impaired.