In May 2020, an 86-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with abdominal pain and vomiting. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed small bowel intussusception in right lower abdomen, and proximal bowel loops of the lesion were diffusely dilated. A slightly enhanced nodule was detected at the lead point of the intussusception, which made us suspect the existence of a tumor, such as gastrointestinal stromal tumor, small intestine cancer, neuroendocrine tumor, and leiomyoma. Laboratory examination was significant for iron deficiency anemia with hemoglobin level of 7.9 g/dL. We considered performing emergency laparotomy at this point, but did not, because the patient’s general condition was stable and intestinal necrosis was not suspected. We considered elective laparoscopic surgery after decompression of the small bowel is better. Hence, conservative treatment by long tube decompression was carried out. Although her general condition improved and the small bowel seemed to be decompressed by abdominal X-ray, the volume of drainage from the long tube remained high, constipation persisted and her hemoglobin level was dropped to 6.4 g/dL in 1 week. Therefore, we decided to perform diagnostic laparoscopy, after transfusion of red blood cells.
The operation was performed with 3 ports. Initially, a 12-mm trocar was inserted through an umbilical incision. Two trocars were then inserted in the left flank. After confirming the diagnosis of intussusception and absence of abdominal adhesions, a mini-laparotomy was made to observe whole small intestine. The lesion was easily identified as a mass, approximately 4 cm in diameter, had caused a small bowel intussusception . Considering the possibility of malignancy, such as small intestinal adenocarcinoma, we decided to remove the mass with approximately 10 cm of proximal and distal margin. We did not perform lymph node dissection because the necessity of lymph node dissection for small intestinal adenocarcinoma is controversial, and lymph node metastasis was not suspected during the operation. The resected specimen showed a 4.2 × 3.2 × 1.8 cm grayish-white semipedunculated polyp at the center . Histologically, it consisted of lobulated lesions with capillary proliferation infiltrated with inflammatory sells, accompanied with erosive mucosa on its surface , consistent with pyogenic granuloma.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The long tube was removed 3 days after surgery and the patient was discharged 10 days after surgery. Her anemia has improved with the hemoglobin level of 9.3 g/dL.