A 67-year-old lady with hypertension and dyslipidaemia presented in mid 2018 with a 6 month history of New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional Class II exertional dyspnoea with no chest pain. She was on daily Aspirin 100 mg after a non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction in 2011 requiring left anterior descending and right coronary artery (LAD and RCA) percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with drug-eluting stents. A 1-day rest-dipyridamole stress MPI was ordered, with the rest MPI completed uneventfully with no perfusion defects seen . She was asymptomatic with a normal baseline ECG before 0.56 mg/kg of IV dipyridamole was infused over 4 min for stress. During the final minute of the infusion, she developed angina and her ECG showed sinus tachycardia with ST depression . Dipyridamole infusion was stopped and IV aminophylline 250 mg was given with no relief. At 9 min post-dipyridamole, new inferior ST elevation with reciprocal ST depression in I, aVL was noted . The rhythm remained in sinus tachycardia with no atrioventricular block. She did not receive any medications before her urgent transfer to the cardiac catheterization laboratory where oral Ticagrelor 180 mg and intra-arterial (through radial arterial sheath) Glyceryl trinitrate 200 mcg were given on table. Coronary angiography showed a right dominant circulation, patent LAD, and RCA stents with a subtotally occluded distal RCA ( and , Videos S1–S4). There was no significant disease in the rest of the LAD and circumflex vessel. No collaterals supplying the RCA could be visualized angiographically. In view of the small vessel size, the procedurist performed PCI to the RCA using a drug-coated balloon (Magic Touch 2.0 × 15 mm, Concept Medicals) rather than a stent. Percutaneous coronary intervention resulted in resolution of angina and ST elevation. The post-PCI serum troponin I was 1575 ng/L. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed left ventricular ejection fraction of 50% with RCA territory hypokinesia. The patient was discharged well after 4 days.