A 62-year-old woman was referred to the Department of Surgical Sciences, University of Insubria, Varese, for left flank pain. Physical examination was unremarkable. Complete blood cell count, electrolytes, eosinophil count, serum biochemistry and urinalysis were within normal limits. Plain radiographs of the abdomen showed a small round opacity, about 3-cm in diameter, in the left upper region of the abdomen, with evidence of calcifications. Chest X-ray was normal. The patient underwent ultrasound examination (US) that showed a calcified heterogeneous cystic mass between the superior left kidney pole and spleen in the retroperitoneal area. CT scanning demonstrated the presence of a solitary cystic mass with a calcified wall within the left adrenal gland with no enhancement after iv contrast media injection. No other intra-abdominal or intra-thoracic masses were found, either in the liver, peritoneum or lung. MRI T2-weighted imaging showed a hypointensive lesion with a calcified wall, and a peripheral hyperintensive nodule . CT and MRI findings suggested adrenal echinococcosis. The specific serology for immunoglobulin anti-E. granulosus resulted positive 1:61 (n.v. < 50). Urinary catecholamines and metanephrine levels were within normal limits. The patient confirmed that she had had animal contact. The albendazole preoperative therapy resulted in the disappareance of pain. The diagnosis was confirmed by surgery. The cyst was removed by a transabdominal laparoscopic approach. The exploration of the rest of the peritoneal cavity did not reveal any other lesions. The area around the cyst was carefully packed with gauze soaked in 20% hypertonic saline solution. The cyst was not drained nor aspirated during the procedure. An appropriate dissection plane between the cyst and the adrenal gland could not be found as it was hard and adhesive, so both the cyst and the left adrenal gland were endoscopically removed. Pathological examination of the specimen confirmed that it was a hydatid cyst of the adrenal gland. Macroscopic pathologic examination showed a circumscribed unilocular cystic lesion 3-cm in diameter with a thick fibrous wall of 2-mm. It weighed about 57 grams. On palpation there were stone hard areas of calcification within the cyst wall. Examination of the contents of the cyst showed the typical clear fluid of a hydatid cyst with sand pasty material and calcified bodies. Moreover necrotic material with protoscolices was present . No protein was detected and the glucose level was 72 mg/dl. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on the third postoperative day. Therapy with albendazole was administrated for the 4 weeks following surgery (30 mg/kg/day orally). Six months later, the patient is well and in good condition with no further symptoms.