An 80-year-old man with myeloproliferative disorder, characterized by a JAK2 V617F mutation on ruxolitinib, presented to the Emergency Department with several days of worsening abdominal pain. His other medical conditions included coronary artery disease, permanent atrial fibrillation on warfarin, heart failure with a reduced ejection fraction of 38%, diet-controlled type II diabetes mellitus, and a history of prostate cancer in remission.
He reported consuming food at a restaurant a few days prior. He recalled feeling unusually fatigued and weak shortly after the event with anorexia and worsening abdominal pain over the next several days. On the day of admission, he awoke to excruciating, non-radiating, lower abdominal pain with persistent nausea, vomiting, and non-bloody diarrhea.
Initial vital signs included a temperature of 37 °C, heart rate of 100 beats per minute, blood pressure of 153/92 mmHg, respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 95 % on 5 L/min nasal cannula. Physical examination was notable for labored breathing, an irregular heart rate, marked hepatosplenomegaly, and abdominal distension. Laboratory workup revealed a white blood cell count of 6.7×109 cells/L, potassium of 5.8 mmol/L, creatinine of 1.71 mg/dL, total bilirubin of 1.5 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase of 53 U/L, ALT of 22 U/L, AST of 18 U/L, and lactic acid of 2.0 mmol/L. Venous blood gas analysis was notable for a pH of 7.20, pCO2 of 60 mmHg, and bicarbonate of 18.8 mmol/L. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis revealed bilateral lower lobe atelectasis, stable severe hepatosplenomegaly, mild ascites, and no evidence of abscess or perforation. Piperacillin-tazobactam and azithromycin were started for empiric treatment of sepsis and presumptive community-acquired pneumonia. In addition, ruxolitinib was discontinued during his acute illness.
Two sets of blood cultures (BacTAlert; bioMérieux) consisting of aerobic and anaerobic bottles were collected on admission. After approximately 20 h of incubation, the automated instrument detected growth in the aerobic bottle of one set. Gram stain of the broth showed long, thin Gram-negative bacilli. Molecular testing using the GenMark ePlex (Roche Diagnostics) BCID-GN multiplex PCR panel failed to identify the organism. The blood culture bottle was sub-cultured to aerobic and anaerobic agar and incubated for 18 h. An aerobic Gram-negative bacillus was isolated. The organism was identified using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-ToF; Bruker) as with a confidence score of 2.277 using the Research Use Only version 4.0.11.0 BDAL library version 9. Given the unusual recovery of in humans, the patient's blood sample was sent to a reference laboratory at the University of Washington for broad-range bacterial 16S rRNA gene PCR and sequencing analysis, which confirmed the presence of . Susceptibility testing was performed using the Sensititre (ThermoFisher). The organism was susceptible to third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins, fluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, carbapenems, piperacillin-tazobactam, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
The next day, growth was detected in the anaerobic bottle from the second set of blood cultures. Gram stain of the broth showed very long, Gram-variable bacilli, noted to look different from the Gram-negative bacilli seen in the aerobic bottle of the previous set of blood cultures. The bottle was sub-cultured to agar plates. After 1 day, no growth was observed on any of the aerobic sub-culture plates, but growth was present on the anaerobic agar. The organism was subsequently identified using MALDI-ToF as , an obligate anaerobe primarily found in the gastrointestinal tract. Susceptibility testing was not performed.
Stool PCR using the Verigene Enteric Pathogen panel (Luminex) performed on admission was positive for species. Antibiotic susceptibilities for the species in his stool were not determined.
He developed hypotension requiring vasopressors, acute oliguric renal failure requiring continuous renal replacement therapy, acute respiratory failure requiring non-invasive mechanical ventilation, and delirium. Antibiotic therapy was broadened to meropenem for suspected -associated septicemia. Despite this, his explosive diarrhea and tense abdominal distension persisted through hospital day 5, and he experienced continued loose stools that were slow to resolve throughout his hospitalization. Stool testing for was negative. Repeat CT imaging showed no evidence of intestinal perforation, abscess, or megacolon.
He was transferred from the intensive care unit to a regular medical floor on hospital day 6 with global improvement in multi-organ failure. He received a total of 14 days of meropenem with complete resolution of symptoms. He was hospitalized for a total of 26 days and discharged to a skilled nursing facility for ongoing rehabilitation.