A 41-year-old Chinese man was diagnosed in January 2018 with ulcerative colitis. Colonoscopy revealed diffuse hyperemia and edema of the sigmoid colon and rectum mucosa about 30 cm from the anal margin, with multiple erosions and ulcers of different sizes. The bottom is covered with white moss. Peripheral mucosa hyperemia and edema. The rectum shows a patchy pattern of fused ulcers. Thereafter, the patient took mesalazine 1.5 g irregularly once a day. He still intermittently appeared pus blood stool. The patient did not smoke or drink in the past, and had no history of allergy, other diseases or trauma. There was no family history of thrombosis.
In April 2022, he was admitted to the First Hospital of Jilin University for 3 months of intermittent lower abdominal pain, 1 month of aggravation accompanied by black stools, and 1 day of blood in stool. Prior to this, he had a fever at night for 20 days with the highest temperature of 40°C. He took methylprednisolone 40 mg orally once a day. But he still had a fever. He underwent an emergency colonoscopy. The abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed high-density shadow in the stomach and multiple lymph nodes in the abdominal cavity . The examination results indicated diffuse hyperemia and edema in descending colon, sigmoid colon and rectum. Diffuse erosion and ulceration were seen, some of which were large sheets and longitudinal, and mucosal exfoliation. Extensive spontaneous oozing of the mucosa is seen. Large amounts of fresh blood, blood clots and fecal matter were seen in the lumen. Endoscopic biopsy revealed chronic inflammation of the mucosa, accompanied by inflammatory activities, local ulceration, and a large number of acute and chronic inflammatory cells infiltrated in the interstitium. Cytomegalo virus DNA (CMV) (+), Epstein-Barr virus encoded RNA (EBER) (-) . And his diagnosis was clear: ulcerative colitis, Mayo 3 (severe). Due to the patient's presence of deep ulcerations and extensive disease, adequate hormone therapy was given in the context of adequate anti-infective therapy. Methylprednisolone 60 mg once a day intravenously. In combination, Infliximab 400 mg was administered intravenously on the third day of admission, combined with methylprednisolone 40 mg iv. After the treatment of acid inhibition, fluid infusion, anti-virus, liver protection, fluid infusion, albumin supplement and blood transfusion, the patient improved . During the period of active gastrointestinal bleeding, the patient had severe hemoglobin reduction and hemodynamic instability. In order to prevent the complications of aggravating anemia, multiple blood transfusions were required for treatment. After the treatment of blood transfusion, hemostasis and anti-inflammatory, the gastrointestinal bleeding improved and the hemodynamics became stable gradually. The patient was not taking antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy during the bleeding event. After discharge, the hormone was regularly reduced and taken orally.
One month after discharge, he was readmitted with dyspnea for 7 days. At this time, he took methylprednisolone 4 mg orally once a day. Physical examination: body temperature 36.5°C, respiration 20 beats/min, pulse 105 beats/min, blood pressure 124/64 mmHg, cyanosis and sweating. Edema of both lower extremities. Pulmonary artery CTA (Computed Tomography Angiography) suggests bilateral pulmonary embolism. Ultrasonography of both lower limb veins showed thrombus in the lower segment of left popliteal vein, posterior tibial vein and fibular vein (acute stage). Left calf intermuscular vein thrombosis (acute stage). Since the patient's symptoms of dyspnea were relatively severe and pulmonary artery CTA results were inconsistent with the symptoms, pulmonary ventilation and pulmonary perfusion were recommended. The probable cause of the low thrombotic burden and disproportionate respiratory failure in this patient was a small thrombus with multiple pulmonary artery branches that could not be seen directly in pulmonary CTA, resulting in more severe respiratory failure. However, due to the epidemic, it is not possible to conduct tests. This patient was diagnosed with pulmonary embolism (PESI score low risk group). The patient's condition improved after anticoagulation and oxygen therapy .