A 75 year-old-male patient with a chronically implanted VVI pacemaker presented for routine assessment of his device in February 2018. The pacemaker had been implanted for recurrent cardioinhibitory vasovagal syncope in 1988, and the last generator change had been performed in 1996 (St. Jude Medical Regency SR 2404L; St. Jude Medical, MN, USA). The patient was asymptomatic and physically in good clinical condition; known co-morbidities included an atypical chronic lymphatic leukaemia with a stable disease since diagnosis in 2012 under a watch and wait strategy and an implantation of a hip prosthesis due to cox arthrosis. He did not report any regular medication. During pacemaker follow up, an intermittent increase in pacing threshold (up to 2.2 V at 1.0 ms) without any signs of insulation breach/fracture or loss of sensing was detected. Moreover, the battery had also reached the elective replacement indicator. Although the proportion of right ventricular pacing was less than 1%, the patient showed good clinical response to pacemaker therapy as there was no recurrence of syncope since beginning of treatment. Possible treatment strategies (generator change vs. TPS implantation) were discussed with the patient, and we decided to opt for a TPS according to current recommendations .
Verbal and written consent were obtained. Device implantation (Medtronic Micra®; Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) was conducted in conscious sedation (propofol) and supportive local anaesthesia at the puncture site. The procedure itself was primarily uneventful achieving adequate pacing parameters (1.13 V at 0.24 ms, R-wave sensing 14 mV, impedance 720 Ohms). The pull and hold test verified movement of at least two tines confirming adequate fixation as seen in the . Unfortunately, most probably due to friction whilst removing the tether, an accidental forward movement of the delivery tool led to dislocation of the leadless pacemaker, which further embolized into a primary side branch of the right pulmonary artery. An angiogram was conducted for proper visualization (S2), and strategies for endovascular retrieval were discussed in the catheter laboratory. The implanting team and the consulted interventional radiologist opted for a single-snare technique by primarily using a steerable sheath (Agilis, Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL, USA) inserted into the Micra® delivery sheath to gain access to the right ventricular outflow tract. The steerable sheath was then exchanged for a 6 French 90 cm sheath (Brite Tip®, Cordis, Hialeah, FL, USA) and an Amplatz Goose Neck Microsnare Kit (ev3 Incorporation, Plymouth, MN, USA) to reach the leadless pacer. After access to the target pulmonary artery branch and multiple attempts, the device was finally caught at the proximal part with the snare catheter and retracted to the guiding sheath (S3). The sheaths, snare, and leadless pacer were subsequently pulled back to the site of puncture. Complete retrieval was achieved by venotomy and consecutive surgical repair as it was impossible to reinsert the device into the delivery sheath.
The patient remained haemodynamically stable throughout the procedure. Repetitive post-procedural vascular ultrasound yielded no therapeutically relevant abnormalities of the femoral veins. Echocardiographic examination showed only minimal pericardial effusion without any need of pericardiocentesis. At the follow-up one week after discharge, the decision for a generator change was made, which was conducted uneventfully two months later. Repetitive pacing threshold testing at every follow-up remained stable (1.0–1.5 at 0.4 ms) over the last two years. No further intervention was necessary.