A 63-year old male patient presented with generalized lymphadenopathy, exanthema, anasarca and overall weakness in November 2011. His personal history was remarkable for the diagnosis of a peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified (NOS) seven years prior (initial Ann Arbor stage IIA) and subsequent treatment with eight cycles of chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, oncovin and prednisone) followed by 30 Gy involved-field irradiation of the inguinal region. He had been in complete remission since completion of therapy. Currently, a diagnostic procedure was performed, including an excisional lymph node biopsy from the inguinal region.
The reported data are represented in an irreversibly anonymized manner and were obtained with the standard diagnostic processes without additional tissue exhaustion, according to the cantonal regulations. All research carried out on the human tissue samples were in compliance with the Helsinki Declaration. The excised lymph node tissue was immediately fixed in 4% buffered formalin. Following complete fixation, the sample was paraffin-embedded and routinely stained with haematoxylin-eosin, Giemsa, Periodic acid-Schiff’s reaction and Novotny.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded serial tissue sections. For antigen retrieval, tissue sections were immersed and microwaved in citrate buffer (pH 6.0) as appropriate for each antibody. After rinsing with phosphate-buffered saline, immunohistochemical analysis was performed using antibodies against CD2, CD3, CD4, CD5, CD7, CD8, CD30, CD19, CD20, CD79a, PAX-5, ALK1, PD-1 and CXCL13 (all antibodies were from Ventana except CD19 (Dako) and CXCL13 (R&D) and all were pre-diluted/ready to use, except for CXCL13, which was diluted 1:50); respective clones: MRQ11, 2GV6, SP35, SP19, SP94, SP57, L29, LECD19, BerH2, SP18, SP34, ALK01, MRQ22 and polyclonal AF801). All staining was performed on an automated immunostainer (Benchmark XT from Ventana/Roche, USA) using a streptavidin-biotin peroxidase detection system, except for CXCL13, which was incubated manually for 2 h at 37°C and also detected using a streptavidin-biotin peroxidase detection.
For detection of Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNA (EBER) an in situ hybridization was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections using the Ventana ready-to-use kit as prescribed by the manufacturer.
To assess T- and B-cell clonality and clonal relationships between the T-cell lymphomas diagnosed in 2004 and 2011 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for both T-cell receptor gamma and IgH heavy chain (IGH) was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded whole tissue sections.
Genomic DNA was extracted using a Genovison extraction kit (Qiagen, Germany). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) based analysis for IGH gene rearrangements was performed utilizing consensus FR1, FR3 and J primers, as previously described . The PCR products were examined using a high-resolution fragment length analyzer (ABI 310 Genetic Analyzer, Applied Biosystems/Life Technologies, USA). Monoclonal gene rearrangements were identified as prominent, single-sized amplification products; the base pair length was recorded for each fraction. A shift of the PCR products of more than three base pairs between the cases was considered to indicate a clonally unrelated event.
Regular histology revealed effacement of the normal lymph node architecture by a vaguely nodular to diffuse, tumour-cell rich lymphoid infiltrate with focal sparing of peripheral cortical sinuses and destruction of the lymph node capsule. An abundance of high endothelial venules was noted . The neoplastic cells consisted of medium sized atypical lymphocytes with slightly eccentrically located nuclei with coarse chromatin. The mitotic count was elevated (>30/10 high power fields, HPF).
Immunochemistry revealed the neoplastic cells to be of a T-cell origin with positivity for CD2, CD3, CD4 and CD5, expression of PD1 (moderate staining intensity) and focal positivity for CXCL13 ; there was antigenic loss for CD7. Furthermore the cells strongly and diffusely expressed CD20, but no other B-cell markers (CD79a, CD19 and PAX5), which stained intermingled reactive small B-lymphocytes and scattered immunoblasts. CD8 highlighted isolated non-neoplastic T-lymphocytes. ALK1 and CD30 were negative. CD23 exposed expanded follicular dendritic cell mesh works. EBER in situ hybridization did not reveal EBV infected tumour cells and only isolated infected B-cells.
Molecular pathology performed on the current lymph node sample revealed a monoclonal T-cell population based on T-cell receptor gamma fragment length analysis, showing 191 base pairs length in two subsequent runs. Retrospectively the same population was detected in the initial lymph node biopsy obtained seven years previously, suggesting a clonally related relapse . Cytogenetic analysis was not performed. B-cell clonality analysis was performed in the initial biopsy as well as in the follow-up biopsy after detection of CD20 expression in the neoplastic population to exclude progression to or concomitant existence of B-cell lymphoma. Clonal B-cells were not detectable in either of the tested samples. At this time point the diagnosis of relapsing AITL was made. Despite the clear-cut positivity of the tumour cells for the B-cell marker CD20, progression to frank B-cell lymphoma, which can be occasionally observed in AITL, could be excluded taking into consideration histopathology and phenotyping as well as results of the B-cell clonality testing and in particular results from the T-cell clonality analysis, which revealed an identical clone in the initial biopsy as well as in the tumour relapse.
The initial lymph node biopsy was retrospectively analysed for the expression of CD20 in light of the suspected lymphoma relapse. The initial biopsy showed features consistent with AITL (expression of CD4, sparing of peripheral cortical sinuses, slightly expanded follicular dendritic cell meshworks, abundance of high endothelial vascular structures), the blasts were CD10-negative (PD1 and CXCL13 were not yet available at the time of diagnosis in our laboratory), so that the diagnosis of a peripheral T-cell lymphoma, NOS was preferred at that time, which was also in line with the lack of the typical biological AITL syndrome, except for minimal exanthema. Retrospective analysis showed presence of PD1- and partially CXCL13-positive atypical cells in the initial biopsy. DNA extraction and PCR-based T-cell receptor gamma fragment length analysis revealed, as already mentioned, the same clonal T-cell population in the initial biopsy as in the relapse. Therefore the initial diagnosis was modified accordingly. Careful comparison between the B-cell markers (CD20, CD79a and PAX5) as well as the T-cell marker CD3 and marker for TFH cells (PD-1) did not suggest co-expression of CD20 on the neoplastic T-cells at the time of initial diagnosis . Thus, we assume that expression of CD20 was acquired by the AITL at the time of relapse. In addition, morphological comparison between the initial biopsy from 2004 and the biopsy from 2011 displayed a significant increase in neoplastic cells in the latter compared to the former, but no cytomorphological signs of progression such as the presence of frank anaplasia of the tumour cells.