A 43-year-old man presented to our hospital complaining of recurrent headaches for 6 mo.
The headaches lasted from a day to a week with increasing severity and were occasionally accompanied by dizziness and nausea.
The patient had a history of hypertension, and amlodipine (5 mg/d) was regularly taken. Six months before admission, the patient developed a headache without any obvious cause, manifested as pulsatile pain at the top of the head in the occipital and bilateral temporal regions, and which was worse at night. When the headache started, the patient was weak all over, unable to walk, and sometimes suffered from eye swelling and pain lasting for about 10 min; there was no obvious abnormality after relief. Seven days before admission, the patient presented with the same symptoms; cerebral imaging examinations showed hydrocephalus and he was treated with a mannitol drip at a local hospital, which only slightly relieved the symptoms.
The patient had smoked for three decades, approximately 20 cigarettes per day. He also had a history of alcohol abuse for several decades. The patient was a farmer, living in a non-endemic area with contact with dogs and pigs. He had no history of raw meat consumption. Furthermore, he was not aware of any hereditary disease within his family.
The physical examination results included the following: Body temperature, 36.4 °C; blood pressure, 139/84 mmHg; heart rate, 86 beats/min; respiratory rate, 21 breaths/min; and neurological examination revealed cognitive decline.
On the day of admission, the routine laboratory tests were as follows: blood sample white blood cells were 11.75 × 109 cells/L; neutrophils, 8.23 × 109 cells/L; and basophils, 0.08 × 109 cells/L. The remaining erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reaction protein, serum amyloid A, and procalcitonin were in the normal range; urine samples revealed normal results; and a biochemical analysis showed normal results during the admission.
On the third day after admission, CSF was collected via standard procedures and an analysis revealed CSF pressure was 330 mmH2O, total protein level was 1 g/L (normal range, 0.15-0.40 g/L), and glucose level was 0.07 mmol/L (normal range, 2.5-4.4 mmol/L). The number of white blood cells in the CSF was 108 per microliter (normal range, < 8 per microliter) and the eosinophilic granulocytes were significantly increased in the sample. Gram staining for bacteria, Ziehl-Neelsen acid-faststainingfor mycobacterium, cryptococcus neoformans antigen test, CSF cultures, and polymerase chain reaction tests for syphilis and virus detection in the CSF were all negative.
The CSF was sent for mNGS. On the fourth day of the hospital stay, the serum test results for Toxoplasma, Herpes virus, Cytomegalovirus, and Rubella virus (TORCH) were all negative. In addition, no abnormalities were found in anti-O and rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, tumor marker, and tuberculous infection of T cell spot tests.
On the day of admission, magnetic resonance arteriography of the head and neck and magnetic resonance venography of the brain showed partial vascular stenosis and weakened blood flow signal. The next day, cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) results showed multiple cystic lesions in the sacculus of the hippocampus, behind the corpus callosum and the right cerebellum; moreover, an MRI revealed an expanded ventricular system and hydrocephalus, which was associated with headaches; cerebral MRI image with contrast showed several small hyperintense lesions. The doctors considered that the headache may be related to ventricular dilatation and hydrocephalus, perhaps caused by infection, but could not specify the etiology. The imaging examinations results are shown in Figure .