A 66-year-old woman was admitted to hospital complaining of shortness of breath and edema of the lower extremities for two weeks. The patient had no personal or family history of similar diseases.
The patient had an initial blood pressure of 120/70 mmHg, a heart rate of 90 beats per min, a respiratory rate of 22 breaths per min, and a low-grade fever (37.5 °C). Physical examination revealed rales at the base of the left lung and pitting edema in both lower extremities. Initial electrocardiographic examination showed a normal sinus rhythm and a low R-wave voltage throughout the limb leads. The complete blood count showed leukocytosis (white blood cell count of 12.77 × 103/µL). She had a C-reactive protein level of 14.7 mg/dL (normal range < 0.5 mg/dL) and an N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide level of 823.9 pg/mL (normal range < 125 pg/mL).
Contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) scans revealed left-sided pleural and pericardial effusions , and the pericardium was thickened by up to 12 mm with contrast enhancement in the peripheral rims of the pericardium .
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a septal bounce, indicating interventricular dependence and pericardial thickening anterior to the right ventricular wall . The medial e’ velocity (11.4 cm/s) was greater than the lateral left ventricular e’ velocity (8.9 cm/s), and the mitral inflow and tricuspid valve velocity varied with respiration . Hepatic vein diastolic reversal flow during expiration was also observed on pulsed-wave Doppler and color Doppler imaging. The inferior vena cava was dilated and plethoric, indicating elevated right atrial pressure. The cardiac chambers were not dilated, and the right and left ventricular systolic functions were normal. Based on these findings, ECP was suspected.
Further laboratory and imaging examinations were performed to exclude infectious or malignant etiologies of ECP. Pleural effusion analysis revealed a lymphocyte-dominant transudate effusion with no evidence of malignancy or infection. Gram staining, cultures of pleural effusion, acid-fast bacilli staining, Mycobacterium tuberculosis real-time polymerase chain reaction, and other common viral tests showed negative results, and the adenosine deaminase test yielded normal values. Additional laboratory tests were performed to assess the possibility of undiagnosed malignancies or autoimmune diseases. The results of autoantibody tests were negative, but the serum IgG4 level was 2,550 mg/dL (normal range: 30–2010 mg/dL). Hence, IgG4-RD with pericardial involvement was suspected.
The patient underwent an 18F-FDG PET/CT scanning, revealing patchy uptake of 18F-FDG in the pericardium, indicating isolated pericardial involvement of IgG4-RD . Semiquantitative measurement of 18F-FDG uptake and the maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of the pericardium was 2.9, indicating active pericardial inflammation.
A pericardial biopsy was performed via the pericardial window to confirm the diagnosis. Pericardial thickening and concurrent serous effusion were observed during surgery. A histopathological examination of the biopsy specimen revealed a thickened fibrocollagenous pericardium with dense plasma cell infiltration . Immunohistochemistry revealed > 50 IgG4-positive plasma cells per high-power field with an IgG4/IgG ratio of > 20%. The final diagnosis was IgG4-related ECP .
The patient was initially treated with furosemide and colchicine. Once the definite diagnosis of IgG4-related ECP was established, prednisolone at a dose of 40 mg/day was initiated. After initiating the glucocorticoid regimen, the patient remained symptom-free for a week. The patient was discharged without complications after 1 month. The prednisolone dose was decreased to 30 mg/day with a gradual tapering plan.
The patient was maintained on prednisolone and colchicine therapy for the next 3 months. Repeat echocardiography revealed improvement in pericardial thickening and constrictive physiology. Follow-up 18F-FDG PET/CT imaging confirmed a reduction in pericardial inflammation , with markedly decreased 18F-FDG uptake in the pericardium (SUVmax = 1.5). Based on these findings, colchicine was discontinued, and prednisolone was tapered to a maintenance dose of 10 mg/day. The IgG4 level decreased to 1,360 mg/dL, and the patient remained stable without disease recurrence over a 24-month follow-up period.