A 60-year-old female presented to a tertiary-care ED with a chief complaint of painless, right-sided monocular vision loss beginning 16 hours prior to arrival while she was eating dinner. At that time, she experienced an acute onset right-sided headache associated with painless vision loss in her right eye. The headache spontaneously resolved after three minutes; however, the persistence of visual deficits prompted her ED evaluation. Upon arrival to the ED, the patient endorsed a worsening right-sided superior quadrantanopia. She denied trauma, other neurologic deficits, headache recurrence, systemic symptoms, or a history of similar occurrence.
Gross ocular examination demonstrated pupils that were dilated to four millimeters (mm) bilaterally. The right pupil had delayed constriction after both direct and indirect light exposure compared to the left, consistent with a relative afferent pupillary defect. The patient’s right eye could perceive movement only out of the right upper quadrant field. Visual acuity was 20/200 oculus dexter (OD) and 20/25 oculus sinister (OS). Intraocular pressure was 16 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) OD and 17 mm Hg OS. An ocular POCUS examination was performed by emergency physicians shortly after ED arrival. This demonstrated right optic nerve sheath diameter of 0.58 centimeters (cm) and left optic nerve sheath diameter of 0.57 cm . There was no evidence of retinal detachment, posterior vitreous detachment, vitreous hemorrhage, retrobulbar hematoma, or lens dislocation. Upon closer examination of the optic nerve sheath, a hyperechoic signal at the distal aspect of the sheath, known as a retrobulbar spot sign, was appreciated .
Color Doppler was applied to assess for central retinal arterial flow, and application of pulsed wave Doppler revealed an arterial flow pattern with an RI ([peak systolic velocity – end diastolic velocity]/peak systolic velocity]) calculated to be 0.71 . After POCUS examination, the patient underwent additional imaging, ophthalmology, and laboratory evaluation. A non-contrast head computed tomography (CT) did not demonstrate acute intracranial pathology. Fundoscopic exam performed by ophthalmology demonstrated retinal whitening with superior macular sparing in the right eye with supero-nasal chorioretinal hyperpigmentation. The cup to disc ratio was 0.2∶1 bilaterally.
Upon repeat POCUS examination one hour later, there was no evident central retinal arterial flow indicating complete CRAO . Due to this devascularization, a central retinal artery RI was unable to be recalculated. Because of the delayed ED presentation after symptom onset, the patient was not a candidate for tissue plasminogen activator (tPA); therefore, ocular massage therapy was initiated, and she was given a drop of brimonidine 0.1% ocular solution in the affected eye. Anterior chamber decompression was recommended; however, the patient declined. Given the atypical headache associated with the patient’s vision loss, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were ordered in the ED and were elevated (ESR = 40 mm/hr [reference range = 0–20 mm/hr] and CRP 23.4 milligrams per liter [mg/L] [reference range = <3 mg/L]). In case the vision loss occurred secondary to temporal arteritis, the patient was started on high-dose solumedrol (250 mg every six hours for 12 doses followed by prednisone 80 mg daily.
Neurology was also consulted in the ED, and the patient was admitted to the hospital for further management. Her hospital stay included a complete evaluation for stroke and inflammatory pathologies. She was discharged four days later on steroid, brimonidine, and aspirin therapy. The patient was provided with instructions to follow up with neurology, ophthalmology, cardiology, and rheumatology for continued evaluation and management. On subsequent reevaluation one month following her CRAO, the patient’s vision had improved to 20/70 -3 OD with extreme enhanced corneal compensation and 20/30+2 OS. Ophthalmology advised her to continue brimonidine eye drops and maintain strict blood glucose, blood pressure, and lipid control.