A 61-year-old man with significant cardiac history presented to urgent care with acute chest pain. He had history of Ross procedure at age 37 for aortic regurgitation (AR) and bicuspid valve. He subsequently underwent Bentall procedure with Medtronic Freestyle aortic valve replacement and root repair as well as pulmonary valve replacement at age 47 and had known moderate-severe pulmonic stenosis. On exam, patient was hypoxic to 93% on room air with a blood pressure of 100/47 mmHg and pulse of 72 bpm. He had rales in bilateral lung fields, a systolic murmur at the left and right upper sternal borders, and 2+ lower extremity edema. Patient was found to have elevated high-sensitivity troponin to 2.62 ng/mL (0.00–0.07), and his electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with new ST depressions in inferolateral leads. He was given aspirin, atorvastatin, metoprolol, and enoxaparin for NSTEMI. Left heart catheterization showed an anomalous left circumflex artery (LCx) arising from the right coronary cusp, non-obstructive coronary artery disease, and suggestion of severe AR on aortogram. Left ventricular end diastolic pressure was elevated to 35 mmHg, suggestive of diastolic dysfunction. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed only mild paravalvular leak, preserved left ventricular (LV) size with ejection fraction of 65%, and stable moderate-severe pulmonary stenosis (PS). The patient improved with diuresis and was discharged on furosemide and antibiotics for congestive heart failure and presumed pneumonia.
However, he returned to urgent care 2 weeks later with worsening shortness of breath. Although prior TTE only showed mild aortic paravalvular leak, bioprosthetic AR can be difficult to detect by surface echocardiogram. Given the clinical suspicion for severe AR, a transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) would be appropriate and highly sensitive for confirming the degree of AR. The TEE was performed to better evaluate the aortic bioprosthesis and showed severe eccentric AR. Right heart catheterization confirmed moderate-severe PS with mean gradient of 35–40 mmHg and peak gradient of 50mmHg, with pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 29 mmHg. Given the new AR in addition to known PS causing symptomatic decompensated HF, replacement of both aortic and pulmonic valves was proposed. Surgical and transcatheter therapies were considered. The patient was deemed high risk by the heart team for a sternotomy considering his extensive history of prior surgeries. He was ultimately evaluated for TAVR with plan for TPVR if he remained symptomatic after TAVR. The TAVR was selected as the first procedure because the PS had been slowly progressive for several years while the aortic prosthetic dysfunction was new. The TAVR protocol CT demonstrated adequate iliofemoral conduits and appropriate aortic complex for TAVR. The TAVR CT also confirmed severe narrowing of the pulmonary homograft .
The patient underwent TAVR with 29-mm Edwards Sapien 3 (S3) Ultra valve via right femoral artery. The valve was deployed successfully with two additional mLs of contrast using rapid ventricular pacing and fluoroscopic guidance to confirm position. Given difficult visualization of the freestyle annulus, both TEE and the placement of multiple pigtails in the aortic sinuses were utilized to better define the annular plane. Despite this, the valve deployment ended up lower than planned ; however, TEE confirmed well-positioned valve with no paravalvular leak. The TTE following the procedure showed well-functioning prosthesis with mean gradient of 4.3mmHg. The patient had an unremarkable post-op course and was discharged on aspirin and warfarin. Oral anticoagulation was started to decrease risk of clinical valve thrombosis following ViV TAVR.
Three weeks later, the patient reported significantly improved symptoms but had ongoing dyspnea with moderate exertion. He was evaluated for TPVR for his severe PS. The TTE again showed a well-functioning aortic bioprosthesis and stable pulmonary valve stenosis with mean gradient of 42 mmHg and peak gradient of 68 mmHg. The patient underwent stenting of the stenosed pulmonary homograft followed by TPVR with 26-mm Edwards S3 Ultra valve. Initially, the stenosed proximal pulmonary artery (PA) was dilated with sequential balloons to 24 mm, with intermittent injection of the right coronary and anomalous LCx to ensure there was no hemodynamic compromise from compression . Next, given that there was a persistent gradient across the stenosed segment of the homograft, the pulmonary valve and proximal PA were stented with a 26–30 mm CP stent , which was post-dilated with a 24-mm True balloon as it remained constrained at the area of the ostial pulmonary artery. A bare metal stent was chosen over a covered stent to prioritize radial strength. Finally, a 26-mm S3 Ultra valve was deployed under rapid pacing, with placement of the S3 valve at the area of residual constraint in the ostial pulmonary artery . The S3 valve was then post-dilated with the S3 balloon with excellent results. Angiography demonstrated no pulmonary regurgitation, and right ventricular pressure improved from 75/10 mmHg to 44/2 mmHg with a mean gradient of 8 mmHg on TTE. Patient tolerated the procedure well and was discharged home the following day on warfarin and aspirin along with his home medications including metoprolol, furosemide, and atorvastatin.
At 1 month follow-up after TPVR, TTE revealed normally functioning, well-seated bioprosthetic valves in aortic and pulmonic positions with no significant aortic or pulmonic paravalvular regurgitation. The mean gradient for TPVR was 12 mmHg and for TAVR was 11 mmHg. The LV systolic function was preserved with EF 65%. Patient reported marked improvement of heart failure symptoms and return of normal exercise tolerance. He completed cardiac rehabilitation and continued to report persistent exercise tolerance a year later. Repeat TTE at that time revealed preserved ejection fraction of 60% and well-seated bioprosthetic aortic valve with mean/peak gradient of 12/20 mmHg as well as well-seated bioprosthetic pulmonary valve with mean/peak gradient 11/23 mmHg.