An 11-year-old girl, currently in an 8-year remission from B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia diagnosed in her early childhood, presented in our emergency department for bilateral lower limb acute pain starting suddenly when in an apparently good healthy state. In the previous hours leading up to the onset of her symptoms, she performed moderate physical effort while rollerblading. During that activity, she felt a sudden pain in both her lower limbs, which was worse on the left side. When the pain was complicated by paresthesia and mild motor deficit, she was brought to the emergency department, about 6 hours after the onset of symptoms.
Upon physical examination, the patient presented an antalgic position of the lower limbs, with spontaneous, intense pain, accentuated by passive movement, loss of skin sensitivity, paresthesia, and distal motor deficit. Moreover, her lower limb extremities were cold, pale, and slightly cyanotic, with an absent right femoral pulse and absent bilateral peripheral pulses. No other significant changes were noted during the physical examination. Aside from the acute pain, she was in a good general state. No other skin anomalies or lesions and no muscular or skeletal abnormalities were seen. She presented with no respiratory distress and was hemodynamically stable, without any recent history of acute illness.
The blood tests revealed a significant increase in muscle enzymes (CK-MB-165 U/L, CK = 15,789 U/L, LDH = 960 U/L) and mild anemia. The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a normal sinus rhythm and high QRS voltage, while no signs of ischemic changes were visible. Due to the nature of the symptoms, our patient underwent both cardiac and arterial Doppler ultrasound.
Bilateral lower leg ischemia suspicion was confirmed. On the right side, arterial Doppler ultrasound revealed subocclusion of the external iliac artery and total occlusion of the femoral arteries . On the left side, the occlusion was localized in the proximal tibio-peroneal trunk.
Cardiac sonography revealed a gigantic 6.3/3 cm, hyperechoic, unevenly defined left ventricular mass attached to the apical region and the interventricular septum . Due to its increased size and extremely mobile edges, the tumor was protruding through the aortic valve during systole . While no important aortic stenosis was present, a mild aortic regurgitation could be seen. The echocardiography showed no other significant changes.
In settings of bilateral acute lower limb ischemia confirmed by Doppler ultrasounds associated with a very friable gigantic left ventricle tumor, the embolic mechanism was the most likely. With over 8 hours since the onset of symptoms, we assumed that she presented with prolonged limb ischemia, which was endangering her functional abilities. So, bilateral embolectomy with Fogarty catheter and the removal of tumoral arterial obstructive fragments was performed on an emergency basis. Considering the high embolic risk of this hypermobile, fragile, cardiac tumor (and being especially concerned about the risk of stroke), an indication for tumor excision was established. So, after the embolectomy procedure, in the same surgical session, under cardio-pulmonary bypass, a giant, translucent, jelly-like consistency, left ventricular tumor was excised and sent for histopathological examination . The histopathological and immunohistochemistry reports were consistent with the diagnosis of an intracardiac myxoma.
Following surgery, complete blood flow was restored in both of her legs and no residual intracardiac mass could be seen . Although our patient did not present suggestive symptoms for embolization in other areas, we still performed a thoracic and abdominal computed tomography angiography (on postoperative day 4), which showed no other signs of tumor embolism. From a clinical point of view, during the early postoperative period, our patient continued to present with pain and reduced sensitivity in both limbs associated with a motor deficit in the left lower limb extremity (with concordant electromyographical changes).
The evolution was slowly favorable and the patient was discharged after a two-week hospital stay, with improving neuromotor and neurosensory disorders and a recommendation of 3-month oral anticoagulant therapy and continuity of physical therapy. A 6-month follow-up showed no recurrence of the tumoral mass and complete recovery of her lower limb motor and sensitivity function.