A 73-year-old white man presented in 2014 with a chronic fistulation of his left mandible. He had a history of primary hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and hypercholesteremia. Furthermore, in 2010 the diagnosis of a poorly differentiated SCC of his oropharynx was made: tumor stage cT4 cN2 cM0 (TNM, 7th edition, 2010). Clinical findings displayed an exophytic tumor portion, which derived from the right lateral wall of his oropharynx, grew into his right epiglottic vallecula, infiltrated the lingual epiglottis and exceeded the midline in the region of his tongue base. Due to the size of the tumor and at his request a tumor resection was not made. Hence, primary therapy was performed as combined radiochemotherapy. External beam radiation was performed with a fractionation of five times 1.8 Gy per week up to an overall dose of 72 Gy. This was supplemented by a simultaneous chemotherapy with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil in the first and sixth week of radiotherapy. During the oncological follow up there were no signs of residual tumor or lymph node metastases.
Due to an increasingly painful restricted mouth opening in 2013 he sought medical help again. At that time an intraoral fistula of the mucosa in his left retromolar region and a pathological fracture of his left mandibular angle on the basis of an osteoradionecrosis were detected. These conditions required a complete resection of his mandible in the retromolar region and the temporary bridging of the bony defect with a reconstruction plate . Despite intensive wound care, wound healing only took place very slowly and remained insufficient with distinctive wound dehiscence.
After this he firstly attended our hospital in 2014 with exposed osteosynthesis material and persisting suppurating fistulation intraorally and extraorally with the desire for a definitive reconstruction of his mandible. A first reconstruction attempt with a microvascular anastomosed graft from his right iliac crest failed due to an insufficient venous anastomosis. The resected bone of his defect-bordering jaw showed the typical pathohistological findings of an intraosseous PH . Five days later, after explantation of the iliac crest graft, the bony defect was successfully reconstructed with a microvascular anastomosed fibula graft along with an indicator flap from his right lower thigh . The wound healing process was again extremely prolonged. Once more in spite of targeted antibiotic therapy with ciprofloxacin and extensive local wound care some long wound dehiscences developed, which healed only very slowly. After covering the skin defect of his right lower thigh with full thickness skin from his right lower abdomen and closure of the tracheostoma, he was discharged after 6 weeks in a good general condition. Seven months later, the occurrence of a pseudarthrosis at the anterior osteosynthesis required another surgical intervention including debridement of the bordering bone and re-osteosynthesis. By means of close monitoring and continuous local wound care all dehiscences were closed. His osteosynthesis material was finally removed after the bony continuity of his mandible was clearly documented intraoperatively. He is well except for a moderate painless restricted mouth opening and he has largely kept symptom-free.
His bone tissue showed a chronic recurrent osteomyelitis. The trabecular bone was multifocally necrotic and surrounded by a mixed inflammatory infiltrate consisting of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and histiocytes. In addition, there were plenty of neutrophil granulocytes, focal formation of abscesses, and some bacterial colonies with features of Actinomyces. Furthermore, signs of bone reabsorption as well as bone remodeling and fibrosis of the medullary spaces were seen. The trabecular bone was partly covered by ribbon-like proliferations of regularly stratified squamous epithelium without nuclear atypia, mitosis, and dyskeratosis. Immunohistochemical stainings were inconspicuous. There was no overexpression of p53, and the proliferation rate, determined with the antibody against Ki67, showed a physiological staining pattern in the basal cell layers of the squamous epithelium . Moreover, the squamous epithelium expressed p63 , while cytokeratin 7 remained negative as expected . Histological characteristics for the previously diagnosed SCC such as nuclear pleomorphism, increased mitosis, perineural invasion , and an infiltrating growth pattern could not be detected.
In summary, this case is a rare example of an intraosseous PH in response to a chronic recurrent osteomyelitis.