A 55-year-old male, farmer by occupation, presented to us with the chief complaints of rough raised lesions over the palms and soles for the last 3–4 years, hyper and hypo-pigmented macules over the trunk, upper and lower limbs for last 2–3 years and a painful ulcer over the right wrist for the last 2 years. He also had a history of cough, shortness of breath, on and off paresthesia on the upper right limb, hypertension, and weight loss (undocumented). To treat these symptoms, the patient took multiple over-the-counter medications for pain (undocumented), but his condition continued deteriorating. Various social factors were responsible for the patient's hesitancy to seek treatment for his symptoms, including illiteracy, lack of understanding of the seriousness of his symptoms, financial difficulties, and lack of access to good medical facilities in his area of residence. On further inquiry, the patient revealed a history of consumption of ground water (hand-pumped) for domestic purposes. The patient was a farmer by occupation and did not report any history of occupational exposure to arsenic contaminated aerosols/dust related to mining or industrial activities, and no such mines or industries were located near his residence. There was no history of similar complaints among others in the same locality, past intake of indigenous medicine, headache, weakness, easy fatiguability, insomnia, memory loss, tremors, vision loss, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain or mucosa pigmentation. Written informed consent for physical examination, clinical pictures and biopsy was obtained from the patient. On clinical examination there was a single well-defined, ulcero-proliferative growth of size 8 × 7 cm, with elevated margins, covered with yellowish, foul smelling discharge, tender and fixed to the underlying structures on the volar aspect of the right wrist . Multiple hyperkeratotic papular lesions of size 4–5 mm were present on both palms and soles . Hyper and hypo-pigmented macules were present on the trunk, upper and lower limbs. A single, 3 × 2 cm, mobile, hard, non-tender lymph node was present in the right axilla (central group). No organomegaly was noted. Keeping in mind the differentials like arsenicosis, plantar and palmar warts and epidermodysplasia verruciformis, several investigations were performed.
His hemogram, liver and renal function tests, blood sugar and serum lipid profile were within normal limits. Metal analysis was carried out by inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) after microwave digestion of samples as described method by Ansari et al., 2015 with a slight modification. Briefly, blood, hair and nail samples were acid digested in a microwave reaction system (Multiwave 3000, Anton Paar, Perkin Elmer, USA) and the resultant clear solution was analyzed by ICP-OES using a low flow system (Perkin Elmer, Optima, 8000, USA). On metal analysis, arsenic levels in whole blood were found to be 29 mcg/dl (normal range, 0.03–0.2 mcg/dl), while levels of other metals like lead, mercury and cadmium were within normal limits. Hair and nails did not reveal elevated metal levels. Right ulnar neuropathy was found on the nerve conduction study. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right wrist showed a soft tissue lesion involving the flexor aspect of the distal third of the forearm and right wrist . High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest showed hyper-inflated bilateral lung with patchy fibrotic changes and focal pleural thickening in bilateral upper lobes with bronchiectatic changes in the right middle lobe with tiny nodules in the bilateral lung fields. His electrocardiogram and electroencephalogram were normal. Histopathological examination from the papular lesions over the palms revealed hyperkeratotic, hypertrophic stratified squamous epithelium with parakeratosis, and the underlying squamous epithelium zone showed fibro-collagenous tissue with mild inflammatory lymphomononuclear cells. Biopsy from the edge of the ulcer at the right wrist showed malignant epithelial neoplasms in clusters and sheets. Individual cells were pleomorphic and medium-sized with high nucleocytoplasmic ratio, enlarged vesicular nuclei, occasional prominent nucleoli with scanty cytoplasm, and a few keratin pearls were also seen . On the basis of the above findings, diagnosis of arsenicosis with squamous cell carcinoma on the right wrist joint was made. Possibilities of warts and epidermodysplasia verruciformis were ruled out. The patient was started on oral d-penicillamine 250 mg, folic acid 5 mg and isotretinoin 20 mg with topical 10% urea cream and 6% salicylic acid cream to be applied on the keratotic lesions.
Right forearm amputation was advised by the surgeon for the carcinomatous ulcer at the wrist joint of the same side. At first this treatment was unacceptable to the patient as his dominant hand had to be amputated. His difficulty comprehending the seriousness of his diagnosis owing to illiteracy and compounded by financial constraints led to delay of his surgical amputation by six weeks after starting his oral medications. Almost six weeks later, when the patient was both mentally and financially prepared, right below elbow amputation along with right axillary lymph node dissection was performed after obtaining consent. Histopathological examination of the growth after right below elbow amputation showed well differentiated large cell keratinizing invasive squamous cell carcinoma with clear margins. The stump was found to be healthy at one month follow-up .
D-penicillamine was given for a total duration of two weeks. The patient's poor financial background did not allow us to monitor his blood and urine arsenic levels during therapy with d-penicillamine. Not much improvement in palmo-plantar hyperkeratosis was evident after three months of isotretinoin therapy. Hence, owing to no further improvement and considering the high cost of isotretinoin, it was stopped at the end of the third month. Counseling was given regarding use of alternative sources of water. The patient was continued on topical therapy with no fresh complaints on subsequent follow-up visits.