A 56-year-old female with a past medical history of asthma and dyslipidemia presented to a community ED with one week of fever, non-productive cough, dyspnea, headache, nausea and vomiting. She denied smoking history or drug use. Travel history was significant for returning home from an amusement park in Los Angeles one week prior to onset of symptoms. Vital signs at triage were temperature (oral) 38.6° Celsius; heart rate 117 beats per minute; respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute; and pulse oximetry 93% on room air.
Significant laboratory results were as follows: rapid influenza diagnostic test was negative; white blood cells 11.7 10*3 per microliter (mcL) (reference range 4.5–11.5 10*3/mcL), neutrophils relative 92% (reference 50–70%), lymphocyte absolute 0.55 10*3/mcL (reference 0.8–4.80 10*3 /mcL), and lactic acid was 1.0 millimoles per L (reference 0.5–2.2 mmol). A two-view chest radiograph (CXR) was interpreted by the radiologist as pneumonia of the left lower lobe with interstitial changes . After symptomatic therapy and a first dose of azithromycin, the patient was discharged home with instructions to continue antibiotic therapy and return for worsening symptoms.
Approximately 12 hours after discharge the patient returned to the same ED with worsening dyspnea. Upon arrival she was noted to be ill appearing, tachypneic and with moderate respiratory distress despite similar triage vital signs as the initial ED visit. Her lung exam was significant for poor inspiratory effort and rhonchi at the bases. A multi-organ POCUS exam was performed to determine the cause of the patient’s dyspnea.
A cardiac parasternal long-axis view demonstrated normal systolic ejection fraction and no pericardial effusion . The IVC in the subxiphoid view showed greater than 50% collapse during inspiration . A lung exam using a low frequency (5–2 megahertz) curvilinear transducer in the anterior, lateral, and posterior portions, showed the presence of diffuse scattered B-lines with small subpleural consolidations and effusions in each lung zone, with confluent B-lines in the posterior inferior lobes bilaterally . POCUS findings were interpreted as the presence of a non-cardiogenic multifocal interstitial lung process with COVID-19 being high on the differential. The patient was placed in a negative pressure room, and all staff were informed to wear full personal protective equipment when interacting with the patient.
Based on the POCUS multi-organ findings, the patient was resuscitated with an intravenous bolus normal saline and treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics (levofloxacin). SARS-CoV-2 oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal swabs were sent from the ED for testing. The infectious disease consultant agreed with a plan for admission and continuation of droplet, airborne, and contact precautions given the progression of symptoms and worsening respiratory status. She was admitted to a negative pressure room on the medical floor for continued therapy and monitoring of respiratory status. An eventual non-contrast CT of the chest demonstrated diffuse multifocal infiltrates .
As an inpatient, the patient’s antibiotic regimen was adjusted to doxycycline and cefepime. She was under observation and isolation for six days at the hospital of presentation. At this point the SARS-CoV-2 testing had not yet resulted, but her clinical course had improved. She was discharged home with instructions to self-quarantine at home or return to the ED if symptoms worsened. SARS-CoV-2 testing resulted the day after discharge as positive for SARS-CoV-2 ribonucleic acid.