A 56-year-old male presented with worsening dizziness and left-sided hemiplegia overnight. The patient’s medical history included 10-year-long hypertension and type 2 diabetes. The physical examination on admission revealed grade 0 muscle strength in the upper left extremity, grade 3 muscle strength in the lower left extremity, and left-sided hypoesthesia . MRI demonstrated a new-onset ischemic stroke in the right anteromedial medulla oblongata and an old hemorrhage in the right medial pons. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed bilateral VA stenosis in the intracranial segment . Later digital subtraction angiography (DSA) confirmed this result, demonstrating a preocclusive (> 90%) narrowing of the left intracranial VA and tortuosity of the left VA (,). We also found marked hypoperfusion in the brain stem and cerebella by computed tomography perfusion . High-resolution MRI revealed atheromatous plaques in the stenotic segment of the left VA . The patient’s state had remarkably improved at discharge after treatment and rehabilitation.
After 50 days of rehabilitation, he was brought in for endovascular treatment. Physical examination on the second admission showed grade 4+ muscle strength in left extremities. Preoperative MRI revealed no new ischemic stroke. Five days after admission, the patient’s left intracranial VA was recanalized under general anesthesia. A 90 cm 6F Neuronmax088 long sheath (Penumbra, Inc., Alameda, CA, USA) was introduced into the initial segment of the left subclavian artery. Angiography with a 115 cm 5F AXS Catalyst 5 distal access catheter (DAC) (Stryker Neurovascular, Michigan, USA) in the distal V2 segment revealed severe stenosis, dysplasia in the left posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA), and anastomosis supplying blood flow from the left VA to the cervical cord . A concomitant clear visualization of the left VA and venous phase of the intracranial anatomy suggested that the DAC incompletely blocked blood flow . A 2.25 × 9 mm Gateway balloon catheter (Stryker Neurovascular, Fremont, CA, USA) was delivered over a 300 cm synchro2 microguidewire (Stryker Neurovascular, Salt Lake, Utah, USA) to the site and slowly dilated to 7 atm. Post-angioplasty angiography revealed improvement of the stenosis and marked spasm of the left V3 segment . The slow infusion of 1 mg of intra-artery nimodipine alleviated the spasms . Next, a 4.5 × 14 mm Enterprise stent (Codman & Shurtleff, Inc., Raynham, MA, USA) was quickly and successfully implanted in the stenotic segment. The DAC was withdrawn immediately after the control run . The final run showed only minor spasms in the initial segment of the left VA . The patient showed no neurologic deterioration on awakening. Proper blood pressure was maintained using intravenous urapidil, while tirofiban was used to prevent acute stent thrombosis. Four hours later, the patient developed an occipital headache and back neck pain, mainly on the left side. Postoperative CT imaging revealed nothing significant.
However, at midnight, symptoms worsened, accompanied by dysarthria, left-sided hemiplegia, and elevated blood pressure (around 170/100 mmHg) . Again, CT imaging showed no marked changes, while MRI revealed acute infarction of the left posterior medulla oblongata on the next morning . In addition to the new infarction, T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (Flair)-weighted images showed newly developed hyperintensity in the left medulla oblongata. Subsequent DSA demonstrated intact vertebrobasilar arteries and patency of the left VA, left PICA, and implanted stent . To regulate blood pressure, we added an intravenous infusion of esmolol. We used Tirofiban for another 24 h before switching to routine dual antiplatelet treatment with 100 mg aspirin and 75 mg clopidogrel per day. The patient received an intravenous injection of 40 mg methylprednisolone twice per day, along with glycerol fructose and edaravone injections. Three days later, T2 and Flair images showed more profound hyperintensity in the left medulla oblongata . One day later, a cervical spine MRI (T2 images) revealed unexpected findings of similar hyperintensity and swelling in the cervical cord . We added an intravenous infusion of mannitol to ameliorate medulla oblongata and cord edema and started early rehabilitation.
Ten days after the operation, MRI still showed marked hyperintensity in the medulla oblongata and cervical cord, while the patient’s symptoms and neurologic deficits gradually improved (,). The final MRI before discharge showed near-normal intensity in the medulla oblongata and cervical cord, with only slight hyperintensity in the left region. At the 1-year follow-up, MRI showed normal intensity in the medulla oblongata and cervical cord, except for the old lesions (,). Both VAs remained patent on the CTA . The patient achieved a favorable outcome, with a modified Rankin scale score of 2. The physical examination revealed normal speech, grade 5 muscle strength in left limbs, and slightly increased muscle tone in the upper left limb.