A 77 year old male was treated at a chiropractic clinic for low back pain resulting from lumbar facet arthrosis and lateral canal stenosis. On a subsequent visit he reported right wrist pain which began while lifting a heavy box. On examination, redness and swelling was noted on the dorsal aspect of his right wrist. Range of motion was full with pain at end range of flexion and extension. His health history included two hip replacements, two previous episodes of gout in both first metatarsophalangeal joints (2 and 5 years prior), and hypertension. Medications for hypertension included perindopril (4 mg), hydrochlorothiazide (25 mg), and Norvasc (10 mg). In addition, he was prescribed 80 mg of aspirin/day and took a daily multivitamin. One week prior, the patient's general practitioner had increased his Norvasc dosage and also prescribed Tylenol 3 to be taken as needed for his back pain.
Two days later the swelling had increased in the dorsal aspect of his right wrist and hand. Wrist flexion was limited by 80% with severe pain. Pain was present on palpation of the scaphoid bone. Due to the suspicion of fracture, the patient was referred to his general practitioner for radiographs. The radiologist who read the films described tiny cysts at the distal radius and concluded that these were most likely due to old trauma. Mild osteoarthritic changes were noted at the carpal-metacarpal joint at the base of the thumb. The report stated that the radiographs were otherwise normal.
The patient's symptoms worsened with increased pain and swelling over the next few days. Due to the worsening symptoms, repeat radiographs were performed five days later and were read by a radiologist. The radiographs revealed well-marginated juxta-articular bony erosions at the radial styloid process and the dorsal rim of the distal radius with soft tissue swelling. These findings were deemed to be consistent with gouty arthritis. (See figure ).
The patient was referred back to his general practitioner with the radiologist's report and the patient was immediately put on colchicine. At follow up two days later, the wrist swelling had decreased significantly. One week after the initiation of colchicine, no swelling was present and only mild pain was noted with flexion/extension of his wrist and fingers. The patient was taken off colchicine due to diarrhea. A recurrence of wrist pain occurred several weeks later. The patient was referred to a rheumatologist who prescribed colchicine for one month duration. When the pain resolved completely, the patient was prescribed allopurinol. Anti-hypertensive medications were not altered. At one year follow up, no further gouty attacks had been reported.