An 81-year-old female local farmer living in a rural region of northeast Japan noticed a nodule on her right ankle 5 years before her first visit to our hospital. She had a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and osteoporosis, but had no history of trauma to her right ankle. The patient did not seek immediate medical attention, and the nodule gradually increased in size, after which she visited our hospital. A physical examination revealed a cystic mass of approximately 45 × 30 mm at the tip of the right lateral malleolus . There was no tenderness, redness, or local heat. The patient had no functional impairment of her right ankle joint. Needle aspiration of the mass revealed accumulation of approximately 10 mL of yellowish white homogeneous fluid . Gram stain of the fluid revealed accumulated neutrophils and Gram-negative branching hyphae . X-ray images revealed osteoarthritis of the ankle joint. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan with contrast revealed a well-defined T1 iso−/T2 high-intensity mass with strong marginal enhancement on contrast imaging . White blood cell count and serum C-reactive protein level were within the normal limit. Microscopic analysis of the fluid revealed no organism or crystal, like monosodium urate and calcium pyrophosphate. Culture of the aspirated fluid showed negative findings. After the initial visit, the patient discontinued the follow-up visits.
One year after the initial visit, the patient returned to our hospital because of pain in the right ankle joint. The mass did not appear to have changed in size. Aspiration of the fluid was repeated with no change in its characteristics. However, culture of the aspirated fluid revealed growth of black colonies . Microscopic analysis detected blackish hyphae . The fungus was classified as a branching group of Kirschsteiniothelia by sequencing the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions. A second aspiration performed 1 month later showed the same results on morphological and molecular biological examinations. The sensitivity patterns of antifungal agents were studied . Fluid accumulation recurred shortly after needle aspiration; however, the patient became otherwise asymptomatic and refused further treatment, such as antimycotics or surgical debridement; the patient is currently under careful observation.
Growth of black colonies was obtained on Sabouraud dextrose agar (Purmedia®, Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) after 10 days of incubation at 25 °C , and no growth was observed on blood agar/bromothymol blue lactose agar (TSA®, Nippon Becton Dickinson Company, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Microscopic analysis revealed 2.5–3.0 μm, brown to black, septate, smooth, or verrucose hyphae with dark brown droplets, which were blanching . There was no conidia or spore formation that would lead to species identification.
The fungal DNA was extracted using PrepMan-Ultra Sample Preparation Reagent® (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) from the culture on potato dextrose agar (Difco™ Potato Dextrose Agar, Nippon Becton Dickinson Company, Ltd.) after 7 days of incubation at 25 °C. The ITS regions of fungal ribosomal DNA were amplified with primers ITS4 and ITS1 . The sequence of the ITS region was determined using ABI Prism 3130 N® (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) (Additional file ) and compared with other known species in the GenBank database using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) algorithm (Additional file ). BLAST searches demonstrated 89–91% identity matches with Kirschsteiniothelia and Dendryphiopsis species in the Kirschsteiniotheliaceae family (91%, K. aethiops, Genbank no. AF377283.1; 91%, Dendryphiopsis atra, Genbank no. HF677175.1; 90%, K. lignicola, Genbank no. HQ441567.1; and 90%, K. emarceis, Genbank no. NR_138375.1).