A 42-year-old female presented to her primary health care provider with a 2-year history of a painful mass on her left forehead with a past medical history of a traumatic brain injury and intracranial hematoma from a motor vehicle accident when she was 11 months old. She has a CT head with contrast showing evidence of gliosis in the right basal ganglia suggest previous trauma . She had left forehead mass over the supraorbital skin that had been increasing in size over several years and was mildly tender on palpation. No skin changes were noted on examination. She has residual left sided hemiparesis from the accident. She has no history of any neurosurgical operations. She has no other co-morbidities and no regular medication. She has a family history of sebaceous cysts only without any history of known brain lesions/meningiomas.
An ultrasound examination was organized by her primary health care doctor which was reported as likely sebaceous cyst with features of a hypoechoic lesion 17x7x21mm in size, with no increased vascularity or bone involvement. She was referred to a plastics and reconstructive surgeon specialist for further management. The lesion was resected and sent for pathological examination. Intraoperative findings included that the lesion was noted to have an intimate association with the left frontal bone within the subgaleal plane. The surgery was performed by a senior plastic surgeon, Dr. W Cockburn .
Macroscopically, the lesion was reported as an irregular shaped mass of grey yellow fibrofatty tissue 24x19x10mm. Microscopically the lesion was a cellular tumour which comprised of ovoid cells arranged in nodules with whorled pattern containing single nucleolus only and some mitotic activity . On further immunohistochemistry, the tumour cells were positive for EMA, cytokeratin AE 1/AE3 and PR. There was also focal S-100 and variable CD99 staining. The Ki-67 proliferation index was low (less than 5 % with a focal area amounting to 20 %). The diagnostic summary reported an ectopic subgaleal left frontal meningioma WHO Grade 1.
Post operatively, a CT brain and neck with pre and post contrast was organized to look for intracranial pathology. There was no broad based dural enhancing lesion to suggest an intracranial meningioma. No destructive osseous lesion or cervical adenopathy was identified. Clinically the patient had an uncomplicated recovery and to date has no clinical reoccurrence of her PEM at a 1 year follow up.