A 17-year-old male student has presented to our emergency with complaints of bilateral loin pain and fever for 10 days. There was no urine output for the last 2 days. There was no significant past, personal, family or genetic history. There was no history of COVID-19 infection or any related symptoms. On examination, patient was sick-looking, pulse was feeble and tachycardic. Blood pressure was 90/60 mm of Hg. On abdominal examination bilateral renal angle tenderness was observed. Patient was resuscitated and investigated further. A Doppler ultrasound of the abdomen revealed bilateral enlarged kidneys with absent blood flow in the renal vasculature. His hemoglobin was 9.1gm/dl, and leukocyte count was 36,000cells/mm3. The serum creatinine was 6.5 gm/dl, and serum potassium was 5.8 mEq/L. Arterial blood gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis, for which sodium bicarbonate correction was given. After resuscitation and inotropic support a provisional diagnosis of bilateral acute pyelonephritis with acute kidney injury and renal artery thrombosis was made. Blood cultures were sent. Due to anuria, urine specimen was not available. Dialysis was done, and patient was started on intravenous ceftriaxone and clindamycin antibiotics. Patient was investigated for thrombophilia, and the results of which were normal. Sickle cell test was negative. Immunodeficiency screening was negative. Blood culture was sterile after 72 h of incubation. Chest X-ray was normal.
The patient did not improve clinically, so it was decided to further investigate the etiology on the third day of admission. Under high-risk consent and peri-procedural dialysis support, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) was performed. CECT revealed bilateral enlarged kidneys with bilateral renal artery thrombosis with global renal infarcts and mild ascitis . CT-guided renal biopsy was performed in the same sitting which revealed fungal hyphae in the background of necrotic glomeruli . Bronchoalveolar lavage specimen did not reveal any fungal hyphae. Patient was started on liposomal amphotericin B with renal replacement therapy. However, patient deteriorated and succumbed to sepsis on the 4th day of admission.