Here we report a 48-year-old male case of EAML of the kidney which is a relatively newly described renal neoplasm and is closely related to the more common classic AML of the kidney and perivascular epithelioid cell neoplasm of extra-renal sites .
The ethical committee of our institute gave us permission for the current publication. The patient gave informed consent and is aware of this case report.
The patient arrived at our institute, complaining of severe pleuritic chest pain for approximately three months. He was not a smoker and did not consume any illicit drug or alcohol. He had never experienced urinary problems. His past medical history was unremarkable. He had no history of previous surgery.
On physical examination, a huge abdominal mass was palpated in the left flank. Incredibly, he did not feel this enormous mass earlier which may suggest the rapid growth of the lesion.
There were no abnormal findings in laboratory studies (Including complete blood count, urine analysis and stool examination) except for a slightly elevated Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR). Renal and liver function tests were within normal limits. He was admitted for further diagnostic evaluations. The chest Computed Tomography scan (CT-scan) revealed a massive pleural effusion in the left hemithorax. Abdominopelvic CT-scan showed two infrarenal heterogeneous masses arising from the medial pole of the left kidney with significantly increased vascularity. Both masses contained adipose tissue, which was suggestive of either AML or a well-differentiated liposarcoma .
Purified Protein Derivatives (PPD) skin test and cytopathologic analysis of pleural fluid were done in order to rule out tuberculosis and malignancy respectively. The aspirated fluid only contained inflammatory materials.
Then, he underwent a radical left nephrectomy which is the treatment of choice for huge AML of the kidney based on the literature. Surgery was performed by an experienced urologist, under general anesthesia, and via a midline incision. After exploring the abdominal cavity, two huge masses attached to the middle pole of the left kidney were observed . Massive intra-operative bleeding led us to infuse one unit of homologous cross-matched packed cells. Masses were measuring 32*22*8 cm and 2*1*0.5 cm, with lobulated surfaces and covered by a thin capsule. On cut sections, both masses contained soft, creamy yellow tissue comprising a growing adipose tissue. The smaller mass was separately located into perinephric fat while the greater one, was invaded renal sinus fat. After the operation, he was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit for 4 days and then to the urology ward for a week. The post-operative period was uneventful and the scar healed perfectly.
The specimen was sent for histopathologic evaluations. The larger mass contained necrotic tissue and atypical epithelioid cells with the mitotic rate of 0–1 IN 10 HPF. The atypical mitotic figure was not identified. These findings completed the gross characteristics to confirm the diagnosis of EAML, possibly associated with tuberous sclerosis. Lastly, by the consult of an expert dermatologist, the association with Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC) which presents with multi-system progressive tumors, intractable epilepsy, and mental retardation, was ruled out. He had no skin lesion suggestive of sclerotic changes or a history of neurological manifestations of TSCs.
No specific concurrent treatment was applied for him except antibiotic (1 g of Cefazolin every 6 h) and analgesia (when required) for two weeks postoperatively. He was under our close observation during his stay at the hospital. Renal Function Test and Complete blood count were evaluated every other month. His abdominal pain was completely relieved after the surgery. At a two-year follow-up by CT-scan. There has been neither metastasis nor recurrence during the 24-month period since resection .