A 74-year-old Japanese woman with rheumatoid arthritis and osteoporosis fell down and sustained a periprosthetic humeral shaft fracture. She underwent left primary TEA 5 years before sustaining this fracture. 1 year after the TEA, she had a left humeral surgical neck fracture caused by a fall from a standing height. Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) was performed with a PERI-LOC plate (Smith and Nephew, London, United Kingdom). This plate pulled out because of the osteoporotic bone 6 months after the ORIF, and repeat ORIF with a PERI-LOC plate was needed. The humeral surgical neck fracture showed union . The periprosthetic humeral shaft fracture was just proximal to the tip of the stem (Mayo classification type H-III) and just around the most distal screw of the PERI-LOC plate. This fracture was classified as simple and oblique (AO/OTA 12-A2). The humeral component of the TEA did not loosen . Operative treatment was indicated because acceptable reduction was not obtainable with a hanging arm cast and because the oblique fracture was at the most distal screw of the previous ORIF. The stem and the minimal distance between the stem tip and fracture line did not allow for solid bicortical screw fixation with plate. Plate fixation with a circulating wire system was an alternative but was more invasive than the external fixator. Therefore, we elected to use the Ilizarov external ring fixator for this patient. The surgery was performed in the prone position, under general anesthesia. Five TrueLok (Orthofix, Lewisville, Texas) rings were used as follows, from the proximal ring, 150 mm; 5/8 a semicircular ring, 140 mm: 5/8; 140 mm: 5/8; 140 mm: 1/2; and 140 mm: 5/8. Olive-stopped (1.8-mm) K-wires (Orthofix, Lewisville, Texas) were inserted percutaneously through the safe corridors into the humerus and ulnar olecranon, fixed after tensioning to 80 Nm, and were connected to four rings proximally. The two half pins were inserted in the proximal fragment of the humerus in a position not interfering with the plate, to protect the radial nerve, and were connected to the 150 mm: 5/8 ring. The most distal ring (140 mm: 5/8) secured the radius using one olive-stopped K-wire passing perpendicular to the shaft. The two screws at the fracture site were removed through a small incision ( and ). After surgery, three additional increases in compression were applied. Weekly pin site care by the surgeon (Y.Y) was done. Superficial pin tract infections occurred once 2 months postoperatively at the most proximal half pin. It was classified as Grade 2 on the Checketts classification and was treated with oral antibiotics (Cefaclor 250 mg po TID for 5 days). Transient ulnar nerve palsy occurred with resolution after 6 months of the fixator removal. The fixator was removed after 4 months when the fracture showed radiographic union and good alignment . During fixator removal, three bicortical screws inserted into the distal part of the plate were also removed. At 6 months follow-up after removal, the patient had elbow range of motion 10С, 80 pronation, and 80 supination . The patient scored 8.6 on the patient-rated elbow evaluation, Japanese version (PREE-J; where 0 is the best score and 100 is worst) , and 20.5 on the quick disability of the arm, shoulder, and hand score , where a score of 0 signifies no disability and of 100 severe disability. The patient experienced no pain and returned to her pre-injury occupational activities. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.