A 57-year-old man was referred to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Kyushu University, with a chief complaint of a painful ulcerative lesion on the left lateral border of his tongue . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a tumorous mass occupying half of the tongue on the left side, extending to the lingual septum, and partially invading into the internal pterygoid muscle . No metastatic lymph nodes were found in the bilateral neck by palpation, ultrasonography, or computed tomography (CT). The patient had a medical history of diabetes mellitus. Pathological diagnosis of an incisional biopsy specimen indicated a moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) (cT4aN0M0, stage IV). Planning CT was carried out followed by preoperative chemoradiotherapy including external beam irradiation to the primary tumor and neck in daily fractions of 2 Gy, five times weekly for 3 weeks, and oral administration of S-1 (120 mg/day) started 1 week prior to radiotherapy and continued throughout the radiotherapy period. One month after completing the preoperative chemoradiotherapy, the tumor was resected by subtotal glossectomy and segmental mandibulectomy under general anesthesia. Modified radical neck dissection and reconstruction using a rectus abdominis myocutaneous flap were performed simultaneously with tumor resection. Pathologically, four metastatic lymph nodes were identified: one in level I, one in level II, and two in level III. The histopathological response of the primary tumor to preoperative chemoradiotherapy was poor, and many residual carcinoma cells were noted in the muscular tissues in the resected specimens, though the surgical margin was tumor-free. Locoregional recurrence was detected by CT imaging 3 months after surgery, and the patient received further chemoradiotherapy (S-1, 120 mg/day; external beam irradiation in daily fractions of 2 Gy, five times weekly for 7 weeks). However, after completion of the chemoradiotherapy, the patient developed hypercalcemia (maximum serum calcium level, 16.3 mg/dL) and leukocytosis (maximum white blood cell count, 22.7 × 103/μL). The serum levels of PTHrP and G-CSF increased in parallel with progression of his hypercalcemia and leukocytosis . Immunohistochemical staining revealed expression of PTHrP and G-CSF in the residual cancer cells . Interleukin (IL)-6 expression was also detected in the cancer cells . Based on these clinical and pathological findings, the patient was diagnosed with hypercalcemia and leukocytosis associated with malignancy. He was subsequently managed with intravenous fluids, furosemide, prednisolone, elcatonin, and pamidronate. However, an F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan disclosed multiple metastatic regions, including the pelvis, lung, femur, adrenal gland, sternal bone, and inguinal nodes, and he progressed to respiratory failure and died of carcinomatous pleuritis 1 month later.