Renal dysfunction was diagnosed in a 70-year-old man who visited our hospital for a medical checkup. His serum creatinine level and creatinine clearance rate were 8.78 mg/dL (normal range: 0.53–1.02 mg/dL) and 8 mL/min (normal range: 80–180 mL/min), respectively. He was diagnosed with Bence–Jones protein λ-type multiple myeloma based on the presence of 40% plasma cells in his bone marrow (10% or more of plasma cells is considered definitive of the disease) and Bence–Jones proteinuria (M proteinuria of 4.8 g/day). Additionally, the diagnosis of symptomatic multiple myeloma (International Staging System stage 3) was based on the presence of renal dysfunction. Renal biopsy revealed cast nephropathy known as myeloma kidney, in which large amounts of Bence–Jones proteins formed casts that blocked the tubules . BD therapy was initiated with concurrent VACV for herpes zoster prophylaxis. We administered a reduced dose VACV of 500 mg three times a week because of the patient’s renal impairment, based on the drug information on VACV provided in the UpToDate database. His renal function was monitored twice per week during therapy. Six weeks later, during his second course of BD therapy, the patient was hospitalized because of impaired consciousness. He displayed no other symptoms during hospitalization.
On admission, his vital signs were as follows: Glasgow Coma Scale score, E2, V4, M4; body temperature, 36.5°C; blood pressure, 145/79 mmHg; pulse rate, 73 beats/min; respiratory rate, 15 breaths/min; and SpO2, 96%. His vital signs were normal, and there were no remarkable neurological abnormalities except for disturbance of consciousness. summarizes the results of patient’s blood test on admission. The results, including renal function, were unchanged. Brain magnetic resonance imaging and cerebrospinal fluid analysis—cell counts 1/µL, protein 40 mg/dL, glucose 98 mg/dL, reference blood glucose level 125 mg/dL—revealed no abnormalities. There was no new electrolyte, endocrine hormone abnormality, or suggestion of epilepsy. Therefore, we suspected drug-induced disturbance of consciousness and suspended the BD and VACV therapy. Three days after discontinuing the drugs, his level of consciousness returned to normal, and the BD therapy was restarted after 20 days of drug interruption. The Naranjo score for estimating the probability of adverse drug reactions was 7 points. In this scoring system, ≥ 9 points indicate “high probability for adverse reactions” and 5–8 points indicate “probability for adverse reactions”. In all Japan, the laboratories do not have facilities to measure ACV/CMMG levels. Though his blood level of ACV could not be measured, the clinical diagnosis was ACV neurotoxicity based on his response to the suspension of the therapy, the high Naranjo score, and the lack of other contributing factors. We theorized that ACV blood levels gradually increased over the long-term administration of oral VACV owing to renal dysfunction. illustrates his clinical course.
The patient underwent 9 cycles of BD therapy and achieved complete remission. We administered 250 mg of famciclovir for herpes zoster prophylaxis, three times a week, between cycles 4 to 9. One year after the end of treatment, he remained in remission. His creatinine level recovered and remained stable at 4–5 mg/dL in response to the treatment. He did not exhibit any sequelae of ACV encephalopathy.