A 71-year-old man with metastatic non-small cell lung carcinoma and cardiovascular risk factors of type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, heavy smoking history of 80 pack years, and previous coronary artery disease, presented to oncology unit for cycle 8 of pembrolizumab and cycle 5 of paclitaxel and carboplatin. He had coronary angiogram in 2014 which showed distal LM 20–30%, left circumflex artery (LCX) 80%, right coronary artery (RCA) chronic total occlusion, and PCI was done to LAD. He has no family history of coronary artery disease. He was recently diagnosed with poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with staging of cT4N2M1. He had previously progressed on four cycles of pembrolizumab, thus carboplatin and paclitaxel were added two months prior to our event. Patient received a total of 7 doses of pembrolizumab and 4 doses of carboplatin and paclitaxel with no events.
During the eighth session of chemotherapy, pre-medications including diphenhydramine 50 mg, dexamethasone 20 mg, and netupitant were given, and patient completed the pembrolizumab infusion without any complications. However, after starting paclitaxel infusion, the patient developed sudden onset left side chest pain, radiating to left arm associated with shortness of breath. On examination, he was alert and oriented, he was tachypneic (respiratory rate of 25 breathes per minute), tachycardic (heart rate of 109 beats per minute), normotensive (blood pressure of 123/58mmHg), and he was maintaining his oxygen saturation (oxygen saturation 93%) on 4 L of oxygen. Physical examination was remarkable for raised jugular venous pressure with diffuse wheezes and bilateral basal crackles on chest. Paclitaxel was immediately stopped, and the patient received hydrocortisone and diphenhydramine as possible hypersensitivity reaction. Electrocardiogram was showing normal sinus rhythm, ST depression 1 mm in the inferolateral leads and 1 mm ST elevation in aVR . Laboratory results revealed troponin T levels of 32 ng/L, 74 ng/L, then 1439 ng/L. The peak troponin level was 2834 ng/L (normal value 3–15 ng/L). He was diagnosed with non-ST elevation myocardial infarction and shifted to coronary care unit.
He received full anti-ischemic medications including his home medications which were aspirin 100 mg, bisoprolol 2.5 mg, isosorbide dinitrate 20 mg, rosuvastatin 20 mg, and in addition, he was loaded with 300 mg clopidogrel and started on therapeutic enoxaparin.
CT pulmonary angiogram showed no evidence of pulmonary embolism. Transthoracic echocardiography showed left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 30% (compared to LVEF 49% in previous echocardiogram), with regional wall motion abnormalities in inferior and anterolateral walls (additional file ).
Coronary angiogram was done (additional file ) which showed 70% stenosis in ostial and distal LM, 80% stenosis in-stent restenosis in proximal to mid LAD, 80% stenosis in distal left circumflex artery, 100% chronic total obstruction in proximal right coronary artery. A drug-eluting stent (Xience Sierra 3.5 × 33 mm) was placed in the ostial LM to proximal LAD.
Unfortunately, two days after the coronary angiogram, patient developed melena with 4 gram drop in hemoglobin, for which he required two units of packed red blood cells. Upper and lower endoscopy showed only two small, flat angiodysplasia lesions oozing blood in cecum which were clipped, which stopped the oozing. Even after gastrointestinal bleeding, he was kept on dual antiplatelet, and his recovery afterwards was unremarkable, with no more drops in hemoglobin.
After several days of observation, he was discharged home with education regarding smoking cessation and lifestyle modification, in addition to dual anti-platelet therapy with aspirin and ticagrelor for one year, then with ticagrelor monotherapy lifelong. In a follow up with cardiology clinic 2 weeks after discharge, patient was well and compliant to medications.