A British Caucasian girl aged 15 years presented to our institution with a double thoracic scoliosis. She was diagnosed with TCS type 1 on the basis of clinical findings and genetic testing. As part of the underlying condition she had bilateral conductive hearing impairment treated with hearing aids. She also had a mild degree of micrognathia with good mouth opening and lower jaw protrusion. There was no history of chest or upper airway infections and she had an effective cough. There was no family history of syndromic conditions or scoliosis.
The development of a scoliosis was first noted at the age of 14 years. No treatment was given at that stage and the deformity gradually progressed. At presentation to our clinic, she was post-menarche with height 162.7cm, arm span 171cm, body weight 50.6kg, and body mass index 31.2.
On clinical examination, she had a severe right thoracic scoliosis which was rotated to the right and was producing a marked prominence of the rib cage and scapula adjacent to the convexity of the curve. There was also thoracic translocation and listing of her trunk to the right with associated waistline asymmetry and prominence of the left side of her pelvis. A left upper thoracic scoliosis was present and this resulted in levelling of her shoulders. Her pelvis was level with no evidence of leg-length discrepancy. There were no skin or soft tissue abnormalities overlying her spine. She reported no neurological abnormality. A neurological examination confirmed normal tone, muscle power, sensation and tendon reflexes in her upper and lower limbs, as well as symmetrically elicited abdominal reflexes. There were no upper motor neuron signs.
Radiographs of her spine during initial assessment in our clinic revealed a right thoracic scoliosis extending from T6 to L1 and measuring 90° and a left upper thoracic scoliosis extending from T1 to T6 and measuring 51°. Thoracic kyphosis was within normal limits but lumbar lordosis was increased with an overall negative sagittal balance of her spine. The radiological evaluation excluded the presence of congenital anomalies affecting her vertebral column and chest wall. There were no features suggestive of congenital spinal stenosis and the interpedicular distance was within normal limits across all spinal segments. Her Risser grade was 2 with closed triradiate cartilage bilaterally, indicating that she had been through the most rapid stages of skeletal growth.
Due to the severity of her scoliosis the decision was made to proceed with surgical correction. In the presence of the underlying syndromic condition, a preoperative assessment was organised and this included spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and cardiac, anaesthetic and respiratory reviews.
Her spinal MRI demonstrated no intraspinal anomalies, normal appearance of the pedicles and no evidence of spinal stenosis. The cardiology evaluation including electrocardiogram and cardiac ultrasound showed normal function. The respiratory review including chest radiographs, capillary blood gas sample and sleep studies demonstrated a restrictive pulmonary disease with forced expiratory volume in 1 second 51% and forced vital capacity 62% predicted. The anaesthetic evaluation did not demonstrate any significant airway anomaly that could complicate intubation and confirmed the patient’s fitness to undergo scoliosis surgery. Blood test results including full blood count, urea, electrolytes, liver function tests, C-reactive protein, and coagulation screen were within normal limits. At the time of surgery, 5 months following her initial clinical presentation, progression of both thoracic curves was noticed to 102° and 63° . Both curvatures were significantly rigid as evidenced by supine maximum traction radiographs.
Our patient underwent a combined single-stage anterior and posterior spinal arthrodesis extending from T2 to L4 vertebrae with the use of pedicle hook, sublaminar wires and pedicle screws, and rod instrumentation at age 15 years and 5 months . The anterior procedure included an open right thoracotomy through an incision along the length of the 8th rib which was excised subperiosteally. Her spine was exposed from T5 to T12 and 7-level discectomies with anterior thoracoplasties that were performed to increase flexibility and allow correction of the rigid deformity. During the posterior stage, a subperiosteal exposure of her spine to the tips of the transverse processes with extensive facetectomies was performed in order to further mobilise the curve. This was followed by an interfacetal and intertransverse arthrodesis using locally harvested bone from the spinous processes and supplemented by autologous rib graft. Posterior instrumentation was used to correct the deformity and the corrective manoeuvers included apical segmental translation, rod de-rotation, as well as proximal/distal distraction/compression of the construct. Intraoperative spinal cord monitoring was performed throughout the surgery recording cortical and cervical somatosensory and transcranial electrical motor evoked potentials and there were no problems. Postoperatively, she was transferred to our intensive care unit (ICU) intubated with a right chest drain.
Our patient was extubated on the first postoperative day and remained in the ICU for a total of 6 days. During the initial postoperative period, her nutrition was maintained with nasogastric feedings. There were no neurological abnormalities and she gradually mobilised out of bed without external support to the spine. She received intensive respiratory physiotherapy as there was evidence of a small bilateral pleural effusion which required placement of a pigtail catheter in her left chest cavity. Non-invasive ventilation was not required. She was discharged on oral feedings 14 days after admission and made an uneventful recovery. Postoperative radiographs showed correction of her right thoracic scoliosis from 102° to 25° and the upper thoracic scoliosis from 63° to 24° with a balanced spine in the coronal and sagittal planes .
At latest follow-up 3 years after surgery, she had no complaints of her back and she had returned to normal activities including sports. She was skeletally mature as determined by the complete development of the iliac apophysis (Risser grade 5). Repeat spinal radiographs demonstrated no loss of scoliosis correction across the instrumented levels and no detected pseudarthrosis. There was also no evidence of add-on junctional deformity either above or below the levels of the spinal fusion.