A 28-year-old female nursing student who is a Jehovah’s Witness from Akwa Ibom state, Nigeria presented with a three year history of pain in the right hip which had been progressively worsening with noticeable shortening within one year duration. Pain was worse while walking and restricted home chores and school activities. She is a known SCD patient diagnosed in childhood who had never attended a sickle cell clinic and did not know her steady state haemoglobin. Her last crisis which was that of bone pains was ten years prior to admission. Examination showed an underweight patient with body mass index of 17.9kg/m2, with an anthalgic gait mobilizing using a walking stick. She had a tender right hip with hip flexion of 50 degrees, abduction and adduction of 10 degrees with zero internal rotation, external rotation and extension due to pain. Her Harris hip score was 53 and she had a limb length discrepancy of 2 cm. Her heamoglobin was 10g/dl, ESR 45mm/Ist hr, WBC 16000/mm3, neutrophils of 72%, lymphocytes of 28%. The liver function test, serum electrolytes, urea and creatinine, fasting blood sugar, urinalysis, were all within normal ranges. X- ray of the hip is as shown in .
A diagnosis was made of avascular necrosis of the head of femur in a SCD and Jehovah’s Witness patient who will not accept blood in any form and had a durable power of attorney to the effect. She was thoroughly counseled and started on erythropoietin injections 4000 units three times a week prior to surgery. The anaesthetist decided on a blood conservation technique by way of acute hypervolemic hemodilution in theatre with general anaesthesia in order to achieve a close control of desired blood pressure using hypotensive anaesthesia. The blood pressure ranged between 85/50mmHg and 100/60 mmHg from a baseline of 120/80mmHg. Measures to avoid hypothermia, hypoxia, and detrimental hypotension were instituted to avoid complications of sickling. The lead surgeon was the most experienced and fastest surgeon. Diathermy and bone wax were used during surgery. Perioperative nurses and health attendants were also prepared to avoid undue delays in providing required materials and instruments. The radiographer was at hand to operate the image intensifier for locating the medullary canal. The duration of surgery was 4 hours 32 minutes with an estimated blood loss of 1200mls and urine output of 1600mls. Difficulty was encountered locating the medullary canal as following the neck cut, complete absence of cancellous bone was noted with only sclerotic bone seen and patient had femoral perforation. A size 6 stem was all the created canal could take and acetabulum received a size 48 cementless cup and neutral liner, the head size was 28+1.5. Bone graft from the head of femur was packed into acetabulum for the protrusio and two screws used for added stability to the shell. Post operative haemoglobin was 7.7 g/dl, ESR 35mm/Ist hr, WBC of 16600/mm3, neutrophil of 66%, lymphocyte of 34% and the patient did not have any crises post operatively. She was placed on extended antibiotic prophylaxis for 10 days, commenced on antithrombotic day one post operative, pain control and haematinics. Her post operative X-rays were satisfactory . She was allowed to sit up on post operative day one and mobilized on partial weight bearing on third day post operatively. She has had three months of follow up and is doing well with a Harris hip score of 89 at six weeks.