A 32-year-old Ugandan woman with an unremarkable past medical history presented with a 3-month history of right sided neck swelling. The swelling was associated with an occasional localised pain and sensation of an object or food stuck in the throat (globus sensation). There was no documented treatment related to the thyroid gland, or a history of head and neck surgery. She reported no known family history of thyroid – related problems. She had no history of menstrual irregularities and had given birth to two children – both of whom are alive and healthy.
Physical examination demonstrated a right-sided mobile thyroid swelling without any obvious nodular contour. Her blood pressure was normal at 90/60mmHg with a normal pulse rate of 80 beats per minute. Auscultation of the swelling was unremarkable without any bruit.
Ultrasound examination of the neck showed a well-defined nodule in the right lobe of thyroid gland, measuring 1.8x1.8x1.4cm. According to the American College of Radiology, Thyroid Imaging, Reporting and Data System (TI-RADS) categorization, it had smooth margins (point 0), wider than taller (0), hypoechoic (2), spongiform composition (0), and with no echogenic foci (0) It had mild to moderate flow on color Doppler and low resistance flow on spectral Doppler. There was no left lobe of the thyroid, but the isthmus of the thyroid was in situ and measured 0.5 cm in antero-posterior diameter. The remaining normal right lobe of thyroid measured 2.2 × 2.8 × 1.7 cm (Vol 5.5ml) . There were no enlarged cervical lymph nodes. The ultrasound findings prompted the examiner to search for any possible ectopic thyroid tissue. A thorough upper neck ultrasound examination found no thyroid tissue in the suprahyoid, prehyoid, infrahyoid, submandibular, sublingual and prelaryngeal region. The ultrasound findings were therefore consistent with the diagnosis of a right thyroid lobe nodule (TI-RADS 2) and left thyroid lobe hemiagenesis.
The serum thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level was 3.92 µIU/ml (reference range 0.27–4.20), Free T3 3.21 pmol/L (3.10–6.80) and free T4 11.79 pmol/L (12.0–22.0).
The patient was counseled about her condition and offered for a regular follow up at the endocrinology clinic for her TI-RADS 2 nodule.