A 42-year-old female (gravida 4, para 2, abortion 1) at 24 weeks of gestation, presented to the Emergency Department with the complaint of right iliac fossa pain of 8 h duration. It was gradual in onset, progressive, severe in intensity, and non-radiating without nausea, vomiting, anorexia, or fever. She had no past medical history and she has never had any surgical procedure in the past. She did not take any drugs or medications. She did not smoke but takes alcohol occasionally. Her family history is negative for any malignancy. On examination she was tender on palpation in right iliac fossa with no rigidity or guarding but with rebound tenderness. Her WBC count was high (13.8 × 103/μl) with increased neutrophil count and high lactic acid of 3.3mmol/L. US abdomen did not show the appendix per se due to gassy abdomen, but minimal fluid was seen in right iliac fossa with viable intrauterine fetus.
She was observed for 24 hours but her pain and tenderness increased significantly, and she underwent diagnostic laparoscopy. The Surgery was performed by a middle grade Surgeon specialist under the supervision of the Attending. Intraoperatively, the appendix was found to be thickened and almost 1 cm in diameter with severe inflammation. The appendix was ligated at the base using endoloop and cut near the base. After that the appendix was safely placed in the endobag and removed from the body. She had an uneventful recovery post-surgery. She was discharged home after 2 days without any concerns. Histopathology reported acute appendicitis and low grade mucinous appendiceal neoplasm of about 1.4 cm near the tip of appendix. There were no lymph nodes present. Dysplastic changes were confined to the mucosa whereas resection margin was free (See, , , , ).
On her follow up visit after 2 weeks from surgery she was seen in clinic and found healthy with no adverse effects from surgery. She was informed about her pathology results. She received the news with a shock, but she was reassured. The Surgery team never suspected this outcome. She was suggested to follow up for further investigations and treatment. Her case was discussed in oncology multidisciplinary meeting. It was concluded that she should be further investigated with MRI pelvis & colonoscopy and be offered HIPEC. She underwent an uneventful normal vaginal delivery at 40 weeks gestational age. Post-delivery, she resumed follow-up. She underwent further imaging where her colonoscopy result was normal and MRI pelvis showed no intraperitoneal metastasis. Patient was offered treatment option of HIPEC which she refused. She came for follow up in the clinic for 10 months but after that she stopped coming to the appointments and lost follow up.