A 20-year-old male presented with 24 h of pleuritic chest pain associated with nausea and vomiting. He denied any preceding coryza, fever, cough, dyspnoea, or syncope. On examination, he was afebrile with a blood pressure (BP) of 78/57 mmHg, pulse rate of 133 b.p.m., and normal oxygen saturation. Cardiorespiratory examination was unremarkable.
The patient was born in India and migrated to Australia at age 6. Past medical history included ulcerative colitis treated with oral mesalazine for the past 4 years. He denied smoking or recreational drug use, and consumed alcohol rarely.
The differential diagnoses included myopericarditis, acute coronary syndrome, pulmonary embolus, and aortic dissection.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated sinus tachycardia with widespread ST elevation . High-sensitivity troponin T (troponin) was 922 ng/L (normal <14 ng/L). White cell count was elevated at 11.4 × 109/L with neutrophilia (7.1 × 109/L) and eosinophilia (2.2 × 109/L). C-reactive protein was 48.4 mg/L (normal ≤4.9 mg/L).
Computed tomography pulmonary angiogram showed no evidence of pulmonary embolism or aortic dissection. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated severe left ventricular (LV) impairment and a moderate-sized pericardial effusion (Video 1).
The patient was transferred to a cardiac transplant centre, where right ventricular (RV) endomyocardial biopsy revealed severe chronic inflammatory infiltrates comprising prominent eosinophils with lymphocytes and macrophages . Bone marrow biopsy demonstrated prominent eosinophilia, and cytogenetics was negative for FIP1L1-PDGFRA and BCR-ABL. A diagnosis of fulminant EM secondary to HES was made and he was treated with intravenous pulse methylprednisolone. There was rapid improvement with normalization of LV function and resolution of pericardial effusion. He was discharged home on a slow-tapering regime of oral prednisolone.
The patient was readmitted to hospital 9 days after discharge with pre-syncope and abdominal pain. Physical examination revealed a BP of 106/63 mmHg, pulse rate of 50 b.p.m., elevated jugular venous pressure, tender hepatomegaly, and mild peripheral oedema. Electrocardiogram demonstrated a junctional escape rhythm . Troponin was 2237 ng/L and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was 1585 ng/L (normal < 125 ng/L). Repeat TTE showed normal LV function with a trivial pericardial effusion (Video 2). RV size and function were normal, with a tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion of 19 mm. Computed tomography abdomen revealed congestive hepatomegaly, dilated inferior vena cava, and bilateral pleural effusions.
The patient was diagnosed with right heart failure and treated with furosemide and pulse methylprednisolone. After consultation with immunology, he was commenced on the interleukin-5 (IL-5) inhibitor mepolizumab, together with cyclophosphamide. The patient’s right heart failure resolved; troponin and NT-proBNP decreased to 29 ng/L and 763 ng/L, respectively. However, he remained in a junctional escape rhythm 20 days after readmission. Exercise stress ECG demonstrated low exercise capacity, persistent junctional rhythm, and chronotropic incompetence with a maximum heart rate of 85 b.p.m.
A positron emission tomography scan did not show any active myocardial inflammation. Cardiac magnetic resonance showed late gadolinium enhancement confined to the atria, a small pericardial effusion, and normal ventricular size and function .
An electrophysiology study (EPS) was performed to assess the electrical status of the atria in order to identify possible sites for atrial lead implantation, and to exclude inducible ventricular tachycardia. Electroanatomic mapping of the right-sided cardiac chambers revealed absence of electrical activity and inability to capture with pacing (at output of 10 V @ 2 ms) throughout the right atrium and coronary sinus, while there was preserved RV bipolar voltage . The H-V interval was normal and there was no inducible ventricular tachycardia. Following atropine (1 mg) and isoprenaline infusion (5 µg/min), there was only mild chronotropic response with a maximum heart rate of 90 b.p.m. After much deliberation amongst the treating physicians, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) capable of cardiac resynchronization (Medtronic Amplia CRT-D) was implanted with a left bundle branch area (LBBA) pacing lead (Medtronic 3830) inserted into the ‘LV port’, and an apical RV defibrillator lead (Medtronic 6935M). The LV activation time was 80 ms with a paced QRS duration of 120 ms at implant ( online, ). An atrial lead was not implanted. The device was set to pace in VVIR 50–150 b.p.m. delivered exclusively via the pacing lead in LBBA. The decision for the ICD was based on the severity of initial LV dysfunction, and the possibility of relapse despite medical therapy. In terms of pacing, an LBBA pacing lead was chosen to reduce the likelihood of pacing-induced dyssynchrony. His-bundle pacing was considered but was not performed because of concerns over potential increase in pacing threshold and the need for lead revision over time. Given the lack of atrial electrical activity, he was commenced on rivaroxaban 20 mg daily for stroke prophylaxis prior to discharge. Other discharge medications included prednisolone 40 mg daily, pantoprazole 40 mg BD, cholecalciferol 1000 units BD, furosemide 40 mg daily, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim 800/160 thrice weekly, as well as monthly mepolizumab and cyclophosphamide.
At 6-month follow-up, he remained in persistent sinus arrest with junctional escape rhythm. He was symptom-free and continued on immunosuppressive therapy.