In August 2009, a 78-year-old man presented with impaired central vision in his right eye and was diagnosed with wet AMD accompanied by subretinal fluid and mild cataract at the Medical Retina Division Clinic (AMD Clinic) of the Department of Ophthalmology, Keio University Hospital (Tokyo, Japan). His best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.7 in decimal VA (0.155 in logMAR). He had received eight intravitreal injections of pegaptanib by January 2011, which resolved the exudative changes and improved his BCVA to 1.2 (-0.079). At this time, he had mild ERM formation and mild vitreo-retinal traction at the fovea , which were not found at his first visit.
After remission of his exudative change, he suspended his visits to the AMD clinic. However, 2 years later, in February 2013, he had a sudden, substantial impairment of visual acuity. His BCVA was reduced to 0.2 (0.699), which was determined to be due to the formation of a macular hole . A fluorescein angiogram (FA) and an indocyanine green angiogram (IA) showed that the CNV still existed, and the hyperfluorescent area in the FA expanded toward halfway around the fovea which may have included atrophic change in the RPE.
In May 2013, he underwent pars plana vitrectomy with gas tamponade (20% SF6) and cataract surgery. Intraoperative findings revealed that he had a formed vitreous despite repeated intravitreal injections. Posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) was only observed at the optic disc, and complete PVD was accomplished during the vitrectomy. His posterior hyaloid cortex was thickened, the ERM was sticky , and the ILM was markedly adherent. The macular hole was retracted and distorted during ERM and ILM peeling. By June 2013, his macular hole had closed and his BCVA had improved to 0.4 (0.398) .
The CNV tissue together with the RPE change secondarily caused by the CNV lesion surrounding the fovea remained post-operatively, as demonstrated by a FA and an IA . The FA image was more clearly recorded post-operatively than pre-operatively , most likely because of the cataract extraction. Although the macular hole was closed, defects in the ellipsoid zone, which has been called the inner segment/outer segment (IS/OS) line, and irregularities in the photoreceptor layer together with RPE were observed on optical coherence tomography (OCT) .