The patient was a 70-year-old male, who presented with reduced physical resilience and progredient shortness of breath, corresponding to NYHA functional class III. He had a baseline blood pressure of 112/59 mmHg, heart rate of 60 b.p.m, and advanced HF in the context of ischaemic cardiomyopathy and an extensive cardiovascular history.
His cardiovascular risk factors included insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus type 2 since the age of 31, arterial hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and a smoking history with 50 pack years. Other comorbidities were diabetic nephropathy, thyroid nodules, and peripheral arterial disease, which had undergone endarterectomy and patch-plastic surgery. His current medication consisted of bisoprolol 5 mg b.i.d., phenprocoumon q.d., ramipril 5 mg b.i.d., eplerenone 25 mg q.d., digoxin 0.2 mg q.d., torasemide 10 mg t.i.d., simvastatin 40 mg q.d., allopurinol 150 mg q.d., and insulin. Physical examination revealed no abnormalities apart from leg oedema. Echocardiography showed a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 31%. Laboratory tests revealed an elevated NT-proBNP level and reduced kidney function, corresponding to stage 3A of chronic kidney disease.
His cardiovascular history started with a silent anterior myocardial infarction back at the age of 50 years. A later cardiac catheter examination revealed a three-vessel coronary artery disease with high-grade stenosis of the right coronary artery (RCA) leading to percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI) of the RCA. Over the following years, the RCA has been intervened with stent implantation three times. At the age of 65, the patient underwent implantation of a cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator (CRT-D) device due to symptomatic HF, severely reduced LV function, and a masked left anterior hemiblock with existing right bundle branch block and first-degree atrioventricular (AV) block. Only 1 month later, he suffered a non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) accompanied by slow ventricular tachycardia (VT) and several episodes of paroxysmal atrial flutter and AF. This was followed by a 4-year episode of multiple and frequent hospitalizations due to cardiac decompensations. During this time, an external cardioversion and catheter ablation of atrial flutter were performed. Atrial fibrillation had become persistent at this point of time, and the first-degree AV block progressed to third-degree AV block. The patient was reluctant to undergo further interventional procedures and refused pulmonary vein isolation.
Despite maximum pharmacologic and CRT-D device therapy and given the patients’ ever deteriorating medical condition with recurring episodes of HF decompensation and arrhythmia events (see ), the decision was made to implant a BAT system (Barostim Neo, CVRx, Inc. of Minneapolis, MN, USA). In brief, a small incision was made in the neck and the carotid artery bifurcation with baroreceptors exposed. The electrode is sutured on the bifurcation and connected with a pulse generator, which is implanted in an infraclavicular subcutaneous chest wall pocket. Baroreceptor activation therapy stimulation was carried out with a frequency of 60 pulse per second (pps) and an impulse strength of 8 mA. The surgery proved uneventful, with no intraoperative adverse events nor post-operative complaints of discomfort encountered. The patient was discharged 5 days post-operation with no modification of medication. The post-operative situs is depicted in .
Over the following months, the NYHA functional class improved from class III to class II. Comparison of pre- to post-echocardiographic investigations revealed an amelioration in LV systolic function (post) as compared with a severely compromised LV before implantation (see , ) accompanied by a moderate improvement in LVEF to 33%. Of particular note, the overall atrial tachycardia (AT)/AF burden decreased markedly. Frequency of ventricular arrhythmic events also showed a decrease in the occurrence of sustained and non-sustained VT events .
Fourteen months post-implantation of the BAT system, AF—which had been previously assessed being persistent—then ceased spontaneously . Electrocardiogram recorded in paused BAT device mode showed no AF events, whereas in active mode, the Barostim system exhibited the typical artefacts . At the age of 72, the patient suffered another NSTEMI, which led to deterioration of cardiac function and overall condition. Nine months later, the patient died at the age of 73 due to HF and multiorgan failure.