A 29-year-old female presented to our hospital with a complaint of menoxenia for 5 years and polyuria, polydipsia, hyperglycemia and lethargy for 1 year, with no previous medical, family, and psycho-social history. She was diagnosed with menoxenia in 2013 and treated with hormone replacement therapy. In 2017, when she gradually developed symptoms of diabetes insipidus and lethargy, a brain MRI was arranged which showed a mass in sellar area. Incomplete resection was performed, and histological examination of the mass showed histiocytic aggregates, which were CD1a-negative, Langerin-negative, and S100-positive on immunohistochemistry. . DNA extracted from the patient’s biopsy sample was obtained and subjected to NGS of 183 genes, including BRAF, MAP2K1, PIK3CA, NRAS, KRAS, ARAF, ALK , yet no BRAF and other meaningful mutations downstream the MAPK or in related pathways was found.
2 years later, the patient was admitted to our hospital due to progression of the intracranial mass. We performed further examinations to confirm the diagnosis. On physical examination, no remarkable abnormity was found. Blood test and tumor markers were normal. Liver enzymes were abnormal with a mild to moderate elevation of alkaline phosphatase (178 U/L) and γ-Glutamyltransferase (72 IU/L). C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and Tumor necrosis factor-α elevated slightly. Enhanced MRI of the brain showed multiple lesions affecting sella, suprasellar area, pons, and part of hypothalamus . The patient’s 99mTc-MDP bone scrintigraphy scan revealed symmetrical increased uptake in the frontal bone and distal femoral and proximal tibial metaphysis . Further investigation with high-resolution peripheral quantitative computed tomography (HR-pQCT) confirmed long-bone osteosclerosis by revealing increased trabecular volumetric bone mineral density and localized structural alteration of trabeculae network in tibia . FDG-PET/CT revealed hypermetabolic foci in the bilateral frontal lobe, nasal septum, sella, gallbladder, and the body and tail of the pancreas . Further examination on the pancreas with enhanced CT scan showed nodules of hypointense lesions within the body and tail of the slightly enlarged pancreas. During the arterial phase and portal phase, such lesions showed reduced enhancement . No dilation of pancreatic duct was identified. Endoscopic ultrasound found multiple hypoechoic, obscure circumstanced lesions with a diameter of about two centimeters. EUS-FNA of pancreas found no evidence of malignancy but only normal pancreatic ductal cells .
Based on typical meta-diaphyseal osteosclerosis and pathological findings of histiocytes aggregates, the patient was diagnosed with ECD, involving the brain, bones and the pancreas. She was treated with IFN-α at 900 million international units, three times a week. Hormone replacement therapy included euthyrox and minirin. Metformin was also applied to control blood glucose. She tolerated the treatment well with no unanticipated events. Repeated MRI of the brain at three- and eight-months post treatment showed alleviation of all intracranial lesions . Repeated abdominal CT scans revealed markedly reduction of size of the pancreatic lesions, and their enhancement features were closer to normal pancreatic tissue . The patient still relied on hormone replacement therapy but her lethargy largely resolved, and her blood glucose level was easier to control.