A 30-year-old female presented with complaints of epigastric burning and indigestion for 1 year, which was occasionally associated with pain and vomiting. On a previous oesophago-gastroduodenoscopy, multiple oesophageal ulcers were noted, located from 30 to 35 cm and the mucosa was seen to be circumferentially hyperaemic. Upon investigation, chest and abdominal X-ray showed abnormal air-fluid level at right hemithorax as shown in Fig. . Computed Tomography (CT) scan demonstrated organo-axial gastric volvulus accompanied with right hemi-diaphragm elevation and a slight mediastinal shift to the left, with gastric bubble above the diaphragm , and sections through the lower chest showed mild bilateral pleural effusion with basal atelectasis of the right lower lobe. The small and large bowel loops were unremarkable and there was no evidence of bowel obstruction.
An elective laparotomy was performed through a midline incision. Stomach was not seen in the abdominal cavity, but pull on the gastrocolic ligament revealed the greater curvature of the stomach through foramen of Morgagni in the right hemi-diaphragm, with the defect measuring 4 × 5 cm . The hernia was reduced, with excision of the hernial sac and the defect was repaired using a size zero non-absorbable polypropylene suture—no mesh was placed. Since there was a high jejunal repair, a gastrostomy was created which served to secure the stomach in place. Following the reduction of hernia, on further exploration, multiple diverticuli were observed in the small and large intestine . Interestingly, these were unremarkable on CT scan. Only the largest and most proximal jejunal diverticulum , which was about 6 cm in size, was resected using a linear stapler as it had a narrow neck. A pelvic drain was placed and the wound was closed in layers using absorbable polyglactin suture. Figure exhibits the normal anatomy and a schematic diagram of this case depicting the presence of gastric volvulus through MH on the right side. The postoperative period was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the 10th post-operative day. The patient was stable and asymptomatic on follow up after one month, and she is doing well as of writing of this report. ‘Timeline for Case Report’ in Additional file represents the events of this case in a chronologic order.