A 71-year-old man presented to our hospital with a 2-month history of lumbar pain and a 3-week history of paresthesia with pain in the right lower extremity, hypesthesia in the perineal and perianal regions, bladder dysfunction (frequent urination and a feeling of residual urine), and intermittent claudication. He had a history of cerebral infarction 8 years prior and was treated with antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel). All blood and coagulation tests (platelet count, prothrombin time, and partial thromboplastin time) revealed normal values. There was no history of major or minor spinal trauma. On physical examination, the patella tendon reflex was normal bilaterally. The right Achilles tendon reflex was diminished, and the left Achilles tendon reflex was normal. Babinski’s sign was absent bilaterally. He had no motor weakness in his bilateral extremities.
MRI performed before hospitalization revealed a space-occupying lesion that extended from the right intravertebral region to the intraspinal canal at the level of the L4 vertebra on the right side. The mass lesion in the spinal canal had heterogeneous intensity on T1-weighted images and low intensity on T2-weighted images. Gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted images showed a heterogeneous enhancement effect in the lesion . Based on the preoperative imaging findings of posterior vertebral scalloping and heterogeneous signal intensity on MRI, the space-occupying lesion in the spinal canal was initially suspected to be a benign epidural or cauda equina tumor (e.g., schwannoma).
After admission, myelography revealed a contrast defect of the spinal subarachnoid space at the L4–L5 level predominantly on the right side . Computed tomography following myelography revealed a space-occupying lesion in the spinal canal on the right side, with bone scalloping over the posterior wall of the L4 vertebral body. Sclerotic bone was observed on the surface of the scalloped region .
We performed a posterior lumbar surgery after stopping clopidogrel administration for 2 weeks for normalization of blood coagulation. A L4–5 laminectomy and right L4–5 facetectomy were performed to allow wide exploration and facilitate a total spinal tumor resection. Intraoperative findings revealed that the surface of the right L4–5 facet cartilage was blackened; prior intra-articular bleeding was suspected . The intraspinal brown mass adhered to the epidural tissues, resembling an old hematoma . In addition, the red-brownish mass in the scalloped space of the right posterior wall of the L4 vertebra was soft and encapsulated . The epidural mass lesion was resected in a piecemeal fashion. An L4–L5 instrumented fusion with local bone grafting was subsequently performed at the left L4–L5 facet .
Histological examination of the intravertebral scalloped lesion revealed granulation tissue with a blood clot and hemosiderin deposition, as well as an adjacent focally degenerated ligamentum flavum . The ligamentum flavum within the epidural tumorous lesion was degenerated with granulation tissue . The amyloid was focally deposited within the scalloped and epidural lesion . Vascular proliferation suggestive of hemangioma or arteriovenous malformation was not observed. The excised lesion was diagnosed as a chronic epidural hematoma without neoplastic changes.
The patient’s preoperative neurological symptoms (paresthesia with pain in the right lower extremity, hypesthesia in the perineal and perianal regions, bladder dysfunction, and intermittent claudication) improved immediately after the operation. He was discharged on the 11th postoperative day and was able to walk without aid. The patient was able to resume his previous job delivering newspapers at 2 months postoperatively. Good clinical outcomes were maintained at the final 2-year postoperative follow-up, with MRI confirming the disappearance of the epidural space-occupying lesion .