A 25-year-old female nurse that worked in our department was admitted to hospital for a seizure. A CT scan of her brain showed bilateral temporal calcifications . The patient had no prodromal features (history of infection or previous flu-like symptoms) and denied drug or alcohol ingestion. In our preceding daily work contacts, we had observed her strange personality and behavior. On general examination, we found no nevus flammeus on her face and supposed she had an atypical Sturge-Weber syndrome (SWS). Laboratory investigations showed that her complete blood count, renal and liver function, blood glucose, serum calcium, serum phosphorus, and parathyroid hormone were within the reference ranges. The screening tests for Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C, human immunodeficiency virus, and syphilis were negative. Her thyroid function test showed increases of anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPO-Ab) (> 1300 U/mL) and anti-thyroglobulin (209.60 U/mL), while fT3, fT4 and TSH were in normal rang. Ultrasound investigation revealed a swollen thyroid. The findings of the brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings were consistent with those of the head CT. 12-h video electroencephalogram revealed spikes and spike-slow waves discharged from left temporal electrodes with spread to the contralateral hemisphere during the sleep stage. She was administered antiepileptic medication (levetiracetam) which terminated her seizures, and she returned to work.
Eleven months later, the patient was hospitalized after a second seizure. Brain MRI showed slightly thickened and swollen bilateral parietal occipital lobe, temporal lobe, and insular cortexes . The patient's strange personality and behavior and her two epileptic seizures were reminiscent of autoimmune encephalitis, although the MRI findings of autoimmune encephalitis are not specific, especially in anti-NMDAR encephalitis . Therefore, a lumbar puncture was performed, and the results of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tests showed 11 WBCs/mm3, protein concentration of 0.56 g/L, normal glucose and chloride levels, Gram stain-negative. The serum was anti-NMDAR antibody-negative results, whereas the CSF was antibody-positive, established using cell-based assays (1:3.2, Euroimmun, Germany). Herpes simplex virus PCR and arbovirus antibody assays were not performed due to the low index of suspicion. The results we obtained confirmed her diagnosis of anti-NMDAR encephalitis . Gynecological ultrasound was conducted with a normal result. 8-h video electroencephalogram monitoring did not show definite evidence of extreme delta brush, but detected several occasional spike-slow waves in each electrode, prominently in bilateral frontal and central-temporal electrodes. Due to the diagnosis of anti-NMDAR encephalitis, she underwent intravenous steroid therapy (methylprednisolone, 1000 mg/d), followed by oral prednisone. The antiepileptic drug was changed to lamotrigine, which is cheaper. Since our patient’s condition was mild, and she responded well to steroids, IV immunoglobulin or plasma exchange was not used, and no other immunosuppressive drugs were administered after her discharge. She refused to be subjected to PET-CT imaging assessment due to the high cost. We suggested that the patient should have a gynecological ultrasound examination every six months.
Six months after the second admission, the patient’s condition remained stable. We found that her CSF antibody titers turned negative. However, two weeks later, her initial symptoms recurred. Laboratory screening results were normal but, the screening of CSF showed it was again anti-NMDAR antibody-positive (1:1, cell-based assays, Euroimmun, Germany). Additionally, mild growth of bilateral temporal calcifications was detected by CT . The MRI of the brain showed that the cortical swelling had subsided significantly compared to the second admission. Gynecological ultrasound revealed the absence of a tumor. Serum folate levels were within the reference range. As aforementioned, cerebral calcifications were a significant specific feature of our patients. Many diseases, including CEC, can cause cerebral calcification and epilepsy. We reviewed the medical history of the patient in detail, including the abdominal symptoms. The patient reported that she had chronic diarrhea, of which her uncle and brother also had a history, and abdominal pain. To determine whether she had CD, we analyzed her serum for anti-autoantigen (tTG) antibodies (including antigliadin and antiendomysium antibodies), but the results were negative. She declined further investigation by duodenal endoscopic biopsy. We considered she was in a stable phase of CD, but still recommended that she had to adhere to a strict GFD. In the following ten months, the patient’s conditions gradually improved. The patient underwent chest and abdomen CT and pelvis ultrasound, no teratoma was found, and she returned to normal work and life activities.