We report the case of a 35-year-old Saudi woman, living in the Eastern Province; a three-hour drive from our hospital. She was a house wife, married for 12 years, with no children. When she was admitted to our hospital, she was complaining of abdominal pain for 10 days and menorrhagia for five days. She was first seen at our hospital’s rheumatology department three months prior to her admission, and was diagnosed at her local hospital with APS five years prior to her presentation. During her follow-up visits at her local hospital she had two deep vein thromboses (DVTs). The first was of her proximal right lower limb, for which she received heparin followed by warfarin, and the second was of her distal right lower limb. As she was two-and-a-half months pregnant at the time of her second thrombosis, she was given enoxaparin subcutaneously. She had a history of nine miscarriages over 12 years, all at a gestational age of one-and-a-half to two-and-a-half months. In her first to fifth pregnancies, she was not receiving any anticoagulation treatment, but she did receive anticoagulation treatment during subsequent pregnancies, and 81mg of aspirin per day. She also had a history of arthralgia, fatigue and thrombocytopenia four years previous, with a platelet count of 45 to 50×103. However, there was no history of mouth ulcer, skin rash, photosensitivity, renal disease or convulsion, or any other medical illness.
At 13 days before her admission, she was planning to travel, prior to which she started using norethisterone (oral progestogen) 5mg two to three times per day to delay her menses during the trip. The medication was not prescribed to her by a physician, nor did she discuss it with any physician before she started using it; rather she bought the drug herself. Three days after her arrival to her destination, which is two hours away by airplane, she developed abdominal pain mainly in the epigastric area, in the form of cramps, associated with nausea and vomiting, but she had no hematemesis and no presentation of diarrhea or fever. During that time, she stopped taking norethisterone, which she had been using for a total of 15 days, and started having severe vaginal bleeding with clots. Because of these symptoms she interrupted her vacation and returned to Saudi Arabia, where she was admitted to her local hospital for three days. She left her local hospital against medical advice, to be admitted to our hospital. Her social history revealed that because of her inability to have children, her husband was considering having another wife, which was a cause of stress.
During her examination she was conscious, oriented, pale and not jaundice. Her temperature was 37°C, her pulse rate was 120 per minute, her blood pressure was 120/80 and her respiratory rate was 22 breaths per minute. Her abdomen was soft, but only tender at the epigastric and the right upper quadrant. Her lower limbs showed no signs of DVT and her other systemic examinations were normal.
Table shows the baseline lab tests at her first presentation. Her iron levels were at 140ug/dL (normal level: 37 to 145), which suggested possible α thalassemia. Even though she was currently receiving warfarin, her PTT levels were still high (PTT = 123.4 seconds (control 34)), suggesting the presence of lupus anticoagulant. She showed a mild positive resistance to activated protein C (APC-resistance ratio of 0.76, normal levels are between 0.8 and 1.1), which may have been due to anticoagulation. Lupus anticoagulant, protein C and protein S tests were not done because she was already on warfarin.
Table shows the tests conducted on her first day of admission. She had an acute drop from her baseline hemoglobin level to 6.6g/dL. Coagulation studies demonstrated a markedly prolonged PT of 173 seconds and INR of 8.36 seconds, and PTT with no clotting. Her peripheral blood film showed microcytic, hypochromic red blood cells with normal white blood cells count, however her platelets were decreased and marked platelet anisocytosis was seen. Her repeat peripheral blood film conducted on 7 June 2011 showed marked anisocytosis with microcytes, occasionally fragmented forms, neutrophilic leukocytosis and marked thrombocytopenia. Table shows the repeated complete blood count, coagulation profile and renal function tests during the patient’s subsequent admission days and three months after her discharge. The tests showed leukocytosis which responded to antibiotics. The tests also showed thrombocytopenia, which improved with intravenous immunoglobulin and methylprednisolone.
The initial diagnosis was APS, gastritis or food poisoning, with menorrhagia and anemia secondary to withdrawal of norethisterone in a patient using warfarin.
During admission, she received a total of four units of packed red blood cells and four units of fresh frozen plasma. She also became febrile, with a temperature of 38.8°C. On the second day of admission, she was started on 60mg of enoxaparin administered subcutaneously every 12 hours, 3mg of warfarin once per day (on the third day of admission, which was later adjusted according to INR), a course of an antibiotic (ceftriaxone), 20mg of omeprazole per day and butylscoplamine bromide for upper abdominal pain. Her previous medications were continued, which consisted of hydroxychloroquine 200mg twice per day, calcium carbonate and vitamin D. She had had no vomiting since her admission, but continued to complain of upper abdominal pain in the following days, in spite of receiving different analgesics. Her abdomen continued to be soft, and only tender at the epigastric and the right upper quadrant. Her upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed moderate erosive gastritis, which could not explain her pain. Her pelvic and abdominal ultrasound only showed mild hepatomegaly, but was otherwise normal. Her Doppler abdominal ultrasound showed no venous thrombosis.
At that stage, it was suspected that there was a psychological contribution to her expression of pain, which was suspected due to her social history. However, investigations were continued by conducting a triphasic abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan, which showed hepatomegaly with multiple small ill-defined hypodensities predominantly in her right lower liver and sub-diaphragmatic region. These are shown in the contrast-enhanced CT scans in Figures , , and . The radiologist identified those lesions as an infarct secondary to vasculitis. The inferior vena cava (IVC) was narrowed in the subhepatic region and showed a filling defect in the distal segment, which extended into the right and left common iliac and external iliac veins, with prominent azygos. Her bilateral lower limb venous Doppler ultrasound showed no abnormality.
On her sixth day of admission a dose of 1g per day of intravenous methylprednisolone was given for three days, followed by 60mg per day of oral prednisolone. She also received 0.4g/kg per day of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) for four days. Later on, the enoxaparin was stopped, and the warfarin dose was adjusted according to the INR. Her vaginal bleeding was initially heavy with clots, but it gradually decreased until it stopped completely. After she was discharged, the oral prednisolone was tapered gradually. Her previous medications were continued, which included warfarin,81mg aspirin,hydroxychloroquine 200mg twice per day, calcium carbonate and vitamin D.
The final diagnosis was APS, menorrhagia, anemia and venous thrombosis, possibly triggered by norethisterone. Her outpatient department (OPD) follow-up visit showed that she was doing well. Her follow-up abdominal triphasic CT scan was conducted three months later, which showed only two hypodense lesions in the liver, which were most likely fatty infiltration or infarction areas. The inferior vena cava showed partial thrombosis in the infra renal area. Her CT scan also showed a dilation of the superficial abdominal veins, and a partial opacification of the common iliac veins, the external and the internal iliac veins. The right common iliac vein was narrowed with a central filling defect, and the left common iliac vein was dilated with a thrombus attached to the wall. These are shown in the contrast-enhanced CT scans in Figure nine. The contrast-enhanced CT scans are shown in Figures , , , , and .