A previously fit and healthy 44-year-old female with no history of hypertrophic ossifications was admitted with a complaint of pain and limited movement of the left upper limb following an accident in which her arm was entangled and twisted injury in a machine. Physical examinations and X-rays demonstrated that the patient had fractures of the left humerus, ulna and radius (AO classification: 12-A3, 13-B1, 22-A3) with a forearm skin contusion . Open reduction and definitive stabilization using plates and screws of the fractures of the left humerus, ulna and radius were performed immediately on admission . She was discharged after the incisions healed. Six weeks following internal fixation, her left forearm became red, swollen and painful. A small hole was made, and pus began to exude. Pseudomonas aeruginosa was cultured from the secretion. X-rays showed obvious bone resorption and slight periosteal reactions on the left ulna and radius . A deep incision infection after internal fixation of the ulna and radius fractures was confirmed. Because conservative treatment is invalid, surgical intervention was required. Following radical debridement including removal of the hardware, 0.7 cm segmental defects of the fracture ends, and 4–5 cm partial defects of the ulna and radius were noted. External fixators were used for fixation and maintaining the length of the ulna and radius, then PMMA bone cement beads loaded with vancomycin (40:4) were inserted into and around the defects . Cefmetazole was administered intravenously for 2 weeks, followed by oral rifampin for 4 weeks. The wound healed uneventfully, and she was encouraged to perform early postoperative rehabilitation activities. Follow-up X-rays two and 4 months after the first stage displayed a continuing process of new bone regeneration in the bone defects . The ulnar and radial fractures and defects were healed by clinical evaluation by 4.5 months, and the external fixators were removed in the clinic at 5.5 months. The second stage of the IMT (bone grafting) was not necessary. The bone cement spacers were removed 6 months after filling with PMMA . Intraoperative exploration revealed that parts of the spacers were wrapped by new callus. No additional surgeries were between the two surgeries. The humeral fracture healed by 3 months postoperatively. The patient recovered the normal length of her humerus, ulna and radius, as well as most of the function of her left upper limb. One year postoperatively, there was no recurrence of infection, her hand grip strength recovered to 80% of the contralateral side, her range of motion: wrist flexion recovered to 56°, wrist extension recovered to 53°, pronation of the forearm recovered to 69°, supination recovered to 73°, elbow flexion recovered to 95°, and elbow extension recovered to 0°.