A healthy 31-year-old multigravida Indian female, gravida 4, abortions 2, para 1 was referred to our ultrasound clinic with complaints of reduced fetal movements. Her anomaly scan was previously conducted at our clinic and was unremarkable.
The fetus was 33 weeks 6 days of gestation according to her last menstrual period (LMP). Ultrasound was performed using a GE Voluson E10 ultrasound machine with a C2-9 curved array probe, and the fetus’s gestational age was found to be 32 weeks and 3 days. Head biometry and femur length of the fetus were below the tenth percentile. Polyhydramnios was noted. The fetal abdomen appeared distended with significantly dilated bowel loops. The maximum diameter of dilated bowel loops was approximately 23 mm . In fetal mid-abdomen, echogenic bowel loops with the classic “whirlpool sign” were demonstrated . The perianal muscular sphincter complex appeared normal. No signs of bowel perforation were detected on fetal ultrasound.
The diagnosis of fetal volvulus with intestinal obstruction was made. The referring clinician was urgently informed about the findings, and the patient was referred to a tertiary care hospital. The patient was further counseled about the condition, regarding the need for emergency delivery and subsequent surgical intervention for the fetus.
Emergency lower-segment cesarean section (LSCS) was performed, and a female neonate weighing 1580 g was delivered. Apgar score was 9 and 10 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively, and the vitals were within normal range.
On the basis of the fetal ultrasonography findings, emergency laparotomy was performed on the neonate at 4 hours after birth. Midgut volvulus was confirmed intraoperatively with the presence of malrotation . No signs of bowel ischemia or necrosis were detected. Untwisting of the volvulus was performed followed by Ladd’s procedure. The postsurgical period was uneventful. Follow-up postoperative ultrasound done on day 1 postsurgery was unremarkable. On repeat visits, the infant’s growth was noted to be within the normal centiles for age. Follow-up ultrasound of the abdomen done at day 10 and at day 30 revealed nondilated bowel loops with normal peristalsis.