A 72-year-old Japanese woman was admitted with severe epigastric pain and vomiting. She had a history of rheumatoid arthritis treated with tocilizumab every four weeks. On examination, she had a temperature of 39.2°C with chills. Her blood pressure was 77/46 mmHg, with a heart rate of 96 bpm. She was jaundiced, but had no signs of palmar erythema, ankle edema, finger clubbing, spider nevi or evidence of skin injury or infection. She had abdominal pain with right upper-quadrant discomfort and a positive Murphy's sign. Laboratory results showed the following: white blood cell count 7600/μL (normal range: 3100-8800 μL), neutrophils 97.7% (normal range: 50-70%), C-reactive protein 2.16 mg/dL (normal range: 0-0.25 mg/dL), a platelet count of 150 × 109/μL (normal range: 140-440 × 109/μL), aspartate transaminase 266 IU/L (normal range: 13-33 IU/L), alanine transaminase 432 IU/L (normal range: 6-27 IU/L), and alkaline phosphatase 890 IU/L (normal range: 115-359 IU/L). In addition, her total bilirubin was 7.0 mg/dL (normal range: 0.3-1.5 mg/dL), direct bilirubin 5.2 mg/dL (normal range: 0-0.2 mg/dL), gamma glutamyl transferase, 342 IU/L (normal range: 10-60 IU/L), protein 59 g/L (normal range: 67-83 g/L) and albumin 33 g/L (normal range: 40-50 g/L). An abdominal ultrasonography revealed an enlarged gall bladder with stones, and dilation of her intrahepatic and common bile ducts. Computed tomography (CT) showed cholelithiasis, choledocholithiasis, dilated common bile duct with a calcified stone and normal liver shape . Our patient was diagnosed with sepsis due to acute suppurative cholangitis. Blood samples were collected immediately and cefoperazone-sulbactam (1 g intravenously every 12 hours) was started for biliary tract infection. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed and two stones were drained along with sludge. Vasopressors were used to manage shock. Jaundice was slightly improved, but the shock state was prolonged as is typical of this condition. On the second day following admission, she vomited and exhibited hypotension with bradycardia. An electrocardiogram showed ST segment elevation at I and aVL. Echocardiography showed left posterolateral ventricular wall dysfunction. Coronary angiography showed patent coronary arteries and she was diagnosed with stress-induced cardiomyopathy. Blood cultures were positive for A. hydrophila and Klebsiella pneumoniae, both of which were susceptible to cefoperazone-sulbactam. A. hydrophila was resistant to penicillin, ampicillin, ampicillin-sulbactam, and first- and second-generation cephalosporins, and susceptible to piperacillin, third-generation cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, carbapenems, tetracyclines, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and fluoroquinolones. A stool culture was negative for A. hydrophila and no malignancy, cirrhosis, chronic renal failure or diabetes mellitus was evident in additional investigations. On day six, her white blood cell count and the percentage of neutrophils were normalized and cefoperazone-sulbactam treatment was halted. Left ventricular function normalized on day twelve and laparoscopic cholecystectomy for cholelithiasis was performed on the 16th day of hospitalization. A culture from her bile showed only A. hydrophila. Eighteen days after surgery, tocilizumab treatment was restarted and there were no complications. Two months after restarting tocilizumab, our patient is stable without any serious events.