A 24-year-old woman presented to the emergency department sent by her cardiologist because of a recent finding of a 16 seconds asystole on the implantable loop recorder (ILR) she implanted 7 months before for recurrent syncopes. She openly declared that she was a heavy cannabis user (at least 5 cannabis-cigarette per day, not mixed up with tobacco, for no less than 12 years), confirmed by hair toxicological analyses. She had a history of at least 2 spontaneous atypical reflex syncopal episodes and a multitude of pre-syncopal episodes that began one year before admission. Her past history was remarkable for febrile seizures at age 16. The first syncopal episode was preceded by prodromes such as bilateral arms paresthesia and dyspnea. Bystanders reported tonic–clonic seizures, morsus and urinary loss followed by a relatively quick regain of consciousness. After the first syncope, because of her past history of febrile seizures, diagnostic neurological work-up aimed to exclude epilepsy, which was ruled out. After that, a 24-h dynamic electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed and revealed a I° atrio-ventricular block (AVB) and sporadic episodes of first type II° AVB. At this point, a loop recorder was implanted and tilt test was performed, revealing a positive response for hypotension preceded by classical prodromes. Under these circumstances, after 7 months from ILR implantation, a second prodrome-less syncopal episode occurred while watching television at late night and a 16 seconds asystole was found on the ILR, leading to hospitalization . Notably, both syncopal episodes occurred while she was sitting and shortly after cannabis smoking.
On admission her vital signs were within normal limits: BP 100/70mmHg, HR 101, O2 saturation on room-temperature air was 98%. During hospitalization the patient did not experience syncopal episodes, although she reported occasional dyspnea while resting, dizziness and palpitations. However, none of these symptoms was related to remarkable changes in hearth rhythm, heart rate, O2 saturation and both sitting and standing blood pressure. The echocardiographic findings were normal. Serial ECGs showed wandering pacemaker , which was also revealed at 24h telemetry, usually preceded by sinus tachycardia . ILR was interrogated every time she referred palpitations, but no significant findings were detected. Given the age of our patients, her history, and clinical findings, we considered a heart conduction system anomaly unlikely. Eventually, the patient underwent a toxicological and a psychiatric evaluation, where she strongly expressed not wanting to abandon cannabis abuse providing a written informed consent. After a collective discussion with the heart team, syncope unit, electrophysiologists and toxicologist, we decided to implant a dual chamber pacemaker, due to the high risk of trauma of the syncopal episodes. 24 months follow-up period was uneventful, apart from sporadic pre-syncopal episodes . In fact, the patient became pregnant 15 months after pacemaker implantation and she declared she finally stopped smoking cannabis, reporting a further reduction in pre-syncopal episodes. Ventricular pacing burden at 24 months follow-up was around 14%. No tachyarrhythmia and bradyarrhythmia were ever recorded.