This case presents a 44-year-old Hispanic female, with no known past medical history, complaining of an acute onset of intractable hiccups, vomiting, and dysphagia. Physical examination was notable for a thin female appearing much younger than stated age. Cardiac and pulmonary examinations were unremarkable. Skin thickening of the fingers extending proximal to the metacarpophalangeal joints was noted bilaterally. Review of systems was positive for Reynaud’s phenomenon, however negative for finger ulceration, nail pitting, dry eyes or mucus membranes, or skin rash. Vital signs on admission were stable. Laboratory studies were unremarkable except for hyponatremia and hypokalemia, which were replaced appropriately. Patient received supportive IV fluids and anti-emetics. The following day, the patient developed new onset of blurry vision, motor weakness and paresthesias of the bilateral lower limbs. Lower extremities were notable for hypertonia and paroxysmal tonic spasms. Motor strength of lower extremities was 0/5 with intact bilateral upper extremity strength. Upper extremity reflexes were 2+, and knee and ankle reflexes were 4+ bilaterally. Babinski’s sign was present bilaterally. Loss of pinprick and vibratory sensation up to bilateral anterior superior iliac spine was noted. Visual acuity diminished bilaterally with no visual field defects, and extra ocular movement was intact. Other cranial nerves were intact. Brain MRI with and without gadolinium enhancement showed multiple scattered hyper-intense T2 flair foci in the bilateral periventricular white matter. MRI spine revealed multiple enhancing lesions in the spinal cord at the levels of C2–C6, consistent with transverse myelitis.
Extensive laboratory evaluation, which included thyroid function, vitamin B12 level, and folic acid was normal. Serologies and PCRs for common neurotropic viruses (HSV1, HSV2, CMV, EBV, HBV, HCV, VZV, HTLV 1/2, Toxoplasma, and HIV) were negative in blood and in cerebrospinal fluid analysis (CSF). Specifically, CSF analysis revealed lymphocytic pleocytosis but no oligoclonal bands. Immunological tests for anti-dsDNA, anti-cardiolipin, anti-β2GPI, ANCA, and cryoglobulins were negative. However, ANA, anti-RNA polymerase III autoantibodies, Scl-70, and NMO-IgG were all positive. Repeat NMO-IgG was positive. Effectively, preliminary diagnosis of NMO was made based on seropositivity and clinical features consistent with transverse myelitis and area postrema syndrome (see Table ). Our case of NMO diagnosis is based on the revised consensus criteria in 2015, shown in Table .
The patient was started on high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g daily for five consecutive days) on day. Resolution of visual symptoms occurred within 2 days. Nonetheless, the patient showed marginal improvement in motor symptoms. On day 5 of hospitalization, patient developed abrupt onset of malignant hypertension, as well as acute onset of renal failure with non-nephrotic range proteinuria, requiring urgent hemodialysis. Renal biopsy showed obliteration of the vascular lumen, with concentric fibrinoid necrosis and “onion-skin” hypertrophy, most consistent with diagnosis of steroid induced scleroderma renal crisis. Steroids were discontinued and patient was started on an ACE inhibitor with resultant normalization of blood pressure and slow recovery of renal function. Patient was started on Azathioprine with improvement of motor symptoms; however, it was discontinued due to hepatotoxity. Effectively, it was changed to Rituximab 1000 mg × 2 doses 14 days apart, with gradual improvement in motor functions.
In sum, our patient was diagnosed with both NMO and Systemic Sclerosis based on her history, clinical presentation, MRI findings as shown in Fig. , anti-Scl-70 antibodies, and the presence of serum NMO-IgG antibody. She had a subacute onset of lower extremity paraparesis, dysesthesia, and hyperreflexia, with gradual improvement in motor function over the course of a year. In the interim, she had multiple readmissions for painful paroxysmal tonic spasms which responded to Gabapentin, Baclofen and Carbamazepine.