A 58-year-old Caucasian female was admitted in the emergency department complaining of sudden onset dyspnea and retrosternal chest pain, radiating to the left arm, that appeared at rest and lasted for several h. The patient was a teacher and reported a recent period of intense work-related emotional stress, after having returned to presential classes during the COVID-19 pandemic and having extra work to replace quarantined colleagues. She had history of GAD, TA in remission under treatment with low-dose corticosteroids, severe asymptomatic aortic regurgitation (AR) with left ventricular (LV) dilation and ejection fraction (EF) of 56%. Moreover, in the past she suffered from crisis of angina with previous documentation of a left anterior descending (LAD) artery myocardial bridging; paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia; uterine myomas with recurrent bleeding and necessity of uterine artery embolization. In addition to prednisone, her chronic medication included bisoprolol, flecainide, transdermic nitrates and vitamin supplements. There was no relevant family history.
Physical examination revealed blood pressure of 120/40 mmHg, tachycardia (110 bpm), symmetrical and bounding peripheral pulses with no blood pressure differential and oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. The patient was eupneic, had mild basal crackles at pulmonary auscultation and an early diastolic heart murmur on cardiac auscultation. There were no signs of peripheral hypoperfusion. The electrocardiogram revealed sinus tachycardia, T wave inversion in left precordial leads, inferior and lateral leads, and a corrected QT of 487 ms . The chest X-ray was unremarkable. Laboratorial evaluation showed hemoglobin of 11.3 g/dL, high sensitivity troponin I of 3494 ng/L and B-type natriuretic peptide of 4759 pg/mL, with no other alterations. The transthoracic echocardiogram revealed severe LV dilation with reduced EF (36%), due to apical and midventricular akinesia; severe AR; dilation of aortic root and ascending aorta (23 mm/m2 and 24 mm/m2 respectively); moderate tricuspid regurgitation; maximal tricuspid regurgitation velocity of 3.3 m/s; and right ventricle with normal dimensions and longitudinal systolic function (/).
The patient was admitted to the Cardiac Intensive Care Unit (ICU) with a suspicion of non-ST elevation myocardial infarction. A cardiac computed tomography (CCT) showed a previously known myocardial bridging in the distal LAD, with an extent of 19 mm and a depth <2 mm, without coronary artery disease. The diagnosis of MINOCA was made. During ICU stay, the patient had recurrent transient chest pain, with worsening of ST segment depression in lateral leads. Due to recurrence of symptoms, it was decided to perform a coronary angiography that confirmed the absence of obstructive coronary arteries disease. During cannulation of the left coronary artery, an acetylcholine provocative test was performed, showing spasm of both the LAD and circumflex arteries, accompanied by reproduction of chest pain and ST depression, which completely reverted after intracoronary nitrates administration . The patient was switched to diltiazem, while nitrates and beta-blockers were stopped. Afterwards, there was no chest pain recurrence, and the patient maintained hemodynamic stability with no ventricular arrythmias. Due to the moderate systolic dysfunction and high BNP levels, levosimendan was administered, and disease modifying drugs for HF, namely angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor (ARNI) and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists were started 2 days after admission. There was good tolerance to sacubitril/valsartan and spironolactone, without side effects, worsening of renal function or hyperkalemia. Due to anxiety, the patient received continuous psychological support and low-dose anxiolytic drugs (sertraline 50 mg id and alprazolam 0.5 mg id) during her hospital stay.
A cardiac magnetic resonance performed on the 9th day after admission revealed severe dilation of the LV, mild apical hypokinesia, improvement of EF to 53%, signs of myocardial edema and increased extracellular volume in apical and mid-ventricular anterior and anterolateral walls, and absence of myocardial late gadolinium enhancement, compatible with TTS. This exam also showed severe aortic regurgitation, aortic dilation, and increased parietal thickness, slight edema and late gadolinium enhancement in the ascending aorta, consistent with TA.
At discharge, the patient was clinically stable, with no signs of HF, with progressive reduction of troponin and BNP levels and with electrocardiogram showing persistent T wave inversion and stable QTc. Disease-modifying drugs for HF, namely sacubitril/valsartan 24/26 mg bid, were maintained at discharge as they probably contributed to the improvement in EF and to the reverse remodeling. After a discussion with the patient, it was decided to wait for the surgical aortic valve replacement, and she was referred to psychiatry and cardiology short-term follow-up. A final diagnosis of MINOCA (with transient acute HF) due to coronary vasospasm and TTS, induced by emotional stress, in a patient with TA and GAD was done. Patient's timeline is shown in .