A 68-year-old male complaining of abdominal pain and diarrhea was admitted to a previous hospital and diagnosed with severe acute pancreatitis. He developed fever and oliguria 2 days later and was transferred to our hospital for intensive care. His vital signs on arrival were as follows: blood pressure, 158/99 mm Hg; pulse rate, 116/min; and oxygen saturation, 99% on a 1 L nasal cannula. There was no reported history of trauma; however, physical examination revealed bruising on the upper middle quadrant. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed total disruption of the pancreas anterior to vertebral body, which accompanied massive fluid collection in the lesser sac . The findings of the laboratory tests were as follows: white blood cell counts, 6,800/μL; C-reactive protein, 46.43 mg/dL; total bilirubin, 0.8 mg/dL; and serum amylase, 479 U/L. Police investigation led to a strong suspicion of domestic assault. The patient was diagnosed with traumatic pancreatic injury with MPD disruption (OIS grade IV).
Emergency endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) revealed total MPD disruption. Because stent placement into the distal MPD was not feasible because of the largely filled intermediate cavity and edema of accessory papilla aperture, pancreatic fluid collection drainage via major duodenal papilla was performed using a 6Fr endoscopic naso-pancreatic drainage (ENPD) tube . An 8.5Fr 5 cm biliary plastic stent was also placed to prevent biliary duct stenosis. Although the fluid collection was spread to Morrison fossa, we expected that the fluid collection could be drained through the foramen of Winslow. The amylase level of in the drained fluid was 433,544 U/L. Meropenem and octreotide were administered after the procedure. The meropenem was initiated to cover for potential bacterial infection. Octreotide was administered for 4 weeks.
On day 2 of hospital admission, his symptoms and laboratory data improved as follows: white blood cell count, of 8,300 μ/L; C-reactive protein, 34.0 mg/dL; and serum amylase, 143 U/L. The fluid from ENPD decreased 1,000 mL on day1 to 300 m on day 2. Follow-up CT performed on day 2 showed a reduction in peripancreatic fluid collection. Antibiotics were changed to ampicillin sulbactam on day 6 and continued for 4 weeks. On day 18, oral food intake was initiated. On day 44, ERCP was performed because the fluid collection was sufficiently reduced. Because the patient was considered unable to endure further placement of ENPD, the ENPD tube was switched to an endoscopic retrograde pancreatic drainage tube through the major duodenal papilla. A 7Fr 4 cm Advanix double-pig tail stent was used to minimize the risk of dislodging. Although access to the distal MPD via the major duodenal papilla was not achieved, a 5Fr 7 cm Harmo Ray stent was successfully placed in the distal MPD via the accessory pancreatic duct without incision of the minor duodenal papilla, preventing the obstruction of the distal MPD . Endoscopic sphincterotomy was also performed, and the biliary plastic stent was removed. The patient had an uneventful post-procedural course without any complications and was discharged on day 55. Two months post-discharge, the stent and drainage tube were replaced. Although the stent and drainage tube were going to be left as drainage access for potential future recurrence of abscess, these were removed 4 months post discharge because the patient was not compliant to the treatment course.