A 66-year-old male was referred to our clinic with an acute abdomen by the cardiology unit, where he had been admitted three days before to be treated for paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) and Right Bundle Branch Block.
The patient was pale with tachycardia and tachypnoea. His temperature was 38.5°C. On physical examination there was localized tenderness at the left iliac fossa. Digital rectal examination was normal.
Blood tests on admission revealed: WBC: 18.200/mm3 (Seg 90%, Lymp 7%, Eos 1%, M 2%), Ht: 35.2%, Hb: 11.5 g/dl and PLT: 537.000/mm3, AST/ALT: 35/29 U/l, LDH: 116, CPK 77. Ultrasound (U/S) and CT scan of the abdomen demonstrated multiple simple hepatic cysts on both lobes, the larger of those on the right lobe with a dimension of 12 cm. After starting antibiotics (ticarcillin-clavulanic acid, amicacin and metronidazole), the patient was operated on two days later for peritonitis. At laparotomy, a small abdominal abscess was found at the area of the sigmoid colon caused by ruptured diverticula. The abscess was drained and Hartmann excision of the bowel was performed. The patient was admitted to the ICU for the first four postoperative days and was discharged fully recovered on the 21st day postoperatively from the clinic. Cultures from the abdominal abscess grew Aerococcus viridans, Escherichia coli and Proteus mirabilis and were negative for anaerobes. Antibiotics were administrated for 18 days after the operation. After discharge only dietary restrictions were recommended.
One month later the patient returned to the hospital with malaise, vague abdominal pain, anorexia, poor general condition and slightly elevated temperature (37.2–37.5°C). Physical examination of the abdomen was normal, and the laboratory results were: WBC: 10.100/mm3 (Seg 78%, Lymp 16%, Eos 2%, M 4%), Ht: 29.1%, Hb: 9.3 g/dl and PLT: 629.000/mm3, AST/ALT: 126/37 U/l, amylase 184. Abdominal ultrasound and CT scan did not reveal any abnormal or unexpected finding, except of course the simple hepatic cysts which were of the same dimensions. Three days after his admission, because of a drop of the hematocrit to 20.9%, elevation of the patient's temperature (39°C), and worsening of his general condition, ultrasound examination was repeated and showed that the largest of the hepatic cysts contained opaque fluid , in contrast to the ultrasound that was performed at the first admission, where the fluid of the cyst appeared to be clear. Abdominal CT scan, showed the formation of an hepatic abscess at the site of the pre-existing hepatic cyst.
Due to an inability to drain the abscess under CT guidance at our hospital, the liver abscess was drained surgically. The cultures of the pus of the hepatic abscess grew Escherichia coli and Enterococcus spp. The postoperative care of the patient was uncomplicated and he recovered slowly but fully. He was discharged one month postoperatively.