A 69-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital for elective ileostomy closure. Ten months earlier, after chemoradiation therapy, he had undergone a low anterior resection and creation of a diverting ileostomy for rectal carcinoma, which was complicated with postoperative leakage. Histopathological study revealed stage III rectal carcinoma (T3N1M0). He had a past medical history of hypertension, cerebral hemorrhage and gastric ulcer and was taking a proton-pump inhibitor.
On the day before the elective surgery, he received oral kanamycin and metronidazole as a chemical preparation. Additionally, immediately before the surgery, one dose of parenteral cefmetazole was given. Ileostomy closure was completed in 31 minutes without any intraoperative complications.
His postoperative course was uneventful until the third postoperative day, when his body temperature rose to 37.8°C. His bowel movement became frequent at 15 times a day. However, because he had no other signs or symptoms suggestive of infection, and because frequent bowel movement is not uncommon after low anterior resections, especially after those complicated with postoperative leakage, careful observation was continued without further examination or additional treatment.
On the fourth postoperative day, in addition to the aforementioned symptoms, he presented with epigastric and left lower abdominal pain. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed that subcutaneous fluid had collected adjacent to the surgical wound. CT also demonstrated a slightly distended colon without wall thickening. We immediately opened the surgical wound and drained the fluid, which was sanguineous. After the drainage, his body temperature returned to within the normal range (36.7°C). That night, at 10:30 p.m., his blood pressure fell to 77/59mmHg and intravenous infusion was started.
Nevertheless, in the early morning of the fifth postoperative day, his blood pressure continued to drop, thus requiring vasopressor treatment to maintain his blood pressure. Again, a CT was done, which indicated severe colonic dilation . Laboratory data were normal except for mild liver dysfunction (aspartate transaminase, 68mU/mL; alanine transaminase, 45mU/mL) and leukocytosis (9,460 cells/μL). Even though CT demonstrated severe dilatation of the colon, the thickening of the colonic wall that is the typical finding associated with fulminant pseudomembranous colitis was not evident. Emergent colonoscopy up to the transverse colon revealed pseudomembranes associated with severe inflammation . Pseudomembranous colitis was thus diagnosed, and oral vancomycin was administered. Until this time, no antibiotics had been given postoperatively. In our institute, the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for C. difficile toxin is not available on weekends (the fifth postoperative days was a Saturday).
The condition of our patient rapidly deteriorated so he was transferred to the intensive care unit at 10:30 a.m. After resuscitation, which included tracheal intubation and massive intravenous infusion along with multiple vasopressors, an emergent operation was done. The time interval between the drop of blood pressure and emergency surgery was 18 hours.
During the laparotomy, a small amount of bloody ascites was observed and the large intestine was severely dilated, part of which was necrotic. The serosa of the small intestine was slightly inflamed but there was no sign of ischemia. Total colectomy with creation of an end ileostomy was then performed, after which our patient was returned to the intensive care unit. However, he did not recover from the shock and died 26 hours after the surgery.
A histopathological examination revealed inflamed mucosa from the cecum to the rectum which was covered with a necrotic exudate, indicating pseudomembranous colitis. A postmortem autopsy was not carried out, because consent could not be obtained from the family.