A 50-year-old woman presented with back pain. A gastric tumor was suspected by upper gastrointestinal series at a local clinic, and she was referred to our hospital. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed a submucosal tumor in the posterior wall of the stomach body . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a well-demarcated inhomogeneously enhanced solid mass in the posterior wall of the stomach . CT also showed a slightly enhanced lesion on the right side of the uterus . T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a mass around the uterus . Dynamic MRI showed a gradually enhanced mass . Based on these results, a preoperative diagnosis of GIST accompanied by an ovarian tumor, leiomyoma, lymphoma, or disseminated lesion from GIST was made. Partial resection of the stomach and extended hysterectomy after exploratory laparoscopy was scheduled. The laparoscopy demonstrated a protruded tumor from the posterior wall of the stomach in the omental bursa. A soft solid tumor was observed in the broad ligament, and multiple small masses were found around the uterus. No disseminated lesion was observed near the gastric tumor in the upper abdominal space including the omental bursa. Considering these findings, we concluded that the pelvic tumors were not disseminated lesions from GIST. A tentative diagnosis of gastric GIST and ovarian tumor with disseminations was made. Intraoperative frozen sectioning of the tumor in the pelvic cavity showed spindle cells, suggesting the presence of mesenchymal tumor such as leiomyoma. However, it was difficult to rule out the presence of disseminated lesions from gastric GIST. Partial resection of the stomach was performed; thereafter, the tumors in the pelvic cavity were removed by total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy under laparotomy.
The resected gastric specimen showed an encapsulated solid tumor measuring 45 mm in the greatest dimension . Microscopically, the gastric tumor was composed of spindle cells forming bundles in an interlacing pattern . Upon immunohistochemical analysis, the tumor cells showed positivity for c-KIT and CD34 and very low positivity for Ki-67 and negativity for actin, desmin, HHF-35, S-100 protein, estrogen receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PgR) . These findings were identical for GIST. Meanwhile, the tumor of the broad ligament showed ill-defined or fused small nodules . Microscopically, the nodules of the broad ligament, uterus, and its surrounding peritoneum were composed of spindle cells resembling smooth muscle cells . Immunohistochemically, they were positive for smooth muscle actin, desmin, HHF-35, ER, and PgR , but negative for S-100 protein, CD34, and c-KIT . The pelvic tumors were diagnosed as DPL based on these immunohistopathological results. The risk grade of GIST was low because the mitotic counts of GIST were < 5 per 50 HPF. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient had no complications and was discharged on the 14th day after surgery. Subsequently, the patient was followed up at 6-month intervals for the first 5 years and then annually for another 5 years. She has neither had any recurrence nor received any drug therapy for 10 years.