A 12-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital for persisting headache, started six days before. At the admission she presented also cough and rhinitis; she referred mild fever (axillary temperature 38 °C) during the previous days and three episodes of vomit. If at the beginning the pain was controlled by paracetamol, during the last days the headache had become deep, localized in the frontal region and associated to photophobia, even though at the beginning the pain was controlled by paracetamol. She had no personal or familial history of headache. Her medical history was unremarkable except for an episode of chickenpox during her infancy. On physical examination vital signs were stable (heart rate 90 bpm, blood pressure 111/73 mmHg, temperature 38 °C, GCS 15), the girl appeared suffering but her general conditions were good. Central nervous system examination didn’t show any neurological deficit, Kernings and Brudzinski signs were negative, she had no neck stiffness. Deep tendons reflexes were normal. Pupils were equal, round and reactive to light; accommodation reflex was present. Nor nystagmus or diplopia was noticed. Clinical examination of heart, lungs and abdomen was negative. On the skin no lesions were present. Blood count was in normal range, reactive C-protein (CRP) and procalcitonin (PCT) were negative, liver and renal functions were preserved. Analgesic and antipyretic treatment was administered. Nasal endoscopy was performed on the second day of hospitalization and highlighted a picture of acute bacterial sinusitis. Antibiotic therapy was started. The day after the girl developed altered mental status and psychomotor agitation; the headache worsened and was accompanied by three episodes of vomiting events; in few hours the girl developed drowsiness and became less responsive to stimuli. Blood tests were repeated but values were still in normal range. Computed tomography (CT) was performed immediately but was unremarkable. Electroencephalogram (EEG) showed “severe alteration of cortical electrogenesis with exacerbation of diffuse slow cortical activity, with fronto-temporal predominance”. Cerebrospinal fluid examination showed increased protein concentration (72 mg/dl), normal glucose concentration (52 mg/dl; blood glucose 105 mg/dl), lymphocytic pleocytosis (484 white cells/µL, 79% lymphocytes, 20% monocytes). The findings were suggestive for viral infection of CNS. Varicella-zoster virus was detected using polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The research of genome of herpes simplex virus 1 and 2, human herpes virus 6, cytomegalovirus and Ebstein-Barr virus was negative. Serological tests showed the presence of IgG vs. VZV and absence of IgM vs. VZV, confirming the reactivation of VZV. Immunological screening for HIV was negative, serum immunoglobulins, T and B lymphocytes counts, complement proteins levels were within normal range for age.
The girl was treated with intravenous acyclovir 10 mg/kg three times a day. During the first day of antiviral therapy her clinical conditions rapidly improved and the following day she was well oriented, smiling and quiet, not remembering the events of the days before. Her headache disappeared completely after two days. After 2 weeks of treatment, she was dismissed with oral acyclovir to be continued for 2 weeks more.
EEG was performed again after 3 and 12 days from the onset of encephalitis, showing progressive improvement of cortical activity, but a persistent slow focal activity in the right temporal region was registered. Magnetic resonance was performed after 2 days from the diagnosis of encephalitis and one month after the discharge and was unremarkable in both cases. Lumbar puncture was performed again after 14 days of therapy: protein concentration and glucose level were in normal range, a mild leukocytosis was still present (40 white cells/µL, with 93% of lymphocytes). PCR for VZV at that time was negative.