The patient was 36-year-old gravida 2 para 1, last menstrual period (LMP) was July 11, 2021, who conceived through ART on July 28, 2021, and two embryos were transferred. Early ultrasonography indicated the diagnosis of monochorionic triamniotic triplet pregnancy at 13 0/7 weeks of gestation , the crown-rump length (CRL) was 73.6/67.4/72.3 mm and the nuchal translucency (NT) was 1.5/1.4/1.3 mm respectively. Considering a history of cesarean section and the high risks of continuing triplet pregnancy, the patient and her family decided to reduce one fetus after being fully informed about the risks of keeping one or two fetuses for subsequent pregnancy. After obtaining signed informed consent, we performed radiofrequency ablation at 17 5/7 weeks of gestation to reduce one fetus with umbilical cord velamentous insertion (leaving one normal fetus and the other with a single umbilical artery) and extracted the amniotic fluid for analysis from the single umbilical artery fetus during the operation due to the advanced age of the patient. The patient was discharged 3 days after surgery without complications and followed by ultrasound assessment.
Twenty-four days after RFA surgery, ultrasonography confirmed the diagnose of twin-twin transfusion syndrome and discordant fetal sex in the two surviving fetuses. We rechecked the chorionicity and the reduced fetus was male. The male donor twin (the one with a single umbilical artery) had an amniotic fluid maximum vertical pocket of 1.7 cm, and the female recipient twin 12.1 cm with ductus venous reversed flow, severe TV regurgitation and pulmonary regurgitation, absent bladder was found in both fetuses. Selective fetal growth restriction (sFGR) was also achieved, as the fetal weight difference was 44 percent and the smaller twin (donor twin) weight was <10th percentile. After discussing all management options, the patient and her family chose FLS and signed informed consent. Operative fetoscopy and Solomon surgery were performed at 21 1/7 weeks of gestation, and the amniotic fluid of the recipient twin was sent for analysis. During the surgery, we found that the male donor fetus and the female recipient fetus had normal-appearing external male and female genitalia respectively. Two large arteriovenous and several small communication vessels were identified and ablated, and a continuous laser photocoagulated the placental surface, connecting the previous ablated points.
The amniotic fluid for chromosome analysis revealed a normal male karyotype (46, XY) of the donor twin and normal female karyotype (46, XX) of the recipient twin, and short tandem repeat (STR) analysis revealed dizygotic twins . Unfortunately, the donor male fetus died in utero on the first day after surgery. The patient was delivered at 30 4/7 weeks by cesarean section. The girl's (recipient twin) birth weight was 2000 g with normal external female genitalia appearing and the other two male stillbirths showed external male genitalia. Pathological examination confirmed the diagnose of monochorionic triamniotic pregnancy .