A 60-year-old Japanese man (weight 78.0 kg; height 179 cm; body mass index 24.3 kg/m2) presented to our hospital testing positive for the fecal occult blood. The patient had hypertension (American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status: class II). Sigmoid colon cancer was diagnosed using colonoscopy and contrast-enema, and a horseshoe kidney was confirmed by computed tomography (CT) . Three-dimensional (3D) CT angiography showed aberrant renal arteries from the aorta and right common iliac artery, and the left ureter passed across the front of the renal isthmus . To reduce the risk for intraoperative ureteral injury, a urologist placed the fluorescent ureteral catheter (IRIS U-Kits; Stryker, Tokyo, Japan) in the left ureter under general anesthesia before colorectal cancer surgery. The procedure required 5 min for completion, and no complications were noted.
We performed a laparoscopic sigmoid colon resection with D3 lymph node dissection using a five-port conventional technique, mobilizing the descending and sigmoid colons via a medial approach. The renal isthmus and aberrant renal arteries did not disturb the lymph node dissection for the root of inferior mesenteric artery and the dissection of vessels in this case. We used a laparoscopic scope (WAIR130A; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan), video system center (OLYMPUS OTV-300; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan), and light source (VISERA ELITE II XENON LIGHT SOURCE CLV-S200-IR; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) to observe the fluorescent ureteral catheter in the near-infrared light. Using the fluorescent ureteral catheter, we were able to identify the left ureter that passed across the front of the renal isthmus and safely mobilize the descending and sigmoid colon from the retroperitoneum . There was no anomaly in the relationship between the left ureter and left gonadal vessels; the left gonadal vessels ran lateral to the left ureter . We could repeatedly identify the ureter easily during surgery by simply changing the white light images to near-infrared light images in the laparoscope. The operative time was 214 min, with intraoperative bleeding of 25 mL. The patient’s postoperative course was good and she did not experience any complications; she was discharged on the seventh postoperative day.
According to the 8th edition of the TNM classification , the pathological stage of the cancer was T2N1bM0 stage IIIA . Ten months after the surgery, the patient is alive without recurrence.