A 25- year-old Sri- Lankan female presented with progressively worsening shortness of breath, orthopnoea and dry cough for three days. Her symptoms were not associated with chest pain, fever, oedema or wheezing. At the onset she noted shortness of breath on mild exertion which progressed to shortness of breath even at rest by third day. The patient reported a good urine output throughout. She was asymptomatic prior to the onset of this illness excepting a mild iron deficiency anaemia for which she was on oral iron treatment and dysmenorrhoea attributed to an ovarian cyst. The patient had undergone an appendicectomy eight months prior to the presentation for appendicitis associated with round worm infestation.
Examination revealed dyspnoea at rest, elevated jugular venous pulse, tachycardia with a heart rate of 120/min, blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg on both arms. There was an early diastolic murmur over left sternal edge associated with a thrill and bilateral lower lung field crackles. Rest of the examination was normal. Her estimated body surface area was 1.24m2 with a body weight of 40 kg and height of 140 cm.
Investigations revealed white cell count of 7.1 × 109/l (4–11 × 109/l), platelet count of 435 × 109/l (150–400 × 109/l),haemoglobin of 10.9 g/dl (11.5–15.5 g/dl) with mean corpuscular volume of 78 fl (80-96 fl). C- reactive protein was 18 mg/l (< 6 mg/l) and Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 114 mm/1st hour (< 20 mm/1st hour). Renal and liver functions, urinalysis, blood sugar and coagulation profile were in normal range. Electrocardiogram revealed sinus tachycardia with no ischaemic changes. Troponin I was negative. Chest radiograph had findings consistent with pulmonary oedema. Repeated blood cultures were negative. Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated ejection fraction > 60%, severe aortic regurgitation with dilated aortic root when adjusted for her body surface area(annulus 21 mm, sinus 34 mm). Aortic valve leaflets were morphologically normal. There was no left ventricular hypertrophy, regional wall motion abnormalities or vegetations. Other cardiac valves were normal. All four cardiac chambers were of normal size. Transoesophageal echocardiogram confirmed the absence of vegetations.
She was started on supportive management for acute pulmonary oedema and treatment was initiated as for infective endocarditis empirically. Though she was referred to cardiac surgery team urgent surgical interventions were not performed since she improved with medical management. After completion of four weeks empiric antibiotics her echocardiographic changes and ESR remained unchanged. However, heart failure improved with medical management with complete resolution of orthopnoea and dyspnea being limited to moderate exertion. Intravenous antibiotics were omitted in the absence of convincing evidence of endocarditis.
Further evaluation was performed in view of persistently high ESR and aortic regurgitation with no definitive cause. Chronic infections such as tuberculosis, vasculitic conditions such as Takayasu arteritis were considered. Further questioning did not reveal constitutional symptoms, contact with tuberculosis, arm claudication, headache or any neurological symptoms. Examination did not reveal any lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, cutaneous or joint involvement, fundoscopic abnormalities, pulse deficit or vascular bruits. Rheumatoid factor, serum cryoglobulins, anti nuclear antibodies and complement levels were normal. Peripheral blood smear revealed rouleaux formation with evidence of mild iron deficiency anaemia. Serum protein electrophoresis and serum Lactate dehydrogenase were normal. Human Immunodeficiency Virus antibodies and Serology for syphilis were negative. Mantoux test and induced sputum for acid fast bacilli were negative. Ultrasound abdomen, Contrast enhanced Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis as well as CT aortogram with arch vessels were normal except mild aortic root dilatation. Bone marrow biopsy revealed reactive marrow with no other abnormalities while bone marrow culture for bacteria, fungi, mycobacteria, brucella and leishmania were negative. Colonoscopy and biopsy did not reveal any abnormality.
The patient was followed up for one year with detailed clinical assessment and continuation of medical management of heart failure. She did not develop any new symptoms and her exertional dyspnoea remained static. Her ESR remained above 100 mm/1st hour. Clinical examination about one year after initial presentation revealed a reduced pulse volume of left upper limb with a blood pressure difference (right- 100/70 mmHg, left- 70/40 mmHg). There was a left subclavian bruit as well. But, patient did not have any constitutional symptoms or any symptoms of left upper limb ischaemia. Digital subtraction angiography at that point revealed significant stenosis at first part of left subclavian artery and at the origin of left vertebral artery . Based on the new findings she was diagnosed to have Takayasu arteritis and was started on prednisolone 1 mg/kg body weight daily with plan for follow up at cardiology and rheumatology units. Six weeks after initiation of glucocorticoids patient remained clinically well and ESR decreased to 25 mm/1st hour. Glucocorticoid dose was slowly tapered. Decision on aortic valve replacement was decided to be made few months later after resolution of active inflammation and repeat cardiac assessment. Ravascularisation for arterial stenosis was not offered in the absence of symptoms of upper limb or cerebral ischaemia. Sequence of events from her presentation to the diagnosis is given in a timeline in Table .