A 73-year-old woman presented to our unit via ambulance with rapid cognitive decline. Her medical history included hypertension and breast cancer. Clinical examination revealed rapidly progressive dementia (mini-mental status examination = 15/30), with no limb paralysis. A routine laboratory examination revealed normal IL-2 receptor (313 U/mL) andβ-2 MG (1.6 mg/L), without any other abnormalities. Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a contrast-enhancing lesion on the corpus callosum in the splenium with perifocal edema ( a, b, c). Therefore, due to the suspicion of a glioma or PCNSL, endoscopic biopsy in conjunction with a neuronavigation system was performed through a parieto-occipital approach into the trigone of the lateral ventricle ( d). This surgery failed to achieve a definitive histologic diagnosis due to poor visualization. Thereafter, additional neuronavigation-guided microscopic biopsy was performed ( e). Her postoperative computed tomography (CT) revealed an appropriate enucleation of the tumor ( f). She had no new neurological deficits postoperatively. Microscopically, the lesion comprised neoplastic proliferation of lymphoid cells along perivascular spaces with a high N/C ratio, large vesicular nuclei, and high mitotic figures ( a, b). Immunohistochemical staining was positive for CD 20 ( c) and negative for CD 3 ( d), cytokeratin AE1/AE3 ( e), and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) ( f), confirming a high-grade diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). The Ki-67 labeling index was approximately 90% ( g). The check-up to rule out systemic lymphoma by whole-body CT scan revealed no apparent lesions. Ophthalmologic examination also indicated no ocular involvements. Based on these results, the patient was finally diagnosed with PCNSL. She was treated with an induction rituximab, methotrexate, procarbazine, and vincristine (R-MPV) chemotherapy (1 cycle = 14 days). After 5 cycles of chemotherapy, her head MRI revealed a reduction in the tumor volume ( g, h, i). Three months after the admission, she was discharged with a modified Rankin Scale score of 3. She has been followed closely without additional treatment.