A 52-year-old male initially presented with a two-month history of congestion of the left eye.
At presentation, he underwent a complete ophthalmic examination. Visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/80 in the left eye. Biomicroscopy showed conjunctival hyperaemia in the left eye with a slight elevation, suggesting a subconjunctival mass , but no intraocular inflammatory reaction was noted. The bilateral intraocular pressures were both 10 mmHg. No signs of inflammatory cells were noted in the anterior chamber or the vitreous, and no signs of retinal vasculitis were identified on biomicroscopy and ophthalmoscopy examination with mydriasis. However, the presence of an abnormality in the foveal reflex in the left eye was observed. A clinical examination revealed nodular lesions in the ears and a lump in the subcutaneous tissue of the left arm.
A biopsy of the subcutaneous lesion showed a cellular infiltrate in the superficial and deep dermis with histiocytes with phagocytized lymphocytes and plasma cells . A characteristic finding was the presence of lymphocytes engulfed within the histiocytic cytoplasm, a feature called emperipolesis . Immunohistochemically, the large histiocytes reacted strongly with antibodies to S-100 protein, CD68, and CD 20b. These three immunohistochemical markers are indicative of a mixed inflammatory or heterogeneous population of cells that are characteristic of RDD. Retinal fluorescein angiography in the left eye revealed petaloid leakage from the perifoveal retinal capillaries during the late phases without staining of the optic disc. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed well-defined, intraretinal cystic areas of low reflectivity in the macula in the left eye, which are characteristic signs of cystoid macula oedema (CME). .
Due to the low visual acuity secondary to CME, the patient was treated intravitreally with triamcinolone (4 mg/0.1 mL). One month later, the patient showed significant improvement in visual acuity (20/20) and OCT showed complete regression of the oedema . The follow-up time was 6 months, and during this period, there was no recurrence of the oedema.