An 18-year-old man presented to our institution via ambulance after a high-speed motor vehicle collision. Paramedics noted a prolonged extrication. He had loss of consciousness at the scene with retrograde amnesia but scored a 15 on the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS). He arrived at our hospital with stable vital signs and continued to score a 15 on the GCS. He complained of lower neck and left hip pain. He had lower neck tenderness to palpation, but had a normal neurologic evaluation to include full strength and sensation in the extremities and preserved cranial nerve function.
CT of his chest and body revealed an isolated grade two splenic laceration per the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) guidelines. Computed tomography (CT) of the head demonstrated no traumatic injury. CT of the cervical spine revealed bilateral partial AOA with displaced fractures through the fused occipital condyles and lateral masses of C1 and a small avulsion fracture superior to the odontoid process of C2. He also had incidental basilar invagination, platybasia, and C1M. CT angiography of the head and cervical spine was negative for vascular injury. Three-dimensional reconstructions of the skull base accentuated the abnormal morphology of the CVJ. Given his benign neurologic examination and hemodynamic stability, he was maintained in a hard cervical collar and proceeded to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to assess for ligamentous injury.
MRI of the cervical spine demonstrated near-complete or complete tearing of the anterior atlanto-occipital membrane and apical ligament and thinning of the otherwise intact tectorial membrane. The alar and transverse ligaments were intact. There was subtle hyperintense spinal cord signal at C1–C2 on T2-weighted images, indicating mild contusion, but no hypointense signal to indicate hemorrhage. MRI also confirmed the presence of severe C1M with inferior displacement of the medulla and crowding of the thecal sac at the CVJ.
Because the tectorial membrane, transverse ligament, and alar ligaments were intact, and the patient had no neurologic deficits, surgical fixation was not performed. Instead, he was maintained in a hard cervical collar. He had an uncomplicated hospital stay and was discharged home two days later able to ambulate and accomplish his own activities of daily living. A follow-up CT of the cervical spine four weeks after injury demonstrated near- complete osseous bridging of the fractures with improved alignment of his CVJ. At the time of telephonic follow-up with the patient 12 weeks after injury, he denied neck pain or neurologic deficits, had removed his cervical collar, and had resumed his usual activities, even running up to five miles daily. He is seeing a chiropractor for post-injury therapy. Due to the restrictions on outpatient clinical appointments in our institution related to the novel coronavirus pandemic, he has not yet been evaluated in person after discharge from the hospital.