Following a fall, an 82-year-old woman was admitted to the Broca University Hospital. According to her family, she had exhibited cognitive impairment for several months. The patient was undergoing treatment for hypertension with Candesartan (Angiotensin Receptor Blockers) and her type 2 diabetes was satisfactorily controlled by diet. The physical examination at the time of admission revealed an akineto-rigid bilateral, symmetrical parkinsonism. Her gait demonstrated marked reduction in arm swing. She displayed bilateral bradykinesia, limb rigidity and hypomimia. Her voice was monotonous and hypophonic. There was neither tremor nor orthostatic hypotension. She scored 18/30 on the Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE) and scored very low on the Cognitive Efficiency Profile , a complete validated comprehensive cognitive battery assessment, indicating a major dysexecutive syndrome (perseveration, judgment trouble, confabulation, anosognosia and apathy) and memory impairment (short and medium recall). There were also deficits on tests of visuospatial ability. Conversely, naming was preserved. Basic biological screening tests (i.e. blood cell count, blood chemistry, C-reactive protein, thyroid stimulating hormone, vitamin B12 and folic acid) were normal, as well as a non-injected computed tomography brain scan . An electro-encephalogram demonstrated slow waves, especially at the level of the left temporal lobe. Allowing for this dementia with parkinsonism, the first diagnostic hypothesis was dementia with Lewy bodies.
Shortly following her evaluation, the akinesia and rigidity worsened, and a frontal syndrome developed. An L-dopa treatment was introduced as well as an anticholinesterase treatment (Galantamine) without any improvement noted.
Two months after the hospital admission, the MMSE score was 5/30. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium injection highlighted a diffuse tumor-related infiltration involving both lobes, the putamen, the pallidum, the substantia nigra and the brainstem, corresponding to the specific description and definition of gliomatosis cerebri .
Fifteen days later, the patient died of urinary sepsis just before the initiation of chemotherapy.