A 4-year-old girl has background history of global developmental delay and dyskinesia, caused by de novo pathogenic mutation in GNAO1 (c.709G>A, p.Glu237Lys). She could not sit independently, and she did not have any verbal expression. She was admitted with worsening of hyperkinetic movement with near continuous choreoathetoid movement involving the whole body, triggered by enterovirus infection. It was further complicated by pneumonia and rhabdomyolysis. She stayed in intensive care unit (ICU) for 7 weeks and required heavy sedation/anesthesia to control her movement, with a combination of midazolam, fentanyl, and propofol. Oral medications were also maximized .
She still had significant choreoathetoid movement after discharge from ICU, which severely affected her daily activities such as posturing and feeding. Parents eventually agreed for DBS as rescue therapy. She underwent preoperative magnetic resonant imaging (MRI) under general anesthesia (GA). The target of DBS was bilateral posterolateroventral portion of the globus pallidus internus (GPi). She was kept sedated and intubated after MRI. The next day, frame-based stereotactic surgery for DBS was performed under GA. Leksell Vantage™ Head Frame was fixed to the head, and computed tomography (CT) of brain was performed together with the frame. Afterward, the preoperative MRI with targeting plan was fused to the CT images. Directional leads (Vercise™ Cartesia™ Model DB-2202-45) were implanted on both sides and a rechargeable pulse generator (Vercise Gevia™ Model DB-1200) was implanted over the left subclavian subcutaneous pocket.
On postoperative day 1, sedation was stopped and the pulse generator was switched on. The initial setting of stimulation was monopolar configuration contact 1 and 9 which were the distalmost (ventral) pair of contact, with 3 mA, pulse width 60 µs, and frequency of 130 Hz. There was significant decrease in the hyperkinetic movement in early postoperative days. The patient was discharged home on postoperative day 8. Her choreoathetoid movement continued to improve with further DBS programming. There was no further exacerbation of dyskinesia at 24 months follow-up after DBS, even with intercurrent infection. The BFMDRS was 106.5/120 before DBS and 64.5/120 by 10 months follow-up . The latest DBS parameters remained the same monopolar configuration 1–9, while the amplitude was increased to 3.9 mA and 4.0 mA, respectively. The frequency and pulse width remained 130 Hz and 60 µs, respectively. We were able to step down her oral drugs . She was also making some progress in neurodevelopment that she could now sit independently and reach out for objects.