A five-year-old boy was admitted in Namazi Hospital, Shiraz, Iran with severe abdominal pain, jaundice and low grade fever. Similar symptoms were reported in his family about 30 days ago. He had abdominal pain and vomiting from 20 days before admission; his jaundice worsened and developed from 10 days ago. At the time of admission he was very sick with fever and yellowish discoloration of skin and sclera. He was very irritable due to abdominal pain. In the physical examination he had normal growth parameters and his vital signs were as follows: temperature: 38ºC, pulse rate: 100/min, respiratory rate: 30/min and blood pressure: 100/60 mmHg. In the abdominal examination, a large mass was palpated in the right upper quadrant (RUQ) with severe tenderness.
Initial laboratory investigations showed elevated liver enzymes: AST: 516 U/L, ALT: 722 U/L, alkaline phosphatase: 1930 U/L, total bilirubin: 5.3 mg/dL, direct bilirubin: 3.9 mg/dL, total protein: 7.7 g/dL, albumin: 3.8 g/dL, WBC: 8000/mm3, Hb: 11.9 g/dL, platelet: 426000/mm3, CPR: 6 mg/dL, ESR: 40 mm/h. Coagulation studies revealed PT: 13 sec, PTT: 34 sec and INR: 1. Serum amylase, blood sugar and serum sodium, potassium, BUN and creatinine were within normal range. Venous blood gas analysis revealed: pH: 7.5, HCO3: 30, and PCO2: 37.9. Blood and urine cultures were negative. Serology of viral hepatitis was positive for HAV IgM, and other viral markers were negative. Serology titers for typhoid and brucellosis were negative. Abdominal ultrasonography showed normal size and echogenicity of the liver, with significantly distended gallbladder (span 130 × 50 mm) with the fundus of gallbladder near iliac crest. The thickness of gallbladder wall was normal and no stone was detected. The hydrops of gallbladder was confirmed by ultrasonography .
Due to fever and toxic condition, he received antibiotic ceftizoxim and metronidazole. After the third day of admission, his fever and blood culture became negative and antibiotics were stopped. Surgical intervention was not required in the patient. After five days, general condition and abdominal pain of and jaundice improved and he was discharged with close follow up.