A 28-year-old male experienced abdominal pain and a mass on the left side of the abdomen. Color duplex ultrasonogram and subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 10 × 9 cm adrenal mass invading the top of left renal and partial of retroperitoneal region . He underwent surgical removal of the mass in an outside hospital. The pathology specimens were evaluated in our hospital which showed neoplastic infiltration of pleomorphic lymphoid cells with scanty cytoplasm, irregular nuclear contour, and prominent nucleoli. Immunohistochemistry analysis showed that the tumor cells were positive for CD2, Bcl-2, CD43, CD56, negative for CD20, CD4, CD5, CD7, CD8, CD138, PCK, HMB45, Des, Pax-5, Bcl-6, Vim, CD34, TdT, MPO and equivocal for CD3. Ki67 labelling index was 40% . Chromogenic in situ hybridization (CISH) was positive for the EBER gene . These are consistent with NK/T-cell lymphoma.
After the surgery, the patient was without any systemic symptoms. He did have a 10 kg weight loss secondary to the removal of the majority of the large mass and the poor postoperative nutrition support. The postoperative physical examination was unremarkable. A postoperative CT scan of the abdomen showed a residual tumor, measuring 2.7 × 5.3 cm at the left side of retroperitoneum with the absence of left adrenal gland and kidney . The bone marrow biopsy was negative. Nasal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed normal findings. The contrast CT scans of the neck, chest and pelvis had been done and showed normal tissue structure. Primary unilateral adrenal NK/T cell lymphoma was diagnosed. He received four cycles of chemotherapy with cyclophophamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisolone (CHOP). A post-chemotherapy CT scan revealed no residual disease . He then underwent a course of consolidated intensity-modulated radiotherapy to the surgical bed to a dose of 50Gy in 25 fractions. Post-radiotherapy, the patient received two more cycles of CHOP. The patient tolerated treatment well without significant side effects. At the 26 months follow up point, the patient remains clinically and symptomatically disease-free.