A 70-year-old woman presented to our department with a 4-week history of progressive walking impairment, neck pain, neck rigidity, fever, dizziness, slight palsy of the left hand, and multiple fall episodes.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the craniovertebral junction (CVJ) and cervical spine revealed a lesion of the OP and the retro-odontoid region with mainly solid components, as well as small cystic components , and brainstem compression and displacement (differential diagnoses include metastasis, rheumatoid arthritis, and spondylodiscitis) . Computed tomography (CT) revealed spinal stenosis and odontoid erosion with signs of instability .
The patient had a history of Saethre–Chotzen syndrome (SCS) (also known as acrocephalosyndactyly type III) and diabetes mellitus with diabetic nephropathy. MRI also revealed a fusion of the cervical vertebral bodies C3 to C6 due to Saethre-Chotzen syndrome .
Owing to brainstem compression and displacement caused by pannus grade 4, cervical instability, and progressive walking impairment, we decided to perform surgery. Our goal was to stabilize the CVJ, decompress the foramen magnum and spinal canal at the C1 level, and perform biopsy of the periodontoid lesion for pathological analysis in a single surgical session.
Preoperative planning included a thin slice CT image of the cervical spine and CVJ for spinal neuronavigation, CT angiography (CTA) for analysis of the V3 segment of the vertebral artery, which revealed a “normal” anatomy, and a three-dimensional model print (1:1 scale model using the fused filament fabrication).
Cefuroxime was administered for perioperative surgical prophylaxis. The patient was placed in a prone position under general anesthesia, and radiography was performed after positioning to verify anatomical alignment. Intraoperative monitoring (IOM) included motor-evoked potentials and sensory-evoked potentials of the upper and lower extremities.
A midline incision was made and the inion, posterior wall of the posterior cranial fossa, C1 arc, and C2, C3, and C4 laminae were exposed.
Fusion surgery of the CVJ C0–C4 was performed with an OC plate (MOUNTAINEER, DePuy Synthes, Raynham, MA, USA) under spinal neuronavigation (Brainlab).
After fusion, the foramen magnum was enlarged under microscope (ZEISS KINEVO, Carl Zeiss, Germany) examination. Laminectomy of the medial C1 arc and the lower lateral part of the C1 arc (subperiostal, with remnant upper C1 arc), removal of the left superior part of the left side of the C2 arc, and flavectomy were performed . Doppler sonography was used to analyze the anatomy of vertebral artery .
Different landmarks such as the C2 root and remains of the C1 arc, C2 arc, and dural sac were identified. Then, PESCA, which we described in a previous publication, was performed .
The window between the remains of the C2 arc and the C2 root was used in our approach. The entry point was located directly above the superior part of the C2 root. The trajectory was located medial to the pedicle of C2, medial to the C1–C2 facet joint, and medial to the tubercle for the transverse ligament of the atlas.
A bioptic instrument was inserted under microscope guidance . Owing to dorsal decompression, the danger of compression was limited as much as possible. IOM remained stable during surgery. A biopsy of the lateral portions of the lesions was obtained.
A postoperative CT scan showed proper positioning of the screws and sufficient decompression of the spinal cord at the level of the CVJ . The patient recovered from surgery without any new deficits.
Pathologic examination of the mass revealed fibrous connective tissue with deposition of birefringent crystals compatible with calcium pyrophosphate (CPP) due to CPPD disease . In addition to the clinical symptoms (especially neck pain), the diagnosis of CDS was made. Non-steroidal inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and colchicine were started.
At follow-up examination 3 months after surgery, the patient did not manifest any neurological symptoms, and the CT scan of the CVJ did not reveal large regression of the pannus. Therefore, NSAIDs (diclofenac), steroids (prednisolone), and magnesium were administered.
At follow-up examination 6 months after surgery, an MRI scan of the cervical spine revealed regression of the pannus and the cyst with replacement of the brainstem , clinical improvement of walking, and increased strength of the left hand. Since then, the patient did not experience neck pain and dizziness.