A 64-year-old male visited a previous hospital complaining of chest and back pain that progressively worsened over a period of 2 months, fever, anorexia, weight loss of about 10 kg, and dyspnea. His symptoms did not improve despite antibiotic treatment with tazobactam/piperacillin (TAZ/PIPC) for suspected bacterial pneumonia. Bone marrow biopsy from the hip bone, which was performed because of elevated serum soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) levels, showed the presence of many epithelioid cell granulomas with Langhans-type giant cells. The patient was transferred to our hospital for further examination. Seven years earlier, he had been suspected to have malignant lymphoma based on the presence of malaise, fever, enlarged lymph nodes, etc., although bone marrow biopsy and other tests had failed to reveal a diagnosis. CD4 levels were not examined at that point. The patient had smoked 15 cigarettes/day since the age of 24 years, although he only occasionally drank alcoholic beverages.
Physically, he was 161.0 cm tall and his body weight was 61.7 kg after a 10 kg weight loss over the previous one month. His vital signs were: temperature 36.7 °C, blood pressure 126/69 mmHg, pulse rate 103 beats/min, and oxygen saturation 96% while breathing 2 L/min oxygen via a nasal cannula. Physical examination revealed no abnormal heart or respiratory sounds. Palpation revealed no abnormalities in the abdomen. However, non-tender subcutaneous masses (approximately 20 mm × 20 mm) were noted in the forehead, sternoclavicular joint and right inguinal region. Blood tests showed: albumin 1.92 g/dL, Na 137.6 mEq/L, K 2.91 mEq/L, corrected Ca 12.89 mg/dL, C-reactive protein (CRP) 10.79 mg/dL, and ferritin 399.8 ng/mL . There were no abnormalities in liver or kidney function. Urinalysis showed no abnormal findings. Levels of leukocytes were 6820/μL (neutrophils 6070/μL, lymphocytes 380/μL), CD4 + were 107/μL, and CD8 + were 64/μL. Immunoglobulin levels were elevated (IgG 2765 mg/dL, IgM 334.2 mg/dL, and IgA 565 mg/dL), while those of complement were decreased (C3 60 [normal: 73–138 mg/dL], C4 3.7 [normal: 11–31 mg/dL], and CH50 20.4 [normal: 31.6–57.6 U/mL]). The level of sIL-2R was elevated to 7829 IU/mL. Anti-human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody and anti-human T cell leukemia virus (HTLV)-1 antibody were negative. He was diagnosed with idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia, since the CD4 + and CD8 + fractions measured over time after admission were below normal at all time points, and he was negative for HIV and HTLV-1 antibodies and had no underlying diseases or history of drug usage to explain the immunodeficiency. Whole blood IFN-γ release assay (using QuantiFERON TB-3G [QFT]) showed a low IFN-γ level even with mitogen (Phytohemagglutinin [PHA]) stimulation. Serum anti-MAC antibodies were positive. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed diffuse emphysematous changes in bilateral chest areas, increased parenchymal density, destruction of alveolar structures, and bronchial wall thickening . It also showed infiltration in the right lower lung lobes. CT also revealed overall diffuse heterogeneous osteosclerosis in the bones, with soft-tissue structures around the acromioclavicular and sternoclavicular joints. Numerous other osteolytic changes were observed in the ribs, clavicle, scapula, ilium, right sciatic bone, and bilateral femoral heads . Both blood and sputum cultures were positive for Mycobacterium intracellulare. Histopathological evaluation of the subcutaneous mass in the right inguinal region showed numerous granulomas consisting of epithelioid cells with Langhans-type giant cells . These findings confirmed the diagnosis of disseminated NTM infection. Hence, two-drug combination therapy with clarithromycin (CAM) and ethambutol (EB) was started. Although rifampicin was added, it was withdrawn due to pancytopenia. The CD4 + and CD8 + fractions did not improve in spite of improvement in clinical symptoms. Subsequently, we evaluated the neutralizing activity of his anti-IFN-γ autoantibodies using signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) phosphorylation in whole blood leukocytes with IFN-γ stimulation, as described previously . The anti-IFN-γ autoantibodies detected in our patient clearly suppressed IFN-γ-dependent STAT1 phosphorylation, which confirmed the diagnosis of anti-IFN-γ autoantibody-positive immunodeficiency. The patient was transferred to the referring hospital on the 62nd day of hospitalization. He is currently on a combination of CAM and EB and has been relapse-free for 1 year.