We report on a 73-year-old female patient with an 8-year history of thyroid nodules for which she underwent regular clinical examination and blood tests. Three weeks before referral to our endocrinological surgery unit she developed a swelling of her head and neck lymph nodes. Her past medical history included surgical removal of a benign breast tumor 22 years ago. Her family history was unremarkable regarding any endocrinological or thyroid disease. Besides her obesity she was suffering from reflux disease and hypertension. She had a regular pulse of 68/per minute and blood pressure of 120/70 mmHg under antihypertensive medication. Her muscle tone was reduced. She had observed a change of her voice and had lost 20 kg of weight within the past 4 months. A thyroid scintigram showed multiple confluencing cold nodules which were highly suspicious for malignant neoplasm of both thyroid lobes and regional lymph node metastases along both jugular veins. Clinical exam and sonography showed multiple enlarged lymph nodes of the head and neck. Pre-operative serum calcitonin was 5.3 pg/ml (normal range 0.8–9.9 pg/ml). Based on the history, clinical presentation and the scintigram we suspected an anaplastic thyroid carcinoma and performed a radical oncologic thyroidectomy with bilateral modified neck-dissection and resection of the right internal jugular vein and the left recurrent laryngeal nerve. Intraoperatively the tumor was tightly adherent to the surface of the trachea. Because of the impressing clinical picture a fine needle aspiration was not performed prior to surgery. In the authors' point of view it would have had no prognostic effect at this advanced stage of disease. A pre-operative pentagastrin test was also not performed as clinical presentation made the presence of an anaplastic carcinoma highly suspicious. Surprisingly, histopathology showed a pT3 L1 V1 R1 N1b low-differentiated medullary-thyroid carcinoma with massive lymphangiosis and haemangiosis carcinomatosa. Immunhistochemistry revealed weak positive staining for calcitonin and carcinoembryogenic antigen (CEA) . Post-operative serum calcitonin decreased to 2.47 pg/ml still being within normal range (0.8–9.9 pg/ml). Post operatively the patient was in the intensive care unit for 6 days. A pentagastrin stimulation test was not performed due to the bad condition of the patient. A permanent tracheostoma was established to ensure a patent airway as the patient aspirated after initial extubation. Additionally massive crust formation obstructed the patient's airway which was treated with a humidifier and frequent irrigations with physiological saline solution and subsequent suctioning of the trachea. Unfortunately the patient developed central lung emboli in the right pulmonary artery. A postoperative CT scan showed multiple lung and intracerebral metastases . The patient died six weeks after diagnosis.