Our patient was a 75-year-old white man who was a former smoker (20 pack-years) with no relevant family history of lung disease. He had been a farmer until the age of 40 years. At the age of 42 years, he had an acute myocardial infarction, which led to the development of chronic heart failure with recurrent episodes of pulmonary edema. His medications included acetylsalicylic acid (150 mg/day) and amiloride/hydrochlorothiazide (5/50 mg/day, respectively). He had never received antiarrhythmic drugs, including amiodarone. Due to worsening clinical conditions, at the age of 54 years he was included on a heart transplant list and after 2 years on the list he underwent a heart transplant. At that time, his chest x-ray and lung function test results, including forced vital capacity (FVC) and diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO), were normal.
The patient, who was already being treated with felodipine (5 mg/day) and atorvastatin (5 mg/day), was initially started on azathioprine (50 mg twice daily), cyclosporine (100 mg twice daily) and prednisone, with the first two drugs being maintained in the long-term treatment. At the age of 65 years, following a chest trauma, he underwent chest radiography, which revealed the presence of bilateral reticulonodular abnormalities predominant in the lower lobes. Chest high-resolution computed tomography confirmed the presence of bilateral reticular abnormalities with minimum honeycombing in the periphery of both lower lobes. Chest auscultation revealed bibasal pulmonary “velcro” crackles. Lung function tests showed a mild restrictive ventilatory defect: FVC 73 % of predicted, forced expiratory volume in 1 second 75 % of predicted, total lung capacity 67 % of predicted, and DLCO 60 % of predicted. The patient was completely asymptomatic. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cytology showed a slight lymphocytosis with prevalence of CD4+ T lymphocytes and a CD4/CD8 ratio of 3.6. Direct stains and cultures for bacteria, fungi, and mycobacteria on BAL samples were negative. Serum and BAL precipitins were negative.
To confirm the suspicion of IPF, an open lung biopsy with sampling in the right lower and middle lobes was performed. The histological pattern was consistent with usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP), thus providing, after exclusion of secondary causes and in the absence of elements for relevant professional and/or environmental exposures, the definite diagnosis of IPF was made 10 years after initiation of immunosuppressive therapy. While continuing immunosuppressive treatment, the patient’s clinical conditions progressively worsened (FVC 44 % predicted and DLCO 4 % predicted), as expected in IPF. He died as a result of respiratory failure 5 years after receiving his diagnosis of IPF .