A 73-year-old man with stable angina pectoris was admitted to our hospital. He underwent coronary bypass surgery 5 years ago. However, all his grafts were occluded. Therefore, he was admitted to our hospital to undergo percutaneous coronary intervention for the proximal site of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery. His coronary risk factors were hypertension, an ex-smoker. His blood pressure was 134/80 mmHg, and his pulse rate was 72/min, regular. He had no evidence of jugular venous distension, no murmur in his lung or heart sounds, and no oedema of the lower legs. His echocardiographic findings showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 59%, no apparent wall motion abnormalities, and no evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy. His coronary angiography revealed 75% stenosis of the left main trunk (LMT) and 90% stenosis of the LAD artery with calcification in the proximal site. Myocardial bridging was not evident when coronary angiography was undergone. We performed transfemoral intervention based on the reduced fractional flow reserve value (0.66). Under ultrasound guidance, a 7 Fr sheath was inserted into his right common femoral artery, and a 6 Fr sheath was inserted into his common femoral vein. An everolimus-eluting stent (Xience SkypointTM 3.5 × 12 mm) was implanted from the LMT to the proximal site of the LAD after a rotational atherectomy. During the stent implantation procedure, we noticed that his blood pressure decreased and his heart rate gradually increased. At that exact moment, we recognized that myocardial bridging had been significantly induced at the middle portion of the LAD, which was not evident before the intervention (, , ). Although there was no swelling at the puncture site, we suspected puncture-related haemorrhage and immediately performed lower limb arteriography. As a result, contrast media extravasation was identified at the branch of the right inferior epigastric artery . His haemoglobin level had abruptly dropped from 11.3 g/dL to 7.0 g/dL (normal range at our hospital: 13.5∼17.6 g/dL). After reversing the heparin with protamine, we continued manual compression for 30 min, but extravasation persisted. Therefore, we opted to perform interventional haemostasis via the left common femoral artery (4 Fr sheath). We used a shepherd hook to cross the bifurcation and selected the right inferior epigastric artery. After crossing the 0.016 in guidewire (Fathom-16TM) and subsequently the microcatheter (breakthrough 2.2/2.9 Fr), coil embolization was successfully performed using five INTERLOCKTM and two TARGET XLR . He required a total of four units of red blood cell transfusion. Finally, he was discharged on the seventh day on his own.
Four months later, he underwent chronic coronary angiography. There were no findings of in-stent restenosis. Furthermore, coronary angiography showed no evidence of myocardial bridging.