A 61 year-old white man with known history of pleural mesothelioma on regular follow up was found to develop multiple facial skin lesions with no clinical evidence of local recurrence 4 years after the primary diagnosis.
On March 2004, this non-smoker, semi-retired boat builder with significant asbestos exposure history, presented with 4 months history of progressive shortness of breath. The inhalers had not helped and this seemed to be clearly a different problem to his original asthma. He also complained of some right chest pain, easy fatigue, dry cough and weight loss. On examination, there were only signs of pleural effusion. The chest X-rays showed increasing right pleural effusion and CT chest showed a large right simple pleural effusion with no pleural thickening or masses. He was admitted and the effusion drained. The cytology of the effusion was highly suggestive of mesothelioma, but pleural biopsy was insufficient. Few weeks later, the pleural effusion recurred and an US guided biopsy on 08/06/04 showed features consistent with a malignant Mesothelioma, epithelioid type . The biopsy contains some skeletal muscle and some pleura with a thick layer of malignant epithelioid cells which are positive for mesothelial markers CK5/6 and Calretinin and negative for lung cancer markers TTF-1 and CEA.
The patient took part on the ALIMTA trial, he received 6 cycles of Pemetrexed 500 mg/m2 + Carboplatin AUC 5 day 1 every 3 weeks; the last cycle date was 03/11/04. This was followed by radiotherapy to the drain site "250 Kv/TD20 Gy/5F" completed 13/12/2004.
Then, the patient underwent close follow up and he remained well and asymptomatic with no clinical or radiological evidence of disease recurrence until the end of December 2007, when he noticed small subcutaneous lesion on his right check and some nasal symptoms. Few weeks later, he developed fever 38°C with dry cough and the cheek lesion increased in size. CT scan on 17/03/2008 recorded several sites of disease; notably in the right hemithorax and right para-renal space consistent with recurrence of the Mesothelioma. Clinical Examination of the face revealed 3 skin lesions: right cheek 24 × 24 mm annular raised red area with eroded central area , a small erythematous plaque posterior to the right ear and a 1 cm very firm subcutaneous lesion on the frontal area.
CT guided core biopsy from the right posterior basal pleural mass showed a thick layer of malignant epithelioid cells. A panel of immunohistochemical markers were performed and these malignant cells are positive for mesothelial markers CK5/6 and Calretinin and negative for lung cancer markers TTF-1 and CEA. Overall, these features are consistent with a malignant Mesothelioma, Epithelioid type.
The three skin lesions were biopsied. The microscopic examination showed sarcomatous atypical spindle cell proliferation within the dermis extending into the subcutaneous adipose tissue . Mitotic figures including atypical forms are noted. The architecture of the tumour is partly storiform. Immunohistochemistry showed positivity with Vimentin, CAM 5.2 and CD10 and focally with SMA and Calretinin. The histopathological diagnosis was in keeping with Metastatic Mesothelioma of sarcomatous type.