A 55-year-old woman with no specific medico-surgical history presented at the emergency room with a 1-day history of squeezing epigastric abdominal pain. Patient also complained of a thick turbid yellowish discharge in the left inguinal area that was intermittently drained for some years.
Vital signs were normal range except for tachycardia (pulse rate, 110/min). Palpation of the abdomen revealed a wood-like hard mass in the left lower quadrant with minimal tenderness and no acute peritoneal signs warranting emergent surgery. A visible scar was noted in the left inguinal area without any discharge.
Initial laboratory testing revealed marked leukocytosis (white blood cells, 24,730 cells/mm3), anemia (hemoglobin concentration of 6.9 g/dL), elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) 32.05 mg/dL (reference range, 0–0.5 mg/dL), hypoalbuminemia (albumin, 2.5 g/dL); and normal AST/ALT and BUN/creatinine. CT scan of the abdomen-pelvis revealed a microperforation of the sigmoid colon, abscess in the left lower quadrant, a hepatic lesion and bilateral hydronephrosis. Furthermore, there was a large infiltrating heterogenous hyperattenuating conglomerated mass invading the urinary bladder, left adnexa, sigmoid, left inguinal canal and left pelvic wall area . Ultrasound revealed an intra-uterine device (IUD) . All these findings initially raised a suspicion of malignancy such as advanced cancer of the colon or ovary with liver metastasis. Despite the rarity of the disease, infectious diseases such as actinomycosis were not excluded because of the IUD found on ultrasound. Colonoscopy or percutaneous needle biopsy was not performed for accurate diagnosis due to suspected colon perforation and the small bowel enclosed mass.
Since the patient showed minimal peritoneal irritation and stable vital signs, and extensive organ resection was expected due to invasion of bladder and ureters, treatment was initially conservative rather than primary debulking surgery. The antibiotic regimen was always determined based on the infectious disease diagnosis after hospitalization. Parenteral antibiotics (ceftriaxone+metronidazole+azithromycin) and fasting with total parental nutrition were prescribed for sigmoid perforation. Because there was a huge left abdominal abscess (11X8X3cm) that could spread to other spaces and cause generalized peritonitis, the imaging-guided percutaneous abscess drainage was performed.
After 10 days of conservative treatment, a repeat CT scan of the abdomen-pelvis showed improvement in abdominal abscess and liver lesion. However, no remarkable change was detected in conglomerated mass invading pelvis. Furthermore, the finding of newly developed mechanical small bowel obstruction warranted surgery.
Exploratory laparotomy was performed for the removal of perforated colon, obstructive small bowel and organs involved. Abscess of the sigmoid colon involved the uterus, adnexa, loop of small bowel and distal colon with severe adhesion between the mass and pelvic organs including the uterus, small and large bowels, and bladder. The abscess compressed the left ureter and caused ureteral dilatation. En-bloc excision of the mass was performed using Hartmann’s procedure, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, small bowel resection and appendectomy. The gynecologist decided not to resect uterus because of severe fibrotic adhesion in the pelvis and transvaginal IUD removal failed repeatedly due to severe adhesion.
Since the frozen section excluded malignancy, a double J catheter was inserted into both the ureters without resection. Although Actinomyces spp. failed to grow in preoperative cultures, postoperative permanent histology confirmed a definitive diagnosis of colonic actinomycosis, which showed the granular colonies of bacteria, commonly termed sulfur granule, with aggregates of filamentous bacteria and neutrophils and abscess with invasion into the uterus and ovaries.
After surgery, the parenteral antibiotic regimen was changed to tigecycline, amikacin, metronidazole and Penicillin G. Three days after surgery, bowel movement was restored and vital signs were stabilized, which decreased the abdominal pain. The patient made an uneventful recovery and was started on a 6-month course of penicillin. At 1-year follow-up, the patient was well and free from disease.