A 51-year-old male prisoner presented to ER with chest pain that started two weeks ago and has worsened progressively. At the presentation, he was ill-looking and distressed but was alert, well-oriented, and cooperative. On physical examination, a bilateral, tender swelling on the anterior chest wall was present that started two weeks prior. This swelling was fluctuating and erythematous with no discharge. He also had supple, nontender cervical lymph nodes, otherwise the rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Additionally, there was cellulitis on the medial aspect of the distal tibia and ankle. His skin looked warm, pink and moist. Upon admission, his vital signs were within normal limits. The patient was admitted to the hospital and aspiration from chest swelling was done. On needle aspiration, pus was present. Pus culture showed significant growth of Staphylococcus aureus which was sensitive to Linezolid and amoxicillin/clavulanate. Blood culture showed the same organism. Complete blood count (CBC) revealed WBC count of 21.6 × 103/mm3, neutrophils of 86.10 %, hemoglobin (Hb) was 12.90 g/dL, platelets were 389.00 × 109/mm3. C-reactive protein (CRP) was 294.10 mg/L. Alanine transaminase (ALT): 236 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP): 185 IU/L, total protein of 81 g/dL, albumin of 19.2 g/dL, bilirubin of 28.9, lactic acid of 4.8 (high). Prothrombin time (PT) was prolonged to 16.20 s. (ECG) was within normal. On admission a parenteral antibiotic was started empirically. Chest (CT) scan illustrated a large multiseptated dense anterior chest wall lesion, extending deep to both pectoralis major muscles, neck root, axillae, and anterior mediastinal leading to bony erosion of the sternum.
An incision was made over the chest wall swelling. Large amount of seropurulent fluid was drained, debridement of all necrotic areas in the subcutaneous layer, fascia, medial portion of pectoralis major muscles, and sternum was done. A vacuum dressing was applied and the patient was continued on the parenteral antibiotic.
The vacuum dressing was changed every few days. A follow-up CT showed bilateral pectoralis major fluid collection measuring 8 × 5.6 × 4 cm that was connected to the midline chest wound, indicating an abscess on the apical-lateral chest wall, and there was a retrosternal enhancing soft tissue mass, without any fluid collection. The CT also showed destructive sternal changes, bilateral small pleural effusion, and bilateral atelectatic changes, reactionary to sternal osteomyelitis.
Following debridement and vacuum dressing application, a healthy granulation tissue started to cover the wound. A follow-up CT scan showed residual collection (measuring 70 × 60 × 34 mm) confined to the superior aspect of the left pectoralis major. There was still a retrosternal enhancing soft tissue swelling without fluid collection. Another debridement was done. Wound culture showed Enterococcus and Staphylococcus aureus, which were sensitive to Linezolid and amoxicillin/clavulanate. A follow-up CT scan, and in comparison, to the previous CT scan, revealed collapse and resolution of the previous left chest wall abscess, with clear lung fields and no other significant internal changes.
Six weeks later, after frequent debridement and vacuum dressing application, the vacuum was removed and the patient was discharged with instructions to have daily dressing with the plan to have skin graft after maintaining a clean wound. The patient was lost for follow-up.