A 30-year-old caucasian male presented with progressive dysphagia for the past few months. The patient had a history of smoking one pack per day and heavy alcohol use for many years. His medical history was significant for hypertension. An endoscopic biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma at the gastroesophageal junction. Gross examination of the subsequent esophagogastrectomy specimen revealed a 5.5 × 3.0 × 1.2 cm fungating tumor, located at the gastroesophageal junction. The remaining gastric and esophageal mucosa appeared unremarkable. Sections of the tumor, random sections of uninvolved mucosa and other pertinent sections were examined after hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining.
On histopathology the tumor was diagnosed as poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Light microscopic examination of random gastric sections revealed multiple small corpuscle like structures in the lamina propria close to the top of the gastric pits . These corpuscles were round to oval in shape ranging in size from 99–330 microns in diameter approximately. Histologically they were comprised of elongated slender cells with slightly eosinophilic cytoplasm and an oval to pale nucleus and were tightly packed in a lamellated arrangement with a well-circumscribed contour. Whorled and parallel-running fibers could also be identified. Adjacent gastric tissue had no significantly histopathological change.
To determine the nature of the cells forming these lamellated structures, we examined related cell membrane markers by using biotin-avitin immunohistochemical methods. The slides were stained with the following immunohistochemical stains: S-100, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), neuron specific enolase (NSE), nerofilament protein (NF), glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP), myelin basic protein (MBP) and CD 57 (Dako Corporation, California).
These cells stained strongly positive with mouse monoclonal antibodies to human S-100 , lightly positive by the antibody to NSE and stained negative with antibodies against EMA , GFAP, NF, MBP and CD 57.
Ultrastructural studies were performed on formalin fixed tissue. Although the tissue was inadequately preserved for such an analysis, it revealed structures similar to the ones described in neurofibromas [,]. The structures were composed of cells with peripherally located nuclei and delicate lamellated cytoplasmic processes. Surface cavoelae, and rudimentary intercellular junctions [,] described in such structures were not seen very clearly due to poor preservation .