A 78 years old man was admitted to our hospital with 4 years history of swollen left testicle. This man suffered from pain in scrotum and abdomen with alteration of health. The performance status at admission was equal to 3 (PS = 3). A physical examination revealed a fixed abdominal mass. The Computed tomography scan of the pelvis, abdomen and lung showed a large retroperitoneal tumour, measuring 18 × 16 cm . The diagnosis of pure seminoma was established from the histological study of the left orchidectomy. The serum markers results showed: AFP (alpha-fetoprotein) = 1,7 ng/ml (normal); β HCG (Human chorionic gonadotropin) = 515 U/L (increased) and LDH (Lactate dehydrogenase) = 3345 U/L (increased). The seminoma was at stage IIC according to the 2002 TNM classification for genitourinary tumours and of good prognosis according to the International Germ Cell Consensus Classification. A complete blood count (red blood cell, white blood cells and platelet) was normal. The estimated creatinine clearance showed renal insufficiency (40 mml/min). The liver check-up showed liver insufficiency with serum transaminase increased up to 2 fold for ALAT and up to 3 fold for ASAT and with GGT (Gamma Glutamyl Transferase) increased up to 2 fold. In addition, the prothrombin rate decreased to 19%. The bilirubinemia was normal. Liver metastasis was the first hypothesis of liver insufficiency considered but the CT scan and ultrasound imaging did not shows liver metastasis. The second hypothesis was the presence of liver infection by B or C virus. This hypothesis was disregarded by the fact that B antibody was positive while HBs antigen was negative. After hydration, corticotherapy and treatment by vitamin K and the increase of PT up to 50% the patient received 2 cycles of chemotherapy with single agent carboplatin AUC 7 with good tolerance of treatment. After the treatment the patient health was drastically improved with normalisation of serum transaminase and prothrombin rate (100%). Then, the patient received 2 other cycles of carboplatin AUC 5 and etoposide (100 mg/m2 at days 1 to 5). After the treatment completed the symptoms disappeared (PS = 0 and the abdomen mass shrunk), the serum markers returned to normal, with complete response of the retroperitoneal tumour in CT scan. The patient is still alive without disease, 5 months after the end of chemotherapy.