A previously healthy 17-month-old boy was given topical antibiotics for a right eye redness appearing in the context of an ear, nose and throat infection. One week later, fixed mydriasis of the same eye was observed, and the child seen elsewhere for evaluation . Ophthalmologic examination revealed an intraocular mass and the child was referred to a specialized oncology centre for further investigations. Diagnosis of intraocular medulloepithelioma with anterior chamber seeding and neovascular glaucoma was made and immediate enucleation advised. Parents refused the intervention and consulted us for a second opinion. Examination under general anesthesia showed multiple free-floating cysts in the pupillary area of the right eye with iris neovascularization and a notched lens that was subluxated superonasally . Intraocular pressure was controlled (17 mmHg) under topical beta-blocker and oral acetazolamide. Fundus examination was normal. Fluorescein angiography revealed anterior segment leakage with inferior peripheral retinal ischemia. Ultrasound biomicroscopy performed on the 12 meridians showed a complete iridocorneal angle closure and an irregular-surfaced, partially cystic mass adjacent to the ciliary body between the 5 and 9 o’clock meridians. Multiple nodules were invading the posterior chamber and anterior vitreous invasion was also seen inferiorly . Left eye examination was unremarkable. Clinical appearance and ultrasonographic features confirmed the diagnosis of ciliary body medulloepithelioma. There being no signs of extraocular extension nor ciliary infiltration, conservative treatment was initiated. After obtaining parents’ informed consent, combined intracameral (2.25 μg/0.15 ml) and intravitreal melphalan (30 μg/0.15 ml) injections given according to a previously described safety-enhanced technique to avoid potential extraocular tumor spread [, ]. Injected doses were similar to the ones used in the treatment of aqueous and vitreous seeding in retinoblastoma. Cytopathological analysis of the aqueous tap performed prior to injection showed small aggregates of malignant cells with high nuclear cytoplasmic ratio that were negative for synaptophysin on immunocytochemistry . Partial regression of both ciliary mass and seeding was observed 1 week later, encouraging treatment to be repeated. In total, 3 combined intracameral (total dose 8.1 μg) and intravitreal (total dose 70 μg) melphalan injections were given every 7–10 days, resulting in complete response of the main tumor (documented on UBM after 2 combined injections) and aqueous/vitreous seeding (observed after 3 combined injections) . One week after the final injections, dense anterior chamber hyphema related to persistent iris neovascularization occurred. After careful anterior chamber washout under melphalan perfusion (15 μg/ml), iris neovascularization was managed with cryoablation of the peripheral retinal ischemia and intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF). Three years later, the patient underwent ab interno trabeculotomy followed by a 360° gonioscopy-assisted transluminal trabeculotomy 6 months later to manage uncontrolled intraocular pressure despite antihypertensive drugs combined with cyclophotocoagulation and 7 intravitreal anti-VEGF injections for recurrent iris neovascularization. Cataract surgery with posterior capsulorhexis, anterior vitrectomy and sulcus implantation of a three-piece intraocular lens was performed during the first glaucoma surgery. Cytopathologic analysis of the vitrectomy fluid was negative for tumor cells. One year after the cataract was removed, YAG-laser capsulotomy was performed for posterior capsular lens opacification. The child has remained disease and metastasis-free at a 5-year follow-up since the last chemotherapy with a controlled intraocular pressure under topical quadritherapy and a best-corrected Snellen visual acuity of 0.08.