A 25 year-old male patient presented with a chief complaint of generalized hair loss in the scalp parietaloccipital region for a duration of 1 year, saying that hair loss started gradually and had worsened over time. In addition, this patient indicated that the alopecia area was occasionally accompanied by mild itching. He had scalp skin folds resembling the ridge and furrow of the cerebral cortex in the parietaloccipital region since birth. These were a small protuberant mass at first and had gradually increased in size and volume in proportion to his growth. He was of normal intelligence and denies neuropsychiatric diseases, eye diseases, scalp injuries, endocrine diseases, tumors, chronic dermatitis and similar family history. Physical examination at our department revealed hypertrophy and formation of folds in the parietal-occipital area, forming 5 to 6 furrows and ridges . The size of the cerebriform mass was about 12.0 × 8.5 cm, without other skin lesions. Diffuse non-scarring hair loss was distributed on the posterior-parietal scalp, mid-parietal scalp and superior-occipital scalp. Further examination did not reveal any changes in neurology or ophthalmology, swelling of the maxillofacial or limb joints, skin thickening and tissue growth. A plain head computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a thickened dermis and excessive growth of the scalp, forming the characteristic scalp folds, with no associated involvement of the bone or intracranial tissue . Due to the lack of neurological or psychiatric findings, this patient was not referred for brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). All laboratory tests (routine blood count, glycemia, lipid, basic metabolic profile, liver functions, kidney functions, immune function, insulin-like growth factor 1, growth hormone, parathyroid hormone, cortisol and acromegaly screening) were within normal range. The patient did not accept our suggestion about performing a scalp skin biopsy firstly. In contrast, due to the strong desire to improve the appearance, he and his families chose surgical excision diretly. After the hospitalization procedures, completing the relevant examination and eliminating the contraindications of the operation, the diseased tissue of the patient's parietaloccipital area was excised under general anesthesia. During the operation, a π-shaped incision was designed on the surface of the diseased tissue . The skin, subcutaneous tissue, subcutaneous superficial fascia layer and cap aponeurosis layer were cut off successively along the designed incision line with a blade. The diseased tissue was peeled off with an electric knife in the cap aponeurosis layer. Then the subcutaneous tissue on both sides of the incision was separated to form two fascia tissue flaps. After using an electric knife to fully stop the bleeding and indwelling a negative pressure drainage tube, we pulled the bilateral fascia tissue flaps to the middle to suture the incision interruptly with 4-0 absorbable thread and performed an interrupted suture of the skin with 5-0 silk thread. After the operation, the incision healed well, leaving only a π-shaped scar with a total length of about 18 cm . Pathological examination of the tissue excised during the operation showed that there were dense intradermal melanocytic nevus . In light of these findings, the patient was diagnosed with secondary CVG caused by CIN. At the 2 year follow-up, there were no obvious changes in the lesions.