A 75 year-old Caucasian male presented with progressively worsening dyspnea of eight days, wheezing and productive cough with clear sputum. His symptoms began abruptly, worsened upon exertion, and were unrelieved by home albuterol inhaler. The patient is a former smoker with a 52 pack-year history, quitting four years prior to the onset of his symptoms. His past medical history is significant for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and atherosclerotic disease involving his peripheral and carotid arteries. His past surgical history is unremarkable, and lungs were clear to auscultation with stridor on physical exam at the time of his presentation.
A chest computed tomography (CT) scan was performed with contrast demonstrating a 1.5 cm x × 1.3 cm × 1.3 cm nodular soft tissue lesion within the subglottic trachea, causing 50 % reduction in cross-sectional area of the tracheal lumen . The patient subsequently underwent bronchoscopy. A biopsy of the tracheal mass was simultaneously obtained, with a preoperative diagnosis of T1aN0M0 primary spindle cell sarcomatoid-type carcinoma . The patient’s lesion involved trachea of resectable length, without ingrowth to irresectable structures such as the larynx, and without lymph node involvement. Thus, the initial workup and isolated nature of disease deemed the patient a good surgical candidate [–].
We performed a standard tracheal resection of the tumor located 8 cm from the carina, arising from the posterior membranous trachea, with primary anastomosis . Three tracheal rings were resected, including one ring on each side of the mass. The sample was sent off for frozen pathological review, which confirmed negative margins for invasive cancer. An end-to-end reconstruction was then performed. The incision was closed in layers and a Grillo stitch was placed in the patient’s chin to prevent hyperextension in the postoperative period. The patient was extubated immediately postoperatively and taken to the surgical intensive care unit for recovery.
Final pathology of the polypoid, firm, tan-white lesion measured 1.8 cm × 1.5 cm × 0.8 cm, invading 2.5 mm into the membranous posterior tracheal wall without involvement of the tracheal cartilage . Microscopic evaluation was consistent with spindle cell sarcomatoid carcinoma given its biphasic characteristic . The primary component was a high-grade neoplasm showing enlarged pleomorphic nuclei with spindle cell features. Markedly atypical squamous epithelial cells with enlarged nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and increased mitoses were adjacent to the spindled areas. Along with this thorough pathological review special stains were performed to the specimen to confirm diagnosis in the form of Pankeratin and OSCAR cytokeratin immunostains, which were positive for the atypical squamous cells. No additional molecular testing was performed. Margins were measured at 0.5 cm both proximal and distally with clear posterior radial margin of at least 3 mm All margins were negative for malignancy, and no evidence of lymphovascular or perineural invasion was found. Final pathology correlated with preoperative TNM status as T1aN0M0 as per current classification for tracheal malignancies .
Following the procedure, the patient reported improvement in breathing and stridor. After an eight-day hospital course, he self-ambulated on room air, tolerated oral intake, and denied pain or difficulty swallowing or breathing. At his six month post-operative follow-up, he continued to do well without complications or evidence of recurrence. The patient is under observation by both surgery and oncology, with regularly scheduled CT scans to monitor for recurrence.