An 85-year-old woman complaining of dyspnoea on exertion was referred to our hospital for the treatment of severe mitral regurgitation. In addition to her current condition, she had a history of systemic arterial hypertension, chronic renal dysfunction (CKD) IV stage, and hip surgery, treated with amlodipine and hydrochlorothiazide. Cardiopulmonary auscultation revealed a grade 4 systolic murmur at apex and bilateral coarse crackles. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a severe eccentric mitral regurgitation jet related to a prolapse of the posterior leaflet (P2) with incomplete systolic coaptation (leaflets systolic separation: 0.6 cm; jet area: 11.4 cm2, vena contracta: 0.7 cm, effective regurgitant orifice area at proximal isovelocity surface area method: 0.63 cm2, R volume 81 mL). Biventricular function was normal, with a mild dilated left ventricle (left ventricular end-diastolic diameter 57 mm) and left atrial (40 mm). These data were subsequently confirmed with transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) (; , ). Coronary computed tomography angiography, which was performed before hospitalization, showed a mild stenosis of the middle left anterior descending (LAD) artery and the left circumflex (LCX) artery. N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide was 3241 pg/mL (normal range 0–150 pg/mL). Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol was 2.48 mmol/L (normal range 0–4.14 mmol/L), and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) (normal range 0–5 mg/L) was 2.58 mg/L. Considering the high risk of open-heart surgery (The Society of Thoracic Surgeons risk score was 11.538%), the Heart Team opted for mitral TEER.
The patient was on general anaesthesia. Brockenbrough’s procedure was conducted with a standard technique with real-time TEE guidance. Mullins sheath (8F) was inserted from the right femoral vein to the superior vena cava, then slowly pulled down in the right atrium, and gently compressed onto the fossa ovalis (; , ). Sinus bradycardia and hypotension were observed before the tip of puncture needle penertrated into the left atrium. The puncture procedure was temporary stopped. Cardiac tamponade was excluded, and the tip of the sheath was still in the right atrium, which was confirmed by TEE. With the injection of 0.5 mg atropine, the patient’s heart rate and blood pressure returned to baseline. The procedure was continued. In a few minutes during catheter compressing before needle puncture, profound sinus bradycardia and hypotension were noted again, and STE in leads II, III, and augmented Vector Foot (avF) was observed. The procedure was interrupted again. Following another shot of atropine, a fast saline drip, and even withdrawal of the Mullins sheath, ventricular fibrillation, and cardiac arrest progressively happened within minutes. Continuous cardiopulmonary resuscitation, defibrillation, and intravenous epinephrine were routinely undertaken, and immediately, coronary angiogram from the left femoral artery showed a severe vasospasm in the proximal right coronary artery (RCA) with 99% stenosis and with the LCX 100% occluded, although the LAD artery was still patent . Intracoronary injection of nitroglycerine was administered but without any improvement. Balloon angioplasty was also performed in the RCA and LCX, respectively, to exclude coronary thrombus embolism, without favourable blood flow. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was simultaneously inserted, and repeated intracoronary nitroglycerine injection finally restored coronary flow. Coronary angiogram was re-checked with ECMO support after minutes, and no stenosis was found in the RCA and LCX . Blood pressure and electrocardiograph returned to normal, and the patient was sent to the intensive care unit (ICU) for continuous monitoring. Following 6 days of monitoring treatment in the ICU, the subsequent multi-organ dysfunction (liver, kidney, and coagulation system) led to the death of this elderly patient.