A 57-year-old white man was seen in the pulmonary clinic of our institution after an abdominal/pelvic computed tomographic (CT) scan for microscopic hematuria incidentally demonstrated a nodule in the left lower lobe (LLL) of his lung. The patient reported periodic chronic cough but denied any hemoptysis or any other alarming symptoms. His comorbidities consisted of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, latent syphilis, obesity, and diabetes mellitus type 2 with peripheral neuropathy. His daily medications included aspirin, lisinopril, hydrochlorothiazide, gemfibrozil, metformin, glipizide and amitriptyline. He reported a greater than 40-year history of smoking an average of two packs of cigarettes per day. He lived alone at home and was able to perform all of his activities of daily living. He reported that both his parents had died from lung cancer due to tobacco use. His physical examination and laboratory results had no pertinent abnormal findings.
A thoracic CT workup in April 2016 revealed a 2.0 × 1.4 × 1.5 cm spiculated nodule in the superior segment of the LLL . This solitary nodule did not extend into the pleural surface, and no regional lymph node enlargement was noted. Bronchoscopy with alveolar lavage revealed malignant cells. On a positron emission tomographic (PET) scan, the pulmonary nodule had mild fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake that was indicative of metabolic activity resembling a low-grade neoplasm. The lesion was biopsied, and the result of immunohistochemical staining was negative for thyroid transcription factor-1 but positive for p63 and p40, correlating with squamous cell carcinoma. An area within the patient’s right suprapubic ramus also demonstrated abnormal FDG uptake on the PET scan, but subsequent bone marrow biopsy of that region revealed no evidence of metastatic cancer. On the basis of these findings, his lung carcinoma was clinically staged as T1M0N0.
Surgical resection of the LLL was recommended on multiple occasions, but it was refused by the patient. He refused additional workup or treatment and reported no change in lifestyle. Three months later, in July 2016, a repeat CT scan revealed that, compared with its appearance on the initial chest CT scan, the solitary mass had decreased in size to 1.6 × 0.9 × 0.9 cm . The patient underwent computed tomography a third time in August 2016, which revealed that the nodule had stabilized at its smaller size.