The authors present the follow-up of a 39-year-old female patient who developed anti-NMDA-R encephalitis in 2009 with a long course of disease (21 months) up to diagnosis . The initial findings of this patient have already been published as a case report . Before the onset of neuropsychiatric symptoms in 2009, the patient had always been mentally healthy and had worked as a business controller .
Initially, the patient presented a wide spectrum of symptoms including severe catatonia, delusions, cognitive deficits, as well as one epileptic seizure and states of altered consciousness . Evidence of anti-NMDA-R encephalitis came from the positive anti-NMDA-R IgG antibodies, hypoglutamatergic state in the left prefrontal cortex in the magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), left hemispheric hypometabolism demonstrated in [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET), and electroencephalography (EEG) alterations. The independent component analysis (ICA) of the EEG initially revealed three components with EEG slowing . The combination of 1) rapid onset of psychiatric symptoms/cognitive dysfunction, mutism, one seizure, catatonia, and states of altered consciousness; 2) EEG (slowing) and CSF (pleocytosis initially) pathologies; and 3) the detection of clearly positive IgG anti-GluN1 antibodies would also allow the syndrome diagnosis of anti-NMDA-R encephalitis, according to present criteria . Unfortunately, the currently recommended CSF testing or a confirmatory analysis in serum with another method was not performed at that time . Anti-inflammatory therapy (glucocorticoids, plasmapheresis) resulted in relevant clinical improvement with disappearance of the catatonic and delusional symptoms in parallel to a remarkable normalization of the FDG-PET . Since symptom onset in 2009, the patient had been unable to remember any dreams. Moreover, she had developed amnesia for initial symptoms. Following discharge from the psychiatric department in October 2010, the patient received a maintenance therapy consisting of prednisolone (40 mg/day, with gradual reduction of 5 mg/week; from 10 mg/day onwards gradual reduction of 2 mg/week) and maintenance therapy with azathioprine (100 mg/day). Prednisolone was fully tapered in January 2011. During aftercare in a rehabilitation clinic a relapse of psychiatric symptoms with thought disruptions, attention/concentration and memory disorders, irritability and insomnia occurred. Therefore, in December 2011 a second cycle of plasmapheresis followed by methylprednisolone pulse therapy (500 mg intravenously for 4 days) were performed and led to a slight improvement. Immunosuppression with azathioprine (100 mg/day) was continued until February 2012. However, it had to be discontinued due to the development of cholestatic hepatitis. Between April 2012 and February 2016, the patient received mycophenolate mofetil (MMF, 2000 mg/day). In 2016, the anti-inflammatory treatment was stopped. In the period between March 2012 and September 2012, the patient received a prophylactic network stabilizing treatment with levetiracetam (2000 mg/day). Beginning in September 2012, the patient had suffered from newly occurring panic-like attacks and the feeling of anxiety arising from a visual and acoustic sensory overload (especially when being in groups of people). Therefore, in January 2013, again a treatment attempt with levetiracetam (2000 mg/day for 3 weeks) for mood stabilization and prophylactic neuronal network stabilization was performed again reducing the frequency of attacks; but without sufficient symptom control. EEG and video-monitoring twice (in January and March 2013) as well as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed negative findings in terms of an epileptogenic focus. In June 2013, treatment with escitalopram (5 mg/day) was started with discrete positive effects in terms of improving the feeling of panic and anxiety. However, over the following years, sensory overload, cognitive dysfunctions, and fatigue continued. In February 2017, sensory overload phenomena worsened and holocephalic oppressive headaches were reported (visual analog scale: 4/10). In the course of 2018, sensory overload further increased, and the fatigue symptoms were accompanied by a reduction in energy levels. Therefore, a therapeutic attempt with low-dose risperidone (up to 2 mg/day) was started, which was clearly efficient in terms of reducing the sensory overload symptoms. The patient regained the ability to go to the cinemas, and the reduced energy level normalized, however, fatigue remained. About 1 year later, there was strong deterioration of energy levels and fatigue, which only improved after discontinuation of risperidone. However, as a result the sensory overload also reemerged strongly, and insomnia occurred. She suffered both from a reduced ability to fall asleep and to maintain sleep throughout the night. The sleep disorder was successfully treated with melatonin (4 mg/day). Quetiapine (50 mg/day) had no convincing sleep-inducing effect. In addition, a treatment with aripiprazole (2.5 mg/day) was started to increase the patient’s energy and reduce sensory overload. Even at a dose of 2.5 mg/day, an agonizing inner and psychomotor restlessness was evident, so aripiprazole was quickly discontinued. Finally, the sensory overload and reduced energy levels could be successfully improved with low-dose amisulpride (200 mg/day). High blood pressure was normalized with clonidine (225 µg/day), possibly contributing additionally to the reduction of sensory overload. In the cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) sessions, states of sensory overload associated with experiences of panic were treated by a) identifying and reducing the stressful stimuli and b) challenging and changing dysfunctional cognitions and behaviors, improving emotion regulation and applying more adaptive coping strategies (e.g., mindfulness-based tasks against catastrophic thinking and to decrease high levels of stress). Furthermore, cognitive deficits were treated by cognitive training as well as acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT). In summary, initial anti-inflammatory therapy (glucocorticoids, plasmapheresis, azathioprine, MMF) as well as later low-dose neuroleptics (risperidone, amisulpride) and CBT had a remarkable impact on symptom relief .
Since acute therapy and continuing to the present time, the patient has suffered mainly from an ongoing dysexecutive syndrome with 1) intense sensory overload, 2) cognitive deficits, and 3) reduced energy levels and fatigue:
The sensory overload sensitivity was triggered mainly by acoustic and visual stimuli and was accentuated in situations with many other people present. Thus, the patient was not able to visit markets or cinemas. Often, she experienced panic in such sensory overload situations, so that a panic disorder was assumed and an epileptic cause was ruled out.
The cognitive deficits consisted mainly of attention and concentration deficits and allowed the patient to only work a maximum of 1-2 hours per day. In addition, she has reported formal thought disorder with lapses of thoughts/thought blocking and a slowed but coherent train of thought.
Reduced energy levels and fatigue: She experienced ongoing fatigue symptoms (e.g., she always needed a nap at noon), therefore, only part-time employment was possible. Over the course of 10 years, episodes with reduced energy levels, in which the motivation to everyday actions was difficult for her, repeatedly evolved. She reported no overt depression, abulia, or anhedonia.
The first anti-NMDA-R antibody follow-up analysis in the reference laboratory in Oxford using a live cell-based assay (CBA) was still slightly positive after initial anti-inflammatory treatment (27 months after symptom onset). Several serological follow-up screenings (38, 48, 82, and 94 months after symptom onset) for IgG antibodies against neuronal cell surface antigens (AMPA-R, DPPX, GABA-B-R, LGI1, Caspr2, NMDA-R) using fixed CBAs showed normal anti-NMDA-R and other antineuronal antibody findings. Tests for anti-aquaporin 4 (AQP4) IgG and anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) IgG antibodies, possibly occurring when a demyelinating disorder (e.g., neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder) develops after anti-NMDA-R encephalitis , were negative. Antibodies against intracellular antigens including SOX1 (initially slightly positive) were negative. The automated analysis of the structural MRI revealed an enlargement of the lateral ventricles with emphasis on the posterior horns and slight striatal and insular atrophy . There was no relevant change in findings between 2010 and 2019. A few new, but non-specific right-frontal white matter (WM) lesions were detected in the follow-up MRI. Visual EEG analyses depicted normalized findings; however, ICA detected left-side spike-wave activity and intermittent rhythmic delta activity (IRDA) as a correlate of remaining network instability. Overall, there was an increase in IRDA rates ( and ). Until today, the gynecological screening for teratoma remains negative; initially, there was no evidence for an infection such as herpes encephalitis, and therefore, the trigger for anti-NMDAR encephalitis remains unclear. Compared with the initial neuropsychological testing, the authors detected improved attentional performance at follow-up testing using the Test for Attentional Performance (TAP) battery (Version 2.3.1; ).