A 62-year-old man presented with an abnormal shadow in the left lung on plain chest radiography during a medical checkup. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a nodule in the left lower lobe and a tumor with calcification in the anterior mediastinum. The well-defined hilar nodule of the left lung measured 13 mm and was located in S10. The anterior mediastinal tumor measured 12 mm in size, and there was no evidence of infiltration into the adjacent tissue . While 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT (FDG-PET/CT) revealed uptake in the anterior mediastinal tumor (SUVmax = 1.5), it did not reveal significant uptake in the left lower-lobe nodule (SUVmax = 1.1) . The patient was seronegative for anti-acetylcholine receptor-binding antibodies and tumor markers. The bronchoscopy was negative for pulmonary nodule, and FDG-PET/CT did not reveal significant uptake. From these findings, the pulmonary nodule was suggested to be a benign tumor. Surgical resection for diagnostic treatment was planned for the anterior mediastinal tumor, and pulmonary resection was planned for later. Contrast-enhanced chest CT revealed that the anterior mediastinal tumor was adjacent to the left brachiocephalic artery, and the border between them was unclear; therefore, the possibility of the adhesions between the tumor and artery was considered. Thymectomy was performed via a median sternotomy in consideration of safety. The operation time was 134 min and the bleeding volume was 75 mL. The tumor measured 16 mm × 13 mm × 9 mm. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 7 days after the operation. The pathological diagnosis was of an atypical type A thymoma. Pathological examination revealed that the tumor cells exhibited poor atypia, had round nuclei, and grew in a fascicular pattern. The tumor had a hemangiopericytoma-like vascular pattern. It also had hypercellularity, but no increased mitotic counts and focal necrosis were observed. The tumor was almost encapsulated by the fibrous cap. Microscopic invasion into the surrounding adipose fatty tissue beyond the capsular portion was noted in one part of the tumor .
A pulmonary nodule resection was planned after the surgery; however, the patient refused to undergo it because of his poor physical condition. Fourteen months after the surgery, follow-up chest CT revealed that the left lower-lobe nodule had enlarged to 18 mm . FDG-PET/CT revealed a slight uptake (SUVmax = 1.3) in the nodule. The nodule itself was considered a low-grade malignant tumor . Surgical resection for diagnostic treatment was planned to rule out malignancy. Sixteen months after the initial surgery for the thymoma, the patient underwent left lower lobe lobectomy and lymph node dissection. The nodule of the left lower lobe was near the segmental bronchus . We considered that we could not take a sufficient resection margin of the tumor if we performed sublobar resection. The operation time was 190 min, and the bleeding volume was 20 mL. The tumor measured 13 mm × 12 mm × 8 mm. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 8 days after the operation. Postoperative pathological findings revealed densely scattered spindle cells. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the tumor cells were positive for the anti-pan cytokeratin antibody, p40, and paired box protein 8. The tumor exhibited hypercellularity. However, the mitotic count was not increased, and focal necrosis was not observed . The tumor was diagnosed as a metastasis of the atypical type A thymoma. The TNM classification was p-T1aN0M1b stage IVb, and it was stage IVb according to the Masaoka staging system. The tumor was completely resected, and the patient did not receive adjuvant therapy. The patient experienced no recurrence for 21 months after the surgery for thymoma and for 5 months after the pulmonary resection.