A 63-year-old man visited our hospital’s outpatient clinic on August 1, 2016, reporting a month-long loss of vision in his left eye; he was admitted with the tentative diagnosis of uveitis. He had been treated at another hospital a month earlier with no improvement, and his vision continued to deteriorate. As for the patient’s medical history, he had surgery for esophageal cancer 2 months earlier. The results of the eye examination were as follows: his visual acuity was only light perception in the left eye, respectively. In the left eye, we observed a transparent cornea, mild aqueous flare, partial posterior synechia, nondilating pupil, and pigment deposits on the anterior lens capsule . In addition, the part of lens behind the pupil was highly turbid, and the fundus could not be seen. B-scan ultrasonography showed pronounced vitreous opacities and macular retinal thickening in the left eye . On August 3, 2016, under local anesthesia, the patient underwent cataract surgery (by phacoemulsification) in the left eye combined with 25-gauge vitrectomy and silicone oil tamponade. During the surgery, we noticed vitreous opacities that looked like floccose white balls as well as flocculent vitreous opacities; part of the vitreous was therefore aspirated for bacterial and fungal culture. After the turbid vitreous body was removed, we observed a flat retina and a many beaded or yeast-like white plaques and spots in retina. We also found that the ciliary body was coated with a white film-like substance . So, a pus sample was collected from his vitreous body for routine microbial cultivation. After incubation for 24 h, cream white colonies without hemolytic reaction were detected. Gram staining showed the presence of Gram-positive spore morphology clusters. The strain was identified with YST card by Vitek 2 Compact system (bioMérieux, USA) as Candida albicans. In addition, antibiotic susceptibility tests were determined using the ATB™ fungns 3 kit (bioMérieux, USA), and the strain was found to be susceptible to fluconazole, itraconazole, amphotericin B, voriconazole, and 5-fluorocytosine. At the meantime, we had collected a sample for blood culture; after two days, the patient refused to collect another blood samples for culture again. So it’s very regret that we couldn’t obtained a positive result for blood culture. Subsequently the patient received antifungal treatment via an intravenous infusion comprising 0.1 g of fluconazole once daily for 3 days followed by the oral administration of 100 mg of itraconazole once daily for 1 month. At 3-month follow-up, the unaided visual acuity of left eye was 0.02 and corrected visual acuity was 0.2. The color fundus photograph showed that the vitreous cavity of the left eye was filled with silicone oil, the retina was flat, and there were no white exudates in retina . These results indicated a good recovery. In addition, there was no recurrence of the endophthalmitis within 1 year of the surgery.