A previously healthy at term-born 11-week-old girl was transferred from a local hospital to our intensive care unit with a history of new-onset pericardial effusion and a sudden drop in haemoglobin levels (6.3 g/dL, normal 9.2–15.0 g/dL), which was treated with erythrocyte transfusion. Symptoms started 3 days prior to admission with weakness, vomiting, and refusal to drink and aggravated during the last night. The patient was the first child of non-consanguineous parents with no family history of liver disease or bleeding disorders. There was no history of trauma.
On admission to our centre, the infant was in a poor clinical condition. Physical examination revealed normal heart sounds which could be heard well, a heart rate of 134–155 b.p.m. with different heights of amplitude, a blood pressure of 76/57 mmHg, and an extended capillary refill time. The saturation was good, but the venous blood gas analysis showed lactate acidosis with pH 7.18 and blood lactate concentration of 8.5 mmol/L (normal 0.5–1.6 mmol/L). The infant was pale, tachypnoeic, tachycardic, and showed a slight icterus and moderate hepatosplenomegaly that was confirmed by ultrasound.
Emergency echocardiography was performed and depicted a significant amount of pericardial effusion leading to haemodynamic compromise. Two-dimensional echocardiography demonstrated collapse of the right atrium and right ventricle (Video 1) as well as inspiratory bouncing of the interventricular septum towards the left ventricle (Video 2). Pulsed wave Doppler of mitral valve inflow was marked reduced on inspiration and M-Mode showed the paradoxical movement of the interventricular septum in early diastole . Cardiac tamponade was immediately treated with pericardiocentesis and tube placement. One hundred and fifty millilitres of haemorrhagic fluid was drained from the pericardial space and the patient improved. In addition, milrinone was started to improve cardiac function.
Coagulation parameters were severely deranged with extended prothrombin time (14 s, normal < 11 s), reduced factor II activity (27%, normal 70–120%) and factor X activity (52%, normal 70–120%), and slight extended aPTT (30.4 s, normal 21.6–28.7 s), and had to be replaced with 1 mg vitamin K intravenously and human coagulation factor II, VII, IX, and X with following fast regression of the coagulation profile. Laboratory tests further revealed cholestatic liver disease [elevated total bilirubin (3.52 mg/dL, normal 0–1.2 mg/dL), gamma GT (253 U/L, normal 27–134 U/L), and a reduction of total protein (52.9 g/L, normal 64–87 g/L), and α-1-antitrypsin levels (37 mg/dL, normal 90–200 mg/dL)]. Thrombocytes were within normal limits.
Vitamin K deficiency bleeding due to α-1-antitrypsin deficiency was suspected. In addition, cholecalciferol (4000 IU), tocopherol (0.35 mg/kg), and retinol (4000 IU) were started to replace fat-soluble vitamins.
During workup, biliary atresia and viral hepatitis were excluded with liver biopsy and serology. To rule out cerebral bleeding, magnetic resonance imaging was performed and despite normal brain sonography a small haemorrhage (10 × 6 mm) in the right frontal lobe was detected . However, no signs of neurologic deficits were evident. A genetic test finally proved homozygotic mutation of the SERPINA1-gene (c.1096G>A), PiZZ-type and confirmed the diagnosis of α-1-antitrypsin deficiency.
Pericardial tubes could be removed 2 days after placement and the infant recovered. The patient was discharged 10 days after admission with vitamin K, cholecalciferol, tocopherol, and retinol as long-term medication. The first follow-up 1 month after discharge showed a normal echocardiography and liver sonography. Also 23 weeks after discharge, the patient still presented without any neurologic deficits or signs of pericardial effusion as well as good cardiac function. The laboratory test showed sufficient blood levels of supplemented vitamins in addition to normal coagulation profile.