A 64-year-old male patient presented with a 5 h history of severe sudden onset central chest pain. His admission ECG showed normal sinus rhythm with no acute ischaemic changes. Over a 12 h period, he developed Wellen’s type A and subsequently Wellen’s type B ECG changes. High-sensitivity troponin I was 4177 ng/L (normal <5) initially and peaked at 99 394 ng/L on a repeat sample taken 6 h later. Of note, the patient had a history of coronary stenting for stable angina 2 years prior to this presentation in another country, and details of the intervention were not initially available.
A standard regimen for non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction was initiated, including dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and ticagrelor. Diagnostic coronary angiography revealed TIMI 3 flow in all vessels and patent LAD stent with mild diffuse attenuation within the D2 stent and an ambiguous appearance in the mid-segment of D2 consistent with intraluminal thrombus (see , ). Intravascular imaging was not performed during this procedure. Takotsubo cardiomyopathy was considered in the initial differential diagnosis. Antero-apical hypokinesis was identified on transthoracic echocardiogram. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging confirmed a distal LAD territory regional wall motion abnormality and late gadolinium enhancement, as well as oedema and post-gadolinium sequences suggestive of no reflow at the apex . These findings were consistent with acute infarction. There was also a small left ventricular (LV) apical thrombus, which was not initially identified on echocardiography. Angiographic images and reports from the patient’s previous coronary intervention were eventually received. This revealed T and small protrusion (TAP) bifurcation stenting of the LAD and second diagonal (D2), with 3.5 × 48 mm Xience and 2.5 × 15 mm Xience Sierra stents, respectively. This strategy was pursued as a ‘bailout’ option following side branch occlusion as a result of deliberate LAD stenting. A diagnosis was made of acute myocardial infarction, arising from embolization of very late LAD stent thrombosis, with complete resorption of embolized thrombus in the distal LAD and residual small thrombus burden in D2.
Repeat angiography was performed with IVUS (see , ), which revealed an under-expanded LAD stent throughout its course with malapposition at the proximal end of the stent, which extended into the left main stem coronary artery and extended across the ostium of the left circumflex coronary artery . IVUS also identified a circular strutted structure adjacent to the ostium of D2 and extending proximally, consistent with the D2 stent protruding several millimetres into the lumen of the LAD . The left main stem and mid-LAD measured approximately 6.0 and 4.5 mm in diameter on IVUS, respectively.
A Sion blue wire was passed down the LAD, ensuring the tip was directed to the opposite side of the vessel to the ostium of D2 to prevent crossing through the side branch stent struts. Balloon angioplasty was performed along the length of the LAD stent using a 4.0 × 15 mm Emerge non-compliant balloon to high pressures to perform an internal crush of the protruding D2 stent and to ensure adequate stent expansion along the vessel length. A 5.0 × 8 mm non-compliant Emerge balloon was inflated to high pressures at the proximal end of the LAD stent. Subsequent IVUS images (see , ) confirmed a fully expanded stent with a satisfactory final angiographic result. A decision was made not to rewire the LADD2 and perform a final kissing balloon inflation in view of the optimal appearances of the LAD and calibre of the LADD2 subtending of the infarcted territory. Following a 6-month period of anticoagulation with warfarin (INR targets 2–3) and single antiplatelet treatment with clopidogrel to allow resolution of the LV thrombus, the patient was discharged on lifelong dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin and clopidogrel).