We report the case of a 68-year-old white female patient who was diagnosed with metastatic RCC in 2021 (shown in ) as an incidental finding since a CT scan was performed during post-COVID surveillance due to unexplained coughing and increased inflammatory blood parameters. The patient was an ex-smoker (20 packyears), who neither drank alcohol nor reported any regular drug intake. Despite the advanced tumor stage, with tumor spread into the liver and pancreas, she underwent surgery with left-sided nephrectomy and splenectomy. Subsequently, adjuvant therapy with 5 mg axitinib orally twice daily and pembrolizumab 200 mg intravenously every 3 weeks was started . A few weeks after the initiation of systemic treatment, the patient mentioned that she was exploring oncology acupuncture because of gastrointestinal side effects related to previous surgery . She also reported mild redness, swelling, and sometimes pain in her hands and feet, possible symptoms of the hand-foot syndrome recognized as a common side effect of the TKI axitinib . Furthermore, the patient was motivated to report side effects and her well-being by using the medidux™ application, wherein she indicated a moderate (grade 1–2) hand-foot syndrome and some bowel irritation, known frequent side effects during axitinib therapy (shown in ). Various studies have shown that the use of electronic patient-reported outcomes has proven to be effective [, ] since the recording of symptoms and functional status assessment in a dynamic structured and standardized manner allow oncologists to monitor their patients’ journeys. Shared monitoring and symptom reviews can further improve patient self-empowerment, understanding and management of side effects and optimize patient care through helpful tips and recommendations for the amelioration of specific symptoms through self-care . Hence, it can be inferred that electronic patient-reported outcomes are efficacious not only in the context of personalized medicine based on our example but also in conjunction with targeted drugs.
Only a few months later, at the end of March 2022, one new metastasis in the liver demonstrated progression and a presumably ineffective systemic treatment. According to the patient’s explicit wish, the lesion was removed surgically straight-away. Since a significant proportion of patients will eventually develop metastasis after nephrectomy due to altered signal transduction, next-generation sequencing (NGS) of the tumor tissue was performed. Although a TSC1 W750 pathogenic mutation was demonstrated, potentially related to tumor suppressor function of the mammalian target of rapamycin signaling pathway according to the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center Data Base, no impact with respect to the outcome of the first-line therapy or specific restriction in therapy was indicated. After an MR-scan had identified another novel lesion in the liver in October 2022, selective internal radiation therapy was performed. Finally, this rapid and unexpected dynamic tumor growth prompted the pharmacological assessment of axitinib serum concentrations in December 2022. This analysis revealed a serum concentration of 2 ng/mL 6 h after the intake of 5 mg axitinib in the morning. This axitinib concentration was unexpected and significantly lower than the threshold associated with a good response to therapy. Peak serum concentrations should be at least 12 ng/mL (at Tmax = after 2.5–4 h after intake), or trough concentrations should exceed 2.5–5 ng/mL .
To exclude a pharmacogenetic reason for the test results, genotyping of CYP2C19, CYP2C9, CYP2D6, CYP3A5, and UGT1A1 was carried out. The patient harbored genotypes which lead to reduced functions of CYP2C9, CYP2D6, and UGT1A1 (intermediate metabolizer), while no activity-changing variant in CYP2C19 was detected (CYP2C19*1/*1). As in most Europeans, the CYP3A5 genotype indicated a CYP3A5 non-expressor status.
As axitinib is metabolized by CYP3A4 and CYP2C19, the tested genetic influences could not explain the low serum concentrations of axitinib. Further extensive anamnestic workup then revealed that the patient took in a mixture of ten herbal medications twice daily (shown in ), 4 h before and after the intake of axitinib, respectively, in order to relieve her gastrointestinal pain and other side effects of the systemic treatment such as her hand-foot syndrome (shown in ). She also indicated that she had already started to take the ten-herb mixture in the beginning of her antineoplastic therapy in December 2021. The patient denied the intake of further phytopharmaceuticals or food supplements and the consumption of grapefruit or St. John’s wort . Upon our recommendation, the patient then stopped the intake of all herbal substances .
Complementary and alternative traditional Chinese medicine is using the herbal substance Dang gui [(9) in ] for the treatment of menstrual cramps and menopausal disorders. An in vitro study by Yu et al. indicated that the use of Dang gui can induce CYP3A4 by activating the pregnane X receptor (PXR). The PXR is a transcription factor that regulates the expression of a variety of genes involved in the biotransformation and transport of endogenous substances, natural products, drugs, and xenobiotics. PXR affects the activities of different cytochrome P450 enzymes. PXR is present mainly in the liver but also in other tissues and plays a key role in the regulation of drug metabolism, transport, and presumably other physiological processes .
Additionally, the study showed a weak induction of CYP3A4 by the herbal substance Bai zhu. The herbal substance named Bai zhu [(1) in ] is used for the treatment of spleen infections and gastrointestinal disorders. In Chinese language literature, which is unfortunately only available as an abstract via Pubmed, more publications about the CYP3A4-inducing effect of the two above mentioned herbal substances seem to exist . Induction of CYP3A4 can decrease the serum concentrations of drugs that are metabolized by this enzyme, such as axitinib. Although we did not identify any known inductor of CYP3A4 or CYP2C19 among the remaining medicinal herbs she was taking, we cannot exclude the possibility of further interactions given the scant availability of relevant literature. Therefore, it was recommended that the patient stop the intake of the medicinal herbs for 10 days and also pause any calcium, magnesium, or antacid drugs intake, which could be in conflict with the intake of axitinib. Since the solubility of axitinib depends on the gastric pH, with higher solubility achieved in acidic pH, potential effects of acid-suppressing agents had also to be excluded . As expected, the axitinib serum concentration increased during the abstinence of the medicinal herbs (9 ng/mL) in January 2023 and (13 ng/mL) in February 2023 (shown in ).
To confirm the possibility of potential acceleration of the metabolism of axitinib by the Chinese herbs, we ensured that the patient was not taking any additional medication that could have triggered further interaction. Unfortunately, the patient did not agree to take in the herbs again for a limited number of days for re-exposure purposes.
The patient finally continued the standard therapy for metastatic renal cell cancer with axitinib 2 × 5 mg daily and pembrolizumab every 3 weeks. Importantly, according to a recent CT scan performed in September 2023, she has not developed further metastases.