A 37-year-old otherwise healthy female was referred to our glaucoma clinic for uncontrolled IOPs in the setting of bilateral hypertensive uveitis. Her initial symptoms included intermittent red and inflamed eyes accompanied by blurred vision. She was managed by several ophthalmologists for five months prior to presenting at our clinic. She had been diagnosed with bilateral hypertensive uveitis, for which she was placed on and off topical steroids and glaucoma drops. Her symptoms notably began shortly after taking a 10-day course of oral moxifloxacin (Avelox) for sinusitis. Initial and maximum recorded IOPs were 30 mmHg in the right eye and 17 mmHg in the left eye. At presentation to our clinic, visual acuity was 20/60 and 20/25 with –2.25 sphere and –1.50 sphere in the right and left eyes, respectively. Both pupils were poorly reactive to light, and the left pupil was noted to have an oval shape [Figure 1A–D]. IOPs by Goldmann Applanation Tonometry were 19 mmHg and 9 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively, on topical latanoprost and fixed-combination dorzolamide-timolol in both eyes, brimonidine in the right eye, and oral methazolamide. Lids and lashes were unremarkable. Cornea exam revealed a bilateral, diffuse endothelial pigmentation. The AC was deep in both eyes and showed trace flare in the right eye and rare pigmented cell without flare in the left eye. Gonioscopic exam was open scleral spur with a flat iris contour and heavy pigment deposition in both eyes [Figure 1E–F]. The irides demonstrated diffuse, patchy TIDs in both eyes. There was trace nuclear sclerosis with a 1+ posterior subcapsular (PSC) cataract in the right eye, and a trace nuclear sclerosis cataract in the left eye. On dilated fundus examination, the right and left optic nerves had cup-to-disc ratios of 0.4 and 0.1, respectively, with sloping of the superior rim of the right optic nerve. The remaining fundus exam was unremarkable.
Optical coherence tomography of the retinal nerve fiber layer (OCT-RNFL) demonstrated mild thinning in the right eye with a corresponding superior nasal step on 24-2 Humphrey visual field (HVF) [Figure 2A]. The OCT-RNFL and HVF in the left eye were within normal limits [Figure 2B]. A prior work-up with a uveitis specialist yielded negative results for syphilis, Lyme, and HLA-B27 antigen.
The patient's acute presentation associated with heavy AC pigmentation, diffuse iris TIDs, prior upper respiratory infection (URI), and oral fluoroquinolone use led to the diagnosis of BAIT.
IOPs were initially maintained on her presenting medical therapy. During follow-up visits, the patient experienced intermittent redness and photophobia, which were treated with topical steroids. The AC reaction remained predominantly pigmented with an absence of keratic precipitates. IOPs were labile but remained well-controlled on and off oral acetazolamide. Five months following her initial diagnosis, the IOP of the right eye was 28 mmHg despite maximum medical therapy. A repeat HVF revealed significant progression of the field defects in the right eye [Figure 2C]. The pressures remained controlled with full fields in the left eye [Figure 2D]. The PSC cataract had worsened, and her best-corrected visual acuity had declined to 20/100.
Due to the visually significant cataract and elevated IOP uncontrolled with medications, a combined cataract extraction and gonioscopy-assisted transluminal trabeculotomy (GATT) was performed in her right eye using a fiberoptic microcatheter (iTRACK, Ellex, iScience Inc., Fremont, CA) as previously described by Grover and colleagues [Figure 3].[ IOP on the first postoperative day improved to 12 mmHg on dorzolamide-timolol and pilocarpine. Following resolution of inflammation with tapering doses of topical steroids, pilocarpine was discontinued at the one-month follow-up. IOP remained controlled in the mid-teens. At her final follow-up eight months after the surgery, IOP was 9 mmHg in the right eye on dorzolamide-timolol alone and 10 mmHg in the left eye.