A 65-year-old woman presented with left hip pain following trivial trauma. She was found to have sustained an Evan's type 4 left intertrochanteric hip fracture . The patient had diabetes and hypertension, which were well controlled with oral medication. We decided to fix the fracture surgically using a proximal intramedullary femoral nail. The patient underwent surgery on the third day after the injury.
During the surgery, the patient underwent routine uneventful combined spinal and epidural anesthesia. She was positioned supinely on a standard orthopedic fracture table. Closed reduction of the left intertrochanteric hip fracture was performed under image guidance. The surgeon performed a standard skin incision at 5 cm proximally to the tip of the greater trochanter, in line with the long axis of the femur. The entry point was into the lateral aspect of the greater trochanter, as per our usual practice. After reaming, a short proximal femoral nail was inserted easily. Two guidewires were then placed with the aid of the insertion device, to guide the insertion of the recon screws. A distal hip screw was subsequently placed successfully.
However, during the placement of the proximal hip screw over the cannulated guidewire, a sudden loss of resistance was unexpectedly encountered. Intraoperative images were immediately obtained and the guidewire was found to have broken with its tip lying within the subchondral area of the femoral head. The broken guidewire had not breached the hip joint. The surgeon therefore decided to leave the guidewire alone, with no further attempt at removing it.
On postoperative day two, plain radiographs were produced, which revealed that the broken guidewire had migrated proximally into the hip joint . The patient therefore underwent a repeat procedure in an attempt to remove the broken guidewire. We began the revision surgery by removing the proximal hip screw. We attempted to reach the broken guide wire with the aid of a cannulated drill bit but we were unable to retrieve the broken wire. We then tried to use the pituitary forceps and Kerrison rongeur to remove the broken guide. Both of the above attempts at removing the broken guidewire were unsuccessful, so we removed the distal hip screw, distal locking screw and intramedullary nail. After complete removal of all other implants, the existing track from the proximal recon screw was enlarged using a cannulated drill bit. We were able to partially engage the tip of the guidewire with the cannulated drill bit. This allowed us to reverse the guidewire slightly into the track. Once the track was large enough, a 2 mm pituitary rongeur and Kerrison rongeur were used successively to grasp the tip of the broken guidewire and remove it. Following successful retrieval of the broken guidewire, a long proximal femoral intramedullary nail was inserted to achieve fracture fixation .
The patient was mobilized with partial weight-bearing on the third postoperative day. Her postoperative recovery was uneventful and she was discharged five days after the revision procedure. She underwent routine follow-up in the outpatient clinic. By three months after the operation, her fracture had completely united and she was walking independently without support.