A 67-year-old man with advanced HCC was admitted to our hospital for massive upper GI bleeding after three cycles of ATZ+BVZ treatment.
The patient had been treated with transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) twice and surgical resection. Owing to HCC progression, he had more recently been treated with sorafenib and four radiofrequency ablation procedures. He was referred to our hospital for evaluation of right upper quadrant abdominal pain in January 2021. Contrast-enhanced abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple enhancing nodules in all segments of the liver . He underwent TACE twice as well as lenvatinib treatment. Nonetheless, his HCC progressed . Combination of ATZ (1200 mg) and BVZ (15 mg/kg) every 3 wk was therefore initiated. Blood testing revealed a white blood cell count of 2.83 × 109/L, hemoglobin concentration of 127 g/L, and platelet count of 149 × 109/L. Child–Pugh score was 6 (Class A), indicating preserved liver function. Prothrombin time was 2 s longer than normal. Concentrations of the tumor markers des-gamma-carboxyprothrombin and alpha fetoprotein were elevated (29787 mAU/mL and 0.8 ng/mL, respectively). After three cycles, MRI showed continued progression but no remarkable gastroesophageal varices . The patient then underwent another TACE procedure which showed no contrast extravasation in the gastric area . He was discharged without complications. Ten days later, he was admitted to the hospital because of massive hematochezia and melanemesis. The patient’s clinical course is shown in Figure .
The patient had a history of hepatitis C, cirrhosis, and HCC diagnosed 3 years ago. He also had a remote history of gastric carcinoma treated with partial gastrectomy 30 years previously.
No specific personal and family history.
On admission, he exhibited signs of hypovolemic shock: Paleness, sweating and low blood pressure (64/38 mmHg).
Hemoglobin concentration and platelet count were 59 g/L and 98 × 109/L, respectively. Prothrombin time was 5 s longer than normal.
His condition did not improve despite infusion of intravenous fluids and a transfusion of packed red blood cells. Because acute upper GI bleeding was suspected, GI endoscopy was performed, which revealed fresh blood and blood clots within the stomach . The blood could not be removed with repeated washings. Esophageal varices and red wale signs were not observed; however, visualization was limited. Because hemostasis could not be achieved, he underwent emergency digital subtraction angiography (DSA), which showed contrast extravasation from a gastric artery pseudoaneurysm, the inferior splenic artery, and a branch of the left gastric artery .