A 53-year-old woman began with gastrointestinal symptoms on November 15, 2020: Bristol type 7 stool evacuations, without mucus or blood, in an amount of 2 per day (approximately 100 ml per occasion), with no food remains, without urgency, and with fecal incontinence. She declared to be a smoker (suspended 6 years ago), not an alcoholic, and having had a transfusion on November 2019 (due to severe anemia). The patient also reported having been diagnosed with Idiopathic Chronic Ulcerative Colitis (ICUC) in November 2019, after presenting episodes of intermittent diarrhea of ​​2 years of evolution (10 depositions/day). She was medicated with mezalazine, cholecalciferol, omega 3 and omeprazole.
On November 23, 2020, she goes to the emergency room due to an increase in the number and volume of depositions, probably associated with the suspension of the treatment (referred by a family member). Initial exploration showed a frank wasting syndrome, apparent age of the patient equal to true chronological age. Oriented, Glasgow Coma Scale: 15. Oral mucosa with a regular state of hydration. Chest with conserved movements, with no pleuropulmonary syndrome. Abdomen without visceromegaly. Rectal examination was performed with difficulty due to anal pain, hypertonic sphincter, and traces of fresh blood in evacuations were found, and no lumps were palpated.
The admission diagnosis was inflammatory bowel disease and a mild event of ICUC . The patient met the criteria for hemodynamic instability, hence, hydroelectrolytic replacement began, without requiring support with amines. Once stabilized, she was transferred to the Gastroenterology Unit.
Considering the clinical background and the initial evaluation at the emergency room, the treatment strategy was focused on the gastrointestinal symptoms and the reestablishment the hydroelectrolytic and hemodynamic balance. Daily laboratory tests were performed, as well as a variety of clinical examinations. A marked metabolic acidosis (pH = 6.8) by the time of the admission stands out, which gradually decreased through day 7 of hospitalization (pH = 7.2). Regarding serum electrolytes, she showed hyperphosphatemia (4.6–5.1 mg/dl), hyperchloremia (109–129 mg/dl), and hypocalcemia (4.5–6.9 mg/dl) as well as intermittently hypokalemia, during the whole time that she remained hospitalized; and hypernatremia in the last three days of hospitalization.
Blood count tests showed altered profiles during the whole time of hospitalization , highlighting an elevated percentage of neutrophils, although in the cell count, a clear increase is observed only between days 2 and 5 of hospitalization . ​​In total lymphocytes and monocytes, both cell count and percentage levels, were always lower than the reference values , in addition, low number of total platelets was detected throughout the hospitalization time .
At least three indicators of renal dysfunction were also observed : uremia , elevated creatinine levels and hypoalbuminemia .
One day after admission to the emergency unit, an upper endoscopy was performed, and one of the findings was an esophageal candidiasis KPDSI III, for which fluconazole was administered .
During the patient’s hospitalization, the levels of the inflammatory markers procalcitonin and C-reactive protein were measured. Regarding procalcitonin values, the following was obtained: on the day of hospital admission, it showed a moderate elevation (4.53 ng/ml); three days later, on November 26, the value increased significantly (26.69 ng/ml) even though the patient started with preventive treatment with ceftriaxone the day before. That same day a blood culture was performed and even without the laboratory result, it was decided to change the antibiotic to imipenem. The result of the blood culture (three days after the blood culture request) indicated growth of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and treatment with imipenem was continued (indicated for the treatment of infection with P. aeruginosa). On the fifth day of hospitalization, the procalcitonin value continued to increase despite antimicrobial treatment (188 ng/ml).
Regarding the C-reactive protein (CRP) results, the value obtained on the day of hospital admission was within the normal parameter (8.44 mg/L). The next day, the concentration increased to 13.2 mg/L, which was not unexpected considering the underlying pathology (ICUC). On the fifth day of hospitalization, the concentration decreased to a value within the normal parameter (6.72 mg/L). During this period, the patient was administered with both non-steroidal and steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
In addition, other diagnostic support studies were performed during hospitalization due to the poor prognostic. In accordance with the clinical evolution, computed tomography scans were performed in different anatomical areas, the findings of which are described in Table . These studies, together with the laboratory results, revealed a refractory shock caused by a progressive organ deterioration (renal and neurological), requiring a double-vasopressor support, oxygenation, and ventilation.
Computed tomography scans suggested a possible SARS-CoV-2 infection; therefore, on November 28 (day 5 of hospitalization), a COVID-19 test as well as D-dimer and ferritin determination were conducted. Nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs were performed, and the sample was tested for SARS-CoV-2 by using GeneFinder™ COVID-19 Plus RealAmp Kit, showing a positive result for COVID-19, with a high viral load evidenced by the quantification cycle (Cq) values: 16.4 for viral gene E; 17.17 for the viral gene N; 17.32 for the viral gene RdRp; and 27.7 for RNAse P housekeeping gene. D-dimer and ferritin levels were both higher than the reference values (1316 µg/l and 518.9 ng/ml respectively).
After considerable systemic deterioration, the patient displayed cardiorespiratory arrest, without response, and died on December 1, after 8 days of hospitalization.
Due to the unusual manifestations that the patient showed during the course of the disease, and given the very fast and fatal outcome, we decided to analyze the sequence of the viral S gene in search of possible mutations. A PCR product of 4,119 bp containing the complete S gene was retrotranscribed and amplified with the SuperScript IV One-Step RT-PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using specific primers designed for that purpose: 5´-GGGGTACTGCTGTTATGTCTTT-3´, and 5´- CGCCAACAATAAGCCATCCG-3´. The PCR product was analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis and sequenced using the fluorescent cycle-sequencing method (BigDye Terminator Ready Reaction Kit; Applied Biosystems) by automated Sanger technology with an ABI 3500 sequencer (ABI 3500 Series Genetic Analyzer; Applied Biosystems).
Sequence analysis was performed using the DNASIS MAX software (Hitachi), finding two nucleotide differences compared to the reference SARS-CoV-2 genome sequence: the A1841G mutation causing a change of an aspartic acid to a glycine in the aminoacidic sequence (D614G); and the C3172T mutation causing a change of a histidine to tyrosine in the aminoacidic sequence (H1058Y). The localization of the mutations in the S protein were analyzed in comparison to the reference sequence, and tridimensional graphics were generated with the CoVsurver tool for mutation analysis of hCoV-19 at the Global Initiative for Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID) database , finding both mutations in regions not related to the receptor binding domain .