A 50-year-old man presented before 2 years with a complaint of change in stool property (dry or thin and unformed with occasional tenesmus) and was diagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome owing to recurrent symptoms. Recently, he was admitted to our hospital with a dull pain in the upper and middle abdomen with occasional hiccoughs and sour regurgitation. Physical examination revealed pressing pain in the epigastric region. The C14 breath test result was positive for HP. Gastroscopy revealed congestion and oedema in the mucosa of the gastric antrum, with reddish-white-coloured (predominantly white) and punctate erosions . A 5 × 10-mm ulcer was observed in the fovea of the duodenal bulb with surrounding mucosal congestion, oedema and smudged moss . The mucosa of the whitened area of the gastric antrum was acquired with medical forceps for biopsy.
Histopathological evaluation did not reveal intestinal metaplasia of the epithelial cells and mitosis or dysplasia in the mucosa of the gastric antrum. However, a chronic inflammatory cell infiltration was observed in the mesenchyme, along with a large number of cytoplasm-rich, nuclear-deviated mimics signet ring cells with a diameter of 5–13 μm between the glands of the lamina propria. A basophilic mucus-like substance was observed in the cytoplasm, and the cells were distributed in a focal or lamellar manner like grapes . Short, thin rods of H. pylori were seen in the small gastric pits and glandular cavities on the surface of the gastric mucosa.Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the mimics signet ring cells were CK (-) , PAS (-) and D-PAS (-) , which excluded the possibility of mimics signet ring cell carcinoma (SRC) of epithelial origin. LCA (+++), MUM1 (+++), CD79a (+++) and CD138 (++) confirmed a plasma cell nature. Kappa (κ) (+++) , Lambda (λ) (++) and molecular tests revealed polyclonal rearrangements of B cells, suggesting a polyclonal phenotype. The negative expressions of CD20, Bc1-2, Bc1-6, CD163, CDX2, CEA, CK20, CK7, CD5, ALK, CD3, CD56, cyclin D1 and SOX-11 ruled out other suspected malignancies, whereas Ki-67 (approximately 1%+) suggested a benign lesion. Therefore, the diagnosis favoured RBG with polyclonal plasma cell hyperplasia.
After 1 week of anti-HP treatment, an endoscopy performed during the follow-up revealed scattered foci of erosion in the anterior wall of the gastric antrum , with a smaller bulbous ulcer measuring approximately 2 × 3 mm . A biopsy of the mucosa from the erosion zone of the gastric antrum revealed interstitial oedema, lymphocytic and neutrophilic infiltration, atrophy of the proper gastric glands and complete disappearance of the mimics signet ring cell .
After regular anti-HP treatment, the gastroscopy was repeated 7 months later: there was no erosion in the mucosa of the gastric sinus, ulcerative scars were visible in the mucosa of the bulb, and the C14 breath test result was negative for HP,therefore, the endoscopist did not clamp the gastric mucosal tissue for pathological biopsy .
The patient is currently in good condition with no discomfort such as acid reflux and belching.