A 3-year-old girl with no significant past medical history presented to the emergency department by air ambulance because she was bitten by a neighborhood Doberman-Boxer mix dog. She had multiple wounds on her head, face, neck, and anterior chest, and air leak was observed from the neck wound. The patient was transported to the hospital with the neck wound manually held by the emergency medicine physician.
Under sedation, blind oral endotracheal intubation was attempted by pediatrics and anesthesiology, however, the tube was trapped in the airway and could not be inserted. As ventilation became impossible, after extending the neck wound with a scalpel, the tracheal lumen was felt and confirmed with a finger, and a 4-mm tracheal tube was inserted directly from the cervical wound .
The trachea was almost completely transected. An ultrathin flexible bronchoscope was prepared, after sufficient ventilation, the flexible bronchoscope was passed through a 4.5-mm intubation tube, the cervical tube was removed once, and the flexible bronchoscope was guided through the cervical wound into the lower trachea for oral intubation. After respiration and circulation had stabilized, a whole-body computed tomography (CT) scan was performed . The CT scan showed not only surface wounds and subcutaneous emphysema, but also a depressed skull fracture and a small amount of air in the intracranial space . After administration of antibiotics (meropenem hydrate) and tetanus toxoid vaccine, the patient was transferred to the operating room. The tracheal tube was visible when the anterior neck wound was extracted . The space between the cricoid cartilage and the first tracheal cartilage was transected three-fifths, and almost only the tracheal membranous area retained continuity. A part of the first tracheal cartilage was damaged, but a direct suture was possible by trimming. Tracheoplasty was performed with 14 stitches using a 5−0 polypropylene suture, with simple interrupted suture . No recurrent nerves were identified. The anterior cervical wounds were closed with sutures, but the remaining multiple crushed wounds were washed with large amounts of saline and were temporarily not sutured. She was immobilized with endotracheal intubation for 3 days and was extubated after confirming that there were no problems with the tracheostomy wound by bronchoscopy . The left vocal cord showed paracentral fixation, but no hoarseness of voice was observed. On postoperative day 4, secondary suture closure of the face and head wounds was performed with plastic surgery. The skull fracture was treated conservatively and antimicrobial therapy with meropenem hydrate was administered for 14 days because of pneumocephalus. The patient was discharged on the 18th day after surgery without any further wound infection.