A 76-year-old Japanese man with diabetes and hypertension was admitted to our hospital with hemosputum, a symptom which he had for about 19 months. The patient had gone to another hospital 19 months earlier for hemosputum and was diagnosed with a nodule (42 × 24 mm) in the left upper lobe of his lung after undergoing a chest computed tomography scan. The chest scan from 18 months earlier showed that the nodule was associated with cavitation. A bronchoscopy was performed, but the cause of the hemosputum was not found. The patient was referred and then admitted to our hospital for diagnosis because the hemosputum persisted and lung cancer was suspected. The patient’s medical interview conducted at our hospital revealed a history of a 3-month stay in Chiang Mai, Thailand, four years previously. There was no other history of dust or tuberculosis exposure, nor any family history, any pets, or any history of gardening or mountain hiking.
On examination, the patient appeared well. His temperature was 36.2 °C, heart rate was 76 bpm and regular, blood pressure was 147/81 mmHg, and oxygen saturation was 97% in room air. His physical examination findings were unremarkable. Laboratory investigations revealed a white blood cell count of 7090/μL (neutrophil count 4552/μL, eosinophil count 177/μL), hemoglobin level of 18.4 g/dL, C-reactive protein level of 0.02 mg/dL (normal < 0.30 mg/dL), and hemoglobin A1c level of 7.5%. His chest radiographs showed a cavitary lesion in the left middle lung field . His chest scan showed a cavity (42 × 24 mm) in the left upper lobe with an internal nodule (13 × 11 mm) . In addition to lung cancer, aspergilloma and tuberculosis were considered differential diagnoses. Serum beta-D-glucan and Aspergillus antibody tests were negative. Bacterial culture of his sputum showed oral commensals and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. The culture and smear of three series of sputum for anti-acid bacteria were negative.
A thoracoscopic left upper lobectomy was performed on the patient, and he was discharged on the second postoperative day. Histopathological examination of the cavitary lesion in the left upper lobe revealed squamous cell carcinoma, and the nodule in the cyst was identified as a fungal ball with numerous filamentous fungi on Hematoxylin and eosin staining . Lung specimens were cultured aerobically at 35 °C on a CHROMagar Candida plate (Kanto Chemical Co, Inc., Tokyo, Japan), sheep blood agar (Nissui Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), and chocolate agar EX II (Nissui Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). No growth was observed at 48 h, and the incubation was continued at 25 °C. At 72 h, small white colonies developed . Lactophenol cotton blue mounts of slide cultures on CHROMagar of the isolated fungus showed hyaline hyphae with clamp connections and spicules, but no conidia .
Since we were not able to identify the fungal species at our institution, we asked the Medical Mycology Research Center (MMRC), Chiba University to identify the fungi. The ITS sequencing of the isolated fungus was performed in MMRC. Based on the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) search of the sequence on the ITS region of the rRNA gene of the isolated fungus, the homology of the standard strain S. commune CBS 124811 (GenBank Accession No.: MH863418) was 99.8% (617/618 bp) . Thus, we identified the isolate as S. commune on phylogeny and deposited it as IFM 67,107 at MMRC, Chiba University, through the National Bio-resource Project, Japan. The final diagnosis was a fungal ball caused by S. commune in the cavity of the lung cancer. The patient has not experienced recurrence of symptoms in 5 months of follow-up.