A 65-year-old man presented to the emergency department complaining of palpitations and peripheral oedema, accompanied by dyspnoea on exertion for 4 weeks.
The patient had a preexisting hypertensive heart disease with reportedly normal LVEF, well-controlled blood pressure, and normal functional capacity. He had additionally a Type 2 diabetes mellitus, an ectasia of the ascending aorta, and a history of tobacco use. His undergoing treatment was perindopril/amlodipine 10/5 mg o.d., carvedilol 12.5 mg b.i.d., and metformin 1000 mg b.i.d. He was independent at home with intact cognitive function.
On physical examination, blood pressure was 144/118 mmHg, heart rate 159 b.p.m., and oxygen saturation 97% on ambient air. The auscultation revealed bibasilar crackles and regular, tachycardic heart tones. There was no jugular venous distension, but moderate peripheral oedema was noted. The electrocardiogram showed regular, narrow complex tachycardia consistent with typical atrial flutter with 2:1 conduction . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a newly reduced LVEF of 15% and diffuse hypokinesia, without relevant ventricular hypertrophy or dilatation (left ventricular end-diastolic diameter - 53 mm, ). With the aim to proceed with an electrical cardioversion (ECV), a transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) was performed, which detected a LAA thrombus .
The diagnosis of new acute heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), typical tachycardic atrial flutter, and LAA thrombus was made.
Differential diagnosis of simultaneous supraventricular tachycardia and new HFrEF includes TCM, which was highly suspected given the patient history. Laboratory tests revealed normal electrolytes and haemoglobin, serum creatinine of 110 µmol/L, and NT-proBNP 2400 pg/mL. Given the high cardiovascular risk profile, a coronary angiography was performed, which excluded a coronary artery disease.
Intravenous diuretic treatment and anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin (30,000 U/24 h for therapeutic activated partial thromboplastin time) were initiated, and the patient was transferred to the cardiac care unit for further management. Restoration of sinus rhythm was considered essential to allow contractility recovery. However, ECV and catheter ablation were contraindicated because of the LAA thrombus.
We decided to perform a percutaneous LAAO using a thrombus-trapping technique with a 20 mm Watchman FLX ( and ). Under sedo-analgesia and TOE guidance, a Watchman 14 F delivery sheath was placed in the upper left pulmonary vein following transseptal puncture at an infero-posterior localization. The Watchman device was advanced through the sheath and partially expanded inside the pulmonary vein (so-called ball configuration). With the atraumatic ball configuration, the sheath was directed towards the anticipated landing zone in the LAA neck and finally released by unsheating the catheter. After TOE verification of device compression and exclusion of residual leak, the device was released. On the same day and separate intervention, a successful ablation of the CTI was performed with restoration of sinus rhythm .
The therapy with heparin was changed to apixaban 5 mg b.i.d. for 3 months (after ablation) in combination with clopidogrel 75 mg o.d. for 12 months. Heart failure therapy was started including metoprolol 25 mg b.i.d., spironolactone 25 mg o.d., and dapagliflozin 10 mg o.d. and a switch of candesartan 8 mg b.i.d. to sacubitril/valsartan 25 mg b.i.d. till 75 mg b.i.d. at discharge. In the TTE following the two procedures, a device embolization and pericardial effusion were excluded, and an improvement of the LV function to 35% was already noted (see ). Forty-five days after discharge, a TOE attested a LVEF of 45% and absence of device-related thrombosis or any peri-device leaks. The 6-month TTE (see ) revealed a normalized LV function under maximally tolerated doses of heart failure therapy including sacubitril/valsartan 200 mg b.i.d., spironolactone 25 mg o.d., dapagliflozin 10 mg o.d., and metoprolol 25 mg b.i.d. The patient was asymptomatic and feeling well. A 7-day ECG confirmed the absence of recurrence of atrial flutter but identified episodes of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, leading to pulmonary vein isolation. No thromboembolic events or recurrence of heart failure occurred under the prescribed therapy, which was unchanged in the course.