A 15-year-old boy not known to have prior medical illness presented to our hospital emergency department (ED) with a history of shortness of breath upon climbing stairs and blue discoloration of his lips and extremities. There was no history of cough, chest pain, palpitation, fever, or constitutional symptoms. Cyanosis was first noted by his parents on his hands 3 months before the recent presentation. There was no significant exposure to household or environmental fumes, dust, or mineral oils. The father of the patient has rheumatoid arthritis, and his mother has multiple sclerosis. Other aspects of history were unremarkable, including drug history; specifically, the patient was asked about using any immunosuppressant medication.
On physical examination (P/E), the patient was conscious, oriented, and alert but appeared ill and had peripheral and central cyanosis as well as finger clubbing. He was afebrile but tachypneic (respiratory rate 35 breaths per minute), with room air oxygen saturation of 68%, which improved to 92% with 10 L of oxygen therapy delivered through a nonbreathable mask. Chest auscultation revealed diffuse bilateral crackles with a decrease in air entry bilaterally. The rest of the P/E was unremarkable.
Laboratory investigations in the ED were normal apart from polycythemia and elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). On chest X-ray, extensive bilateral alveolar scattered and coalescent alveolar infiltrates involving both lung fields were evident . The patient was admitted to the general ward for further evaluation and management. After admission to the general ward, further investigations were conducted, including inflammatory marker and tuberculosis tests, which all returned normal .
High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest showed extensive diffuse bilateral thickening of the lung interstitium with superimposed interlobular septal thickening and a typical “crazy-paving” appearance . A pulmonary function test was not done. Collectively, these findings indicate a possible diagnosis of PAP.
The patient then underwent flexible bronchoscopy under general anesthesia, and an apparent milky fluid was aspirated and sent for laboratory testing . Given the lungs’ abundant secretions, a therapeutic whole lung lavage (WLL) of both lungs was planned for the next day. WLL was done for two separate sessions, starting with the left lung, then followed by the right lung after 3 days, and we did the same procedure steps for both. When the patient arrived at the operating room at the first session, electrocardiographic and invasive arterial pressure monitoring was established. He wore a nonbreathable mask, and oxygen saturation was maintained at >90%. Anesthesia was induced with propofol 25 mg, sevoflurane 2–3%, and fentanyl 100 μg and maintained with sevoflurane 1% infusion. He was intubated with a double-lumen endotracheal tube size 32 Fr, and its correct position was confirmed by fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Oxygen saturation was 100% on intermittent positive pressure ventilation mood with a volume control of 350 mL, positive end-expiratory pressure of 5 cm H2O, and airway pressure of 40 cm H2O, which were continuously monitored, and regular arterial blood gas analysis. WLL was performed with the patient in the right lateral position on the operating table, and we did sequential lavage with warm saline solution at body temperature followed by passive drainage under gravity. An experienced physiotherapist performed manual chest vibration and percussion. Cycles were repeated until 10 L of total lavage volume was used and clear fluid effluent was obtained . The procedure lasted approximately 4 hours. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for ventilatory support, where he was extubated within 12 hours. Manual chest physiotherapy techniques and positioning maneuvers were continued postoperatively. Finally, a right-sided WLL was planned for within the next 72 hours with the same procedure. After completing the WLL, the patient reported a dramatic improvement in the SOB but still required oxygen therapy.
Cytological examination of the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) revealed multiple eosinophilic globules on the background of granular material and inflammatory cells, including macrophages and lymphocytes. They are periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) stain positive . PAP diagnosis was confirmed, and antibodies against GM-CSF and necessary immunological and infectious workup were requested . Antibodies against GM-CSF returned positive in the patient serum. Microbiological investigations of BALF returned negative, including culture studies. Given the absence of clinical and laboratory evidence of hematological, rheumatological, and infectious diseases, and the presence of anti-GM-CSF antibodies in the patient serum and BALF, the diagnosis of aPAP was established. The patient was discharged from the hospital on oxygen therapy, and he maintained oxygen saturation of >93% on 5 L of oxygen for 1 month, then gradually tapered off until he was completely weaned off the oxygen therapy. After 6 months of follow-up, the patient’s oxygen saturation was > 93% on room air, and the symptoms completely disappeared.