A 91-year-old Japanese woman presented to our hospital with hypoxia of unknown origin. She had a medical history of hypertension and atrial fibrillation. Eight years before, when she was 82, an advanced atrioventricular block was diagnosed after a syncopal episode and she received a permanent dual chamber pacemaker implantation. She underwent coronary computed tomography (CT) and radioisotope examination at this time, but there was no evidence of cardiomyopathy or of ischemic heart disease. The tip of the pacemaker lead was observed to pass through a PFO at the left ventricular apex; she received a follow-up examination because of no serious adverse event. She had no history of lung disease or tobacco smoking. She had no subjective symptoms associated with cardiovascular disease after pacemaker implantation. There was no evidence of a decline in oxygen saturation levels at that time, which were measured by pulse oximetry.
Her physical examination findings on admission were as follows: clear level of consciousness and severe hypoxia and cyanosis observed only in the right lateral decubitus position. These symptoms were immediately improved in the left lateral decubitus, the supine, and the upright position. Arterial blood gas values were consistent with her symptoms. Partial arterial oxygen pressure (PaO2) and arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2) decreased only in the right lateral decubitus position . These observations were reproducible. There was no evidence of lung rales or cardiac murmur.
Laboratory tests, including complete blood count, thyroid function tests, and D-dimers were almost normal. A chest X-ray showed a significant elevation of her right diaphragmatic dome.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed an atrium-sensing, ventricular-pacing rhythm with a complete right bundle branch block (RBBB) pattern . In general, when the pacemaker lead is set on the right ventricle correctly, the pacemaker first stimulates the right ventricle, and next the left ventricle. Because of this, the expected ECG pattern with right ventricle pacing should show a left bundle branch block (LBBB) pattern. A RBBB pattern suggests that the pacemaker first stimulates the left ventricle, and next the right one. Only this ECG pattern could indicate the possibility of inadvertent left ventricle pacing. This patient’s ECG pattern also suggested left ventricle pacing. However, we could not assess a malposition of the pacemaker lead from only an ECG pattern because sometimes we find a RBBB pattern although the pacemaker lead is set correctly. Contrast-enhanced CT excluded the diagnosis of cerebral infarction, pulmonary embolism, pneumonia, and lung parenchymal abnormalities and revealed giant liver cysts and compression of the right atrium by one of cysts . A chest X-ray and CT scan revealed right hemidiaphragmatic elevation that was probably compressing the right atrium. This finding was suspected in the case of right hemidiaphragmatic paralysis . A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, left atrial dilatation, and compression of the right atrium due to the giant liver cyst. In addition, the pacemaker lead probably ran abnormally to the left atrium and ventricle through PFO, but shunt flow across the PFO on color Doppler image was not apparently observed. Pulmonary perfusion imaging with 99mTc-macroaggregated albumin (MAA) was performed in the right lateral decubitus position. MAA accumulated in her kidneys and brain, which suggested the presence of a right-to-left shunt. The estimated shunt ratio was 26.3%.
A transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) with intravenously administered agitated saline contrast solution was performed in both right and left lateral decubitus . TEE showed a compressed right atrium and shunt blood flow in both directions: from the left to the right atrium and vice versa. The shunt flow was exacerbated by postural changes from the left to the right lateral decubitus . TEE also confirmed that the giant liver cyst was compressing the right atrium and the pacemaker lead was abnormally running to the left atrium through PFO .
Considering these results, we concluded that the cause of hypoxia was POS with right-to-left interatrial shunt through PFO. POS can be treated with the closure of the interatrial shunt by thoracotomy or percutaneous cardiac catheterization . Surgical closure of PFO was not performed due to the age of our patient, surgical difficulties, and failure to obtain informed consent. For these reasons she was discharged after receiving medical advice about her posture.