A 79-year-old Indian man, who had CRF due to hypertensive nephropathy for the past five years, presented with new-onset headache for the past six months. The headache was global, of moderate to severe intensity, dull in character, persistent, and occurred daily. It had no relation to coughing, straining, or posture change. It had no diurnal variation. He had a history of occasional vomiting. For the past approximately one year, he had symptoms suggestive of restless-leg syndrome. He had received maintenance hemodialysis for more than one year. He had no history of scalp tenderness, jaw claudication, persistent fever, neck pain, persistent nasal symptoms, or dental disease. No history of any obvious trauma was found. He had received sertraline, gabapentin, sodium valproate, and topiramate for the headache, with no benefit. The headache was not relieved even by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
On examination, he had mild pallor, blood pressure of 130/88 mm Hg, and a sallow complexion. The rest of his general examination and systemic examinations were unremarkable. He had no neurologic deficit. His neck was supple. Fundus examination revealed no papilloedema. Plain CT scan of his head revealed diffuse, dense calcification of the cerebellum, tentorium , and falx. He had a hemoglobin level ranging from 9 to 11 mg/dl (with erythropoietin; normal range (NR), 13.6 to 17.5 gm/dl), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 20 mm, first hour (NR, 0 to 15 mm, first hour). Blood urea level ranged from 140 to 198 mg/dl (NR, 8 to 40 mg/dl), and serum creatinine level ranged from 6 to 9.6 mg/d (NR, 0.6 to 1.2 mg/dl); serum calcium level ranged from 7.4 to 8.2 mg/dl (NR, 8.5 to 10.5 mg/dl), and the serum phosphorus level, from 6.8 to 8.0 mg/dl (NR, 2.5 to 4.5 mg/dl). His serum parathormone level was 321.1 pg/ml (NR, 15 to 68.3 pg/ml). His arterial blood gas analysis revealed no hypoxemia or hypercapnia. The rest of his investigations were unremarkable.
We continued with maintenance hemodialysis and started him on a low-phosphorus diet. Sevelamer, a phosphate binder, was started, with a dosage of 800 mg thrice daily. We uptitrated its dose to 1600 mg thrice daily. We also administered tablets containing vitamin D and calcium. His serum calcium level increased to 8.6 mg/dl, and the serum phosphate decreased to 5 mg/dl. He reported a remarkable improvement of his headache but would still have an occasional mild to moderate headache.