A 19-year-old Japanese woman had presented with an enlarged thyroid gland of the left lobe at the age of 14 years during a regular medical check-up at school. Following this observation, the patient was closely monitored without any treatment. The nodular lesion gradually became visible and enlarged. Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) examinations were performed thrice, and the tumor was diagnosed as benign. Five years after the initial detection of thyroid enlargement, the lesion reached a size of 45 × 40 mm and revealed heterogeneous enhancement on contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) images . Her serum thyroglobulin level was high at 1220 μg/L, while her thyroid hormone levels remained within the normal range. The fourth FNAC revealed numerous epithelial cells arranged in follicle-, papillary-, and sheet-like patterns. The cells were round and nearly uniform, suggesting neoplastic etiology. There were no nuclear findings suggestive of papillary carcinomas in the nuclei, such as nuclear grooves or nuclear inclusion bodies . Subsequently, the patient was judged to have a relative indication for surgery, left hemithyroidectomy using video-associated neck surgery (VANS) method. The resected thyroid tissue was submitted to the pathology department after formalin fixation.
The cut surface of the tumor showed that it was well-demarcated; however, it exhibited irregular contours with a thin incomplete capsule as well as heterogeneous white/light tan-colored areas upon formalin fixation. The diameter of the excised tumor mass was 3.1 × 2.3 cm .
Microscopically, the tumor displayed various distinct growth patterns: follicular, solid, trabecular, and papillary. The tumor cells invaded the surrounding thyroid tissue and breached the fibrous capsule . A follicular growth pattern with colloid was predominant, where the tumor cells had mildly enlarged nuclei but lacked the typical nuclear features of papillary carcinoma. In contrast, several foci of solid nests with interlacing trabeculae composed of elongated cells were present, and the papillary structures were associated with or adjacent to the solid nests . Moreover, block-like or petaloid eosinophilic depositions were observed in the interstitium of the solid nests, and occasionally in the papillary cores . The tumor cells of the solid and papillary portions showed the characteristic nuclear features of PTC, such as ground-glass appearance, nuclear grooving, and nuclear contour irregularity . Regional lymph node metastasis was also detected, and both follicular and solid architectures were concomitantly observed in the metastatic lesions . The eosinophilic deposits around the tumor nests were positive for periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and periodic acid-methenamine-silver (PAM) staining, consistent with basement membrane material staining .
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the tumor cells were diffusely positive for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and galectin 3, with more intense galectin 3 immunoreactivity in the solid/trabecular and papillary portions . Cells in the solid/trabecular and papillary portions were positive for CK19 and 34βE12, whereas those in the follicular structures were negative . In contrast, the follicular area was strongly positive for thyroglobulin (Tg), but only faint signals were observed in the solid, trabecular, and papillary portions . MIB-1 (Ki-67 (cell prolferation marker)) staining revealed an incomplete and weak membranous staining pattern in the solid and trabecular portions . Table summarizes the results of immunohistochemical analysis. Point mutations in BRAF were not detected using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by direct sequencing . RET-PTC1, RET-PTC2, RET-PTC3, PAX8-GLIS1, as well as PAX8-GLIS3 rearrangements were not detected by RT–PCR [, , ]. KRAS (codons 12,13,59,61,117, and 146) and NRAS (codons 12, 13, 59, 61, 117, and 146) gene mutations were also not detected (performed at the laboratory of SRL Inc., Tokyo, Japan). Collectively, the final pathologic diagnosis was PTC with HTT-like features.
A complete physical examination was performed after surgery. Cervical ultrasonography showed enlarged lymph nodes of levels II and IV. Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) revealed small nodules in the lower lobes of both lungs, suggesting the presence of pulmonary metastasis. Subsequently, additional resections of the right lobe of the thyroid and the regional lymph nodes were performed. Metastasis was found in the left lymph nodes at level IV, although no definite cancer was detected in the right lobe of the thyroid gland. According to the eight edition of the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC 8th ed.), final staging of this case was considered pT2, pN1b, cM1, Stage II. After the second surgery, the patient underwent two rounds of radioactive iodine therapy with monitoring of thyroglobulin levels. The pulmonary lesions disappeared in the images. Currently, about 5 years have passed since the surgery, and no apparent recurrence has been observed.