A 77-year-old Chinese man complained of bilateral, simultaneous onset vision loss for 5 days, accompanied by severe headache on right side and jaw pain. He was a considerable healthy man in the past. The Neuro-Ophthalmological examination revealed the patient to be alert and oriented. The visual acuities were no light perception in both eyes. The pupils were dilated with no reaction to light. Slit lamp examination showed punctate cataract and funduscopic examination revealed diffused swollen of the optic disc bilateral, with pallid “chalky white” appearance; the choroids showing diffused atrophy around the optic disc bilateral . The extra-ocular motility was full of both eyes. The bilateral superficial temporal arteries were palpable and tenderness.
The routine laboratory tests showed slight decreased RBC (3.09 × 1012/L, normal: 4–5.5) and Hb (92 g/l, normal:120–160),with normal platelet count (170 × 109/L, normal:100–300);dramatic elevated erythrocyte sedimentation ratio (ESR: 100 mm/h, normal: 0–15) and C-reactive protein (CRP: 39.27 mg/L, normal: 0–5). The ocular blood flow detected by color duplex ultrasonography (CDUS) revealed decrease of posterior ciliary artery, central retinal artery, ophthalmic artery in both eyes. CDUS of the bilateral superficial temporal arteries with high-frequency linear probe revealed inflammation of the vessel wall as a hypo-echoic concentric ring, which referred as the “halo sign” . The orbital fat-suppression T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contract only showed the enhancement of the optic nerve sheath in the left eye, without inflammatory and mass occupation lesions. The MRA were also unremarkable . The right temporal artery biopsy was performed and revealed the occlusion of the luminal owing to the intimal proliferation and infiltration . Methylprednisolone 1 g/d was intravenous for 3 days followed by prednisone 1 mg/kg/d. The vision acuity maintained NLP bilateral after treatment, whereas the headache and jaw pain disappeared. The oral prednisone was weaned and methotrexate was added as the immunosuppressive agent for long treatment. The patient was followed more than one year and there was no other new systematic symptoms, but with the permanent blindness eventually.