A 60-year-old Japanese woman who had no immunodeficiency and an unremarkable medical history visited our hospital with sudden right facial paralysis and vertigo as the chief complaints. On neurological examination, she had no motor or sensory abnormalities other than facial paralysis and no cranial nerve symptoms. At that time, we detected a bone destructive skull tumor extending from the right frontal bone to the parietal and temporal bones on a head computed tomography (CT) scan . However, no obvious abnormalities were observed from visual inspection and palpation of the head.
Using contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (CEMRI), the lesion was confirmed to have invaded the surrounding subcutaneous tissue and temporal muscle , but it had not yet developed in the brain. Diffusion-weighted imaging revealed multiple acute ischemic lesions in bilateral hemispheres . Additionally, we confirmed abnormal accumulations consistent with the bone lesion as well as in the large intestine by positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT). However, no abnormality was detected on colonoscopy, and all tumor markers—carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, α-fetoprotein, soluble interleukin-2 receptor, protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II, sialyl-Lewis X, cancer antigen 125, and β2 microglobulin—were negative. Contrast-enhanced CT did not reveal phlebothrombosis or any abnormal finding in the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis. The skull tumor was resected for confirming the diagnosis. When the bones were exposed in a wide area by performing a curved skin incision from the anterosuperior portion of the auricle to the midline, bone destruction was found mainly from the frontal bone to the parietal bone, with an abundance of indurated tumor inside . The tumor was highly vascularized with temporal muscle/subcutaneous invasion . We confirmed that there was no invasion to the dura mater by removing the destructed bone and the fractured pieces in the surrounding area . We covered the defective part of the bone with a plate and conducted coagulation for the invasion sites in the muscle. There were no complications due to surgery. Resection of the tumor was confirmed by postoperative MRI. Histopathologically, the resected lesion was diffusely invaded by large atypical cells with a high nucleo-cytoplasmic ratio; there were individual tumor cells with irregular nuclei as well as cells with distinctive nuclear bodies. Mitosis and necrosis were also observed . Immunohistochemical examination was positive for CD20/CD79a and negative for CD3 in terms of atypical cells; the Ki-67 labeling index was approximately 90%. Based on these results, the tumor was identified as a DLBCL. Further examinations were conducted on the basis of the pathological results. Cerebrospinal fluid cytology examination and bone marrow biopsy were both negative for malignant cells. The blood sample was negative for viral markers, including HIV, with no abnormalities in blood counts and images. Coagulative markers indicated an increase in fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products (FDP) (70 μg mL), D-dimer (6.7 μg/mL), and thrombin–antithrombin III complex (TAT) (9.1 μg/L), but protein C and protein S levels were normal. Furthermore, various autoantibody, anticardiolipin antibody, and lupus anticoagulant tests were negative. Vascular stenosis was not observed on magnetic resonance angiogram and contrast-enhanced CT. There were no abnormalities in carotid ultrasonography and 24-hour electrocardiographic monitoring. Transesophageal echocardiography showed no nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis findings and patent foramen ovale.
Based on all the test results, we confirmed the diagnosis as primary DLBCL of the cranial vault complicated with Trousseau syndrome. Trousseau syndrome was treated with continuous infusion of heparin during the perioperative period. On the third day after surgery, we switched the treatment to oral anticoagulant medication. After completing three courses of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone (R-CHOP) and high-dose methotrexate for DLBCL, the patient is demonstrating an asymptomatic, benign course with reduced residual lesions. Her symptoms and coagulation abnormality with Trousseau syndrome improved simultaneously with tumor shrinkage (FDP 4.2 μg/mL, D-dimer 1.1 μg/mL, TAT 3.2 μg L). We are planning to initiate radiation therapy after the completion of four courses.