A 67-year-old sportive male (1.89 m; 95 kg) was referred to our trauma department by air ambulance after he fell while skiing crossover at a reasonable speed from deep snow back to the prepared slope – overseeing a significant step down of approximately 1 m. The patient unsuccessfully tried to break his fall but hit the snow with both extended arms straight over his head upfront. The patient’s past medical history excluded epilepsy, hypoglycemia, or any other possible seizure trigger. The patient was managed acutely on the slope and in our emergency room, according to ATLS principles, with a presenting GCS of 10 – E3V3M4. Full clinical examination was supplemented with imaging including a FAST scan and radiographs of shoulder joints, thorax, and pelvis. These confirmed the clinically suspected bilateral anterior shoulder dislocation combined with a four-part proximal humerus fracture on the left side and an osseous rotator cuff avulsion on the right side. The patient was neurovascular intact (, and ).
In the emergency room, both dislocations were consecutively reduced under sedation using the traction-counteraction-technique ( and 3b). No neurovascular deficit was detected post reduction. The right shoulder was immobilized in a Gilchrist bandage and the left shoulder in a Desault’s bandage before performing a computed tomography (CT)-scan of the head to successfully eliminate possible cerebral hemorrhage or skull vault injuries.
2 h after the accident, surgical treatment of the left four-part proximal humerus fracture was performed by minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis with a PHILOS® plate (Synthes; West Chester, USA). A central bone void was filled with an Allobone® allograft (Neutromedics AG; Charm, Switzerland) . An intra-operative diagnostic shoulder arthroscopy revealed no concomitant pathologies to the left shoulder joint, excluding any significant rotator-cuff injury, labral lesion, or chondral articular damage.
As the patients recovering progressed, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the right shoulder was performed 3-day post-injury to clarify the soft-tissue damage and subsequently a single-row rotator cuff repair using two 5.5 mm TwinFix® anchors (Smith & Nephew; London, United Kingdom) was performed. An additional Pulley-lesion was treated with a biceps tenodesis with fixation of the tendon to the intertubercular sulcus using a 5.5 mm Footprint® anchor (Smith & Nephew; London, United Kingdom). The Hill–Sachs lesion was insignificant and did not require any further treatment .
Post-operatively, the left shoulder was immobilized in a Velpeau-sling for 4 weeks and the right shoulder in an abduction splint for 6 weeks. Passive mobilization of both shoulders was started immediately on the first post-operative day, followed by increasing active and assistive mobilization. On the right shoulder, progressive adduction and a steady build-up of strength were initiated after 6 weeks. On the left shoulder, full mobilization was allowed following clinical and radiological confirmation of fracture consolidation.
Physiotherapy (3 times a week), aquatic therapy (2 times a week), and a 3-week stay in a rehabilitation facility 2-month post-injury completed the post-operative care. The patient was discharged in good general condition with a total inpatient stay of 11 days. The 30-day follow-up assessment showed a still restricted range of movement while the 6-month follow-up assessment demonstrated bilateral considerably improved range of movement . At the 2-year follow- up assessment still no evidence of implant failure, recurrence of dislocation or instability was observed.