An 85-year-old male was initially evaluated as an outpatient for aortic stenosis.
His echocardiogram demonstrated a valve area of 0.8 cm2, mean
gradient of 47 mmHg, peak gradient of 91 mmHg and aortic valve peak velocity of
4.76 m/s, in keeping with severe aortic stenosis. Mild mitral regurgitation and
moderate mitral stenosis with significant mitral annular calcification were also
demonstrated.
He endorsed shortness of breath on exertion, and was limited to slowly walking
100 m with a walker. This was also in the context of chronic anemia, with a
baseline hemoglobin around 7.0 g/dL (normal 13.5-17.5). He was dependent on red
blood cell transfusions twice per month, and a monthly course of intravenous
(IV) iron sucrose. Previous upper endoscopies revealed recurrent angiodysplasias
in the distal duodenum and proximal jejunum, which required clipping. In the
context of severe aortic stenosis, this was suspicious for Heyde syndrome.
Intervention for his aortic stenosis was indicated given his New York Heart
Association class II-III symptoms. Considering his age and comorbidities, he
underwent evaluation for TAVI, and was deemed to be a candidate.
While awaiting TAVI, he presented to the emergency department (ED) at a
peripheral hospital with orthopnea . Initial vitals included a
blood pressure of 113/54 mmHg, heart rate of 93 bpm, respiratory rate of 18
breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 95% on 2 L/min, and temperature of
35.1°C. On auscultation, there was a late-peaking systolic murmur over the
aortic area radiating into the carotid with an absent S2. He had bibasilar
crackles and 2+ pitting edema bilaterally.
In addition to severe aortic stenosis and recurrent small bowel angiodysplasias,
the patient was also known to have hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus,
peripheral vascular disease, and a prior laparoscopic low anterior resection for
a sigmoid adenocarcinoma.
The patient’s presentation was consistent with a heart failure exacerbation. The
differential for his state of decompensation included valvular (eg, worsening
aortic stenosis), infectious (eg, bacterial pneumonia, COVID-19) and ischemic
triggers.
Bloodwork revealed an elevated white blood cell count of 15.2 × 109/L
(normal 4.0-11.0) and a low hemoglobin at 9.9 g/dL. Of note, the patient
received 2 units of packed red blood cells the day prior. Troponin was elevated
at 1.610 µg/L (normal < 0.012). COVID-19 nasopharyngeal swab was negative.
Chest X-ray showed patchy bilateral opacities emanating from the mediastinum and
moderate bilateral pleural effusions, in keeping with pulmonary edema. ECG
showed sinus rhythm at 92 beats per minute, an incomplete left bundle branch
block and left ventricular hypertrophy. There were no acute ischemic
changes.
The leading diagnosis was decompensated heart failure secondary to progression of
aortic stenosis. The patient was admitted to hospital and diuresis was
initiated. Overnight, he had worsening oxygen requirements and was placed on
bilevel airway pressure (BiPAP). Given the mild leukocytosis, ceftriaxone and
azithromycin were started for possible community-acquired pneumonia. Transfer to
our center was arranged for ongoing management and to expedite his TAVI.
At our center, BiPAP, diuresis and antibiotics were continued. In the context of
significant orthopnea, both pleural effusions were drained and analyses were in
keeping with a transudative process—his known heart failure.
The patient’s condition stabilized, and a TAVI was arranged. In the procedure
room, a pre-operative transthoracic echocardiogram was done, which unexpectedly
demonstrated a large mass on the mitral valve. The TAVI was cancelled, and a
transesophageal echocardiogram was arranged for further evaluation. It confirmed
a 30 × 18 mm mass of the anterior mitral valve leaflet , associated with leaflet perforation and
severe mitral regurgitation . Blood cultures were drawn given the
concern for IE, but were negative. Importantly, the patient had completed a
5-day course of ceftriaxone and azithromycin by this point in time.
In the setting of IE, the patient was no longer eligible for TAVI. Despite
restarting antibiotics, his condition deteriorated. A goals of care discussion
was held with the patient and his family. He expressed that he did not want any
further escalation of care. Transfer to his home hospital was arranged for
palliation. He passed away days later with family at the bedside.