Painful rash involving his face, scalp, torso, and perianal area.
A 39-year-old African American man presented the emergency department with increasing swelling of his eyelids and lips for the past 2 wk associated with a painful rash involving his face, scalp, torso, and perianal area. He also complained of great pain moving his bowels and passing bright red blood per rectum intermittently. No recent travel or contact with sick persons.
Admitted a recent diagnosis of HIV. He was not compliant with antiretroviral therapy (HAART).
The patient initially denied having sex with men (MSM) but later said to be having anal receptive intercourse with men.
On physical examination he was afebrile but warm to the touch. His skin had innumerable coalescing vesiculopustular patches at various stages of erosion and crusting. His nasal bridge, eyebrows, and scalp were ulcerated . A coalescing lesion with crusting and purulent discharge surrounded his anus . Rectal exam was refused due to pain.
Electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine were normal. Hemoglobin was 5.4 g/dL. Leukocytes 5.32 × 103/uL, Neutrophils 49.1%, Lymphocytes 24.1%, Eosinophils 2.1%, Monocytes 11.5%, and Basophils 0.4%. Absolute CD4 count was 29 cells/uL. Liver tests were normal with: Albumin at 3.6 g/dL, total protein 6.6 g/dL, Alkaline phosphatase 21 IU/L, Aspartate transaminase 21 IU/L, Alanine transaminase 20 IU/L, and total bilirubin 0.3 mg/dL. Rectal tissue swab for MPX DNA PCR was positive. HIV viral load was 90,000, and anal, rectal, and oral swab for chlamydia and gonorrhea were negative likewise urine sample. Nevertheless, IgM for Herpes Simplex 1 and 2, and Herpes 8 were negative. Human papilloma virus was not assessed given his positivity for MPX.
Abdominal computed tomography showed marked circumferential thickening of the rectum measuring up to 2.6 cm with near obliteration of the lumen, adjacent pericolonic mesenteric stranding, and perianal fistulas extending from the distal rectum to the medial gluteal cleft . Endoluminal evaluation with flexible sigmoidoscopy was not done due to the high risk of perforation as the risk outweighs the benefit.