A 25-year-old Bataknese woman, G1P0A0, at 22–24 weeks pregnant was referred to our fetal diagnosis and therapy unit with a suspected diagnosis of TTTS. This was her first spontaneous pregnancy, and she had no remarkable history of medication use during pregnancy, no family history of genetic disorders or twin pregnancies, and no history of psychosocial disorders.
The patient complained of breathlessness and normal blood pressure (120/78 mmHg), and aspirin was not routinely used in our institution for pregnant patients. Physical examination revealed a uniformly enlarged uterus with a fundal height was 38.7 cm. The fetal parts were not palpable, and uterine contractions were palpated, but not observed. Laboratory values were as follows: complete blood count (CBC) examination showed hemoglobin (Hb), 12.6 g/dl (12–16); Ht, 38.0% (36–47); leukocytes (WBC), 8.990/µl (4.000–11.000); and thrombocytes (PLT), 343.000/mm3 (150.000–450.000).
Ultrasonography revealed a monochorionic diamniotic (MCDA) pregnancy. The placenta was anteriorly located. A thin, intertwined membrane (T-sign) was observed. The donor twin amniotic fluid maximal vertical pocket (MVP) was 2.74 cm. Bladder filling was also observed. The middle cerebral artery peak systolic velocity (MCA-PSV) was 34.97 cm/s (1.244 times the median/MoM). Persistent-absent end-diastolic flow (AEDF) was observed in the Doppler umbilical artery (UA) waveform, a positive a-wave was observed on the Doppler ductus venosus (DV) waveform, and the estimated fetal weight was 322 g. No fetal hydrops was noted in the recipient twin, with an MVP of 14.19 cm, polyhydramnios, bladder hypertrophy, Doppler MCA-PSV of 28.67 cm/s, 1.02 MoM, normal Doppler UA waveform, positive a-wave on the DV waveform, and EFW of 529 g (As shown Fig. A, B), fetal weight discordance was at 39.1%. Cervical length (CL) 35.12 mm. The Tei Index (TI) and myocardial performance index (MPI) in the recipient twin’s heart were 0.77, the left and 0.79, respectively. After 2 weeks of follow-up, the findings overlapped with diagnostic criteria for sIUGR type 2, discordancy of EFW (>25%) and persistent Absent End Diastolic Flow (AEDF) in Doppler UA donor, hence we decided to diagnose this pregnancy with ‘Atypical TTTS’. As shown in As polyhydramnios became more severe, we explained to the patient in detail the natural progression of TTTS, as it is necessary to perform selective fetoscopic laser photocoagulation (SFLP) and amnioreduction at 26 weeks’ gestational age, the complications that may arise from the procedures, such as persistent/recurrent TTTS, iatrogenic preterm premature rupture of membranes (iPPROM), preterm labor, chorioamniotic separation, placental abruption, and amniotic fluid embolism in the mother. The patient and her family understood, signed the informed consent form, and agreed with our decision to perform SFLP followed by amnioreduction. Before the laser procedure, we intravenously administered two ketoprofen suppositories as tocolytics and cefotaxime (1 g) for antibiotic prophylaxis.
The operation was performed by the fetal therapy and diagnostic’s team leading by Dr Dudy Aldiansyah, M.Ked (OG), Sp.OG, Subsp.KFm. The patient was placed in a right lateral recumbent position. To maximize the view of the placenta, the left side of the maternal abdomen was selected as the entry point. Under epidural anesthesia, the procedure was ultrasound-guided (GE Voluson P6 BT 16, Seongnam, GE, Ultrasound Korea, LTD), and an 8 Fr curved operating sheath was introduced into the uterine cavity. A 600 µm Nd-YAG laser fiber with a power of 60 watts in continuous mode in the laser source setting was used in this procedure. We found that in the anterior placenta, five vascular anastomoses were successfully ablated, and we continued to perform amnioreduction about 2,5 l untill the MVP in the recipient sac was 7 cm. The surgical time was 35 min .
For postsurgical tocolytics, we used 100 mg ketoprofen suppositories and 400 mg micronized progesterone vaginally every 12 h until uterine contraction resolved, which occurred in 1 week. The patient received oral cefixime 200 mg every 12 h for 14 days and vitamin C tablets 100 mg daily until delivery. Twenty-four hours after SFLP and amnioreduction, the donor twin developed transient bradycardia (107 BPM) but stabilized the next day (range, 115–125 BPM). Five days after laser surgery, the patient developed amniotic fluid leakage or iPPROM but with normal amniotic fluid (MVP of the recipient twin, 6.29 cm), which was uncomfortable and very afraid because she reported feeling a vaginal discharge, with little by little flowing out continuously, and she asked if there was a way to stop it. An amniopatch was offered to the patient to seal amniotic fluid leakage. The risks of the amniopatch procedure, such as infection, labor, iatrogenic amniotic bands, and fetal death, are discussed. The patient was also informed of the risks of infection from blood product administration and that spontaneous sealing of the membranes could occur without amniopatch, but the rate is not known. After signing the informed consent form, the patient and the patient’s family agreed to continue the procedure. We decided to perform amniopatch using autologous blood products, with 350 cc of blood extracted 24 h before the amniopatch procedure. Our institute protocol included 30 ml thrombocyte concentrate and 30 ml cryoprecipitate injected directly into the recipient twin’s amniotic sac under local anesthesia (20 cc of lidocaine, 1% noradrenaline) and US guidance. The leak ceased at 7 days after the amniopatch procedure, with normal recipient and donor MVP during follow-up between 4.20 and 6.29 cm and 2.74 to 3.61 cm, respectively. There were no signs of chorioamnionitis. The patient and fetus were then followed by antenatal care and ultrasound weekly.
The patient’s blood pressure showed a gradual increase over a week-by-week observation period, and 80 mg of low-dose aspirin once daily and 10 mg of calcium channel blocker were added to the patient’s treatment regimen. The patient developed severe headache at the gestational age of 34 weeks. The donor twin develops a reversed a-wave in the Doppler DV waveform. Pregnancy was terminated by caesarean section due to preeclampsia with severe features, but elective caesarean section was recommended routinely between 36+0 and 36 +6 weeks of gestation after laser surgery for TTTS in uncomplicated pregnancies. The donor and recipient twin weights were 1,120 g and 1,837 g, respectively (EFW discordance 39%, which was greater than 25%). The APGAR scores for donor and recipient twins were 3/4 and 6/8, respectively. The donor twin died 6 days after delivery due to respiratory failure, and the recipient twin survived. Neonatal echocardiography of the surviving twin showed no tricuspid regurgitation or right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) obstruction .
We cannot describe the long-term outcomes because the patient and the surviving baby did not return for follow-up for unknown reasons, even though we told them to come to our hospital.
We want to know if any different atypical versus typical TTTS placenta, so we examine the morphology of placenta in our case, the placenta was MCDA measuring 16.0×12.5×2.2 cm and weighing 686.2 g. The recipient’s placental territory appeared much darker, and the donor’s placental territory was paler and greenish due to meconium staining and fetal distress. Examination of the umbilical cord showed the recipient cord insertion at the marginal part of the placenta recipient territory, it measured 30.0 cm in length and 2.6 cm in diameter, and had three vessels. The donor twin’s cord insertion was at the center part of the placenta donor territory, the cord ismeasured 24.0 cm in length and 2.2 cm in diameter, and had three vessels. There was no velamentous cord insertion, which is found in ~12% of monochorionic twin placentas. The estimated placenta sharing was ~60% for the recipient and 40% for the donor, unlike small sharing placenta in the donor territory, as in the sIUGR twin. We found five coagulation sites in the chorionic plate of the placenta.