In July 2017, a 31-year-old male presented to our department with palpebral and right supraorbital swelling associated with nasal obstruction, posterior rhinorrhoea, pulsating headache and exophthalmos. The patient, from Venice, Italy, had worked as a high-school teacher since the age of twenty-five. The symptoms had first appeared one month earlier, and the right exophthalmos had progressively worsened, despite antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and oral corticosteroid.
In 2008, the patient had undergone endoscopic sinus surgery and septoplasty at a different centre for chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps. The patient was immunocompetent, and not suffering from cystic fibrosis or other chronic diseases.
Investigations
On admission, the endoscopic evaluation revealed scar tissue between the middle turbinate and the lateral wall of the right nasal fossa, with purulent drain from the frontal recess; no nasal polyps were found.
An emergent brain CT scan showed an expansive cystic lesion of about 50 x 40 mm with calcified walls without contrast enhancement, occupying the right frontal sinus, with partial erosion of the orbital roof and extending to the anterior cranial fossa (shown in ).
Treatment
Emergent endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS) was scheduled in order to treat the expansive frontal sinus mucocele. Under general anaesthesia, the patient was placed supine in an anti-Trendelenburg position and both nostrils were decongested with cottonoid soaked in a solution of adrenaline 1:100,000 with 2% lidocaine. A frontal sinusotomy was then performed, drilling out the frontal sinus floor between the lamina papyracea laterally and the nasal septum medially (Draf IIb), shown in ). After incision of the cystic lesion capsule, the purulent content was drained and the mucocele was widely marsupialized in order to prevent reaccumulation (shown in ). Nasal packing with absorbable oxidized regenerated cellulose was placed into the frontal sinus.
Purulent material was plated onto sheep blood agar (COS; bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France) and chocolate agar with PolyVitex (bioMérieux). Gram staining was performed. The isolates were identified as Bcc using a commercial test (Vitek GN, bioMérieux), and the identification was confirmed by the ID32 GNI test (bioMérieux).Additionally, polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism
(PCR-RFLP) analysis was used to identify the isolate. Antibiotic susceptibility testing was performed using a microdilution method (Sensititre panel; Biomedical, Scorzè, Venice, Italy) and confirmed by the E-test (AB Biodisk, Solna, Sweden). Microbiological examination of the specimen showed Burkholderia contaminans growth, resistant to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, ampicillin sulbactam and ciprofloxacin, but sensitive to levofloxacin, administered postoperatively for 8 days. Histopathological examination of the tissue obtained from the left frontal sinus revealed: pseudostratified columnar epithelium predominated, associated with areas of squamous and cuboidal epithelium. The cellular infiltrate of neutrophils, lymphocytes and plasma cells was consistent with chronic inflammation. The surrounding bone showed osteoblastic activity with osteoid and sclerosis alternating with areas of active bone destruction.
Two days after the procedure, the patient’s exophthalmos and headache already showed satisfactory improvement, and he was discharged six days later with no visual, neurological or systemic complication. Contrast-enhanced MRI performed one month after surgery showed complete lesion removal without evidence of recurrence (shown in ). At the same point in time, i.e. one month after the procedure, the exophthalmos was completely resolved. The last endoscopic evaluation, performed 12 months after surgery, was still negative, as was a control MRI performed after 12 months (shown in ).