A 19-year-old man presented to our otolaryngology department in August 2017 with a table tennis-sized lump in his left chest wall and right axilla and pain in right rib that lasted for 1 month. The patient’s history was free of relevant diseases. The patient’s family history and genetic history are free of genetically related diseases and free of hematologic disorders such as lymphoma. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed enlargement of the right axillary lymph nodes, indicating neoplastic lesions and destruction of the right eighth rib bone. The diagnosis of ALCL was confirmed using a right axillary lymph node biopsy and immunohistochemical analysis . Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumor cells were positive for ALK and CD30. The Ki-67 proliferation index was 90%. The patient was diagnosed with stage IV ALCL and had an international prognostic index (PI) score of 3. The patient received induction chemotherapy, including 8 courses of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, etoposide, and prednisolone (CHOEP). The patient underwent clinical evaluation after completing 8 cycles of chemotherapy. Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) revealed bilateral neck and axillary lymph node enlargement and increased metabolism. Subsequently, the patient underwent neck and axillary sensitization radiotherapy (Dt 3960cGy/22F). Three months later, a substantial subcutaneous mass measuring approximately 1 cm was palpated in the left lower abdomen. The patient was diagnosed with relapsed/refractory ALCL after an abdominal mass biopsy . PET–CT (August 29, 2019) demonstrated multiple mediastinal, abdominal, and retroperitoneal lymph node enlargement that were partially fused. The largest one was approximately 4.9 ×3.3 cm, and the SUVmax was 19.6. Right pleural thickening, a slightly low-density shadow in the left kidney, multiple muscles, and subcutaneously increased metabolism were also observed. These new changes were considered lymphoma infiltration. The bilateral cervical and axillary lymph nodes increased in size, and metabolism was enhanced. Increased local metabolism of the stomach, small intestine, and transverse colon was also observed. One cycle of dexamethasone, high-dose cytosine arabinoside, cisplatin (DHAP) chemotherapy was initiated on September 4, 2019. The patient presented with abdominal pain on September 23, 2019. Abdominal imaging revealed a significant increase and enlargement of the peripancreatic, retroperitoneal, and mesenteric root lymph nodes, indicating tumor progression. New flaky low-density shadows appeared in the left kidney, indicating a potential tumor invasion. Imaging assessment of the retroperitoneal mass showed that the stable disease (SD) developed into progressive disease (PD). The patient began taking crizotinib (250 mg twice daily) on October 1, 2019, for 1 month. BV at a dose of 100 mg was administered to the patient on October 29, 2019. On the day of BV infusion, the patient underwent an abdominal CT examination. Compared with the previous abdominal images (September 25, 2019), the number of enlarged retroperitoneal and mesenteric lymph nodes was significantly reduced. The range of patchy, low-density lesions in the left kidney also decreased significantly. Abdominal imaging findings were evaluated as partial remission (PR). The patient learned of the clinical trial of tandem ASCT and CAR30 T cell infusion in r/r CD30 + lymphoma being conducted at our hospital, to further enhance the curative effect, he volunteered to participate in the clinical trial. The trial was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, and the study was registered with the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR, number ChiCTR2100053662). Informed consent was obtained by the patient and her family according to the Declaration of Helsinki. On December 21, doxorubicin hydrochloride liposome with the BEAM regimen pretreatment was performed. Autologous hematopoietic stem cells (4.94 × 106/kg CD34+ cells) were infused on December 28, and CD30 (24.00 × 106/kg) CAR-T cells were infused three times. The three infusion doses of CD30 CAR-T were 5 × 106/kg, 5 × 106/kg and 1.4 × 107/kg respectively (January 1, 2, and 3, 2020). The structure is as shown in . CAR30 transgene copy numbers in the peripheral blood was detected by droplet digital polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR) . After infusion of anti-CD30 CAR T-cells, grade 1 cytokine release syndrome (CRS) was observed, and immune effector cell-associated neurotoxicity syndrome (ICANS) was not occur. The serum ferritin and interleukin-6 levels were assessed after cell infusion . The engraftment times of neutrophil and platelet after hematopoietic stem cells infusion were both 14 days. The results of the PET–CT evaluation 3 months after treatment showed that the retroperitoneal soft tissue focus was significantly reduced or had disappeared . PET–CT assessments at 3, 6, and 12 months after autologous stem-cell transplantation (ASCT) and CAR T-cell therapy showed sustained complete remission (CR). The latest PET–CT showed that the size of the lymph nodes in the left neck IIA region was similar, and metabolism was slightly reduced compared to previous PET–CT images (July 16, 2020). Approximately 4 years after ASCT and CAR T-cell therapy, the patient was disease-free. The timeline of clinical treatment and disease status is shown in .