24-year-old female patient was referred to our hospital because of spiking fever, arthritis in the proximal interphalangeal joints, wrists, and knees. She had been diagnosed with a systemic type of AOSD. The onset occurred 9 months previously, with acute attack of fever, bilateral tenderness and swelling over both wrists and knee joints, sore throat, and hyperferritinemia (17,900 ng/mL). The patient was diagnosed with AOSD according to the criteria of Yamaguchi et al. , and started on prednisolone (60 mg/day) and methotrexate (10 mg/week). However, the spiking fever was sustained, and thus tacrolimus (3 mg/day) and tocilizumab (8 mg/kg, every 4 weeks) were combined with these treatments. During that time, the patient reported some improvement. However, despite this treatment, her arthralgia increased and elevated C-reactive (CRP) was observed. Tocilizumab (8 mg/kg) was switched to infliximab (3 mg/kg), however, elevated serum levels of ferritin and CRP were sustained . She had no episodes of persistent fever of unknown origin, and no symptoms such as arthritis, and skin rash that were indicative of autoimmune disease. There was no family history for autoimmune or autoinflammatory diseases.
Upon examination, inflammatory arthritis of the ankle and knee joints coinciding with the erythematous skin rash on her trunk and spiking fever (> 39 °C) were evident. Laboratory data on admission were as follows : leukocytes, 19,000/μL (neutrophils, 90.0%); hemoglobin, 9.6 g/dL; platelets, 31.7 × 104/μL; erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 41 mm (1h); C-reactive protein, 19.85 mg/dL; soluble interleukin-2 receptor, 1340 IU/L; and ferritin, 1719 ng/mL. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) antigenemia showed negative results. Urinary infection was confirmed and treated with antibiotics. Infliximab and tacrolimus were stopped, and she was treated with prednisolone and methotrexate (16 mg/week). However, her AOSD was not remitted, and hyperferritinemia was observed. Therefore, the dose of prednisolone was transiently increased to 60 mg/day and tacrolimus (TAC) was switched to cyclosporin A (CyA, 100 mg/day) because of lack of efficacy. In addition, colchicine (1.5 mg/day) was added to these treatments. The combined treatments silenced the disease activity of AOSD, and the dose of prednisolone was successfully tapered. Elevated levels of serum amyloid A (SAA; 773 µg/mL) and ferritin (1719 ng/mL) were also normalized. An analysis of the Mediterranean fever (MEFV) gene (exons 1–10) was performed by direct sequencing, but no mutation was detected. Six weeks later, the patient was discharged from the hospital. The administration of colchicine was continued and the dose of PSL was gradually tapered . The patient’s clinical course remained unchanged and AOSD was successfully controlled in remission under the low-dose steroid treatment (PSL 10 mg/day) over the subsequent 15 months of follow-up .