A 37-year-old man has presented with a history of unilateral painless scrotal mass for many years. Also, he had a period of voiding difficulty and frequency. In the past medical history, he underwent a herniorrhaphy due to a right scrotal hernia in his sixth and right hydrocelectomy about 13 years ago. He has an 8-year-old daughter now and is not smoker. In his examination his kidneys were not palpable and no sign of VHLD detected. Lymphadenopathy was not palpated. There were diffused skin lipoma-like masses all over his body. The ultrasonography (US) of these masses about 2 years ago had shown multiple lipoma-like cyst in the left breast (about 10 to 30 mm in sizes around the nipple) and a benign left axillary lymph node (about 10 × 20mm in size).
The US of kidneys revealed multiple cysts in variable sizes in the cortex of the both kidneys (The biggest of them in the Lt. kidney was 39.5 × 30mm in size and in the right was about 21 × 18.5 mm). And also reported “it can be a sign of ADPKD and furthermore screening is needed”. The US of scrotum showed right testis shrinking with heterogeneous parenchyma (mild to moderate atrophy). Also in the head of the right epididymis, there was a hypervascular area (about 26 ×35mm in size and consists of multiple cysts separated by thick echogenic septa). Its report emphasized on “the adhesion of these cysts to the upper pole of the right testis Is presenting a neoplastic mass”. Besides, varicose veins were detected.
The semen analysis result was totally in an infertile range. In details, it was liquefaction=more than 60min (normal range=less than 20 min), sperm count=less than 5 million/ml (the least for fertilization is more than 10 million per ml), viability=less than 35% (normal range=more than 55%). The tumor markers (LDH, alpha feto protein and beta HCG) were within normal range. The conventional laboratory data before the surgery were normal totally (FBS=100, BUN=13, CR=1.06, Na=141, K=4, WBC=6000, Hb=13.8).
Finally, the patient underwent right orchiectomy via inguinal approach because of the US’s report emphasizing on the adhesion of the multiple cysts of the right epididymis to the upper pole of the right testis which were presenting a neoplastic mass. Considering the pathological study, in the macroscopic view, the testis was creamy with a not-invaded capsule. It was about 4.2×3.5×3 cm in size. There were no signs of any suspicious changes in the spermatic cord. But in the supralateral of the epididymis, a 3 cm solid-cystic yellowish to brown tumoral mass was seen. The mass had lobulated borders with no obvious invasion to the testis.
In the microscopic sections, cystic spaces containing colloid like eosinophilic material and papillary projections lined by a layer of epithelium . Other areas showed sheets and tubular structures of cells with abundant clear cytoplasm .
The pathology confirmed PCE and suggested for more studies for making it clear whether it is related to VHLD or not. Unfortunately, he did not accept to pass the genetic testing studies. But the IHC was negative for VHLD. The computed tomography (CT) of the abdominal and pelvic after the surgery was totally normal. Only there were multiple hypodense cystic foci in the cortex of the left kidney. The report mentions matching these cysts with the US’s results.
To date, 5 months after surgery, the patient is alive with no evidence of disease recurrence or metastasis signs. To consult the ophthalmologist, the suspicious dilatation in the retina could be an initial presentation of a retinal angioma. To consult the neurosurgeon, the brain MRI was a defined border mass in the para sagittal view of cerebellum without post contrast abnormal enhancement. However, the size of the mass was not noticeable but it could be an initial of a cerebellar hemangioblastoma. Altogether, the evidence shows a unilateral papillary cystadenoma of epididymis with an atrophied parenchymal of right testis, suggesting a clinical follow-up and more investigation for VHLD.