A 61-year-old man was presented to the hospital with sporadic fever and an exudative mass, located on the right gluteal region.
One year before the medical oncology consultation, the patient noticed a small nodule located on the right gluteal region, which kept growing and became exudative and bloody. For several weeks the patient refused to leave his house, as he was uncomfortable due to physical constraints. When he decided to attend the emergency department, the lesion was about 9 cm in diameter and was bloody and exudative. The patient also reported episodic fever, predominantly in the morning, in the week before the consultation. A biopsy was performed on that same day, and the patient was reassessed a few weeks later on a medical oncology consultation.
The patient had a history of arterial hypertension, type 2 diabetes, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
The patient had a history of arterial hypertension, type 2 diabetes, and COPD.
On the first medical oncology consultation, the patient presented a 10 cm (diameter) malodorous painless mass, located on the right gluteal region, with hard consistency and bloody seropurulent discharge. Upon physical examination, two painless inguinal lymph nodes were also found, both fixed, with hard consistency and diameter of 2 cm on the left side and 3.5 cm on the right side.
Anatomopathological analysis: The anatomopathological examination of the right gluteal mass confirmed the diagnosis of MCC positive for cytokeratin AE1AE3 and chromogranin.
Imaging studies were obtained. An abdomen and pelvic computed tomography highlighted a large mass in the right gluteal region measuring 9.6 cm × 3.2 cm × 9.0 cm (in transverse, anteroposterior and longitudinal diameters, respectively), and a similar nodular soft tissue lesion with 2.4 cm × 1.5 cm × 2.4 cm in the vicinity of the mass. Large inguinal heterogeneous lymph nodes were also identified, with the largest one located on the right side (2.6 cm × 1.8 cm × 5.0 cm).
Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the existence of an expansive, heterogeneous lesion with lobulated contour and exophytic component located in the right gluteal region, involving the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and extending to the right gluteus maximus muscle in its inner portion (7.5 cm × 4.8 cm × 7.7 cm; Figure ). The images confirmed other subcutaneous lesion, with similar characteristics, measuring 2.4 cm × 1.2 cm, and three other small nodules, permeating the muscles between the gluteus maximus and maxillary muscles near the right hip. Bilateral inguinal lymph nodes, with 3.8 cm × 1.9 cm and 3.3 cm × 2.0 cm, were also evident and highly suspicious. The exam also revealed two bone lesions, one in the sacrum (2.8 cm) and another in the left iliac wing (2.4 cm), both compatible with bone metastasis. However, these lesions were not visible in the bone scintigraphy that was also performed, which in turn revealed two other bone lesions on the body of D11 and in the ninth right costal arch, with uncertain etiology and suspected of metastasis, in the additional MRI.