A French 44-year-old man without noticeable medical history was admitted for a first episode of acute global heart failure. He was of Caucasian phenotype and had never travelled outside of the north-east region of France. He complained about lower limbs oedema and new-onset New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III dyspnoea. His vital signs were normal at admission: blood pressure 110/70 mmHg, heart rate 80 b.p.m., respiratory rate 15/min, oxygen saturation of 96% on room air, and temperature at 37°C. Heart sounds were regular, lower limbs oedema up to his knees were noticed without jugular venous distension nor hepatojugular reflux. Bilateral inspiratory crackles were heard on auscultation.
Electrocardiogram was normal, and first-line blood test showed an elevation of NT-pro-BNP [1674 pg/mL (reference range < 300 pg/mL)], with a mild inflammatory syndrome [leucocytes 14.3 × 109/L (reference range 4–10 × 109/L) and C-reactive protein 15.8 mg/L (reference range < 5 mg/L)]. Renal function was normal [93 µmol/L (reference range 59–104 µmol/L), estimated glomerular filtration rate 86 mL/min/1.73 m2] and we did not notice eosinophilia [eosinophils 0.2 × 109/L (reference range 0.1–0.4 × 109/L)]. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a dilated and hypokinetic left ventricle (left ventricle ejection fraction at 40%). An atypical appearance filled the left ventricular apex ( and , Video S1). No significant valvulopathy was identified, but right and left side pressures were elevated, and right cavities were dilated and hypokinetic. Finally, pericardium had no abnormality. The patient was therefore hospitalized in cardiology ward, intravenous loop diuretics were administered, and early clinical evolution was favourable.
Coronary angiogram was normal, but a left ventricle apical filling was observed during ventriculography ( and , Video S2). Haemodynamic examination revealed a dip-and-plateau pattern on the left ventricular pressure curve . Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) was performed and showed a hypo-intense T1/T2 signal circumscribed to left ventricle apex assessed by balanced steady-state free precession sequence without immediate gadolinium enhancement but with sub-endocardial late enhancement, which are all typical criteria of EMF ( and , Videos S3 and S4). Second-line blood tests were negative regarding anti-nuclear antibodies. Hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and human immunodeficiency virus serologies were negative, as well as serologies such as schistosomiasis.
At first, medical treatment of chronic heart failure was proposed [namely Bisoprolol 5 mg two times a day (BID), Ivabradine 5 mg BID, Eplerenone 50 mg once a day (OD), Sacubitril/Valsartan 24 mg/26 mg BID, Furosemide 125 mg OD] associated with oral anticoagulation (Warfarin 5 mg OD) because of the increased thromboembolic risk. The patient was discharged after a few days and followed cardiovascular rehabilitation programme.
In the following months, two episodes of congestive heart failure occurred, leading to two unplanned hospitalizations with intravenous administration of loop diuretics and transient inotropic support. In light of unfavourable evolution, low peak VO2 and post-capillary pulmonary hypertension with low pulmonary vascular resistances, a pre-transplantation assessment was started.
The patient had an elective orthotopic heart transplantation 9 months after initial diagnosis. Ventilator-associated pneumonia and acute renal failure needing transient haemodialysis occurred during the post-operative phase. The patient was finally discharged from hospital 3 months after surgery. Macroscopic view and anatomopathological examinations of the explanted heart confirmed endocardial fibrosis, circumscribed to the left ventricle, without valvular lesion .
Six months after heart transplantation the patient was NYHA Class I. His medications included Bisoprolol 5 mg OD, Furosemide 20 mg OD, plus antirejection drugs. Echocardiographic follow-up did not show any sign of fibrosis recurrence, nor transplant rejection. His four children (two boys and two girls) had normal cardiovascular examination, electrocardiogram, and transthoracic echocardiography.