Local Institutional Review Board approval was obtained, and the patient’s guardian gave their written, informed consent to publish this case.
A 49-year-old Japanese woman with a history of depression was found in an unconscious state by her husband after ingesting an unknown amount of boric acid, mirtazapine (1950 mg), and sennosides (780 mg) and transported to a local medical facility. She had unstable circulation so she was transported to our Department of Acute Critical Care Medicine. On arrival, her vital signs were as follows: Glasgow Coma Scale, E1V1M1; blood pressure, 45/13 mmHg; heart rate, 190 beats per minute; and body temperature, 37.0 °C. She had systemic diffuse erythema. There were no other physical findings. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed atrial fibrillation tachycardia. She received tracheal intubation with mechanical ventilation. A cardiac echocardiogram depicted diffuse hypokinesis of wall motion with an ejection fraction of 20%. Chest roentgenography revealed no findings. Whole-body computed tomography to evaluate her brain condition, residual drugs in her stomach, and accompanying lesions indicated bilateral dorsal lung consolidation, suggesting aspiration . The results of an arterial blood gas analysis, cell blood count, and biochemical study are shown in Table . Soon after, she exhibited pulseless electrical activity; spontaneous circulation was obtained by advanced life support. However, she experienced repeated episodes of pulseless electrical activity, and percutaneous cardiopulmonary bypass was required due to unstable circulation. An emergency coronary angiogram was negative. She was admitted to an intensive care unit and underwent additional continuous hemodialysis filtration due to acute kidney injury with anuria. She remained in a deep coma state without sedation. On the second hospital day, cardiac motion ceased on the echocardiogram, but her atrial fibrillation rhythm continued. As her husband strongly wished to continue these treatments, we selected to continue them until cardiac standstill. However, cardiac motion was obtained again on the fourth hospital day and stable spontaneous circulation with sinus rhythm was obtained on the sixth hospital day; thus, percutaneous cardiopulmonary bypass was withdrawn. She exhibited hair loss. She remained in a persistent unconscious state; thus, tracheostomy was performed on the seventh hospital day. Sufficient urinary flow was obtained, and her potassium level remained within the normal limits; thus, continuous hemodialysis filtration was withdrawn on the tenth hospital day. Head magnetic resonance imaging showed signal change in the bilateral white matter and caudate nuclei, suggesting hypoperfusional cerebral ischemia. As she developed right leg dry necrosis, which was induced by cannulation for percutaneous cardiopulmonary bypass, leg amputation was performed on the 22nd hospital day. She also developed bilateral corneal ulcers, which was possibly due to boric acid poisoning.
Stable spontaneous respiration was finally obtained on the 30th hospital day; thus, mechanical ventilation was withdrawn. Systemic erythema gradually subsided with desquamation. She displayed spontaneous eye opening and spontaneous movement of her extremities; however, she could not respond to any commands. She was transferred to a local medical facility in a persistent unconscious state on the 39th hospital day. A subsequent examination revealed that her serum concentrations of boric acid and mirtazapine on arrival were 560.49 mg/L and 1270 ng/mL, respectively . She could speak simple words for commands and swallow food but was unable to walk; thus, at 6 months after collapse, she was totally dependent in her activities of daily living.