We present a 63-year-old male with past medical history of coronary artery disease, diabetes mellitus type II, hypercholesteremia, hypertension, cerebral vascular accident (2011), status post kidney transplant with a graft on the left pelvis in September 2014 on treatment with tacrolimus, who presented to the clinic for evaluation of bilateral inguinal hernia. On physical examination he had bilateral palpable inguinal hernias, with the right one larger and only partially reducible.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed a moderate right-sided inguinal hernia containing fat and nondilated small bowel. On the left side, it showed a smaller inguinal hernia containing preperitoneal fat, a portion of the urinary bladder, and possibly a portion of the transplant ureter. In addition, the CT scan showed a left lower quadrant transplanted kidney with mild hydroureteronephrosis . He was consented for robotic-assisted inguinal hernia repair with mesh, with the possibility for conversion to open.
The patient was positioned supine and the abdomen was prepped and draped in the usual sterile surgical fashion. The urology team performed a rigid cystoscopy, catheterized the transplanted ureter, and injected indocyanine green (ICG) dye. An open-ended catheter was left in place. We positioned three 8-mm robotic ports on the superior abdomen and docked the robot from the patient’s right side. We could appreciate a large direct hernia on the right side. The small bowel was reduced, and the defect measured 4 × 4 cm. The smaller direct and indirect defects on the left side measured 3 × 3 cm with a sliding bladder and preperitoneal fat into the defect.
We proceeded with a high peritoneal flap from one anterior superior iliac spine to the other. On the right side, the preperitoneal space was dissected. The sac was abandoned distally to avoid further dissection into the scrotum and to protect the elements of the cord. The spermatic vessel and vas deferent were dissected and preserved. The Retzius space was reached at the midline. On the left side, using a Firefly filter, it was possible to clearly differentiate the position of the transplanted ureter. The preperitoneal space was dissected however, it was more difficult than the right side due prior surgical manipulation. The spermatic vessels and the vas deferens were safely dissected away from the transplanted ureter. The preperitoneal fat, and the sliding urinary bladder were reduced from the defect. No bladder or retroperitoneal injury were identified, and hemostasis was reviewed as well.
Both hernia defects were closed with running 2-0 barbed suture, taking only bites of the ilio-pubic tract, protecting the nerves, and the posterior aspect of the rectus and conjoint tendon. On the left side, a 15 × 10 cm self-gripping mesh was positioned. The mesh was completely open with no wrinkles or folds and was placed anterior to the transplanted ureter, whose position was confirmed using Firefly filter.
On the right side, a 16 × 12 cm anatomical mesh was positioned and fixated with interrupted sutures of 2-0 Vicryl, two superiorly and two in the Cooper’s ligament, taking bites of the left side self-gripping mesh as well on the overlap area at midline. We confirmed the position of the mesh and its relation with the ureter using Firefly . At this point, no further dissection was necessary, and we closed the peritoneal flap and gaps with running 3-0 barbed suture.
The patient was discharged home with oral pain medication on the same day.