An 18-year-old boy with Behçet’s disease (HLA-A26 positive) who had previously undergone aortic valve replacement with an 18-mm ATS Open Pivot AP360 mechanical aortic valve prosthesis (ATS Medical, Inc, Minneapolis, MN) at the age of 12 years, presented sudden-onset general fatigue and was emergently transferred to the regional hospital. Since initial aortic valve replacement, 10 mg a day of prednisolone sodium succinate, 12 mg once weekly of methotrexate, 750 mg every 4–6 weeks of infliximab, and 35 mg every 2 weeks of alendronate sodium hydrate had been administered.
Chest X-ray showed displacement of the implanted mechanical valve . From a retrospective point of view, slight displacement of the valve prosthesis had been already confirmed 1 week ago at the scheduled follow-up . An echocardiogram revealed mobile valve prosthesis and severe aortic regurgitation. Just before leaving for our hospital for surgical treatment, a completely detached valve prosthesis was floating in the ascending aorta .
On arrival, the valve prosthesis was stuck to the transverse arch . Emergent removal of the previous mechanical valve from the aortic arch and redo aortic valve replacement were performed under total circulatory arrest. After a removal of fibrous tissues around annulus on where previous valve prosthesis was placed, 14 pairs of pledgeted 2–0 polyester terephthalate braided, non-everting mattress suture from deep subannular left ventricular endocardium to the aortic wall just above the true annulus were placed to prevent recurrent detachment of implanted valve prosthesis. After that, a newly fashioned 24-mm ATS Open Pivot AP360 valve could be implanted in the supra-annular position without any annular enlargement procedures. The patient was back to the intensive care unit with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support. Histopathology of the surrounding tissue around a previous valve prosthesis showed no bacterial infection sign, then only inflammatory change was noted .
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was successfully decannulated 5 days later. Intra-arterial balloon pump and hemodialysis could be weaned off on post-operative day 8. Intra-cranial computed tomography was performed on post-operative day 29, which revealed the hypoxic ischemic change in bilateral basal ganglia and multiple old microinfarctions. Left ventricular dysfunction has remained since then, but catecholamine support could be discontinued 2 months later. Now 3 months have been passed since the emergent surgery. He was still supported by phosphodiesterase III inhibitor, but no longer supported by mechanical ventilator. Left ventricular end-diastolic diameter and ejection fraction were 43 mm and 25%, respectively.
Sixty mg a day of soluble predonine had been initiated since post-operative day 13, which then was gradually tapered to 30 mg a day for 3 months.