A 50-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to the department of urology of the Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University on 13 July 2020. She gradually developed perianal and pelvic floor pain and discomfort, right lower limb numbness, and involuntary vaginal discharge owing to recurrence and metastasis of cervical cancer more than half a year ago. Before admission, she could finish all daily activities herself at home, which meant that her functional status was satisfactory. Clinical diagnoses included rectovesicovaginal fistula, right ureteral obstruction urinary tract infection, and cervical carcinoma; she received external beam radiotherapy to the pelvis plus brachytherapy. On 22 July 2020, she accepted laparoscopic total pelvic exenteration, pelvic lymphadenectomy, sigmoidostomy, and radical cystectomy with construction of Bricker bladder, the whole procedure lasted 10 hours. On the first day after surgery, to prevent the formation of venous thrombosis, the doctor prescribed the appropriate dosage of low molecular heparin and anticoagulant drugs, such as rivaroxaban, on the basis of the results of Caprini score for venous thromboembolism and blood clotting tests. After surgery, the patient developed depression edema, pain, sensory dysfunction, and movement limitations in both lower extremities. Therefore, she was referred to a physical therapist on the first postoperative day and began physical therapy evaluation and intervention.
Time for evaluation: postoperative day 1 (DPO1), postoperative day 7 (DPO7), postoperative day 14 (DPO14), as well as the day of discharge.
The main results of DOP1 were detected as follows: leg circumference was 39.5 cm (35 cm for the left) at the widest point of the right calf, the right ankle circumference was 24.5 cm (21.8 cm for the left); obviously observable edema appeared in the right lower extremities and pitting edema existed in both lower extremities; numeric pain rating scale (NRS) score of the right inguinal region was 5/10, pain increased to NRS score 7/10 at 35° right hip passive flexion with right knee extension; sensory function assessment revealed a decrease in temperature sensation and light touch in the medial thigh of the right lower limb, suggesting a skin sensation disorder; manual muscle test (MMT) is a grading system of muscle strength including 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, where 0 indicates no muscle contraction identified with palpation, while 5 indicates that muscles can drive the joint across full range of motion (ROM) and against full resistance applied by the investigator. The MMT with the patient in supine position discovered that the MMT of right hip adductor muscle was grade 1 and the right hip flexor muscle with knee extension was grade 1, which indicates dysfunction of the adduction and flexion muscles of the right hip joint; the ROM assessment found the patient unable actively to adduct and flex the right hip with knee extension, suggesting limited active ROM of the right hip; the total score of the de Morton Mobility Index (DEMMI) was 0; the score of the Modified Barthel Index (MBI) was 35, indicating severe dependence (dependent in mobility and in self care) and it was unlikely that the patient would be discharged and allowed to return home.
Timely and early physiotherapy to postoperative patients effectively reduces postoperative complications and promotes rehabilitation . Therefore, according to the evaluation results of the patient in this case, we formulated the postoperative physical therapy program. The aims of physiotherapy designed by experienced physiotherapist were to reduce the edema of both lower limbs, relieve pain, enhance the sensory function of the medial femoral skin, improve muscle strength and active ROM of the right hip joint, and develop motor function and the activities of daily living (ADL), while preventing postoperative complications and controlling the length of hospital stay. The following shows the three main interventions: exercise therapy, mechanical stimulation, and electrical stimulation as well as manual therapy.
Therapeutic exercises were tailor-made with a specific type of exercise, standard procedure of movement, intensity as well as frequency and time . In addition, both position transfer training and ADL training were interspersed in the treatment process, with the purpose of enhancing the overall motor function, improving the ADL ability, and preventing the occurrence of complications.
Table demonstrates the mechanical stimulation including intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC) and graduated compression stockings (GCS). Moreover, neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES) was also applied to manage various clinical conditions .
Manual lymphatic drainage (MLD) massage remains widely accepted as a conservative treatment for lymphedema . It is thought to soften fibrosis and facilitate lymph drainage into venous circulation by stimulating superficial lymphatic contraction and rerouting lymphatic fluid into adjacent healthy lymphatic systems; thus, MLD may help prevent lymphedema after cancer surgery . MLD combined with elevation of the lower extremities by placing a pillow under the leg was also applied to the patient; this method has been described as having a good effect on reducing edema of the lower limbs . In the case of exposed skin, the therapist fixed the ankle joint with one hand and the other hand gently massaged from the medial malleolus to the medial side of the calf, along the path of the lymphatic duct for 3 minutes/time, two times/day for each side of the limb.
After 1 week of treatment, the edema of both lower limbs was alleviated. The circumference of the right calf decreased from 39.5 cm to 35.6 cm, and that of the left calf decreased from 35 cm to 34.7 cm, the right ankle decreased from 24.5 cm to 23 cm and the left ankle decreased from 21.8 cm to 20.4 cm . The ROM of the right hip increased, the active adductive range of motion increased from 0° to 10°, and the hip flexion increased from 0° to 5° under knee extension . The muscle strength of the right lower limb around the hip joint increased slightly, with the adductor muscle from MMT increasing from grade 1 to 1+ and the flexor muscle from MMT grade 1 to 1+ . The pain was also relieved slightly, the NRS score of right inguinal region decreased from 5/10 to 4/10 and hip flexion and knee flexion decreased from 7/10 to 6/10 . The overall score of DEMMI increased from 0 to 67 , and she still had difficulties in static equilibrium and dynamic equilibrium. The MBI score increased from 35 to 68 and the ADL improved to moderate dependence .
After 2 weeks of treatment, the functional status improved. The edema of both lower limbs was alleviated significantly. The circumference of the right calf decreased from 39.5 to 34.5 cm, the left calf decreased from 35 to 33.5 cm, the right ankle decreased from 24.5 to 21.3 cm, and the left ankle decreased from 21.8 to 19.1 cm . The ROM of the right hip increased, the active adductive range of motion increased from 0° to 15°, and hip flexion increased from 0° to 5° under knee extension . The muscle strength of the right lower limb muscles around the hip joint increased slightly, with the adductor muscle increasing from MMT grade 1 to 1+ and the flexor muscle from MMT grade 1 to 1+ . The pain was relieved, the NRS score of right inguinal region pain decreased from 5/10 to 3/10 and hip flexion and knee flexion decreased from 7/10 to 4/10 . The overall score of DEMMI increased from 0 to 74 . The MBI score increased from 35 to 80, and the ADL improved to basic self-care life , indicating that she was likely to be discharged to community living.
Overall, after 2 weeks of rehabilitation, the patient was satisfied with the 2-week intervention plan and the clinical effects. She achieved significant relief of edema and pain, which were embodied in the reduced lower limb muscle circumference and NRS. The mobility and ability of daily activities was also significantly improved, as shown by the increase in DEMMI and MBI, respectively. Hip motion, hip adductor, and extensor muscle strength increased slightly. She suggested that the therapeutic exercises for hip motion and muscle strength should be begun early before the surgery.