A 75-year-old gentleman presented with a one-week history of bright red rectal bleeding and fever. His past medical history included: history of human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis C, decompensated cirrhosis with ascites, portal hypertension, transient ischaemic attack, excess alcohol consumption and smoking. He also had severe aortic stenosis, for which he underwent a transcatheter aortic valve implantation, squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue, basal cell carcinoma and depression. His drug history included anti-retrovirals, aspirin, thiamine, vitamin B, folic acid, omeprazole and fluoxetine. On examination, the patient’s abdomen was distended with minimal tenderness. Digital rectal examination revealed active bleeding with no obvious masses or haemorrhoids. Blood investigations showed a haemoglobin level of 74 g/L, platelet count of 54 × 109/L and deranged clotting and liver function tests. A computed tomography (CT) angiogram demonstrated splenomegaly and ascites but did not identify any specific cause for rectal bleeding. He was optimised medically prior to endoscopy with intravenous antibiotics, tranexamic acid, vitamin K, human albumin solution and a transfusion of one unit of packed red blood cells.
Oesophago-gastro-duodenoscopy demonstrated patchy candidiasis and a single varix in the lower third of the oesophagus. There was mild portal hypertensive gastritis in the cardia and fundus of the stomach and the lower body of the stomach with no gastric varices. No fresh or altered blood was seen within the upper gastrointestinal tract. On flexible sigmoidoscopy, there was a visible point of continuous fresh bleeding on the anterior wall of rectum around 4 cm from the anal verge. With the exception of a possible rectal varix there was no overlying mucosal abnormality at this site. Bleeding persisted despite the application of eight resolution clips (Boston Scientific), adrenaline injections and rectal packing. The patient became haemodynamically unstable with a blood pressure of 70/46 mmHg. A massive haemorrhage protocol was activated with immediate transfusion of packed red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma, platelets and terlipressin.
A decision was made to insert a Sengstaken-Blakemore tube per rectum and to inflate the gastric balloon using 100 mL of air to tamponade the lower rectum. The oesophageal balloon was then inflated (external to the anus) to provide gentle traction to ensure that the balloon was firmly situated in the rectum and exerting optimal pressure onto the bleeding point on the rectal wall. The luminal port was connected to the catheter bag for free drainage and the bleeding stopped immediately. The blood pressure responded and increased to 95/54 mmHg. A subsequent CT angiogram demonstrated no evidence of haemorrhage with the effects of balloon tamponade . There was no free air noted in the abdomen and no obvious varices in the portal venous phase.
The patient was closely monitored in the intensive care unit following endoscopy where he remained haemodynamically stable. He was further managed with intravenous antibiotics and terlipressin. After 36 h, the haemoglobin level was 92 g/L with a platelet count of 70 × 109/L and the balloon was removed at this point to reduce the risk of pressure necrosis and ulceration of the compressed rectal wall. There were no further bleeding episodes with two months of follow-up.