A 34-year-old female, diagnosed with relapsing-remitting MS since the age of 26, suffered from 2008 to 2013 from recurrent attacks of optic neuritis that partially responded to corticosteroid treatment. The patient was initially treated with glatiramer acetate for 2 years, and then switched to natalizumab (NTM) treatment due to significant clinical relapses. John Cunningham virus seropositivity developed while the patient was receiving NTM intravenously and treatment was discontinued after 24 months. The patient subsequently switched to Alemtuzumab therapy (12 mg/day for 5 days). At the day prior to Alemtuzumab-initiation she had a white blood cell (WBC) count of 14,500/μL (absolute neutrophil count [ANC], 10,900/μL; lymphocytes, 2300/μL) (Additional file : Table S1). 9 weeks (Day 65) after the first Alemtuzumab induction therapy, during the standard follow-up, complete blood count revealed severe neutropenia (Grade III) (WBC count, 2000/μL; ANC, 899/μL) (Additional file : Table S1), a finding that led to her hospitalization. We tested for the presence of an underlying infection/pathology.
At the onset of neutropenia and throughout its duration, clinical, serological and ultrasonic investigation did not reveal any underlying pathology (Additional file : Table S1). At the onset of neutropenia, peripheral blood smear analysis (May-Grünwald-Giemsa staining) revealed numerous large granular cells (LGL cells) (approximately 80–90%) that had variable numbers of randomly distributed azurophilic granules in their cytoplasm . Neutrophils with apoptotic features were rare. To further verify the nature of LGL cells, immunophenotypic analysis of peripheral blood was performed by flow cytometry. Such analysis showed marked elevation in the percentage of a specific cell-subset that belongs to the NK lineage [CD3-CD(16 + 56+): 47%] (Additional file : Table S1). Moreover, the percentage of CD3 + CD8+ T cells was found elevated compared to the baseline levels (before Alemtuzumab initiation). Of notice, the fold increase of CD3 + CD8+ T over baseline values (fold increase: 1.5) was less than that of NK-cells (fold increase: 3.2).
At the 70th day post-Alemtuzumab initiation, neutropenia was further exacerbated (ANC = 500 /μL). The occurrence of sustained neutropenia for at least 5 days underscored the need for therapeutic intervention. The patient was placed on corticosteroids (prednisolone 25 mg for 3 days and subsequent dose tapering) and 3 days after, the values of WBC and ANC started to rise, reached normal levels (fourth day) and remained stable for 2 months . Neutropenia resolution is stable for at least 1 year of follow up. Peripheral blood smear analysis showed that LGL cells were markedly reduced (approximately 50%) after prednisolone initiation and were further diminished 1 month later. Flow cytometry analysis showed that the percentage of NK cells remained increased (48%), whereas the percentage of CD3 + CD8+ showed a significant reduction compared to their levels upon neutropenia development (27.3% versus 48%) (Additional file : Table S1). The constellation of neutropenia, along with normal hemoglobin and platelet counts, the expansion in the peripheral blood of LGL cells, in the absence of a common infection, and the responsiveness to corticosteroids were highly suggestive of an ensuing immune-mediated mechanism for Alemtuzumab-induced neutropenia.
During the phase of neutropenia, our patient was in disease remission, with moderate neurologic disability and an EDSS = 2 (pyramidal signs, mild ataxia). We did not perform MRI scanning during the short phase of neutropenia because there was no any disease exacerbation and our patient did not exhibit any new neurological signs. No signs of radiological disease activity were evident during alemtuzumab treatment and as shown in Additional file : Figure S1, the lesion size and signal intensity was slightly reduced after 6-months of therapy. Our patient responded well to alemtuzumab, exhibited disease stabilization and was thereof, she was placed in a follow up with neurological examination and assessment of her hematological profile every 1-month, for at least 1 year. Due to prolonged disease remission and the resolution of neutropenia we have not switched to another disease-modifying drug yet.