A 44-year-old male patient had been on regular hemodialysis three times per week, with 4-hour sessions since December 2003. The etiology of his renal failure was unknown and the patient had no systemic disease when hemodialysis was started.
Anamnesis revealed no family history of a serious disease 4 year before coronary bypass surgery for coronary artery disease was performed. The initial iPTH value of the patient measured at the beginning of hemodialysis was 74.5 ng/L and his clinical and laboratory findings for renal osteodystrophy were within acceptable limits. His follow-up parameters showed progressively increasing values of iPTH, along with Ca and P. In our patients, kidney transplantation is a good choice. But in our country, a large part of it is made via a living donor. Our patient does not have a living donor and cadaver donor cannot be found. Following phosphate control, calcitriol, paricalcitol and cinacalcet treatment have started. The level of iPTH in start of the cinacalcet in 2010 was 2121. Cinacalcet was first administered at 30 mcg/day in April 2010 for one month, at 60 mcg/day for another month, and when PTH values did not decrease sufficiently at 90 mcg/day for one year unit such time parathyroidectomy occurred.
CaxP values of the patient were consistently above 72 and the patient clinically suffered severe and widespread musculoskeletal pain during this period. Parathyroid MRI was performed when iPTH values went above 2000 ng/L, parathyroid glands were found to be significantly hyperplastic; however, parathyroid scintigraphy was normal. Lesions were 18x21 mm, 14x10 mm and 24x16 mm in size. In April 2011, painful, erythematous skin lesions were detected over and around the external malleolus of the right foot. In the next two months, erythematous skin lesions gained a necrosed character and spread into the malleolar and posterior tibial region and back of the ankle in both extremities. In the lower extremity, Doppler USG the arteries were found to be open and the patient received hyperbaric oxygen therapy for 30 sessions via the recommendation of the dermatology department. The patient showed no clinical signs of recovery and despite anti-biotherapy, debridement and protective measures, the skin lesions got infected and presented as intolerable, painful wounds. The patient was diagnosed with CUA and hospitalized for parathyroidectomy. All parathyroid glands were removed after having checked quick PTH intraoperatively .
A small amount of parathyroid tissue was intramuscularly auto-implanted into the right forearm when intraoperative value of the PTH was <300 ng/L. Skin lesions showed fast improvement in further follow-ups . On the 13th postoperative day, the iPTH value was 396.60 ng/L. Three months after parathyroidectomy, iPTH value was measured as 1197 pg/ml. After 6 months of medical treatment, iPTH was found as 970 ng/L and we decided to remove the implanted parathyroid tissue from the right forearm. Following surgical excision, the mean iPTH value was measured 430 ng/L.