A previously healthy 25-year-old Korean woman had a two-month history of progressive proximal muscle weakness. She had myalgia, fever, severe alopecia and a pruritic macular rash over her face, hand dorsum, upper anterior chest and upper back. She had difficulty in sitting up and could only move around using a wheelchair. She had no hypotonia, feeding difficulty, dysarthria, motor developmental delay, or orthopaedic abnormalities in infancy or early childhood. Her family history was unremarkable.
On physical examination, her vital signs were stable, and her body mass index was 21.8 kg/m2 (height 156 cm, weight 53 kg). Her bilateral muscle strength was grade 4/5 at neck flexion, 4/5 at shoulder abduction, 4/5 in wrist flexion, 4/5 in hand grip, 2/5 in the proximal hips, and 4/5 in ankle dorsiflexion. She had normal reflexes of the biceps brachii, patella, and ankle. Facial erythema involving the nasolabial folds and an erythematous rash on the upper back and anterior chest wall compatible with V-neck sign and shawl sign were observed. Skin ulcers were seen on the hand knuckles, right elbow and lateral aspect of the right thigh . She had widespread, palpable soft tissue thickening of the bilateral thigh and upper arm with tenderness, which turned out to be calcification. The laboratory results were as follows: white blood cell count, 6440/mm3 with lymphopenia (lymphocyte 322/mm3); haemoglobin, 9.1 g/dL; platelet, 148,000/mm3; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 72 mm/hr.; C-reactive protein (CRP), 0.44 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 95 (1–40) IU/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 30 (1–40) IU/L; creatine kinase (CK), 128 (20–270) IU/L; lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 553 (100–225) g/dL; myoglobin, 47.1 (0–106) ng/mL; aldolase, 10.8 (0–7.6) U/L; C3, 83 (83–193) mg/dL; and C4, 19 (15–57) mg/dL. The antinuclear antibody test was positive and showed a homogeneous pattern at a 1:160 dilution, but the anti-dsDNA, anti-Sm, anti-Ro, anti-La, anti-Scl-70, anti-centromere, anti-U1 ribonucleoprotein, anti-phospholipid, and anti-Jo-1 antibody tests were all negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the thigh showed symmetric diffuse muscle signal changes with an enhanced T2 signal and diffuse patchy contrast enhancement involving both the anterior and posterior compartments of the thigh . Her radiographs of shoulders and pelvis showed extensive, plaque-like soft tissue calcification of both hips, thighs and upper arms. Electromyography (EMG) showed fibrillations, positive sharp waves (PSWs), increased amplitudes of motor unit action potential (MUAP) and reduced interference pattern in the biceps. In the EMG of the tibialis and gastrocnemius muscles, fibrillations, PSWs, small and polyphasic MUAPs, and reduced interference pattern were identified. In contrast, the nerve conduction study revealed normal responses. A muscle biopsy of the right vastus lateralis demonstrated many degenerating and regenerating muscle fibers and perifascicular atrophy with moderate infiltration of inflammatory cells in the endomysial and perivascular areas, consistent with dermatomyositis. However, enzyme histochemical analysis showed centrally placed cores in the type I myofibers with nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide dehydrogenase (NADH) and succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) staining, suggesting CCD . Electron microscopy showed both tubuloreticular bodies in the endothelial cells and disorganized myofilaments with scattered short Z-bands and structured central cores in the muscle fibers, findings that suggested a diagnosis of CCD with superimposed dermatomyositis . Computed tomography of the chest and abdomen showed no evidence of interstitial lung disease or malignancy. The echocardiography was normal. The patient had no pathogenic mutations in the genes associated with congenital myopathy, including RYR1, SEPN1, ACTA1, AGRN, BIN1, CFL2, CHAT, CHRNA1, CHRNB1, CHRND, CHRNE, COLQ, DNM2, DOK2, GFPT1, IGHMBP2, KBTBD13, KLHL40, LAMB2, MTM1, MUSK, MYH7, RAPSN, SLC5A7, SMN1, TNNT1, TPM2, TPM3 and TTN, in hybridization capture-based next-generation sequencing. However, she had a heterozygous mutation in the NEB gene of c.8318G > A (p.Arg2773Gln), which is considered a variant of uncertain significance. Parental genetic testing was negative.
The patient received intravenous methylprednisolone at 100 mg daily for 3 days, followed by oral prednisolone at 25 mg twice a day and azathioprine at 50 mg daily. Additionally, she started regular physiotherapy and rehabilitation to maintain mobility. One month later, the patient had a significant improvement in muscle strength with a decrease in muscle enzyme levels . The muscle strength for hip flexion improved to grade 4/5 after 1 month of treatment and to grade 5/5 (normal) after 3 months of treatment. The patient did not complain of respiratory symptoms and had no abnormal findings on chest radiographs after 1 year of follow-up. Currently, the patient is able to walk on her own, and is taking 7.5 mg/day of prednisolone and 100 mg/day of azathioprine.