Our patient is a 14-year-old female with a history of a non-functioning micropituitary adenoma found incidentally during imaging for concussion, chronic constipation, reflux, anxiety, and depression presenting with complaints of persistent daily fevers for 6 weeks and a sixteen-pound weight loss over 2 months. A complete review of her medical history was significant for a family history of an aunt with type 1 diabetes, and a cousin with Sjogren’s syndrome. Two months prior to presentation she was diagnosed with Hand, Foot, and Mouth (HFM) disease. After brief resolution of HFM symptoms, she then began having daily fevers with the highest temperature of 104 °F. Review of systems was significant for daily fevers, cough, difficulty breathing, chest pain, headaches, sore throat, polyarthralgia, myalgias, nausea, and loss of appetite leading multiple providers to evaluate her for Covid-19. Previous workup had been significant for erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 48 mm/hr., hemoglobin of 9.1 g/dL, absolute lymphocyte count of 600/mcL, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 696, AST 281 U/L, and ALT 157 U/L. Blood and urine cultures were negative. She had multiple negative Covid-19 PCRs no evidence of a source of infection. Chart review on admission was significant for a sixteen-pound unintentional weight loss over 2 months, dropping from the 54th to 21st percentile on her weight growth curve with preservation of her height over that time frame. Her exam was remarkable for mild weakness, no overt arthritis, and dry plaques over her MCPs and elbows.
Initial broad differential for prolonged daily fevers of unknown origin and weight loss included but was not limited to infectious, malignant, or autoimmune etiologies. During the extensive workup, she continued to have multi-system involvement making diagnosis of the underlying etiology difficult. Her extensive infectious disease workup showed no evidence of an underlying infectious etiology including a negative next-generation sequencing of microbial cell-free DNA evaluation. Workup for malignancy was negative including bone marrow evaluation .
The evaluation confirmed suspicion for autoimmune disease with creatine kinase (CK) of 217 U/L, aldolase 14.9 U/L, ferritin 1641 ng/mL, anti-SS-A/Ro antibody 1.5 AI, anti-smooth muscle antibody 87 Units, and von Willebrand factor antigen 239%, however without any confirmatory results for a specific disease process. Throughout her workup, she continued to have persistent complaints of GI discomfort and reflux treated with a PPI. She had concerning pulmonary involvement and complaints of difficulty breathing. Initial imaging showed significant consolidations, ground-glass opacities, and interstitial involvement .
On diagnostic bronchial alveolar lavage there was concern for mucosal friability and bleeding in small airways. Her PFTs showed moderate ventilatory deficits in a mixed restrictive/obstructive pattern. Follow-up imaging and PFTs showed persistent interstitial lung disease and mixed ventilatory deficit but the patient did not require supplemental oxygen. These findings of interstitial lung disease in conjunction with her family history of Sjogren’s and positive anti-SSA/Ro raised our clinical concern for primary Sjogren’s syndrome versus an IIM given the elevated muscle enzymes.
Due to significant pulmonary findings, lab abnormalities with worsening transaminitis, and decreased likelihood of infection the decision was made to begin initial treatment with steroids. On hospital day 11 patient was started on a three-day pulse of 1000 mg IV methylprednisolone, followed by Prednisone 50 mg daily orally (1.2 mg/kg/day). The patient showed significant clinical improvement as well as laboratory improvement of her transaminitis and pancytopenia. She developed significant thrush, which was resistant to oral nystatin and required systemic treatment with caspofungin. Unfortunately, she had recurrence of her fevers on hospital day 15 as well as declining neuro-psychological features with acutely worsening anxiety and developmental regression, prompting repeat pulse doses of methylprednisolone IV 500 mg, followed by 2 mg/kg/day divided twice daily. She also had cardiac abnormalities which persisted despite steroid administration. On initial presentation, given complaint of chest pain, an EKG was obtained showing first-degree heart block with global low voltages but her echo was without any abnormalities. On hospital day 18 she had new complaints of intermittent chest pain at rest with a repeat EKG showing prolonged QTc and T wave inversions in left lateral leads (I, V5, V6). Repeat echo again did not show any abnormalities, including no evidence of coronary artery dilation, myocarditis, or pericarditis. The patient was placed on telemetry given abnormal changes in EKGs.
Due to persistent symptoms, repeat PFT’s showing continued interstitial lung disease, and worsening of lab values, the patient was started on mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) at 600 mg/m2 twice daily on day 20 with high dose IV steroids. MMF was chosen as a means of targeting the rheumatic disease-related interstitial lung disease and its relatively lower side effect profile when compared to other immunosuppressants. Subsequently, a T2 fat saturated MRI of the chest and pelvis was obtained and showed myositis of shoulders, paraspinal muscles, and proximal thighs increasing concern for myositis and prompting a muscle biopsy.
Despite MMF and high dose steroids, the patient’s labs continued to worsen and on day 21 was noted to be in an irregularly irregular rhythm without discernable P waves and a heart rate of 60–70 diagnosed as atrial fibrillation without rapid ventricular response .
Her echo showed possible coronary dilation so a cardiac MRI was performed, showing no abnormalities. Her rhythm normalized without intervention. Her maximum troponins were 0.030 ng/mL. Due to continued symptoms, clinical progression now with cardiac involvement, and again worsening labs the decision was made to begin IVIG 70 g and anakinra 2 mg/kg twice daily SQ for treatment of MAS complicating a likely IIM on day 25.
Shortly after the initiation of anakinra the confirmatory myositis antibody panel sent at the time of hospital presentation returned positive for anti-MDA5 and anti-SSA-52 antibodies, which are seen in a distinct phenotype of juvenile IIM. Despite the use of anakinra her underlying inflammation progressed. At this time the patient was transferred to a medical facility with pediatric rheumatology capabilities. Her MMF was discontinued, Anakinra was increased in intervals up to a maximum of 160 mg every 6 h IV (15 mg/kg/day), and IV cyclosporine 3–5 mg/kg/day divided every 12 h was started with the dose adjusted based on the trough level, along with continued IVIG and IV methylprednisolone. As her ferritin continued to climb to levels greater than 10,000 ng/mL and she developed posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome, her cyclosporine was discontinued. She was transitioned to etoposide 150 mg/m2 twice weekly for 2 weeks, then weekly for 6 additional weeks and dexamethasone 10 mg/m2 divided twice daily in addition to continued Anakinra and IVIG . Tofacitinib was added at 5 mg orally twice daily. This combination (Etoposide, Dexamethasone, Anakinra, IVIG, and Tofacitinib) was successful as indicated by significant clinical improvement in her multi-system organ involvement.
Anakinra was weaned and her IV steroid was transitioned to oral prednisone while continuing tofacitinib. At the time of this report she is stable on low dose prednisone of 5 mg daily, tofacitinib 10 mg twice daily, and IVIG.