A 33-year-old male with complex congenital heart disease was referred for catheter ablation after presenting to the emergency room for palpitations and dizziness. He had a medical history of pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum and Type 0 bicuspid aortic valve. He underwent four previous palliative and corrective heart surgeries, the last one being a complete cavo-pulmonary Fontan circulation with extracardiac conduit at the age of 7 years. His follow-up was erratic. The per-critical electrocardiogram showed a narrow QRS complex tachycardia with a frequency of 260 b.p.m. and no discernable P waves. The decrease in heart rate after Amiodarone infusion allowed a better visualization of the atrial activity, with negative waves in the inferior limb leads and positive waves in Leads V1 and V2 (cycle 310 ms). A diagnosis of IART was made . The arrythmia was terminated by electrical cardioversion, given the poor haemodynamic tolerance (blood pressure 82/56 mmHg, NYHA IV status, 87% O2 saturation on air). On TTE, there was an impaired ejection fraction of the unique systemic ventricle estimated at 35%, a probably severe but underestimated aortic stenosis with a mean gradient of 32 mmHg and a dilation of the ascending aorta (52 mm). An anti-arrhythmic (Amiodarone 200 mg daily) and anti-coagulant (Apixaban 5 mg twice a day) treatment was subsequently started. At 1-month follow-up, TTE demonstrated an improvement of the univentricular ejection fraction up to 55% and confirmed the severity of the aortic stenosis, with a mean gradient of 47 mmHg and a 4.2 m/s Vmax . Considering the limited options for medical treatment of the arrhythmia, a relatively favourable anatomy (the aortic annulus area was 7.2 cm2 with moderate calcifications of a Type 0 bicuspid aortic valve, sino-tubular junction was measured at 40 mm and the distance between annulus and coronary ostia was 16 mm) and the prohibitive risks of another heart surgery (Euroscore II estimated at 18.1% and complex congenital heart disease), a decision was made to perform a radiofrequency arrhythmia ablation combined with a transcatheter aortic valve implantation with on-site surgical team back-up considering the risk of valve embolization.
Under conscious sedation, an electrophysiological study was performed, with three-dimensional electro-anatomic mapping (CARTO 3, Biosense Webster, Johnson & Johnson, CA, USA) and integration of cardiac computed tomography images. After transconduit puncture, a meticulous mapping of both atria in sinus rhythm was realized using a multipolar catheter (Pentaray, Biosense Webster, Johnson & Johnson, CA, USA). The IART was easily triggered, with the same tachycardia cycle length of 310 ms. Activation mapping of both atria and the extracardiac conduit was needed to completely understand the reentrant circuit. The critical isthmus of the tachycardia was localized in the antero-lateral region of the extracardiac conduit. A 35 Watts radiofrequency ablation led to termination of the tachycardia . The IART was no longer inducible with burst pacing at 200 ms and Isoprenaline infusion.
A left transfemoral access was used for the TAVR procedure. After a careful assessment of the distance between the aortic annulus and the coronary ostia and invasive measurements demonstrating a 56 mmHg mean gradient, a 29 mm Edwards Sapien valve (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) was deployed with 3 cc extra-volume above the nominal value and no prior valve dilatation to prevent prosthesis embolization. The rapid ventricular pacing during aortic valve implantation was provided by a catheter placed in the unique systemic ventricle via a transconduit puncture. There was a mild para-valvular aortic regurgitation on angiography (1.5/4) and a mean transvalvular gradient of 8 mmHg on TTE following the aortic valve implantation.
Anti-arrhythmic (Amiodarone replaced by Flecainide 100 mg daily) and anti-coagulant treatment were given following the IART/TAVR combined procedure. At 3-month follow-up, the patient was arrhythmia free with NYHA 1 status, NT-proBNP 92 ng/L (n < 300) and a VO2 max at 21.5 mL/kg—120 W. CMR showed a 55% ventricular ejection fraction, with a non-compaction aspect. Two little spots of fibrosis were visible on late gadolinium enhancement sequence, located on the interventricular septum and the inferolateral wall of the ventricle . The flecainide was stopped, and anti-coagulation therapy continued. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors were introduced but poorly tolerated and finally stopped. The follow-up is now 1.5 years, the patient being asymptomatic, without further arrhythmic episodes.