An 80-year-old Caucasian male initially presented to a peripheral unit with a lymph node mass in left groin. Ultrasound revealed a large pathological lymph node measuring 5 cm in length. A lymph node biopsy was performed and revealed metastatic squamous cell carcinoma with immunohistochemistry findings suspicious for human papillomavirus type 16 specific staining .
Computed tomographic (CT) scans of the chest, abdomen and pelvis showed bilateral inguinal lymph node more marked on the left and indeterminate subcentimeter left pulmonary nodules. No primary neoplastic process was detected. We performed a 18F-fludeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) which revealed a Standardised Uptake Value (SUV) of 11 on left inguinal mass and low grade uptake overlying lower sacrum .
As no primary lesion had been detected and there were histological findings suspicious for a metastatic squamous cell cancer, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the penis was performed to identify a possible penile cancer primary. A T2 weighted MRI (coronal image) after intracavernosal prostaglandin demonstrated a large lymph node in left groin, a normal urethra and corpora cavernosa (see Fig. a). MRI after intracavernosal prostaglandin demonstrated normal corpora cavernosa and normal urethra (see Fig. b). The use of intracavernosal prostaglandins with penile MRI imaging can help in the detection of penile cancers . No such lesion was identified this patient.
Proctoscopy and colonoscopy were performed to assess for an anal SCC and were negative for disease. Flexible cystoscopy was also performed which revealed a small nonspecific lesion within the navicular fossa of the distal urethra and was biopsied (see Fig. ).
Distal urethrectomy with bilateral inguinal lymph node dissection was performed with radical inguinal lymphadenectomy performed on the affected side and a superficial modified approach used on the contralateral groin.
A surgically created hypospadic neomeatus was created within the penile shaft (see Fig. ). 11 nodes were removed and metastatic squamous cell carcinoma was present in one of the lymph nodes measuring 4.5 cm in length. There was no extracapsular extension. On the right side, 9 lymph nodes were removed with no evidence of neoplasia. Histopathological analysis of the distal urethrectomy specimen confirmed an invasive squamous cell carcinoma of the distal urethra (see Figs. and ). This was a Human papillomavirus (HPV) related basaloid lesion with an invasive component of 4.5 mm in size. As per the TNM staging, this staged the disease as a T1N1Mx . The patient has been referred for adjuvant treatment consisting of carboplatin (Area Under the Curve (AUC) = 5) and paclitaxel (175 mg/m2) for four cycles.