A 55-year-old male presented with a painful, ulcerated tumour mass, located on the anterior thoracic wall in the left mammary region .
The patient reported a six month history of pain in the left mammary region, caused by a progressively growing, ulcerated tumour mass, with no other significant symptoms. Three months before presentation in our department, he underwent a biopsy and suspicion of a tumour of neural origin, namely a peripheral neuroecto-dermal tumour (PNET) was raised, based on the positivity of tumour cells for Neurofilament and neuron specific enolase (NSE) and negativity for Cytokeratin AE1/AE3.
He was an ex-smoker of seven years and a social drinker, with arterial hypertension and ischaemic heart disease, which were controlled by medication.
No previous illnesses were declared and there was no family history of oncologic diseases.
The physical examination revealed an ulcerated tumour mass, with infiltrative aspect, occupying the left mammary region . No other signs or symptoms were observed.
A mild elevation of serum level of alanine-aminotransferase (55.4 U/L; normal ranges 0-41 U/L), aspartate-aminotransferase (70.0 U/L; normal ranges 0-40 U/L) and gamma-glutamil-transpeptidase (130 U/L; normal ranges 0-71 U/L) was observed, without any other serological modifications.
The preoperative CT-scan revealed a 67 mm × 74 mm × 80 mm nodular mass, located on the anterior thoracic wall, laterally from the sternum, with high density (40 UH) and multiple disseminated micro-calcifications. Direct spread in the soft tissues and tumour-induced costal erosions were also documented, along with axillary and subclavicular adenopathies. The third intercostal space was infiltrated, with no involvement of parietal or visceral pleura.
After surgery, the CT-scan showed a 28 mm × 135 mm (antero-posterior/Lateral-lateral) haematoma affecting the axillary region and intercostal muscles. No mediastinum involvement or suspicion of bone or lung metastases were highlighted.
Grossing of the left mastectomy specimen showed a 67 mm × 74 mm × 80 mm tumour mass, located on the inner medial quadrant of the mammary gland, which was associated with a 33 mm × 30 mm ulceration of the skin . On section, it was observed as a poorly circumscribed, yellow-grey tumour mass, with small haemorrhagic areas, which infiltrated the deep soft tissues. The attached muscular components were also macroscopically involved, as were the rib fragments.
Under the microscope, the predominant component, which represented over 70% of the tumour mass, consisted of clusters of large, intensely pleomorphic (> 20 mitoses/high power field), elongated cells, with perivascular proliferation but not tumour emboli. Multinucleated cells were also visible. These large cells were admixed with small cells, with amphophilic and scanty cytoplasm and round to oval, centrally located nuclei. This component proved the formation of Homer-Wright-like rosettes, which were composed of specific circular strands of tumour cells with round-oval nuclei, surrounding fibrillary cores. The tumour exhibited an infiltrative growth pattern, with involvement of the subcutaneous tissue and the deep resection margins .
Both tumour populations expressed vimentin and did not display positivity for the epithelial markers, such Cytokeratin AE1/AE3 and Cytokeratin 7 . In the predominant component, namely the large and pleomorphic cells, with a Ki67 proliferation index of over 90%, the rhabdoid differentiation was proved in terms of positivity for desmin, sarcomeric actin and myogenin . The tumour cells were not marked by the neural- (neurofilament, NSE), neuroendocrine- (synaptophysin, chromogranin), mesothelial- (calretinin) or vascular markers (CD31, CD34) and did not show a melanoma immunoprofile (negative for S100 and HMB45) .
The second component, composed of small cells, showed a Ki67 index of around 40% and a PNET-like aspect. The immunoprofile was similar to those of cells identified in the biopsy specimens. In contrast with the predominant component, these cells showed focal positivity for neurofilament, NSE and CD99 , without rhabdoid differentiation. They did not express desmin, Smooth Muscle Actin (SMA), sarcomeric actin or myogenin .