A 8 year old girl of non consanguineous parents from low socioeconomic condition, immunized as per EPI schedule got admitted with fever, jaundice and abdominal distension. Fever was for 2 & ½ months, high grade, intermittent, usually developed at evening and night, highest recorded temperature was 104 °F, subsided after taking antipyretic and not associated with chills and rigor. She had also jaundice for 2 months followed by abdominal distension. There was no history of contact with tuberculosis patient and travelling to kala-azar, malaria endemic zone and no history of previous jaundice, blood or blood product transfusion, history of sib death, family history of jaundice or neuropsychiatric disorder, significant weight loss. For these she was treated initially by different injectable antibiotics in medical college hospital but didn’t improve. On general examination she was fretful, febrile, moderately icteric; mildly pale, vitally stable, severely wasted and moderately stunted and developmentally age appropriate, skin survey revealed infected scabies, BCG vaccine mark was absent, generalized lymphadenopathy present, maximum 1.5 × 1.5 cm at right anterior cervival group, non tender, discrete, movable, not fixed with underlying structure and overlying skin, bony tenderness absent and there was no stigmata of chronic liver disease. Abdomen was distended, hepatomegaly about 7 cm, spleen enlarged about 6 cm, ascites present. Other system examination revealed normal findings. Slit lamp examination of eye showed no Kayser Fleisher ring. Complete blood count revealed mild anemia with neutrophilic leukocysis and thrombocytosis, ESR was very high (130 mm), Mantoux test was negative, ICT for kala-azar and malaria was negative, liver function showed direct hyperbilirubinemia, slightly low albumin, normal serum alanine aminotransferase and normal prothrombin time, ascitic fluid study had high lymphocyte count, atypicallymphocytes with high SAAG, HBsAg, antibody for Hepatitis C virus, antibody to smooth muscle antibody, antibody to liver kidney microsomal antibody, anti neuclear antibody were negative. Total Immunoglobulin G, chest X-ray and bone marrow study was normal. Lactate dehydrogenase was high. Ultrasonography of whole abdomen showed hepatomegaly with coarse hepatic parenchymal echotexture, splenomegaly with enlarged hilar vessels, enlarged lymph nodesat porta hepatis and around the celiac plexus, mildly dialated intrahepatic biliary tree and common bile duct is mildly dialated. Endoscopy revealed grade IV esophageal varices; Fig. a. Finally lymph node biopsy was done and histopathology report showed large number of foreign body giant cells and small ill defined granuloma. Numerous histoplasma capsulati spores within giant cells, histocytes and extracellular space are seen. Histoplasma capsulati spores are PAS stain positive .
After evaluating the clinical data, physical findings and investigation results, the case was finally diagnosed as Disseminated histoplasmosis with portal hypertension.
We started treatment after counseling the parents with injectable Deoxycholate Amphotericin B(1 mg/kg/day) for 28 days, multivitamin, 5% Permethrin cream for scabies, endoscopic variceal ligation for portal hypertension. There was no drug related or infusion related complication developed. During treatment period her clinical condition was dramatically improved. She became afebrile, regaining of apettite, jaundice was declining, organomegaly reduced. We discharged her with oral Itraconazole (5–10 mg/kg/day), Tab. Propranolol and multivitamin. Itraconazole was given for 5 months and propranolol for 1 month. After 1 month of treatment follow up endoscopy showed no esophageal varices. During treatment we follow up the patient regularly based on clinical and biochemical parameters. At the end of treatment her weight increased, jaundice disappeared; lymphadenopathy present but not significant, hepatomegaly was 3 cm and there was no splenomegaly and no ascites. There was no esophageal varices on follow up endoscopy; Fig. b.
Follow up ultrasonography was done after 1 month at the end of treatment with Amphotericin B. Report showed hepatomegaly with coarse echopattern, normal biliary tree. Splenomegaly with enlarged hilar vessels. No ascites.