A 41-year-old African-American female had no other abdominal complaints, including nausea/vomiting or change in stools. The patient denied fever or rigors. Her medical history was significant for a laparoscopic gastric bypass surgery 2 years previously with marked weight loss from roughly 400 to 102 lbs. Indications for the bypass surgery included morbid obesity, hypertension thought secondary to her obesity and mild restrictive lung disease. An extensive workup had been pursued to evaluate her pain both surgically and medically. The patient had undergone an appendectomy and a cholecystectomy, separately, without inflammatory signs, over 1 year prior to her admission, which demonstrated no pathology. The surgical service had labeled her pain as nonorganic in etiology. The patient’s abdominal pain had originally began 2 weeks after her surgery and remained constant without change. The weight loss was gradual and smooth over the 2-year course. She denied prior abdominal pain in her history. There was a 40 pack year history of tobacco use previously. Constipation began 1 week prior to admission. Her exam showed an abdomen with multiple healed scars and mild diffuse pain without peritoneal signs. No lymph nodes were detected. She appeared emaciated with extensive skin flaps. The patient had multiple draws for tumor markers (including CA-19), computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the abdomen and pelvis with and without contrast which were normal. It also included MR arterial and venous arteriography with negative results. She subsequently underwent full endoscopy from above (esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)) and below (full colonoscopy) without abnormal findings. Visualization of the pancreas demonstrated no abnormal findings.
A CT of the chest was normal. Several pelvic exams with papanicolaou (PAP) smears were negative. There was no history of alcohol or illicit drug use and hepatitis B or C, and HIV studies were normal. Given her persistent pain, a capsule study of her small bowel was undertaken to rule out small bowel lymphoma or other pathology, though unlikely given the absence of malabsorption, which demonstrated no abnormal findings. Although some risk in capsule passage may occur in abnormal pathology states, the gastroenterologist felt comfortable having done several EGD/ERCP’s on this patient. The only abnormalities from a laboratory standpoint were a mild leukocytosis 11.2 × 109/L and hypoalbuminemia with levels ranging from 30–40 g/L when hydrated. An erythrocyte sedimentation rate was normal. Other than her mildly decreased albumin, her corrected calcium, protime and cholesterol were all normal. Given her multiple prior admissions, the patient was treated conservatively with laxatives, opioids, and antidepressants without benefit according to the patient. At the time of our admission, her weight had stabilized and the above workup had been pursued over the prior 12 months.
Given her multiple admissions, benign abdomen and prior recent workups, we treated her with intravenous fluids, opioids and psychiatric evaluation, given her negative organic workup. There was no evidence for any infection, tumor or other inflammatory response. Her history of multiple follow-ups of tumor markers, endoscopy, CT and MR scanning and prior laparoscopic procedures without findings strongly suggested a nonorganic etiology. The team also did a courtesy consult with the surgeon who had performed her prior negative surgeries. After a long discussion with the patient and her family, the surgeon relented to our surprise and scheduled the patient for laparoscopic evaluation of the abdomen and pelvis. The exam was visually normal with adhesions, however, multiple biopsies were randomly requested of normal-appearing tissue which included liver/spleen, mesentery and any localized lymph nodes. All frozen sections were negative except for a small focus of exocrine pancreatic adenocarcinoma in her celiac node based on immunohistology evaluation. Upon review of all prior studies, there was no evidence of tumor by markers and visualization, directly and indirectly. We were unsure whether this small focus could be causing that much sympathetic pain along with progressive cachexia. However, given the close proximity to the sympathetic plexus, this is certainly possible.
Two days after her surgery, she developed suppurative peritonitis with multiorgan failure and died. Postoperative cultures of the blood and abdomen were negative. Since this was a complicated case and a couple of family members worked at the hospital, the team arranged a discussion explaining the difficulty in located small metastatic foci even with our current technology. An autopsy was not performed at the family’s request.