A 10-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital because of 2 weeks of fever and arthralgia. His medical history was unremarkable, and he had not been previously treated with glucocorticoids, including mPSL. Laboratory testing showed leukocytosis of 22,400/mL with 88% segmented neutrophils and an elevated C-reactive protein of 9.21 mg/dL. Magnetic resonance imaging of the lower extremities with fat-suppressed T2-weighted images showed high intensity in the right gluteus maximus muscle. He was suspected to have bacterial myositis and was treated with ceftriaxone. However, his symptoms persisted for more than 2 weeks. Autoinflammatory arthritis was suspected, and treatment with mPSL pulse therapy (30 mg/kg) was initiated.
After 15 min of mPSL injection, he had wheezing and generalized wheal formation with decreased oxygen saturation. As anaphylaxis was suspected, mPSL was discontinued, and olopatadine and oxygen were administered. The symptoms improved considerably without the use of epinephrine and disappeared in 30 min. Oral prednisolone (PSL, 2 mg/kg/day) was started for the treatment of arthritis and afforded resolution of fever and arthralgia. He was discharged from the hospital 1 week after the start of oral PSL. There was no relapse and oral PSL was reduced to 5 mg/day after 1 year.
One month after discharge, SPT, IDST, and BAT were performed to assess for reaction to glucocorticoids including MPS. Of note, the patient remained on his prescribed oral PSL during this evaluation. SPTs for MPS, hydrocortisone sodium succinate (HCS), PSL sodium succinate (PSS), dexamethasone sodium phosphate (DSP), and betamethasone sodium phosphate (BSP) were negative. IDST for MPS resulted in a 7 × 7-mm wheal and a 9 × 8-mm area of erythema, whereas normal saline revealed no wheal or erythema. Therefore, IDST for MPS was positive. Moreover, IDSTs for HCS and PSS were also positive, whereas those for DSP and BSP were negative. BAT for MPS was negative compared to the positive control stimulated by a monoclonal anti-IgE antibody (1-h incubation, 1.0% vs 60.4%; 24-h incubation, 1.9% vs 18.3%). Nonmedical ingredients in the glucocorticoids tested in this patient are shown in Table .