A 52 year old right hand dominant male patient, welder by occupation, presented with pain in right shoulder following a fall directly on the right shoulder. Radiographic evaluation revealed Ideberg type III intra-articular glenoid fracture. The patient underwent arthroscopy assisted percutaneous fixation of the fracture.
The procedure was performed with the patient in a lateral decubitus position as this facilitated simultaneous arthroscopic as well as fluoroscopic evaluation. The surgeon, the assistants and the scrub nurse were positioned posterior to the patients shoulder. The monitor was positioned on the opposite side at the foot end. The C-arm image was placed in a lateral position across the shoulder with the beam parallel to the floor. The affected limb was positioned in about 40 degree abduction and 20 degree flexion using a traction system to facilitate arthroscopic evaluation. However the traction was kept to minimum to allow manipulation of the arm during fracture reduction
Through a standard posterior viewing portal initial diagnostic arthroscopy was performed and the fracture pattern evaluated. The joint was evaluated to rule out other soft tissue injuries. There was fraying of the margin of antero-superior labrum. A 2mm k-wire was passed percutaneously in a superior to inferior direction just adjacent to the Neviaser portal and drilled into the fractured superior glenoid fragment. This k-wire was used as a Joystick to dis-impact the fragment and restore the articular surface under direct arthroscopic vision. An arthroscopic probe introduced through an anterior working portal helped in correcting the rotation of the fracture fragment. Once a satisfactory reduction was achieved, the k-wire was advanced further into the glenoid to obtain provisional fixation.
A Neviaser portal was then created and a guide wire was passed from superior to inferior direction through the centre of the fracture fragment. The correct placement of the wire was confirmed fluoroscopically. After drilling over the guide wire, definitive fixation and compression of the fracture was achieved with a 35mm partially threaded cannulated cancellous screw. The fracture reduction was again confirmed under both arthroscopic and fluoroscopic visualization. The k-wire used for provisional fixation was then removed and portals closed with simple sutures. The operated limb was put in sling and mobilization was started as tolerated by the patient. The patient was lost to follow up after one month, by which time he was pain free and had a range of movement of 90 degree of forward elevation and abduction.