A 66-year-old man presented to our emergency department with a clonic seizure on his right arm and hand. The seizure lasted for 15 s at 30 s intervals, which then progressed to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures. He was diagnosed with hypertension 16 years prior, and there was no history of recent head trauma or infection. On his first admission, he was drowsy but well oriented, and his vital signs were stable except for his blood pressure (172/92 mmHg). He had signs of acute inflammation, as leukocytosis (24.82 × 103 /μl) and increased level of hs-CRP (71.20 mg/L) were observed in the blood test. The blood test also revealed hyperglycemia (298 mg/dL). The results of the routine CSF study did not show any evidence of central nervous system infections.
Electroencephalography (EEG) results were normal, with no epileptic discharges. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed left caudate nucleus and putamen lesions, hyperintense on DWI, and hypointense on the ADC map . Furthermore, high-signal intensity lesions were detected on fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image, including the left caudate nucleus, putamen, and medial frontal lobe . However, the patient’s MR angiography results were normal.
Based on the brain MRI findings, we suspected acute ischemic stroke in the left basal ganglia. Anti-platelet and anti-epileptic agents (levetiracetam 1500 mg/day) were administered for ischemic stroke and focal seizure, respectively. On the seventh day of admission, he experienced hallucinations. He described that “something floats on the ceiling” and that “cartoon-like image pops-up”. We changed his drugs to sodium valproate and levetiracetam 3000 mg/day, for his symptoms did not improve. As his seizure occurred at a lower frequency, we reduced the dose of levetiracetam to 1500 mg/day, and he was discharged on the 14th day of admission.
Four days after discharge, the patient visited our emergency room again for another clonic seizure event. This time, the seizure involved his left upper extremity. In the emergency room, he was drowsy, but his vital signs were stable. Blood test results showed low levels of serum valproic acid (1.9μg/mL) and high levels of serum glucose (263 mg/dL). Brain MRI showed lesions in the caudate nucleus and putamen with a similar pattern to that of the last admission on DWI, ADC, and FLAIR, but on the opposite side . In addition, the same lesion previously observed on the left medial frontal lobe was identified on FLAIR image . The EEG did not reveal any abnormalities, while his tonic-clonic seizure with left eye deviation and left head turn continued. He also had symptoms of lip smacking and orofacial dyskinesia, which he was not aware of.
Given the suspicion of autoimmune encephalitis, we administered methylprednisolone 250 mg/day for 3 days. Also, the patient received anti-epileptic drugs (sodium valproate 1800 mg/day, levetiracetam 500 mg/day) to manage status epilepticus. As his symptoms improved after 3 weeks of medication, the patient was discharged. After discharge, his CSF test revealed the presence of anti-NMDA receptor antibodies, which confirmed anti-NMDAR encephalitis.