A 38-year-old Caucasian man came to the emergency department of our hospital with diffuse abdominal pain for the past 10 hours. A few months ago he was diagnosed with metastatic brain melanoma and he has been treated since then with high doses of corticosteroids. At follow up, 20 days before admission, he had computed tomography (CT) scans of his brain, chest and abdomen showing only the known brain lesions. At that time, his vital signs showed only mild tachycardia. On physical examination abdominal sounds were absent and his abdomen was rigid and diffusely tender with rebound tenderness. A rectal examination showed an empty rectum. The emergent laboratory tests revealed as follows: white blood cells 10,200mm3, hemoglobin at 11.5g/dL, c-reactive protein was at 14mg/L, the results of creatinine, electrolytes, and liver function tests were normal. The admission chest X-ray showed pneumoperitoneum. An exploratory laparotomy was performed under general anesthesia on the same day. Intraoperative findings revealed multiple (>100) black-colored nodules, of different size (0.5 to 7.0cm) on the small bowel wall as well as on the peritoneum surface. One of the nodules located in his jejunum was perforated (Figure ). A long part of his small bowel (approximately 2m), containing most of the nodules, was resected for cytoreduction purposes and also to prevent another perforation in the near future. The postoperative period was uneventful and the patient was discharged 9 days later. Six months after the operation the patient remains asymptomatic. The histopathological diagnosis was malignant melanoma of the small bowel. There was diffuse infiltration of the intestinal wall from atypical large neoplastic cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. Melanin pigmentation was observed in the neoplastic cells (Figure a). Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumor cells were positive for S-100 protein (Figure b), HMB-45 (Figure c), melan A (Figure d) and vimentin, whereas they were negative for CD45-common leukocyte antigen and pancytokeratin.