A 73-year-old woman was admitted to Liaocheng People’s Hospital in October 2019 due to irregular postmenopausal vaginal bleeding.
The patient had undergone natural menopause 32 yrs ago and had a history of irregular vaginal bleeding in the 3 mo prior to admission. Initially, bleeding was intermittent, lasting for intervals of 2 d. Blood loss was minimal, there was no abdominal pain, and the patient did not seek medical treatment. Twenty days before admission, the patient experienced continuous vaginal bleeding. Blood loss was similar to menstruation, and there was occasional abdominal pain. Two weeks later, the patient experienced massive bleeding and was treated in the gynecology clinic of Liaocheng People’s Hospital.
The patient’s medical history was unremarkable.
After admission to the hospital, the patient’s temperature was 36.6 ℃, heart rate was 76 bpm, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute, and blood pressure was 142/73 mmHg. On gynecological examination, when the patient held her breath, the posterior wall of the vagina compressed and partially protruded outside the vagina. The cervix was atrophied, and the uterus was enlarged.
Blood analysis, biochemistry, and urinalysis were normal. Electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, and arterial blood gas were normal.
Ultrasonography showed an enlarged uterus and a 5.1 cm × 3.3 cm area of medium and low echogenicity in the uterine cavity. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated an enlarged uterus and uterine cavity, and the endometrium was thickened, irregular, and protruded into the uterine cavity. A coronal contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan revealed a heterogeneously enhanced uterine tumor with diffuse infiltration of the posterior wall of the uterine myometrium and local roughness of the serosa. Lymph node metastasis was suspected as the internal and external iliac lymph nodes were enlarged. The largest was approximately 1.4 cm and lay along the right external iliac artery. The right internal iliac lymph nodes were partially necrotic . Diagnostic imaging showed no detectable invasion of the tumor into the bladder or rectum.
Biopsy by dilatation and curettage suggested poorly differentiated carcinoma. The patient underwent a hysterectomy and bilateral adnexal resection. Pelvic lymph node dissection was not performed as the patient was obese. Gross observations revealed an ill-defined white solid mass that arose from the endometrium and extended through the full thickness of the posterior wall of the myometrium to the uterine serosa. Multiple solid nodules were scattered on the serosa; the largest was 1 cm × 0.8 cm × 0.5 cm.
Microscopically, the poorly differentiated carcinoma infiltrated the muscular layer of the posterior wall of the uterine body to the serosa and did not invade the inner orifice of the cervix. Histologic characteristics included polygonal cells with abundant cytoplasm and a granular eosinophilic or basophilic appearance, large nuclei, prominent nucleoli, “salt and pepper” chromatin, thick nuclear membranes, and ≥ 10 mitoses/high power field without obvious necrosis. The tumor cells showed neuroendocrine morphology (organoid nesting, trabeculae, palisading, or a rosette-like growth pattern) mixed with a solid diffuse pattern . There was obvious vascular invasion and occasional perineural invasion.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, chromogranin A, synaptophysin, CD56 and P16 and negative for P53, estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and CD10. The Ki-67 index was approximately 80%. There was no loss of expression of mismatch repair proteins (MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, and MSH6).