A 68-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital with acute intermittent claudication for 2 weeks. He could walk without any symptoms before; however, he suddenly developed intermittent claudication 2 weeks earlier. He had leg pain when he walked about 10 m. He had hypertension, dyslipidaemia, Type 2 diabetes mellitus, and end-stage diabetic nephropathy with regular haemodialysis. He had a history of PAD treated with a nitinol self-expandable bare-metal stent in his left distal SFA 5 years earlier. On admission, the arterial pulse was palpable at the left common femoral artery (CFA), but not at the popliteal artery. He had slight coldness in his left foot, but no wound. The laboratory data showed that haemoglobin A1c was 6.9% (normal range: 4.9–6.0%); low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol was 123 mg/dL (normal range: 65–163 mg/dL); triglycerides were 88 mg/dL (normal range: 30–117 mg/dL); high-density lipoprotein cholesterol was 32 mg/dL (normal range: 48–103 mg/dL); creatine phosphokinase was 38 IU/L (normal range: 41–153 IU/L); and D-dimer was 0.51 IU/L (normal range: 0.0–1.0 μg/mL). The left-ankle brachial index (ABI) was 0.31, and lower extremity ultrasonography showed an occlusion in the left SFA with the popliteal artery perfused via collateral channels from the deep femoral artery, suggesting the presence of an atherosclerotic lesion. A diagnosis of ALI Stage 1 (viable limb) was made, and revascularization by endovascular treatment (EVT) was performed, with the approach from the contralateral right CFA with a 6 Fr guiding sheath. Angiography showed total occlusion in the left SFA with inadequate perfusion to the popliteal artery via collateral vessels . Although the 0.014-inch guidewire penetrated the occluded lesion easily, it advanced into the subintimal space in the mid-SFA. Therefore, a retrograde approach was performed using a 5 Fr guiding sheath from the left dorsalis pedis artery. The retrograde guidewire passed successfully through the occluded lesion. After dilatation by a 4.0 mm balloon, a large contrast defect in the proximal SFA was detected on angiography . Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) could not evaluate the lesion morphology due to massive thrombus in the lesion. The thrombus was removed by aspiration thrombectomy with a 6 Fr guiding catheter. After acquiring a sufficient lumen area by dilatating with a 6.0 mm balloon, a drug-coated balloon was applied. The final angiogram demonstrated a successful result .
Angioscopic examination to identify the aetiology of ALI was also performed . The proximal SFA was occluded by a 6.0 mm balloon through the antegrade system to remove blood flow from the viewing field. Angioscopy was performed through a retrograde system using a 4 Fr catheter. Angioscopy showed vessel dissection, mixed thrombus, and yellow plaques in the proximal SFA (, , ) and yellow plaques and ruptured plaques in the distal SFA (, , ). The stent was completely covered with neointima . Therefore, the aetiology of the ALI in this case was determined to be arterial thrombosis at an atherosclerotic plaque rather than thromboembolism based on the findings of angioscopy.
After EVT, the left ABI increased from 0.31 to 1.04, and his intermittent claudication disappeared. He was started on aspirin 100 mg/day and clopidogrel 75 mg/day as dual anti-platelet therapy and atorvastatin 20 mg/day as lipid-lowering therapy. He was discharged 5 days later without any complications. After 1 month, his LDL cholesterol level was 55 mg/dL, and the follow-up angiogram demonstrated a patent SFA without any complications at the retrograde puncture site ( and ).