A 63-year-old Pakistani man presented to the emergency department with two days of sudden bilateral chest pain, shortness of breath and a mild cough. He had been experiencing shortness of breath for the last month, which had worsened in the last two days. His chest pain was sharp and pleuritic in nature. No hemoptysis was reported and there was no personal or family history of cancer, diabetes, or tuberculosis. He also reported a lesion on his scalp that had been gradually increasing in size for 6 weeks. A week before his presentation, he visited a dermatologist at another institution who performed a biopsy, suspecting basal cell carcinoma or angiosarcoma, but the histopathology report was still pending.
On admission, he appeared acutely ill. His blood pressure was 100/70 mmHg, his pulse rate was 130 beats per minute, and his body temperature was 37.6 °C. Oxygen saturation was 80% on room air and respiratory rate was 35/ min. A nonpainful, violet-colored lesion measuring 8 × 10 cm was found on the right occipito-parietal lobe of the skull, with a dome-shaped elevation and an irregular border. . Breathing sounds were diminished in the bilateral lung field, and a few scattered crackles were heard in the bilateral lower zones. Other physical findings were negative.
On the day of admission, his white blood cell count was 14,500/mm3 with 80% neutrophils and 25% lymphocytes, the hemoglobin level was 12.5 g/dL, and the platelet count was 278,000/mm3. Serum biochemical values were all within the normal range. Differential diagnoses included tuberculosis which is endemic in our region. Pneumocystitis carinii pneumonia, Nocardia, fungal infection, malignancy, and Langerhans cell histiocytosis were also considered.
Chest radiography showed bilateral pneumothorax Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple cystic lesions on both lungs, patchy areas of ground-glass opacities and nodules with bilateral pneumothorax Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was negative for any infectious etiology, which ruled out active infections such as tuberculosis (TB), fungal infections and Nocardia. Meanwhile, histopathology results from his scalp lesion confirmed aggressive angiosarcoma .
The patient underwent bilateral tube thoracostomy and was started on broad spectrum antibiotics. Because the family refused invasive ventilation, noninvasive mechanical ventilation (NIMV) was used to assist with breathing along with broad spectrum antibiotics. Based on histopathology and CT scan findings of bilateral cystic lesion and nodules with bilateral pneumothorax on the lungs, a diagnosis of metastatic angiosarcoma was made. Given the prognosis of his disease, the patient was discharged on request because he was unwilling to undergo further treatment for the underlying metastatic disease, and he died of ARDS (acute respiratory distress syndrome) and severe respiratory failure two days later at home. An overview of the patient's hospital course is shown in Fig. .