A 43-year-old woman with no significant medical history was brought to our hospital by ambulance because of acute onset of headache and nausea. On admission, she complained of severe headache without any other neurological deficits. Her brain CT/CT angiography revealed SAH and left SCA dissection with aneurysms. She was diagnosed with Hunt & Kosnik grade 2 SAH due to ruptured left SCA dissecting aneurysm(s). Subsequently, she underwent digital subtraction angiography under general anesthesia for further evaluation and definitive treatment. The left vertebral angiography (VAG) showed apparent aneurysmal dilatations of the left S2 along with dissection through the S2 and S3 segments. The S2 segment was extremely tortuous with two aneurysms. Although the rupture point is usually located on the aneurysms, it could not be identified. The dissection involved the entire S2 segment and rostral trunk of S3 segment. The left vermian branch and caudal trunk of the S3 segment were intact. The left VAG showed ipsilateral PPTA with to-and-fro blood flow pattern between the basilar artery (BA) and left internal carotid artery (ICA). The left PPTA joined the BA proximal to the orifices of bilateral SCAs and distal to the orifices of bilateral anterior inferior cerebellar arteries (AICAs) . The left vertebral artery (VA) had a normal caliber, whereas the right VA was hypoplastic. The BA segment proximal to the orifice of the left PPTA was not hypoplastic. The left P1 was not identified on any angiography. The left ICA angiography (ICAG) showed the ipsilateral anterior cerebral artery and middle cerebral artery as well as the ipsilateral PPTA supplying the BA distal and proximal to the orifice . The left posterior communicating artery supplied blood to the left posterior cerebral artery (PCA) distal to P1. The right PCA was visualized by the left VAG and bilateral ICAGs. Based on the aforementioned findings, the left S2 aneurysms were considered to be accessible via the left VA during endovascular intervention. The balloon test occlusion covering the orifices of bilateral SCAs showed good collateral crossflow to the healthy left S4 and vermian branch from the left AICA and posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA). The distal part of the dissection was located at S3, which was not the rupture point, and was inaccessible because of the proximal extreme tortuosity at S2. The planned strategy was proximal parent artery occlusion (PAO) at S2, including occlusion of ruptured aneurysms, without bypass. The left SCA was cannulated with an Excelsior SL-10 microcatheter (Stryker Neurovascular, Tokyo, Japan) over a manually curved Traxcess (Micro Vention, CA, U.S.A.). The microcatheter was advanced beyond the distal aneurysm. Nine metallic coils were sequentially deployed in a distal-to-proximal order. At the end of the procedure, the proximal left SCA was patent and the SCA distal to S1 showed complete obliteration on angiography from BA distal to AICA. The left VAG showed that the retrograde arterial flow of the left vermian branch and rostral and caudal trunks of S4 were supplied by the left AICA and PICA without visualization of the dissecting S2 and S3 . There were no perioperative complications. Magnetic resonance imaging/angiography revealed no infarctions. Her hospital course was good. She was discharged home at the 21st day of hospitalization with modified Rankin Scale of 0. At the 4-month follow-up, a diagnostic angiogram revealed complete obliteration of the dissected portion of the SCA and significant collateral crossflow to SCA distal to the dissected portion. There was no rebleeding or recanalization of the dissected vessel at 5 months.
The left vertebral angiography (VAG) before the treatment showing ipsilateral persistent primitive trigeminal artery (PPTA) (1 in a and b), basilar artery (BA) (2 in a and b), aneurysmal dilatations of the left S2 segment (3 in a and b), and right posterior cerebral artery (PCA) (5 in a and b). The dissection involving the entire S2 segment and the rostral trunk of the S3 segment of superior cerebellar artery (SCA) with the left vermian branch and caudal trunk of the S3 segment intact (c). The left PPTA joining the BA proximal to the orifices of bilateral SCAs and distal to the orifices of bilateral anterior inferior cerebellar arteries. The left vertebral artery had a normal caliber. The BA segment proximal to the orifice of the left PPTA was not hypoplastic.
The left ICA angiography showing ipsilateral PPTA (1 in d and e), BA (2 in d and e), aneurysmal dilatations of the left S2 segment (3 in d and e), left posterior communicating artery (4 in e), and left right PCA (5 in d and e). The PPTA supplying the BA distal and proximal to the orifice.
The left VAG after the treatment showing the retrograde arterial flow of the left vermian branch and rostral and caudal trunks of S4 being supplied by the left AICA and PICA without visualization of the dissecting S2 and S3 (f).