A 70 year old male patient presented with the sole complaint of sudden onset of hoarseness of voice for the past 3 months. There was no history suggestive of any respiratory illness, sore throat, neck surgery, trauma, intubation, cardiovascular accident, exposure to any irritants, hypothyroidism, vocal abuse, valvular or ischemic heart disease. The patient was a non smoker, but a chronic alcoholic for the past 30 years. He was a known hypertensive for the past 5 years and was on irregular medication for the same. On clinical examination there was no stridor, goiter, cervical lymphadenopathy. His blood pressure was 140/90mmHg. His cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal examinations were within normal limits. Indirect laryngoscopy and also a 90 rigid endoscopy revealed the left vocal fold fixed in paramedian position. Since no local cause of vocal fold palsy could be found, so further evaluation to find extralaryngeal causes of vocal fold palsy was done. Chest radiograph showed a left hilar opacity with mediastinal widening suggestive of a mediastinal mass. Laboratory investigations showed normal complete blood cell count. Serum lipid and thyroid levels were within normal limits. VDRL test was negative. Contrast enhanced computed tomography scans showed crescent shaped hypo attenuating area of size 6.8x1.8 cm along the left wall of aortic arch between the left common carotid and extending up to the left subclavian vessel with atherosclerotic plaque .
There was atrophy of the left thyroary- tenoid muscle with enlargement of the left laryngeal ventricle indicating left laryngeal nerve compression secondary to aortic intramural hematoma (,).
Even on retrospective repeated questioning, the patient did not divulge any other symptom regarding the disease except for hoarseness of voice. Patient was thus diagnosed as a case of cardiovocal hoarseness secondary to aortic intramural hematoma (Ortner’s syndrome). The patient was referred to the department of cardiology for further management.