In October 2013, a 78-year-old woman was admitted to our Oncology Unit because of the development of costal pain and cough. A chest CT-scan showed a complete atelectasis of the left lung inferior lobe, a solitary nodule in apex segment of the upper right lung lobe, the presence of multiple small nodules in basal posterior segments of the right lung lobe as well as in the middle and upper left lung lobes, and a left pleural effusion . She had a good performance status (PS) (ECOG PS = 0). Her prior medical history was remarkable for surgical excisions of two nodular BCCs of the trunk (0.5 × 0.3 cm and 0.6 × 0.7 cm, respectively, both without perivascular and perineural invasion) in 2003. In addition, she was an active smoker (40 packs/year).
In order to complete the pathological and clinical staging, the patient received a whole-body 18FDG-PET/CT and a bronchoscopy with a biopsy of the left lung lesion. The 18FDG-PET/CT showed a high metabolic activity of the lesion in the left lung, whereas the other lesions did not show any metabolic activity. The pathological examination demonstrated the diagnosis of lung squamous cell carcinoma (p63+, TTF-1-). She was staged as a stage IV NSCLC (according to TNM staging 7th edition).
Because of her good clinical conditions, the patient was treated with six cycles of chemotherapy with gemcitabine (1250 mg/m2), on days 1 and 8, plus cisplatin (75 mg/m2) on day 8, every 21 days. In May 2014, whole-body CT scan showed a partial response (PR) (according to RECIST 1.1 criteria) following six cycles of chemotherapy with 90% reduction of the hilar lesion and disappearance of the pleural effusion . Following multidisciplinary discussion, the patient received a consolidative radiotherapy treatment on the residual disease, obtaining a stable disease (SD) for an additional 8 months. However, in April 2015, a whole-body CT scan showed a progression of disease (PD) with an increased diameter of the left hilar lesion and the appearance of several hilar lymph nodes . Thus the patient received a second-line chemotherapy with 6 cycles of docetaxel (75 mg/m2) every 21 days, obtaining a SD. Unfortunately, in January 2016, a whole-body CT scan showed a PD with an increase of the pulmonary hilar lesion associated with atelectasis of the inferior left lobar bronchus and several pathological mediastinal lymph nodes . In order to reanalyze tumor histology and the molecular profile, we decided to perform a re-biopsy of the left lung lesion. Pathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of lung squamous cell carcinoma. No targetable oncogenic alterations (EGFR mutations, ALK/ROS-1 rearrangements and BRAF mutations) were detected. PD-L1 expression on tumor cells was scored as > 1% on tumor proportional score (TPS).
Based on these results, we decided to start a third-line treatment with the anti-PD-1 mAb nivolumab at the dose of 3 mg/kg, every 14 days. In February 2016, the patient started the administration of nivolumab. In May 2016, a CT scan showed a SD which was confirmed in successive restaging of the disease . Following 18 cycles of nivolumab treatment (in January 2017), in a good performance status and without experience of any immune-related adverse event, the patient developed an ulcerated lesion (diameter = 1.0 × 1.4 cm) localized at the right ala of nose . While she was on nivolumab treatment, in February 2017, she underwent an excisional skin biopsy. Histological examination of the lesion showed an ulcerated nodular BCC. Perivascular and perineural invasions were not detected. Surgical tumor margins were negative. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of tumor showed a PD-L1 expression < 1%, on both tumor cells and immune cells, and lack of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I and β2-microglobulin (β2m) expression on tumor cells . In addition, a limited number of T cells (CD3+) was present in the tumor microenvironment, with a higher number of regulatory T cells (Foxp3+) and macrophages (CD11b+) as compared to activated cytotoxic T cells (CD8+/ Granzyme B+) . After two months, while still being treated with nivolumab, the patient relapsed with a new BCC lesion in the same region of the previous surgical excision . A new surgical excision was performed and the pathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of a relapsed BCC with same pathological characteristics.
At present, the patient is still being treated with nivolumab. She has received 46 cycles of nivolumab. Sustained stable disease control is still ongoing for metastatic NSCLC. She is in good health conditions. No treatment-related toxicities have been observed. No additional BCC relapses have been detected so far.