The patient was an 85-year-old man who presented with appetite loss and choluria. His past medical history included hypertension, tuberculosis, and ulcerative colitis. Laboratory examination revealed elevated hepatobiliary enzyme and serum tumor marker levels: total bilirubin, 21.2 (normal range, 0.1–1.2) mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 83 (normal range, 5–30) IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 103 (normal range, 3–35) IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 1699 (normal range, 90–300) IU/L; γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, 926 (normal range, 1–28) IU/L, carcinoembryonic antigen, 5.9 (normal range, 0–5) ng/mL; carbohydrate antigen 19–9, 1966 (normal range, 0–37) ng/mL, and s-pancreas-1 antigen, 371.5 (normal range, 0–30) U/mL. Computed tomography revealed a low-density pancreatic head mass (diameter: 25 mm) and dilation of the common bile duct and pancreatic duct. The superior mesenteric vein (SMV) was located to the left of the superior mesenteric artery, and this phenomenon is known as the SMV rotation sign . The duodenal sweep did not cross the midline, the small bowel was located in the right abdomen, and the large bowel was located in the left abdomen . These findings are consistent with the characteristics of malrotation. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography revealed interruptions in the continuity of the common bile duct and main pancreatic duct, and brush cytology showed pseudo-positive findings. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer accompanied by malrotation. During laparotomy, we noticed that the ligament of Treitz was absent, the small bowel was in the right abdomen, and the ascending colon and cecum were not fixed to the retroperitoneum but were located in the median abdomen . These findings indicated the nonrotation-type malrotation. Pancreaticoduodenectomy with reconstruction using the modified Child’s method was performed. In addition, we fixed the ascending colon to the abdominal wall because the ascending colon and efferent loop twisted easily . The pathological diagnosis was as follows: tubular adenocarcinoma, moderately differentiated, and pT2N1M0 Stage IIB in accordance with the eighth edition of the UICC TNM Classification.
On postoperative 4th day, upper gastrointestinal (UGI) series showed that contrast medium easily flowed through the intestines , and the patient was prescribed a postoperative diet. On postoperative 8th day, the patient vomited and UGI series showed that contrast medium did not flow into the efferent loop . On postoperative 12th day, upper endoscopy revealed anastomotic edema and stricture; however, contrast medium flowed into the efferent loop . Although we treated the patient conservatively, he did not respond to the treatment. On postoperative 20th day, the upper endoscope could not pass through the anastomotic site and UGI series revealed right efferent loop twisting . On postoperative 22nd day, reoperation was performed. During laparotomy, it was found that the efferent loop had twisted 180° in the clockwise direction and was adherent to the right upper abdominal wall . Detorsion and Braun anastomosis were performed to prevent torsion and maintain the efferent loop continuity inferiorly . Postoperative oral intake was good, and the patient was discharged from our hospital on the 24th day after reoperation.