A 65-year-old South Asian male, a fisherman by profession (65 kg, BMI – 21 kg m−2) was planned for a Mckeown oesophagectomy for a moderately differentiated, mid-oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma staged as T3N2M0, in a District General Hospital in Sri Lanka. His smoking history revealed 20-pack years. In the preoperative contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT), the tumour length was 4.2 cm. No local visceral organ or distant metastasis was noted. He received neo-adjuvant chemo radiotherapy. Chemotherapy was provided according to FOLFOX regimen. Following 03 cycles, the patient became unwell and refused further chemotherapy. RECIST criteria (response evaluation criteria in solid tumours) could not be applied fully due to the limited availability of CT facilities. Post-neoadjuvant endoscopy revealed visible tumour regression. His lung functions suggested a moderate obstruction (FEV1/FVC < 70 %, FEV1–40 %). The rest of the medical, surgical, and family history was insignificant. Prehabilitation was carried out with a high protein diet (serum protein-51 g/L) through jejunostomy, chest physiotherapy, and cessation of smoking. Three-stage Mckeown oesophagectomy was carried out 4-weeks post-chemotherapy with a thoracic epidural, invasive monitoring, and a double-lumen ETT (DLT) facilitating right thoracotomy. The thoracic and abdominal dissections and tumour mobilization were carried out without difficulty. During the cervical dissection, iatrogenic injury to the posterior membranous part of the trachea was observed while dissecting fibrous bands. It was a 2-cm laceration around the C7–8 level. The upper border of the DLT tracheal cuff was visible across the lower margin of the laceration. There was a leak of anaesthetic gases through the defect. The DLT was gently advanced distally with the use of video bronchoscope until the leak was no longer heard. Due to an unavailability of an oncosurgeon or an ENT surgeon at our institution, a collaborative decision was taken by the two-experienced surgeons to carry out primary closure of the defect by interrupted sutures with 2.0 prolene and local transposition muscle flap using prevertebral muscles. The defect was repaired carefully. A suction tube was advanced through the tracheal lumen of the DLT, tracheal cuff was deflated and gentle manual breaths were provided with the adjustable pressure limiting valve set at 20-cmH2O pressure. Instillation of 0.9 % saline around the repair did not reveal any air leaks. Subsequently, the cervical anastomosis was completed with meticulous dissection. Ryles tube was used throughout the surgery and used as an aid to identify the oesophagus during cervical dissection. DLT was replaced with a size 7.5 mm single lumen ETT under direct vision and the use of video-bronchoscope to avoid any disruption of the tracheal repair site by the ETT or inflated cuff. The right lung was inflated with an intercostal drain in-situ. The total operative time was 6 h and 45 min. At the completion of the procedure, the patient was admitted to intensive care with the ETT and sedated and ventilated for 48 h for the tissue oedema to settle and aid in healing the repair site. Continuous bubbling was noticed from the right intercostal drain. The chest x-ray revealed a small pneumothorax on the right lung. Hemodynamic parameters were stable and no mediastinal shift was noted in sequential X-rays. There was no subcutaneous emphysema in the neck suggesting disruption of the tracheal repair. On postoperative day 2, he was extubated under remifentanil cover which facilitated smooth extubation. Routine post-operative care was provided with gentle chest physiotherapy. The pneumothorax and the bubbling completely resolved with full expansion of the lung and the intercostal drainage was removed on day 3. On day 4, he was discharged to the ward HDU and home on day 07. The pathological staging was pT3N2M0. Postoperative chemotherapy was continued. He was followed up regularly at the outpatient clinic. At 2 years, he continued to abstain from smoking. He had no recurrence of the disease or symptoms suggestive of tracheal stenosis .