A 45-year-old woman presented to the outpatient department with a lump in the lower right quadrant of her abdomen that had been evolving since 10 years. She also complained of exacerbating cyclic abdominal pain, which was not associated with fever, vomiting, diarrhea, or constipation. Her past medical history was unremarkable other than two cesarean deliveries by a Pfannenstiel incision in 2007 and 2011. No family history of cancer was mentioned.
Physical examination showed a huge subcutaneous lump arising in the caesarean scar. It had a cystic consistency and showed inflammatory and necrotic cutaneous changes .
An abdominal MRI revealed a voluminous subcutaneous mass developing in the anterior abdominal wall and contracting a contact with the rectus abdominis muscle . A biopsy was done but was inconclusive.
A monoblock excision of this abdominal mass was performed by an assistant professor in digestive surgery. The postoperative course was uneventful. The specimen was then sent to our pathology department for histolopathological evaluation. Macroscopic examination showed a well limited tumor of 20 × 14 × 11 cm which had a whitish cut section and contains foci of necrosis .
Histologically, the tumor consisted on a carcinomatous proliferation formed by tubulocystic and papillary structures and solid nests. Tumor cells had a clear cytoplasm and showed moderate nuclear atypia without mitosis. Foci of necrosis were extensive (a). Immunostaining was positive and strong with CK7, PAX8, Napsin A, patchy with PR and P53 and negative with CK20,WT-1, and calretinin (b-c-d). No foci of endometriosis were found. Considering histopathological and immunohistochemical findings, the hypothesis of clear cell carcinoma of the female genital tract was raised. The patient was subsequently referred to the gynecology and obstetrics department. She underwent coelioscopic and hysteroscopic exploration of the gynecologic tract which was performed by an associate professor in gynecology and obstetrics. Biopsies of the endometrium and ovaries were negative for malignancy. Afterwards, the patient underwent a hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy which did not reveal any disease. The diagnosis of primitive clear cell carcinoma of the abdominal wall was then confirmed. The admission course was uneventful.
Clinical and radiological monitoring in the outpatient unit revealed the absence of recurrence and metastasis after a 12-month follow up.