A 74-year-old female presented to the hospital with acute left-sided chest pain, neck swelling and shortness of breath for one hour. In the emergency department, she appeared in respiratory distress and was placed on supplemental oxygen.
She was in her usual state of health, when she developed acute onset left-sided severe chest pain that was sharp in nature and non-radiating. It was worse with inspiration and had no relieving factors. It was associated with significant shortness of breath and neck swelling that prompted her to seek medical attention.
She had a past medical history of End-Stage COPD (FEV1-15%) with severe diffuse emphysema and underwent a successful single right lung transplant in July 2004 . Her medications included tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and prednisone for immunosuppression and sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, valacyclovir and itraconazole for Pneumocystis, cytomegalovirus and fungal infections prophylaxis respectively. Her peak FEV1 on post-operative follow up was 65%. She had no evidence of acute rejection on early surveillance bronchoscopies.
Unfortunately, in 2015, eleven years following the transplantation, she developed acute complicated diverticulitis requiring urgent right hemicolectomy and ileostomy. Her postoperative course was complicated by frequent episodes of dehydration and acute kidney injury. She also had two bouts of lower lobe pneumonia involving the allograft and acute tubular necrosis that eventually progressed to chronic kidney disease. On subsequent follow-ups, she complained of worsening dyspnea and cough. Her spirometry revealed a gradual decline in FEV1 from a peak of 65% of predicted to a nadir of 51% . In November 2018, she presented with worsening renal function, volume overload, and recurrent left-sided pleural effusions . Hemodialysis was initiated, and therapeutic thoracentesis was performed with 1200 cc transudative fluid removal. Despite the optimization of her volume status, she continued to have worsening dyspnea and lung function along with recurrent left-sided pleural effusions. We excluded ongoing acute cellular rejection by transbronchial biopsies, and a diagnosis of chronic lung allograft dysfunction prompted replacing mycophenolate with sirolimus. She also had a tunneled pleural catheter placed in left pleural space for recurrent effusions. She was placed on inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting bronchodilators with minimal improvement. By December 2018, she was on supplemental oxygen at 4 L/min by nasal cannula for chronic hypoxemic respiratory failure.
She had no significant family history. Prior to lung transplantation she was a lifelong smoker with 40 pack year smoking history and subsequently quit in 2003. She denied any illicit drug use or alcohol use.
Her blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg and pulse was 100/min and oxygen saturation was 86% on 4 liters of oxygen via nasal cannula. On inspection she was using accessory respiratory muscles and appeared in respiratory distress. She had significant subcutaneous emphysema with crepitus extending up to the neck. On auscultation of the chest, there were absent breath sounds on the left hemithorax.
Initial laboratory examination was largely insignificant with normal hemoglobin, white blood cell count, platelets, liver function and electrolytes. She had history of chronic kidney disease and her blood urea nitrogen and creatinine were 48 mg/dL and 2.3 mg/dL respectively.
A chest radiograph revealed a large left hydropneumothorax with an indwelling pigtail drainage catheter in the left pleural space. The native left lung was partially collapsed. There was subcutaneous emphysema in the left chest wall .