A 75-year-old female underwent left total hip arthroplasty secondary to severe osteoarthritis in 1989 with a subsequent revision surgery due to pain. The patient has a history of hypercholesterolemia and no predisposing comorbidities or risk factors (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis, immune-suppressive therapy with steroids, liver cirrhosis, etc.).
In November 2018, the patient was admitted to the hospital due to the appearance of secreting sinus, subsequently treated by antibiotic therapy without any improvement. Physical examinations revealed the presence of inflammatory signs (i.e. heat, pain, and redness). Radiographs highlighted bone loosening with the migration of prosthetic components . Laboratory tests showed a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 4.43 mg/l and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 88 mm/hour.
The next day, the patient underwent revision surgery of the left hip prosthesis for a suspected PJI. After the debridement of the infected soft tissue, a Vancogenx-Space (Tecres S.p.a.) spacer loaded with vancomycin and gentamicin was fixed with Simplex™ bone cement (Stryker) with erythromycin and colistin, further enriched with 3 g vancomycin. Vancomycin (1 g/2 days) and meropenem (1 g/2 days) was used in peri-operative prophylaxis. Histological analysis depicted a chronic inflammation with fibroconnective tissue speculating an ongoing metallosis. Three periprosthetic tissue samples and the implant itself were collected intraoperatively and sent to the laboratory for culture. Aliquots of eluate obtained after treatment with 0.1% dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich) were then cultured in proper conditions . After incubation, all the samples yielded the growth of Gram-positive cocci identified as Staphylococcus capitis by means of Vitek2 System (BioMeriéux). The antibiotic treatment started the day of surgery with intravenous antibiotics (vancomycin 1 g every 12 h and meropenem 1 g every 8 h) and shifted to vancomycin alone after the antimicrobial susceptibility profile was obtained. It was suspended due to cutaneous erythema 10 days after. Therefore, based on antimicrobial susceptibility results, treatment was continued with oral trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg every 12 h for 6 weeks). During the hospitalization period, urinalysis and urine culture were routinely performed without evidencing any sign of infection due to bacteria or yeasts. Nineteen days after surgery CRP levels decreased and the patient was discharged from the hospital.
However, 3 months later, the patient was attended to the emergency room due to the presence of inflammatory signs (i.e. edema and swelling). She did not report any infectious event in the period from hospital discharge to the admission to emergency department when specifically asked. Synovial fluid was collected and sent to the laboratory for culture. The sample was plated on agar plates and inoculated into proper broths. No evidence of S. capitis was detected, however, a yeast grew on Chocolate agar and Sabouraud agar plates and after 3 days, also in BHI broth. The yeast was identified as Candida albicans by Vitek2 system. The retrieved C. albicans was susceptible to all the tested antifungal agents (amphotericin B MIC = 0.5 mg/l; caspofungin MIC ≤0.12 mg/l; flucytosine MIC ≤0.1 mg/l; fluconazole MIC ≤0.5 mg/l; micafungin MIC ≤0.06 mg/l; voriconazole MIC ≤0.12 mg/l).
Fifteen days later, the patient was hospitalized for the removal of the infected spacer. Briefly, a custom-made spacer was created with StageOne™ Select Hip Cement Spacer Molds (Zimmer Biomet) using the Refobacin® Bone Cement R (Zimmer Biomet) containing gentamicin and clindamycin and further enriched with 400 mg voriconazole. Afterward, the explanted spacer was sent to the laboratory together with biopsies of the surrounding soft tissues and the synovial fluid. The synovial fluid analysis evidenced a leukocyte count of 2926 cells/μl with 74.3% of polymorphonuclear cells. Leukocyte esterase resulted positive (score 2+). Microbiological cultures confirmed the results of the synovial fluid sample collected in the emergency room with the isolation of C. albicans with the same susceptibility profile. Again, cultures were negative for S. capitis. According to the susceptibility profile, the patient was treated with fluconazole (400 mg/day). Additionally, 1 g vancomycin and 1 g meropenem until the results of the intra-operative cultural examination were administered. The same therapeutic plan was followed once the patient was discharged from the hospital for the next 6 months. In November 2019, the patient underwent second-stage surgery, performed with an un-cemented hip revision implant (multihole acetabular component also fixed with screws and diaphyseal stem with distal femoral grip) to overcome the huge loss of bone substance as a consequence of the infection and previous interventions. The removed spacer was sent to the laboratory and the microbiological tests were all negative, hence, after 15 days the antifungal and antibiotic therapy was suspended. After 12 months of follow-up, the patient has fully recovered and no radiological signs of infection have been detected.