A 69-year-old woman with a past medical history of hypertension, tuberculosis, and meningioma presented with abnormal vaginal bleeding for 10 days as well as fever. Furthermore, her family history was unremarkable. Physical examination revealed a barrel-shaped uterus. The patient felt mild tenderness upon palpation. Laboratory studies noted an elevated carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125) level of 201.1 U/ml, while the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19–9) levels were normal.
The patient underwent a pelvic Two-dimensional ultrasound that showed an enlarged uterus and a heterogeneous mass in the cervix. Then, MRI examination of the pelvis was performed with a 1.5 Tesla MR scanner (Ingenia 1.5 T; Philips Healthcare, The Netherlands). The T2-weighted images showed that the uterus was replaced by an ill defined and diffuse lesion with inhomogeneous intensity. On T1-weighted images, the lesion appeared with hypointensity. The lesion showed invasive growth with enlarged lymph nodes in the pelvic cavity. DCE-MRI demonstrated inhomogeneous enhancement and resulted in a plateaued curve with a prolonged scanning time . PET/CT fusion images showed abnormal FDG accumulation, with maximum SUVs of 24.8 and 19.3 for the uterus and pelvic lymph node, respectively . Therefore, uterine malignancy with nodal metastasis was diagnosed.
The patient underwent hysterectomy and bilateral adnexectomy with pelvic lymph node dissection. Macroscopically, the uterus was enlarged with thickened myometrium, which was grey and yellow on the cut surface with poor elasticity and brittle texture. Additionally, some nodules could be seen in the myometrium. Histologically, haematoxylin and eosin (HE) stained sections showed that the uterine tumour was composed of spindle cells and nodal metastasis was confirmed. Immunohistochemical analysis supported the diagnosis of USC . The patient received postoperative systemic radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The patient remained well and has no evidence of recurrence at the postoperative 6-month follow-up.