We report a case of a 37-year-old white female who presented with an echocardiographic diagnosis of severe mitral valve regurgitation and had a history of fatigue, weakness and dyspnea on exertion for last three months. Her symptoms were not further investigated considering the severe mitral valvular disease. She had no other co-morbidities and the preoperative EuroSCORE was 3. She was scheduled for an elective mitral valve repair surgery.
The patient underwent routine median sternotomy. At direct inspection of the retro-sternal space, the superior third of the anterior mediastinum was filled with a 2 × 1.5 cm mass arising from left lobe of thymus . The mass was not invasive and easily resectable. No intraoperative frozen sections were examined. However, A total thymectomy was performed before opening the pericardium. Thereafter, the classic mitral valve repair was performed without any intraoperative or perioperative complication.
In the postoperative stay, high titers of anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies and anti-striated muscle antibodies were found (9.1 nmol/L and titer >1:80, respectively) and myasthenia gravis was diagnosed. MG diagnosis was further confirmed by the positive tensilon test. The severity of MG was retrospectively evaluated in the postoperative period according to the clinical classification of the Medical Scientific Advisory Board of the Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of America (MGFA) . The patient was classified to be in MGFA class IIa, as mild weakness involved not only ocular muscles but also axial muscles while oropharyngeal and respiratory muscles were not concerned. The histopathologic examination of the specimen revealed a completely excised thymoma. It was classified as type A accordingly to new World Health Organization classification of Rosai and Sabin (WHO type A or medullary). Using the staging process described by Masaoka, this specimen was staged to be as Masaoka Stage I since macroscopically it was a completely encapsulated thymoma with no microscopically determined capsular invasion .
The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 6 to home-rehabilitation in tele-cardiology without any complications. The patient was strictly monitored by a multidisciplinary team composed of a cardiologist, a surgeon and a neurologist for regular follow-ups. No MG therapy was initiated considering the recent operation and the good clinical status. At six-month follow-up, no mitral regurgitation was detected by transthoracic echocardiography and the symptoms related to MG were completely remitted. The anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies titer decreased to 4.2 nmol/L. At 1-year follow-up a complete stable remission (CSR) was assessed according to the MGFA Post-Intervention Status Classification and the acetylcholine receptor antibodies titer had further decreased to 1.4 nmol/L .