A 24-year-old male patient with no significant past medical history presented with a new, large, and tender lump under his right upper arm and axilla for four months with associated fever and chills for two days. The patient reported a key history of sleeping with his cat and experiencing a recent cat bite. On localized physical examination, two tender subcutaneous nodules in the right upper arm and axilla, measuring 5 cm and 1 cm in diameter, respectively, were discovered. Given his clinical presentation, social history, and physical examination, the differential diagnosis included lymphoma, reactive lymphadenopathy, abscess, deep epidermal inclusion cyst, and CSD. This clinical presentation is an exceptional diagnosis of adult Cat-scratch disease and could be mistaken for a neoplasm (lymphoma) or mycobacteriosis.
General physical examination on the presentation revealed that the patient moderately built, moderately nourished, presented febrile with temperature 37.6°C, blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg and pulse rate of 76/min. No abnormality was detected clinically in systemic examination. On localized examination, finding of axillary lymphadenopathy was evident hence further workup by imaging is indicated. An ultrasonography image revealed enlarged right axillary lymph nodes with cortical thickening, measuring up to 33 mm, prompting further investigation with axillary lymph node biopsy . Serology studies were not available for this case.
The specimens of axillary lymph nodes were obtained by multiple excisions . Dimension of lateral node tissue was 3,5 x 2 x 1 cm and central node was 4,5 x 2 x 1 cm. The lymph nodes were fixed with 10% neutral buffered formalin solution for 24 hours, embedded in paraffin and cut into 4μm-thick sections, then stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) for 2 hours. Later the specimens were dehydrated with 95% alcohol for 5 minutes in four times and xylene for 5 minutes twice. Specimens were observed histologically using a CX23 Olympus microscope.
Histological examination of these two specimens showed subcapsular microabscesses at the cortical area without granuloma formation. Monocytoid cell hyperplasia were prominent around microabscess foci and seen at the area of paracortex . Residual secondary lymphoid follicles still showed polarized pattern. Atypical cells were not observed microscopically.
After the clinical examinations, we diagnosed the patient with CSD. The patient was surgically and pharmacologically treated with lymphadenectomy and azithromycin 500 mg bd for 7 days prior the diagnosis confirmation. The patient was completely cured with no additional complaints during two weeks of follow-up .