A 76 year old man was refferd from a District Hospital for further treatment of a tumor in retro-peritoneal space, originating from the left adrenal gland.
The patient was admitted to the District Hospital for investigation of macroscopic haematuria and lumbar pain during the last 48 hours. He had a past medical history of hypertension and hepatitis B. The laboratory investigations revealed hypercalcaemia and in an abdominal ultrasound scan (US), a mass was detected in the retroperitoneal space close to the left kidney. Then a Computed Tomography (CT) scan with contrast was performed which revealed an enhancing mass, 10 cm in diameter, between the pancreas and the left kidney originating from the left adrenal gland. No other pathological findings from intra or extra-peritoneal organs were identified . The serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) concentration was 75.6 ng/ml (normal range: 0–10 ng/ml) and C19-9 concentration 37.6 ng/ml, while the liver function tests were normal.
After his admission to our Department, the patient was tested for underlying hormonally active tumor by low dose (1 mg) overnight dexamethasone suppression test and a 24-hour urine collection for catecholamines, cortisol, 17-ketosteroids, metanephrines and vanillylmandelic acid. As the patient was hypertensive, plasma aldosterone and plasma rennin were also tested. None of the tests indicated a functional adrenal tumor. The patient was under surveillance due to hepatitis B and had been subjected to AFP measurement and US scan 2, 8 and 14 months prior to his admission (AFP: 65, 69 and 60 ng/ml respectively). Regarding the facts that there was not remarkable increase in the AFP level during the last 14 months, the multiple US scans were negative and the CT scan on admission did not reveal any intrahepatic lesion, HCC was not considered in our patient.
With a presumptive diagnosis of a non-functional adrenal tumor, the patient underwent left adrenalectomy through a left Köcher incision. The exploration of the other intra-peritoneal organs did not reveal any other palpable lesions while the liver was found to be cirrhotic during the operation. The resected lesion was a firm elastic mass measuring 11.5 cm by 7.5 cm . The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on day 7. Histologically, the resected lesion was a poorly differentiated metastatic HCC with trabecullar patterns. The patient was then informed of the findings and contacted for readmission, further investigation and adjuvant therapy. However, despite our repeated attempts, the patient refused to be subjected to any further investigation or treatment.
Seven months later patient presented with cachexia, icterus, abdominal discomfort and significant weight loss (more than 10 % of body weight). The serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) concentration was 1620.5 ng/ml and the serum bilirubin 5.4 mg/dL. CT scan revealed hyperdense lesions of the liver . Even though Trans-Arterial Embolization (TAE) was then performed, the serum AFP concentration showed persistently elevation to 3543 ng/ml one month later, and the patient died 3 months after readmission due to rapidly progressive liver failure.