A 50-year-old Chinese man presented to the orthopedics department with chief complaints of osphyalgia, right buttock pain, and radiating pain from the right buttock to the back of the right leg. The right buttock pain was the most prominent symptom. The pain was accelerated by movement and relieved by lying supine, which induced abnormal walk in the patient. No previous relevant treatment or surgery was reported. Additionally, there was no significant relevant family or social history.
Lasegue’s sign and its strengthening test were positive. Physical examination also demonstrated the positive findings of right femoral nerve traction test and Faber test, and the limitation of right hip abduction was observed. Neurological examination of the lower limb did not demonstrate any loss of sensation or reduced muscle power in any of the nerve root distributions. Non-remarkable finding was revealed after the abdominal examination.
As no apparent abnormalities were indicated upon the plain radiograph imaging of his lumbar spine, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the lumbar/sacral area of the spine was then suggested, showing lumbar disc herniation (LDH), which did not account for the patient’s predominant right buttock pain. Thus, the musculoskeletal ultrasound (MSK-US) for the sciatic nerve scanning was performed, implying that the right sciatic nerve was pushed by an anechoic mass within the right piriformis muscle measuring 6 cm mediolateral, 2.3 cm anteroposterior, and 2.6 cm craniocaudal. The lobulated mass was cystic-like with regular margins and no posterior wall enhancement . Subsequently, further MRI of the pelvis and ipsilateral hip indicated a cystic-like lesion in piriformis muscle region with low T1 signal and high T2 signal, and the maximum measurement was about 3.1 cm mediolateral and 2.2 cm anteroposterior . Considering these results, a piriformis ganglion was suspected, and the differential diagnoses included hematoma, metastatic tumor, and so forth.
Aiming to achieve the final diagnosis, the ultrasonography-guided aspiration was conducted, but failed due to unextracted cystic fluid. In addition, significant resistance was encountered when injecting with physiological saline. As for the undefined nature of the mass and the associated serious symptoms, malignancy could not be excluded; the patient was suggested to undergo piriformis muscle mass resection and neurolysis of sciatic nerve. Operative finding showed the compression of right sciatic nerve by a fat-like mass at the lower margin of piriformis muscle measuring 5 cm mediolateral, 2 cm anteroposterior, and 2 cm craniocaudal. Final histology revealed that the lesion was fibrous adipose tissue, which was consistent with diagnosis of lipoma . The patient exhibited significant relief of symptoms 3 days post-surgery. No recurrence of relevant symptoms was observed during 24-month follow-up period.