A 44-year-old male was admitted to our clinic with a history of left-side nasal obstruction, episodes of epistaxis, hyposmia, and postnasal discharge over the previous 2 months. The patient had undergone endoscopic sinus surgery 2 years earlier for bilateral sinusitis at another clinic. Otherwise, his medical history was unremarkable. General and neurological examinations and routine laboratory test results were unremarkable. Non-contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) sections revealed an extensive hypodense non-calcified lesion occupying the left nasal cavity and pushing against the lateral nasal wall . The lesion showed heterogeneous iodinated contrast enhancement and demonstrated remodeling of the adjacent bony structure . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the tumor mass was of slightly lower intensity than the brain parenchyma on T1-weighted images and heterogeneously isointense on T2-weighted images, with significant heterogeneous contrast enhancement on gadolinium administration . The preoperative CT and MRI showed an endonasal soft tissue mass with no intracranial connection. During the operation, a friable mass originating from the bony-cartilage junction of the nasal septum and extending to the lateral nasal wall was resected completely with the attached septal cartilage and nasal mucosa via an endoscopic endonasal approach. The safety margins were free of disease.
Microscopically, the tumor cells were arranged in sheet-like growths or were uninterrupted and patternless and showed nasal septum invasion . No cellular whorl, psammoma body, or necrosis was observed. Individual tumor cells had round-to-oval nuclei, with prominent nucleoli and dense nuclear membranes. Mitosis was seen frequently (7/10 HFP, Figure B). The immunohistochemical profile was positive for epithelial membrane antigen and vimentin , focal positive for S-100 protein, and negative for cytokeratin, p63, and smooth muscle actin. This histopathological investigation led to a diagnosis of an atypical meningioma (WHO Grade II) according to WHO criteria [,].
Two years later, the patient was readmitted to the Hematology and Oncology Department of our hospital with recurrent severe epistaxis and general weakness, which had developed over the previous month. He also described breathing difficulties. Paranasal sinus CT showed recurrence of the left nasal cavity tumor, with palate and maxilla region involvement. Histological investigation of this second tumor showed morphological characteristics similar to the primary tumor . Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) was used to identify distant metastases. PET/CT showed no abnormal glucose metabolic activity, except in the nasal cavity and palate region. The patient received local external radiotherapy (6840 cGy in 38 fractions) for local recurrence of meningioma.
Two months after local recurrence, subcutaneous tumors were found located on the left anterior chest wall (1.5 × 1.2 cm) and left parietal region (0.5 × 0.4 cm). The tumors were removed under local anesthesia. Histological examination showed morphological characteristics similar to the primary tumor ; however, the mitotic index (up to 40 mitoses within 10 HPF) and Ki-67 labeling index (40%) were higher than those of the primary counterpart. Foci of geographic necrosis were also found . The tumor was classified as a malignant (WHO Grade III) meningioma.
After radiation therapy, the nasal cavity tumor shrank markedly. However, 2 weeks after the radiation therapy, multiple small subcutaneous tumors occurred over the entire body. At that time, the patient was very debilitated and did not want any other intensive treatment. He was transferred to a palliative care facility and died 3 months later.