38 years old female operated eight times for the last twenty years for recurrent primary hyperparathyroidism. The first operation was done in 2003 at the age of 18, the patient presented initially to the emergency department with lower limbs pain. The laboratory results showed high serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) level of 3552 pg/ml (Normal range: 10–60 pg/ml) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) level of 2920 mg/dl (normal range 50-150 mg/dl). Neck ultrasound (US) showed a single 4 × 3 cm cystic area left to the thyroid region. (99 m)Tc-MIBI scan revealed abnormal uptake in the upper mediastinum with normal thyroid. She underwent excision of the cyst with accidental rupture of the functioning parathyroid cyst resulting in spillage of the contents in the operative field, discharge safely with normal calcium level at that time. In 2006 she was admitted with a history of stable neck swelling for 1 year. Serum calcium was slightly elevated at 2.82 mmol/L (Normal rang 2.0–2.52 mmol/L), PTH 224 pg/ml, ALP 155 mg/dl. Neck US and (99 m)Tc-MIBI scan showed parathyroid adenoma 1.5 cm anterior to left sternocleidomastoid. Excision of the nodule was done, and intra-op PTH dropped from 573 to 206 pg/ml. Histopathology examination revealed parathyroid adenoma. By 2008, she had recurrent bone pain. Investigated by Computed tomography (CT) and (99 m) Tc-MIBI scan with findings of right inferior parathyroid lesion. Neck exploration and excision of the parathyroid gland implanted in sternocleidomastoid and subcutaneous nodules were performed. Intraoperative PTH exhibits a non-significant drop. Post-operative (99 m) Tc-MIBI scan revealed normal region uptake and serum calcium level was in the high upper range. In 2012, she had classical symptoms of hypercalcemia. Parathyroid hormone was high at 2204 pg/ml. Multiple well-defined, midline, subcutaneous, infra-hyoid soft tissue lesions largest was 15x12mm in the anterior border of the right sternomastoid were detected in US and MRI neck. Neck exploration was done with complete excision, and intraoperative PTH significantly dropped. Two years later, she was found to have nephrolithiasis and palpable nodules in the previous collar scar along with a high PTH level of 386.6 pg/ml and calcium level of 3.05 mmol/L. (99 m) Tc-MIBI scan showed right inferior parathyroid adenoma. Excision of hypertrophic collar incision scar with extensive dissection over left sternocleidomastoid muscle and excision of parathyroid subcutaneous implantation was done. Histopathology revealed multiple parathyroid nodules with cystic change. After six months of follow-up, PTH gradually increase to 179.5 pg/ml, and a soft tissue lesion, located left side of the midline of the neck root area, about 10 mm x6mm was found in the US, and planned for follow-up at that time. In 2017, (99 m) Tc-MIBI scan was repeated with the same findings of parathyroid adenoma, calcium level fluctuating 2.7–2.9 mmol/L, started on cinacalcet and Cholecalciferol. Despite medical management, she had persistent hyperparathyroidism. US neck and SPECT-Mibi scan has suggestive of left inferior parathyroid adenoma with another focal uptake in right muscular region (, ). In 2018, surgical intervention was decided, and the patient underwent left inferior parathyroidectomy and right subcutaneous cyst excision, PTH dropped from 1003 to 545.9 pg/ml. The patient's bone pain had reoccurred, and there was ectopic parathyroid at the lower part of the left sternocleidomastoid muscle seen in the neck ultrasound. Medical therapy continued with the addition of Denosumab. later on, excision and dissection of the left parathyroid deposit in the left sternocleidomastoid muscle were done with a significant drop in PTH. In 2020, she was found to have high PTH 323 pg/ml after her follow-up, and (99 m) Tc-MIBI demonstrated a new parathyroid recurrence above the superior pole of the left lobe and ectopic parathyroid adenoma in the left sternomastoid location . Underwent excision of 3 ectopic parathyroid nodules with significant PTH drop. Over the last 2 years, she has been followed up and kept in medical therapy, with a current good control in serum calcium level. The case is summarized in .