A 31-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) with nausea, emesis, and altered mental status. Past medical history was notable for major depressive disorder treated with escitalopram and bupropion and had no known prior cardiac history. She reported obtaining sodium azide from a laboratory facility and ingesting an unknown amount within 12 h of presentation in a suicide attempt. Admission vital signs were notable for sinus tachycardia to 100 b.p.m., blood pressure of 115/69 mm Hg, temperature of 97.6°F, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and an oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. On physical exam, the patient had mydriasis and was awake and alert but oriented only to person. A review of systems was negative for fever, chills, cough, shortness of breath, dysuria, syncope, and new rashes. The patient was initially chest pain free; however, she started experiencing intermittent, sub-sternal, dull, non-radiating chest pain exacerbated by deep inspiration during her inpatient admission at 48 h after ingestion.
Admission laboratory testing included a venous blood gas with pH of 7.30, CO2 of 16 mm Hg, and lactic acid of 15.7 mmol/L. The basic metabolic panel had an anion gap of 25 mmol/L and a serum bicarbonate level of 11 mmol/L, whereas the complete blood count noted a neutrophilic predominant (85.6%) leukocytosis to 14 610/mcL. The hepatic function panel was within normal limits. Nasal swab PCR tests were negative for influenza A/B, Respiratory Syncytial Virus, and SARS-CoV-2. Urine drug testing was negative, and acetaminophen/ethanol/salicylate levels were undetectable. Initial cardiac biomarkers were negative, and the initial electrocardiogram (ECG) was notable for sinus tachycardia to 100 b.p.m. and a QTc of 530 ms. A subsequent ECG performed while experiencing chest pain on hospital Day 2 showed new ST-segment depression in lead aVR and diffuse ST elevations most notable in the inferior leads (II, III, and aVF) and V3-6 . High-sensitivity troponin-T peaked at 179.8 ng/L (upper limit of normal ≤14 ng/L) and normalized within 4 days at which point her ECG was back to baseline . The C-reactive protein assay peaked at 7.71 mg/L (reference range 0–5.0 mg/L), whereas the erythrocyte sedimentation rate remained negative. A transthoracic echocardiogram was notable for a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 50% without focal wall motion abnormalities, normal valvular function, and no evidence of a pericardial effusion.
On presentation to the ED, toxicology was consulted, and the patient was admitted to the medical intensive care unit (ICU) for close monitoring. With the onset of chest pain and the aforementioned ECG changes, the patient was transferred to the cardiac ICU. Treatment was initiated with colchicine 0.6 mg twice daily with as needed ibuprofen for symptomatic relief. The patient noted improvement in the intensity and frequency of chest pain within 24–48 h and complete symptom resolution within 4 days of treatment initiation. Colchicine was administered for a total of 14 days while inpatient and discontinued upon discharge from the hospital given the risk of recurrent suicide attempt with colchicine ingestion. At a 1-month follow-up appointment, the patient remained asymptomatic and no further cardiac testing was pursued.