A 34-year-old woman presented with two weeks of diplopia. Her medical history included obesity, myopia treated with laser in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) treatment in both eyes, and pilonidal cyst removal. The patient was evaluated in the ophthalmic emergency room with binocular horizontal diplopia and moderate-to-severe headache of one week duration. She denied trauma, recent illness, pain with eye movement, numbness, weakness, change in menstrual cycle or recent weight changes. On examination, she had an 8-prism diopter right esotropia in primary gaze with a −2 abduction deficit of the right eye. The remainder of the cranial nerve exam was normal. A complete neurologic and systemic physical exam was performed and was otherwise normal. The visual acuity was 20/20 in each eye, and the remainder of the ophthalmic examination (intraocular pressure, pupillary exam, slit lamp and fundus examinations) was normal. The findings were consistent with an acute isolated sixth cranial nerve palsy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and orbits revealed a 2.2 × 3.0 × 2.5 cm sellar/suprasellar mass with internal cystic necrotic component and abutment of the cavernous sinuses ( and ). The pituitary stalk was thickened and deviated to the left. The mass extended into the right sphenoid sinus, dorsum sellae, and clivus. Prolactin, adrenocorticotropic hormone, cortisol, follicle stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone were within normal limits. Gross total resection was achieved via an endoscopic transnasal transsphenoidal approach, as confirmed on post-operative MRI. Pathology of the clival lesion revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. The lesion was also sent for next-generation sequencing of DNA/RNA and immunohistochemistry (Claris Life Sciences).
At three weeks after the resection, her sixth cranial nerve palsy improved; she was no longer diplopic in primary gaze, although she had a residual 6-diopter right esotropia on right gaze. Humphrey visual field testing, retinal nerve fiber layer and ganglion cell layer optical coherence tomography were normal, which is consistent with radiographic findings that there was no compression of the optic chiasm or nerve.
At five weeks after resection, the patient developed new onset horizontal diplopia in primary gaze with a worsened (−4) abduction deficit of the right eye. An MRI at that time revealed recurrence of a mass centered in the sphenoid sinus with new bulging into the right cavernous sinus and involvement of right Dorello’s canal ( and ). Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scan at that time demonstrated a large hypermetabolic partially necrotic mass in the right hepatic lobe extending to the caudate lobe. There was also a hypermetabolic left hepatic lobe mass and hypermetabolic portocaval lymph node suspicious for metastasis.
The liver lesions were biopsied and histology revealed a moderate to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, consistent with cholangiocarcinoma, with immunostains positive for cytokeratin (CK)7, CK20, and CK19. Immunostaining of the metastatic clival lesion was also positive for CK7 and CK20. Alkaline phosphatase (169 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST; 34 U/L) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT; 68 U/L) were mildly elevated, whereas total bilirubin levels were normal. Cancer antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) at the time of diagnosis was 164 U/mL. Next generation RNA whole transcriptome sequencing of the metastatic tissue revealed an FGFR2-BICC1 gene fusion (exon 17 of FGFR2 joined in-frame to exon 3 of BICC1), which has been described in a molecular subtype of cholangiocarcinoma patients and has been shown to drive cell proliferation. Next generation sequencing of DNA from the metastatic lesion also revealed a pathogenic variant in exon 2 of the cell cycle regulator gene CDKN2A (c.238C>T).
At seven weeks after resection, the patient received stereotactic radiotherapy applied to the brain lesion (30 Gy in five fractions) and then began treatment with gemcitabine and cisplatin. At 13 weeks after resection, MRI of the brain revealed an interval increase in size of the clival lesion with further invasion of the cavernous sinus and dural extension ( and ). The patient continued gemcitabine and cisplatin treatment for eight cycles with a partial metabolic improvement in her multiple liver lesions on PET/CT, and slightly decreased size of the clival lesion on MRI. Then, at 33 weeks after resection, treatment was changed to pemigatinib, a kinase inhibitor approved by the FDA for the patients with cholangiocarcinoma harboring fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR2) gene fusions or rearrangements. Ten weeks after starting pemigatinib, there was again a slightly decreased size of the clival lesion on MRI brain. CA 19-9 levels prior to starting chemotherapy, after eight cycles of gemcitabine and cisplatin, and with ongoing pemigatinib monotherapy (at 45 weeks after resection) were 260, 161, and 28 U/mL, respectively. The patient was alive at 49 weeks after initial presentation.