On August 27, 2020, a 28-year-old woman, was admitted to the chest clinic in Rania Medical City (RMC) private hospital, she presented with gradual swelling in the left supraclavicular region, at the beginning the mass was painless, but within 1 month the pain started with no past medical and surgical history.
Subsequently, physical examination revealed a hard, painful, tender, non-pulsative mass at the left supraclavicular region , on the course of the external jugular vein, the mass in the first month was enlarging during lying on the bed. The skin overlying the mass did not have any signs of inflammation. The vital signs within normal limits. Regarding laboratory findings, there was no significant alterations. Additionally, there was no history of cervical trauma, cannulation of the neck vessels, prior hospital admission, or previous thromboembolic or oncological diseases. There was no cervical lymphadenopathy. The patient did not have symptoms in the otorhinolaryngological, thoracic or abdominal areas. She did not have night sweat, and neither weight loss, nor fever, no traveling recently. Chest, abdomen examination, and blood tests were normal. The patient was referred for a confirmatory US evaluation from a qualified radiologist, which revealed a 2 cm cystic mass without any increase in size with Valsalva maneuver, was not compressible. The mass was diagnosed as a branchial cyst in the neck.
On September 3, 2020, after explaining the procedure to patient the cardiothoracic and vascular surgeon with his team decided to surgery to remove a branchial cyst. On September 3, 2020, the patient underwent surgery by the first author, with local anesthesia in the supine position, with tilting of the neck toward right side and some extension. After good disinfection, and covering of the patient, through a transverse incision, the cyst was looks like venous aneurysm, black, uncompressible, and connected to the external jugular vein proximally. The cyst was extended toward the chest under clavicle. Due to an inflammatory reaction, there was adhesion around the cyst had been removed. Proximal and distal control of the external jugular vein without resection of the clavicle was performed. Ligate and trans-fixation of the external jugular vein was done without any complications. The cyst was excised, after opening the cyst intraoperatively it was clotted. Histopathological examination was made, and diagnosed as thrombosed external jugular vein aneurysm. On September 12, 2020, the stiches have been removed.
After two days remained at critical care unit, and the patient was discharged to home for outpatient follow-up. Additionally, after 2 months, the patient did not have any additional local or general events during the follow-up period, and there was no recurrent swelling.