A 65-year-old afebrile gentleman, laborer (in brick industry) and non-smoker with no previous major health problems, was admitted for painful swelling in the bilateral inguino-scrotal region. The swelling had started one and half months ago in the bilateral inguinal region, and later, it gradually involved the upper part of the scrotum bilaterally. The swelling was small initially, but gradually attained presenting size in the last 4–5 days. The swelling did not reduce on lying down, but it used to get prominent in standing position. Initially, there was mild dragging and aching pain over the swelling, but the pain was increased and became severe since 1 day with tenderness and indurations. There was no history of vomiting, abdominal pain, dysuria, and obstipation. Neither he had history of previous surgery, chronic cough, prostatism, and trauma nor he presented any thrombogenic factors.
Physical examination revealed normotensive person with BMI of 22.5, was significant only for one left sided elongated, tender, movable, and firm to hard 10 cm (vertical) × 3 cm (horizontal) mass (above the crease of groin and medial to pubic tubercle). It was extending from the left deep inguinal ring up to the upper pole of the testis in the scrotum. Local temperature over the swelling was raised with mild erythama. There was no visible or palpable cough impulse. “Get above the swelling” was not possible. As the swelling was irreducible, the deep ring occlusion test could not be performed. Dull note was found on percussion with no audible gurgling sound. Another 5 cm (vertical) × 3 cm (horizontal) mass of similar character was found extending from the right deep inguinal ring up to the root of the scrotum. Both the testes were normally positioned in the scrotum, but the left one was mildly swollen. Prostate size and penile position were normal. Umbilicus was in normal position in scaphoid abdomen without any tenderness, visible peristalsis, or palpable mass.
Contrary to pre-operative grayscale USG finding (hernia containing tubular loops), which clinched the suspicion of incarcerated inguinal hernia, on exploration of left inguino-scrotal region under spinal anesthesia, left spermatic cord was found to be thick, multi-lobulated, blackish-red colored, tubular mass of firm to hard consistency . This was thrombosed pampiniform plexus without any evidence of hernia sac, and the testis was found to be mildly congested. Decision of no further intervention was taken. Wound was closed. Contralateral inguino-scrotal exploration was spared considering the same nature of disease .
Post-operative period was uneventful. The patient was put on anti-inflammatory drugs. Oral feeding was started from the next day, and early ambulation was encouraged. The swelling and pain started to get reduced gradually. There was no episode of shortness of breath or chest pain, tachycardia, and tachypnea in post-op period. BP was normal throughout the post-operative period. There was no development of calf tenderness. Post-operative ultrasonography with color Doppler study confirmed the diagnosis of bilateral thrombosed pampiniform plexus, showing hyperechoic soft tissue mass lesions in bilateral spermatic cords. Very few vessels were seen within the mass with colored flow. Bilateral testis was normal. MDCT and MRI scan of the whole abdomen revealed no abnormality other than bilateral spermatic cord thrombosis. Blood thrombophilia screening (factor V Leiden, prothrombin time, antithrombin assay, protein C and S, lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibody) came normal. ECG and urine analysis were normal. There was no surgical site infection. The patient was discharged in a stable condition after 7 days. The subject, with 2 years follow-up, is doing well, remaining asymptomatic and had returned to his usual life . He was advised regular check-up in surgical out-patients’ department.