A 63-year-old male patient was transferred to the emergency department of the first affiliated hospital of Nanjing Medical University for esophageal foreign body. Two weeks ago, he swallowed fish bone and it got stuck, after attempt of pushing downward by bolus, the foreign body sensation aggravated gradually in the next few days, and the local community hospital initiated antibiotics therapy on the 3rd day without laryngoscope and gastroscopy examination for local poor medical condition. Until referral on the 12th day, symptoms showed no signs of decreasing. On admission, the patient couldn’t lie down due to a swollen neck with activity limitation, and body temperature was 39 °C; blood pressure, 139/82 mmHg; hemoglobin 11.5 g and white blood cell count 20,200. Contrast-enhanced CT results showed an abscess confined to right mediastinal pleural with two high density foreign bodies in the abscess at the level of the sternum angle, one located the medial margin of the carotid artery and the other at outside of the esophagus wall .
Surgical scheme was made to adopt a single lumen intubation, a horizontal position, with upper back elevated to suitable height avoiding neck overextension and possible injury of fish bones to the adjacent carotid artery. After anesthesia, the location and diameter of perforation was explored by a gastroenterologist with endoscopy, which showed a rim of compressed fibrous tissue protruding from the esophageal mucosa 24 cm from the incisor. Nasogastric decompression tube and nasointestinal feeding tube were placed, while stent was needless since no obvious crevice was found. Subsequently, the thoracic surgeons probed the abscess with an incision anterior to the border of sterno-mastoid muscle. After exposing the deep layer of cervical fascia, the abscess wall with high tension was palpable. After abscess cavity decompression and pus drawing for a bacteriological examination with injector puncture, the abscess wall was cut and the pus was cleared with further suction. In consideration of the sharp fish bone adjacent to the carotid artery and the deep abscess extending to the mediastinum, which caused huge risk of bleeding and difficulty of exposure, video-mediastinoscopy was applied via the abscess wall incision. Two fish bones with locations coincident to preoperative CT results were displayed clearly on the screen . With a grasper through the wide operating channel of the video-mediastinoscopy, fish bones were removed carefully, then,the abscess septations were debrided completely and flushed with diluted iodine, hydrogen peroxide and saline in sequence. Three drainage tubes were embedded at the top, center and bottom of the abscess.
Postoperative comprehensive therapy included anti-infection and nutrition support. Pus culture was positive for pseudomonas aeruginosa, which is sensitive to sulperazone. The patient received intravenous drip for 7 days until the body temperature and blood routine returned to normal. Continuous irrigation with diluted iodine lasted for 7 days until liquid drainage disappeared. On postoperative day 14, after upper gastroenterography and CT confirmed satisfactory closure of the abscess cavity without contrast agent leakage and all routine examinations recovered to normal, all indwelling tubes were removed. Enteral feeding was then initiated and the patient was discharged without any problems on postoperative day 16. Follow-up results on postoperative day 30 showed no problem.