A 49-year-old man was first referred to a local hospital due to a mass on the right hilum found by plain chest computed tomography (CT) during medical check-up. The tumor seemed to be invasive to the left atrium. Therefore, only excisional biopsy by video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery was performed. He was referred to our institution for treatment. His past medical history was unremarkable.
Enhanced chest CT showed a 4-cm mass, with a heterogeneous enhancement . Enhanced chest magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a low signal in a T2-weighted image, which indicated the richness of the fibrous components inside the tumor . The borderline between the tumor and left atrium was unclear. Positron emission tomography (PET) showed high uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) within the tumor lesion . All of the tumor markers were within normal limits. We performed the pathological examination with the biopsy specimen from the local hospital, which revealed that there were few cells positive for immunoglobulin G (IgG) 4, one of the subclasses of IgG, of less than 10% (shown in Fig. ). The serum level of IgG4 was 37.7 mg/dl, and thus the diagnostic criteria of IgG4-related sclerosing disease (IgG4SD), where steroid treatment would be effective, were not fulfilled. On the other hand, anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) expression was positive in the tumor, suggesting the tumor has malignant potential (shown in Fig. ). We planned to perform an operation because of the possibility of malignancy and a risk of massive bleeding or tumor embolism.
The patient underwent thoracotomy after an isolation of the right femoral artery and vein in preparation for a case of the cardio-pulmonary support that would be needed. The tumor lesion was palpable around the right hilum, surrounding the inferior pulmonary vein (IPV). After resection of the A6, basal artery, and the lower bronchus, the pericardium was opened and the superior and inferior pulmonary veins were isolated in the pericardium. The tumor lesion was revealed to localize at the IPV in the pericardium. Thus, we clumped the left atrium and resected the tumor en bloc with IPV and a part of the left atrium without cardio-pulmonary support. After removal of the tumor, the left atrium was sutured by over and over running suture.
Pathological examination demonstrated the proliferation of spindle cells and collagen fibers. It also revealed the infiltration of plasma cells and lymphocytes . No evidence of malignancy was obtained. Thus, the diagnosis of IMT was gained. Invasion to the IPV, pericardium, and left atrium was observed, but there was no evidence of exposure to the lesion. Smooth muscle actin (not shown) and ALK were positive , but the ratio of IgG4/IgG was less than 10% , the same as that from a previous examination.
The postoperative course of the patient was uneventful. Currently, the patient remains free of disease over 5 years after surgery.