The patient was a 34-year-old woman who had previously been active and had studied abroad. She underwent surgical removal of a neck polyp at around the age of 12 years and thereafter noticed nausea and problems in her throat.
At the age of 16, she had depressive mood, anxiety, and palpitations and visited a psychiatric outpatient clinic in Tokyo, where she was diagnosed and treated as panic disorder and depression,
She has visited our hospital for 10 years for the treatment of panic disorder and bipolar disorder due to the appearance of manic state. She was treated with trazodone 50 mg/day, escitalopram 10 mg /day, and diazepam 2 mg /day, and there was no evidence of Graves’ disease such as persistent tachycardia.
At age 34 years, she developed a mild fever in April. A month later, she felt compression in her chest. Depression, vomiting, palpitations, and tachycardia ensued as her condition worsened.
Six weeks later, she had intense palpitations, tachycardia (140/min), had difficulty with things getting stuck in her throat when eating and brushing her teeth. She was able to consume only yogurt and gelatin. She also complained of weight loss, from 84 kg to 68 kg over a 6-month period, though she felt herself obese and was consciously losing weight.
Two months later, on a Sunday morning, she visited our emergency outpatient department with severe nausea, blood pressure 182/111 mmHg, heart rate 153/min, body temperature 37.7 C, and restlessness with anxiety. At her medical examination, panic disorder was suspected because of her medical history, but she had a fever so we examined the pharynx and collected blood to assess her physical condition.
Although there was no sign of infection in the pharyngeal findings or blood examination, they revealed anemia and dehydration, and she was given an iron preparation by oral administration.
Proptosis was noted in her examination and the possibility of Graves’ disease was considered, so thyroid function tests were performed even though it was a weekend.
She was allowed to go home, but her condition did not improve and she returned to the hospital at 4 am on Monday. She complained of feelings of dysphoria with severe palpitations, tachycardia, and nausea and was diagnosed as having panic attacks due to preexisting panic disorder.
We administered diazepam 10 mg/ampoule, and she became calm and was allowed to go home. At that time, the thyroid function test results were unavailable until Monday morning at the earliest, so the test results were unknown.
On Monday morning, her blood test results revealed the following: TSH < 0.02 μU/mL (standard ranges:0.45–3.33), free triiodothyronine > 25.00 pg/mL(2.11–3.51), free thyroxine > 8.00 ng/dL (0.84–1.44), total-triiodothyronine 10.86 ng/mL (0.84–1.40), and total thyroxine 55.50 μg/dL (5.15–10.43), thus thyroid crisis was suspected.
Because her condition could be expected to worsen, the attending physician immediately consulted with the endocrinology department and the patient was referred to them for further specialist management.
We evaluated her symptoms with the Burch Wartofsky scale on hospitalization. Of her 50 total points, severe nausea was 10, heart rate 25, body temperature 5, and restlessness with anxiety 10, so thyroid storm was strongly suspected [, ].
After hospitalization in the department of internal medicine, serum thyroid hormone and TSH receptor antibody levels were found to be high at 36.8 IU/L, so the patient was diagnosed as having thyroid crisis due to Graves’ disease. Treatment was started with dexamethasone injection 6.6 mg/day, methimazole 80 mg/day, and potassium iodide 200 mg/day. Propranolol 60 mg/day was added when the patient requested radioactive iodine therapy because of continued fever and tachycardia.
She was discharged from hospital in 3 weeks, after radioactive iodine therapy. Even after the isotope treatment, methimazole was not effective and was stopped. Propylthiouracil treatment was started because the thyroid profile showed no tendency to increase thyroid hormone. At 1 year after discharge she needed no psychiatric drugs, so consideration was given to termination of treatment. At 3 years after discharge, her depression recurred and she began taking antidepressants, though not as much as before Graves’ disease was diagnosed.