A 36-year-old previously healthy woman was referred to our hospital for a right cystic adrenal mass, which was discovered incidentally during her routine medical checkup. A contrast CT scan showed a poorly enhanced 5 cm solitary mass on the right adrenal gland, with a polycystic appearance with some calcification . On MRI, the mass was uniformly hypointense on T1 weighted image , and hyperintense on the T2 weighted image . An endocrinological workup was performed prior to referral, with no detectable abnormalities, suggesting a non-functioning adrenal mass.
The patient opted for surgery from her concerns about a possible malignancy, or future hemorrhage.
The surgery was performed under general anesthesia in the left semi-lateral decubitus position. A 12 mm laparoscopic port was positioned slightly lateral from the right midclavicular line, 3 cm caudal from the ribcage. A 5 mm port was placed on the same axial plane, on the right midclavicular line for the right-hand access, and on the anterior axillary line for the left hand. A 5 mm assistant port was placed caudally from the xyphoid.
The tumor had a round, polycystic appearance, with clear visible margins with the adrenal gland . The lack of adhesions between the tumor and surrounding tissue was strongly suggestive of a benign tumor, and an intraoperative decision for a partial adrenalectomy was made. A complete resection of the tumor was performed with much of the functioning adrenal gland left intact. The operation time was 1 h 53 min, with 5 mL blood loss, and the patient was discharged 4 days post-surgery. On cross-section, the tumor was polycystic, containing a clear, serous substance.
Histologically, on H&E staining, fibrotic cysts containing calcifications were observed, with clear borders with the normal adrenal tissue . On immunohistochemistry, the endothelial cell lining of the cyst wall was stained positive for D2–41 and CD31, a phenotype characteristic of lymphatic tissue, together suggestive of the final diagnosis of adrenal lymphangioma .