The patient is a 73 year old Caucasian lady who presented in November 2013 with a hoarse voice. She had a past history of a left total knee replacement, cholecycstectomy and appendecectomy and was on no regular medications. She had a 40 pack year smoking history. There were no significant findings on physical examination, notably no palpable lymphadenopathy, chest nor abdominal findings. CT and FDG-PET imaging demonstrated lesions adjacent to the thoracic aortic arch, aortopulmonary lymphadenopathy, a left superior internal mammary lymph node and a left pleural/para-vertebral lesion near T10. An endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) guided FNA biopsy of a subcarinal lymph node showed aggregates of epithelioid histiocytes consistent with granulomas without evidence of malignancy. Core biopsy was also attempted and showed abnormal lymphoid cells but without monoclonality. In January 2014, the mediastinal mass, mediastinal lymph node and left pleural mass were resected via a left lateral thoracotomy and talc pleurodesis was performed to debulk the disease and obtain tissue for diagnosis. A timeline of the patient’s clinical course is outlined in Table .
The histopathological and immunohistochemical analysis led to a diagnosis of FDCS though the specimen was difficult to interpret due to admixed reactive populations of lymphocytes, fibroblasts, histiocytes and blood vessels. Focally, the tumour expressed some histiocytic and muscle markers, raising the possibility of inflammatory myofibroblastic sarcoma or histiocytic sarcoma but there were areas of bland spindle cells expressing CD21 favouring the diagnosis of FDCS. Interestingly, the tumour was positive for CD21 but negative for CD23 and CD35. Subsequent FDG-PET scan showed residual mediastinal disease, a new T9 metastasis, and pleural-based uptake thought to be secondary to pleurodesis. The case was reviewed at a multidisciplinary team meeting and treatment with CHOP chemotherapy, plus or minus radiotherapy, was recommended. She completed 4 cycles of CHOP and proceeded to mediastinal radiotherapy 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions, encompassing all sites of disease and completed in July 2014.
At the same time, mutation testing with Caris Molecular Intelligence was performed. This is a commercially available platform that identifies a spectrum of clinically actionable treatment options based on immunohistochemistry (IHC), chromogenic and fluorescence in situ hybridization (CISH/FISH), 46- and 592-gene next-generation sequencing (NGS), Sanger sequencing, pyrosequencing and fragment analysis, coupled with a literature review to correlate biomarkers with treatment response. An E1493 fs BRCA2 mutation was demonstrated and confirmed as a germline mutation. Further family history detailed that her daughter had triple negative breast cancer at age 48 years, a maternal aunt died of postmenopausal breast cancer and this aunt’s own daughter also died of postmenopausal breast cancer. She has paternal German ancestry but no known Jewish ancestry. A hereditary genetics clinic was consulted and risk reducing surgery as well as family counselling was offered.
Follow-up PET in October 2014 demonstrated increased uptake in the left upper and lower lobes and increased intensity in pleural based disease. These changes were thought to be either treatment related or disease progression, with a further PET in February 2015 confirming the latter.
Due to the finding of a BRCA2 mutation, it was decided to treat with the combination of carboplatin and a poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitor. A compassionate supply of veliparib was sought. Single agent carboplatin was given for 2 cycles in June 2015 with the introduction of veliparib 100 mg twice daily at the 3rd cycle in July 2015. FDG-PET scan after the 4th cycle showed reduced PET activity in the previously identified lesions. She completed 6 cycles of carboplatin with concurrent veliparib, followed by maintenance veliparib at 300 mg twice daily from October 2015. Her disease remains clinically stable after 5 months of veliparib monotherapy.
Interestingly, when excision repair cross-complementation group 1 (ERCC1) IHC was performed retrospectively, it was negative, consistent with the benefit derived from carboplatin.