An 81-year-old male patient presented at our service complaining of marked adynamia, and reported that his urine had been darker than normal for the past 2 weeks. Symptoms had started with moderate, self-limiting diarrhea lasting for 3 days, without fever or signs of disease in his stools, and moved to progressive muscle weakness. Ten days before seeking medical help, the patient had fallen and bruised his scalp. Clinical examination and workup did not find any repercussions from the incident. The patient had no respiratory, urinary, or digestive complaints. According to his wife, the patient had suffered bouts of muscle weakness after having short walks since his youth. He has never been on statins. When asked about it, the patient reported his muscle symptoms improved after a few minutes of rest.
He had been previously diagnosed with late-onsetdiabetes mellitus (prescribed oral hypoglycemic drugs), mild to moderate cognitive impairment of unknown origin, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and had undergone a cholecystectomy. He was on the following medications: tamsulosin 0.4 mg/day, vitamin D3 1000u/day, ASA 100 mg/day, vitamin B12 5000 IU/week, gliclazide 30 mg/day, memantine 10 mg/day, rivastigmine 27 mg/day, linagliptin 5 mg/day, and venlafaxine 75 mg/day. His family had a history of consanguineous marriages.
The patient was well-oriented during physical examination. His blood pressure was normal (130/80 mmHg) and he was afebrile. He did not present additional noteworthy clinical findings.
The patient had been hospitalized 4 years previously (2015), for myalgia with nausea, vomiting, and decreased urine output. He had been exposed to elevated temperatures during a fishing trip to the Amazon region. He was transferred to our Center and arrived with pronounced acute renal failure, signs of uremia, and findings consistent with rhabdomyolysis . His workup showed a serum myoglobin level of 5351 ng/mL (normal range: < 72 ng/mL); the patient was positive for urine myoglobin and negative for anti-Leptospira and anti-Plasmodium antibodies. He was promptly prescribed renal dialysis therapy, undergoing three hemodialysis sessions, and recovered fully from renal impairment. The patient was not tested for viral infection and the cause of severe dehydration was attributed to a potential case of rhabdomyolysis.
The patient was asymptomatic between 2015 and 2019 and performed supervised physical activities with the aid of a personal trainer. Figure a shows that his creatine kinase (CK) levels had been consistently above normal range, and may have remained unremarked on account of his good overall clinical condition.
His workup at the time of hospitalization showed elevated blood glucose and glycated hemoglobin levels, and normal renal function. The patient, however, had another episode of rhabdomyolysis, without apparent cause, as evidenced by high serum CK and plasma myoglobin (364 ng/mL) levels. The patient was examined for viral infections, by Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for Epstein-Barr virus, antibodies against Anti-Coxsackie A and B viruses, and detection of enterovirus RNA in peripheral blood. Results were all inconclusive.
Symptoms of muscle fatigue since a young age, in combination with the “second wind phenomenon,” recurrent rhabdomyolysis without an apparent cause, persistent elevation in CK levels, a family history of consanguineous marriage, and negative test results for viral infection built a strong case around a potential hereditary myopathy. As a part of additional investigation, the patient underwent a biopsy of the brachial biceps. With regard to morphology, no change was seen on the size of muscle fibers or in connective tissue and endomysial/perimysial fat. No signs of centronuclear myopathy, fiber necrosis, macrophages, or lipid accumulation were found. Subsarcolemmal vacuoles were observed, along with some with PAS-positive material. Myophosphorylase histochemical staining was negative.
Supplementary diagnostic workup included genetic analysis via next-generation sequencing with a gene panel for muscular dystrophies, myopathies, and myasthenia gravis, which revealed a homozygous insertion at Chr11:64.525.744 T > TA in the gene PYMG causing a frameshift mutation and the introduction of a stop codon halting translation (p.Asn168*fs). This mutation has not been described in medical literature.
The combination of clinical, histology, and genetic-molecular findings confirmed the diagnosis of McArdle disease. The patient was discharged on a prescription of metformin 1000 mg/day and pioglitazone 30 mg/day. His workup had not improved 2 months after the start of therapy , at which time his prescription was changed to low dose intermediate-acting insulin. The patient and his family have since reported significant clinical improvement.