A 3-year-old female, previously in good health, was admitted to the “G. Di Cristina” Children's Hospital in Palermo for vomiting and abdominal pain. She did not complain of any other symptoms. Vital signs were normal. On physical examination, she appeared sick, with moderate epigastric tenderness. Laboratory investigations showed hemoglobin 13.8 g/dl, platelet 340,000/mm3, white blood cell count 16,600/mm3 (neutrophils 20%, monocytes 11%, and lymphocytes 69%), C-reactive protein 13,1 mg/dl (normal range < 0.5 mg/dl), aspartate aminotransferase 40 U/l, alanine aminotransferase 25 U/l, total bilirubin 0,11 mg/dl, amylase 913 U/l (normal range 30–100 U/l), and lipase 6450 U/l (normal range 3–32 U/l). Because of fair general conditions and elevated inflammatory markers, empirical antibiotic therapy with cefotaxime was started. Abdominal ultrasound revealed an enlarged pancreas, with hypoechogenic areas; no biliary lithiasis was observed. She had no past history of abdominal trauma, surgery or cholecystitis and any familial history of pancreatitis or gallstones was reported. She did not receive any medications known to cause pancreatitis. Serological tests for mumps, parotitis, rubella, EBV, cytomegalovirus, varicella-zoster virus, herpes simplex virus, coxsackie virus, and mycoplasma were all negative, except for the presence of EBV VCA IgM and IgG (EBNA IgG negative). Exudative pharyngotonsillitis, cervical lymphadenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly were not present. A diagnosis of EBV-associated acute pancreatitis was made; the patient was treated conservatively, including fasting for three days until the resolution of vomiting, peripheral parenteral nutrition support for seven days, and pain management with acetaminophen. An abdominal ultrasound, performed after five days, did not show any complications and antibiotic therapy was discontinued. She improved clinically, lipase and amylase levels progressively decreased, and enteral feeding was gradually resumed. She was discharged home on the fifteen day of hospitalization.