A 29-year-old female came to the ENT department with complaints of swelling over her left cheek for the past 6 months which was insidious in onset, progressively increasing in size, and associated with intermittent pain. Loosening of teeth was also present for the past 3 months.
A complete head and neck examination revealed a firm to hard swelling in the left cheek which was approximately 6×5cm in size. On intraoral examination- there was a soft tissue swelling involving the left half of the hard palate and extending up to the soft palate . Contrast Enhanced Computed Tomographic (CECT) Scan of the Nose and Para Nasal Sinus (PNS) with 3D reconstruction was done which revealed an osteolytic, expansile mass of approximately 6.4×5.3×7.3cm in left maxillary sinus eroding the maxillary sinus walls compressing the neighboring structures without any obvious invasion into them.
Cytological aspirate from the swelling revealed features suggestive of Brown’s tumor. Further investigations included intact parathyroid hormone assay, serum calcium and phosphate, serum alkaline phosphatase, serum vitamin D, serum creatinine, and urine creatinine. The intact parathyroid hormone serum level was found to be elevated at 297.7 (15.0-65.0 pg/mL), serum calcium level was normal-9.15 (8.6-10.3 mg/dL), serum phosphate was decreased-2.34 (3.4-4.5 mg/dl), alkaline phosphatase was elevated-360.4 (30-130 IU/L).
Other investigations such as vitamin D, serum creatinine, and urinary calcium came out to be normal thus ruling out secondary causes of hyperparathyroidism. On ultrasonography of the neck, a hypoechoic lesion of size 18.3×9.0 mm at the inferior pole of the right thyroid lobe was reported. The patient was then posted for a CECT scan of the neck which revealed an ovoid lesion in the right trachea-oesophageal groove along the posteroinferior aspect of the right thyroid lobe likely a parathyroid lesion . The scan was also suggestive of Brown’s tumors like lesion in the C7 and T1 vertebrae. A Technetium 99 sestamibi (Tc 99 MIBI) scan recorded normal thyroid with increased focal tracer uptake in the right inferior pole of the thyroid.
Diagnosis of a parathyroid lesion with hyperparathyroidism with normocalcemic maxillary sinus Brown’s tumor was made. The patient was planned for right parathyroid mass excision. Intra-operatively, an enlarged right inferior parathyroid gland was encountered. It was carefully separated from the thyroid gland and removed in toto. Intraoperative intact parathyroid hormone level was assessed within 10 minutes post excision which dropped significantly from 297.7 pg/mL (preoperatively) to 9.7 pg/mL (reference range 15-65 pg/mL). Diagnosis of a parathyroid adenoma was concluded on histopathological examination .
One day post-surgery patient developed hypocalcemia which was managed by calcium and Vitamin D supplements. The patient was kept under close observation for early detection of signs and symptoms of hypocalcemia for their timely management. Serial ECG monitoring followed by intravenous calcium gluconate administration was done when needed. The patient was discharged 7 days after surgery with near normal calcium and parathyroid hormone levels (29.39 pg/mL). Post-excision there was a significant reduction in the size of Brown’s tumor thus providing symptomatic relief to the patient . On 11 months follow-up, serum calcium, and parathyroid levels were found to be normal.