The patient in this study was 22 years old. She was admitted to Shanxi Grand Hospital, Shanxi Province, China, on July 16, 2015 because of one day of vaginal bleeding and three days of abdominal distension accompanied by fever after five months of amenorrhea. This patient had a history of regular menstruation, and her last menstrual period had been on February 20, 2015. An immunoassay showed her urine to be positive for human chronic gonadotrophin. The patient had no fever during early pregnancy and did not have a history of exposure to toxic, harmful, or radioactive materials. Down’s syndrome screening performed as part of a regular second-semester prenatal checkup showed no obvious fetal abnormality. The patient had abdominal distension with fever and received anti-infective treatment at a local hospital three days before coming to Shanxi Grand Hospital. One day before coming to Shanxi Grand Hospital, she suffered vaginal bleeding. She was given conventional tocolytic treatment, but the outcome was poor. The patient was examined after hospital admission and had a body temperature of 39 °C, pulse rate of 120 beats/min, breath rate of 21 breaths/min, and blood pressure of 90/53 mmHg, but no cardiopulmonary or abdominal abnormalities. Specialist examinations showed minor abdominal swelling, irregular contraction of the uterus palpable at two fingers under the uterus and umbilicus, and a small amount of vaginal bleeding. The fetal membrane was slightly ruptured, and the fetal heart rate was 170–180 beats/min. A complete blood count showed 16.6 × 109/L white blood cells, 78.4% neutrophils, 16.5% lymphocytes, 4.9% monocytes, 3.63 × 1012/L erythrocytes, 106 g/L hemoglobin, 202.1 × 109 g/L platelets, and 102.16 mg/L C reaction protein. Intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g/d), 25% magnesium sulfate, and antipyretic treatments were administered to the patient after her admission to Shanxi Grand Hospital, but the patient had a miscarriage and vaginal delivery of a female fetus on July 19. Her body temperature continued to fluctuate after admission, increasing to 39.3 °C the afternoon of July 19. Further questions about the patient’s medical history showed that this patient had sheep at home but never came into direct contact with them. However, she had begun to drink unpasteurized goat milk during her fourth month of pregnancy and was thus suspected of having Brucella infection. A serum tube agglutination test (SAT) for brucellosis and blood culture were immediately performed. The SAT result was 1:800, confirming brucellosis. This patient was given antibiotic treatment for three consecutive days. She was discharged from the hospital on July 24 because the fever stopped. At the time of discharge, she was prescribed oral doxycycline (100 mg/dose, twice a day) and rifampicin (600 mg/dose, once daily) for 6 weeks as recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO). No recurrence was observed during the six months of follow-up after the cessation of antibiotic treatment. The onset, diagnosis, and treatment of the disease in this patient are shown in Fig. .
The diagnosis of brucellosis was based on the serum standard tube agglutination test (SAT). The SAT result was 1:800.
Five milliliters of venous blood from the patient were collected and injected into a two-phase culture flask for culture. After detecting bacterial growth in the culture, traditional biological methods were used for the isolation and identification of the bacteria . With the reference to the standard strain B. melitensis 16 M, colony morphology, Gram stain reaction, CO2 requirements, H2S production, inhibition of growth by basic Fuchsin and Thionin, agglutination with monospecific antisera, and phage lysis testing were performed. Serum and bacteriophage were provided by the Brucellosis Laboratory, National Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, and the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
Specific sequences of the 16 MLVA primers are described in previous work . The reaction system for genotyping included 10 μl 2 × Taq PCR Mastermix, 0.4 μl each of the 10 pmol/μl primers, and 1 μl DNA template, with sterile distilled water to a total volume of 20 μl. The amplification conditions were: 95 °C denaturation; 40 cycles of denaturation at 95 °C for 30 s, annealing at 60 °C for 30 s, and elongation at 72 °C for 30 s. Amplification products were analysed by microsatellite sequencing to convert the repeated unit according to the size of the PCR products. BioNumerics (Version 5.0) software was used for cluster analysis to perform an online comparison between the typing and the Brucella database. Nucleic acid extraction was performed using a bacterial whole genome nucleic acid extraction kit [Tiangen Biotech (Beijing) Co., Ltd., Beijing, China]. MLVA primers were synthesized by Sangon Biotech (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China), and STR microsatellite sequencing was performed by Tianyi HuiYuan Biotech Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China).
Seven housekeeper genes (dnaK, gyrB, trpE, aroA, cobQ, gap, and glk), one outer membrane protein gene (omp25), and one intergenic region int-hyp were used as the target genes of MLST for synthesis of the corresponding primers and for PCR . PCR products were purified and subjected to bidirectional sequencing. The sequencing was completed by Tianyi HuiYuan Biotech Co., Ltd.. The tested sequences were compared to the sequences of allelic genotypes of the corresponding genes. The MLST online tool was used to analyse the alleles in the sequence.