A 47-year-old Japanese man visited a local doctor complaining of low-back pain 5 months before admission to our hospital. The patient had no relevant past or family history. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) and ultrasonography (US) incidentally revealed a dilatation of the intrahepatic bile duct. The patient was referred to our hospital for further investigation. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) detected an obstruction of the B2 intrahepatic bile duct and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed dilatation of its peripheral ducts. The use of curved multiplanar reconstruction (MPR) of contrast-enhanced CT imaging detected a 1.8 × 0.5 cm high-intensity mass in the arterial phase at the obstructed region of the B2 bile dust . Brush cytology failed to collect any samples for analysis. Laboratory examinations showed normal liver function test results but the presence of the carcinoembryonic antigen and cancer antigen 19–9 (CA19-9) tumor markers. An intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma was suspected and a left hemihepatectomy was performed.
Macroscopically, the resected tissue specimen was a grayish mass of 3 × 3.8 mm with an ill-defined border but without a capsule . Routine hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stained sections from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue were examined. Histologically, the tumor was composed of randomly arranged spindle cells with pale eosinophilic cytoplasm. Nuclear pleomorphism was not evident and mitotic figures were absent. Eosinophilic glands, resembling pancreatic acini and ductal structure, were observed in the periphery of the mass adjacent to the spindle tumor .
Immunohistochemical studies showed a strong but diffuse distribution of the markers human melanoma black 45 (HMB45) and smooth muscle actin (SMA) in the spindle cells. These cells were negative for Melan-A, desmin, S-100, and cytokeratin 19 (CK19). The Ki-67 index was <1 %. The tumor was diagnosed as a PEComa . Acinic lesions positive for trypsin but weakly positive for amylase-α were identified; they were considered as pancreatic acini. Ductal structures were CK19 positive, but were indistinguishable from either the pancreatic or intrahepatic biliary duct. Small ducts with the appearance of regenerative change were localized near the main biliary duct . This lesion was considered to consist of heterotopic pancreas. Langerhans’ islets were not present. Overall the tumor was diagnosed as a PEComa associated with heterotopic pancreas. Biliary congestion was also apparent in the adjacent liver tissue. The patient was followed up for 56 months after surgery. No recurrence of the original tumor or metastasis has been observed.