A 1-day old female newborn presented with severe unilateral proptosis . She was born at term with elective caesarian section after an uncomplicated pregnancy. The 25-year-old Caucasian mother had a normal antenatal history, no history of recreational drug use, no pharmacologic therapy or known exposure to chemicals or radiation.
Ophthalmologic examination revealed massive proptosis of the right eye and an absent direct or consensual pupil reaction of the right eye. Despite the degree of proptosis, possibly due to the very early examination of the newborn immediately postpartum, the cornea was clear. The anterior segment was examined via a portable slit lamp and showed neovascularization of the iris without hyphema. The lens was clear and there was a good red reflex of the posterior segment.
A CT of the brain and orbits showed a large heterogeneous mass arising entirely in the right orbit, engulfing the globe and the optic nerve, and filling the entire orbit. No bony erosion or calcifications were noted . T2-weighted MRI imaging shows predominantly the tumor to be hyperintense to fat and extraocular muscles .
Due to the degree of proptosis and the imminent risk for severe exposure keratopathy and corneal breakdown, urgent surgical excision of the tumor was scheduled. One day later, the tumor was removed completely via a 360-degree conjunctival limbal peritomy, identification of the 4 recti muscles and temporary disinsertion of the lateral rectus muscle in order to provide the necessary dissection plane to allow for complete tumor excision .
After tumor removal there was significant upper and lower eyelid laxity and conjunctival prolapse due to an expansion effect on the eyelid and periocular tissues exerted by the tumor . However, it was decided not to sacrifice eyelid or conjunctiva tissue at this time and a decision to place upper and lower forniceal sutures and a reversible suture tarsorrhaphy and allow the tissues to retract to their normal size was made, . Since the prognosis for vision in that eye was very poor, it was decided to keep the tarsorrhaphy sutures for 3 weeks in order to help with the healing process and keep the “redundant” and laxed tissues in place. The eyelid tone and the conjunctival fornices were restored during this time. The tumor measured 7X5X4.5 cm .
The specimen was stained using a hematoxylin and eosin dye. Figure a shows the mature teratoma containing cells coming from three of the intestinal wall’s cell layers, namely the smooth muscle layer, the submucosa, and the mucosa with its columnar epithelium, while in Fig. b another portion of the specimen shows cells forming a choroid plexus papilloma. Figure c depicts respiratory epithelial cells alongside bronchial mucosal glands as well as bronchial cartilage tissue.
Postoperatively, our newborn patient recovered remarkably well. Unfortunately, as expected due to the compression effect and to the ischemic changes manifested by the neovascularization of the iris, there was no vision from that eye, but the orbit developed remarkably well over the next years. We decided to follow the child clinically over the next 18 years and to proceed with orbital imaging only if required by the clinical exam findings. Our decision was based on complete tumor removal with clear margins, on the very low malignant potential and on the requirement for general anesthesia during imaging. The anterior segment hypoxia reversed as shown from the absence of iris neovascularization. There was a progressive mild to moderate volume deficit of the right orbit manifesting mainly as a deepened superior sulcus and a corresponding upper eyelid ptosis/contour abnormality . When our patient was mature enough to wear a scleral shell, a custom-made shell was fitted. The family elected not to undergo any further surgery or minimally invasive procedures for cosmetic reasons at this point. Figure a and b shows our patient currently at age 18.
There was no recurrence or malignant transformation during this 18-year follow-up period and our patient graduated from high school and was recently admitted to Law school.