Our patient was an 88-year-old Asian woman who had noticed a mass in her right breast 1 month earlier. She visited our department, where she had been receiving outpatient treatment for other conditions. In the lower outer quadrant of the right breast, a less mobile, elastic-hard mass measuring 20 mm in diameter was detected 25 mm from the nipple. Neither the axillary nor the supraclavicular lymph nodes were palpable. Regarding the patient’s medical history, she had been followed at our department for 12 years after surgery for left breast cancer (T1N0M0, hormone receptor-negative, no postoperative therapy); however, she had no history of apparent trauma to the breasts. Mammography revealed a dense, round, microlobulated mass . Ultrasonography of the breast revealed a round, hypoechoic mass measuring 18.1 × 16.2 × 14.4 mm in size. The internal echo pattern was heterogeneous, and lateral shadowing was observed. The echo was partially broken at the anterior margin but unbroken at the posterior margin . Subsequently, a needle biopsy was performed. Although proliferation of neoplastic spindle cells was suspected, no definitive diagnosis was obtained. Because the imaging studies and needle biopsy could not exclude the possibility of a malignant tumor, examination of the entire tumor was considered necessary, and an excisional biopsy was consequently performed. According to the macroscopic findings , the cut surfaces appeared solid and milky white, and the tumor was clearly demarcated from the surrounding adipose tissue. According to the histopathological findings , the tumor was a nodular lesion composed of spindle cells with deposition of abundant elastic fibers. It was not encapsulated, and it proliferated in the mammary tissue and partially extended into the adipose tissue. Although mitotic activity was relatively high at 10 mitoses/20 high-power fields, the Ki-67 level was only 3%. No apparent malignant changes were observed. The spindle cells were positive for α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) and vimentin but negative for pancytokeratin, cytokeratin 14, estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, β-catenin, cluster of differentiation 34 (CD34), desmin, S100, and synaptophysin. These findings led to a diagnosis of NF. The resection margin was tumor-free. At the latest follow-up, 12 months postsurgery, no recurrence was observed.