A 69-year-old man was referred to our gastroenterology department because of worsening diabetes. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a mass measuring 22 mm in diameter, in contact with the PV in the pancreatic head. It was identified as an adenocarcinoma by endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS)-guided fine needle aspiration (FNA). He was diagnosed with pancreatic head cancer, but he was not offered therapeutic radical resection because the tumor had invaded the PV. He was referred to our department again for surgery after receiving chemotherapy with nine courses of gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel. Although the CT scan showed a mass measuring 25 mm in diameter and still in contact with the PV, we judged that the mass was resectable and he had subtotal stomach-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy (SSPPD) with PVR 11 months later. The PV had 4 cm of its length resected, and end-to-end anastomosis was performed without reconstruction of the SpV. We had to completely resect the right colic vein (RCV), accessary right colic vein (accRCV), and middle colic vein (MCV) which received reflux directly from the PV-SMV due to tumor invasion . The pathological diagnosis was ypT3, ypN1a, ypM0, and ypStageIIB, and he was administered TS-1 as postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. Seven months after therapeutic radical surgery, he developed black stools with progressive anemia. CT did not show obstruction or stenosis of the reconstructed PV, but it revealed transverse colonic varices . The diameter of the spleen increased preoperatively from 67 to 74 mm, but there were no symptoms of hypersplenism such as thrombocytopenia. He was offered interventional radiology (IVR). Trans-splenic arterial splenic venography showed that transverse colonic varices had developed as collateral circulation of the SpV and inferior mesenteric vein (IMV) system. A balloon catheter was inserted into the splenic artery via the right inguinal arterial approach, and a microcatheter for embolization was introduced retrograde to the colonic varices via the intrahepatic PV. An embolic substance was injected into the transverse colonic varices . This halted the progression of the anemia caused by melena. During follow-up after IVR, esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy did not show any gastrointestinal varices. Fifteen months after therapeutic radical surgery, local recurrence of the tumor occurred, and he died 28 months after therapeutic radical surgery and 39 months after diagnosis.