A 57-year-old man with no known medical illnesses, presented with voiding lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) of hesitancy, poor flow and incomplete bladder emptying lasting 1.5 months and had a benign feeling prostate on digital rectal examination (DRE). He had previously one episode of urinary retention and had an elevated Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) of 14.5 ng/ml. He was started on Alfuzosin 10 mg but with no significant improvement in his symptoms. A trans-abdominal ultrasound scan of the urinary tract showed a large prostate gland of size 41 ml, with indentation in the bladder base. A multiparametric MRI scan displayed an enlarged prostate (41 ml) with central gland hypertrophy protruding into the bladder base, the capsule was intact, with normal seminal vesicles, PIRADs 2 score {, }. His repeat PSA was 25 ng/ml.
Due to the high PSA density, a trans-perineal prostate biopsy was undertaken. This was performed from 6 sectors of the peripheral zone showing 24 cores with no evidence of malignancy. The patient underwent a Trans-urethral resection of the prostate (TURP) for his obstructive symptoms in August 2016. Intraoperatively, enlarged adenoma causing bladder outlet obstruction was seen by the cystoscope and 11.85 g of prostate tissue was resected. The histopathology report confirmed the previous biopsy results of no malignancy but added that the prostate had adenomatous hyperplasia. Initially, the patient’s symptoms improved, and his PSA fell from 25 ng/ml to 3 ng/ml. A year later, the patient presented with haematuria and recurrence of his voiding LUTS. Even though his PSA was still 3 ng/ml, his prostate was much more enlarged on Ultrasound scan with a size of 131 ml. An MP-MRI scan was repeated which demonstrated a huge prostate (>100 ml) bulging into the bladder base, extending from the central gland, with a papillary middle lobe area measuring up to 6 × 5.4 x 3.9 cm intravesically, the capsule was intact, the seminal vesicles were atrophic with the same PIRAD score of 2 {, }.
The patient’s case was discussed at a multi-disciplinary prostate meeting and booked for a Holmium Laser Enucleation procedure (HoLEP) of the prostate to relieve the bladder outflow obstruction and attempt to resect all of the recurrent adenoma. The endoscopic view showed a multilobed mass which stemmed from the verumontanum and extended to the bladder neck and inside the bladder. During the procedure 64 g of tissue was removed and the histopathology report stated the specimen showed hypercellularity of the stroma, with some areas with a myxoid background, and some areas showing a spindle cell morphology. There is however, no atypia, no mitoses and no necrosis. There is also marked epithelial hyperplasia, without atypia, which are the features of Stromal Tumour of Uncertain Malignant Potential (STUMP) with no evidence of any malignancy.
The patient was followed up after 6 and 11 months of the HoLEP; the patient was not complaining of any symptoms; the PSA levels were undetectable and the MP-MRI showed no sign of recurrence or regrowth of the STUMP {}.