A 29-year-old female of Indian origin with no prior comorbidities was diagnosed with metastatic GIST in March 2019. She had nausea and loss of appetite for 2 weeks in March 2019. She underwent initial evaluation at an outside hospital for her symptoms. Upper GI endoscopy showed relaxed lower esophageal sphincter and poorly distensible stomach, with external mass effect. Whole-body positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) done in March 2019 showed a soft tissue mass lesion in the left hypochondrium abutting the greater curvature of the stomach and measuring 14.2 × 15.1 × 17.1 cm3 with hypodense lesion in the liver. CT-guided biopsy showed poorly differentiated malignant round cell tumor, and immunohistochemistry (IHC) was positive for CD117, CD34, and DOG1, suggestive of gastrointestinal stromal tumor. The tumor had a low Ki-67 index of 2%, and C-KIT mutation analysis showed exon 9 and exon 11 wild type. She was started on imatinib 400 mg OD, which she took for 3 months before disease progression. PET/CT scan done at progression in June 2019 showed heterogeneously enhancing mass lesion in the gastrocolic ligament, mesentery, and omentum, possibly arising from the inferior surface of the greater curvature/body–antrum of the stomach with peritumoral, intratumoral vascularity, and mild ascites. There were multiple liver metastatic lesions, increased in number compared with baseline imaging. She underwent laparoscopic subtotal gastrectomy and liver metastasectomy in June 2019. Postoperative histopathological examination confirmed gastrointestinal stromal tumor of predominantly spindle type (80%), grade 2, high risk, with free margins, and about 10% necrosis was present in the tumor. Follow-up scan done 2 months after resection in August 2019 showed residual heterogeneously enhancing mass lesion in the gastrocolic ligament, mesentery, and omentum. There was interval development of new enhancing lesions in segments VI, II, VII, and IVA of the liver. There was also interval development of peripherally enhancing hypodense lesion in segment VIII of the liver in subcapsular location. The patient was treated with fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-based stereotactic body radiotherapy with CyberKnife technique to liver lesions with a dose of 35 Gy in five fractions and lung and mediastinal lymph nodes to a dose of 30 Gy in five fractions. She was started on sunitinib 50 mg OD for 2 weeks every 3 weeks.
Follow-up fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography - computerized tomography in March 2020 showed interval regression of liver lesions. However, there was a new osteolytic lesion involving the right scapula, not associated with any soft tissue component. She received radiotherapy to the scapular lesion, and sunitinib was continued. The latest fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography - computerized tomography scan done in January 2021 showed evidence of interval appearance of multiple hypermetabolic lesions in the liver, omentum, and peritoneum along with mesenteric lymphadenopathy. The focal hypermetabolic lesion in the seventh rib was present, and there was a stable scapular lesion. Overall features were suggestive of progressive disease.
She was referred to us for further evaluation. On thorough examination, we found multiple café-au-lait macules present all over the trunk . She had axillary frecklings. She did not have optic nerve glioma, Lisch nodules, or plexiform neurofibromas. Her child, who was 4 years of age, also had café-au-lait macules. Her parents did not have features suggestive of neurofibromatosis 1. Her examination findings were suggestive of neurofibromatosis, hence NF1 mutational analysis was done in tumor tissue. NF1 mutation was detected in exon 45. Histopathology review was done, and histology was confirmed. DOG1 (discovered on GIST1) and CD117 were positive in the tumor tissue. SDH-B (succinate dehydrogenase B) immunoexpression was retained throughout the tumor . Based on the study by Schoffski et al., we decided to treat her with cabozantinib. She was started on cabozantinib with effect from January 2021. The patient took medicine for 4 months before she had clinical progressive disease. She stopped taking cabozantinib and started using alternative medicine. She died in June 2021 due to progressive disease.