A 72-year-old man with a past medical history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease, and aortic insufficiency was admitted to our hospital with an unprovoked pulmonary embolus. As part of an occult malignancy work-up, a computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous (IV) contrast was performed and revealed a right persistent sciatic artery aneurysm. Follow-up CT angiography confirmed the diagnosis of a right sided persistent sciatic artery aneurysm and also demonstrated a hypoplastic right superficial femoral artery (SFA). . Maximal aneurysm dimensions were 40 mm × 35 mm in the right gluteal region . The patient did not endorse any right lower extremity complaints. Physical exam was notable for a pulsatile right sided gluteal mass, bilateral palpable femoral pulses but no palpable pedal pulses.
After a standard pre-operative evaluation, the patient elected to proceed with surgery to reduce the potential risk of aneurysm rupture, thrombosis or embolization . From a percutaneous left femoral access, two 16 mm Amplatzer ™ vascular plugs (Abbott Medical, Plymouth, MN) were placed proximally and distally to exclude the PSA aneurysm. Next, standard exposure of the proximal superficial femoral and below knee popliteal arteries was performed. Ipsilateral saphenous vein was harvested and a non-reversed proximal superficial femoral to below knee popliteal artery bypass was performed to restore perfusion to the patients right lower extremity . The proximal superficial femoral artery was chosen as inflow for the bypass due to limited saphenous vein conduit length. His surgery was performed by one of our fellowship trained vascular surgeons at a facility with an endovascular capable operating suite. After an uneventful three-day hospital stay, the patient was discharged in a stable condition. Aside from the immediate post-operative recovery, he has had no changes to his level of activity or lifestyle.
A CT angiogram of the aorta with lower extremity run off was obtained one month following his embolization which demonstrated a successfully excluded right sciatic artery. There was no flow appreciated within the aneurysm sac. His post-operative arterial doppler study demonstrated an ankle brachial index of 1.0 with triphasic wave forms. He continues to follow with surveillance arterial duplex studies obtained every 6 months. His graft has remained patent at his one year follow up with no symptoms.