A 46-year-old Caucasian male was referred to the Department of Hepatology and Gastroenterology complaining of nausea, general weakness, shortness of breath, abdominal enlargement, and night sweating.
Patient’s symptoms started about a month ago.
He had a history of localized cutaneous malignant melanoma of the right ear auricle, status after excision with surgery carried out 1 year ago. The excision of the tumor and histological examination was performed in other institution. The primary tumor was nodular melanoma with ulceration and a Breslow thickness of 3.55 mm. High mitotic activity (58 mitosis per square millimeter) was also mentioned in the pathological report. The sentinel lymph node was negative for metastatic melanoma.
He had no family health history of cancer.
The enlarged and painless lymph node of the neck was found upon physical examination. No other abnormal findings were found.
The initial laboratory tests performed in the Emergency Department showed the increased aspartate transaminase 110 U/L, alanine transaminase 55 U/L (< 40 U/L), alkaline phosphatase 451 U/L (< 40 U/L), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 1200 U/L (125-243 U/L), gamma- glutamyl transferase 802 U/L (< 36 U/L), C-reactive protein 168.8 mg/L (0-5 mg/L).
Procalcitonin 7.76 ug/L (< 0.05 L ug/L) levels. Complete blood count revealed anemia with hemoglobin count of 115 g/L and leukocytosis with white blood cells count of 34.87 × 109 per L (4-9.8 × 109 per L) .
The abdominal ultrasound revealed enlarged liver (308 mm length) and spleen (157 mm length), with multiple hyperechogenic lesions with hypoechogenic shell, the largest with a diameter of 24 mm in the liver. A small amount of ascites was seen in the abdominal cavity.
The patient was referred to the Department of Hepatology and Gastroenterology with a suspected diagnosis of metastatic liver disease, and additional tests were performed.
Computed tomography (CT) was performed and demonstrated multiple lesions in the lungs, liver, spleen, subcutaneous tissue, and bones. CT also showed a pathological lymphadenopathy of the neck and the right lung. Fluid was present in both abdominal and pleural cavity .
Due to anemia and unknown primary cancer site, an upper endoscopy was performed. Gastroscopy revealed atypical ulcers of the duodenum . It also showed several 0.5 cm red polyps in gastric body and fundus, also in the descending part of the duodenum . Biopsies were taken and sent for histological evaluation.
Considering the typical symptoms (night sweats, fatigue), high leukocyte count and lesions in multiple organs, lymphoma was suspected. Trephine biopsy and the biopsy from the enlarged lymph node in the neck were taken.
Microscopically biopsies from stomach and duodenum lesions showed focally ulcerated, dense infiltrate in lamina propria, composed of discohesive medium-sized cells with pale or clear cytoplasm and hyperchromatic, oval, or irregularly shaped nuclei with small nucleoli . Due to the lack of clinical information about prior melanoma, the suspicion of hematologic malignancy and histological features, such as multifocality and cell discohesion, our initial differential diagnosis was between myeloid leukemia or enteropathy-associated T- cell lymphoma.
However, staining for myeloid and lymphoid markers, such as LCA, CD34, CD117, MPO, CD68, CD123, CD7, CD4, CD3, CD20, CD30 were all negative. On the contrary, tumor cells showed diffuse positivity for CD99 - a non-specific immunohistochemical marker, expressed in a wide variety of malignancies, including melanoma. All the subsequently stained melanocytic markers showed diffuse or focal positivity .
The following bone marrow trephine biopsy revealed metastatic lesion with focal necrosis, composed of densely arranged tumor cells , analogous to previously seen in duodenal and gastric mucosa. Similar diffuse infiltrate with interspersed melanophages was seen in a subsequent core biopsy of the enlarged cervical lymph node.
Tumor cells showed diffuse immunohistochemical labelling for BRAF V600E . Moreover, BRAF V600E mutation was confirmed by real-time polymerase chain reaction test.