An 8-year-old girl fell from the fifth floor and was transported to a local hospital. She had a tracheobronchial injury , bilateral hemopneumothorax, traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage, liver injury, and fracture of the left fibula. She experienced cardiopulmonary arrest during transportation to our hospital and underwent a successful cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). On arrival at our hospital, we inserted a drain into the right thoracic cavity and transferred her to the operating room, where she experienced another cardiopulmonary arrest. We performed CPR and introduced veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO). After she was revived and regained normal cardiac output, surgery was performed. A posterolateral skin incision was made, and the right thorax was opened. The tracheal bifurcation membrane was missing, and the cartilage in the area was injured. Furthermore, there were membrane lacerations on the cephalic side of the trachea and right upper bronchus . The right lung was tense and congested. We resected the tracheal bifurcation, two cephalic rings of the tracheal cartilage, two rings of the right main bronchus, and one ring of the left main bronchus. We closed the membrane laceration of the trachea and right upper bronchus with interrupted sutures using 4-0 PDS sutures (Ethicon, USA; Fig. B). We dissected the right pulmonary hilum and made a U-shaped pericardial incision around the pulmonary vein for pericardial release. In addition, we performed tracheobronchial reconstruction by inverted Barclay’s method because a little movement of the right main bronchus was observed. The trachea and left main bronchus were reconstructed using 4-0 PDS sutures with interrupted sutures in the cartilaginous portion and running sutures in the membranous portion . A foramen was created in the left main bronchus and anastomosed to the right main bronchus using 4-0 PDS sutures with interrupted sutures for the cartilage and running sutures for the membranous portion . VA-ECMO was continued, and the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). On postoperative day 1, the anastomosis was patent, but complete bilateral atelectasis persisted. We switched from VA-ECMO to venovenous (VV)-ECMO 4 days post-surgery. On postoperative day 12, we performed another surgery on the right hemothorax. VV-ECMO was discontinued 27 days after the surgery. The patient was awake and weaned off the ventilator 58 days postoperatively. She was discharged from the ICU 64 days after the surgical procedure. Bronchoscopy showed anastomotic obstruction by granulation because of perioperative ischemia. On postoperative day 85, the granulation was removed, and balloon dilation was performed . Although the patient had a minor short-term memory impairment and needed some support because of the difficulty in moving her left foot due to the left fibula fracture, she was discharged 97 days after the surgery walking. After discharge, she went to a public normal elementary school.