A 63-year-old Chinese male patient from Asia visited our hospital on 1 August 2021, due to “swelling and pain in the right testicle for over a year” who had a history of surgical treatment for left testicular hydrocele and was without other special medical experiences and allergy history regarding food and drugs, no history of exposure to significant carcinogenic factors, and no obvious family history of tumors. Physical examination: normal vital signs, height 178 cm, weight 74 kg, no swelling of superficial lymph nodes throughout the body, intact scrotal skin, no redness, swelling or pain. The size and morphology of the left testicular epididymis were normal, with slightly lower activity. The size of the right testicle was close to normal, and there was a nodule about 4 cm × 4 cm in size in the upper and posterior epididymal area. The texture was hard, with poor mobility and no obvious squeezing pain. Scrotal ultrasound showed an irregular cystic mass in the right epididymis area that was tightly adhered to the right testicle, exhibiting an uneven mixed echo mass with unclear boundaries. The size of the lump was approximately 4 cm × 3 cm × 2 cm. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) prompted the following description: right epididymis was full; within it, there was a range of approximately 2.6 cm × 2.8 cm × 2.1 cm mixed signals of cystic and solid nature; boundary was not smooth, especially in the junction area to the upper edge of the right testicle . Retroperitoneal computed tomography (CT) and chest CT did not show important positive results. The levels of alpha fetoprotein (3.6 ng/mL), human chorionic gonadotropin (0.3 mIU/mL), and lactate dehydrogenase (220 IU/L) were all within the normal range.
The nature of the patient’s right epididymis tumor was uncertain, and a malignant tumor could not be ruled out. After sufficient communication with the patient and his family on feasible management measures, the patient chose to undergo radical resection of the right testicular epididymis directly. With sufficient preparation, we performed radical resection of the right testis and epididymis through a right inguinal incision. The postoperative gross specimen was described as follows: the right testicle with the epididymis was completely cut, measuring 5.5 cm × 5 cm × 3 cm in size; the epididymis was 3 cm × 2.5 cm × 2 cm in size; upon incision, gray yellow spongy testicular tissue was observed, and a gray white lump with a size of approximately 3.5 cm × 3 cm × 2 cm was visible in the epididymis; the surface of the lump was gray white and solid in nature; under the microscope, the tumor cells had varying structures, large nuclei, obvious atypia, deeply stained cytoplasm, and glandular-like structures .
The immunohistochemical results were as follows: PCK(+), EMA(+), CEA(−), WT-1(+), CK5/6(+), CR(calretinin)(+), CD30(−), SALL4(−), Ki-67(20%), OCT-3/4(−), CK7(+), β-catenin(cytoplasm)(+), inhibin-α(−), MC(HBME-1)(−), D2-40(−), pax-8(−), and Cam5.2(+). Microscopic morphology and immunohistochemical results supported epididymal adenocarcinoma with testicular invasion. Perineural invasion was identified, and no tumor thrombus was found in the vessels. Further gastroscopy, colonoscopy, electronic laryngoscopy, neck enhanced MRI, and positron emission tomography (PET)-CT examinations did not indicate the possibility of tumors in other parts of the body. Therefore, we considered the final diagnosis as primary adenocarcinoma of the right epididymis. Considering the high malignancy of primary adenocarcinoma of the epididymis and its susceptibility to retroperitoneal lymph node metastasis, some scholars have pointed out that retroperitoneal lymph node dissection should be performed not only in cases with lymph node enlargement, but also as a preventive treatment for clinical N0 patients . Therefore, retroperitoneal lymph node dissection was recommended for this patient.
The laparoscopic retroperitoneal lymph node dissection was performed 2 weeks later. During the surgery, we removed the entire right retroperitoneal lymphoid adipose tissue and checked the wound surface to ensure that there was no obvious bleeding point. After repeatedly rinsing the wound with sterile distilled water, we removed the specimen tissues . The overall appearance of the postoperative specimens was described as follows: a piece of gray yellow adipose tissue with a size of 7.5 cm × 4.5 cm × 2.5 cm; several nodules with a diameter of 0.5–3 cm were observed inside, and all nodules were taken; The microscopic examination results were as follows: 11 lymph nodes were found, with one lymph node showing cancer metastasis (1/11).
Primary malignant tumor of the right epididymis, Adenocarcinoma, Secondary malignant tumor in the right retroperitoneal lymph node.
After multidisciplinary discussions and evaluations, the surgery completely removed the tumor tissue. Under sufficient communication with the patient and their family on feasible treatment measures, they decided not to accept adjuvant measures such as radiotherapy and chemotherapy, and strict follow-up had been chosen. At 3 months, 6 months, 9 months, 12 months, 18 months, 24 months, and 30 months after surgery, the imaging showed no progression. As of now, no additional adjuvant treatment has been added, and close follow-up is continuing.