A 13-year-old boy with an asymptomatic fistula opening near the dorsal penis was admitted to our hospital due to fever and lower abdominal pain . The fistula was recognized at least several months, and it was the first time of the appearance of symptoms. His body temperature was 38.0℃ and hematologic examination revealed a white blood cell count of 8200/μL with neutrophil predominance, a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 6.15 mg/dL, and high inflammatory response. Abdominal ultrasonography and computed tomography revealed an abscess inside a fistula lumen on the posterior surface of the rectus abdominis muscles in the midline of the lower abdomen . The size of abscess was 50 × 10 × 10 mm. These fistulas seemed to be connected across the pubis. He was diagnosed with CPS, and surgery was scheduled after treatment of the inflammation with antibiotics. The patient’s clinical symptoms improved after antibiotics administration for 18 days with cefmetazole (1 g/8 h).
Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the supine position. Initially, we made a Y-shaped incision, a semicircular incision in the natural skin crease immediately below the umbilicus, with a longitudinal incision below the umbilicus. After making the umbilical incision, the rectus abdominis muscle was excised outward to expose the preperitoneal space. The E‧Z Access/LAP-PROTECTOR mini-type device (Hakko Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), a single-port system, was placed in the preperitoneal space . The preperitoneal space was established with 8-mm Hg carbon dioxide inflation (5 L/min). Three 5-mm-port trocars were inserted through the device plate using a 30° laparoscope. Inflammatory adhesions appeared in the preperitoneal space. After dissecting these adhesions, a sinus connecting to the pubic symphysis was confirmed . The pubic symphysis did not connect with the bladder. Because the fistula passed through the pubic symphysis, the remaining caudal fistula was removed percutaneously with a small spindle-shaped incision around the fistula opening . Finally, the sinus was completely resected, with confirmation from both the cranial side and dorsal side of the pubic symphysis. The total procedure time was 197 min. There were no intraoperative complications. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 5. No recurrence has been observed during 1 year of follow-up.