A 48-year-old man was referred to the Eye Clinic of the University of Florence with bilateral decreased vision and hemeralopia in 2012. Best-Corrected Visual Acuity (BCVA) was 3.2/10 (0.50 LogMAR) in the Right Eye (RE) and 8/10 (0.10 LogMAR) in the Left Eye (LE). Spherical equivalent was − 6.0 and − 5.0 diopters in right and left eyes respectively. Slit lamp examination of the anterior segment showed mild posterior subcapsular lens opacities in the RE and clear lens in the LE. Intraocular pressure was normal. Fundoscopic examinations revealed a pale optic disc with widespread chorioretinal atrophy with a residual island of preserved retina at the macula of both eyes . Genetic examination performed at the Genetic Department of Careggi Teaching Hospital in Florence (Italy) identified the pathogenic deletion (c.1771−? _1962+? Del) on the CHM gene. During follow-up, the patient showed progressive worsening of vision in the RE. From January 2015 to May 2017, BCVA was stable (1/20; 1.30 LogMAR), while at the last visit (October 2018), BCVA was hand motion and 6.3/10 (0.20 LogMAR) in the right and left eyes respectively. OCT examination revealed the presence of a MH (which was not present at previous follow-ups). More specifically, avascular homogeneous material of medium reflectivity adherent to the inner retina at the margins of the macular hole resembling Lamellar Hole-associated Epiretinal Proliferation (LHEP) was detected . No hypo-reflective spaces were detectable between LHEP and the inner retina. The foveal edge appeared elevated. Schitic cavities, involving the residual atrophic neurosensory retina were characterized by hyper-reflective bridges of tissue crossing wider hypo-reflective spaces (typical of LMH) . Outer retinal tubulations were also present. Surgery was considered due to the decrease in visual acuity and the development of macular hole in the right eye. The patient underwent a standard 25-Gauge pars plana vitrectomy, complete removal of LHEP and peeling of the Internal Limiting Membrane (ILM) using Membrane Blue-Dual and fluid-air exchange. Simultaneous phacoemulsification was performed at the time of surgery. No complications were observed during surgery and one month later. At the 4-week postoperative follow-up the macular hole was closed ; the visual acuity remained stable: hand motion in right eye. Pre- and post-operative microperimetry (MP-3, Nidek, Japan) examinations did not change and no improvement of the retinal sensitivity and fixation stability was observed post-surgery. The macular hole remained closed and visual acuity stable at the last follow-up (18 months after surgery, July 2020) . The epiretinal cell proliferation specimen was prepared and processed with standard fixation (Karnowski’s fluid and OsO4), embedding epoxy-resin, and sectioned for electron microscopy. Using transmission electron microscopy, the LHEP had a wavy retinal side and smooth vitreal side, and was made up of dense amorphous material mainly composed of abundant clusters of fibrous collagens, closely resembling compact fibrous long spacing collagen (FLSC) embedded in native vitreous collagen (NVC) and type IV collagen. NVC and collagen type IV were the 2 main types of collagen strands observed in the extracellular matrix . In all the specimens collected neither fibroblasts, hyalocytes or myofibroblasts were identified. Written informed consent was obtained to report this clinical case.