A 52-year-old male asymptomatic HBsAg carrier (HBeAg negative) presented regularly every three months at the outpatient clinic of the Department of Hepatology and Gastroenterology at Charité University hospital for the last eight years. HBV viremia was assessed regularly and constantly showed negative results or viral loads below 250 IU/mL. Aminotransferase levels remained within the normal range for the last eight years. Fibroscan testing repeatedly showed results below 10 kPa, indicating absence of advanced fibrosis. Ultrasound examinations displayed signs of a mild fibrosis. Based on these findings, no antiviral treatment was considered necessary. In March 2013, the patient attended the outpatient department for a routine visit. He presented without clinical symptoms. At this visit, laboratory findings showed signs of an acute hepatitis with elevated aminotransferases (ALT 1010 U/l, AST 338 U/l, GGT 307 U/l, AP and Bilirubin were within the normal range). Due to the underlying disease, acute hepatitis B re-activation was suspected, and viral load was analyzed. However, the result was not consistent with HBV reactivation given the low viral load (145 IU/mL). Repeated abdominal ultrasound displayed no additional findings. A week later, aminotransferases decreased (ALT 232 U/l, AST 53 U/l), no signs of autoimmune disease or hepatitis D virus (HDV) superinfection were detected (negative anti-HDV (DiaSorin®) and normal results for IgA, IgM, IgG and negative results for ANA, AMA, AMA-M2, anti-SMA and anti-LKM were detected. Hepatitis A infection was unlikely because of preexisting immunity (positive Anti-HAV-IgG). The patient had not taken any new or immunosuppressive medication. On follow-up one month later, he reported clinical signs of fatigue and weakness. Laboratory testing showed normal aminotransferases. An acute HCV-infection was ruled out by HCV-RNA testing. At this visit, HBV-DNA was 23.200 IU/mL. No therapy was initiated since aminotransferases had returned to normal range. Still facing an unclear episode of hepatitis one month earlier, less common causes of acute hepatitis were examined. Laboratory testing showed positive results for hepatitis E virus IgM by ELISA (Mikrogen®) and HEV-IgG Blot by immunoblot. Further tests revealed a questionable result for HEV-IgM by immunoblot and negative results for HEV-RNA. Suspected acute HEV-superinfection as the most probable cause of the undergone hepatitis was confirmed by testing the blood sample from March 2013 for HEV-RNA. HEV-PCR had positive results at 76.400 copies/mL. Retrospective testing of previous blood specimens (from august 2012) showed negative results for HEV serology. During the follow-up visits, the patient had normal aminotransferase levels and HBV-DNA declined to 141 IU/mL, while HEV-RNA remained negative. The patient still had fatigue. Five months after acute HEV infection and four months after the HBV flare, HBV viral load had negative results again, serology remained unchanged (HBs Ag positive). The patient was asked for potential risk factors for acquiring HEV. He did not have contact to pigs or wild animals; he lived in an urban area, did not eat intestines or uncooked meat, did not travel abroad, did not receive transfusions or had contact to HEV-infected patients.