A 6-year-old boy presented to our hospital because of urinary incontinence with urgent urination for 3 years. He had astigmatism and myopia. He had no history of convulsions. His physical growth, intelligence, and motor development were normal. There was no family history of consanguineous marriage, kidney disease, or hereditary disease. The physical examination revealed specific facial features, including low-set ears, micrognathia, thin lips, wide eye distance, stubby neck, and large ear lobes. His blood pressure was normal. There was no edema in his body. All other results of the physical examination were normal. The urine examination showed massive proteinuria at the nephrotic level. The blood examination indicated that he had hyperlipidemia, that the lowest level of his serum albumin was 25.3 g/L, and that his estimated glomerular filtration rate suggested stage 3 chronic kidney disease. Urinary ultrasound suggested reduced volume and hydronephrosis in both kidneys. The urodynamic examination showed decreased bladder compliance and poor detrusor contraction. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed that the bilateral frontal extracerebral space was widened, the left ventricle was fuller than the right ventricle, and a cystoid cerebrospinal fluid signal was observed in the cisterna magna and was considered to be an arachnoid cyst. The Wechsler Intelligence Scale result was normal. After excluding tuberculosis, hepatitis B, systemic lupus erythematosus, diabetes, tumors, and other diseases, he was administered sufficient prednisone, captopril, dipyridamole, and multivitamins orally for 28 days. There was no remission in the proteinuria and serum creatinine levels, but the urinary incontinence symptoms disappeared after treatment with Solifenacin. A further renal biopsy showed diffuse fusion of the foot process and microvilli, but no significant thickening of the glomerular basement membrane was observed using electron microscopy. Using light microscopy, eight glomeruli were observed; of these, six had glomerular sclerosis and one was an incomplete glomerulus with suspected segmental sclerosis. The renal tubules showed cystic dilatation. No capillary endothelial cell proliferation, mesangial cell proliferation, inflammatory infiltration, necrotizing lesions, crescent, or thrombotic microangiopathy was observed. These pathological changes suggested FSGS with sclerosis and cystic dilatation of renal tubules .
We performed whole exome sequencing and found a novel de novo truncating variant in the last exon of TRIM8 (Chr10:104,416,939;NM_030912.2:c.1484G > A;p.Trp495*). This variant leads to the early termination of protein translation encoded by TRIM8. There were no additional kidney or nervous-related pathogenic gene variations that could be found in the proband. According to the criteria for classifying pathogenic variants in the guide of sequence variation , the variant was classified as pathogenic. Sanger sequencing showed that the variant and other variants were not detected in his parents, suggesting that the variation was a de novo variant in the patient himself .