The patient signed the consent form, therefore written informed consent to participate in this report has been obtained.
A 47-year-old man was referred for management of a cSCC on the right upper eyelid . The patient had an 8-year history of a right upper eyelid lesion, which was diagnosed as a cSCC on biopsy. He underwent wide local excision with clear resection margins and reconstruction with Cutler-Beard flap in 2018 under ophthalmology. There was no other significant family and past medical history. The patient had a previous history of intravenous drug use but was not under any regular medications or treatments.
Division of the flap was planned but due to patient related factors he was lost to follow up. He was referred to maxillofacial and when he re-attended for division of the flap, he was found to have a new lesion in the lateral aspect of the right upper eyelid and was diagnosed as a recurrent cSCC on biopsy. The patient was subsequently referred to Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery via ophthalmology for further management.
Clinical examination revealed a large 4 × 3.5 cm ulcerated mass in the right lateral periorbital region. The mass compressed the globe and extended from supraorbital ridge to the level of the zygomatic arch. There was also partial loss of vision from the right eye. There was no evidence of cervical lymphadenopathy. A repeat biopsy of the region confirmed poorly differentiated cSCC occupying the entire width and depth (8 mm) of the biopsy specimen.
Staging scans identified no bony erosion or intracranial extension, but there was involvement of the lateral rectus muscle.
Following an multidisciplinary team discussion, he was managed surgically with wide local excision of the tumour with 1 cm margin with an orbital exenteration, a right superficial parotidectomy and reconstruction by means of placement of orbital implants, an anterolateral thigh (ALT) flap and a partial thickness skin graft. A consultant surgeon was the main operating surgeon for this case.
The patient received post-operative care at the community hospital and made good recovery. He has healed without complications as shown in .
The post-operative histopathological results showed a pT4b, 35 mm × 12 mm SCC with perineural invasion involving bone with tumour present at the deep margin . Additionally, the histology revealed an incidental synchronous pT1a, 20 mm adenocarcinoma of the lacrimal gland with extra glandular extension and perineural invasion focally present at deep margin. The two tumours within the same histology specimen are shown in .
Further management plan involves post-operative radiotherapy and further reconstruction with an ocular prosthesis.