A 27-year-old male patient complained of pain on medial joint space in his right knee after running on the road for few years. He attempted self-treatment, but the pain did not improve. He subsequently consulted a nearby clinic and was diagnosed with medial and lateral discoid meniscus in his right knee with medial meniscus tear on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). He was referred to our institution for operation.
Physical findings for his right knee showed that although the range of motion was not limited, there were swelling and pain on the medial joint space. In addition, the McMurray test revealed pain and clicking on the medial joint line with external rotation.
Radiographs showed nothing particular in his right knee. T2-weighted coronal and sagittal MRI of his right knee revealed medial and lateral complete discoid meniscus, which was confirmed by arthroscopic examination of his right knee. The medial meniscus had a complete discoid conformation with a horizontal tear, whereas the lateral meniscus had no tear . Arthroscopic examination of his right knee similarly revealed that the lateral discoid meniscus had no tear, and the medial discoid meniscus had a horizontal tear. In addition, the discoid medial meniscus also had an anomalous insertion to the anterior cruciate ligament, and there was also mild fibrillation of the medial tibial cartilage surface .
We performed arthroscopic partial meniscectomy of the medial discoid meniscus. We performed no surgical procedure for the lateral discoid meniscus because the patient had no clinical symptoms, and the lateral discoid meniscus had no tear. We also checked the stability of the connection between the meniscus and the posterior soft tissue both medially and laterally .
Walking was allowed the day following the operation. Three months later, the patient had no pain or symptoms in his right knee and resumed playing sports. At the last follow-up, 18-month post-surgery, he had no limitation of motion, could play sports with full effort, and was satisfied with the result. The medial joint space in his right knee was observed clearly on MRI, and the lateral meniscus had no tear .