A 52-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for PEG tube placement. The patient's body mass index was 19.0 kg/m2. He had previously been treated for acute aortic dissection of the aortic arch and descending aorta under thoracotomy. A cardiologist had replaced the aortic arch and descending aorta. After the operation, he experienced a disturbance in swallowing because of cerebral infarction. For 2 years, he had been experiencing occasional vomiting. Blood examination and laboratory serum tests did not reveal any abnormal findings.
X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scan images did not show a distended stomach . The CT examination revealed that the transverse colon was on the entire surface of the stomach, and therefore PEG insertion would be difficult.
We first attempted PEG under gastrointestinal fiberscope (GIF) inspection. The GIF findings indicated no remarkable abnormalities. The gastric folds were smooth and not tortuous. We failed to place a PEG tube while using a GIF because the abdominal wall could not be transilluminated. Therefore, we believed that the transverse colon was covering the stomach.
We then attempted PEG insertion by using a colon fiberscope to move the transverse colon down to the caudal side; however, this procedure was unsuccessful . The reasons for the unsuccessful PEG tube insertion were that we failed to move the transverse colon down and we could not detect transillumination of the abdominal wall. We subsequently attempted LAPEG to observe the stomach and other organs because we believed some abnormalities around the stomach might have existed.
Laparoscopic surgery was performed under general anesthesia. Based on laparoscopic observation, we determined that the stomach was twisted and the transverse colon was not on the stomach. By using laparoscopy, we found a greater curvature of the stomach on the head side (i.e., the stomach was twisted 180 degrees). We diagnosed the patient as having the organo-axial type of gastric volvulus. During the endoscopy procedure, we were unable to derotate the stomach to its original position although the stomach had no adhesions to neighboring organs and paraesophageal hernia. We easily corrected gastric volvulus by using laparoscopic forceps and derotating the stomach. We then sutured the anterior wall of gastric body to the abdominal wall at four sites by using the Funada-style gastropexy kit . We finally inserted the PEG tube safely at the anterior wall of the gastric body . The operative time was 62 minutes.
After the PEG tube insertion, the patient recovered smoothly and was discharged from the hospital without any complications. The patient has not had a recurrence of gastric volvulus. We were able to place the tube safely without interfering with organs surrounding the stomach by using the laparoscopy procedure.