A 53-year-old man was referred to our hospital for a second opinion because of the suspicion of infection of an aortic stent. His medical history included presence of a small, restrictive muscular ventricular septal defect (VSD), a bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) of the right–left coronary cusps type, and coarctation of the aorta. More than 30 years before presentation, he had a sepsis with a Staphylococcus aureus and was treated as if it were endocarditis. In 2016, the coarctation was treated percutaneously by uncomplicated implantation of a Cheatham-Platinum/Iridium CP stent (NuMed Inc. Hopkinton, NY, USA) because of persistent hypertension. A non-covered stent was used to allow unrestricted perfusion of the lusoric artery through the stent struts. Approximately one and a half years later, he presented to the referring hospital with fatigue, night sweats, and shivers that persisted for several weeks. Physical examination revealed fever up to 40°C combined with a blood pressure of 153/78 mm of mercury, a tachycardia of 106 b.p.m., and a known systolic murmur on the aortic valve. The electrocardiogram showed a sinus tachycardia including a first-degree atrioventricular block. Laboratory results included leucocytes 11.1 × 10e9/L (reference range 4.0–10.0 × 10e9/L), C-reactive protein 66 mg/L (0–10 mg/L), haemoglobin 8.2 mmol/L (8.6–10.7 mmol/L). He was admitted with the working diagnosis of endocarditis and after taking blood cultures antibiotic treatment consisting of ceftriaxone was initiated. Transthoracic echocardiography showed no proof of endocarditis and therefore, transoesophageal echocardiography was performed: the BAV functioned well, the peak velocity was 1.8 m/s, no aortic valve regurgitation was seen, and no vegetation or other characteristics of endocarditis were found. The entry point was extensively searched for but could not be identified. Blood cultures revealed a Streptococcus gordonii and antibiotic treatment was adjusted accordingly to penicillin 12 million units per 24 h. A computed tomography (CT) scan was performed and showed no vegetation or thrombus of the BAV, no wall thickening, aneurysm, abscess, or other signs of inflammation . A positron emission tomography (PET)–CT scan with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) showed an increase in FDG uptake at the distal end of the stent in the descending aorta . Hereafter, antibiotic treatment was switched again to ceftriaxone once daily 2000 mg and continued for 6 weeks, in accordance with treatment of endocarditis with a prosthetic valve. Clinically the patients’ functional status improved quickly, the fever resolved and the laboratory markers of inflammation returned to normal. Control PET–CT scan a week after treatment showed normalization of FDG uptake . The patient was sent home where he completed the antibiotic treatment. During outpatient follow-up, he had no fever and control blood cultures remained negative. At last follow-up, August 2019, he was free of complaints.