A male, 50 year-old patient, with no particular medical or surgical history, with no history of biliary colic or known gallstones, presented in the emergency department with a right upper-quadrant abdominal pain since 2 days. He complained of nausea, but no vomiting; there was no change in urine or stool colour. He has normal vital signs (68 bpm, 152/87 mmHg blood pressure), and no fever.
Upon clinical examination, patient was not icteric. He has pain at the palpation of the right upper quadrant with a positive Murphy sign.
Laboratory tests showed systemic inflammation with a white blood cell count of 15 G/l, and CRP 100 mg/l. Liver enzymes were slightly elevated: GGT 203 U/l, total bilirubin 32 μmol/l, conjugated bilirubin 12.8 μmol/l). Blood lipase was not tested in the emergency department. An abdominal ultrasound confirmed the diagnosis of acute cholecystitis with the presence of a gallstone in the infundibulum with, no unusual anatomy was reported by the radiologist. .
Although liver enzymes were slightly elevated, our local algorithm dictates immediate laparoscopic cholecystectomy .
In our institution, gallbladder surgery is performed daily by senior registrars specialized in general surgery. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed the day after admission, a Saturday morning, by the on-call surgical team (resident and senior registrar). We were surprised by an unusual anatomy, resembling a bifid gallbladder, with an unidentified bulging pouch in the region of the cystohepatic triangle . Our initial suspicion was that of a large cyst of the common bile duct. We mobilized our on-call consultant who was, luckily, an hepato-bilio-pancreatic surgeon, who was also unsure of the anatomical structures observed. After careful laparoscopic dissection, we discovered this mass to be intimately attached to the gallbladder. However, we still hadn't identified this structure. We decided to puncture and empty the gallbladder, in order to release its tension and to see if the second pouch would also deflate. This second pouch deflated as well, hinting that it belonged to the gallbladder.
We very carefully started the dissection of the cystohepatic triangle under the second pouch. This finally allowed us to mobilize the content of this pouch, which turned out to be a very large gallstone in Hartmann's pouch. We then clearly identified the critical view of safety with only 2 structures entering in this pouch of the gallbladder, the artery and the cystic duct .
An intraoperative cholangiogram confirmed the anatomy and the vacuity of the common bile duct . The intervention was safely completed laparoscopically. The patient was discharged the next day.