A 43-year-old male presented to the emergency room with the chief complaint of jaundiced skin and eyes, for 7 days. Vital signs were within normal limits except for a heart rate of 98 beats/min and high blood pressure of 166/98 mmHg; pain score was 0. At the time of admission, he had not taken any medications. During admission, he stated that he was feeling fatigued and noticed a slight distention of his abdomen. He had been using alcohol on a regular basis, and homeopathic pills 3 times per week; he was unable to recall the name and content of pills.
Medical history was significant for obesity: body mass index 43.54 kg/m2, hyperlipidemia, and prediabetes. In addition, he was suffering from prolonged major depressive disorder and alcohol abuse problems. He admitted to consuming 3–5 alcoholic drinks per day for the past 15 years. Over the course of several years, he was treated with psychotherapy, electroconvulsive therapy, and venlafaxine 37.5 mg, one capsule daily, with only temporary relief. The patient had a history of soliciting help for his alcohol use disorder from AA group meetings.
Five years ago, he was admitted to the emergency department complaining of a self-inflicted stab wound to the right thigh. He denied any suicidal thoughts and/or past thoughts of self- harm and reports that he impulsively stabbed his thigh while playing with a knife in his car. Laboratory workup was within normal limits, except for ethanol blood level of 214 mg/dL.
During the current encounter, ultrasound investigation revealed no bile duct dilation, no gallstones, gallbladder with wall thickening, enlarged liver without focal mass, and likely thrombosed portal vein. Although the liver injury presented as a cholestatic picture, considering the significant direct hyperbilirubinemia possibly from portal vein thrombosis, he also had a hepatocellular pattern of liver dysfunction typical for alcoholic hepatitis due to >2:1 aspartate aminotransferase/alanine transaminase elevation. Other differential diagnoses were drug- induced: the use of unclear homeopathic supplements, and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis due to severe obesity. Deranged synthetic liver function as evidenced by thrombocytopenia and mild coagulopathy suggestive of hepatic insufficiency, likely due to acute alcoholic hepatitis. During the hospitalization, the patient showed signs of mild alcohol withdrawal with tremor, tachycardia (119 beats/min), and high blood pressure. The symptoms were managed by administering lorazepam 1 mg, once. Clonidine and gabapentin for ethanol withdrawal were also started, which helped in symptom resolution. The patient was also started on prednisone, per gastroenterologist indication. The recommendations at discharge were strict alcohol cessation, no acetaminophen intake, and hepatitis A and B vaccine when the patient was stable, outpatient gastrointestinal (GI) follow-up, liver function tests, and international normalized ratio follow-up, monitoring for alcohol withdrawal, and psychiatry referral. The medication list at discharge was as follows:
Clonidine 0.1 mg/24 h; he had two patches in place, one was supposed to be removed in 3 days and then removal of the last remaining patch on the 4th day Multivitamin – iron one tablet by mouth daily Folic acid – 1 mg tablet take one by mouth daily Gabapentin 300 mg: take one capsule by mouth 3 times a day, then one capsule by mouth twice a day, then two capsules by mouth daily at bedtime and discontinue Prednisone 20 mg: take 3 tablets orally every morning for 28 days, then taper off per instructions by GI doctor.
Eight days later, the patient was brought by the ambulance to the emergency room with a gunshot wound to the head. The event occurred approximately 40 min before presentation, and resuscitation efforts continued. The patient was transferred to a trauma gurney, and cervical neck spinal precautions were maintained. Manual blood pressure was not obtained due to continuous, uninterrupted chest compressions. Prehospital vital signs were: Glasgow coma scale 3, PEA 20s than 70s in the field. The patient shot himself 1 time with a large caliber hand gun. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation has been ongoing for approximately 38 min per emergency medical services. The patient had received a total of 5 mg epinephrine and total resuscitation time 40 min. Cardiac monitoring leads and pulse oximeter were placed. FAST exam showed cardiac standstill. The patient’s spouse stated that the patient had been dealing with health issues and mental health issues for quite some time. However, the spouse expressed shock and surprise as she did not think he was capable of self- harm .