A 22-year-old Black African woman, primigravida, married, a small-scale farmer with a primary level of education, and uneventful prepartum period presented to the hospital at full term in labor. She delivered a full-term fresh stillbirth by cesarean section due to obstructed labor with fetal distress. The mother booked prenatal clinic at a gestation age of 12 weeks and made only two visits throughout her prenatal period. During prenatal visit she was prescribed with routine supplements including anti-helminthes and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) for presumptive treatment of malaria as well as ferrous sulfate and folic acid, which were not refilled afterward. She was reported as having normal blood pressure and blood glucose level, and tested negative for syphilis and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. However, she was not screened for other congenital fetomaternal infections, that is, TORCH complex. She had no history of active or passive smoking, alcohol consumption, drug abuse or any known familial congenital disorders. She denied any exposure to pesticides or herbicides, though reported regular use of fertilizers in her farming activities. She denied the use of post-coital hormonal contraceptives or misoprostol for attempted abortion of the index pregnancy. The parents of the newborn were not close relatives and there was no family history of consanguinity.
The newborn was delivered by cesarean section in a standard manner. The newborn had an Apgar score of 0 both at 0 minutes and 5 minutes, consistent with a fresh stillbirth. On physical examination, the newborn weighed 2100 g, and had fused lower limbs, agenesis of the left upper limb, imperforate anus, ambiguous genitalia, and cleft lip as shown in Figs. and . The mother did not have any peripartum complications.
No any additional tests or imaging were performed. The diagnosis of SML was made on the basis of typical clinical features as depicted in Figs. and . The differential diagnosis of CRS, Potter syndrome and a syndrome of vertebral (V), anorectal (A), cardiac (C), tracheoesophageal (TE), renal (R) and limb (L) anomalies - termed VACTERL associations, were less likely in this patient due to the obvious features suggestive of SML. Whole body imaging using x-ray and post mortem examination were not permitted due to cultural taboo and restriction regarding handling of deceased individuals. Further genetic testing was performed due to lack of laboratory capacity.