A 76-year-old Korean woman was admitted to our hospital due to sore throat and poor oral intake. The patient presented with a decreased urine output and a febrile sensation. She had hypertension for 1 year and was taking amlodipine 10 mg/day. She had no history of gastrointestinal, liver, or renal diseases. In addition, she had undergone upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopies (GFS), which revealed non-significant findings without bleeding lesion.
On admission, the blood pressure was 130/70 mmHg, with a pulse rate of 80 beats/min. Grade 1 pretibial pitting edema was noted. The laboratory findings were as follows: hemoglobin 8.6 g/dL (normal: 12–16 g/dL), platelet count 86,000/mm3, blood urea nitrogen 124.7 mg/dL (normal: 10 ~ 20 mg/dL), and serum creatinine 8.87 mg/dL (normal: 0.6 ~ 1.2 mg/dL). The 24-h urine protein was 1214 mg/day (urine volume was 1250 cc). Physical examination revealed a dehydrated tongue and no organomegaly. The rectal examination was negative for melena. Chest radiography and computed tomography showed ground-glass opacity in both lung fields and bilateral pleural effusion. Echocardiography showed a pericardial effusion without regional wall motion abnormalities. Abdominal computed tomography showed non-specific findings; the right and left kidneys were 8.6 and 8.9 cm in diameter, respectively. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer was 1:320. The patient had normal complement level and negative result for anti-dsDNA level. The diagnosis of SLE was performed using 2019 European League Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology classification criteria . The patients had high ANA level (1:320 titre) and SLE was considered. We evaluated additive criteria and the patient had thrombocytopenia (86,000/mm3, 4 score weightage), pleural and pericardial effusion (detected on CT imaging, 5 score weightage), oral ulcer (detected on physical examination and history, 2 score weightage), and proteinuria (1.4 g/day at initial findings and sustained + 2 ~ + 3 in urine dipstick test after infectious conditions, 4 score weightage). Total score was 15 and the patient was diagnosed with SLE . The patient had pleural and pericardial effusions, but had decreased effective circulating volume. Therefore, fluid therapy and antibiotics were initiated due to upper respiratory infection symptoms and signs. The serum creatinine level recovered to 3.9 mg/dL at 1 month after hospitalization, when the patient was discharged. The serum creatinine improved to 3.03 mg/dL at 2 months after first visit. Prednisolone 10 mg per day and hydroxylchloroquine sulfate 400 mg per day were started 3 months after first visit.
She was followed up for 16 months at the outpatient department and hemoglobin level was stable during first 16 months using erythropoiesis stimulating agent (ESA) and oral iron supplementation. However, at 17 months after the first visit, the serum creatinine level steadily increased and the anemia was refractory to the erythropoiesis-stimulating agent and iron supplementation treatment. At the outpatient department, the laboratory findings revealed blood urea nitrogen, serum creatinine, and hemoglobin levels of 103 mg/dL, 6.1 mg/dL, and 9.0 g/dL, respectively. She was started on HD through a tunneled cuff catheter and underwent surgery for autologous arteriovenous fistula creation. Hemoglobin level was relatively stable after initiation of HD. We thought that the cause of anemia at the initiation of HD was uremia.
After 5 months from initiation of HD, hemoglobin level suddenly dropped to 5.5 g/dL and the patient complaint of dizziness and did not have change in stool nature. The anemia was evaluated using the iron status, peripheral blood (PB) smear, and GFS. Iron, transferrin saturation, and ferritin levels were 46 μg/dL, 18.5%, and 448.5 ng/mL (reference level: 5–205 ng/mL), respectively. The PB smear revealed a normocytic normochromic anemia. GFS revealed multiple erythematous raised hyperemic mucosal lesions at the distal antrum without active bleeding , a finding compatible with GAVE. Anti-ulcer treatment was started using a proton pump inhibitor. Although the patient was diagnosed with GAVE, the patient did not have active bleeding focus and melena. We performed bone marrow biopsy because the definite cause of anemia was not identified. The bone marrow biopsy showed a normocellular marrow with normal iron status. Hemoglobin level was stable after transfusion and anemia did not recur.
At 9 months after initiation of HD, the patient firstly complaint of melena and emergency GFS was performed. The GFS revealed active bleeding lesion at GAVE. Bleeding focus was treated using argon plasma coagulation (APC). The hemoglobin level was stable after the treatment of GAVE. However, after first diagnosis of bleeding at GAVE, she frequently complained of symptoms or signs associated with anemia, such as dizziness, dyspnea, hypotension, melena, and hematemesis. During 18 months after the diagnosis of GAVE, she underwent four pre-emptive APC treatments for the GAVE lesions expected to bleed and four APC treatments for actively bleeding lesions. Although she frequently complained of symptoms or signs associated with anemia and had frequent GFSs with or without APC, her clinical status is relatively stable, and she is undergoing maintenance HD without anticoagulants.