A 65-year-old male patient with past medical history for diabetes mellitus was brought to the hospital for having 7 days of fever and cough, and recent onset of dyspnea. The patient was given 15 lpm of oxygen with non-rebreathing mask, and his oxygen saturation improved from 85 to 90%. Laboratory tests were as follows: haemoglobin (Hb) 16.2 g/dL; leucocyte 9000/μL; lymphocyte 3%; thrombocytes 222,000/μL; CRP 0,2 mg/dL; d-dimer 0.78 mg/L; HbA1c 8.0%. His chest x-ray showed severe bilateral pneumonia and his real-time PCR on nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs were tested positive for SARS-COV-2. The patient was diagnosed with COVID-19 with severe case and received COVID-19 regimen.
After 7 days of hospitalized, the patient suddenly complained of epigastric pain. His respiratory rate was increased, oxygen saturation was 88–90% with 15 lpm of oxygen, and there was tenderness in the epigastric. Laboratory results showed an increase in leucocyte 15.100/μL; D-dimer 14.04 mg/L and Albumin 1.4 g/dL. A contrast abdominal CT scan was performed, infarction was found in both kidneys and no abnormalities in other abdominopelvic organ . Abdominal pain was suspected due to mesentery ischemia caused by hypercoagulation because ischemia was seen on the kidneys, whereas renal arteries are bigger than mesenteric arteries. Anticoagulant therapy with low-molecular weight heparin 25,000 IU/day were administered; with the addition of tramadol 100 mg/day to reduced the pain and third-generation of cephalosporin antibiotic as bowel decontamination. On the next day, the patient felt less abdominal pain, d-dimer decreased to 8.54/μL and the medications were continued.
Three days after his epigastric pain, the patient complained of had a worsened abdominal pain with marked distension, inability to pass gas or defecate. On physical examination, signs of peritoneal irritation were found. His leucocyte increased to 33.100/μL; aPTT 71.4 s (control aPTT 24.1 s). Abdominal X-ray showed free air in the abdominal cavity and distension of the large bowel . We diagnosed it as intestinal perforation in COVID-19.
The patient underwent an emergent laparotomy with midline incision. The surgery was performed under general anaesthesia. After the peritoneum was incised, air came out of the peritoneal cavity and the bowel was soaked in brownish liquid and reddish black feces. We explored it and obtained about 200 cc of brownish liquid. During the surgery, we found necrosis in two locations: first, we found a round necrosis, 3 cm in diameter, yellowish black in antimesenterial site. In the second location, 20 cm whole intestinal necrosis was found at 1 m from the first site . We did bowel resection at each site of necrosis and end-to-end anastomoses by using manual suturing . The surgery duration was approximately 2 h and at the end of the surgery, intra-abdominal drain was placed to help further evaluation of re-perforation occurrence. The histology showed a small bowel tissue with multiple microthrombus in submucosa, extensive haemorrhagic infarction and perforation .
Right after surgery, the patient was admitted to the ICU and was put on ventilator, with anticoagulant and other medications continuing. The patient had stable vital signs with 85–93% oxygen saturation on ventilator, but never regained consciousness. On the fourth day, melena occurred and blood laboratory result showed Hb 8 mg/dL, ureum 1.4 mg/dL, and creatinin 42 mg/dL. The patient was given packed red cell (PRC) and fresh frozen plasma (FFP), 500 cc each. We did not find any sign of intestinal paralytic, discharge from the drain and there were no signs of re-perforation. Six day after surgery, the patient’s condition got worse with unstable vital signs and progressive decrease of oxygen saturation. Unfortunately, the patient passed away in the ICU. We did not perform autopsy because the patient’s family refused.