The patient is a 43-year-old woman who was admitted for the first time for a progressive non-painful, mobile mass of the right inguinal fold evolving for 7 months. The medical history of the patient included childhood asthma, chronic tonsillitis, seven pregnancies and four children, caesarean section and abortions. Pelvic ultrasound showed a heterogeneous suspicious non-circumscribed mass measuring 5 cm in its longer axis. It was localised in the right inguinal region and showed cutaneous adhesions. CT scan confirmed the presence of this inguinal mass, measuring 5.8 × 4.9 × 3.2 cm and extending within the right femoral triangle in contact with the long adductor muscle, without enhanced contrast, and without locoregional lymph node .
The patient underwent a chirurgical biopsy. The pathological analysis diagnosed a granular cell tumor (Abrikossoff’s tumor) without any malignant signs (absence of mitosis, necrosis and cytonuclear atypias). Tumorectomy of this inguinal mass were performed three weeks later. At the gross pathology examination, the tumoral tissue was homogeneous with a greyish stain. Its margin was not well defined and the hypodermic, dermic were involved. One lymph node was discovered and was invaded. The epidermis was not ulcerated . Histologically, collagen bundles were infiltrated by cords of large, polygonal cells with inconspicuous cell membrane and homogenous finely granular cytoplasm. Nuclei were round or oval and presented large nucleoli, vesicular of dark chromatin and sometime an intranuclear vacuole. Mitosis were rare and the mitotic index was low (1 mitosis/ 10 High Power Field). There was a slight increase of the nucleo-cytoplasmic ratio. We observed no necrosis . Fanburg-Smith score of malignancy was of 3: nuclear pleomorphism, tumor cell spindling, vesicular nuclei with large nucleoli. Immunohistological finding showed a cell expression of S-100 protein, vimentin, calretinin (slight), α-Inhibin, CD56, CD57, CD68 and neuron specific enolase (NSE). Cytokeratin AE1-AE3, EMA, calponin, caldesmon, desmin, smooth muscle actine, myosin, myogenin, chromogranin, synaptphysin, Neurofilament proteins, Glial fibrillary acidic protein, CD1a, renal cell carcinoma antibodies were all negative. Therapeutic marker, estrogen receptors, progesterone receptors, androgen receptor, HER2, CD117 ALK, C-MET, ROS1 and PDL-1 were negative too.
Due to microscopic resection and the nodal status, a large surgical revision with an inguinal curage was then decided at the oncology committee. Pathological evaluation did not reveal tumor tissue in the tumorectomy region but showed metastatic invasion by granular cells in four of twelve lymph nodes, without capsular rupture. Adjuvant chemotherapy was excluded because of very low mitotic activity. To reduce the risk of local recurrence, adjuvant radiotherapy on the tumor bed and right inguinal area of ​​50 Gy in conventional fractionation was delivered. After 10 months after the end of radiotherapy, the patient is in complete remission. Due to the unpredictable tumor, the follow up strategy is a physical examination with a CT scan every 4 months for the first 2 post-operative years, then every 6 months for up 5 years and yearly thereafter, as a sarcoma.