A fit and well 34-year-old man was admitted to the emergency service with multiple stab injuries to posterior thorax and occiput with a retained knife in his interscapular area. He remained haemodynamically stable and neurological examination revealed normal power in upper limbs and a 4/5 power in his right lower limb, 0/5 power in his left lower limb. Sensory examination revealed an intact pin prick and light touch from C2-T4, altered sensation T5, absent sensation to pin prick and light touch from T6-S2 with intact perianal sensation. He had a Motor incomplete- ASIA impairment score (AIS) D score. A CT spine was confirmed trajectory of the knife traversing the superior T2 right lamina into left inferior posterior T2 vertebral body. There was no associated vascular injury associated .
A thoracic T2 and T3 laminectomy and removal of foreign body was performed within 3 hours of presentation. The knife was noted to be retained in the right paraspinal region with a trajectory of the knife tip to the midline . A 10 cms midline incision made and connecting the oblique right paraspinal wound. The paraspinal muscles dissected and laminae of T2/3 expose and T2/3 laminectomy completed with high speed drill.
Under microscopic guidance, the knife was removed following the laminectomy with minimal manipulatory movement. Care was taken not to move the knife perpendicular to the cord to avoid further damage. The tip of the knife penetrated the right side of the cord causing more than a hemisection (60% of the lateral cord diameter and 100% of anterior posterior diameter on the right side) of the cord landing in the vertebral body and penetrating the posterior longitudinal ligament. The dura appeared contused and severed . 8 mgs dexamethasone was administered intravenously after the knife was removed from the cord. The torn right hemi cord was sutured with continuous 7′0 prolene .The pia arachnoidal layer was included in the suturing procedure in a circumferential manner to oppose the torn cord. Haemostasis secured with Floseal®. Dural margins were trimmed and a watertight duroplasty was performed Duraguard™ with 3′0 prolene. Tisseel fibrin glue was used to seal the duroplasty margins. Wound closed in layers. No post-operative surgical complications were encountered.
As this procedure was carried out as an emergency out of hours, neurophysiological monitoring was not utilised.
He was treated in the intensive care unit and was noted to have complete loss of power in both legs for 8 days and a power of 1/5 noted in his left extensor hallucis longus that improved to 4/5 over 6 weeks. Sensory examination revealed a Brown-Séquard syndrome pattern with loss of pinprick sensation and temperature below T4 on the right side which recovered on the left side. Post-operative spinal MRI at day 4 revealed high signal at the repair sight at the T2/3 level . An MRI performed at 3 months revealed sign of significant spinal cord injury in the and micro-haemorrhages in the cord above and below the level of injury with associated post-operative changes. His ASIA score improved to E from D.
At a 18 month follow-up his is mobilising independently with normal lower limb power and does not need any mobility aid. He is under the care of neuropsychologists for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).