A 43-year-old male patient was burned by 10 kV high voltage on the left upper limb and in the abdominal wall and was admitted to the Department of Burns and Skin Repair Surgery, Hainan General Hospital.
A 43-year-old male patient suffered from temporary unconsciousness after a 10-kV high-voltage electric shock on June 17, 2018. He had no history of falls from a height or incontinence. He was transferred to the local hospital for disinfection, wound dressing, and fluid transfusion. However, due to disease progression, he was transferred to the Department of Burns and Skin Repair Surgery, Hainan General Hospital, 8 h after the incident.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
The patient was born and brought up in the country of origin, and had no history of exposure to epidemic water and poisons. His living conditions were normal, and he denied any history of sexually transmitted diseases. He had no history of smoking or alcohol abuse. His family members were healthy, and he denied a family history of mental illness, genetic history, or tumor history.
The physical examination at admission indicated a pulse of 69 beats/min and blood pressure of 134/99 mmHg. The patient had a pale face but was conscious and could answer simple questions. He had abdominal and rebound tenderness. The burned areas involved the middle abdomen and the left upper limb. The involved abdominal skin measured 18 cm × 15 cm. Full-thickness abdominal wall defects (5 cm × 2 cm, portrait) were noted 2 cm above the umbilicus, with carbonized marginal tissues and exposed blackened bowels . Regarding the left upper limb injury, most skins were carbonized, the muscles were necrotic, arteries and veins were embolized, ulnar and radial arterial pulses disappeared, cyanosis was present, and the skin temperature significantly decreased.
Routine blood tests showed a white blood cell count of 26.20 × 109/L, a neutrophil percentage of 91.3%, a lymphocyte percentage of 2.5%, a monocyte percentage of 5.8 %, a red blood cell count of 4.26 × 1012/L, a hemoglobin level of 133 g/L, and a platelet count of 256 × 109/L.
Computerized tomography indicated subdiaphragmatic free air (suggesting pneumoperitoneum) and subcutaneous free air in the left upper limb and abdominal wall.