12-year-old male proband, was referred to our center AECS- in Damascus for confirmation of his affected status for β-thalassemia. The parents were non-consanguineous. His history revealed, pallor and anemia. The electropherogram revealed low level of (Hb A1) 36.2%, high level of (Hb F) 62.2% and low level of (Hb A2) 1.6%, for that, δ-globin gene variant was suspected. His father had a classical clinical picture of β-thalassemia trait. His mother had normal indices but with reduced (Hb A2 levels) 1.9%, all hematological data were summarized in Table . The parents had never been transfused, while the proband requires blood transfusion occasionally.
To investigate the high level of Hb F in the proband, the XmnI restriction site at − 158 position of the Gγ-gene was done. Hematological parameters of the parents and proband were obtained with an automated differential cell counter (ABX Micros ES60; HORIBA ABX SAS, Montpellier, France). Capillary Hemoglobin electrophoresis (Hb) analysis were measured using Capillarys 2 system (Sebia, Lisses, France) system.
After obtaining informed consent, genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood from the parents and proband using the QIAamp DNA Blood Mini kit (Qiagen, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Purified gDNA was run on a 0.8% agarose gel. The quality and quantity of the DNA was determined spectrophotometrically (NanoVue™; GE HealthCare, Freiburg, Germany).
Direct DNA sequencing of the entire human HBB and HBD genes was done on an ABI PRISM 310-DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystem, Foster City, CA, USA) as previously reported [, ]. The genotyping of HBB gene was determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The suitable primers were used for three exons of β-globin gene including the promoter, first intron, 5’ and 3’ untranslated region (UTR) sequences as previously reported . For HBD gene, two specific primer sets were designed for Ex 1& 2 and Ex 3 including their flanking regions on the δ-globin gene as previously reported . Reverse hybridization assay (α-Globin StripAssay® 4–160; ViennaLab Diagnostics Gmb Vienna, Austria) which covers 21 of α-thal mutations was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Detection of Xmn-I locus was performed with RFLP-PCR technique with specific primers and restriction enzyme Xmn-I .
In this case, the blood and physical examination of the proband showed that, and he had anemia and pallor, and he was affected by delta and beta thalassemia. Hematological and molecular data for the family were described in Table . Direct DNA sequencing for β-globin and δ-globin genes shown in Fig. . The father had the β0 Codon 5 [−CT] mutation in heterozygous state, whereas, the mother presented the β+ Hb Knossos codon 27 (G > T) mutation with δ0 codon 59 [−A] mutation both in heterozygous state, thus resulting in a low level of Hb A2 (1.9%) .
The Molecular analysis of the proband showed that, he had inherited the β0 codon 5 [−CT] mutation from his father, and had inherited the β+ Hb Knossos codon 27 (G > T) mutation and the δ0 codon 59 [−A] mutation from his mother, so, a low level of Hb A2 (1.6%) was also observed . On the other hand, the results of the α-thal test in the proband revealed that none of the common deletional forms were present.
The result of PCR/RFLP of the Xmn-I locus at − 158 to the G훾-globin gene indicated that, the homozygosity [TT] genotype in the proband was observed.