The Department of Pediatric and Preventive Dentistry, present at AJ Institute of Dental Sciences, Mangaluru, was visited by a female patient aged 4 years with a chief complaint of missing teeth in the mouth since infancy. She complained of difficulty in speech and mastication. When asked, the parents gave no relevant family history and were not willing to do any tests to confirm whether the anodontia was syndromic or nonsyndromic. She had an additional appendage on the right foot, which was surgically removed 1 year back. Other than this, no other medical history was reported. The patient was aware of her appearance, which resulted in her being shy and timid.
On general examination, the patient was ill-built and poorly nourished. Hair and skin were normal. On extraoral examination, the facial form was oval along with reduced lower facial height, and due to the presence of a retrognathic mandible, the facial profile was convex ( and ).
Clinical examination revealed a completely edentulous maxilla and mandible . The alveolar ridges were poorly developed, with normally appearing alveolar mucosa. An intraoral examination also showed a shallow palate with healthy oral mucosa. The tongue appeared normal, and a panoramic radiograph reported the complete absence of primary as well as permanent tooth germs .
For the purpose of improving speech, mastication, and appearance, as well as enhancing the psychosocial outlook, a treatment plan which included the use of removable complete dentures for both upper and lower arches was implemented. The concerned parents were provided with informed about the treatment plan and procedures involving the complete denture fabrication. They were also educated on periodic checkups and refabrication of oral prostheses at regular intervals as the oral environment and alveolar ridges increased in size due to child growth.
Throughout the procedures, the tell-show-do technique was used. Primary impressions of the upper and lower arches were made with putty impression material, and primary casts were made. Special trays were fabricated on the casts. Border molding was then done with putty impression material and light-body impression material as used to obtain the final impression. The master cast was prepared using the final impression. Acrylic base plates were adapted on the casts of both arches, and occlusal rims were fabricated using wax.
Jaw relation was ascertained by the placement of the occlusal rims using the base plates in the oral cavity. Working casts were mounted onto a simple articulator after obtaining interocclusal records. Since the patient was just 4 years old, deciduous dentition was decided for the dentures. The artificial teeth were fabricated in the lab using heat cure acrylic resin of suitable shade, and they were then positioned onto the wax occlusal rim along with necessary spacing as per the patient's age. A trial insertion was done, and the necessary alternations were made.
The dentures were then processed with heat-cure acrylic resin . After the final insertion, necessary instructions about routine oral hygiene measures for the dentures were imparted to the patient and parents. No pressure spots or ulcers were noticed during recall appointments. The patient's self-esteem also improved, thus resulting in improved socialization skills.
As few clinicians recommend relining or rebasing prostheses every 2–4 years and remaking them every 4–6 years, this patient was recalled after 4 years when she attained the age of 8 years for remaking the complete denture with respect to the mixed dentition period. The new dentures will simulate the dentition the patient should normally have for her age.
During the mixed dentition period, the patient was recalled, and all the steps were repeated, that is, impression making, pouring casts, fabricating denture bases and occlusal rims, followed by jaw relation, teeth arrangement, and acrylization . The prosthetic teeth used were modified in width and height to minimize alveolar resorption-causing eccentric forces directed to the compromised ridges. Occlusal interferences were eliminated after insertion of the denture, and post that, finishing and polishing of the final dentures was done . Lateral cephalograms before and after insertion of the complete dentures were taken , and cephalometric analysis revealed an increase in the vertical dimension.
While delivering the complete dentures, the patient was advised to remove the dentures at night to relieve the daily stresses on the oral tissues. Pressure areas were identified during recall appointments and relieved accordingly. Excellent retention was obtained, and significant improvement in mastication and speech was reported by the parents.