Our patient was a 29-year-old man complaining of medial knee pain and giving way of his right knee for 2 years since a previous sport injury. His past medical history and drug history were negative.
During physical examination, the patient had no genu recurvatum. His Anterior Drawer Test (ADT) was positive with a 10 mm anterior subluxation. His Lachman and Pivot shift tests were positive. In addition to varus malalignment (varus angle 7 degrees), a lateral thrust was evident during his gait performance.
The Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) confirmed ACL tear of his right knee. Our patient had double varus based on Noyes’s grading . His Lysholm and International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) score were 26 and 29.8 respectively. The Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) score of his preoperative right knee pain was 8.
Based on the patient’s standing triple joints alignment view, our patient’s varus angle was 7o and according to his Medial Proximal Tibial Angle (MPTA) (90.83o) and Lateral Distal Femoral Angle (LDFA) (92.21o), the varus deformity was assumed to be of femoral origin . So, it was decided to perform distal femoral valgus osteotomy to correct varus malalignment. No significant femoral/ tibial length discrepancy existed comparing both sides (femoral and tibial length of 492 and 413 mm on the right side consecutively; femoral and tibial length of 493 and 417 mm consecutively on the left side). Instead of lateral closing wedge osteotomy, it was preferred to perform medial side opening wedge valgus osteotomy as the former might interfere with femoral tunnel drilling during ACL-R. Using the mediCAD ® software, it was analyzed that at the osteotomy opening, the angle between proximal and distal fragments should be increased to 7 degrees and the space between the proximal and distal fragments should be increased to 10 mm at the medial cortex.
The patient was placed in a supine position. The involved lower limb was hung hyper-flexed with a leg holder. A prophylactic dose of Cefazolin (1 gram) and tranexamic acid (TXA) (1 gr) was administered intravenously 30 min and 1 h before the surgery consecutively. A same intravenous (IV) dose of TXA (1 gr) was repeated at the end of the surgery. A tourniquet was applied during the surgical procedure.
Arthroscopy was performed through standard anteromedial and anterolateral portal. A mid substance tear in ACL plus 1cm2 chondral lesion in medial femoral condyle were diagnosed . The stump of the ACL was removed. Then, chondral abrasion and micro fracturing was performed to stimulate the regeneration of chondral lesion . No meniscal lesion was detected.
A 3 cm vertical incision was made on the anteromedial tibial cortex initiating at 1 cm distal to the joint line of the knee. The sartorial fascia was dissected and the Semitendinous and Gracilis tendons were recognized. All vincula of both tendons were released carefully and tendon stripper was then used to harvest Gracilis and Semitendinous autograft.
After diagnostic arthroscopy, the knee was extended and the leg was placed on a Mayo table. A longitudinal incision on anteromedial side of the right thigh was created starting from 10 cm above the upper border of the patella to 2 cm bellow the patella’s upper border. The distal femur was exposed through subvastus approach. The joint capsule was left intact. Under fluoroscopic guidance, two pins were placed from 55 mm proximal to the joint line on the medial side to just proximal to the lateral femoral condyle. The first pin was inserted at the intersection of anterior one third and posterior two thirds of the femur and the second one was applied in the intersection of posterior one third and anterior two thirds of the femur in parallel to the first one .
Biplanar osteotomy was performed from medial to lateral direction . Protecting the soft tissue dorsally with a Hohmann retractor and constantly cooling the oscillating saw blade, a transverse osteotomy cuts was performed in the posterior three fourth of the femur parallel to the path of the inserted pins. In the ventral one fourth of the femur, the osteotomy was performed vertically according to the biplanar osteotomy technique. The vertical osteotomy cut was accomplished with a thinner saw blade to prevent further soft tissue injuries. Posterior cortex was cut with manual broad osteotome to protect the neurovascular structures. During the osteotomy, one centimeter of the cortex on the lateral side was kept intact to function as a hinge during the wedge insertion.
Careful opening of osteotomy site was performed gradually with variable sized chisel osteotome to save the lateral femoral cortex. Lamina spreader was placed to insert the wedge shape corticocancellus allograft.
The osteotomy was stabilized with TomoFix Medial Distal Femur Plate (Synthes®) placed anteromedially . Four bicortical screws were applied at the proximal segment and 4 unicortical screws were used at the distal fragment in such a way not crossing the midline.
In the next step, the leg was hung on the leg holder again and the femoral and tibial canals were created arthroscopically. The harvested hamstring autograft was passed through the tibial and femoral tunnel. It was fixed proximally by flipping an endo-button on the lateral femoral cortex and distally to the tibia by interference bioabsorbable screw. After careful hemostasis and wound irrigation with sterile normal saline, the surgical incision was repaired without placing any drainage catheter.
Following the surgery, the patient was allowed to start range of motion. Partial weight bearing in a hinge knee brace was permitted during the first 6 weeks postoperatively. After 6 weeks, as the clinical and radiologic signs of bone union were observed, the patient was allowed to progress to a full weight bearing status and discontinue the brace. Closed chain exercise was practiced during the first 6 weeks and then, the open kinematic chain exercise was allowed.
Long standing alignment view, at 12 weeks postoperatively, confirmed deformity correction . The valgus angle was analyzed to be 2o. the detailed alignment variables before and after surgery are depicted in Table .
After 6 months, complete union was achieved and our patient’s Lachman and pivot tests were negative. The patient reported no pain during his daily activities (VAS = 0). The amount of anterior subluxation in the ADT was 3mm. The Lysholm and IKDC score were 99 and 94.4 respectively.