A 42-year-old male visited to Tianjin Medical University General Hospital with a chief complaint of weight loss of 10 kg within three months. Physical examination revealed no stained-yellow sclera and no enlarged lymph nodes in the neck, underjaw, armpits, and groin. An enlarged spleen could be palpated in the left upper abdomen, but no tenderness. Abdomen ultrasound suggested that there was a huge mass in the spleen.
The enhanced computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed when the patient was admitted to our hospital for the first time. A giant solid tumor of the spleen was considered. The images of the arterial phase and portal phase revealed a huge low-density mass in the spleen with nodular enhancement on the margin. The separations and scattered calcifications could be seen in the spleen, with the maximum cross-section area of 12.1 × 15.1 (cm2). The nearby compressed, displaced tissues and organs had unclear boundaries with the greater curvature of the gastric wall. There were no enlarged lymph nodes in the abdomen and retroperitoneum, and no sign of ascites. The arterial phase of T2 and T1 fat-suppression image showed a huge mass with mixed signals in the spleen, including high signals in the peripheral area of T2 and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), and low signals in the central zone of T2 and DWI. Nodular enhancement could be found in the margin of the spleen and enlarged lymph nodes could be seen around. A blood test was used to detect the tumor markers, and the results showed that carbohydrate antigen 199 (CA199), alpha-fetal protein (AFP) and carcinoma embryonic antigen (CEA) were at a normal level but ferritin increased to 596.7 ng/ml.
Laparoscopic splenectomy was performed, and the intraoperative specimen was seen in Fig. a. The tumor of the spleen was grayish-white and hard, with intact envelope, and the surrounding tissues were not invaded. The postoperative specimen was shown in Fig. b. The tumor with a diameter of about 12 cm located in the upper spleen and seemed like spherical. The section was grayish-yellow and the boundary was clear.
Postoperative pathological results via hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) indicated a cross distribution of deeply and lightly stained lesions . The deeply stained zone was mainly composed of a large number of plasma cells and lymphocytes, and interspersed in a flake-like, lightly stained area like stripes, which was known as emperipolesis. The giant pleomorphic tissue cells characterized by abundant cytoplasm, vacuoles, large nuclei, and irregular nucleus were distributed in the lightly stained area . In the cytoplasm of histiocytes, it could be observed that some lymphocytes and a small number of plasma cells were phagocytized, which was the typical phenomenon known of emperipolesis .
Immunohistochemically, S‑100 protein staining was strong positive, diffusely distributed within histiocytes in the lesion . The labeling for CD68 protein was also positive within the lesioned histiocytes . CD1a, CD21, CD23, CK, HMB45, Melanie, SMA, Desmin, EMA, CD31, CD34, Fli-1, FVIII, CD20, and CD3 were negative, and Ki67 index was about 15% in lymphocytes and plasma cells. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed as RDD.
To analyze the molecular character of this case and seek available options of precise treatment, a comprehensive genomic profiling with a 539-genes panel (Simceredx, Nanjing, China) was administered in biopsy specimens via NGS by DNA-based hybrid capture. NGS could detect the potential deleterious and damaging mutations . The mutations of ATM and NFKBIA, which were genes associated with apoptosis, were identified .