A 55-year-old female presented to the out patient department of our hospital with a history of a fall from height. The patient had experienced immediate pain and swelling in the knee and ankle area of the limb. On removing the splint used to transport this patient and examining the patient, swelling of the knee, upper tibia and heel were noticed. Palpation produced crepitus of the upper tibia. Significant tenderness was elicited on palpation at the knee as well as the heel.
Radiographs of the knee in the anterioposterior and lateral plane showed a type VI Schatzker fracture of the tibial plateau. Radiographic examination of the calcaneum showed a tongue type fracture of the calcaneum with complete loss of the Bohler angle ( & ).
The patient's limb was placed in a well padded splint and observed for compartment syndrome. Over a period of three days the patient developed significant ecchymosis around the upper tibia.
In view of the compromised soft tissue envelope, age of the patient and complexity of the trauma, it was decided to manage both the fractures in a ring fixator .
The patient was anaesthetised and placed on a traction table. The proximal fragments were approximated with manual pressure under image intensifier control. Ilizarov wires were placed to obtain compression in the coronal plane. A cancellous transverse lag screw was placed to obtain further stability. An additional ring was placed and affixed to the bone, below the metaphysiodiaphysial comminution. This ring was affixed to the diaphyseal bone with two Schanz pins placed at right angles to each other. The foot was immobilised with a Schanz pin attached to this fixator. This Schanz pin was placed in the first metatarsal ( & ).
A Schanz pin was placed into the tongue shaped calcaneal fragment, starting posteriorly. This pin was attached to the second ring by means of a plate and two threaded rods. By gradual distraction and lateral pressure under image intensifier control, the Bohler angle was restored. The Schanz pin was kept in this position in the distraction mode. The patient was allowed range of motion exercises of the knee from the first post operative day. At 10 weeks the fixator was removed and patient allowed partial weight bearing crutch walking. 12 weeks post fixation full weight bearing was allowed ( & ). At final follow up of 40 weeks, the patient had a range of motion from 10 degrees to 125 degrees. The ankle range of motion at was 15 degrees dorsiflexion to 30 degrees of plantar flexion. The patient is able to ambulate without pain, and is able to do light activity. However, heavy activity causes mild discomfort around the knee.