A 51-year-old man presented with a sudden loss of hearing in his left ear. He also noted vertigo and imbalance. Approximately three times over the previous week, the patient had experienced transient hearing loss and vertigo lasting between 5 and 10 minutes. The patient had a history of hypertension and heavy smoking but he did not have a history of hearing impairment, head trauma, central nervous system infection, autoimmune diseases, or exposure to ototoxic drugs.
On neurological examination, he had vibration-induced right-beating nystagmus and left-beating nystagmus after a head-shaking test. Additionally, he had left-beating nystagmus in the right roll test and right-beating nystagmus in the left roll test. The head impulse test was normal. Analysis of blood contents, including complete blood count, serum electrolytes, liver and kidney function indicators, and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP), were normal, except for an increased LDL-cholesterol level (130 mg/dL). Pure-tone audiogram (PTA) showed a mild unilateral sensorineural, pure-tone average of 37 dB (dB) in the left ear .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was performed 9 hours after the last event. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps showed normal findings . Perfusion-weighted imaging (PWI) showed territorial perfusion deficits in the left posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) and anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) without infarction. Brain CT angiography (CTA) revealed occlusion of the left post-PICA intracranial VA and multifocal stenosis of the right intracranial VA, indicating that both VA dissections were confirmed by conventional angiography .
We started treating the patient with 75 mg of clopidogrel and 40 mg of atorvastatin. After starting treatment, his vertigo gradually improved, but his SSNHL did not change. Follow-up DWI and ADC mapping performed 3 days after onset showed multifocal infarctions along the posterior circulation involving the upper cerebellum and occipital lobe, not the PICA and AICA territories . Two months later, the patient had no vertigo but still had hearing impairment in his left ear. A follow-up PTA documented a persistent unilateral sensorineural, pure-tone average of 53 dB in the left ear . Additionally, perfusion computed tomography (CT) showed that perfusion deficits remained in the left cerebellum along the PICA and AICA territories .