A 20-year-old Japanese man was referred due to nonproductive cough and abnormal findings on chest imaging. His mother was a heterozygous carrier of CGD, and he was diagnosed as having X-linked recessive CGD lacking gp91phox at the age of 1 year. He was given prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and itraconazole and had been well for 19 years. When he was 19-years old, he developed CGD-related colitis and started treatment with prednisone 45mg per day. He started working at a warehouse 4 months later. After 3 months, a routine chest X-ray showed abnormalities. He then developed a nonproductive cough unresponsive to either antibiotics or antifungals.
On admission, his oxygen saturation at rest was 92%, and there were end-inspiratory crackles on auscultation of both lung bases. Results of laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 11,380/mm3, C-reactive protein of 4.67mg/dL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 37mm after 1 hour, and a serum KL-6 of 3824U/mL. Lactase dehydrogenase and angiotensin-conversion enzyme levels were within the normal range. Screening for cytomegalovirus antigen and QuantiFERON®-TB Gold (Cellestis Limited, Carnegie, Victoria, Australia) were negative, as were rheumatoid factor, antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody, antinuclear antibody and anti-Jo-1 antibody. Pulmonary function studies showed that first-second vital capacity was 2.68L (86.2% predicted), a vital capacity of 3.25L (72.5% predicted), a ratio of residual volume to total lung capacity of 25.8%, and a single-breath carbon monoxide diffusing capacity of 64.5% predicted. The serum precipitins reaction test was 2+ for Aspergillus species except Aspergillus niger and negative for Trichosporon asahii. A chest radiograph showed bilateral fine reticulonodular shadow in his lower lung areas. Computed tomography of his chest revealed bilateral diffuse fine centrilobular nodules and some mass lesions in lower lobes that do not fit a common image of hypersensitivity pneumonitis, but no lesions in interstitial areas (Figure ). Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from his right middle lobe consisted of 37% macrophages and 62% T cells, with a CD4 to CD8 ratio of 0.84. Fungal and mycobacterial cultures of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid were negative, as were polymerase chain reactions for tuberculosis, nontuberculous Mycobacterium, and Pneumocystis jirovecii. A transbronchial lung biopsy from his right middle lobe demonstrated small, loosely formed, non-necrotizing granulomas surrounded by slight collagenous fibers with or without giant cells in the bronchioles and alveolar duct, as well as lymphocytic alveolitis. These features were consistent with hypersensitivity pneumonitis.The patient stopped working at the warehouse, and his oxygen saturation returned to normal in 3 weeks; however, centrilobular nodules persisted on computed tomography, the mass lesions enlarged, and his serum KL-6 was still high at 4000U/mL. As a diagnostic procedure, a surgical biopsy of a mass lesion was performed. The specimen revealed massive granulomas spreading not only in alveolar ducts, as in the transbronchial lung biopsy findings, but also in the lymph tract just below the pleura. Granulomatous vasculitis was not evident, and these findings were consistent with poor drainage of a large amount of granulomas (Figure ).
Considering the negative findings for infectious disease, high-dose steroid therapy was started. The centrilobular nodules then disappeared, the mass lesions shrank, and his serum KL-6 decreased.