A 19-year-old woman living in Strasbourg (Northeastern France) complained of headache, diarrhea, asthenia, anorexia, and abdominal cramps having lasted for 15 days. The symptoms started after she had consumed baked cod. Two nematode larvae were spontaneously expelled via the mouth while she was brushing her teeth. The patient had an unremarkable medical history, and had not recently traveled abroad. The patient’s discomfort improved after worm expulsion, and gastroscopy proved negative. The patient was treated with albendazole 800 mg/day for 5 days.
Stool examination and blood analysis were all normal without eosinophilia. Serology was negative for Trichinella spiralis, Strongyloides stercoralis, Ascaris lumbricoides, and Toxocara canis.
Anisakis serology was also negative. IgG titers against Anisakis sp. were estimated at 1:50 (<1:100) using an own laboratory-developed Immunofluorescence assay (Parasitology-Mycology laboratory, Hôpital Cochin). Detection of anti-Anisakis antibodies using immunoelectrophoresis was negative and IgE titres against Anisakis sp. (p4) were at <0.1kUa using ImmunoCAP (Phadia, France) (Parasitology-Mycology laboratory, Lille University hospital center). No IgE against cod were detected by means of ImmunoCAP.
The larva was brought to the Parasitology department of Strasbourg University Hospital for further characterization. The parasite was 22 mm long and 0.9 mm large with three anterior lips without any boring tooth . Morphological characteristics were a clearly visible esophagus and ventriculus, with a terminal tiny point . The parasite was morphologically characterized as a fourth-stage Anisakidae larva and submitted for molecular species identification at the department of Parasitology, University of Granada, Spain.
DNA was extracted from a roundworm portion using the commercial kit RealPure kit for genomic DNA extraction (REAL), following mechanical rupture of parasite tissue using a pestle and repeated freezing/thawing cycles in liquid N2. The precipitated pellet was resuspended in 20 μL of deionized water. For genetic identification of the larva, polymerase chain reaction of the ribosomal fragment ITS1–5,8S–ITS2 was carried out with primers NC5 (forward): 5′ GTAGGTGAACCTGCGGAAGGATCATT 3′ and NC2 (reverse) 5′ TTAGTTTCTTTTCCTCCGCT 3′ using programming described in 1998 by Zhu et al. . The expected size of the amplified fragment was approximately 1000 bp. As controls, two specimens previously identified by the same technique as A. pegreffii and A. simplex s.s., were used respectively . PCR products were run on gels prior to digestion in order to verify the amplification process’s success.
First, restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) was performed independently with two restriction enzymes, TaqI (5′...T↓CGA...3′) and HinfI (5′...G↓ANT...3′) Fast Digest (Thermo Sciencific) at 65 °C and 37 °C, respectively for 10 min, using a final enzyme concentration of 0.5 U/μL. The results were visualized through electrophoresis on a 3% agarose gel. The band pattern collected from the roundworm differed from A. simplex s.s. and A. pegreffii controls.
For comparative sequence analysis, the PCR amplification product was purified using the Zymoclean Gel DNA Recovery Kit (Zymo Research), and then directly sequenced in both directions using the same primers as for DNA amplification. The sequences were edited and aligned using Clustal-X 1.81 software. Subsequently, BLAST software was employed to compare this sequence with a sequence library in order to identify similar sequences. As shown in Fig. , two identical sequences of P. decipiens s.s. from Denmark (GenBank accession number KM273087.1) and Norway (GenBank accession number JQ673262.1) showed a 99% similarity with our sequence. The alignment has been detailed in Fig. .
In a second infection case occurring a few months later, a worm exited through the patient’s nose after she had eaten raw sea bream. The larva was morphological and molecularly identical to the previous case being identified as P. decipiens s.s.