A 61-year-old woman was admitted to the Ear Nose and Throat (ENT) Department of our hospital complaining of pain and noticeable swelling of the tongue.
The patient sought out a general practitioner because of pain and noticeable swelling in the tongue that persisted for over 1 mo. She was given a short course of antibiotics which provided no symptom relief. The patient was referred to the Department of Stomatology, where an oral surgeon prescribed oral maxillofacial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The imaging revealed abnormal signal intensities, as shown in Figure , which are indicative of tongue cancer. The patient then visited the ENT Department for further consultation.
The patient had no previous medical history.
There was no specific personal and family history.
Intraoral examination showed mild swelling in a longitudinal 2 cm × 1.5 cm area on the left lateral aspect of the tongue. A hardened nodule with an ill-defined margin was found on the tongue. The nodule was the same color as the surrounding tongue tissue (normal color) and no clearly identifiable foreign bodies were observed on the tongue as shown in Figure .
The results of routine tests of complete blood count, kidney function and liver function were normal.
The oral maxillofacial MRI showed abnormal and ill-defined signal intensities on the left side of the tongue (size: 1.6 cm × 1.2 cm × 2.0 cm; Figure ) and multiple swollen cervical lymph nodes (up to 0.7 cm in size, in the submaxillary region and carotid sheath). The primary diagnosis was tongue cancer as reported by the specialists in the Department of Radiology. However, the doctors in the ENT Department reviewed the MRI images and considered the possibility of foreign body granuloma for two reasons. First, granuloma and cancer can have similar imaging features; and second, the shadow seemed to indicate that the tongue tissue was protected from foreign bodies, as shown by images taken in the transverse plane. During the initial clinical interview the patient denied a history of foreign body ingestion. To differentiate between the two possibilities, further examinations were conducted.
The patient was referred for ultrasound examination of the tongue. The ultrasound device used a linear probe with a 13-MHz transducer. The acoustic picture was consistent with a linear hyperechoic foreign body, specifically a piece of bone, as shown in Figure . When asked about the possibility of fish bone ingestion or another foreign body in the tongue, the patient could not recall whether she had recently eaten fish. However, her daughter recalled that a meal containing fish (with bones) might have been served to the patient 2 mo prior to seeking medical assistance. Complete surgical enucleation of the lesion was then conducted. The mass with the fish bone was completely removed without compromising the capsule , and no hemorrhagic accident occurred. The fish bone was 1.5 cm in length . Post-operative pathological examination showed that the lesion was a granuloma containing collagen fibers, macrophages and chronic inflammatory cells.