A 41-year-old caucasian woman presented with ataxia, tremor, dysarthria, and cogwheel rigidity. Two weeks prior to admission she had been on a holiday in southwest Africa. After three days in the hot climate there, she developed tiredness and fatigue with profuse vomiting. In hospital, routine bloods showed low sodium less than 100 mmol/l and raised potassium at 5.9 mmol/l. Other routine blood parameters were normal and random cortisol was low at 136 nmol/l.
Using intravenous normal saline, she was started on gradual sodium replacement aiming at 8 mmol/l correction per day with daily electrolyte monitoring. The sodium improved to 130 mmol/l over 5 days. Over the next week she developed dysarthria and ataxia with rigidity and tremor. MRI showed faint symmetrical change laterally in the basal ganglia that were not felt to be significant.
With a deteriorating condition and no clear diagnosis, she was flown back to the UK as an emergency for assessment at our tertiary neurological centre.
She had been diagnosed with coeliac disease at the age of 14 and maintained close dietary control. Two months prior to her holiday, she was found to have hypothyroidism and had been started on thyroxine 25 mcg once a day. There was no other past medical or surgical history.
On examination she was slim and under-nourished with a noticeable tan. She was afebrile and pulse and blood pressure were normal. Cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal examinations were normal. Glasgow coma scale was 14/15. She was unable to speak, but was responding to questions with grunting and communicating with great difficulty using a finger-board.
The cranial nerves and fundus were normal. Tone was uniformly increased with cogwheel rigidity and tremor. Remaining neurological examination was normal.
The blood tests were normal on admission including the hepatic and renal functions. Sodium was 135 and potassium 3.9.
Thyroid functions were normal and thyroid peroxidase antibody was negative. The serum cortisol was low at 83 nmol/l and glucose was normal. A synacthen test was diagnostic of Addison's disease and her adrenal antibodies were positive. So, Addison's disease, exacerbated by dehydration and vomiting, had been the cause for her hyponatraemia.
Chest Xray, ECG and CT Scan of brain were normal.
At this stage, a metabolic insult to the brain due to osmotic shift during correction of hyponatraemia was thought of clinically and an MRI scan was requested.
MRI following transfer showed symmetrical hyperintensity on the T2-weighted images within the caudate and putamen and in FLAIR T2 images . There were absolutely no changes within the pons in T2-weighted images . These changes did not show marked progression in comparison with the MR done soon after the metabolic insult. There were no changes within the globus pallidus, cerebellum or within cerebral white matter.
She was treated with hydrocortisone 200 mg tds intravenously and thyroxine 100 mcg daily. Fludrocortisone was subsequently added. Her neurological symptoms were controlled with Baclofen 20 mg bd and LevoDopa/carbidopa 100/25 mg tds. She improved markedly and levodopa therapy was no longer required after day 10. Baclofen was also withdrawn and she returned to work within 2 months.
Follow-up MRI 2 months later showed significant resolution of the basal ganglia changes .