A 61-year-old man with a one-week history of temporal visual field defect in the left eye was referred by a local ophthalmologist to our department for investigation of white nasal retinal lesions. The patient had a low-grade fever of around 37 °C and mild respiratory failure for about 2 weeks before he was aware of visual field defects. At presentation, his best-corrected visual acuity was 24/20 in both eyes, and intraocular pressure was 10/11 mmHg. Slit-lamp examination revealed no specific findings other than mild cataracts. No inflammatory cells and vitreous opacity were observed. Fundus examination showed no abnormal findings in the right eye, but revealed a yellowish-white raised patchy lesion in the nasal fundus of the left eye. Fundus autofluorescence imaging of the same site showed a mixture of hyperfluorescence and hypofluorescence regions. Optical coherence tomography depicted a ridge in the retinal pigment epithelium and a subretinal lesion . Laboratory findings were as follows: white blood cell count 6100/μL, hemoglobin 14.3 g/dL, platelet count 28.3 × 104/μL, aspartate transaminase 84 U/L, alanine transaminase 21 U/L, blood urea nitrogen 12.9 mg/dL, creatinine 0.83 mg/dL, C-reactive protein (CRP) 0.60 mg/dL (reference range ≤ 0.30 mg/dL), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 923 U/L (reference range 106–211 U/L), soluble IL-2 receptor (sIL-2R) 609 U/L (reference range 122–496 U/L), and beta 2-microglobulin 2.02 mg/L (reference range 0.64–1.56 mg/L). VRL was suspected. Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed for the detection of central nervous system lesions revealed old cerebral infarction, but no lymphoma infiltration. On day 13 after the first visit, the patient was admitted to undergo phacoemulsification, intraocular lens implantation and 25-gauge pars plana vitrectomy for diagnostic purpose. Intraoperative examination revealed only mild vitreous opacity, and routine vitrectomy was performed. Immediately after vitrectomy, intravitreal injection of methotrexate (MTX) was started for suspected VRL. He was discharged the next day.
The patient’s systemic symptoms did not resolve. One week after discharge, fever persisted at around 38 °C and respiratory failure worsened. Whole-body computed tomography (CT) was performed for detailed examination. Interstitial pneumonia and splenomegaly were found on CT, and he was admitted to the department of respiratory medicine of our hospital for detailed examination and treatment. LDH, CRP, sIL-2R, which were higher at the time of admission to respiratory medicine than at the first visit ophthalmology, further increased to 1381 U/L, 9.6 mg/dL, and 5239 U/mL, respectively. Changes in the above blood levels and histopathological examination of a transbronchial lung biopsy suggested IVL. For definitive diagnosis, bone marrow biopsy and random skin biopsies of seven sites (skin without apparent lesion in the left upper arm, skin with spider angioma-like lesion in the left anterior chest, left thigh, and left lower leg, and skin with cherry angioma lesion in the right shoulder, right anterior chest, and right lower leg) were additionally performed. Histopathological examination of the random skin biopsy showed many lymphocyte-like atypical cells distributed in small blood vessels, and some were distributed in the dermis and subcutaneous adipose tissue, confirming the diagnosis of IVL .
Regarding treatment, after vitrectomy was performed on day 13 after the first visit, intravitreal injection of MTX had been performed three times according to the treatment protocol for VRL, and the yellowish-white lesions in the peripheral retinal area tended to shrink . Since the fundus lesion was typical of VRL and vitreous IL-6 level was 198 pg/ml and IL-10 was 41 pg/m, which were poor findings for VRL, intravitreal MTX injection was scheduled to be continued. However, due to exacerbation of systemic symptoms, systemic treatment was started and intravitreal MTX injection was discontinued. Rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP) therapy and high-dose methotrexate (HD-MTX) therapy were started for the treatment of IVL at the department of hematology of our hospital. With the start of treatment, LDH, CRP and sIL-2R began to decrease and fever tended to improve. A total of six courses of R-CHOP therapy and two courses of HD-MTX therapy were performed within 4 months. Both systemic symptoms and laboratory findings tended to improve, and intraocular lesions also tended to shrink . Two more doses of rituximab were administered. However, positron emission tomography-CT performed 5 months after the start of chemotherapy showed abnormal accumulation in the right frontal lobe, and contrast-enhanced MRI showed an enhancing effect at the same site. Although the disease had spread to the central nervous system , no central nervous system symptoms were observed. Then, chimeric antigen receptor T cells (CAR-T) therapy was started for the central nervous system lesion in another hospital. The retinal lesions did not worsen during central nervous system spread, and improved further after switching to CAR-T therapy . At the last follow-up, CAR-T therapy was successful, and systemic and intraocular findings remained favorable.