A 19-year-old Japanese man developed left eyelid swelling around October 2, 2013. On October 9, 2013, he visited the ophthalmologic department of a local hospital because of subsequent gradually worsening ophthalmalgia and visual deterioration. The symptoms did not improve after the ocular administration of antibiotics. He was referred to Toho University Sakura Medical Center in Sakura, Japan (referred to hereafter as “our hospital”) on October 16, 2013, with a main complaint of left eyelid swelling. He had no medical, family medical, or allergy history. At the first visit, his right best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 1.2; his left BCVA was 0.8 with visual deterioration. His right and left intraocular pressures (IOPs) were 17 mmHg and 36 mmHg, respectively. Prominent left eyelid swelling and exophthalmos were evident . A slit-lamp examination revealed prominent mucosal hyperemia, edema, and slight mucous discharge . Moderate mydriasis of the left pupil, direct light reflex attenuation, and positive relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) were present. No abnormality existed in the corneas, lenses, retinas, or optic nerve heads; however, ocular motility was omnidirectionally circumscribed. Dynamic campimetry showed neither central scotoma nor visual field deficiency. No laterality of central flicker values was revealed on central flicker examination. No systemic symptoms such as fever or infection were found on physical examination at the first visit. The blood examination exhibited a normal inflammatory response value.
Orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed soft tissue swelling in the left orbital muscle cone, and orbitographic MRI showed systematic trachychromatic images in the periorbital soft tissues .
Clinical findings indicated suspected orbital cellulitis, although the blood examination exhibited no increase in the inflammatory response value. Intraorbital inflammatory pseudotumor was a differential diagnosis because of suspected orbital panniculitis on diagnostic MRI. He was hospitalized. An intravenous infusion of betamethasone (4 mg/day) was started on October 16, 2013.
The following medications were started at the first visit because of the possibility of orbital cellulitis: ocular administration of levofloxacin four times daily and cefmenoxime four times daily, ofloxacin ophthalmic ointment once daily, and intravenous infusions of imipenem/cilastatin (0.5 g × 3 times daily). Culture identification of the eye discharge was also performed on the same day. Oral administration of acetazolamide tablets (300 mg × 3 × 3 times daily) and potassium l-aspartate tablets (300 mg × 3 × 3 times daily) was also started because of left ocular hypertension. We supposed that there might be another possibility of an immunologic or inflammatory pseudo tumor besides orbital cellulitis because of the few inflammatory clinical findings; thus, we tried to use a sub-Tenon’s injection of triamcinolone as a diagnostic therapy. A sub-Tenon’s injection of triamcinolone (0.5 mg) in the left eye on the first day of hospitalization resulted in improvements in mucosal hyperemia and edema and the disappearance of eyelid swelling . The left BCVA improved to 1.2, there was a reduction in left IOP to 15 mmHg, and the left eyelid swelling nearly disappeared and did not recur. Mucosal hyperemia and edema were observed on the sixth day of hospitalization. Improvement of the left orbital panniculitis compared to the image acquired at the first visit was revealed by orbitographic MRI on the seventh day of hospitalization. He was discharged on the ninth day of hospitalization. Left and right IOPs gradually declined to approximately 15 mm Hg at discharged. Systemic and local administrations of antibiotics were discontinued on the seventh day of hospitalization because a culture of the eye discharge, which was performed at the first visit, had returned negative results. Oral prednisolone (30 mg/day) was started after hospital discharge. There was no recurrence of ocular symptoms and a favorable progression in vision to 1.2, despite a gradual reduction of prednisolone. Favorable progress in the left ocular tension to approximately 15 mmHg also occurred with the discontinuation of oral acetazolamide tablets and the initiation of the ocular administration of dorzolamide hydrochloride/timolol maleate (twice) and latanoprost (once).
Symptoms had not recurred when he was examined at an ambulatory follow-up visit on January 8, 2014. On January 20, 2014, he visited the internal medicine department of a local hospital and was orally administered antibiotics because of a subsequent fever of 39 °C and appendicular arthralgia. The symptoms did not improve, despite the oral antibiotic administration. A subsequent blood examination exhibited pancytopenia, hepatopathy, and an increased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level. He immediately revisited our department for an intensive examination and treatment on January 29, 2014 (the 15th week after the first visit) with a complaint of slight swelling of the right eyelid, whereas swelling of the left eyelid was observed at the first visit.
Ophthalmological findings at the second visit revealed slight right eyelid swelling . The BCVA of both eyes was 1.2, but the intraocular pressure was 25 mmHg in the right eye and 27 mmHg in the left eye. Slight direct light reflex attenuation of both eyes was present, and positive RAPD of the right eye was also found. No abnormality was found in dynamic campimetry or a central flicker examination. However, orbitographic MRI showed right exophthalmos and orbital soft tissue inflammation. Left orbital panniculitis, which had improved (compared to the image acquired at the first visit), had recurred, compared to the image acquired during hospitalization on October 23, 2013 . Systemic findings included a high body temperature of 39.8 °C and tachycardia of 103 beats per minute. A blood examination revealed leucocyte and thrombocyte cytopenia, hepatopathy, and increased coagulability: leucocytes, 3220/mm3; thrombocytes, 11.1 × 104 mm3; aspartate transaminase/alanine transaminase (AST/ALT) level, 115/91 IU/L; LDH level, 1014 IU/L; creatinine kinase level, 362 IU/L; prothrombin time, 13.6 s; activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 37 s; and D-D dimer, 2.17 s. He visited the internal medicine department of our hospital for an intensive examination. Abdominal echography and abdominal/pelvic computed tomography (CT) showed moderate retention of abdominal fluid, dropsy, and an enlarged spleen.
He was transferred to the hematology department at another hospital and was hospitalized for an intensive examination on the following day because of the possibility of hemodyscrasia, based on the increased LDH level in the blood examination results. Bone marrow aspiration examined after the hospital transfer revealed decreased numbers of nucleated cells and megakaryocytes and a small amount of corpuscular phagocytosis. A blood examination revealed leucocyte and thrombocyte cytopenia; increased levels of AST/ALT, LDH, and ferritin; and hepatopathy. Antibodies against herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, and Epstein–Barr virus were negative.
Steroid administration (30 mg/day) was started with a diagnosis of HPS. After 1 week, he left the hospital because his symptoms improved. However, bubonalgia appeared immediately after hospital discharge and did not improve. He revisited the hospital on February 29, 2014. Abdominal CT exhibited suspected panniculitis in vesicular subcutaneous tissue. Cyclosporine was administered because of suspected Weber–Christian disease. The hepatopathy and increased levels of LDH and ferritin did not improve. Worsening HPS was diagnosed because of the appearance of a high fever (39.5 °C) on the morning of March 20, 2014. A biopsy of the vesicular ventral subcutaneous adipose tissue by hypogastric transection was also performed in the anaplastic department of a local hospital on the same day. The histopathological diagnosis of the biopsy tissue revealed an aggregating tendency of nuclear irregularity-prominent atypical lymphocytes in the adipose tissue. SPTCL was diagnosed because of the surrounding arrangement (i.e., rimming pattern) of lipid droplets . On May 1, 2014, two aggregations of fluorodeoxyglucose in the right ilium were detected by positron emission tomography (PET) examination. Advanced malignant lymphoma was also suspected, based on the pelvic MRI findings. He was transferred to Suwa Red Cross Hospital (Suwa, Japan) on May 1, 2014 because of his requirements for intensive examination and treatment.
After the hospital transfer, histopathological and immunohistological re-examinations of the vesicular adipose tissue exhibited poor infiltration of atypical lymphocytes into the dermis. Immunohistological findings exhibited positivity for CD3, CD8, granzyme B, T-cell intracellular antigen-1 (TIA-1), and beta F1; and negativity for C-gamma M1, CD30, CD56, and Epstein–Barr virus-encoded small RNAs (EBERs), which led to a definitive diagnosis of αβ-type SPTCL. He was hospitalized for treatment on May 21, 2014. The standard treatment for malignant lymphomas—cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (CHOP) therapy—was administered for 5 days, and presented no efficacy. Four courses of etoposide, methylprednisolone sodium succinate, high-dose cytarabine, and platinum chemotherapy were administered beginning on June 11, 2014. On September 26, 2014, he underwent autologous peripheral stem cell transplantation because his symptoms were controlled. Hospital treatment for 6 months resulted in remission of his symptoms. Remission has been maintained.