The present case involved a 66-year-old female who became aware of decreased vision in her left eye. She had previously visited another eye clinic, and was diagnosed as bilateral anterior scleritis and prescribed steroid eye drops for treatment. Although the inflammation had subsided and the scleral redness had disappeared, vitreous opacity increased in her right eye around August 2014. Thus, she was diagnosed as uveitis and referred to the Department of Ophthalmology at Osaka Medical College in September 2014 for examination.
The patient had previously been diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis when she was 30 years of age, and she had undergone a 5 mg-per-day administration of prednisolone as a maintenance dose and long-term treatment with immunosuppressants such as tacrolimus and anti-tumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF) drugs such as etanercept by the Department of Internal Medicine at our university hospital. Her past medical history included phacoemulsification and aspiration with bilateral intraocular lens (IOL) implantation surgery in January 2014. It should be noted that there was no significant family history.
Upon initial ocular examination, her visual acuity (VA) was 20/50 × S-0.25D = C-2.00D Ax90° in the right eye and 20/25 × S-0.50D = C-1.25DAx100° in the left eye, and intraocular pressure was 17 mmHg OD and 15 mmHg OS. Slit-lamp examination revealed 1+ cells in both anterior chambers, and fine keratic precipitates on both corneas. The superior sclera in both eyes showed redness and thinning of tissues . Moreover, the iris in her left eye was found to be adhered to the implanted IOL . There was no remarkable fundus abnormality except for moderate vitreous opacity in her right eye . Blood tests revealed negative results for tuberculosis and syphilis.
In regard to the follow-up treatment course, we initially increased the frequency of the instillation of steroid eye drops and added immunosuppressive eye drops. However, those drugs were ineffective, and the vitreous opacity gradually increased. Thus, we increased the amount of oral prednisolone to 20 mg per day in November 2014. Subsequently, the eye redness and vitreous opacity gradually disappeared within approximately 2 weeks, her VA slowly improved, and there was no remarkable fundus abnormality in the right eye at each examination. However, uveitis accompanied with moderate ocular pain relapsed , and fundoscopic examination revealed an intraocular elevated whitish lesion at the superior nasal retina of her right eye in November 2015 . We did not observe any restricted motility accompanied with eye movement. B-scan ultrasonography was also performed, and revealed that the sclera was thickened and that the lesion seemed to have high internal reflectivity . Although the patient underwent a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan for a differential diagnosis, it was difficult to distinguish whether the lesion was a granuloma or a tumor. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) and high frequency B scan might have been useful to distinguish between a tumor and granuloma, however, those examinations were not available at that time.
Hence, we recommended to the patient that she should undergo fluorescein and indocyanine angiography examination for differential diagnosis, however, the patient wished to receive treatment without undergoing those examinations. Both the value of C-reactive protein (0.60 mg/dL) and the blood sedimentation rate (32 mm per hour) were increasing. In addition, the value of matrix metalloproteinase-3 (135.0 ng/mL), an indicator of the activity of rheumatoid arthritis, was also increasing. After consultation with her rheumatologist, we increased the administration amount of prednisolone to 30 mg per day. As a result, the lesion began to shrink 1-week after, and fully disappeared 4-weeks after, initiating the increased administration . Her VA improved to 20/20, and there has been no recurrence of ocular inflammation up to the present time.