A 67-year-old Saudi man presented to the outpatient clinic of our university hospital with a 3-year history of painful and itchy skin lesions on the right lateral chest wall posterior to the axillary line. The lesions were constant in size and character. For 22 years, he had a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and dyslipidemia. Diabetes was controlled using oral hypoglycemia agents and insulin. He was a smoker. Within the last 4 years, he also suffered from angina and renal impairment (secondary to post-contrast nephropathy) and has received treatment for gout the past year. At presentation, his latest fasting blood sugar was 5.2 mmol/L (normal range: 4.0–5.9 mmol/L) and glycosylated hemoglobin was 6.3% (normal range: 4.6%–6.5%). Apart from the above conditions, he was otherwise well. He has no history suggestive of any autoimmune disease. There was no history of trauma, medicine intake, or allergy to drugs or environmental agents. There was no family history of diabetes.
On clinical examination, he weighed 128 kg and his height was 180 cm (body mass index 39.5). On the right lateral chest wall posterior to axillary line, he had a red discolored patch with superficial capillaries and yellow discoloration at the center measuring approximately 2cm × 1cm, which remained constant, without changes in size or character . Examination of the rest of the skin and other systems was unremarkable.
Histological examination of a 4-mm punch skin biopsy from the lesion edge showed subcutaneous tissue sclerosis and dense collagen material deposition. The upper dermis and papillary dermis contained few inflammatory cells . The epidermis was unremarkable. Based on the appearance, necrobiosis lipoidica was confirmed without malignancy, and the appearance was not consistent with necrobiotic xanthogranuloma or sarcoidosis.
Initial treatment with clobetasol propionate, tacrolimus, and topical corticosteroid cream was unsuccessful, the patient is still being followed up and further NL lesions developed on the lower limb . Smoking cessation was encouraged.