An eight-year-old girl, previously healthy, presented to the emergency department with three days of fever associated with left-side swelling of the neck, tenderness, and torticollis with no improvement after 24 h of oral antibiotic treatment. The physical examination revealed bilateral cervical lymph node enlargement. Her positive laboratory findings included leukocytosis of 16,800/μl with 85% neutrophils, C-reactive protein of 13 mg/dL (normal range 0–0.5 mg/dL), and a throat swab culture that showed no growth. EBV and CMV serology were negative. An ultrasound showed multiple enlarged lymph nodes, the largest with a 25 mm circumference. She was admitted, and IV Amoxicillin\Clavulanic Acid was commenced for suspected cervical lymphadenitis.
Despite antibiotic treatment, her fever continued, as well as the neck swelling. A cervical CT was performed on the 4th day of fever, demonstrating left retropharyngeal swelling with a hypodense lesion of 45 mm with a suspected abscess , as well as multiple enlarged and inflamed lymph nodes. Expansion of antibiotic coverage to ampicillin sulbactam also showed no clinical improvement. Subsequently, she underwent surgical drainage, which showed minimal serous fluid and sterile bacterial cultures. A third antibiotic change to Ertapenem, was also without any clinical improvement. On the 8th day of fever, symmetrical arthritis of the PIPs, MCPs, and MTPs joints appeared. On the 9th day of fever, non-purulent conjunctivitis, as well as a strawberry tongue with swollen dry lips were noted. An ophthalmological examination showed mild anterior uveitis. Echocardiography was normal.
At this point, she was diagnosed with Kawasaki disease, and the administration of a single dose of IVIG (2 Gram\kg) led to a rapid clinical improvement and resolution of fever and other signs and symptoms. At her follow-up visit two weeks later, she displayed a desquamation of the skin of the tips of the thumb and third finger. At the follow-up four weeks later, the echocardiography of the coronary arteries was normal.