A 19-year-old male was admitted with fevers, altered mental status, vomiting, and headaches, preceded by 2 weeks of a cough and sore throat. The patient had no past medical history, took no regular medications, and was normally fit and healthy. He was a lifelong non-smoker and denied any alcohol intake or recreational drug use. There was no relevant family history.
Peripheral examination demonstrated small, tender, violaceous lesions in five finger digits. The heart sounds were normal. There were coarse crepitations in the right upper zone on auscultation of the chest. Abdominal examination was unremarkable and there was no peripheral oedema. Neurological examination demonstrated a Glasgow Coma Score of 13 but was otherwise normal. The patient required 2 L/min of O2 via a nasal cannula to maintain saturations of 96–98%, his respiratory rate was 31, and temperature 39.9°C. The heart rate was 124 b.p.m. and blood pressure was 102/58 mmHg.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a sinus tachycardia at 140 b.p.m. Blood tests demonstrated haemoglobin 117 g/L, white cell count 18.8 × 109/L, neutrophils 17 × 109/L, C-reactive protein 311 mg/L, Na+ 124 mmol/L, K+ 4.9 mmol/L, and eGFR >90. A chest X-ray demonstrated cavitating consolidation in the right upper zone, with patchy consolidation elsewhere. A lumbar puncture did not show evidence of infection.
Computed tomography (CT) head scan demonstrated an area of low density within the right parietal lobe. There was mucosal inflammation of both maxillary sinuses. A subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the head showed multifocal lesions in both cerebral hemispheres, particularly affecting the right middle cerebral artery territory.
Blood culture test results were positive for the Gram-negative rod F. necrophorum. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was organized to investigate for infective endocarditis. This demonstrated normal biventricular size and function. The valves were competent; there were no vegetations and no effusion. A subsequent transoesophageal echocardiogram did not demonstrate any vegetations.
Following the positive blood culture results, a diagnosis of Lemierre’s syndrome was considered, although there was no evidence of jugular vein thrombophlebitis on ultrasound imaging of the neck, so this was discounted. An initial ENT review showed that there was no pharyngeal involvement. The patient was treated with piperacillin/tazobactam and clarithromycin for disseminated F. necrophorum infection of unclear source.
On Day 4, the patient developed chest pain overnight. An ECG showed inferolateral ST elevation and troponin T was 269 ng/L (normal <14). The patient’s condition was discussed with the regional primary percutaneous coronary intervention centre, but due to his pain having settled and his ECG normalizing, a decision was taken to manage him locally. Serial troponins over the following week remained between 100 and 350 ng/L, and the working diagnosis was a myopericarditis or Type 2 myocardial infarction. A repeat TTE demonstrated a left ventricular ejection fraction of 50% and hypokinaesia of the mid to apical anterolateral and inferolateral walls. There were no valvular abnormalities or vegetations visualized. A cardiac MRI scan was requested at the regional tertiary centre.
After an initial clinical and biochemical response to antimicrobials, the patient developed fevers with rising inflammatory markers. Due to the underlying source of infection remaining unclear, a positron emission tomography (PET) CT scan was arranged. This demonstrated increased uptake in the right parapharyngeal space, raising the possibility of a peritonsillar abscess, multiple coalescing cavitating lesions in the upper lobe of the right lung, and a moderate pericardial effusion. A focused TTE confirmed this to be a small effusion with no signs of compromise.
Discussions in a regional multidisciplinary setting were held with cardiothoracic surgeons, infectious diseases specialists, ENT surgeons, and the tertiary cardiology team. The working diagnosis remained disseminated F. necrophorum infection, with the source felt to be due to the peritonsillar abscess seen on PET CT imaging. Antibiotics were escalated to meropenem and metronidazole.
The patient developed a pericardial rub, prompting further TTE and CT assessments. This demonstrated an enlarging effusion without haemodynamic compromise and a thickened hyperenhancing pericardium suggestive of a pericardial abscess or purulent pericardial effusion . The patient was, therefore, transferred to the regional cardiac surgery centre for further management.
Surgical drainage of the effusion was performed, which also encountered inferolateral adhesions that were not divided. The fluid was serous, with moderate white cells but no organisms.
A post-operative TTE, 1 week later, demonstrated focal akinesis of the apical and mid-lateral walls. There was an anechoic chamber adjacent to this area with flow seen on colour flow Doppler assessment . A gated cardiac CT confirmed a pseudoaneurysm of the left ventricular free wall .
The patient underwent an emergency repair of the pseudoaneurysm through a median sternotomy. He was placed on cardiopulmonary bypass. A large clot was encountered upon entering the superior vena cava (SVC); therefore, venous cannulation was achieved via a two-stage cannula through the right atrium. The pericardium was filled with exudative material. Adhesions were divided between pericardial and epicardial layers. The pseudoaneurysm was identified on the inferolateral wall adjacent to the apex. A fibrous cap was excised, the neck was found, and the defect was repaired using Teflon strips and then a bovine pericardial patch.
The patient continued to progress well post-operatively, completing a 5-week course of antibiotics before discharge and a 3-month course of therapeutic anticoagulation with a factor Xa inhibitor.
At follow-up at 6 weeks, he became well and returned to normal activity. A cardiac MRI at 6 months demonstrated a mildly impaired left ventricular systolic function (ejection fraction 47%) with a markedly reduced long-axis shortening. Akinesis was seen at the site of repair. There was transmural late gadolinium enhancement involving the apical lateral and apical inferior segments, and separate further focal subendocardial enhancement in the mid inferolateral segment, but no residual pseudoaneurysm.