An 86-year-old Chinese woman admitted to our clinic, presenting with vertigo, headache, and vomiting for four days. She successively developed weakness in the left limbs, then the right limbs, fever, and disturbance of consciousness two days before admission. On examination, Glasgow coma scale on arrival was 7/15 (E2V1M4). She had normal pupils, reactive to light. Hypotonia and diffuse muscle atrophy in the limbs were observed. Deep tendon reflexes could not be elicited. There were no pyramidal signs except for a positive Chaddock’s sign on the left. Signs of meningeal irritation were negative.
Retrospectively, the patient had suffered from recurrent spontaneous vertigo since her 50 s. Initially, the symptom would be relieved following vomiting, lasting for half a day. With increasing age, the vertigo attacks were accompanied by severely pulsatile pain involving one or both sides of the head, photophobia, and phonophobia. The occurrence of attacks increased from once a year to 5–6 times a year, and the duration increased to 1–2 days. There were some triggers for the attacks, such as chocolates and sweet cakes. Initially, repeated brain CT scans showed no abnormalities, resulting in the recommendation of painkillers and anti-vertigo medicines to alleviate symptoms. In addition, in her 60 s, the patient gradually developed shaking of the hands when holding objects. By age 77, the patient noticed a deterioration in memory. Her family reported that she became increasingly stubborn and developed visual hallucinations. Several years ago, brain MRIs were performed, however, unfortunately, the results were unknown except for mild cerebral atrophy. She had no known family history of neurological diseases.
Laboratory investigation showed a significant increase in leukocytes in both peripheral blood and urine, as well as elevated C-reactive protein, indicating a urinary tract infection. D-dimer was also substantially increased, up to 40,670 ng/mL (normal range < 250ng/ml), and pulmonary embolism (PE) of middle lobe in the right lung was confirmed by computed tomographic pulmonary angiography on the first day of admission. No deep venous thrombosis was detected in lower limbs by venous ultrasonography. Brain MRI revealed curve-like high intensity signals on DWI along the corticomedullary junction of the left hemisphere, particularly in the frontal lobe, as well as multifocal, punctate regions of high intensity signals on DWI and low signals on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) involving the bilateral cerebral cortex. Leukoencephalopathy and cerebral atrophy were also observed . Color Doppler ultrasound revealed atherosclerotic plaques in carotid arteries and declined blood flow velocity in the intervertebral segment of right vertebral artery. Brain Magnetic Resonance Angiography (MRA) showed multiple mild to moderate stenosis of intracranial arteries, especially the right vertebral artery the most prominent. Digital video electroencephalogram revealed a small number of diffuse slow waves in all the leads. Nerve velocity conduction tests disclosed both axon and myelin damage in the nerves of the limbs.
Following the finding of high intensity signals on DWI along the corticomedullary junction, an imaging marker of NIID, skin biopsy and genetic analysis were performed, with written consent by the patient’s family. Skin biopsy revealed eosinophilic intranuclear inclusions in the ductal epithelial cells of sweat glands which were immunoreactive to anti-p62 antibodies. Electron microscopy disclosed filamentous material that lacked a limiting membrane in the nucleus . Repeat-primed PCR (RP-PCR) and fluorescence amplicon length PCR (AL-PCR) were performed successively as described in previous study to identified 81 GGC repeats in the 5’-UTR [, ] .
After admission, a urinary catheter was placed for treating dysuria and 1000 ml urine was drained after the catheterization, suggesting severe urinary retention. Antibiotics (cefoperazone 3 g, q12h for 7 days) and anticoagulant therapeutics (low molecular weight heparin 5000U, q12h for 7 days, followed by oral anticoagulation rivaroxaban 15 mg/d) were applied. The patient rapidly recovered to the clinical baseline by three days. When she was alert, neuropsychological tests were performed, for which she showed an MMSE score of 12 and a FAB score of 7. Cognitive impairment deteriorated accompanied by obvious psychiatric symptoms within one-year after discharge (from May 2020 to April 2021). During the same follow-up period, the patient complained of episodic vertigo, headache, and vomiting (4 times, lasting for 2–3 days per time), but no fever or neurological dysfunctions were noticed.