A 77-year-old Persian man with a 1.5 cm × 1 cm non-ulcerative lesion in the midline of the lower lip for 5 months, which had gradually increased in size, is reported. The lesion had some irregular edges without any satellite lesions. After examination, it was firm and painless with induration of the surrounding skin and mild inflammation. Neck examination also showed suspicious lymph nodes on the right side at level 2, as confirmed in the computerized tomography (CT) scan . The examination of the rest of the oral cavity was normal.
The patient had worked as a farmer over the past 50 years, with a history of smoking (for 50 years), and was not an alcohol consumer. Besides, the biopsy had been taken around 3 months before the patient came to the private office and was reported as well-differentiated (SCC).
His treatment plan was the SCC resection with a 2 cm safety margin, the bilateral neck dissection (the right radical neck dissection and the supraomohyoid neck dissection on the left side) , and the lower lip reconstruction via the right radial forearm free flap (RFFF), known as the Chinese flap [, ] (of note, the case was right-hand dominant). The donor site was thus covered by a split-thickness skin graft, harvested from the right groin, and then closed primarily. The arterial pedicle of the free flap was also taken from the radial artery. The Allen test was also performed before the surgery , and the venous pedicle was taken from the cephalic vein. No nerve graft was taken. The arterial pedicle was subsequently anastomosed to the facial artery (end-to-end), and the venous pedicle was anastomosed to the facial vein (end-to-end), which was doubtful. Hence, the surgeon decided to add another end to the side anastomosis on the same pedicle instead of redoing the connection . The median follow-up time was 6 months to 1 year, and there was no locoregional recurrence. The flap has successfully survived during post-operative follow-up examinations. Notably, no related complications were observed, such as the need for re-exploration, venous thrombosis, hematoma, fistula, infection, or partial or total flap necrosis.