A 46-year-old woman presented at our service with previously diagnosed IIH that had been diagnosed two years earlier, which had led to chronic refractory headache and an estimated 30% loss of visual acuity, associated with bilateral papilledema. She presented partial improvement of the headache with acetazolamide, but the visual loss persisted. The intracranial pressure, measured by means of lumbar puncture, was 34 cmH2O. Biochemical, cytological and microbiological assessments on the cerebrospinal fluid did not reveal any abnormalities. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography did not show any abnormalities either . She has been obese for 20 years and, on admission, presented a body mass index (BMI) of 39.5 kg/m2, also associated with high blood pressure that was controlled through use of enalapril maleate.
She underwent Roux-en-Y gastric bypass with uneventful postoperative evolution. One month after surgery, the patient reported a slight reduction in the frequency of her episodes of headache and improvement of her visual impairment; there was also complete resolution of her high blood pressure. She had lost 24% of her excess weight by then. Use of acetazolamide and enalapril maleate was discontinued at this point.
Six months after the surgery, she presented a 55% loss of excess weight, such that her BMI was 31.5 kg/m2. An ophthalmological examination revealed absence of visual loss and remission of the papilledema. The patient reported that there had been a more significant reduction in the frequency and intensity of the episodes of headache since her previous postoperative report. Lumbar puncture was performed again and the opening pressure was found to have decreased to 24 cmH2O. There were no abnormalities in the biochemical, cytological and microbiological assessments on cerebrospinal fluid. details the characteristics of the cerebrospinal fluid before and six months after surgery. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed that no abnormalities were present .