An otherwise fit-and-well 15-year-old female patient complaining of persistent pain in her left hip for a month was referred to our outpatient clinic by her family’s physician. The patient (a recreational folk dancer) reported that her symptoms started a couple of days following a weekend of increased physical activity due to her participating in a dancing festival. She could not recall any recent injury and she was able to uneventfully complete her participation in the festival.
The patient was capable of full, nonetheless painful, passive range of motion at her hip with no mechanical or audible click. Active hip movements were more painful and restricted. The pain area could be easily pinpointed by the patient at her left gluteal area, just behind the greater trochanter. Pain was aggravated with passive internal and external rotation with the hip in flexion, extension, and hyperextension. Routine blood tests, including inflammatory markers, came back negative. A plain radiograph showed normal anatomy with a slightly increased neck-shaft angle .
The initial therapeutic approach was based on rest and analgesia with paracetamol and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Since there was no improvement after a week, the patient underwent an MRI scan. An area of diffused edema and hematoma in the IF space suggested a partial rupture of the QF muscle. However, both the IF (20.3 mm) and the QF (20.3 mm) spaces were within the expected for the patient normal range. On the contrary, the contralateral right hip’s IF space (17.3 mm) was narrower than expected .
Despite the continuous use of analgesics and the avoidance of physical activities by the patient for a period of 1 month, the symptoms persisted. Physiotherapy was prescribed next, but also failed to relieve the patient from her symptoms. The patient was instructed to remain bedridden for a period of 15 days, but this measure was also proven unsuccessful. She was then told to avoid weight-bearing for another 15 days, but there was still no improvement. The patient underwent a new MRI scan 1 month following her initial evaluation, which showed a slight resolution of the QF edema in the IF space and a significant reduction of the QF space .
The patient was referred to a consultant rheumatologist and a consultant psychiatrist for evaluation. All laboratory tests failed to reveal any pathology and her psychiatric evaluation was also non-consistent with any disorder. She underwent a new MRI scan 3 months later , which showed a partial resolution of the edema and revealed a marked reduction in the IF and the QF spaces (12.6 mm and 8.1 mm, respectively), suggesting thus the underlying IFI syndrome [, ], which apparently had led to a partial rupture of the QF muscle (probably during the weekend of increased physical activities) and the subsequent development of a refractory tendonitis. Physical examination at this stage revealed positive IFI test and long-stride walking (LSW) test . Although the IF and QF spaces were also narrow in the contralateral hip in all MRI scans (, , ), the patient never complained about any symptoms and her physical examination was always negative for IFI.
The patient underwent a local infiltration of the QF with betamethasone sodium phosphate + betamethasone acetate (6+6 mg/2 ml) under CT guidance , which led to the complete resolution of all her symptoms within a few days. She remains symptoms free at her latest follow-up visit 24 months following the infiltration. She has fully returned to her previous activities and she is able to perform everyday life and sports activities without experiencing any pain and/or discomfort.