A 25-year-old Caucasian woman was brought to our emergency department after a single, high velocity projectile penetrated her vehicle windshield and struck her in the head. The vehicle was found pulled to the side of the road with transmission in park; there was no evidence of vehicular damage apart from the windshield damage. It was presumed by emergency responders that the patient had pulled over and stopped the car. The patient had been wearing a seatbelt. On presentation to our emergency department, our patient had a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 3, and was subsequently intubated for airway protection. A physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 111/87mmHg and her heart rate ranged from 100 to 150 beats per minute. A neurological examination revealed fixed and dilated pupils, as well as decerebrate posturing. She had a large, bleeding scalp laceration but no foreign material was noted. The remainder of the physical examination was normal. No other contusions or lacerations of her neck, chest or abdomen were identified. Of note, there was absence of a lap belt sign.
Initial laboratory results showed a normal hemoglobin level of 130g/dL and hematocrit of 0.40. A toxicology screen, including alcohol, was negative. A subsequent total body computed tomography (CT) scan, performed approximately 1 hour 15 minutes after the accident, revealed extensive intracranial injuries, including acute subdural hematoma, subarachnoid hemorrhage and cerebral edema, with loss of gray-white matter differentiation . Transtentorial and cerebellar tonsillar herniation were also present. There were numerous skull fractures, including splitting and diastasis of her skull through the sagittal suture and the left lambdoidal suture . A depressed fracture of the frontal bone, with associated pneumocephalus, was also present, in addition to a fracture through her planum sphenoidale.
CT of her abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast demonstrated an abnormal pancreas, which appeared diffusely enlarged . Multiple linear hypodensities were seen throughout her pancreas, which had the appearance of prominent pancreatic folds. No pancreatic laceration was identified. A small to moderate amount of simple fluid was present in her abdomen, but localized to her retroperitoneum; specifically, the peripancreatic region. Overall, the findings simulated the CT appearance of early acute pancreatitis or low-grade pancreatic injury, which have overlapping imaging characteristics. However, no other abnormalities, or other findings of traumatic injury, were seen within the remainder of her chest, abdomen or pelvis. In particular, the structures adjacent to her pancreas, including her liver, duodenum, spleen and aorta, were normal. There were no gallstones seen on CT, and there was no intrahepatic biliary duct or common bile duct dilation. The mechanism of our patient’s injury, a single penetrating injury to her head, could not account for the finding.
Our patient was subsequently admitted to our intensive care unit. Her serum lipase levels obtained during this time were within normal limits, at 14U/L (normal range: 0 to 60 U/L), and her amylase levels were elevated at 248U/L (normal range: 30 to 110U/L). A repeat amylase level was not obtained, but a repeat lipase level (obtained approximately six hours later) remained within normal limits at 10U/L. Her neurological status failed to improve and a subsequent perfusion nuclear medicine study showed findings consistent with brain death. Consent was obtained from the patient’s family for organ donation.
During a laparotomy for organ donation, approximately 28 hours from the time of the initial trauma, the transplant surgeon observed marked pancreatic and peripancreatic edema, but no findings consistent with traumatic injury, such as laceration, pancreatic duct injury or regional hemorrhage. This was an isolated finding at surgery, with no other findings of traumatic injury identified in the remainder of her abdomen. Her pancreas was not removed for organ transplant, given its edematous appearance.