50-year-old gentleman, an ex-smoker with background of hypertension and obesity, presented with inferior ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. Eight years earlier, he was diagnosed with ITP, which was difficult to treat despite immunosuppressive agents due to highly labile platelets count (PC). Apart from thrombocytopenia, his complete blood count was normal in addition to routine biochemical profile, lactate dehydrogenase level, autoantibodies levels, and immunoglobulins. He was negative for hepatitis profile and human immunodeficiency virus. He was on daily 75 mg of Eltrombopag (Revolade), a small molecule agonist of thrombopoietin receptor, with occasional dexamethasone rescue therapy. Unfortunately, he developed sepsis and petechiae affecting his lower limbs and was admitted in our hospital. His PC was 2 × 109/L (normal range 150–400 × 109/L) and he received intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG). He was discharged home but on Day 7 post-IVIG initiation, presented with acute chest pain for 3 h and electrocardiogram confirming ST-elevation in the inferior leads . He was haemodynamically stable and cardiovascular examination was normal. His PC was 658 × 109/L, haemoglobin 13.4 g/dL (13–16.2 g/dL) and white blood count 9.3 × 109/L (normal range 4.3–11.2 × 109/L). He was given 300 mg of aspirin and clopidogrel. Radial coronary angiogram showed critical proximal stenosis in the right coronary artery (RCA) with TIMI 2 flow . Additionally, there was mild distal left main stem disease with moderate proximal left anterior descending artery disease, and mild lesion in proximal circumflex artery. A bolus of 1000 IU of heparin was given with the aim to achieve activated clotting time of 250–300 s. A 2.5 × 15 mm balloon was inflated to improve flow. The lesion was further assessed with OCT which showed proximal atheroma with plaque erosion and red thrombus . A 4.0 × 15 mm balloon was then inflated to low pressure at the lesion, no stents were deployed and TIMI 3 flow was restored . Optical coherence tomography analysis was re-done, and did not reveal any significant dissections . Laboratory tests post-procedure showed high sensitivity-Troponin I level of 6444 ng/L (normal <34 ng/L), with normal lipid profile. After consultation with the haematologist, both aspirin and clopidogrel were continued with the addition of lansoprazole to reduce the risk of upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Echocardiogram post-percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) showed normal left ventricular ejection fraction (55%). Eltrombopag was paused due to the thrombocytosis and restarted 12 days later during an outpatient visit due to symptomatic drop in PC to 3 × 109/L. Clopidogrel was stopped, aspirin continued, and a short course of dexamethasone started. When the PC rose above 30 × 109/L, clopidogrel was restarted and given for a total of 10 weeks before discontinuing it completely due to a fall in PC from 162 to 49 × 109/L. One year later, aspirin was stopped as PC decreased to 1 × 109/L with occurrence of spontaneous bruises. The patient has remained angina-free so far.