The proband is a boy aged 1 year and 7 mo with psychomotor retardation.
The proband presented to our clinic with psychomotor retardation at 8 mo of age as he was unable to sit. He achieved head control at 4 mo of age. Subsequently he began to sit at 11 mo of age, and was able to stand and walk independently at 1 year and 5 mo of age, but had a tendency to fall. He started babbling at 1 year and 5 mo of age, and was unable to say a word or recognize his parents at 1 year and 7 mo of age.
He had no past admission or known medical problems. His development was normal in the first 3 mo after birth.
The family was of southern Chinese and Han ethnicity. The proband was the first child of the healthy parents . He was delivered naturally at term with no perinatal issues. The pregnancy was normal and the neonatal period was uneventful. His parents were non-consanguineous, and there was no family history of psychomotor retardation or metabolic diseases. Spontaneous abortion of the second child of the parents occurred at 2 mo of pregnancy .
The proband’s weight and height were normal at presentation . He didn’t show facial dysmorphism. He had mild hypotonia without any pathological reflex. No obvious abnormalities were shown in his skeleton and viscera.
Routine biochemical test: Routine biochemical tests at 8 mo of age showed normal liver and renal function, blood glucose, blood ammonia, blood gas, and blood electrolyte (data not shown).
Enzymatic assay: The activities of sphingolipidoses-relevant enzymes at 8 mo of age were normal (data not shown).
Metabolic analysis: Quantitative plasma amino acid profiling by high-performance liquid chromatography and semi-quantitative urine organic acid analysis by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry were performed as described previously[,].
Plasma amino acid profiling at 8 mo of age showed elevations of leucine, isoleucine, valine, and leucine/alanine ratio , which met the specific amino acid spectrum of MSUD. However, no maple syrup odor was noticed in his urine. Urine organic acid analysis revealed a small amount of 2-OH-isovaleric acid .
To exclude the impact of dietary factors and further define if this boy had MSUD, he had repeated sampling and analysis of plasma amino acids and urine organic acids. On the second examination at 1 year and 1 mo of age, the concentrations of plasma BCAAs returned to normal , while the peak of urine 2-OH-isovaleric acid became lower , which did not support the possible diagnosis of MSUD. The proband was then categorized as unexplained psychomotor retardation.
Genetic analysis: gDNA was extracted from whole blood samples using DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (QIAGEN). Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed as described previously. For Sanger sequencing, the exon sequences together with adjoining intron boundaries of the BCKDHB gene (NG_009775.2, NM_183050.3) were amplified and sequenced with an ABI 3730xl DNA Analyzer. The SNP databases were employed to exclude the polymorphic alleles, while HGMD (Professional 2022.3) and ClinVar were referenced for the confirmation of known pathogenic variants.
To identify the underlying genetic cause, WES of the proband-parents trio was performed when the proband was at age of 1 year and 7 mo. To our surprise, a compound heterozygous c.584A>G(p.Tyr195Cys)/c.818C>T(p.Thr273Ile) variant of the BCKDHB gene was identified in the proband, one of which was transmitted from the unaffected parents respectively. Both of the identified BCKDHB variants were known to cause MSUD[,]. Sanger sequencing subsequently confirmed these results .
He had brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed by another hospital at 8 mo of age (data not shown) and our hospital at 1 year and 3 mo of age and 1 year and 7 mo of age , showing abnormal signal in the right frontal lobe, and increased T2/FLAIR signals symmetrically in the basal ganglia and trigone of lateral ventricles.
The proband’s semi-quantitative urine organic acid results were re-analyzed. In addition to a small amount of 2-OH-isovaleric acid, very small amounts of 3-OH-isovaleric acid, 2-OH-isocaproic acid, 2-keto-isocaproic acid, and 2-keto-3-methylvaleric acid were noted . These small fluctuations were missed previously. Thus, a characteristic urine organic acid spectrum of MSUD was concluded, supporting the molecular findings.
After repeated questioning, the parents recalled that the proband once vomited after eating meat and he tended to refuse eating meat since then, but could tolerate milk. There was no severe acute illness that required hospitalization. They also concealed the medical history that the proband was supplemented with trivitamins B tablets (containing vitamin B1, B6, and B12) at another hospital between the first two analyses of plasma amino acids and urine organic acids, which directly interfered with the levels of BCAAs.