This 12-year-old boy was referred at 5 years of age for developmental delay . He was the first child of unrelated sri-lankan parents; two younger siblings were healthy. His medical history was unremarkable and developmental milestones were normal up to 2 years of age, when parents noted speech and expressive language difficulties, frequent falls, and slowing of developmental progress without plateauing or loss of skills. At presentation, head circumference was at 10-25th centile, height at 75-90th and weight at 25th. On clinical examination, organomegaly or dysmorphic signs were absent. There was mild hypotonia with ataxia of limbs and gait ; cranial nerves and deep tendon reflexes (DTR) were normal. Development was globally delayed. Ten months later, following a febrile illness, the boy presented with alternating periods of agitation and apathy, loss of sphincter control, expressive and receptive language regression and worsening of the cerebellar syndrome. Three similar episodes occurred between age 6 and 8 years, all triggered by benign infectious illnesses. Thereafter, he displayed a downhill course with progressive deterioration. At the age of 11 years he developed brief epileptic behaviour arrests. At 12 years old, he has a severe intellectual disability (ID) and is nonverbal but retains a friendly behaviour. He is unable to walk unassisted and has swallowing difficulties. He has a cerebellar syndrome with mild limb dystonia and choreic movements, brisk DTR without other pyramidal signs.
A first brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) done at 5 yo, prior to regression, showed mild white matter atrophy and periventricular hyperintensities on T2-weighted (T2W) images . Follow-up MRIs done at age 6, 7 and 9 years showed progressive cortico-subcortical supratentorial atrophy, periventricular and peritrigonal deep white matter T2 hyperintensities with an increased apparent diffusion coefficient. Cerebellum appeared mildly atrophic at 9 yo.
A first electroencephalogram (EEG) done at 5 yo showed bilateral fronto-central spike and spike-wave (SW) complexes during drowsiness and sleep stage I with slightly slow background rhythm for age (7-8Hz). From 7 to 9 yo, 2 EEGs showed a pattern of semi-periodic diffuse slow delta waves complexes occurring every 2 to 5 seconds (0.2-0.3Hz) during wakefulness without clinical correlate . Sleep EEG kept on showing frequent anterior spike and SW complexes that became diffuse from 9 yo . Electroclinical seizures were recorded at 11 yo, with diffuse alpha rhythmic discharges at 11Hz during 10 seconds correlating with behavioural arrest. Photosensitivity was never elicited (minimum frequency 1 Hz). Visual and auditory evoked potentials were normal.
A first cerebral-spinal fluid (CSF) analysis during the first episode of regression at age 6 years showed 5 lymphocytes/mm3 and normal lactate, glucose and proteins levels. Two subsequent spinal taps at age 7 years were normal. Extensive workup including ammonium, lactate, organic acids, amino-acids, acylcarnitines profile, lysosomal enzymes activities, anti-neuronal antibodies (CSF and serum), anti-measles and anti-rubella antibodies (serum and CSF), prion and interferon signature were all negative.
At first, an Array Comparative Genomics Hybridisation (Agilent oligoNT array CGH 180K) was undertaken and did not reveal any pathogenic change. Whole Exome Sequencing was then performed on Illumina HiSeq2500 sequencer, with Agilent Sure Select XT Human All Exon V5 capture kit, after appropriate informed consent. The raw data from Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) were screened using an in-house pipeline as previously described allowing for filtering of synonymous and common variants to which a panel of approximately 1300 genes known to be implicated in developmental delay and seizure disorders was applied. The original analysis failed to yield any variant that might be plausibly linked to an intellectual disability or epilepsy phenotype . The data were reanalyzed six months later using an updated panel that (at that point) contained the gene UBTF, that had just been published in connection with an intellectual disability phenotype by Edvardson et al . This allowed for the detection of a heterozygous c.628G>A UBTF variant, which was confirmed by Sanger sequencing and found to be de novo.