A 46-year-old Caucasian woman, a nonsmoker, was evaluated in our office for an enlarged thyroid gland. Her complaints included dysphagia and a sensation of airway compression when supine. Her past medical history was significant for active RA, pulmonary nodules, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and a radical right nephrectomy due to renal cell carcinoma. Notable outpatient medications included hydroxychloroquine 200mg twice a day orally and levothyroxine 75mcg once a day orally. Her family history was positive for a goiter in her paternal grandmother. On examination, her thyroid gland was visibly enlarged and facial plethora was noted. Her initial thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level was 4.22uU/mL (0.34 to 5.60), with a free thyroxine (T4) of 0.96ng/dL and free triiodothyronine (T3) of 3.5pg/mL (2.5 to 4.2). Her calcitonin level was 7.1pg/mL (0.0 to 4.6). Her microsomal antibody levels were >1000IU/mL (0.0 to 3.9). A thyroid ultrasound scan showed an enlarged gland (the right lobe measured 7.9×3.4×3.3cm, the left lobe measured 8.3×3.3×3.1cm, and the isthmus measured 2.1cm). A solitary 1.0×0.6×0.8cm nodule was seen in the right lower lobe. A fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of this nodule revealed follicular cells, abundant colloid and lymphocytes, consistent with a nodular goiter in the setting of lymphocytic thyroiditis. Due to a concern of worsening tracheal compression and a possibly enlarging nodule on thyroid replacement therapy, a total thyroidectomy was performed (her thyroid gland weighed 79g).
A repeat thyroid ultrasound scan showed no remaining thyroid tissue and a 5.8cm×1.4cm postoperative seroma in the thyroid bed (Figure ). This was present in the midline of the neck, with medial and lateral extension. Postoperatively, her TSH level was 6.77uU/mL and her thyroglobulin level was 0.6ng/mL (1.8 to 68.0). However, this was difficult to interpret as a marker of residual thyroid tissue, due to the presence of thyroglobulin antibodies- 98.0IU/mL (0.0 to 14.4). Final pathology confirmed the presence of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (Figure ) and a 2mm papillary Hurthle cell lesion. Unequivocal evidence of carcinoma was not identified. Two reactive lymph nodes were noted at the right upper pole of her thyroid. In view of the papillary Hurthle cell lesion, our patient was treated with suppressive doses of levothyroxine (TSH was kept in the low to normal range) and low-dose radioactive iodine (RAI) (33.4mCi).
Four months later, the patient again complained of fullness in her neck and a mass was felt on physical examination. A large solid nodule of mixed echogenicity, measuring 5.6×3.3×2.3cm, was seen on ultrasound scan in the right anterior compartment of her neck. In the left anterior compartment, solid tissue of mixed echogenicity was present, measuring 2.9×2.3×1.7cm. Some 4mm of tissue was also identified in the plane of the original isthmus. Due to a concern for malignancy given the rapid growth of tissue, a FNAB was not done and surgery was scheduled. Repeat surgery yielded an 11g aggregate of multiple soft, tan, irregular tissues from the right and a 1g aggregate of multiple soft, tan, irregular tissues from the left. Pathology from the right-sided tissue revealed findings consistent with Hashimoto's thyroiditis, as well as small Hurthle cell nodules (Figure ). The left-sided tissue showed necrobiotic granulomas with central fibrinoid necrobiosis and peripheral palisaded histiocytes, consistent with rheumatoid nodules (Figure ). Her postoperative TSH level was 5.36uU/mL (0.34 to5.60), with a thyroglobulin level of 1.0ng/mL (1.3 to 31.8). Again, this was difficult to interpret in the setting of thyroglobulin antibodies- 58.8IU/mL (0.0 to 4.4). A repeat ultrasound scan nine months later found no evidence of residual thyroid tissue in her neck. Based on the diagnosis of rheumatoid nodules within the thyroid bed, no further RAI was given. The patient continues to do well and remains disease-free.