A 60-year-old woman presented to her primary care physician with bloody stool for 2 months. Laboratory examination revealed Hb and Hct levels were 11.8 g/dL and 34.2%, (reference range: 11.6–14.8 g/dL and 34–44%), respectively. Stool occult blood was < 7 ng/mL (reference range: < 12 ng/mL). Physiological examination did not reveal any other skin lesion that could be suspected for melanoma. Colonoscopy and biopsy performed at another hospital revealed a malignant melanoma at the anorectal site; thereafter, the patient was transferred to our hospital only with pathology report for further management. Routine 18F-FDG PET/CT examination performed after the biopsy for melanoma staging revealed a highly 18F-FDG-avid lesion in the rectum . The maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) was 15.3. Two additional high 18F-FDG-avid lesions were found in her left ankle and left foot (SUVmax, 8.9; Fig. ).
The lesion with the highest 18F-FDG avidity noted was diagnosed as rectal melanoma; moreover, the lesions in the left ankle and the left foot showed high 18F-FDG avidity. For these reasons, and because melanoma has a high metastatic potential, these lesions were first thought to be distant metastases.
The patient was referred to a surgical oncologist to undergo additional workup. Magnetic resonance images (MRI), sagittal T1-weighted turbo spin echo (TSE) image , sagittal T1-weighted TSE fat-suppressed with Ga-DTPA contrast -enhanced image with Ga-DTPA fat suppression , coronal proton density (PD)-weighted TSE fat -suppressed image , and transverse T1-weighted TSE fat-suppressed with contrast-enhanced image with Ga-DTPA fat suppression of the left foot, obtained to further characterize the lesions, revealed the two masses beside the flexor hallucis longus muscle and tendon, which were locations suggestive of metastases from melanoma; however, the differential diagnosis included PVNS. Out of concern that they represented metastatic melanoma, she was taken to the operating room. Surgery on the left ankle revealed firm, yellowish subcutaneous tumors beneath the deep fascia and the Achilles tendon. Intraoperative pathological study revealed that the lesion in the left foot was benign; therefore, only the mass in the left ankle was resected , and special pathological staining revealed that the correct diagnosis was PVNS . Thus, this patient underwent abdominoperineal resection. However, a follow-up abdominal CT conducted 3 months later revealed new multiple liver metastases, and chemotherapy treatment was initiated. Fortunately, a follow-up abdominal CT conducted 2 years later revealed that the liver lesions were nearly in complete regression. The patient is alive, and after another 2 years after complete regression, the patient is stable at present.