A 32-year old female presented to us with progressively deteriorating vision in her right eye for 2 months.
When the patient presented to us, visual acuity (VA) in her right eye was counting fingers and in the left eye, it was 20/30. Anterior segment examination was within normal limits for both eyes and intraocular pressures were 14 mmHg. Right eye fundus examination was significant for vitritis, with vitreous clumps manifesting as classic ‘pearls on a string’ appearance. A full thickness, yellowish-white foveal lesion was also appreciated . Left eye examination was normal. Uveitis workup was unremarkable, except for an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR = 38). Mantoux test (0 mm), VDRL, FT-ABS, ANA, ASMA, AMA, and Toxoplasma IgG and IgM were all negative. Prior to consulting us, she had seen outside ophthalmologists where she was given intravitreal triamcinolone acetate in the affected eye. In addition, systemic prednisolone therapy had also been given. However, no improvement was observed with these treatments. A diagnosis of Toxoplasma retinochoroiditis was presumed and the patient was started on empiric Septran DS (sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim).
On direct questioning, the patient revealed having undergone back-alley abortion 3 weeks prior to onset of her ocular symptoms, and that she was also suffering from vaginal discharge. She was referred to gynaecology, who felt, that the two problems were unrelated. Vaginal swabs were however taken, and Gram-positive rods were identified on Gram staining. A diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis was made, and she was commenced on Metronidazole.
Based on the patient’s history and clinical findings, we strongly suspected a fungal sub-retinal abscess. Retinal imaging, which included optical coherence tomography (OCT) and fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA), were ordered. OCT of the right eye showed a sub-foveal conical lesion extending from the choroid into the full thickness of retina . The apex of the lesion was directed towards the inner retina and formed a tiny protuberance (roof of the abscess). Blood cultures were requested but did not reveal any microbial growth. A vitreous tap was subsequently performed, and intravitreal amphotericin B 5 μg/0.5 ml was administered. Vitreous culture showed profuse Candida albicans growth. Because of limited response to intravitreal antibiotics, therapeutic 25 g pars plana vitrectomy, with gas tamponade and repeat intra-vitreal amphotericin B was performed. She was also commenced on oral voriconazole. The eye responded well to debulking surgery. Three weeks post-vitrectomy, inflammation resolved completely with macular scar formation . During the subsequent 4 years follow-up, the patient had no recurrences.