A 32-yr-old woman was referred to our center with the inability of weight bearing, five days after primary cesarean section for her twins. She had recently given birth to a pair of healthy twins at 33 wk of pregnancy and had two other pregnancies leading to another healthy child and a miscarriage. Her body mass index was 25 kg/m2. Physical examination showed the severe limitation of motion in the right hip and moderately painful left hip. Right femoral neck fracture was clearly identified in the X-rays. In pelvic magnetic resonance imaging, fracture lines at both femoral necks along with peripheral bone edema were visualized, confirming the presence of a simultaneous fracture in the left femoral neck of the patient too. The fracture of the right femoral neck was managed by close reduction and internal fixation (CRIF) along with dynamic hip screw, while CRIF and screw were used for the fixation of left femoral neck fracture .
Since no history of trauma was reported by the patient, she was referred to the rheumatologist, where further investigations of the underlying cause of the fractures were performed. The positive past medical history points were repeated weekly courses of antenatal Betamethasone injections for fetal lung maturity, started from 26 wk gestation, plus daily oral 5 mg prednisolone due to the history of a previous miscarriage and complete bed rest during the whole third trimester of pregnancy.
In the laboratory evaluation, patient serum calcium, phosphorus, creatinine, alkaline phosphatase, parathyroid hormone and 24 hr urine calcium were normal; Serum vitamin D was 15 ng/ml, which was compatible by vitamin D deficiency. The results of bone mineral density showed a Z-score of -2.2 in L1-L4, suggesting low bone mineral density (Z score <-2). The woman was advised to discontinue breastfeeding, while her medical treatment was initiated with a daily subcutaneous injection of teriparatide (CinnoPar® 20 µg per day) along with calcium and vitamin D supplementation.
In the short-term follow-up, no complication was observed. Five weeks later, signs of the union were observed in the follow-up radiographs and the patient was finally able to bear weight for short periods of time on a daily bases. The patient allowed us to report her case and informed consent has been obtained in this regard.