The patient is a 13-year-old girl, third child of nonconsanguineous parents, born at the end of a normal course pregnancy, by eutocic birth. Increased 17-OHP level (252 nmol/L) was found at Guthrie neonatal screening and confirmed by a second test (440 nmol/L). Classical CAH form with salt losing was diagnosed, and replacement therapy with hydrocortisone, acetate fludrocortisone, and NaCl oral supplementation was therefore started. During infancy and childhood, there were no remarkable events in her medical history except for episodes of febrile convulsions; secondary enuresis at the age of 6 was treated with oxybutynin for 6 months. Growth and neuropsycomotory development were normal. Menarche occurred at 12 years. During the follow-up (10 years), therapeutic adjustment in medications was related to weight gain and stress periods (fever). Despite the adherence of the therapy was not always optimal, major complications never occurred. The data at the last checkup visit (4 months before Ramadan beginning) are reported in . Without consulting our clinic or agreeing on therapeutic plans, the girl begins Ramadan, which she completes after a total of 30 days. During Ramadan, the girl observed fasting from sunrise to sunset, having dinner at 9 pm, snacks at midnight, and abundant breakfast at 4 am. Consequently, the patient modified therapy schedule as reported in . At the periodic endocrinological evaluation, which almost coincided with the end of Ramadan, we found a dramatic increase of ACTH level (1081 pg/ml, n.v. 6–57), reduced cortisolemia (5 mcg/dl, n.v. 4.3–22.2), tendency to hypotension, and important weight loss (−12.5% of body weight) .
From the anamnestic collection, it emerged that, during the fasting period, the girl presented some difficulty falling asleep in the first days of Ramadan. She complained intense thirst and strong predilection for salty foods, mainly due to the fast and the saline loss, compensated only during the night. She also reported onset of asthenia and episodes of daytime headache. During this control visit, we prescribed restoring the previous therapy schedule and increasing the total hydrocortisone daily dose to 30 mg. One month after this therapeutic change, the ACTH level was diminished, still indicative of poor control of the CAH, but the symptoms had disappeared, and body weight increased by 2 kg. Four months later, at the end of Ramadan, ACTH hematic level further reduced, and the cortisolemia was within normal ranges. Progressive restoring of hormonal control was reached .
Finally, the patient and the family discussed on the seriousness of the decision taken and on the risks that the girl could have faced.