The patient is a 36-year-old female, G3P1, who presented at 37-weeks of gestation in active labor scheduled for elective primary CD. Indication for CD was previous third-degree laceration during spontaneous vaginal delivery. A spinal anesthetic was performed at L4-L5 with 1.6 mL hyperbaric 0.75% bupivacaine hydrochloride, without intrathecal morphine. The surgical procedure was uneventful. The patient received 1 gram of intravenous (IV) acetaminophen following delivery of the placenta, before skin closure. In order to facilitate narcotic-free analgesia, the decision was made to place bilateral posterior QL catheters post-operatively. She consented to this plan for analgesia and signed consent for regional anesthesia.
After application of surgical dressings, while the patient was on the operating room table, a wedge was placed under the right flank and hip to achieve 30-degree lateral rotation. A high-frequency linear ultrasound probe (Sonosite, Bothell, WA, USA) was placed in a transverse orientation on the lateral abdomen between the costal margin and iliac crest for identification of the three abdominal wall muscles: external oblique (EO), internal oblique (IO), and transversus abdominus (TA). The ultrasound was moved laterally and posteriorly until the abdominal muscles were seen to terminate superficial to the QL muscle. A right-sided posterior QL block was performed using an echogenic Touhy needle (BBraun, Bethlehem, PA, USA) under sterile conditions. The needle was advanced in-plane from lateral to medial until the needle tip was anterior to the termination of the IO and posterior to the QL, as described by Blanco et al. Once the appropriate plane was confirmed with injection of 1 mL of normal saline, 20 mL of 0.25% bupivacaine hydrochloride and 3 mg preservative-free dexamethasone was deposited into this plane. Then, a continuous nerve block (CNB) catheter (BBraun, Bethlehem, PA, USA) was threaded through the needle, and the needle was removed over the catheter. Localization of the catheter tip in the correct plane was confirmed by injecting 1 mL of normal saline through the catheter under ultrasound visualization. The catheter was secured with a sterile chlorhexidine-impregnated transparent dressing (3M Health Care, St Paul, MN, USA). This procedure was repeated on the left side, and the patient was transferred to her hospital bed and then to the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU). While in PACU, CNB infusions of 0.2% ropivacaine hydrochloride were started on each side, at a rate of 10 mL per hour per side, without demand dose. Post-operatively, the patient was prescribed ketorolac 15 mg IV every 6 hrs for the first 24 hrs, ibuprofen 800 mg every 8 hrs to begin after ketorolac, and acetaminophen 1 gm PO every 6 hrs until discharge. She had orders for as-needed tramadol and oxycodone, however, none of these analgesics were requested by the patient; she was happy with the analgesia from her posterior QL catheters. No narcotics were prescribed for discharge.
Post-operatively, the patient reported a resting pain score of 0 with a dynamic pain score of 3 out of 10 on numeric rating scale (NRS). She was discharged on post-op day 3. Both catheter tips were intact upon removal, and the skin at the site was normal in appearance, without erythema or induration. The patient provided written, informed consent for publication of a case report detailing her care. Institutional review board approval for publication of the case details was not required.