A 61-year-old postmenopausal Norwegian female with a history of more than 10 years of urinary tract symptoms with urgency and urinary incontinence was studied. Having negative urine stick analyses, the diagnosis of OAB was made as an exclusion diagnosis based on absence of bladder pain, and most importantly, cystoscopy examination to rule out other urological disorders (e.g. interstitial cystistis, bladder cancer). Complaining of severe symptoms, the patient had been treated with various anticholinergic agents (Cetriprin, Detrusitol, and Vesicare) with only periodical relief. For her persistent symptoms, she had now been started on electric stimulation treatment. Finding the treatment satisfactory and wanting to continue, she was encouraged by the clinic to contact them as needed.
Knowing that patients with chronic urinary symptoms may actually suffer from an undetected UTI (e.g. low-count bacteriuria or “difficult-to-culture” pathogen), we investi-gated the urine sample from our case subject with a cultivation-independent approach. We characterized the urine microbiota using 16S rDNA amplicon analysis for two variable regions V1V2 and V6. Total DNA isolation, 16S rDNA amplification, followed by 454 pyrosequencing and sequence read analysis for taxonomic grouping of the reads was performed as described by Siddiqui et al. (2011) .
We performed both a urine dipstick analysis and a routine culture to ensure that the patient, as previously, did not have any traditionally detectable UTI. The urine stick analysis was negative, however she had a positive urine culture; she was reported to be infected with α-hemolytic green Streptococcus > 105 colony-forming unit (CFU/ml) (Streptococcus viridians group) (see Table ). Antimicrobial susceptibility was determined and she was prescribed Trimethoprim 160 mg x twice a day for a week. In contrast to the clinical reports, the molecular analysis revealed a complex bacterial composition of the urine sample taken . Consistent with the culture report, Streptococcus was observed (sequences assigned to α-hemolytic Streptococci). The abundance of the bacterial sequences assigned to this genus was 23% and 30% for both V1V2 and V6 analysis. Several fastidious bacteria not identifiable by routine culture were also present. Atopobium was the major genus identified, with a total sequence abundance of 24% and 33,5% for V1V2 and V6, respectively. Interestingly, Ureaplasma was also present with a relatively high sequence abundance of 17% for V1V2 analysis, although V6 analysis only gave an abundance of 1.2%. Prevotella was also identified with an abundance of 16% for V1V2 and 8.6% for V6 analysis. The species Bacteroides urealyticus was also detected with abundances of 10.8% and 5.8% for V1V2 and V6, respectively.
About a month later after the antibiotic treatment the clinical reports for both urine dipstick and routine culture were negative, a sign of recovery from the incidence of significant bacteriuria and UTI.
However, the urinary symptoms lasted and were persistent. A year later, we again examined the patient´s urine with the 16S rDNA approach as a follow-up. Urine stick and culture was also performed and both were again negative. In accordance with the previous observations, 16S rDNA analysis of the urine specimen showed a composite bacterial profile. However, the previously dominant genus Atopobium was completely absent this time (Fig. ). Interestingly, Streptococcus, found in the first sample and the reason the antibiotic treatment was given, was still detected in the urine with two times higher sequence abundance, 53.4% for V1V2 and 59% for V6. Ureaplasma was again identified within the same range of sequence abundance as before: 23.3% for V1V2 and 1.4% V6. While the V6 analysis showed Prevotella with an increased sequence abundance of 29.3% from 8.6%, V1V2 analysis identified this genus in the same range as previously (21% of the bacterial sequences). This time, the species Bacteroides urealyticus was observed with only trace amounts (< 0.3%) for both amplicons.