A 70-year-old man, who worked at a vegetable plantation in previous years, was admitted to our institution with severe edema on the lower right leg and foot, accompanied by pain, fever (38.3 °C), erythema, numerous small-sized papules and abscesses. There was no medical history of notable trauma, however the patient did undergo a prosthesis implantation surgery of the right knee, 10 years ago.
In the previous year, he was hospitalized because of melena and anemia. The patient was given 8 units of red blood cell transfusions and underwent gastroscopy, colonoscopy and abdominal computed tomography angiography. Comprehensive gastrointestinal examination found no source of bleeding, however, laboratory tests showed significant proteinuria (10 g/day), low albumin (22 g/L) and IgG (5.24 g/L) levels. A kidney biopsy was performed, which revealed focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Owing to the possibility of myeloma multiplex and amyloidosis, additional tests were also carried out with negative results. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome and received corticosteroid pulse therapy (3 × 750 mg) intravenously, which was then switched to oral administration. In the following weeks, the corticosteroid dose was gradually reduced from 80 to 16–8 mg, without any complications.
Three months later, he developed fever (38.3 °C), swelling and erythema on both legs. In addition, small petechiae could also be observed on his arms, torso and right knee, which was interpreted as vasculitis caused by the patient’s septic state. Laboratory results displayed profoundly high C-reactive protein (CRP; 354.9 mg/L) level and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (94 mm/h). Based on the clinical symptoms, erysipelas and sepsis were considered to be the initial diagnoses and the patient was put on a course of antibiotic treatment (3 × 1.2 g amoxicillin and clavulanic acid). After 4 days, subsequent laboratory values for CRP and erythrocyte sedimentation rate showed 76.8 mg/L and 84 mm/h, respectively.
After 2 weeks, however, the patient was referred to our clinic, owing to the progression in his cutaneous symptoms. The patient then presented with a severely oedemic and painful lower right leg, with slight erythema and multiple small soft papules . In addition, the whole skin of this extremity had a sponge-like feel to the touch. No notable symptoms were present on the left leg. Laboratory tests showed elevated CRP (38 mg/L) and high white blood cell count (12.85 × 109/L). Ultrasound revealed four 10–13 mm-sized subcutaneous collections of echogenic fluid in the right leg. After incision and drainage of these lesions, swabs were sent to the microbiological laboratory for culturing. Only Scedosporium apiospermum grew in culture after 3 days of incubation at normal atmosphere at 30 °C. After accurate morphological assessment, the sample was sent for additional identification by DNA sequencing.
Considering this finding, instead of the initially administered penicillin-type antibiotic, the patient was given fluconazole (200 mg) intravenously on six occasions, to which his symptoms markedly improved. Subsequently, taking the patient’s low glomerular filtration rate (56 mL/min) into account, he was prescribed a synthetic allylamine antifungal medication (250 mg terbinafine) to take every second day with the aim of minimizing potential side effects and underwent several other abscess drainages in the following weeks, in addition to the local antimicrobial agents (i.e. betadine, hydrogen peroxide, and boric acid powder). Parallel with his treatment for the mycotic infection, his steroid therapy dose was gradually decreased and his nephrotic syndrome improved. Two months into his treatment, he experienced a recurrent infection on the right leg. At this time, no mycotic infection could be proven, as only Staphylococcus aureus was cultured from multiple small superficial abscesses, thus the patient received a combination antibiotic of piperacillin and tazobactam (3 × 4.5 g) for a week, followed by amoxicillin and clavulanic acid (4 × 1.2 g) for another week, to which his symptoms regressed.
Though edema of the right leg persisted even after many months, there were no longer any clinical signs of inflammation and the patient did not experience any pain. Leukocyte scintigraphy displayed increased activity around the right ankle, suggesting the development of a new abscess, but it was successfully managed with antibiotic and local treatment. After 7 months, the patient remained asymptomatic and currently maintains a low dose of corticosteroid (4 mg/day) therapy. In addition to occupational exposure, low serum IgG levels and the immunosuppressive effect of the corticosteroid treatment were most likely compelling factors in further substantiating the likelihood of this rare fungal infection in our patient’s case.