The patient was a 36 year-old-woman who had no history of any underlying disease and lived in Jiroft county in Kerman province. She was a housewife and had reported no history of contact with livestock or tick bites. The initial clinical signs of the disease started on August 23th, 2019. On September 5th, 2019 the patient was admitted to Afzalpour Hospital in Kerman city with complaints of fever, chills, weakness, lethargy, muscle pain, joint pain, and bone pain. Also, she described painful dark urine, headache, and mild sore throat. At the initial examination, pulse rate, temperature, and blood pressure were 120, 36.5 °C, and 100/50 mmHg, respectively. No abnormalities were observed in clinical examination of the lung, heart, and abdomen. During the examination, the patient was conscious and mild yellowing of the eyes and diffuse skin rashes (maculopapular) were observed. The patient was hospitalized for 14 days and the progress of significant changes in her test results was as follows.
During hospitalization, a significant increase in the levels of liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase), lactate dehydrogenase and, renal markers (urea and creatinine) were observed . The patient also had anemia and thrombocytopenia. Urine analysis showed proteinuria, hematuria, and urinary tract infections. The liver and bile ducts were normal in ultrasonography. The differential diagnosis was MSF, CCHF, and brucellosis. According to Wright and 2ME tests, the possibility of brucellosis was negative. Treatment of the patient was started with doxycycline and ceftriaxone.
On the second day of hospitalization, the white blood cell increased from 6700 (× /L) to 13,500 (× /L). On the fourth day of hospitalization, partial thromboplastin time coagulation test time (PTT) was increased to more than 120 s. The white blood cell increased significantly and there was no infectious explanation for microcytic hypochromic anemia and leukocytosis. The patient’s condition did not improve with treatment. Also, temperature and blood pressures were 37.5 °C and 100/60 mmHg, respectively. To monitor the patient's condition and necessary examinations to respond to treatment, liver and kidney tests were requested daily. Blood urea and creatinine levels and electrolyte tests were abnormal and necessary treatments were performed with KCl. According to the laboratory tests, the patient had a hypocalcemia level, and treatment was started with calcium carbonate. According to the tests, the patient gradually responded to the treatment with doxycycline (100 mg twice daily) and the liver tests returned to normal and the patient’s general condition improved. Also, in hematology examinations, the leukocyte counts gradually decreased from 25,000 (× /L) to 8400 (× /L) and hematology service reported this was a reactionary increase.
On the first day of admission, the skin rashes were observed in clinical examination of patient, she was diagnosed with suspected CCHF and MSF. CCHF infection was negative. Blood and tissue samples (including biopsy of skin rash) were taken from the patient and sent to the Research Centre for Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Diseases of Pasteur Institute of Iran on September 5th. The results from a R. conorii ELISA for detection of specific IgM antibody against R. conorii (Vircell co, Spain) was borderline and titer of IgM antibody against R. conorii was 1:48 by IFA (Vircell co, Spain). The result of real-time PCR tests (16S rRNA gene) on both biopsy of skin rash and blood samples were positive for Rickettsia spp . By complementary phylogenetic studies including amplification and sequencing of specific genes of Rickettsia spp. including gltA and ompA and, the infection was finally confirmed as R. conorii subsp. israelensis.
On September 9th, 2019, based on the tests and clinical examinations, her condition improved and on September 17th, 2019 the symptenoms completely disappeared and the patient was discharged from the hospital on September 18th, 2019. No abnormalities were observed during follow-up after 14 days of discharge from the hospital and she was completely recovered.