A 65 year old male famer from Deniyaya, Sri Lanka was stung by a swarm of 75–100 honey bees while working in his tea plantation. The offending insect was identified as A. dorsata. He was a nonsmoker but a patient with hypertension and ischaemic heart disease who was on aspirin 150 mg nocte, atorvastatin 20 mg nocte and losartan 25 mg bd. He was admitted within 1 h of the incident to the local hospital with itching and a generalized erythematous rash. On admission, the patient was hemodynamically stable with a blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg and regular good volume pulse with a rate of 92 beats/min. He was administered Intravenous Hydrocortisone 200 mg, Chlorpheniramine 10 mg. He subsequently developed pain and numbness of his left sided lower limb around 4 p.m. on the same day of admission. Pain and numbness increased over a few hours from admission and his dorsalis pedis pulse became impalpable with a cold non-oedematous lower limb. A clinical diagnosis of acute limb ischaemia was made and intravenous unfractionated heparin infusion was commenced and was subsequently transferred to the National Hospital of Sri Lanka.
On admission to the NHSL the patient was conscious with normal blood pressure, regular good volume pulse and lungs were clear on auscultation with a cyanosed left big and 2nd toe and a cold left lower limb with impalpable dorsalis pedis, posterior tibial pulse. All other peripheral pulses were normal.
He underwent immediate left sided femoral embolectomy under local-anaesthesia. An embolus measuring 7 × 7 × 3 mm was extracted from the femoral artery using a Fogarty catheter and sent for histopathological analysis. Analysis of the extracts confirmed a sterile fresh thrombus with an inflammatory infiltrate. His basic blood investigations are summarized in Table . Raised white blood cell count attributable to the systemic reaction caused by the venom. All other blood investigations were normal. His ECG was in sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 88 beats/min. 2D Echocardiogram was normal without a cardiac source of thrombo-embolism. Magnetic Resonance Aortogram (MRA) done post procedure was normal with patent left femoral artery. Intravenous Heparin infusion was continued for another 13 days. He regained his pulses of left lower limb and made and uneventful recovery. He was discharged from the hospital 14 days after admission. The thrombophilia screen was negative.