An 84-year-old Chinese man came to our clinic complaining of swelling and pain in his right scrotum for 1 week. He could touch a mass in his right inguinal region. Upon physical examination (PE), a 3.0 × 1.5 cm hard and fixed mass could be touched in his right inguinal region. Droppler ultrasound (US) examination was performed initially. A 2.9 × 1.2 cm solid-cystic (predominantly solid) mass could be observed in the right inguinal region. There were abundant blood flow signals within the mass. The spermatic cord was swollen with a high echo. No obvious hernia contents or enlarged lymph nodes were observed when abdominal pressure increased . The radiologists believed that neurogenic tumors could not be excluded and suggested an ultrasound-guided percutaneous biopsy.
To learn about the properties, blood supply, and anatomical position of the mass, an abdominal and pelvic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CE-CT) scan was performed thereafter. A 2.3 × 1.3 cm heterogeneously enhanced mass with soft tissue density was seen inside the right inguinal canal . Hypodense, non-enhanced cystic components could be observed within the mass. To further evaluate the involvement of adjacent soft tissues and lymph nodes, pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was then completed. MRI showed a 2.3 × 1.3 cm round-like mass with low signal intensity in T1-weighted imaging (WI) and high signal intensity in T2-weighted imaging (WI). Upon diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), the mass also presented high signal intensity. Meanwhile, perilesional effusions and edema could be observed. There were no enlarged lymph nodes on both CT and MRI scans . Based on imaging findings, a neurogenic tumor was initially considered by radiologists and might be clinically relevant to his scrotal discomfort. Considering its abundant blood flow, a vascular tumor was also taken into consideration. Moreover, its heterogeneous components and enhancing patterns raised concerns for malignant soft tissue sarcoma. Besides, the patient had a recent history of coronary heart disease (CHD). Therefore, a multidisciplinary team (MDT) discussion with radiologists, pathologists, general surgeons, and cardiologists in our center was conducted. Then, we felt that radical inguinal right orchiectomy might be the appropriate treatment for this patient. We informed the patient about the treatment options, benefits, and potential perioperative risks. He fully understood the benefits and risks of each treatment and chose to undergo surgery.
After intraspinal anesthesia, an oblique incision was made along a Langer line, 2 cm superior and parallel to the right inguinal ligament. The inguinal canal was exposed after incising the external oblique aponeurosis. We transected the cremasteric muscle and exposed the spermatic cord. The mass was palpable within the spermatic cord. The spermatic cord was then dissected bluntly from the mass toward the cephalad direction. Gonadal vessels and vas deferens were separately ligated with absorbable sutures at the deep inguinal ring level. Blunt dissection of the spermatic cord in the caudad direction was performed thereafter. The right testis along with its tunica vaginalis was retracted into the surgical area and completely resected. After careful hemostasis, the fascial layers and skin were sutured. The ilioinguinal nerve was well identified and preserved during the whole surgical procedure.
Grossly, a 1.5 × 1 × 0.8 cm gray-white solid mass could be seen on the sagittal section of the resected specimen. The mass was 1 cm away from the cutting edge of the spermatic cord, 5.5 cm from the testis, and 5 cm from the epididymis. There was no clear boundary between the mass and its adjacent tissues. Microscopically, the mass showed typical features of a vascular tumor. It was composed of irregular, anastomosing capillary-sized vessels. The lumina of those vessels were lined by a monolayer of oval endothelial cells. Some of them showed a hobnail appearance. Those endothelial cells had a mild cellular morphology lacking nuclear atypia and mitoses. Focal short spindle stromal cell hyperplasia could be observed within the spermatic cord. Atrophy in adjacent seminiferous tubules was observed in the right testis. There was no obvious lesion in both resected testis and epididymis. The margin status was negative. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining showed positive staining of endothelial markers—CD31, CD34, and ERG. Desmin, inhibin-α, S-100, and NSE were negative. The Ki-67 rate was low (approximately 2%) . SMA was positive in the surrounding stromal cells. Based on the pathological findings, the diagnosis of AH was confirmed.
The patient recovered uneventfully after surgery and was discharged 4 days later. During the 18-month follow-up, the patient reported no local discomfort. PE and abdominal US examination showed no disease recurrence. He expressed satisfaction over the treatment. The timeline of the presented case is summarized in .