A 56-year-old man with no significant medical history presented to hospital with right hemiparesis which had developed gradually over 2–3 days. He had recently immigrated to Israel from Russia, spoke very little Hebrew and worked as a janitor. After initial workup, as the symptoms had lasted for over 24 hours, the patient was admitted to the internal medicine department with suspected stroke since there were no vacant beds in the neurology department. Vital signs were normal at admission. The patient’s general appearance was unkempt; substance abuse, promiscuous sexual activity and exotic travel were denied. His physical examination revealed normal heart sounds without murmurs and bilateral vesicular breathing sounds on both lungs. The abdomen was soft and non-tender without any evidence of organomegaly. There was no evidence of pedal oedema. Skin examination revealed tinea unguium on all digits of the left hand. The patient had prominent facial seborrheic dermatitis. Neurological examination revealed mild seventh cranial nerve palsy on the left with right hemiparesis (strength of 3/5 in the right lower and upper limbs). Further investigation revealed abnormal liver function tests with elevated AST (139 IU/l), ALT (85 IU/l) and GGT (282 IU/l). CT of the brain (without contrast material) was normal. An electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm. A posterior-anterior chest x-ray was normal.
Routine workup and management of stroke in a middle-aged adult were initiated upon admission. The patient’s comparatively young age, low socioeconomic status and the fact that he was an immigrant, along with the dermatological findings, suggested CNS infection should be ruled out. Serological testing using the HIV combo test and immunoblot assay, HBV-hepatitis B core antigen (S/CO) and hepatitis B anti-surface (HbsAg) antibody (mlU/ml) including hepatitis Be antigen, HCV-hepatitis C antibody (S/CO) and syphilis-RPR, were all positive . The CD4 count was 230 cells/mm3. The opening pressure of a lumbar puncture was 160 cm H2O. The CSF cell count was 66 cells/mm3 (PMN cells and mononuclear cells), the protein level was elevated (64 mg/dl), and glucose and lactate levels were within the normal range. CSF real-time PCR was positive for JC virus but negative for cryptococcal antigen, Toxoplasma gondii, Toxoplasma gondii IGM and syphilis VDRL. Culture for mycobacteria was negative.
The initial CT scan of the brain mentioned above was normal. However, MRI of the brain showed subacute stroke in the medulla together with general subcortical microangiopathic changes. Several characteristic findings associated with neurosyphilis were also seen. These included general atrophy, mesial temporal atrophy as well as an infarct in the midline medulla and left pyramid ( and ). Further CT angiographic studies ruled out large-vessel vasculitis and other significant vascular anomalies. Trans-thoracic echocardiography showed no evidence of endocarditis.
After a working diagnosis of neurosyphilis was established, the patient was treated with intra-muscular benzathine penicillin G (for syphilis) and intravenous penicillin G sodium (for neurosyphilis) for 10 days. There was no Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction. Anti-retroviral treatment with a combination of dolutegravir, tenofovir and emtricitabine for HIV was also initiated. The patient received daily physiotherapy. Neurological improvement was noted and after 30 days of hospitalization, the patient was discharged and referred for continued rehabilitation.