Seven years and three months post-transplantation (in February 2016), a 34-year-old man was admitted to the outpatient department of our hospital, complaining of decreasing appetite, weight loss, gross hematuria, fatigue, and oliguria (urinary volume was less than 200 mL).
The patient had undergone living kidney transplantation after hemodialysis for 2 mo at the age of 22 years on November 27, 2008 for ESRD. Biopsy of the patient’s native kidney was not performed, and etiology of the primary disease causing the ESRD was unclear. His mother, who was 41 years old at the time, donated her left kidney to him. The kidney graft was implanted at the right iliac fossa. The zero-point biopsy of graft showed unremarkable findings. Methylprednisolone was administered as induction therapy for a total dose of 2.5 g. Maintenance immunosuppression consisted of tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), and prednisone. The target trough level of tacrolimus was 8-10 ng/mL for 1 year post-operation. The creatinine level was 6.93 mg/dL before transplantation and decreased to 0.98 mg/dL 2 wk post-operation. The patient was discharged and followed regularly at another hospital.
Three and a half years post-transplantation (in May 2012), the patient was reviewed at another hospital. The creatinine level had increased to 1.92 mg/dL and urine test was positive for proteins (3+). The patient had no other discomfort or complaints, but he refused biopsy of the kidney graft. At that time, the result of panel reactive antibody (PRA) testing was negative, ultrasonography of the kidney graft was normal, and tacrolimus trough level was 6.2 ng/mL. Methylprednisolone was administered at a total dose of 1.5 g experientially (500 mg/d for three days), but the creatinine level increased gradually. Six years post-transplantation (in November 2014), the creatinine level of the patient further increased to 5.31 mg/dL, and biopsy of the kidney graft was performed at another hospital. Histopathological examination showed T-cell mediated acute rejection (Banff 1A) and sclerosing glomerulonephritis. Ultrasound of the kidney graft also showed a mass involving the upper pole of the graft, measuring 2 cm × 3 cm × 3 cm. However, the patient declined further examination and treatment.
The patient presented no other significant findings on a previous medical history.
On admission, the patient’s body weight was 37 kg, which had reduced by approximately 20 kg in 2 years. Physical examination showed pale palpebral conjunctiva and hyponychium, and a large mass could be palpated in the right abdominal region with clearly demarcated boundaries and partial mobility.
The patient was admitted on February 2, 2016. Laboratory tests showed a hemoglobin level of 53 g/L, white blood cell count of 5.03 × 109/L, platelet count of 212 × 109/L, and creatinine level of 11.23 mg/dL.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a giant heterogeneous cystic-solid mass, measuring 10 cm × 10 cm × 15 cm, involving the upper pole of the kidney allograft. The solid lesion of the tumor was enhanced by the contrast medium, whereas the cystic part of the mass was not enhanced . No lesion was found in the liver and both native kidneys. No abdominal and pelvic lymphadenopathy was revealed. Head CT showed no abnormalities. Malignancy of the kidney graft was suspected. The R.E.N.A.L nephrometry score was 11x. Based on the TNM classification, the lesion was scored as stage II, T2bN0M0. Ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of the mass was not performed due to concerns of malignant tumor metastasis along the passage path of the puncture needle.