A 47-year-old woman came to the cardiology outpatient clinic of tertiary hospital with complaints of palpitations and shortness of breath, especially during strenuous activities. The patient also complained of swollen both legs. There was no previous diabetes mellitus, hypertension, or coronary heart disease history. The patient just found out that she had heart disease at this time. There was no history of smoking, alcohol, recreational drug use, or allergies. Neither family has ever had a disease like this before.
Physical examination obtained blood pressure of 105/79 mmHg, pulse 130 beats per minute irregular, and breathing 18 times per minute. On chest examination, heart sounds S1 S2 irregularly irregular with a grade III/IV diastolic murmur at the apex. There are no rales or wheezing in the pulmonology examination. On examination of the extremities, there is pitting edema on both legs. Laboratory examinations within normal limits. An electrocardiogram examination showed atrial fibrillation rhythm with 110–140 beats per minute rapid ventricular response. The patient was then given intravenous rate control to achieve a moderate ventricular response. Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with a cardiothoracic ratio of 65%. The waist of the heart is flat; the conus pulmonalis is prominent, the right border of the right heart widens to the right, and there is a double contour that supports the image of the mitral heart configuration.
Transthoracal echocardiography (TTE) examination performed by an echocardiography expert supported the clinical diagnosis of with severe MS (MV mean PG 11.55 mmHg; MVA (VTI) 0.7 cm2; MV 321 ms; MVA By PHT 0.7 cm2; MVA planimetry 0.7 cm2) Wilkins Score 2-2-3-3 (, Movie 1). There was mild mitral regurgitation (MR ERO 0.1 cm2; MR RV 11 ml), mild tricuspid regurgitation (TR maxPG 31.37 mmHg), and mild pulmonary regurgitation (PR Dec Slope 1.7 m/s2). Cardiac chamber dimensions showed LA dilatation (LA major 7.9cm; LA minor 6.4cm), right atrial dilatation (RA major 7.5cm; RA minor 3.5cm) with an est RAP of 15 mmHg, and right ventricular dilatation (RVDB 3.4cm) with mild pulmonary hypertension (estPASP 46.37 mmHg; PV AccT 101 ms). There was a ping-pong-like thrombus in the LA with a size of 4.1 × 2.3 cm (, Movie 2). LV systolic function (EF by Mod A2C 61%) and RV systolic function (TAPSE 2.1cm) were normal. Left ventricular (LV) segmental analysis showed paradoxical IVS. There is LV concentric remodeling (LVDMi 62.97 g/m2; RWT 0.468).
csSupplementary video related to this article can be found at doi:
The following is/are the supplementary data related to this article:
We calculate EuroSCORE I and EuroSCORE II in patients. It was 4.16% for EuroSCORE I and 0.86% according to EuroSCORE II. After discussion with the cardiothoracic surgeon, the patient was immediately planned by a senior thoracic and cardiovascular surgeon with 10 years of experience as a surgeon for mechanical mitral valve replacement (MVR) surgery, tricuspid valve repair (TVr), and LA thrombus evacuation. A multi-layered and easily detached thrombus size 4 × 3 × 2.2 cm was evacuated at the surgery. There was a dense brownish mass in the center and chewy consistency . Microscopic examination of anatomical pathology showed extensive fibrin and extensive bleeding with mononuclear inflammatory cells and macrophages with a conclusion of a cardiac thrombus.
After surgery, the patient was evaluated by TTE. The results showed that the mechanical mitral valve was in good location and function (peak velocity 1.35 m/s; mean gradient 2.04 mmHg; VTI PrMv/VTI LVO 1.75; EOA 2.2 cm2; PHT 96 cm2). No thrombus in LA, negative LASEC. After the patient's condition stabilized, our patient was discharged eight days after surgery with oral furosemide 40 mg three times daily, spironolactone 25 mg once daily, and warfarin 2 mg once daily, also education to checks INR regularly and keep up cardiac rehabilitation. The patient feels relieved after the operation because the complaints of shortness of breath are much reduced. The patient was followed up for 1 year postoperatively with good results. The patient can carry out normal activities without any complaints.