We present the case of a 47-year-old woman, with no underlying clinical conditions, who presented to the emergency department with a 2-day history of severe right upper quadrant abdominal pain radiating to the right shoulder. She described the pain as sharp and constant. Her pain was associated with recurrent episodes of vomiting. The patient reported taking paracetamol and an herbal product, which did not result in any improvement. She could not identify the ingredients of the herbal preparation, but she reported using it regularly for its analgesic properties. She does not drink alcohol and has never smoked. There is no history of liver diseases in the family.
On examination, her vital signs were within normal limits and the abdominal examination revealed a soft and lax abdomen with mild tenderness in the right upper quadrant. Two months prior to presentation, the patient experienced mild respiratory tract symptoms and she tested positive for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). She had negative results on two consecutive reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) tests after 2 weeks of home isolation considering her mild symptoms with no derangements in laboratory parameters.
Abdominal ultrasound demonstrated the liver with smooth capsular contour and normal parenchymal echogenicity. It had a normal hepatopetal blood flow in the portal vein with no evidence of biliary duct obstruction . Laboratory findings revealed markedly elevated hepatic enzymes and deranged coagulopathy profile. However, the viral serology, autoimmune, toxicology profiles were negative .
In light of the aforementioned clinical and laboratory findings, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for monitoring and continued supportive care. As per local institutional policy, the patient underwent RT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2, which revealed a positive result. However, the chest radiograph findings were normal. The patient developed rapid deterioration in the neurological status with a remarkable increase in the liver enzyme levels . The need for emergency liver transplantation was discussed. However, despite aggressive resuscitation, the patient suffered irreversible cardiac arrest and died. An autopsy examination was not performed.