An 11-week-old, Dutch-Australian female patient was referred to the lead author’s clinic on 5 September 2014 with suspected scoliosis. The patient’s mother had initially noticed the abnormal curvature approximately 1.5 months after birth and had taken the child to a local chiropractor. A short course of chiropractic treatment had been provided with no success, and the patient had been referred on. A standard history and physical examination were performed by the lead author. The child had been delivered naturally; however, the patient’s mother reported that the child had “gotten stuck” and support staff had to intervene. The child’s shoulder was dislocated at this time, and later relocated. The Apgar scores were normal. Both parents were of Dutch descent and the mother was 33 years old at the time of birth. The subject of this case study was the mother’s second child. There was no family history of spinal, syndromal disorder, or genetic conditions.
The examination performed at the time of the initial consultation revealed a single, large, left-convex, thoracic scoliosis and left-sided deformational plagiocephaly . The patient demonstrated reduced left posteroanterior rotation of the cervical spine. Examination of the patient’s ears, hips, and feet was unremarkable. There was no other observable deformity or abnormality present. The curve was very rigid with little correction during side-bending and light traction. The neurological examination was within normal limits except for a slight reduction in the abdominal reflexes. Lumbar and thoracic plain films (supine anteroposterior and lateral decubitus) were ordered on the same day, which confirmed the findings from the physical examination. The single thoracic curve measured 44° (Cobb) with an apex at T11. All patient measurements described in this report were measured using the Surgimap software . According to Mehta’s classification , the patient was in Phase I and had a rib–vertebral angle at the apex at the convex and concave side of the curve measuring 70° and 56°, respectively, giving a rib–vertebral angle difference (RVAD) of 14° . A diagnosis of IIS was made, and the patient was referred to an orthopedic surgeon for an assessment. Molded baby syndrome was listed as a differential diagnosis; however, the absence of hip contracture and ear or foot abnormalities and the direction of the cervical restriction [, ] made this less likely.
The patient had not responded to manual therapy and was showing signs of worsening. Given that there was an absence of red flags and a substantial wait before the patient could be seen by the surgeon, the patient was prescribed a ScoliBrace orthosis (Sydney, Australia). The orthosis was a lightweight, rigid, over-corrective TLSO. The orthosis was customized to the patient based on three-dimensional (3D) scans and constructed using computer-aided design and manufacture software (CAD/CAM). The 3D scans are acquired using the BraceScan system. This system uses an infrared-laser projector that projects thousands of invisible infrared dots onto the patient. The sensor then uses a frequency-matched infrared camera to record how the pattern of light that has been projected onto the patient differs from the reflected pattern, thereby allowing for a reconstruction of the patient’s surface geometry.
The brace design was sent electronically to a factory. A 3D “negative” of the brace was created from foam, and then a single sheet of metallocene polyethylene plastic was heat molded around the negative. The orthosis was then trimmed and smoothed to match the CAD design, and then lined with AliPlast foam. The brace was secured to the patient’s body using three Velcro straps and a central tongue-and-groove strap.
As the brace is made in CAD, there is the opportunity to add true 3D corrective forces in the x, y, and z axes. For example, y-axis traction that is achieved with the patient under traction during the casting process can be simulated in the design of the orthosis and tightly controlled in millimeter increments. Similarly, corrective translation along the x-axis and corrective rotation in the y-axis can be added to the design. These 3D forces are traditionally very difficult to induce in a cast; hence, casting primarily relies on the x-axis traction force. The design approach used in the infantile ScoliBrace is therefore truly that of a 3D corrective approach as opposed to the traditional three-point bending (which is primarily a 2D coronal plane force) used in standard TLSO bracing.
Given the wait to see the orthopedic surgeon, the patient was closely monitored, acknowledging that bracing would be ceased if any adverse events occurred, or if any additional information came to light that would contraindicate the patient to bracing.
The patient was fitted with the brace 25 days after the initial consultation and continued with the home exercises prescribed by the chiropractor. The curve had not shown any signs of improvement during this time. The parents were advised to have the patient wear the brace daily under supervision for five 30-minute blocks in the first 2 weeks. The patient’s mother was also given instruction for donning and doffing of the brace.
After 2 weeks, brace wear was increased from 4 to 6 hours per day for another fortnight. The patient was seen by the orthopedic surgeon 46 days after the initial consultation. The surgeon ruled out any neurological lesion/s and did not request magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or genetic screening at that time, instead recommending that a course of physiotherapy be undertaken. The patient did not proceed with the recommended physiotherapy sessions.
At the 1-month point in the brace treatment schedule, the curve had been reduced from 44° to 31° (RVAD 8°) , and brace wear was increased to 8 hours each day for the next month. Importantly, the brace was applied under the supervision of the parents during the day and was not worn at night.
After 3 months wearing the brace, the patient’s scoliosis had reduced significantly. Brace weaning was commenced, with the patient reducing the brace wear from 8 to 4 hours per day for the next 4 months. Plain films taken 4 months after the brace fitting revealed that the patient’s scoliosis had reduced from 44° to 7° and the RVAD had reduced from 14° to 1° . The patient was followed up again 23 months after the initial consultation. There was no evidence of scoliosis or rib humping at this time, and the patient’s angle of trunk rotation (ATR) was < 5°. A final review was performed 2 years after the cessation of brace wear. The Adam’s forward bend test was negative, and ATR measurements were within normal limits. A standing 3D ultrasound image of the patient’s spine was taken using the Scolioscan (Telefield Medical Imaging Ltd, Hong Kong), which did not reveal any abnormal curvature of the spine using the spinous process method of Cobb angle evaluation [, ] . A flow chart depicting the timeline of management for this case is provided in Fig. .
Compliance with the bracing was good and generally well tolerated by the patient and her parents. Minor modifications were made to the orthosis at several points along the treatment schedule. These modifications involved removing padding, cutting away plastic, and flaring out sections of the brace around the arms and legs to accommodate the rapid growth of the patient during this period. In terms of adverse reactions, the mother stated that the child’s arm would occasionally change color if the child was being carried in an upright position while in the brace. This was most likely due to compression of the neurovascular structures in the axillary region by the uppermost edge of the orthosis. This is a possible side effect if the orthosis is worn too loosely. In terms of comfort, the mother did report that the child would cry at times when wearing the brace, which made adherence to the treatment a little more challenging.