A 62 year old male presented with complaints of pain in abdomen following blunt trauma to abdomen. On examination, he was afebrile with stable vitals. Palpation of the abdomen revealed tenderness in the upper abdomen and a firm palpable mass along the midline of upper abdomen.
Routine ultrasonographic examination revealed a circumscribed hypoechoic lesion in the upper abdomen measuring 6.6 × 6.3 × 5.9 cm (CC × AP × Tr). For further evaluation, patient underwent computed tomography which revealed a circumscribed retroperitoneal soft tissue lesion in right side of midline, measuring 7.3 × 7.5 × 8.1cm (CC × AP × Tr). The lesion showed inhomogeneous contrast uptake on arterial phase and homogeneous enhancement on portal venous and delayed phases with few nonenhancing areas within. It was abutting the inferior vena cava posteriorly with imperceptible lumen at the site of maximum contact. However, proximal and distal segments of the inferior vena cava showed normal contrast opacification. Medially, the lesion was in relation to the abdominal aorta. Second and third part of duodenum and head of pancreas were displaced anterosuperiorly. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a homogeneously enhancing circumscribed lesion in the retroperitoneum on right side of midline appearing isointense on T1W, hyperintense on T2W showing restricted diffusion. Few cystic areas were seen within the lesion. On prone imaging, the lumen of inferior vena cava was still imperceptible at the site of maximum contact. No obvious intraluminal extension was seen. Whole body positron emission tomography CT revealed mild FDG uptake with a maximum standard uptake value (SUVmax) of 4.1. No distant metastases were found.
Based on the radiological findings, differential diagnoses included low grade retroperitoneal lymphoma and primary retroperitoneal sarcoma. Histopathological sampling was done under computed tomographic guidance. Histopathological examination showed malignant proliferation of smooth muscle cells consistent with FNCLCC grade 2 leiomyosarcoma. The tumor was strongly positive for SMA and desmin, positive for vimentin and ß catenin and was negative for CK, CD 117, S 100, HMB 45 and LCA. Tumor cells showed 30% expression of Ki67. Immunihistochemical analysis was further confirmatory of leiomyosarcoma. Following histopathological examination and retrospectively evaluating the features on imaging, the possibility of primary leiomyosarcoma of infrarenal inferior vena cava was considered.
Patient then underwent laparotomy through midline approach for excision of the tumor. Intraoperatively, an exophytic circumscribed lobulated soft tissue tumor was seen arising from the anterior wall of infrarenal inferior vena cava. No intraluminal component was noted. Bilateral renal vessels were unremarkable. The tumor along with the corresponding segment of the inferior vena cava were excised and inferior vena cava graft reconstruction was performed. Bilateral renal veins were anastamosed to the reconstructed inferior vena cava. Excisional biopsy further confirmed the diagnosis.