A 52-year-old male arab patient, a regular smoker, presented to the emergency department with acute, constructive, prolonged, intense chest pain radiating to the left upper limb, at 11 hours from the presumed onset of the pain. He did not report any particular medical or surgical history. The patient was still suffering. His blood pressure was 120/85 mmHg, his heart rate was at 91 beats per minute. Cardiac auscultation was normal. The ECG revealed ST-segment elevations in antero-septo-apical (V1–V4) and low lateral leads (V5) associated with necrosis-Q in the same leads . The troponin level was as expected very high. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) found an ischemic cardiopathy aspect with moderate ventricular dysfunction. We noted akinesia of the apex, septal wall, and hypokinesia of the anterior wall. No pericardial effusion was noticed Coronary angiography showed a bifurcation lesion in the middle anterior interventricular artery (AIV) and the diagonal branch classified as Medina (1-1-0). . Due to lack of means and even if they are not used in first intention, 2 hydrophilic guidewires were used. One for the AIV and another one to protect the diagonal . A 2.75 × 32 mm active stent was deployed followed by post-dilatation proximally with a 3.5 × 10 mm non-compliant balloon with a good final angiographic result but a final image without guides was not done . 4 hours later, the patient suddenly developed chest pain that increased with lying down. His blood pressure was 95/65 mmHg, and his heart rate was at 110 bpm. Cardiac auscultation found muffled heart sounds. The ECG did not reveal any modifications. TTE found a medium abundance pericardial effusion whose largest diameter concerned the lateral part of the right ventricle with 19 mm with an impact on the right cavities: collapse of the right atrium and the right ventricle with a dilated and not compliant lower vena cava. The respiratory variation in transvalvular blood flow velocities was normal. A significant increase in white blood cell counts and C-reactive protein (CRP) was noted. Thus, the diagnosis of post-cardiac injury syndrome (PCIS) has been established. Saline perfusion was started and he was put on an anti-inflammatory dose of Aspirin in addition to Colchicine, given the importance of the inflammatory component. Coronary angiography could not be redone due to technical problems. Close clinical and echocardiographic monitoring was conducted (every 4–6 hours initially). A marked clinical improvement with significant regression of the effusion and its impact was noted . The white blood cells and the CRP became negative after 4 days. The patient was discharged and he was followed up monthly for recurrence or progression to chronic constrictive pericarditis. Fortunately, the evolution was favorable after 6 months.