A 57-year-old white man presented to the neurosurgery outpatient clinic at a tertiary care hospital located in the city of Porto Alegre, southern Brazil, with the complaint of headache. The patient reported an episode of focal seizure that had occurred 1 month earlier. Neurological examination revealed no abnormalities, except for left hemianopia on confrontation visual field test.
Brain MRI showed an expansive, relatively well-defined mass in the right parietal lobe [Figure and ]. The lesion was heterogeneously hypointense on T2-weighted images and isointense on T1-weighted images. The mass measured 5.0 cm in diameter, showing peripheral contrast enhancement with peri-lesional vasogenic edema suggestive of a primary neoplasm. Dexamethasone therapy was initiated and the patient was referred for surgery.
Preoperative chest X-ray film revealed multiple bilateral micro-nodules, with emphysema bubbles in the apices. The patient underwent craniotomy and the intraoperative finding was a yellowish, hard lesion with good cleavage plane, thick content, and yellow inside. There was a hypothesis of brain abscess. The patient tested negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibodies.
On anatomo-pathological examination, the findings were pathognomonic of PCM: large, thick-walled, spherical yeast cells with multiple peripheral buds, with the capsule wall thickness giving the impression of a double capsule, although it was a single capsule [Figure and ].
Serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) specimens were negative for cryptococcal antigen by the cryptococcal latex agglutination test (Crypto-LA; Wampole Laboratories, Cranbury, NJ, USA). Gram-stained CSF contained 4 leukocytes/mm3, 8 mg/dl of glucose, and 4 mg/dl of total protein. Four days later, gram-stained CSF contained 2 leukocytes/mm3, 46 mg/dl of glucose, and 33 mg/dl of total protein. No microorganisms were detected on Gram stain of the CSF. Fibrotic bronchoscopy (FOB) performed 1 day later revealed bleeding at the carina and pus in the right upper lobe (RUL). Analysis of cells obtained from RUL broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) fluid showed a negative smear for acid-fast bacilli (AFB), negative Gram stain, and presence of Strongyloides stercoralis larvae and yeast cells compatible with P. brasiliensis.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed a nodule in the prostate and a left adrenal nodule. Chest CT scan showed cavitated apical lesions and diffuse micro-nodular infiltrates in the mid-upper lobe with some areas of atelectasis and ground-glass pattern.
In the immediate postoperative period, the patient had worsening of proprioception and impairment in left-side motor coordination, which improved later. Headache improved with surgery.
Culture of the lesional material confirmed the diagnosis of disseminated PCM (including a right adrenal nodule and lung injury) and the patient was treated with liposomal amphotericin B.
The patient responded well to amphotericin B therapy with resolution of the headache and clinical improvement. Echocardiography showed no abnormal findings. Thyroid ultrasound examination revealed a simple cyst (0.36 cm in diameter) at the junction of the isthmus and the right lobe and another simple cyst (1.31 cm in diameter) located in the lower pole of the left lobe. There were no solid nodules. Visual field testing (perimetry) performed by an ophthalmologist showed bitemporal hemianopia. The patient was clinically stable and was then discharged in good general condition.