A 63-year-old Caucasian female with diabetes and dyslipidemia presented with sudden onset gait instability, right-sided hemiplegia, and severe dysarthria. She was previously independent, required no additional support and lived in a private home. The symptoms started 1.5 h prior to her presentation. Her NIHSS was 13. Neurovascular imaging revealed a proximal occlusion of her basilar artery, which was successfully recanalized with endovascular therapy five hours after her symptom onset. She regained antigravity strength on the right side, with subsequent brain imaging showing bilateral cerebellar and pontine ischemia , which was the likely cause of her deficits.
During her recovery in hospital, she began to experience sudden outbursts of tearfulness in response to routine questions. The tearfulness was often so intrusive, it prevented her from conversing. Additionally, bedside PHQ-9 was completed 7 days after her stroke with a score of 18, suggesting moderately severe depressive symptoms. A diagnosis of PBA was made due to her uncontrollable tearfulness. Interestingly, she was able to recognize that her emotional response was inappropriate given the current context, a feature that is not always present in PBA. She denied any history of depression, anxiety, or other mood disorders. The emotional lability limited her capacity to communicate effectively with clinical staff and engage in rehabilitation as she was unable to control her tearfulness during interactions, which resulted in increased social stress, exacerbating the situation further. She was started on escitalopram 10 mg and noted an improvement in emotional lability over the ensuing weeks, allowing better engagement in her post-stroke rehabilitation.
She was transitioned to a long-term rehabilitation centre for a few months where she continued to improve. At her follow-up visits 1 year later, she still had some residual right sided hemiparesis and right arm and leg ataxia, but her mood and emotion regulation have remained stabilized on escitalopram. She remains fully independent for her basic ADLs and requires minimal assistance with some instrumental ADLs.