A 60-year-old male with end-stage renal disease secondary to IgA nephropathy (biopsy proven), on hemodialysis for 7 years, received a kidney transplant from an ABO-compatible deceased donor outside of Japan (details unknown). Tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, prednisolone and basiliximab were used for induction. He subsequently presented to our institute on postoperative day (POD) 9 with good kidney graft function (serum creatinine, SCr, 0.9 mg/dl without proteinuria). However, on POD 18, he developed elevated SCr and graft biopsy revealed acute T cell-mediated rejection (ATMR, Banff classification, borderline change). He was treated with corticosteroid pulse therapy (500 mg/day of methylprednisolone, for 3 days) and gusperimus hydrochloride (5 mg/kg/day, for 7 days).
Although he was doing well until POD 118 except for asymptomatic CMV viremia, he suddenly developed severe edema, oliguria, and elevated SCr (from 0.9 to 1.5 mg/dl) after angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) treatment was initiated for calcium channel blocker-resistant hypertension. Proteinuria was not severe at that time (urine protein to creatinine ratio, Up/c, 0.41). Kidney graft biopsy demonstrated neither acute rejection nor calcineurin inhibitor nephrotoxicity . C4d stain was negative on the peritubular capillaries by immunofluorescent stain (data not shown) and anti-donor HLA antibody wasn’t detected by bead-based flow-cytometry assays. A contrast enhanced computed tomography revealed that the kidney graft had two arterial branches (black and white arrowheads, Figure B), which were reconstructed by conjoined anastomosis just distal to the external iliac artery anastomosis. One of the branches was markedly stenotic (0.7 mm in diameter, white arrowhead, Figure B) and plasma renin activity (PRA) was significantly elevated (31.9 ng/ml/h). After percutaneous transluminal arterioplasty (PTA) of the stenotic branch , blood pressure (BP) and SCr subsequently returned to baseline.
However, 9 months after kidney transplant, hypertension recurred and massive proteinuria (Up/c, 9.53) developed. Repeat digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed recurrence of RAS in the same branch. The poorly-perfused and the well-perfused areas of the allograft could be easily distinguished using Doppler ultrasonography. Allograft biopsies were obtained from the two different areas and showed ischemic changes in the poorly-perfused area and FSGS-like changes in the well-perfused area , respectively. Repeat PTA of the stenotic branch was performed with radiographic resolution of the stenosis. Subsequently, the patient’s hypertension and proteinuria markedly improved (Up/c, from 9.53 to 1.80) and the PRA was significantly reduced (from 27.0 to 4.6 ng/ml/h).
Fourteen and thirty months after kidney transplant, respectively, surveillance graft biopsies of the poorly-perfused and well-perfused areas were obtained. Histology of the well-perfused area at 14 and 30 months after the transplant showed significant improvement of the FSGS-like changes while the previously poorly-perfused area demonstrated moderately ischemic changes (Banff classification, interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy, IF/TA, grade II, data not shown). The patient currently has excellent graft function (SCr, 0.87 mg/dl) with insignificant proteinuria (Up/c, 0.14), and normal BP without antihypertensive agents 36 months after kidney transplant.