A 1-year-old girl was presented to a hospital in the northeastern part of Ghana with a 1-week history of pustular rashes on her scalp and neck, which occasionally ruptured, along with discharge of yellowish purulent fluid. The child is of Mole-Dagbon ethnicity and hails from the northern part of Ghana. The patient had also experienced recurrent episodes of fever for 3 days, which had been controlled with the use of acetaminophen. The child had no known history of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, tuberculosis, or other underlying medical condition and lived with her parents, whose primary occupation was farming. The child lives in a rural area about 20 km from the hospital. On examination, the patient weighed 8 kg, was pale and febrile with a temperature of 39.7 °C, and well-hydrated. Her heart rate was 132 beats per minute, and her heart sounds were normal. Her lungs were clear, and her respiratory rate was 35 breaths per minute. A provisional diagnosis of sepsis and malaria was made.
Pending the results of laboratory tests of collected blood, urine, and stool samples, the patient was empirically treated with 270 mg of intravenous cefuroxime three times daily and 40 mg of intravenous gentamicin daily for 48 hours. Intravenous artesunate 24 mg was also administered for the first 24 hours .
Complete blood count investigations showed a hemoglobin concentration of 6.6 g/dl and a total white blood cell count of 8800 cells/μl (lymphocytes 52.1%, neutrophils 37.4%). The result of a malaria rapid diagnostic test was positive for malaria. The patient was given a hemotransfusion of 240 ml of whole blood over a period of 4 hours.
Results of both urine and stool cultures were negative for any bacterial growth. The blood culture sample was flagged as positive after 24 hours of incubation in an automated BD BACTEC 9050 blood culture system (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA), and a Gram stain of the culture broth revealed gram-negative rods. The broth was subcultured on blood agar, chocolate agar, and MacConkey agar (Oxoid Ltd, Basingstoke, UK) and incubated at 37 °C and 30 °C. Growth characteristics at 37 °C were poor, with grayish nonhemolytic colonies on blood agar and nonlactose fermentation on MacConkey agar. Plates incubated at 30 °C showed good pure growth on MacConkey agar and nonhemolytic colonies on blood agar. Results of biochemical investigations were negative for oxidase and urease and positive for citrate. The isolate was subjected to analytical profile index (API) 20NE and 20E (bioMérieux, Marcy-l’Étoile, France), which yielded unacceptable results.
Molecular identification was performed by extracting deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) from a pure culture of this bacterium using SpheroLyse DNA extraction kit (Hain Lifescience GmbH, Nehren, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The 16S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) was amplified using the primer pair 8F and 1492R . The polymerase chain reaction conditions and the subsequent steps of Sanger sequencing we used were based on those described by Liu et al. . The resulting 16S rDNA sequence was checked using DECIPHER (version 2.2.0; R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria) to verify that it was not a chimera .
The procedure for molecular phylogenetic inference was based on that described by Ku et al. . Briefly, the 16S rDNA sequence of the isolated strain was used as the query for sequence similarity search against the GenBank 16S rDNA sequence database. Highly similar sequences representing closely related species were selected for phylogenetic inference. All sequences were aligned using Multiple Sequence Comparison by Log-Expectation (MUSCLE) , and the resulting multiple sequence alignment was used to infer a maximum likelihood phylogeny using PhyML (version 3.0) . The bootstrap support values were inferred based on resampling 1000 iterations.
The isolated strain reported in this study was found to be most similar to Pseudomonas oryzihabitans IAM 158 [GenBank accession NR_115005] with nucleotide sequence identity of 1455/1460 (99.7%). The molecular phylogeny also indicated that the new sequence is clustered with other P. oryzihabitans strains, which strongly supports the findings displayed in Fig. . The purified bacterial strain has been assigned the strain name Agogo to reflect its geographic origin and the sequence deposited in the GenBank database [accession number KX812763].
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was done on the isolated bacteria using the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion method following Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines . The isolate was found to be susceptible to co-trimoxazole, chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, and gentamicin but resistant to ampicillin and cefuroxime. The rash on the patient’s scalp and skin, as well as her temperature spikes, resolved after continuous treatment with gentamicin, and her condition improved clinically. She was discharged on flucloxacillin and folic acid therapy 1 week after admission. A final diagnosis of septicemia secondary to bacterial skin infection with malaria coinfection was made.