A 72-year-old Asian male was consulted to our hospital with sudden scrotal swelling but no additional symptoms. His past history included low risk CLL in revised Rai stage 0 without any treatment 16 years ago. On physical examination, his left scrotum was slightly swollen, whereas his right scrotum had marked swelling and a detectable hard mass. Blood examination showed high levels of white blood cell (27 840 μL: normal range 3300–8600) and LDH (341 U/L: normal range 124–222); however, other abnormalities including for the testicular tumor markers, serum alpha fetoprotein and human chorionic gonadotropin, were not evident. Enhanced CT showed a round, bilateral testicular tumors (right side 72 × 58 mm and left side 22 × 18 mm) with homogeneous iso-enhancement relative to normal testis, and 8-mm–sized para-aortic masses. These masses were slightly and gradually enhanced in dynamic contrast-enhanced CT without any suspicious lesions of visceral metastases noted except the surrounding lesions of the para-aorta . MRI revealed a low intensity on T2-weighted images compared to those of normal testis and a low intensity on an apparent diffusion coefficients map . The clinical diagnosis was bilateral testicular tumors including malignant lymphoma, and after informed consent, an immediate bilateral orchiectomy was performed. The tumor was solitary, and rounded shape, with the cut surface of that showing a yellowish color . Pathological finding revealed that the tumor consisted of blastemal cells, each with an atypical small round shape, and scant cytoplasm. These cells morphologically composed of confluent sheets of large neoplastic B lymphocytes resembling either centroblasts or immunoblasts . The tumor lesion of large neoplastic B lymphocytes was immunoreactive for CD20 , and negative for CD5 , CD3 , and CD23 . Atypical small round cells around large neoplastic B lymphocytes were immunoreactive for CD20, CD5, CD23, and Bcl2 , and negative for CD3. These histopathological findings were consistent with a DLBCL variant, a transformation of CLL, with the final diagnosis being RS. PET–CT revealed the presence of positive lesions in the nasal septum, a tiny subcutaneous tumor in front of the left chest, and bilateral adrenal glands that could not be detected on CT . Therefore, the patient immediately underwent an induction combination of rituximab with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone immunochemotherapy, and the intrathecal administration of chemotherapeutic agents, including methotrexate, cytarabine, and prednisone. After four cycles of the regimen, the patient showed a complete response in an imaging study. Totally, eight cycles of chemotherapy was performed, and the patient was monitored on an outpatient basis. He was successfully in remission for 14 months after the end of immunochemotherapy.