Mrs. I.M was a 32-year-old gravida 6, para 5 whose last childbirth was five years ago. She presented at 31 weeks gestation with numbness in all limbs of nine days and one-day history of weakness in all limbs. The numbness started from the lower limbs and then involved the upper limbs. She was still able to walk unsupported till a day before the presentation when she began to have profound weakness starting in the same sequence as the numbness. She was unable to stand unsupported or walk and she could not lift her hand to the level of her head necessitating her presentation. However, she still had normal neck control and optimal sphincteric function.
She had a two-day history of catarrhal symptoms. There was no associated loss of consciousness, body swelling, or fever. She had no difficulty with breathing or swallowing. There was no preceding history of diarrhoea or vomiting.
This was the second episode of such weakness in the patient's life. The first episode occurred during her last pregnancy at term. She presented to a General Hospital and had an uneventful induction of labour. The weakness slowly began to resolve, and she was able to walk with support by the fourth day postpartum and had complete resolution of weakness at the sixth week postpartum.
She had never experienced such weakness following intake of a large meal, upon waking up from sleep, or following rest after exertion. She was not a known diabetic or hypertensive. There was no history of drug ingestion except for the prescribed haematinics. She had no family history of similar symptoms.
Index pregnancy was booked at 20 weeks gestation in our hospital. Infection screens for HIV, Syphilis, and Hepatitis B and C were negative. The pregnancy had been uneventful till the onset of these symptoms.
On examination, she was a young woman who was anxious, afebrile, and was not pale. Her pulse rate was 86 beats per minute, regular, and of normal volume. Her blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg, and the heart sounds were normal. Her Glasgow Coma Scale score was 15/15; had no signs of meningeal irritation and no cranial nerve palsy. She had normal muscle bulk and sensation was preserved in all limbs. The power in both upper limbs and both lower limbs was 4/5 and 3/5 respectively; deep tendon reflexes were reduced, and plantar reflex was flexor bilaterally. There was no clearly defined sensory level. An initial diagnosis of myopathy in pregnancy was made. The neurological review was sought for and diagnosis of periodic paralysis in pregnancy was suspected to rule out acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (AIDP).
Her Packed Cell Volume was 35% and her blood glucose was 4.2mmol/l. Serum biochemistry showed severe hypokalaemia of 1.8mmol/l and normal levels of sodium, bicarbonate, chloride, urea, and creatinine levels. Urinary electrolytes were within normal limits. A diagnosis of HPP in pregnancy was finally established.
She was commenced on parenteral potassium supplementation with gradual correction of hypokalaemia. There was a gradual improvement of the weakness which completely resolved with normalisation of serum potassium level by the seventh day of admission (see ). She was commenced on an oral potassium supplement. Serum potassium levels remained within normal limits for the rest of the antenatal period. She had an uneventful spontaneous vaginal delivery at 37 weeks gestation to a live infant that weighed 3.25kg with an Apgar score of 9 and 10 in the first and fifth minute respectively. The puerperium was uneventful.