We report the case of a 32-year-old Indian woman admitted to our institute with angina on exertion. This symptom first appeared 2 years prior to her presentation, with gradual onset and progressive worsening from class I to class III associated with multiple episodes of pre-syncope. She had no history of diabetic mellitus, arterial hypertension, palpitation, or syncope and no family history of similar complaints or sudden death. On physical examination, our patient appeared generally well. Her blood pressure and pulse rate were 128/84 mmHg and 57 beats per minute, respectively.
Electrocardiography revealed a sinus rhythm and left ventricular hypertrophy by Sokolow–Lyon criteria, with secondary ST depression and biphasic T-waves in leads I, aVL, and V4–V6. A chest X-ray was normal. A Holter study was not suggestive of any significant arrhythmias or pause as a plausible cause of the pre-syncope. Her biochemical blood parameters were also within normal ranges. Echocardiography revealed HOCM with systolic anterior movement. Pulsed wave Doppler showed a dagger-shaped spectral profile with a peak sub-aortic velocity of 287 cm/s and a maximum pressure gradient of 33 mmHg , with mild eccentric mitral regurgitation. After an initial evaluation, our patient underwent cardiac catheterization to exclude concomitant coronary artery disease and to rule out other coexisting congenital coronary anomalies. Coronary angiography showed no significant stenosis due to coronary artery disease. However, angiography revealed multiple coronary microfistulas originating from both her left coronary artery system and her right coronary artery . Our patient also underwent a cardiac catheterization study with oximetry analysis to confirm that the microfistulas originated from her left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD), left circumflex artery (LCX), and right coronary artery (RCA). The rapid filling of her pulmonary artery after dye was injected into her left coronary artery during the catheterization study demonstrated that the microfistulas were all draining into her right ventricle (RV) . Further confirmation came from an oxygen step up of 15 % (from 65 % to 80 %) from her right atrium (RA) to her RV during oximetry analysis.
Our patient was discharged 5 days after the completion of her clinical investigation on medical therapy including metoprolol and nicorandil. At a follow-up 1 month later, her angina grade had decreased from class III to class II.