A 50-year-old Han Chinese man was admitted to our hospital after several episodes of syncope during the previous week, with electrocardiographic evidence of monomorphic ventricular tachycardia. On physical examination, increased head circumference, pronounced lower jaw protrusion with macroglossia and swelling of the soft tissues in the hands and feet were evident .
Serum levels of growth hormone and serum insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) were elevated, reaching 40 and 368 ng/ml, respectively. The concentration of serum brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) was 2640 pg/ml. The patient’s medical history was remarkable because of the presence of systemic hypertension over the past five years, which had not been treated regularly by antihypertensive drugs. His daily blood pressure range was from 150/90 to 160/100 mmHg. Blood tests on admission revealed that the patient’s serum levels of estradiol, luteinizing hormone, prolactin and follicle-stimulating hormone were within normal values.
Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an intrasellar mass lesion, suggestive of definitive presence of a pituitary adenoma . The size and shape of his skull were increased. Scattered spots and flaky hyperintensity in T1 and T2, with unclear edges, were observed in the basal ganglia bilaterally. The right corona radiata area and the fluid attenuated inversion recovers (FLAIR) images of these area showed medium intensity. Enlargement of the pituitary gland with uneven signal, patchy hyperintensity on T1 and hyperintensity on T2 was observed with a clear edge. The other brain parenchyma area did not show any abnormal signal. No obvious abnormalities were observed in the size and shape of the ventricles, sulci or cistern, and there was no schizencephaly. There was no midline structural shift, but part of the bifurcation of the left middle cerebral artery was slightly enlarged. Hyperintensity on T1 and T2 was observed in the maxillary sinus bilaterally, right ethmoid and frontal sinus. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) fusion imaging did not reveal any malignant lymph node metastases.
The main echocardiographic values found through a transthoracic echocardiogram performed on this patient at the time of admission were as follows: left atrium (LA): 47.4 mm; left ventricle (LV): 71.8 mm; right ventricle (RV): 21.9 mm, ejection fraction (EF): 45%; fractional shortening (FS): 23%; interventricular septum thickness (IVS): 17.7 mm; and left ventricular posterior wall thickness (LVPW): 19.0 mm. Left ventricular hypertrophy, symmetry septal, left ventricular wall thickening, uncoordinated movements, diffuse wall motion abnormalities, moderate aortic regurgitation and mild mitral regurgitation were also found by means of echocardiography on this patient.
Coronary angiography showed normal coronary arteries. The patient received oral drug therapy consisting of aspirin, carvedilol and enalapril. At this time, a possible ICD insertion was planned for prevention of sudden cardiac death.
The patient was referred for electrophysiological study. Intermittent monomorphic ventricular tachycardia concomitant with syncope was induced by means of programmed electrical stimulation with three extrastimuli from two right ventricular sites, using a standard stimulation protocol . The implantation decision was supported by the 2006 guidelines of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force and the European Society of Cardiology Committee for management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and prevention of sudden cardiac death.
A dual-coil lead ICD defibrillator (Medtronic Marquis DR 7274) was implanted and a 50-mg dose of metoprolol succinate was administered twice per day. Transsphenoidal surgical resection of a pituitary adenoma was performed after the ICD implantation.
During six months of follow-up, no documented episodes of syncopal ventricular arrhythmia occurred.