A 70-year-old woman was referred by a local physician to our hospital for detailed investigation of renal function. On admission, her height was 159 cm, weight was 48 kg, body temperature was 36.2°C, pulse was 72 bpm, and blood pressure was 154/74 mm Hg. Her physical findings were not remarkable. Family history was not remarkable except for pancreatic cancer of her father.
Twenty-six years before, the patient had developed intestinal obstruction and undergone small bowel resection. Although the small bowel was partially resected, it was unknown how long the resected small bowel was due to lack of medical records. After the small bowel resection, the patient had often experienced diarrhea or loose stools. Ten years prior to admission, the patient had undergone cholecystectomy for gallstones. Her chronic diarrhea had been aggravated after cholecystectomy. Eight years before, the patient had undergone extracorporeal shock wave transurethral lithotripsy for renal stones. The collected stones were calcium oxalate stones. Her renal function at that time was unknown. Approximately 3 years before, the patient had experienced further aggravation of chronic diarrhea and started to receive treatment for diarrhea, hypertension, and dyslipidemia at a local clinic. Amlodipine, atorvastatin, and an antiflatulent were started. Laboratory findings at that time were blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 9.1 mg/dL, creatinine (Cr) 0.79 mg/dL, and hemoglobin (Hb) 11.2 g/dL. Since then, the patient had experienced diarrhea several times a day and rarely had normal stools. In February of the year prior to admission, laboratory findings showed renal dysfunction (BUN 21.3 mg/dL, Cr 1.23 mg/dL, and Hb 11.2 g/dL). There was no hematuria or proteinuria. In September of that year, laboratory findings showed aggravation of renal function (BUN 52.7 mg/dL, Cr 3.09 mg/dL, and Hb 7.8 g/dL). The patient was admitted to our hospital for further examination and treatment.
The test results on admission are shown in Table . Her renal function showed further aggravation (Cr 3.36 mg/dL). The levels of urinary beta-2 microglobulin and urinary NAG were elevated. Blood gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis. Daily urinary excretion of calcium oxalate measured by 24-hour urine collection was 141 mg/day (reference value, 9.0–37.7 mg/day).
Figure shows the plain abdominal computed tomography image. There were no significant abnormalities, although there was mild dilatation of the left renal pelvis and urinary tract probably attributable to past effects of calcium oxalate stones.
Figure shows the renal ultrasound image. The entire kidneys were slightly atrophic. There was hepatorenal echo contrast in an opposite manner and increased echogenicity of the renal medulla and cortex. A hypertrophic column of Bertin was present with an increased echogenicity, and the contrast between the columns and the medullary pyramid was evident.
Figure , Figure , and Figure show the histological findings of renal tissue. There were no significant changes in the glomeruli, and infiltration of inflammatory cells in the tubulointerstitium was observed . There were renal tubules containing a clear or crystal substance , and the contents were positive for Kossa stain . They were hyperechoic under a polarizing microscope.
Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with oxalate nephropathy. We took a careful dietary history, including the presence/absence of biased nutrition. However, she had no obvious biased nutrition. The patient was not taking other drugs or supplements. It was revealed that her daily water intake was 1 L or less. We considered that the reduced water intake might have been an aggravating factor and encouraged the patient to drink more water. Pyridoxine 10 mg and potassium citrate-citrate sodium 2 g were started. After that, her serum Cr decreased gradually to 2.9 mg/dL 1 month later, 2.8 mg/dL 2 months later, and to 2.1 mg/dL 1 year later and then remained at the same level.