A 56-year-old woman, gravida 2, para 2, was referred to the gynecologist on account of abdominal distention. She had a past medical history of acute pancreatitis, but she had never experienced similar symptoms before. She was on no medications at the time of presentation. She denied familial history of ovarian and/or breast cancer. Blood tests revealed that serum CA125 was high (1520.5 U/mL). Abdominopelvic magnetic resonance imaging showed massive ascites, ovarian masses and numerous nodules in the abdominal and pelvic cavities. In addition, chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed left-supraclavicular lymphadenopathy. Consistent with these radiological findings, positron emission tomography-CT detected fluorodeoxyglucose accumulation within bilateral ovarian masses and left-supraclavicular, peritoneal, para-aortic and intra-pelvic nodules, which were suggestive of distant metastases and peritoneal dissemination from ovarian cancer. Since the clinical diagnosis of advanced ovarian cancer, FIGO Stage IVB (cT3N1M1) was made, three cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) with paclitaxel/carboplatin were administered. Following NAC, serum CA125 was reduced (97.6 U/mL) on blood tests, all the suspicious tumoral lesions had decreased in size, and the ascites had diminished on radiological re-assessment. The clinical evaluation of chemotherapeutic response yielded a partial response; total hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy, intra-pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy were performed.
Upon histological assessment of the surgical specimen the ovarian cancer was classified as FIGO Stage IIIB (ypT3bN1MX) and the chemotherapy response score was estimated as 1 (minimal tumor response) . She underwent six cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with bevacizumab and/or paclitaxel/carboplatin, and has been disease-free without any detectable tumor for 5 months.
Histologically, the cancer cells showed high-grade nuclear atypia and spread into both ovaries, the omentum, uterine serosa, and left fallopian tube. In the left distal fallopian tube , these cancer cells showed complete absence of p53 (clone: DO-7; Figs. and ), but overexpressed p16 . Interestingly, the benign-appearing tubal epithelium adjacent to the high-grade cancer cells showed an overexpression of p53 , but lacked p16 expression . In addition, nuclear expression of γ-H2AX (clone: ab11174, Abcam, Fig. ), was found in both p53 aberrantly-expressing lesions. The Ki-67 labeling index of p53-positive benign-appearing epithelial cells was < 5% , whereas that of high grade tumor cells was approximately 15% . Finally, we diagnosed these lesions as HGSC with discordant p53 signature.
We also performed TP53 mutation analysis of HGSC by direct sequencing according to the International Agency for Research on Cancer protocol ( Accessed 22 Dec 2017) with minor modification. Briefly, genomic DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples of the ovarian tumor and normal tissue, respectively, using NucleoSpin DNA FFPE XS (Macherey-Nagel, Germany). Exons 4–8 of TP53 were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and the products were analyzed at the Division of Genomics Research, Life Science Research Center, Gifu University. The results showed that the ovarian cancer contains a 1 bp deletion (c.792del1), which is interpreted as a frameshift mutation, in exon 8 of TP53, whereas normal tissue lacked this alteration .