A 71-year-old woman presented with right flank pain. Computed tomography showed hydronephrosis of the right kidney and an incomplete duplicated collecting system. Computed tomography suggested possible crossing of the vein from the lower moiety of the kidney draining into the gonadal vein. Retrograde pyelography revealed significant narrowing of the right lower pole ureter, preventing guidewire passage. The right lower pole ureter was highly constricted approximately 1 cm from the confluence with the upper pole ureter . A preoperative Tc-99m MAG3 scan showed an obstructive pattern in the right lower pole . After excluding malignant diseases, Surgical intervention was planned based on persistent flank pain and evidence of urinary obstruction on MAG3 renography.
Deciding on the best surgical procedure was challenging due to preoperative imaging ambiguities, specifically concerning the length of the ureter from the kidney's lower moiety, adhesions between the extrarenal pelvis and lower pole ureter, and presence of crossing vessels. Therefore, our approach was decided based on intraoperative findings : A-H procedure if adequate distance existed between the UPJ and the ureteral crossing point of the lower and upper pole segments, end-to-side pyeloureterostomy if said distance was insufficient, or an upper pole ureter to lower pole pyeloplasty with the A-H procedure if stenosis was due to crossing vessels.
The da Vinci surgical system was used and the patient was placed in the lateral decubitus position. A total of five trocars were placed and transperitoneal approach was performed. The ureter was identified and traced up to the UPJ. The lower pole ureter was compressed anteriorly by the vein flowing from the kidney into the gonadal vein, and severe stenosis was observed at the same site. After severing the crossing vein, the ureter was separated from the surrounding tissue, which allowed us to secure a sufficient length of the lower pole ureter . Therefore, we performed dismembered pyeloplasty of the lower half of the kidney instead of end-to-side anastomosis. After placing a stay suture in the renal pelvis, an incision was performed in the anterior wall of the renal pelvis, and the stenotic segment of the lower moiety was excised . As a result, about 1 cm of the normal ureter was preserved from the junction of the lower and upper pole ureters. A 6Fr ureteral stent was antegradely inserted into the lower pole ureter . End-to-end anastomosis was performed with a running suture using 5-0 Monocryl . The operation time was 300 min, the console time was 193 min, and the blood loss was minimal.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The double-J stent was removed on day 15. On follow-up, the patient was pain-free, and the MAG3 scan showed improvement in the obstruction pattern.