The studied patient is currently 42-year-old, G0P0. Family history, Nothing noteworthy. Her menstrual period started at age of 13 years. Dysmenorrhea was diagnosed at age of 15 years. At age of 16 years, she had a fever, lower abdominal pain, and fullness of the abdomen. Computed tomography (CT) showed ovarian swelling, and laparotomy was performed. Endometriosis and an infected endometriotic cyst were identified in the abdominal cavity; therefore, ovarian cystectomy and lavage drainage were performed.
She visited our hospital at age of 29 years with increased menstrual pain. Low-dose estrogen/progestin (LEP) and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) were administered. However, she experienced strong abdominal pains and underwent CT scan that revealed bilateral hydronephrosis. The blood test indicated white blood cells (WBC) 12.8 × 103/uL (reference 3.3–8.6), C-reactive protein (CRP) 20.0 mg/dL (reference 0–0.1), blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 16 mg/dL (reference 8–20), creatinine (CRE) 1.02 mg/dL (reference 0.46–0.79) and urinary occult blood 1 + . The patient was manged by insertion of intravesical catheter and antibiotic. When the renal function improved and inflammation subsided the urinary catheter removed and the patient was discharged. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed after discharge revealed bladder wall thickening, and bladder endometriosis was diagnosed. At three months, CT scan showed that the hydronephrosis was worsened. A right ureteral stent was placed and the left ureteral stent placement was not possible. The patient showed no improvement in hydronephrosis even after stent implantation, and developed left abdominal pain. She had a fever of 39.0–39.9 °C with WBC 10.4 × 103/uL, CRP 21.5 mg/dL, BUN 28 mg/dL and CRE 3.50 mg/dL. Acute pyelonephritis due to left ureteral obstruction and postrenal renal failure were suspected and a left nephrostomy was performed. However, right hydronephrosis and renal function did not improve, and one month after the left nephrostomy, the right nephrostomy was performed. Later, the renal fistula catheter was regularly replaced. Regarding endometriosis, the GnRHa therapy (leuprorelin acetate 1.88 mg/month) was continued with hormone add-back of conjugated estrogen 0.625 mg every other day until age of 35 years, when the therapy was changed to dienogest 2 mg/day. Her pelvic MRI at age of 36 years revealed only some irregularities of the bladder wall.
At age of 38 years, she had hematuria and bloody stools, and MRI revealed 6 cm-sized mass in the bladder and 1.8 cm-sized mass in the cecum . Positron emission tomography and computed tomography (PET-CT) indicated standardized uptake value (SUV) max of 13.16 in the bladder tumor, and 3.43 in the cecum mass . Malignancy caused by endometriosis was suspected and a cystoscopic guided biopsy was performed that showed the tumor in the bladder was endometriosis . Colonoscopy revealed tumors in the cecum and sigmoid colon which were demonstrated by biopsy to be endometriosis ; endometriosis with tumor formation or polypoid endometriosis was diagnosed. Immunohistochemistry showed that the bladder and intestinal endometriotic lesions were estrogen receptor (ER) -positive in the tubular and interstitial parts . For progesterone receptor (PGR) expression, the lesions were positive in the interstitial parts, but only 30% in the tubular parts. Using FFPE specimens of lesions in the bladder, cecum, and sigmoid colon, the tubular parts were collected by laser microdissection according to the method described in the previous report , and three hot spots of PIK3CA (E542K, E545K, and H1047R) were examined by droplet digital PCR. The H1047R mutation was found only in the bladder lesion that was the largest.
As treatment, the surgical option was pelvic exenteration that was judged too invasive; therefore, the drug therapy was continued. Based on the history and immunostaining results, the lesion was judged progesterone-resistant but estrogen-dependent; therefore, GnRHa (leuprorelin acetate 1.88 mg) was administered once every 4 weeks for the first 6 months, resulting in a significant reduction of the intravesical mass volume confirmed by pelvic MRI . Later, GnRHa was administered once every 6 weeks, and the total number of administrations to date is 38 GnRHa injections. Bloody stool disappeared, and hematuria rarely appeared. Bone density is gradually decreasing, but no osteoporosis observed.