Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images.
A woman in her 50s presented with a medical history of generalized loss of muscle strength induced by post-traumatic stress disorder. At 27 years of age, she was involved in a traffic accident that resulted in cervical and lumbar disk herniation. Although spinal surgery was performed, the weakness in the left half of her body did not improve. Furthermore, it gradually progressed to loss of muscle strength and uterine and bladder prolapse; subsequently, she was diagnosed with disuse syndrome.
At the age of 39 years, she was diagnosed with diabetes and prescribed oral medications (metformin, Riobel); her HbA1c level at admission was 6.6%. She began developing asthma at 47 years of age and reported mild attacks approximately twice a month. Her regular therapy included theophylline and budesonide/formoterol inhalation. During an attack, she used a procaterol inhaler; however, she was prescribed oral steroids when the inhalers failed to control the symptoms. The patient developed ventricular extrasystoles at 53 years of age and was treated with oral disopyramide. She also had a history of anaphylactic shock, loss of consciousness, and respiratory arrest following administration of amoxicillin. She commented that, after losing consciousness in the hospital, she was monitored and given adrenaline. Since then, she has been prescribed an EpiPen and has been instructed to carry it with her.
The medical records from the examination conducted by the orthopedist 6 years ago indicated a Jackson test that showed radiating pain in the right upper limb. The left upper and lower limbs were found to be spastic owing to cervical myelopathy. MRI findings showed misalignment of the cervical spine. Stenosis of the spinal canal was observed owing to bulging of the intervertebral disk or osteophytes. Outer hernias were found on the left lateral side of C6/7 and on the right lateral side of C5/6.
The patient was scheduled to undergo extraction of a right lower molar and three upper anterior teeth secondary to progressing dental caries. However, it was anticipated that the treatment would be difficult since she could not open her mouth adequately. Therefore, we considered relieving the trismus to facilitate the dental treatment. Diagnostic imaging revealed no abnormality of TMJs. Palpation of the temporalis and masseter muscles revealed tenderness; therefore, the cause of the TMD was considered pain in the masticatory muscles during mouth opening. Consequently, it was expected that the mouth opening would improve if the pain were relieved.
The maximum mouth opening was 20 mm between the upper alveolar crest and the lower anterior incisor apex before treatment. Mouth opening resulted in severe pain (visual analog scale pain score, 100/100) and was difficult to maintain. The patient was seated in the dental chair and monitoring of her blood pressure, oxygen saturation, and electrocardiogram was started. After confirming that her vital signs were normal, ultrasound-guided IANB was performed bilaterally with 6 ml of 0.375% ropivacaine on each side . Three minutes later, the pain during mouth opening disappeared and mouth opening improved to 40 mm with a visual analog scale pain score of 10–11/100. Dental treatment could be performed without difficulty and the patient was able to maintain an open mouth throughout the treatment. The course of treatment and the patient’s recovery were unremarkable. No palsy or hypoesthesia was noted after the block. The patient informed us subsequently that the improvement in trismus lasted for 3 days following IANB.