An 83-year-old woman with a pancreatic mass identified on abdominal ultrasonography during a medical examination was referred to our hospital. Multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) revealed a 25-mm-diameter low-density mass in the body of the pancreas with dilatation of the main pancreatic duct . The carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19–9) level was significantly higher (286 U/mL) than the normal range. To examine the pathological diagnosis, EUS-FNA of the pancreatic tumor was performed using a 22-G needle (SonoTip® 22G, Medicos-Hirata, Tokyo, Japan) passed twice through the gastric wall. During the procedure, early complications were not observed. Subsequently, the patient was diagnosed with adenocarcinoma. Considering that metastatic disease was not observed and her condition was good for her age, she underwent distal pancreatosplenectomy with lymphadenectomy (i.e., anterior radical antegrade modular pancreatosplenectomy). Based on the intraoperative findings, peritoneal dissemination was not observed, and the peritoneal washing cytology was negative for carcinoma cells (CY0). The pancreatic tumor did not invade the gastric wall. The pathological findings resulted in a diagnosis of invasive ductal carcinoma (tub2, Pbt, pTS2 [32 × 25 × 20 mm], infiltrative type, int, INFb, ly3, v2, ne1, pT3, pCH0, pDU0, pS1, pRP1, pPV1sp, pA0, pPL1, pOO0, pN1b [10/20] [#11], pM0, pStage IIB) (according to the 7th edition of the Japanese Pancreas Society classification) with R0 resection (pT2N2M0 pStage III, according to the 8th edition of tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) classification by the American Joint Committee on Cancer/Union for International Cancer Control). According to the pathological examination, there was an invasion on the serosal side of the anterior pancreatic tissue, but not on the stomach. She received adjuvant chemotherapy containing S-1 for 6 months.
Twenty-two months after surgery, the CA19–9 level increased, but both MDCT and positron emission tomography did not show an evidence of recurrence. Three months later, during a careful follow-up, MDCT revealed a 23-mm low-density mass in the gastric body wall with paragastric lymph node swelling . Gastroendoscopy revealed a 10-mm submucosal tumor in the posterior wall of the middle gastric body , and endoscopic ultrasound revealed a hypoechoic mass in the submucosa . Adenocarcinoma was detected on EUS-FNA, and the gastric mass was diagnosed as a metastasis of pancreatic cancer caused by needle tract seeding. Partial gastrectomy and lymph node resection were performed. Using an electrosurgical knife, all layers of the stomach located with the gastric tumor was resected with a certain margin, and the only hard and swollen lymph nodes were resected. Regarding the intraoperative findings, other metastases or peritoneal disseminations were not observed, and the cytology for ascites was negative. A 25-mm white mass was observed in the resected specimen , and histopathological examination indicated adenocarcinoma, extending from the submucosa to the subserosa in the gastric wall , and paragastric lymph node metastasis . She was diagnosed with metastasis of the previous pancreatic cancer derived from needle tract seeding . The postoperative course was uneventful, and recurrence was not observed for 5 months, at the time of this writing. The timeline of the treatment for this patient is described in Fig. .