In August 2012, a 38-year-old man came to our center with a 5-day history of progressive and bilateral vision loss. He also reported chronic daytime sleepiness.
His visual acuity (VA) was hand movements in both eyes. A relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) was observed in his right eye. Anterior segment examination was unremarkable and intraocular pressure was within normal limits.
Fundus examination (FE) of both eyes revealed vascular congestion and massive pre- and intraretinal hemorrhages in all quadrants . The right eye's optic nerve head, posterior pole and macular region were not evaluable due to hemorrhages, while in the left eye severe papilledema, hard exudates and macular edema were noticed. A diagnosis of bilateral and simultaneous central RVO was formulated. General medical examination revealed morbid obesity with a body mass index (BMI) of 45, untreated hypertension (170/100 mm Hg) and type II respiratory failure.
The patient was treated with antihypertensive and antiaggregant drugs and referred to the pneumology and hematology department. After 1 week of presentation, the patient underwent fundus fluorescein angiography (FA) . After 1 month of presentation, FE revealed partial resolution of hemorrhages and persistence of macular edema . The patient underwent polysomnography which revealed a pathologic apnea-hypopnea index that led to the diagnosis of OSAS, and treatment with continuous positive air pressure (CPAP) was started.
Laboratory tests for thrombophilia showed increased hematocrit (59%) and high levels of fibrinogen and C-reactive protein (CRP). Other causes of congenital and acquired hypercoagulability like factor V Leiden, mutation G20210A of prothrombin, deficiency of natural anticoagulants and antiphospholipid syndrome were ruled out. After 3 months of antihypertensive treatment, the patient's blood pressure ranged from 140/90 to 135/80 mm Hg. At 3 months from presentation, the patient was treated with 0.5 mg of intravitreal ranibizumab (Lucentis®, Genentech Inc.). He did not come to the follow-up visits, but presented again at 10 months from presentation, complaining of poor vision.
VA was no light perception in his right eye and hand movements in the left eye. FE and FA documented bilateral retinal atrophy . Spectral domain optic coherence tomography (SD-OCT) confirmed bilateral macular atrophy . Small remnants of intraretinal fluid not involving the fovea were observed in the right eye . Due to these findings, the occurrence of a nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION) in the right eye was considered.