A 64-year-old man presented to the hospital with a complaint of left-sided abdominal discomfort. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a cystic lesion of approximately 46 mm in the pancreatic tail ; additionally, positron emission tomography (PET)–CT showed standardized uptake value, SUVmax: 7.1 of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) accumulation in the lesion, with no suspicious findings of lymph node or distant metastases . He was diagnosed with resectable pancreatic tail cancer. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy was not administered, and the patient underwent an up-front surgery—distal pancreatectomy with D2 lymph node dissection. Intraoperative para-aortic lymph node sampling was negative. The postoperative course was eventful with the occurrence of grade B pancreatic fistula, which was conservatively treated with drainage and resolved. Pathological diagnosis was invasive ductal carcinoma of the pancreas, pT3N2M0 pStageIII (TNM Classification of Malignant Tumours, UICC 8th edition). S-1 adjuvant chemotherapy was initiated. Three months postoperatively, the levels of tumor markers—carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA19-9, DUPAN-2, and SPan-1 in peripheral blood were 5.1 ng/mL (< 5.0 ng/mL), 619 U/mL (< 37 U/mL), 1100 U/mL (≤ 150 U/mL), and 160 U/mL (≤ 30 U/mL), respectively. Moreover, contrast-enhanced CT and FDG-PET/CT revealed local recurrence in para-aortic lymph nodes . Chemotherapy was revised to a combined regimen of gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel. After 4 cycles of chemotherapy, all tumor markers were within the normal limits. After 5 cycles, local recurrence could not be identified on CT. Complete remission was achieved, and chemotherapy was administered for a total of 29 cycles with a reduction in dose. After the 29th cycle, the patient presented with complaints of sudden headache and vomiting. CT revealed metastatic brain tumors . Two lesions were identified on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): a 20-mm lesion in the left frontal lobe and a 32-mm lesion in the left cerebellum . No other metastases were identified. The patient had symptoms of cerebral hypertension and underwent emergency craniotomy. Tumor markers, which were examined 1 month prior to surgery, showed no significant elevation. However, on the day of surgery, CA19-9 level was elevated (86 U/mL). Conversely, SPan-1 and CEA levels were slightly elevated (34 U/mL and 5.8 ng/mL, respectively). Intraoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples showed prominent elevation of CEA (89 ng/mL), CA19-9 (1442 U/mL), DUPAN-2 (220 U/mL), and SPan-1 (390 U/mL). The neurological symptoms rapidly improved following the complete resection of the metastatic brain tumors, and no remnants were observed on imaging . Pre-operative FDG-PET/CT was not performed because emergency surgical intervention was required to resolve the symptoms of cerebral hypertension; however, FDG-PET/CT performed on postoperative day 7 showed no findings of FDG accumulation, including in the para-aortic lymph nodes, which were suspected to be a recurrence . The patient was discharged on postoperative day 12, without any complications. A total of 53 Gy of local radiation was performed to suppress local recurrence. The pathological examination results of the brain and primary tumor specimens are shown in Fig. . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the neoplasm cells were positive for CK7 and CK19, and negative for S100 protein, similar to the primary tumor. Additionally, the metastatic brain tumors were positive for CDX2 and the Mib-1 index increased from 50 to 70%. However, the other histological and immunohistochemical features of the metastatic brain tumors were diverse from the primary tumor. In addition, no other primary tumors were present, including in the gastrointestinal tract.
In order to determine the effective chemotherapy regimen, cancer gene panel tests for the primary and metastatic tumors were performed. The results of the mutant genes without variant of uncertain significance are shown in Table . Tumor mutation burden increased from 6 Muts/Mb in the primary tumor to 8.7 Muts/Mb in the metastatic tumor. Variant of uncertain significance increased from 8 to 15. In addition, mutation of CDKN2A/B, MTAP, and TP53 was found in the primary tumor and not in the metastatic brain tumors. However, mutation of KRAS and BRCA2 was found in both primary and metastatic tumors. Additionally, the variant allele frequency of KRAS in the metastatic brain tumors was markedly increased.
On postoperative day 30, blood CEA had decreased to 5.4 ng/dL, and CA19-9, CA125, DUPAN-2, SPan-1, and elastase 1 (≤ 300 ng/dL) were all within the standard range. A lumbar puncture was performed for the purpose of reassessing tumor markers in CSF and for cytological diagnosis. Tumor markers in CSF were CEA (< 0.5 ng/mL), CA19-9 (< 2.0 U/mL), DUPAN-2 (≤ 25 U/mL), and SPan-1 (2.5 U/mL). Cytology of the CSF revealed no tumor cells. Six months postoperatively, there has been no recurrence of the metastatic brain tumors.