An 8-month-old Caucasian baby boy with heterotaxy syndrome was admitted to our general pediatric ward after presenting to a scheduled clinic visit with fever, hypoxemia and cyanosis. His history was significant for dextrocardia, polysplenia, interrupted inferior vena cava, biliary atresia status post-Kasai procedure, and malrotation status post-Ladd’s procedure. He was febrile on presentation, and was started on oxygen via nasal cannula for oxyhemoglobin saturations as low as 70%. His chest radiograph on admission showed a patchy right lower lobe opacity, and he was started on antibiotics out of concern for pneumonia. He was subsequently transferred to our pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) for refractory hypoxemia requiring high flow oxygen therapy.
Throughout his PICU admission, he continued to require high flow oxygen up to 9L per minute and fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 1 to maintain oxyhemoglobin saturation greater than 75%, with persistent desaturations while upset. Early in his admission, he developed increased work of breathing requiring positive pressure ventilation with bilevel positive airway pressure. A chest radiograph revealed pulmonary edema, and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) at that time was elevated at 1130pg/mL. His pulmonary edema improved with diuresis, resulting in de-escalation of therapy with return to standard nasal cannula. He required blood pressure support with a dopamine infusion during aggressive diuresis, which was subsequently weaned off without complication. Multiple echocardiograms revealed no clear cardiac etiology of his hypoxemia.
A chest CT angiogram with high resolution reconstruction of the lung parenchyma was performed on the recommendation of our Radiology department to further evaluate the pulmonary vasculature and lung parenchyma. CT imaging showed dilatation of the pulmonary vasculature bilaterally without significant abnormalities of the lung parenchyma . Pulmonary arterial hypertension was felt to be an unlikely cause of his dilated pulmonary vasculature as right ventricular pressures were measured as less than half of systemic pressures on echocardiogram. Given his history of biliary atresia and constellation of symptoms, HPS was included on the differential diagnosis. He underwent agitated saline contrast study, which showed bubbles entering the right-sided atrium (systemic atrium in the setting of dextrocardia) through a right pulmonary vein approximately 3 cardiac beats after opacification of the left-sided chambers , consistent with clinically significant intrapulmonary shunting.
Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to evaluate for the presence of a congenital portosystemic shunt given the strong association of Abernethy malformation and heterotaxy syndrome and the possibility of reversal of HPS with shunt occlusion. MRI did not reveal portosystemic shunting. The patient subsequently underwent evaluation for liver transplantation. His liver enzymes and coagulation studies were normal. His bilirubin levels were also normal and given normal bile ducts on abdominal ultrasound, a hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid scan was not performed. Abdominal ultrasound also demonstrated diffuse liver disease, patent portal vein with hepatopetal flow, and no ascites. He did have polysplenia with splenomegaly. He had no signs of collateral circulation on examination. No abnormalities were noted in his stools. His partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO2) was measured at 29mmHg while on FiO2 of 0.5. He was listed for transplant with a pediatric end-stage liver disease score of 28, which was further increased to 35 following petition to UNOS for worsening clinical status.
Prior to diagnosis of HPS, the patient was initiated on a milrinone infusion for suspicion of diastolic heart failure. Following the diagnosis, he was trialed off milrinone with the rationale that further pulmonary vasodilation actually may be deleterious given the diagnosis of HPS. However, he responded poorly with subsequent oxyhemoglobin desaturations requiring reinitiation of the infusion. His oxygenation stabilized on a milrinone infusion of 0.5μg/kg/minute. Inhaled nitric oxide was also trialed without significant improvement in oxygen requirement and was subsequently weaned off. Oxygen requirements ultimately stabilized on a diuretic regimen including spironolactone and furosemide.
He underwent OLT 2 months after initial presentation. His postoperative period was complicated by hypercarbic and hypoxemic respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation. He underwent tracheostomy for chronic ventilator-dependent respiratory failure. He was transferred out of the PICU 2 months after OLT and subsequently weaned off mechanical ventilation during the daytime. He was discharged home 4 months following OLT on FiO2 of 0.21 through a tracheostomy mask with nighttime ventilator support. He continues to do well. Please see Figure for a timeline of the patient’s clinical course.