A 43-year-old woman, gravida 3, para 1, abortus 1, implanted with frozen-thawed embryos was diagnosed with high-risk pregnancy at her previous hospital. Her obstetric history included a term, vaginal singleton delivery (3298 g, male neonate) 4 years earlier, which was complicated by a retained placenta. The placenta was removed manually. Thereafter, no uterine prolapse was observed.
She had been undergoing treatment for hypertension and dermatomyositis since 2018. She had been prescribed nifedipine CR 20 mg/day for the hypertension and steroids (prednisolone) 4.0 mg/day and tacrolimus 3.4 mg/day for the dermatomyositis. As the symptoms of dermatomyositis improved in 2019, the pregnancy was approved. She had also undergone sub-plasmalemmal myomectomy 10 years previously. She was otherwise fit and had a normal body mass index; she did not smoke and had no allergies. During the index pregnancy, at the 19-week check-up, her cervix was found to have descended. Subsequent regular ultrasound scans at 24, 26, 30, 32, and 34 weeks of gestation demonstrated normal fetal morphology, with normal and concordant fetal growth. An ultrasound scan at 36 weeks showed that the cervical canal was very long (8.8 cm) and closed . A 95-mm self-removable donut-shaped pessary (donut support for 3° prolapse/procidentia; CooperSurgical Milex™, 75 Corporate Drive Trumbull, CT 06611 USA) appeared to drop out spontaneously. Color Doppler imaging with 3D transvaginal ultrasonography revealed cervical edema . Color Doppler examination did not reveal any obvious blood flow. She was admitted to hospital at 37 + 2 weeks due to a worsening skin rash over the perineum and difficulty in washing. Her blood pressure was stable, her general condition was good, and there were no abnormal clinical or biochemical findings suggestive of an infection.
In the pre-induction state of the cervix, the Bishop scoring system showed that the cervical os was dilated by 4 cm, effaced 0%, station −3, soft, and anterior 7 points. Induction with oxytocin was commenced at 38 weeks and 4 days of gestation for planned delivery, but there were no effective contractions. The next day, the cervix was dilated by 6 cm and effaced 30%.
With the patient's consent, we performed an artificial rupture of the membranes, which led to labor progression. After an intramuscular injection of butyl scopolamine, her cervix was softened for a short time. The cervix was completely prolapsed outside the vagina, but the station had reached +1 in relation to the pubic symphysis. The 95-mm donut-type pessary was easily removed from the soft birth canal, and vacuum extraction delivery (Kiwi®) was deemed feasible. Cervix-holding forceps were used, and a Duhrssen incision was made under visualization as labor progressed. A cervical Duhrssen incision of approximately 5 cm was made, and the length of the incision was extended to 10 cm. We did not perform a perineal incision. After three traction cycles, a live female neonate weighing 3190 g was delivered, with Apgar scores of 8/9 (1st and 5th minutes) and a pH of 7.319. The delivery was complicated with a retained placenta and massive postpartum hemorrhage (PPH), with blood loss of 2500 mL. The cervix was sutured, as usual, using 0 Vicryl® sutures in one continuous layer from 5 mm above the upper edge of incision, and the surface of the suture appeared to be fine. However, on discharge examination on the 4th day post-delivery, a complete breakdown of the repair of approximately 5 cm of the cervical canal was identified at the introitus. After she was returned to the operating theatre, debridement was performed; the first layer was sutured with a single ligation using the Gambee suture (2–0 Vicryl®), and the second layer was sutured with an end-to-end single ligation using the mattress suture technique (2–0 Vicryl®). On the 7th day after re-suturing (11th day after delivery), the uterus was markedly involuted, and uterine prolapse somewhat improved, but the ligature threads were collected in one place and became a single ball of threads. All sutures were removed, and the wound was re-sutured with two Z-sutures using a 3–0 Vicryl® thread. Sutures were removed 1 month postpartum, and complete wound healing was confirmed. Two months post-surgery, uterine prolapse had improved to a 2° prolapse. The healing process of cervical laceration and cervical canal prolapse is shown in .