A 65-year-old White male physician experienced accumulation of bilateral leg edema over several months, accompanied by episodes of paroxysmal dyspnea. The edema was pitting. Initially it was evident only over the feet and ankles, but the swelling then spread upward above the knees. There was no redness, tenderness, or palpable mass. The patient had been in generally good health, suffering only hypercholesterolemia well controlled with atorvastatin, mild exercise-induced asthma prevented by montelukast, and a prior episode of nephrolithiasis. He had no chest pain, orthopnea, hemoptysis, or other signs or symptoms of heart, liver, or kidney disease. There was no history of unusual environmental exposures or family history of adrenal malignancy. The patient did not smoke and rarely consumed alcohol. Vital signs were within normal ranges, and physical examination was unremarkable with the exception of the edema. Evaluations of the cardiorespiratory system (including electrocardiogram, chest radiography, stress echocardiography, spirometry, and carbon monoxide diffusing capacity), hepatic function, and renal function were normal. Serum albumin concentration and routine blood and urine studies were normal. The edema improved with compression stockings and diuretics.
Computed tomography revealed a large tumor above the right kidney with compression of the intrahepatic inferior vena cava and upstream distension. Serum cortisol (18.0 µg/dL, normal < 11.3 µg/dL), 24-hour urinary cortisol (73 µg, normal 3.5–45 µg), and serum dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (734 µg/dL, normal 35–212 µg/dL) levels were elevated, consistent with a hormonally active adrenal neoplasm. Serum adrenocorticotropic hormone (< 5.0 pg/mL, normal 7.2–63 pg/mL) and free testosterone (28 pg/mL, normal 30–140 pg/mL) concentrations were suppressed. Blood and urine studies of metanephrines, estradiol, renin, and aldosterone were normal. Positron emission tomography and chest computed tomography did not detect metastatic disease.
A 27-cm tumor, the right lobe of the liver, the right kidney, the gallbladder, and 26 lymph nodes were resected . A separate 2.7-cm tumor was found near the renal hilum. The cancer was stage 3, based on size and local extension. The postoperative course was complicated by Clostridioides difficile enterocolitis, multidrug-resistant urinary tract infection, and intraabdominal chyle leak (following lymph node resection) that prompted parenteral nutrition for a week.
Histological examination confirmed the clinical diagnosis of adrenocortical carcinoma. Neoplastic cells evidenced clear cytoplasm and atypical mitoses . Immunoreactivity for synaptophysin and steroidogenic factor 1 support an adrenal cortical origin of the tumor. Ki67 proliferation index was 26.7% . Lymph nodes were free of malignancy.
Adjuvant chemotherapy with mitotane was begun, per standard practice to eliminate occult residual disease. Side effects included fatigue, sleepiness, malaise, and breast pain. Doses above 1.5 g per day were intolerable, and targeted plasma concentrations above 14 µg/mL have not been attained. Owing to adrenal suppression and CYP 3A4 induction by mitotane, high-dose prescription of hydrocortisone (40 mg on awakening and 20 mg 4–6 hours thereafter) proved necessary. Atorvastatin was switched to rosuvastatin.
Peripheral edema and paroxysmal dyspnea did not fully resolve until 6 months after surgery. Serum testosterone concentration increased to normal. Computed tomography of the chest and abdomen was performed on a quarterly basis to monitor for tumor.
The patient developed painful muscle cramps and restless legs. Iron deficiency was detected (3% transferrin saturation, normal 15–50%; serum ferritin concentration 9 ng/mL, normal 20–230 ng/mL). These symptoms resolved following oral iron supplementation.
Fifteen months following surgery, there has been no recurrence of tumor.