A 67-year-old male was admitted for exertional dyspnea and fatigue. He was diagnosed with MM one year earlier. He had received chemotherapy with bortezomib, cyclophosphamide, and dexamethasone, achieving nearly complete remission without maintenance therapy. Two months earlier, he was diagnosed with sick sinus syndrome due to syncope and was implanted with a permanent pacemaker. After this admission, the patient had a body temperature of 36 °C, blood pressure of 119/72 mmHg, pulse rate of 74 beats per min, and respiratory rate of 20 beats per min. Physical examination revealed mild edema on his face and lower extremity. Slightly distended jugular veins were observed. The electrocardiogram revealed atrial fibrillation. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a significant and irregularly shaped mass filling the right atrium (RA) and obstructing the right ventricular inflow tract. The mass also extended into the superior vena cava (SVC) and inferior vena cava (IVC), resulting in almost complete occlusion of the SVC and partial obstruction of the IVC . A computed tomography (CT) scan also demonstrated a large mass in the RA extending to the SVC and IVC . The large mass surrounded the pacemaker lead . Bilateral pleural effusions were also observed. Angiography was negative for pulmonary embolism. The laboratory test showed a white blood cell count of 4.5 × 109/L, hemoglobin level of 127 g/L, platelet count of 119 × 109/L, creatinine level of 108 μmol/L, and alanine aminotransferase level of 57.7 U/L.
Because the patient was in a stable course of MM and the pacemaker led through his SVC and RA, we initially considered the mass to be a right atrial thrombus. The patient underwent right atrial mass resection under cardiopulmonary bypass. Intraoperative findings revealed multiple lobulated masses occupying most of the RA , extending to the SVC and IVC. The mass also infiltrated the free wall of the RA, especially “freezing” the anterolateral wall of the RA. Intraoperative rapid pathological examination of the mass indicated a malignant tumor. The large mass in the RA could not be completely removed due to infiltration of the atrial wall. Therefore, a partial tumor and the anterolateral wall of the RA were resected to relieve the obstruction of the SVC, IVC, and right ventricular inflow tract. Then, the incision of the RA was reconstructed with a pericardial patch. The patient recovered uneventfully after the surgery. One month later, he received one cycle of chemotherapy with bortezomib, cyclophosphamide, and dexamethasone.
Postoperative pathological examination of the right atrial mass suggested malignant plasmacytoma associated with MM. Immunocytochemical staining of the tumor sections indicated atypical immature plasma cells positive for CD138, CD38, CyclinD1, and λ, and negative for CD20, CD79a, and CD10 .
After follow-up for seven months, our patient was still alive with a considerably good health condition after surgery. His echocardiography showed no intracardiac relapse of MM.