A 47-year-old Malay woman presented with a one-day history of symptoms suggestive of intestinal obstruction, which included severe colicky abdominal pain and profuse vomiting. She had had an LAGB placement five years before. Her initial body mass index had been 59.1. Seven months after placement of the LAGB, the procedure had been complicated by a band connection wire tube leak and a port site dislocation, which necessitated a resetting of the reservoir and a trimming of the tubing. After this procedure, she was subsequently lost to follow-up. When she presented to our hospital, her body mass index was 28.2.
During a physical examination, she was noted to have abdominal distention and tenderness. The results of her laboratory test on admission showed a white blood cell count of 8.07 × 109/L. An X-ray of the abdomen revealed a loop of dilated small bowel in the upper abdomen, and air and fluid levels.
The stomach bubble was prominent. On a computed axial tomography scan , small bowel and stomach were noted to be dilated. The connection tubing appeared to be looping around the mesentery of the small bowel. A gastroscopy demonstrated gastric band erosion of the lesser curve.
Our patient proceeded to the operating room. During the operation, the proximal small bowel and mid-transverse colon were densely adherent to tubing. The surgeons were unable to dissect this safely, and a decision was made to convert to a full laparotomy. During the laparotomy, the adhesions were taken down sharply to reveal the tubing sandwiched between the small bowel anterior and the mid-transverse colon posteriorly . It was noted, on closer inspection, that the tubing had eroded into the colon . The tubing was dissected away from the mesentery and freed the small bowel, and the colonic perforation was closed with, primarily, 3.0 polydioxanone sutures in two layers. The gastric band was removed, and the lesser curve of the stomach was repaired with vicryl 2.0 sutures. A tongue of omentum was secured over the repair.
Our patient's recovery was uneventful. A gastrografin study was carried out on postoperative day five. After the absence of a contrast leak was confirmed, our patient went on a diet and was discharged on postoperative day eight. Three months after discharge, our patient had gained 15 pounds.