A 61-year-old man was incidentally found to have a left renal mass on imaging studies performed for workup of left back pain and urine color change for 1 week. A computed tomographic imaging scan of the kidneys revealed an enhancing mass with central necrosis and a sub-centimeter-sized hypodense nodule. Laparoscopic left radical nephrectomy was performed.
Pathologic gross examination showed a vaguely circumscribed lobulated mass in the upper to mid pole, which measured 5.6 × 4.0 × 3.3 cm. The cut surface of the mass was bright golden yellow with areas of gray-white fibrosis and hemorrhage . Apart from this main mass, a separate small nodule was present in the lower pole, which measured 1.2 × 1.0 × 0.6 cm . Both tumors were confined to the kidney, having no extension into the perinephric adipose tissue, renal sinus, renal pelvis, or Gerota fascia. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained sections from the larger tumor showed a well-circumscribed neoplasm composed predominantly of solid nests and lobules of large round cells with relatively monotonous round nuclei showing no mitoses and abundant granular eosinophilic cytoplasm . The second nodule was well-encapsulated, showing proliferation of delicate fibrovascular cores and variable numbers of macrophages. The papillary fibrovascular cores were thick and hyalinized. The tumors were cuboidal with eosinophilic cytoplasm. The nuclei were low-ISUP-grade nuclei and were arranged linearly and inverted toward the apical surface . For further evaluation, immunohistochemical stains were performed. The tumor cells were positive for CD10, AMACR, CAIX, and vimentin and negative for CK7, TFE3, E-cadherin, HMW keratin and GATA3. The separate small mass was positive for CK7, GATA3, AMACR, E-cadherin, HMW keratin, and EMA and negative for CD10, vimentin, CAIX, and TFE3 . AMACR was moderately positive showing blush-like staining, which was weaker than that seen in the proximal renal tubules in the separate small mass. Based on the morphology and immunohistochemical findings, a chromophobe or translocation RCC were excluded. The findings support clear cell RCC and PRNRP. The tumor in the upper pole was clear cell RCC, with pathologic stage pT1b N0 M0. The histologic grade (World Health Organization [WHO]/ISUP nuclear grade) was 3. The second tumor in the lower pole was PRNRP, its pathologic stage was pT1a N0 M0, and its histologic grade (WHO/ISUP nuclear grade) was 2. Sarcomatoid features and necrosis were absent. The patient has been alive and well for 8 months after surgery.
NGS analysis detected a KRAS mutation in the PRNRP in the exon 2-codon 12 junction (c.35 G > T resulting in p.G12V). A PIK3CA mutation was detected in the clear cell RCC in the exon 10-codon 542 junction (c.1624 G > A resulting in p.E542K) .