A 63-year-old HIV-negative man, with a history of well controlled diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), presented to the ED complaining of acute-on-chronic lumbar pain. His home medications included insulin, atorvastatin, and levothyroxine. Upon arrival, patient was afebrile, with a blood pressure (BP) of 86/52 mmHg with orthostatic changes, rest of vital signs within normal limits. Patient was found somnolent, with tenderness on the left upper quadrant, without rebound. Rest of physical exam was within normal limits. Laboratory results showed a hemoglobin 9.4 g/dL (14 – 18 g/dL), leukocytes 17 × 103 leukocytes/µL (4 – 11 × 103/µL), serum bicarbonate 15 mmol/L (22 – 29 mmol/L), serum lactate 5.0 mmol/L (0.5 – 1.8 mmol/L) with anion gap (AG) LA of 28 (6 – 12), arterial blood gases pH 7.26 (7.38 – 7.44), paO2 83.4 mmHg (75 – 100 mmHg), paCO2 24.5 mmHg (38 – 42 mmHg), HCO3 10.8 mmol/L (23 – 26 mmol/L). Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was 1,041 U/L (80 – 225 U/L). The rest of chemistry and infectious workup was within normal limits. Of note, 2 months prior to presentation, patient was incidentally found to have a left perinephric hematoma after he had an abdominal computer tomography (CT) for NAFLD workup. Upon admission, a repeat abdominal CT scan showed interval increase of the perinephric hematoma as well as gastric wall thickening . Urology recommended no surgical intervention. He was resuscitated with isotonic intravenous fluids, and was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), where he continued supportive care. Two days after admission, despite bicarbonate therapy and fluid resuscitation with complete resolution of shock, the patient remained with persistent AG metabolic acidosis and increasing lactic acid up to 14.5 mmol/L. A subsequent abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple rounded hypoenhancing lesions noted throughout the renal parenchyma bilaterally . A kidney biopsy was planned but aborted since the patient became acutely anemic (hemoglobin 5.6 g/dL) after an episode of melena. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with biopsy showed a high-grade Burkitt’s lymphoma . Further staging showed bone marrow involvement and extensive abdominal adenopathy. After two cycles of inpatient chemotherapy with dose-adjusted EPOCH-R (etoposide, prednisone, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and rituximab), the patient developed multifocal pneumonia complicated by respiratory failure. Following a prolonged ICU stay, after discussion with the family members, a decision of withdrawal of life-sustaining therapy was reached.