A 3 three years old boy was admitted into the emergency department unit (ED) from a pediatric hospital in Curitiba, PR, Brazil, showing fever (38 °C), abdominal pain and tachycardia. The patient presented a history of chronic renal disease and myelomeningocele (previously corrected by surgery). Twenty-four hours after hospitalization, erythematous and pruritic lesions arose on the palms and soles of the feet, perioral region and ears, which further evolved to vesicles in hands, feet, mouth, and ears. Four days after the admission, the symptoms improved and the patient was discharged. Two days later, the child returned with fever (39 °C), cough, respiratory distress with O2 saturation of 85–88%, being readmitted due to dyspnea. The child was referred to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) and submitted to mechanical ventilation. Skin examination revealed vesicles and crusts on hands, face, and ears. In the following day, renal function complications led patient to be submitted to hemodialysis. The patient was sedated, clinically managed, treated with antibiotics (piperacillin tazobactam) and, subsequently, improved O2 saturation. However, blood pressure (BP) remained unstable—fluctuating between periods of hypo- and hypertension (BP peaks > 200/110), stabilized after the onset of peritoneal dialysis. The echocardiogram showed major systolic and diastolic dysfunctions in the left and the right ventricles (LV and RV) and a major pulmonary arterial hypertension, suggestive of acute myocarditis. Chest X-ray showed reduced transparency at the base of the right lung, and absence of pulmonary consolidation. Blood cultures were performed with negative results. After stabilization of clinical conditions, mechanical ventilation was halted and the child was extubated, after 14 days of hospitalization. Subsequent echocardiography showed improvement of RV systolic function and normal pulmonary arterial pressure. He was discharged from the PICU after 16 days and was maintained in oxygen therapy (O2 saturation of 98%). After complete recovery, the patient was discharged. The chronological order of events is shown in the Table .
Oro and nasopharynges swabs and vesicles fluid were collected and sent to the Public Health Laboratory of Paraná (LACEN/PR) for the identification of the causative agent. Clinical samples were also referred to the Enterovirus Laboratory (Oswaldo Cruz Institute/Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) for further investigation, as part of the National Enteroviruses Surveillance Program. Samples were inoculated into RD (human rhabdomyosarcoma) and HEp-2C (human epidermoid carcinoma) cell lines, which were then incubated at 37 °C or 33 °C and examined daily for the presence of a cytopathic effect (CPE). Both cell cultures failed to yield CPE. Viral RNA was extracted (Viral Nucleic Acid Extraction Kit—QIAmp-Qiagen) directly from the clinical specimens and initially subjected to a broad-reactive real time RT-PCR for human enteroviruses as previously described . EV-positive samples were then subjected to a semi-nested RT-PCR for amplification of partial VP1 gene as described . EV-positive amplicons (~ 350 nt.) were sequenced by the Sanger method using a BigDye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems). Nucleotide sequences obtained were compared with those available at GenBank, which confirmed the presence of EV-D68 and CVA6 in nasopharyngeal and blisters swabs, respectively. A multiplex real time PCR-based assay was also performed for the simultaneous detection of respiratory viruses (influenza A, influenza B, syncytial respiratory virus, adenovirus, metapneumovirus, bocavirus, parainfluenza 1, 2 and 3, coronaviruses OC43, HKU1, NL63 and 229E) by using a commercial assay (Seeplex RV15 ACE detection kit, Seegene, Korea), but yielded non-detectable results, which excludes these pathogens as those responsible for the SARI presentation.
The EV RT-PCR results were confirmed by phylogenetic analysis. Representative EV-D68 and CVA6 sequences were downloaded from Genbank and added to our datasets. For phylogenetic reconstruction, sequences were aligned using Muscle available in the Mega 7.0 package and the best nucleotide substitution model was determined by using JModeltest, version 2.1.4 . The temporal structure of the dataset was verified using TempEst v. 1.5.1 . Afterwards, phylogenetic trees were reconstructed by a Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method, accessible in the BEAST software package, version 1.10 [, ]. Time calibration was set based on the year of sample collection, and the general time reversible (GTR) with gamma-distributed rates and invariant sites was employed as the nucleotide substitution model. Beast runs were carried out using the uncorrelated lognormal relaxed molecular clock model and a time-aware Gaussian Markov Random Field (GMRF) Bayesian skyride coalescent tree prior [, ]. The length of MCMC chains were established as 40 million, sampled every 40,000 steps. Trace files generated through Bayesian phylogenetic inference were visualized and analyzed in Tracer version 1.7 . Convergence of parameters was considered in the presence of effective sample size (ESS) values exceeding 200. The target Maximum Clade Credibility (MCC) tree was summarized by TreeAnnotator 1.8.4, with a burn-in corresponding to 10% of states. MCC trees were visualized and edited in FigTree, version 1.4.3 . Beast runs were performed in CIPRES Science Gateway . Viral sequences were deposited at GenBank (NCBI), under the accession numbers MT747440 (CVA6) and MT756204 (EVD-68). The Bayesian phylogenetic trees of partial VP1 gene sequences are shown in Fig. . The CVA6 sequence showed a clear phylogenetic relationship with HFMD viruses circulating in Turkey in 2017 . EV-D68 sequence grouped into a contemporary clade, comprising global representatives from 2016 to 2018, and exhibited a robust phylogenetic relatedness with a Chinese sequence (MK713961) . Neither EV-D68 nor CVA6 were genetically related to viruses known to be circulating in Brazil.