A 69-year-old female patient with a previously diagnosed SLE was admitted to the hospital in July 2022 due to a slowly progressive increase in serum creatinine levels up to 3.3 mg/dL with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 14 mL/min/1.73 m2 according to the CKD-EPI equation (serum creatinine levels of 1.7 mg/dL 2 years and 6 months earlier and 2.9 mg/dL 1 year earlier) and an increasing proteinuria (2 g/g creatinine) with suspected renal disease activity of SLE (chronic kidney disease stage CKD5A3 according to 2012 KDIGO classification). The diagnosis of SLE was established approximately 25 years ago when the patient initially presented with erythema, arthritis, and tendomyopathia and serologic evidence of anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-double-stranded DNA, anti-SSA(Ro), and anti-SSB(La) antibodies was obtained. A recent admission physical examination revealed skin and joint involvement with generalized tendomyopathy in an unaltered, stable degree in comparison to the last presentation. Serologically, there was no evidence of increased disease activity of SLE under continued immunosuppressive therapy with mycophenolate mofetil (500 mg/day) and prednisolone (5 mg/day). Furthermore, immunosuppressive therapy with hydroxychloroquine (200 mg/day) had been administered for approximately 25 years and has been reduced to an application once every 48 h in the previous month because of declined renal function. The cumulative dose of hydroxychloroquine was approximately 1,800 g. Annual ophthalmologic check-ups during treatment with hydroxychloroquine have so far been without pathological findings. Sonographically, the kidneys showed signs of advanced chronic parenchymal damage with a narrowed parenchymal margin.
In January 2020, at this time with a serum creatinine of 1.7 mg/dL (eGFR 31 mL/min/1.73 m2), a renal biopsy was performed externally to clarify the genesis of the deterioration of renal function. Histopathological work-up showed chronic damage with mild nephrosclerosis and reactive focal segmental and global glomerulosclerosis (in 3 of 7 glomeruli), as well as focal tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis with a degree of 40%. Immunofluorescence staining revealed negativity for IgA and positivity for C1q, C3c, and IgM mesangial and for C1q, IgM, and IgG in scarred glomerular sections. Electron microscopy did not show basement membrane deposits but extensive podocyte foot process effacement without evidence for uncommon intracellular structures, for instance, lamellar bodies. Accordingly, no active renal involvement of SLE had been diagnosed.
With regard to the continued progressive renal function impairment and the limited significance of this renal biopsy, containing only 7 glomeruli, the indication of performing a new renal biopsy was set after careful consideration to clarify whether the patient developed an SLE activity in the kidney requiring subsequent intensification of immunosuppression. Sequential renal biopsy performed in July 2022 revealed moderate chronic parenchymal damage of the cortex with moderate nephrosclerosis, focal segmental and global glomerulosclerosis (in 5 of 11 glomeruli), and minor arteriolohyalinosis, as well as tubulointerstitial inflammation with focal acute tubular damage (a). In addition, mild vacuolization of the cytoplasm was noted (b). There was no evidence of lupus nephritis since immunofluorescence showed negativity for IgA and IgG and discrete, questionable-specific mesangial deposits of IgM, C1q, and C3c (online suppl. Fig. 1). Electron microscopy did not reveal any evidence of basement membrane deposits but podocyte foot process effacement and numerous lamellar bodies predominantly localized in podocytes (c), which were not described in the previous biopsy from 2020. Since zebra bodies may indicate the presence of Fabry disease, we performed further diagnostics in this regard. Clinically, there were no further indications of Fabry disease, especially neither grouped angiokeratomas, hypohidrosis, nor small fiber neuropathy, and the family history was unremarkable in this respect. Genetic evaluation of the GLA gene by Sanger sequencing was without pathological findings, excluding Fabry disease as the cause of the present renal insufficiency and the zebra bodies.
In summary, there was no evidence of Fabry disease regarding the medical history, physical examination, and molecular genetic analysis. Considering the drug history, the zebra bodies in podocytes are most probably signs of drug-induced renal phospholipidosis. Hereby, the histomorphological picture of Fabry disease is imitated, in which the zebra bodies are the typical sign of renal phospho- and sphingolipid deposition. With the exception of hydroxychloroquine, the patient was not taking any medication at the time of the second biopsy that is currently known to cause drug-induced phospholipidosis .
With progressive renal function impairment with proteinuria and evidence of zebra bodies as an indicator of a relevant lysosomal storage disease in the podocytes, we discontinued the medication with hydroxychloroquine. During the 1-year course, renal function remained stable at a low level (serum creatinine 2.94 mg/dL, eGFR 16 mL/min/1.73 m2 by CKD-EPI equation), and the proteinuria was unchanged so far. After discontinuation of hydroxychloroquine, there were no serological (anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies, complement consumption, platelets) or clinical signs of resurrected SLE disease activity.