A 75-year-old man was treated for a high-grade bladder urothelial carcinoma (pT3b N1) by endoscopic resection of the bladder with neo-adjuvant chemotherapy, followed by a right nephro-uretrectomy, a radical cysto-prostatectomy and bilateral ilio-obturator lymph node dissection. Macroscopic invasion of perivesical soft tissue was observed, and histology showed poorly differentiated carcinoma , with perineural invasion. On the deep leading edge of the tumor, small foci of osteomedullary bone metaplasia were observed . Non atypical osteocytes were seen within trabeculae of mature-appearing lamellar bone. Two out of seven lymph nodes were metastatic, among which one showed a focus of parahilar bone metaplasia . Reactivity to p63 is expected in 81-92 % of high grade urothelial carcinomas accordingly both the primary tumor cells and a lymph node metastasis showed reactivity to squamous-associated marker p63 (clone 7JUL, mouse monoclonal, Novocastra).
Treatment was completed by adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy for positive lymph nodes. Two years later, during normally scheduled imaging follow up, the apparition of several osseous formations localized in the right retroperitoneal space within the psoas muscle at the level of the bodies of 4th and 5th lumbar vertebra was noted . The formations were very dense on CT (like cortical bone), lobulated and in continuity with normal bone with a parosteal location . The largest mass measured initially 4 cm. A PET-CT showed that the mass situated in the right lower quadrant was moderately hypermetabolic with a max SUV of 5.1.
A complementary MRI was performed and the lesions appeared hypointense on all sequences with thin peripheral enhancement. The multidisciplinary discussion recommended a control CT after 3 months. At control the osseous formations increased in size with vessel sheathing, including the inferior vena cava, lumbar arteries and also the 5th right spinal ganglia without extension in the foramina . In addition, it showed the development of further foci of bone formation in pelvic ganglia sites bilaterally. Considering the rapid progression of the disease and the absence of a clear diagnosis, a percutaneous biopsy was scheduled. The procedure was performed under CT guidance (VCT,GE healthcare, Milwaukee, Wis) with anaesthetic stand-by using a Bonopty 16G/15 cm needle (AprioMed/Bonopty Bone Biopsy System) .
Histological study of the biopsy showed mainly crush artifacts, but also minute foci of lamellar bone trabeculae associated with broad spectrum keratin (clones AE1/AE3, mouse monoclonal, Dako) and p63 positive epithelial cells consistent with metastatic urothelial carcinoma . Again, the bone trabeculae displayed no atypical features.
At the time of this report, the patient is still alive and only the mentioned lesions are progressing, without response to additional radiotherapy.