A 73-year-old Japanese woman had been diagnosed as having RA 5 years before presentation and was initially treated with etanercept at 50 mg/week. Her family history included no consanguinity or collagen diseases. Two years before presentation, she had suffered tuberculous cervical lymphadenitis and had stopped taking etanercept because of remission. After 1 year, she was diagnosed as having interstitial pneumonia by chest computed tomography (CT) . Her RA disease activity gradually increased, and she was started on methotrexate (MTX) at 6 mg/week 18 months before presentation. She was referred to our hospital because of her increasing disease activity. Because control of the RA was incomplete, the dose of MTX was gradually increased to 10 mg/week. Two month before treatment of biologics, chest X-ray was performed and diagnosed as having interstitial pneumonia again . As the disease was refractory, biological therapy with etanercept at 25 mg/week was readministered when the RA was diagnosed as class 2, stage II. Five weeks later, she presented at our hospital complaining of cough and shortness of breath that had persisted for 2 weeks. On admission, the patient’s body temperature was 35.7 °C and her respiratory rate was 18 breaths/min. Chest auscultation revealed bilateral fine crackles. Arterial blood gas analysis on 2L of O2 via a nasal cannula showed a pH of 7.41, PaO2 89.3 Torr, PaCO2 38.1 Torr, and HCO3− 23.7 mmol/L. Laboratory examinations revealed a white blood cell count of 6930/μL (neutrophils: 97.0 %, lymphocytes: 3.0 %, monocytes: 0.0 %, eosinophils: 0.0 %, basophils: 0.0 %), lactate dehydrogenase 424 IU/L, C-reactive protein 20.7 mg/dL, procalcitonin 0.83 ng/mL, sialylated carbohydrate antigen Krebs von den Lungen-6 (KL-6) 1035 U/mL, surfactant protein D (SP-D) 262.9 ng/mL, and β-d-glucan 158 U/mL. Although the CT findings did not suggest malignancy, the levels of tumor markers such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), and soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) were elevated at 8.5 ng/mL, 799 and 2954 U/mL, respectively. In addition, an HIV test had a negative result. A chest X-ray showed demonstrated GGOs in the middle and lower lung fields. High-resolution CT (HRCT) showed GGOs with thickened interlobular septa and traction bronchiectasis . We suspected that the patient had PCP, but MTX-induced lung disease and cytomegalovirus pneumonia were included in the differential diagnosis. We then stopped the MTX therapy and started the patient on trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (SMX/TMP) at a TMP dose of 720 mg daily with empirical meropenem antibiotic therapy. On the 2nd hospital day, chest CT was performed again and this showed that CT-attenuation of pulmonary infiltrates had increased and the beginning of architectural distortions was evident . Bronchoscopy was performed on the third hospital day. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) performed in the right middle lobe yielded 20 mL of fluid, but no significant pathogens were cultured from it. However, the results of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for P. jirovecii were positive, even though para-aminosalicylic acid and Grocott-Gomori methenamine silver nitrate staining of the BAL fluid revealed no P. jirovecii cysts. The patient was diagnosed as having PCP, and SMX/TMP was administered for 14 days. On the 14th hospital day, skin eruption was observed, and this was considered to be a drug reaction; therefore SMX/TMP was switched to pentamidine. On the 14th hospital day, the patient developed dyspnea and her coughing increased. In addition, the PaO2 on 3L of O2 per cannula decreased to 63.4 Torr. A chest X-ray and HRCT performed on the 8th hospital day showed an increase in GGO and parenchymal consolidations with progression of the architectural distortions and pleural effusion . These findings were considered to reflect an immune response due to the treatment for PCP with SMX/TMP alone. Therefore, we administered methylprednisolone from 2nd hospital day (500 mg/day intravenously for 3 days, followed by 250 mg/day intravenously for 3 days and 125 mg/day intravenously for 3 days). Shortness of breath was progressive and saturation of O2 was decreased, necessitating readministration of methylprednisolone from the 11th hospital day (1000 mg/day intravenously for 3 days and then 500 mg/day intravenously for 3 days). In addition, direct hemoperfusion using a polymyxin B-immobilized fiber column was performed on the 11th hospital day. A chest X-ray performed on the 15th hospital day showed an increase in GGO with pleural effusion . The patient’s respiratory condition worsened, and 500 mg of intravenous cyclophosphamide was added on the 18th hospital day. Repeated examination of chest X-ray was performed on the 18th and 21st day and revealed no improvement . However, The β-d-glucan level was not elevated at any time during the patient’s hospital course. It is known that the level of KL-6, a marker of interstitial lung disease, is increased in patients with PCP. The KL-6 level in our patient was 1441 U/mL on the 10th hospital day and 1585 U/mL on the 11th hospital day. However, the patient’s respiratory status deteriorated rapidly, and she died on the 25th day of hospitalization .