A 46-year-old Japanese woman with no smoking history was referred to our hospital with a dry cough that had been worsening for a month. The patient had a slight loss of appetite, and no weight loss. There was no medical history, no family history of lung disease and no allergies. She had one gravidity and one parity, and had been a homemaker since her twenties, living with her husband and one child. Her socioeconomic status was not low. She drank socially. Her vital signs were within the normal range: body temperature, 36.8 °C; blood pressure, 130/88 mm Hg; pulse rate, 88 beats per minute. Heart sounds were normal without murmurs, and breath sounds were clear on auscultation. Her abdomen was soft and flat. Superficial lymph nodes were not palpable and there were no skin lesions. There were no significant neurological findings. The patient had uveitis in both anterior eyes as a result of medical examination by an ophthalmologist. Complete blood counts were normal: white blood cell count, 5300/µL; hemoglobin, 14.7g/dL; platelet count, 201,000/µL. Liver and renal function were both normal, C-reactive protein was 0.76 mg/dL, serum calcium was 9.7 mg/dL, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) was elevated at 35.1 U/L, soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) was elevated at 1693 U/mL, and antinuclear antibody was within normal range. Urinalysis showed no special findings. Blood and sputum cultures were negative. A Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific interferon-γ release assay was negative, but the serum anti-glycopeptidolipid core immunoglobulin A (IgA) antibody for Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) was positive. Aspergillus-galactomannan antigen, beta-d-glucan, Cryptococcus neoformans antigen, perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, and cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody were within normal range. Anti-human immunodeficiency virus antibody was negative. The chest X-ray showed an upper mediastinal widening . Contrast-enhanced thoracic computed tomography (CT) showed swelling of the mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes, which contained low-density areas and hepatosplenomegaly .
A fiber bronchoscopy was performed. The bifurcation of the trachea was dull and the bronchial mucosa was erythrogenic and edematous. Subsequently, endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration was performed under adequate conscious sedation to obtain a specimen from the mediastinal lymph node. However, a sufficiently large specimen for evaluation could not be obtained due to the patient’s severe cough. She underwent surgical lymph node biopsy in order to differentiate malignancy, mycobacterial infection or sarcoidosis. The specimen obtained from the mediastinal lymph nodes revealed epithelioid cell granuloma with marked necrosis . Ziehl–Neelsen staining and polymerase chain reaction of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and MAC using the obtained specimen were negative. Based on the pathological findings of epithelioid cell granuloma, mycobacterial infection, fungi, vasculitis and sarcoidosis were considered as differential diagnosis. The possibility of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, fungi or vasculitis was considered low because Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific interferon-γ release assay, Aspergillus-galactomannan antigen, beta-d-glucan, Cryptococcus neoformans antigen, perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, and cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody were negative. While elevated ACE, sIL-2R and uveitis suggested sarcoidosis, marked necrosis of epithelioid cell granuloma and IgA antibody for MAC strongly indicated MAC infection, especially disseminated MAC according to swelling of the mediastinal and hilar lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly. While waiting for the results of the cultures of acid-fast bacilli, the symptoms of cough and consumption had worsened, and initiation of therapy was required before the confirmed diagnosis. Oral clarithromycin (600 mg/day), rifampicin (450 mg/day) and ethambutol (750 mg/day) as therapy for MAC were initiated for 3 weeks, because it was feared that immunosuppressive therapy containing corticosteroid for sarcoidosis could worsen the patient’s condition if MAC infection was the main etiology. Clarithromycin was started at a reduced dose because of her appetite loss and the concern regarding tolerability for triple-drug combination therapy for MAC, and dose escalation was planned if it was well tolerated.
In spite of the treatment for 3 weeks, skin rash appeared on her face, trunk and extremities, her dry cough and appetite loss worsened, and the computed tomography (CT) findings of lymphadenopathy did not improve, so these drugs were discontinued. Almost 6 weeks after surgical biopsy, it was clarified that no acid-fast bacilli were cultured in the liquid culture medium. Sarcoidosis was determined to be the appropriate diagnosis of these clinical symptoms, because mycobacterial infection had become less likely. The patient’s symptoms and radiological findings improved after oral administration of prednisolone 30 mg/day (0.5 mg/kg) . The dose was reduced by 5 mg every 2 weeks, and after 20 mg, the dose was gradually decreased by 5 mg every 3 months. At 6 months after the start of treatment, symptoms had completely disappeared, and the chest X-ray showed a marked reduction in the upper mediastinal widening .