We present the case of an 83-year-old female with a past medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and hypothyroidism who presented to the emergency department with back pain, nausea, and vomiting. A large retro cardiac paraesophageal hernia (type III) was diagnosed on computed tomography. She was scheduled for an elective laparoscopic paraesophageal hernia repair due to persistent severe symptoms, weight loss, and the risk for volvulus. Intraoperatively, no major difficulties or complications were noted by the surgical team. Towards the end of the case, the anesthesia team observed an unexpected increase in end-tidal CO2 levels. An arterial blood gas (ABG) indicated a pH of <6.81 with a PaCO2 that was incalculably high (max measurable value is 115 mmHg). The partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) was 118 mmHg on a fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 40% and positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 5 cm H2O. The bicarbonate (HCO3) could not be calculated due to severe acidosis. The ionogram was normal in this sample. Peak and plateau pressures were 28 cm H2O and 19 cm H2O, respectively. Interestingly, the patient remained hemodynamically normal despite this profound acidemia and did not require any vasopressors or intravenous fluid boluses.
The patient remained intubated, deeply sedated, and was taken to the intensive care unit for the management of severe respiratory acidosis. The ventilatory changes included increasing the respiratory rate from 12 to 20 breaths per minute and the tidal volume from 400 mL to 450 mL. Repeat ABG after one hour showed a pH 7.22, PaCO2 58 mmHg, PaO2 166 mmHg, and HCO3 23.7 mEq/L. A significant degree of crepitus was noted tracking along the chest, neck, arms, and hands . This prompted suspicion for diffuse subcutaneous gas due to CO2 insufflation and passive absorption of CO2 causing acidosis. A third ABG, two hours after the first, showed an overcorrection of the hypercarbia with pH 7.48, PaCO2 28 mmHg, PaO2 171 mmHg, and HCO3 20.9 mEq/L. At this point, the respiratory rate was decreased to 12 breaths per minute with no other changes on the ventilator, and an ABG two hours later revealed pH 7.42, PaCO2 34 mmHg, PaO2 174 mmHg, and HCO3 22.1 mEq/L. The patient was extubated the following morning requiring only 2 L/min via nasal prongs. The patient's hospital course was complicated by a contained esophageal leak, and after successful treatment, she was eventually discharged to subacute rehabilitation.