A 57-year-old male with stage 3B colorectal cancer was referred by Medical Oncology to the Royal Brisbane Hospital Ophthalmology department, with simultaneous transient bilateral inferior altitudinal defects that would last up to 10 seconds in duration. These defects had commenced approximately four weeks earlier. The patient had no atherosclerotic risk factors (e.g. smoking, hypercholesterolaemia, hypertension, diabetes), or suffer from episodes of systemic hypotension, or obstructive sleep apnoea. On initial presentation to the Ophthalmology department, the patient had just completed cycle 8 of an intended 12 cycles of FOLFOX adjuvant chemotherapy with curative intent. The patient’s dosing schedule was oxaliplatin 165 mg (Day 1), fluouracil 780 mg bolus dose (Day 1) with a subsequent infusion of 1170 mg over 48 hours, and leucovorin 390 mg (Day 1 + 2). The patient’s symptoms had occurred during cycle 7 within the continuous infusion period, and for a few days following the completion of the infusion. On initial examination the patient’s visual acuity was 6/5 bilaterally. Ophthalmic examination, computerized perimetry and OCT retinal nerve fiber layers were unremarkable, with no evidence of a disc at risk at this time. The bilateral simultaneous inferior altitudinal field defects subsequently recurred with cycles 8 and 9 of chemotherapy during the continuous infusion and for a few days following the completion of the continuous infusion, but had not occurred in the periods between cycles.
The patient represented two weeks later, upon completion of cycle 9 of chemotherapy, with a persistent complete left inferior altitudinal field defect. Ophthalmic examination at this time revealed visual acuities of right 6/5-1, left 6/7.5 with a left relative afferent pupillary defect. Dilated fundal examination revealed diffuse left sided optic disc swelling and swelling of the superior quadrant of the right disc . The patient subsequently went on to have formalized fields, which confirmed the left inferior altitudinal defect and no obvious field defect on the right . At this stage, the patient’s chemotherapy was ceased after careful discussion with the medical oncology team, who in their expert opinion felt that the threat of further visual loss was greater than the potential benefit to be gained from further chemotherapy in reducing recurrence of the disease.
Investigations were subsequently undertaken to rule out secondary causes of the optic disc oedema (i.e. toxic, infiltrative). The patient underwent blood examination (e.g. CRP, ESR, FBC, Paraneoplastic Panel Screen), duplex carotid ultrasound, holter monitor, MRI brain and orbits and lumbar puncture. All investigations were inconclusive. The patient was prescribed low dose aspirin 100 mg/day and brimonidine tartate 2 times/day. Over the course of approximately three months the patient’s symptoms did not progress without the chemotherapy treatment and the patient ceased to experience any further episodes of inferior altitudinal field defects on the right side (the left side now had a persistent defect). Serial ophthalmic examination revealed a stable visual acuity with resolution of optic disc oedema and the gradual appearance of a pale superior left optic nerve. Repeat fields showed a stable left inferior altitudinal defect with no progression.