A 56-year-old Caucasian man with severe AS (valve area 0.81 cm2, mean gradient 54 mmHg), high Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) score (> 8), moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) of 1.9 L at 53% of predicted, Crohn’s disease (on immunosuppressive therapy), hypertension, and non-obstructive coronary artery disease presented for a TAVR procedure under monitored anesthesia care. An echocardiogram and subsequent left ventricular hemodynamic study completed as part of the preoperative evaluation showed symmetric, concentric left ventricular hypertrophy with no left ventricular outflow gradient. His early intraoperative course was unremarkable. Following successful deployment of the transcatheter valve and cessation of rapid ventricular pacing at 180 beats per minute, he became hypotensive, tachycardic, and short of breath. Despite escalating doses of phenylephrine, ephedrine, vasopressin, norepinephrine, and epinephrine, he remained profoundly hypotensive and unresponsive. He continued to decompensate and developed acute pulmonary edema, requiring oral suctioning and rapid sequence intubation. Given his deterioration immediately following rapid pacing and valve deployment with poor response to epinephrine, an LVOT obstruction was considered, but other etiologies were included in the differential . Consequently, inotropic medications were ceased and rate-control and afterload-increasing medications (esmolol, phenylephrine) were prioritized with marked improvement in symptoms. An expedited intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) assessment confirmed the presence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy pathology causing LVOT obstruction with associated mitral valve systolic anterior motion, as shown by the “hockey sticking” of the anterior mitral valve leaflet into the LVOT in Fig. a. The physiologic consequence of this decompensation is clearly represented in Fig. b, showing a near obliteration of flow across the LVOT. The initial peak gradient across the LVOT obstruction reached 70 mmHg, and we considered performing an urgent septal alcohol ablation in the event that the gradient remained refractory to our attempts at medical management. Beta blockade with metoprolol was titrated for rate control, a phenylephrine infusion was started to maintain systemic vascular resistance, and fluid resuscitation to achieve euvolemia was guided by TEE. This resulted in a significant improvement of the LVOT obstruction (peak gradient of 25 mmHg, mean of 13 mmHg) as shown in Fig. a and b. Intubated, paralyzed, and showing stable vital signs, our patient was transported without external pacing to the intensive care unit. Subsequent arterial blood gas was normal with improving respiratory status.
He was mechanically ventilated, sedated, and remained on a phenylephrine infusion until postoperative day (POD) 1 when he became responsive. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed moderate to severe concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, normal left ventricle (LV) systolic function, ejection fraction of 60%, and a normally functioning prosthetic valve with peak gradient of 27 mmHg and mean systolic gradient of 10 mmHg. An overlying LVOT gradient of 40 mmHg that was late peaking was also observed. He was weaned from vasopressor medications and extubated on POD 2. He was ambulatory and able to move to the ward on POD 4, and was discharged on POD 5. Post-discharge, his LVOT gradient gradually increased again and his HOCM was deemed refractory to medical management. Eight months after his TAVR, he received an alcohol ablation which successfully relieved the LVOT obstruction.