A 60-year-old female patient was admitted to our spine surgery department with recurrent low back pain for six years and sudden onset of sensory-motor deficits in both lower limbs for 9 h. The patient had no previous history of pulmonary tuberculosis, cough, low-grade fever, night sweats, or other symptoms. The patient had no history of AIDS.
Physical examination: body temperature was 36.6 °C, anemic appearance, kyphotic deformity of the lumbar spine, and no reddening or sinus tract on the back skin, tenderness, and percussion pain at the vertex of lumbar kyphosis. Both lower limbs strength (Medical Research Council scale) was grade 0, the sensation of the perineum and both lower limbs was significantly decreased, absent reflexes in the lower limbs and anal, the sphincter was flaccid, and she was not possible to urinate voluntarily. The patient’s neurological status was diagnosed as grade B on the ASIA scale. The patient’s VAS score for back pain was as high as 7 points, and the ODI score for patient quality of life was 92 points. The patient’s nutritional score (Nutrition Risk Screening 2002, NRS 2002) was 3 points.
Laboratory and imaging examination: A blood test was performed after admission. White blood cells 2.26*109/L, hemoglobin 87 g/L, platelet count 134*109/L. Inflammatory markers were examined: CRP 13.23 mg/L and ESR 72 mm/h. Liver function examination showed albumin 32 g/L. HIV testing was negative. Chest X-ray and lung computed tomography (CT) revealed pleural effusion, and no signs of tuberculosis destruction were found in the lungs. Because the T12-L5 vertebral body was severely damaged, X-rays could not clearly show the structure of the lumbar spine . CT sagittal images showed severe destruction of all lumbar vertebral bodies, with the apex of lumbar kyphosis located at L2 and a kyphotic Cobb angle of + 68° . Free sequestrum was seen in the spinal canal, and the bony structures of the posterior columns of L1-L5 had been extensively eroded, with a large number of irregular cavities in the vertebral plate, part of the spinous processes, and the pedicles, which were interconnected with the cavities in the vertebral body, and the entire vertebral body was “honeycomb-shaped” . CT three-dimensional reconstruction imaging showed amorphous sediment-like sequestrum throughout and around the psoas major muscle . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine could not be completed because the patient could not tolerate prolonged lying down.
The patient was placed in the lateral position, and after the position of the abscess was located by ultrasound, the abscess was punctured through the right psoas major muscle to obtain 300ml of pus containing gravel-like sequestrum. The density of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in the pus smear was > 20,000/mm2, and pathological examination of the solid material after pus filtration revealed bone tuberculosis. Four anti-tuberculosis drugs (rifampicin, isoniazid, ethambutol, pyrazinamide) were given to the patient immediately after the diagnosis of bone tuberculosis was confirmed by puncture. Pleural effusion puncture fluid examination was normal. Due to acute paralysis, the day after the diagnosis of bone tuberculosis was confirmed by puncture, the patient underwent a posterior spinal approach to remove the paravertebral psoas abscess, laminectomy with spinal decompression, and long-segment spinal fixation surgery. The kyphotic Cobb angle was corrected to + 25°, and the spinal cord was decompressed . Intraoperative samples were taken and sent for pathological examination to reconfirm tuberculosis infection . The next day after surgery, the patient continued to take oral anti-tuberculosis drugs. The patient showed quadriceps femoris recovery on postoperative d3. The patient’s lower limb muscle strength and fecal and urinary functions improved significantly after 19 days. In the 4th postoperative week, three tuberculous sinus tracts appeared in the surgical incision in the lumbar back, draining approximately 12–15 ml of pus per day. The patient was re-admitted to our hospital after three months of regular and adequate anti-tuberculosis drug therapy and nutritional therapy at the local tuberculosis hospital. At this time, the patient’s lower limb sensation, muscle strength, reflexes, and fecal and urinary function were normal. The patient’s VAS score for back pain was 2 points for lying down and 5 points for standing up. The patient’s neurological status was diagnosed as grade E on the ASIA scale. The patient’s nutritional score (Nutrition Risk Screening 2002, NRS 2002) was 1 point. Three tuberculosis sinus tracts were observed at the surgical incision on the patient’s back, with secretion of 3 ml/24 hours. The patient’s ESR was 55 mm/h, CRP was 3.36 mg/L, hemoglobin concentration was 112 g/L, serum albumin was 39 g/L, and sinus tract secretion bacterial culture was negative. The patient underwent a two-stage transabdominal anterior approach to remove the abscess. Limited removal of lumbar lesions, and transperitoneal reconstruction of the pelvic-thoracic 12-vertebral body support using bilateral free fibulae were performed . Internal fixation remains stable as seen on recent follow-up . The amount of pus secreted by the sinus tract gradually decreased after the operation and healed completely after seven months . Four anti-tuberculosis drugs (rifampicin, isoniazid, ethambutol, pyrazinamide) were given to the patient immediately after the diagnosis of bone tuberculosis was confirmed by puncture, with streptomycin added during the first 3 months of intensive period. Isoniazid and rifampicin during the consolidation period, for a total of 18 months of anti-tuberculosis treatment. During postoperative follow-up, the anti-tuberculosis treatment was effective. The patients were followed up for five years. After the second stage operation, the nutritional status of the patient continued to improve, and the tuberculosis sinus was healed after seven months. One year after the operation, the patient’s VAS score for back pain was 1 point, and the patient’s ESR and CRP levels returned to normal. Five years after the operation, the ODI of patient quality of life was 14 points. There was a 4-degree change in the Cobb angle over five years. During the five-year follow-up period, the grafted fibula did not experience any subsidence .
To salvage spinal cord function, it is necessary to correct kyphosis in addition to decompressing the spinal canal to provide stronger fixation of the spine. At one stage, we opted for posterior spinal surgery and performed laminar decompression at the L1-L3 segments, removing pus and sequestrum within the spinal canal and anterior to the dura at the T12-L3 segments, as well as removing pus and part of the sequestrum within the paravertebral lumbar psoas major muscle. Pedicle screw fixation was performed on T9-11 bilaterally and the right side of T12, and the bone knife chiselled about 1 × 2 × 0.5 cm area of the posterior superior iliac spine, with distal and proximal points of entry, respectively, with the proximal screws oriented towards the anterior superior iliac spine, and the distal screws oriented towards the anterior inferior iliac spine. The goal of this procedure was not to pursue perfect lumbar correction, so after partial correction of the kyphotic deformity via transpedicular osteotomy of the posteriorly convex parietal vertebrae (L2), we fixed the lumbar spine in an acceptable kyphotic position. Except for the articular eminence, no additional autogenous iliac bone graft was performed. The distance from the middle of the T12 vertebral body to the upper edge of the pelvic iliac spine was measured to be 21.6 CM on CT imaging before the stage 2 surgery, and the median Stoppa approach was taken to expose the inner wall of the pelvis to the T12-L5 vertebral body extraperitoneal on both sides. The pus was aspirated out of the iliac fossa in bilateral iliac fossae of approximately 200 ml. After the first posterior debridement and three months of anti-tuberculosis treatment, the paravertebral pus thinned out and was replaced by a large amount of scar and sequestrum encased by scar. During the operation, the palpable free sequestrum was dissected and removed from the scar as much as possible, the lesion bone in the anterior part of the L1-L5 vertebral body was removed, the sclerotic bone in the cavity wall was abraded after exposing the cavity, accompanied by extensive oozing and instability of blood pressure, and most of the focal vertebral body of L1-L5 was absent. After measuring the graft distance again during the operation, 23 cm of bilateral nonvascularized fibula was taken, the lower end of the T12 vertebrae was perforated, one end of the fibula was inserted into the perforation from the lower edge of the T12 vertebrae, and the caudal end was inserted into the bone at the upper edge of the iliac spine for approximately 8 mm. The titanium plate was bent into a L shape, and the fibula was fixed to the bilateral iliac wings, and fixed with the assistance of a titanium plate for pelvic reconstruction. On the fifth postoperative day, the patient got out of bed and walked, and the patient reported that the symptoms of low back pain were significantly reduced when standing compared with those before surgery.