A 75-year-old female with a CRT-defibrillator (CRT-D) presented with worsening dyspnoea and right ventricle (RV)-only pacing rhythm on 12-lead electrocardiography. She was noted as having normal and regular heart sounds without a murmur and mild lower limb oedema. Eleven years prior, she had undergone CRT-D implantation due to symptomatic dilated cardiomyopathy with dyssynchrony due to typical left bundle branch block and showed significant improvement in QRS duration (153–125 ms) and LV ejection fraction (20–40%). However, device analysis revealed that the pacing threshold of the CS lead and impedance of the RV shock lead, which had remained stable for the past 11 years, had increased to 6.5 V at 1.0 ms and 200Ω, respectively. The CS lead pacing threshold was >6.0 V at every possible pacing configuration. Dislodgement or fracture of the CS lead initially implanted in the lateral cardiac vein on the LV basal segment was not definite on the chest x-ray . A dual-coil RV lead was visualized in the RV lower septum. Therefore, we decided to replace the malfunctioning CS and RV leads.
The old RV defibrillator lead was successfully extracted using a lead-locking stylet and TightRail dilator sheath (Spectranetics Corp., Colorado Springs, CO, USA) (see , ). After inserting a locking style, manual traction of the CS lead was not effective. Then, a 10-Fr polypropylene dilator sheath (Byrd Dilator Sheath Sets, Cook Vascular Inc., Vandergrift, PA, USA) was utilized. When the dilator sheath arrived at the right atrium, the CS lead was successfully extracted out of the coronary sinus with gentle traction force (see , ).
After CS lead extraction, however, the vessel in which the CS lead was previously located was not visualized by contrast injection . Multiple attempts to reinsert a 0.014″×180 cm guidewire into the same target vein failed, suggesting extraction-induced dissection of the vessel . Moreover, no other branch vessels suitable for re-implantation of a new CS lead were observed. Fortunately, however, the distal portion of the initial target vein was visualized by retrograde flow of contrast via the connecting vessel . Thus, we decided to perform the anti-dromic snare technique to overcome unsuccessful antegrade access to the same target vessel. First, a 0.014″×180 cm guidewire was inserted into the middle cardiac vein and advanced retrograde into the distal portion of the target vein via the connecting vessel , guided by intermittent puffs of contrast. Then, the 0.014″×180 cm guidewire was further inserted back into the CS ostium . The distal end of the guidewire was captured around the CS ostium using the EN Snare (Merit Medical, South Jordan, UT, USA), which was introduced via the sheath prepared for insertion of a new defibrillator lead . The snared distal end of the guidewire was pulled out of the sheath. After trimming off the damaged distal portion of the guidewire, a new CS lead was inserted over the intact distal tip of the guidewire. Using a veno-venous loop of the guidewire, we were able to insert the new CS lead into the same target vein, overcoming some resistance, while both ends of the guidewire were under the control of the operator ( and ). Subsequently, a new defibrillator lead was inserted at the apical mid-septum of the RV, with good separation between the CS and RV leads in the left anterior oblique (LAO) view . After the procedure, the CS lead pacing threshold was 3.25 V at 0.5 ms, and RV shock lead impedance was 57Ω. The QRS duration was 125 ms, the same as before CS lead malfunction. The patient was discharged 2 days after the procedure with no complications. During a 6-month follow-up period, the CS lead pacing threshold (2.0–2.5 V at 0.5 ms) and RV shock lead impedance (65–75Ω) remained stable without requiring lead revision. Furthermore, shortness of breath improved to New York Heart Association Class I-II, and the echocardiogram performed at 6 months showed that the LV ejection fraction was well maintained at 42.4%, the same as before the lead malfunction occurred.