The patient was a 76-year-old woman who had JAAA with 28 mm proximal neck diameter and 3 mm proximal neck length of the right side, concomitant with colorectal cancer and chronic renal failure. We scheduled FEVAR, wherein the surgeon modified the left renal artery fenestration using a 32-mm-diameter Endurant II (Medtronic Inc., Dublin, Ireland) for extending the right side of the proximal neck before open surgery for colorectal cancer. Postoperative computed tomography (CT) revealed a type Ia endoleak and sac expansion from 55 to 63 mm in diameter that was caused by proximal neck dilation and stent graft migration . We planned proximal additional stentgraft with bilateral renal artery snorkel technique.
During the secondary intervention however, it was difficult to cannulate to the left renal artery through the trans-brachial access due to interference of the supra-renal stent from the previous Endurant II stentgraft. A 5-mm-diameter Viabahn stentgraft (W.L. Gore, Flagstaff, AZ, USA) was nonetheless able to be delivered into the left renal artery via trans-femoral access with a 5 Fr Destination guiding sheath (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) . It was difficult to treat the type Ia endoleak using the periscope technique of the left renal artery because of the previous fenestrated Endurant II stentgraft. Therefore, repositioning the proximal end of the Viabahn was necessary. A 5-mm-diameter SABAR balloon (Cordis, Hialeah, FL, USA) with a 0.018-in. Thruway guidewire (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) was inserted coaxially through the destination guiding sheath. After balloon touch up was performed over the entire length of the Viabahn, the balloon inflated in the proximal end of the Viabahn and then pushed up to replace the proximal end from down to up . The additional aortic cuff of a 36-mm-diameter Excluder (W.L. Gore, Flagstaff, AZ, USA) was deployed parallel to the Viabahn . The final angiography showed no endoleak in the patient’s left renal artery. One year after the additional treatment, CT revealed aneurysm sac shrinkage.