In October 2015, a 60-year-old non-smoker and non-alcoholic woman was admitted to our hospital due to the tumor found at the upper lobe of the left lung, who then underwent left upper lobe resection and left mediastinal hilar lymphadenectomy, and was diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma with stage IIIA (T2aN2M0). After the operation, the patient refused all adjuvant treatments and did not turn up to the clinical examination on time. In June 2019, the patient showed symptoms of dyspnea. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed atelectasis in the left lower lobe of the lung and a massive pleural effusion in the left chest, but no metastatic lesions were found in other organs . After the pleural effusion was drawn, a further CT scan found that the metastatic nodules existed in the lower lobe and pleura of the left lung . Therefore, the tumor was stage IV. The patient subsequently underwent molecular tests, including NGS and IHC analyses to guide subsequent treatment. The results showed that the PD-L1 expression of the tumor cells was 20–30% , TMB was 58.58 mutations/Mb, and intriguingly, a novel NCOR2-NTRK1 fusion was detected . This novel NTRK1 fusion has not been reported thus far. Since larotrectinib was not available at that time, and the patient refused chemotherapy. This patient started the treatment of PD-1 inhibitor, camrelizumab (Jiangsu Hengrui Medicine Co., Ltd, China) (200 mg/time, twice per week) alone in a clinical trial at other hospitals from July 2019. However, in September 2019, a chest CT scan revealed that the metastatic nodules still enlarged, indicating disease progression . We then switched to TRK inhibitor larotrectinib (200 mg/day). After 1 month, the chest CT scan showed that the volume of some lesions was reduced by 30%, indicating larotrectinib was a useful therapeutic option to this patient . We then continued to treat the case with larotrectinib. After another 2 months, the CT examination showed that some lesion sizes was reduced continuously by 50%, and no metastatic lesions in other organs were found . In March 2020, the further CT scan showed that some lesions were remarkably reduced or even disappeared . To December 2020, the patient continues to take larotrectinib and is still alive.