A pedigree of the family is shown in Fig. . The index individuals (IV:4 and IV:5) are dizygotic male twins, who were 11 years old at the time of clinical examination. They were born at gestational age 36 to healthy and unrelated parents. Birth weights were 2300 g (IV:4) and 2352 g (IV:5). Shortly after birth, IV:4 and IV:5 were found to be excessive hypermetropic (+11,75D/+11,75D and 12,75D/+13,75D) and both had corneal clouding and flat corneas. The boys have been wearing glasses since the age of 3 months, and have been monitored frequently. The clouding of the corneas decreased over the first 8 months of life. Clinical and eye examinations were carried out at the age of 10 years showing hazy corneal limbi with vessels were noticed . IV:4 has a small temporal iridocorneal synechi. Axial lengths were within normal range (A-scan using Hiscan opticon). ERG, motility, pupillary reaction, funduscopy and intraocular pressure were normal. Keratometry (Zeiss keratometer) showed bilateral flat corneas and high astigmatism in both boys (Additional file : Table S1).
The boys’ general development has been in the lower range of normal. They attend a normal school at normal age level, but perform in the low end of their class. They both have slight behavioural problems and motor tics, which are also found in their unaffected younger brother. From the age of 9 years IV:4 has experienced progressive frontal hair loss on vertex, the hair being lighter in colour and lusterless . Hair microscopy was normal without any signs of hair shaft disorder. IV:5 has slight general hypermobility and pes planus.
There were several affected individuals in the family, and the pedigree was suggestive of autosomal recessive inheritance . Clinical information of the individuals III:10, III:11, IV:3, IV:9, V:1 and V:2 was extracted from charts of previous examinations. For individuals III:12, IV:1, IV:2 and IV:8 clinical information was obtained from family members. Clinical details on family members are found in Table , Fig. and Additional file : Table S1.
The clinical features and family history prompted us to sequence KERA. Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood lymphocytes using Chemagnic Magnetic Separation Modile 1 (Chemagen, Baesweiler, Germany). Coding exons (exon 2 and 3) of KERA were amplified from genomic DNA of the investigated family members using PCR. Purified PCR products were sequenced using BigDye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Sequencing products were purified and run on an ABI 3130 XL genetic analyzer (AppliedBiosystems). Sequences of the coding exons and 10 bp of the flanking introns were analyzed using SeqScape software (AppliedBiosystems). Primer sequences and PCR conditions are available on request.
A novel missense mutation was detected in exon 2 of KERA, c.674T>C, which is predicted to result in substitution of isoleucine at position 225 with threonine, p.(Ile225Thr). All affected family members investigated for the mutation (IV:3, IV:4 and IV:5) were homozygous, while the clinically unaffected parents (III: 3 and III:4), the brother (IV:6), a maternal aunt (III:7) and a maternal uncle (III:5) were all heterozygous for the mutation. . The mutation is absent from the 1000 Human Genome and NHLBI Exome Sequencing databases. The Ile225 lies within the LRR domain and is a highly conserved amino acid. The in silico prediction programs SIFT and Polyphen2 predict the substitution to be pathogenic (SIFT score 0.00 and Polyphen2 score 0.999).
We modelled the three-dimensional structure of the keratocan protein to predict the effect of the present mutation and the three previously published missense mutations on protein structure/function.
The LRR protein core of decorin (PDB entry 1xku_A) was used as template. The template was chosen using BLASTp to search against the protein data bank. ClustalW was used to align the two sequences and SWISS-MODEL was used to change the amino acids. Finally, the structure was investigated using Pymol . The number of LRR repeats were predicted using LRRfinder . Keratocan has a LRR structure, where the leucine rich motif is repeated several times. It has the shape of a curved solenoid, where the concave side of the structure is made up of a parallel beta-sheet and the convex side is made up of a more diverse number of structural elements . The leucine-rich motif LXXLXLXXNXL at the concave side of the tandem is highly conserved: The L may be leucine or a hydrophobic amino acid, N may be asparagine or cysteine, and X may be any amino acid . The interior of the LRR domain is made up of hydrophobic residues – with the exception of the conserved asparagines (Asn, N) which create an Asn-ladder stabilizing the structure as seen in Fig. [–]. Previously, 10 LRR repeats were suggested for keratocan , but the LRRfinder suggests presence of an 11th LRR repeat starting at amino acid position 322 .
We found that the p.(Asn131Asp) and p.(Asn247Ser) mutations affect the conserved Asn131 and Asn247 residues of the 3rd and 7th LRR-repeat. The substitution of an Asn with an Aspartic acid or a Serine will change a hydrogen bond donor to a hydrogen bond acceptor or to neutral. The important stabilizing structure of the Asn-ladder, which is seen in Fig. , is likely to be destroyed.
The p.(Thr215Lys) mutation affects the Thr215 in the beginning of the 7th repeat where the threonine is pointing into the structure. Substitution of this residue with lysine is likely to destroy the structure in this area due to steric hindrance of the large lysine side chain.
The p.(Ile107Arg) and the current mutation, p.(Ile225Thr) affects the 11th residue within the 2nd and the 7th repeat (the end of the beta-strain) where the isoleucine is pointing into the structure, stabilizing the hydrophobic core. Substitution of the hydrophobic isoleucine with the hydrophilic and bulky arginine or the hydrophilic threonine will most likely destabilize the structure. It is interesting that the two mutations p.(Ile107Arg) and p.(Asn131Asp) have the same special orientation with respect to each other as the two mutations p.(Ile225Thr) and p.(Asn247Ser).