In July 2020, a 66-year-old man with a 7-day fever, shortness of breath, cough, seizure, lethargy, headache, and blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 85% was admitted to the Emergency
Department of Fatemeh Zahra Hospital affiliated to Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, northern Iran. The timeline of his illness is illustrated in
. Laboratory testing in the onset of symptom (before hospital admission) showed a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 43 mg/L, white blood cell (WBC)
count of 2.65×109/L, neutrophil 76%, lymphocyte 22%, hemoglobin 11.3 g/dL, mean corpuscular volume of 79 fL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 76 mm/h, red blood
cell count of 3.95×106/ μl, and lactate dehydrogenase 877 U/L.
Acetaminophen (2 g/day), naproxen (500 mg every 12 h), diphenhydramine compound (300 mg/day) were prescribed at the outpatient clinic. The fever stopped after three days;
however, the cough and lethargy continued. His past medical history revealed aortic valve and mitral valve replacement (AVR, MVR) with mechanical prosthetic valve two years before
his hospital admission. Moreover, it was found that he has been receiving warfarin (5 mg/day), losartan (25 mg/day), and furosemide (25 mg twice a day).
On the first day of admission, laboratory examinations showed CRP 65 mg/L, WBC count of 1.43×109/L, neutrophil 66%, lymphocyte 31%, ESR 76 mm/h, and the international normalized
ratio of 2.3. On the first day of hospitalization, the patient received 0.9% sodium chloride injection in addition to intravenous acetaminophen and parenteral vitamin C (2 g/day).
On the second day, due to persistent fever, transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) examination was performed. Both mechanical prosthetic mitral and aortic valves had normal
function and motion as well as an acceptable gradient. The TEE also revealed multiple large size highly mobile masses on both sides of the mechanical mitral
valve protruding to the left atrial cavity that was highly suggestive of vegetation . Due to the presence of mechanical prosthetic valve vegetation,
vancomycin (2 g/day) and gentamicin (6 mg/kg bw/day) were added to the treatment.
On the third day of admission, spiral lung computed tomography scanning showed simulating scattered COVID-19 peripheral ground-glass opacities.
The COVID-19 diagnosis was confirmed by the positive result of reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for COVID-19; therefore, remdesivir
(200 mg loading dose on day 1, followed by 100 mg daily mg), ceftriaxone (2 g/day), and fluticasone propionate (250 μg twice daily) were administered.
Due to prolonged fever, a set of blood cultures were ordered as well.
On the third day, despite receiving oxygen by reservoir mask, his oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 89%. The growth in blood culture bottles was checked by sub-culturing onto
sabouraud dextrose agar (Laboratorios Conda, Madrid, Spain), and after being kept at 30 ºC for 48 h it yielded yeast colonies. The smooth white-to-cream colonies showed hyaline
budding yeast cells that were identified as Candida species. Liposomal amphotericin B was started immediately.
On the night of the fourth day, the patient's respiratory condition worsened. He was intubated immediately; however, he was asystole after 3 h of intubation.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation quickly began, but the attempt was not successful. The routine workup was performed on yeast colonies to identify the causative agent.
The obtained colonies were sub-cultured on CHROMagar Candida medium (Merck, Germany) and yielded blue colonies, presumably Candida tropicalis.
For confirmation, PCR assay was performed using the two universal primers internal transcribed spacer 1 (ITS1) and ITS4 . The ITS region (ITS1-5.8S, ITS2 rDNA) was amplified. The amplicon was sequenced (Gen Fanavaran Ltd., Tehran, Iran) and compared with sequences deposited in GenBank and The
Dutch Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures (CBS), databases which showed 100% similarity with the C. tropicalis. The obtained sequence was deposited at the GenBank database
under the accession number MW911803.
The in vitro antifungal susceptibility of the obtained isolate was performed according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute documents M27-A4 and M27-S3.
Minimum inhibitory concentration results showed the isolate was susceptible to fluconazole (1 μg/ml), voriconazole (0.063 μg/ml), posaconazole (0.5 μg/ml), amphotericin B (0.25 μg/ml)
and itraconazole (0.5 μg/ml). However, the isolate was resistant to caspofungin (4 μg/ml), anidulafungin (2 μg/ml), and micafungin (4 μg/ml).