A 56-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital with "paroxysmal chest pain for 1 month". He had no bad habits such as smoking or drinking, no history of diabetes and hypertension. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST segment depression of 0.2–0.4 mV in leads V2-V5. High-sensitive troponin T was normal. Cardiac echocardiography showed that LVEDD was 48 mm and LVEF was 60%. He was diagnosed with unstable angina pectoris.
After admission, he was given conventional drug treatment, and coronary angiography was performed the next day. It showed that the culprit lesion was in the middle segment of LAD with it’s lumen stenosis of 60–70%, which was intermediate but diffuse, and what’s more there was a moderate to severe myocardial bridge in the lesion segment . And there was no lesions in right coronary and left circumflex artery. Then intravascular ultrasound was performed with the results: minimum lumen cross-sectional area (MLA) of the lesion was 4.25mm2, with the length of 44 mm, and plaque load was 60%, and the plaque was made of plenty of fiber and lipid composition, without plaque rupture and dissection . Now that the MLA was more than 2.8mm2, with its’ reference vessel diameter more than 3 mm, stent was not needed according to the guidelines of IVUS. However combined with the classical symptom and ECG changes of the patient, FFR was performed further. The result of distal segment of LAD was 0.31 at rest, suggesting significant stenosis. Adenosine was then given intravenously, and the value measured for maximum myocardial congestion was 0.36 (normal > 0.8), and during adenosine administration, ECG monitoring of the patient showed ST-segment elevation of 0.2–0.6mv in leads II and III, ventricular premature , and the patient complained of chest pain. Then the FFR guidewire was withdrawn and the FFR values were recorded at different parts of the lesion. The FFR values of a and b points of LAD were both 0.36 , which were positive but without pressure gradient between the two points. In the proximal and middle segment of LAD lesions, the FFR values at point c was 0.50 , and that at point d was 0.96 . The diffuse lesion was divided into two different pressure regions by the point b, c and d. The pressure gradient of c–d zone was 0.46, and the pressure gradient of b–c zone was 0.14 (normal pressure gradient is < 0.1). Although stent implantation was not recommended in the myocardial bridge area, a 3.0 × 24 mm stent was implanted in c–d zone. After full expansion, FFR test was performed again, and the values at point a and point b were both 0.89 after the maximum myocardial congestion. The pressure gradient between point c and point d was 0.07, and the pressure gradient between point b and point c was 0.01 . No symptoms of chest pain and no ST segment changes of ECG monitoring were observed during the last adenosine administration. And the minimum area of the stent is 8.67mm2, with good sticking and expansion, and the stent was well expanded and apposed, without coronary dissection at both ends of the stent, which was showed by IVUS after a stent implantation . The ST-segment in ECG of the patient returned to normal after the operation. The patient was followed up to now for more than 10 months, and fortunately his daily life and work were returned normal.