An 84-year-old man presented to the Department of Urology in Hiroshima University Hospital with a high fever that had persisted for several days. He was a retired clerk in a zoo.
Five years prior to presentation, he underwent total nephroureterectomy for left ureteral cancer, and 1 year prior to presentation, he had undergone total cystectomy and right ureterocutaneostomy. A ureteral stent was inserted during ureterocutaneostomy and replaced every month. When he presented to our hospital, the stent had spontaneously fallen out of his ureterocutaneostomy. The patient was admitted to the hospital where he developed fever (39.0 °C) and tachycardia (heart rate 129 beats/min), with a blood pressure of 166/115 mmHg. The urinary pH was determined to be 6.5, accompanied by the identification of 20 to 29 erythrocytes per high-power field (HPF) and 50 to 99 leukocytes per HPF. Adverse results were absent for urinary glucose and protein. A complete blood count revealed leukocytosis (1.39 × 109 cells/L), a thrombocytopenia (151 × 109 cells/L). No deviations in hemoglobin levels, hepatic functionality, or electrolyte homeostasis were detected. Acute kidney injury (serum creatinine 2.38 mg/dl) was detected. C-reactive protein level was elevated (2.75 mg/dL). Computed tomography revealed right hydronephrosis and inflammatory changes in perirenal fat. The patient was diagnosed with right pyelonephritis and hydronephrosis. Pelvic urine and blood culture samples were submitted for analyses.
V. fluvialis and Pseudomonas aeruginosa were cultured from pelvic urine samples and bacterial concentrations of 105 colony-forming units per milliliter (CFU/ml) were identified in each bacterial species. Only P. aeruginosa was cultured from blood culture.
A matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) analysis was performed to identify these pathogens using a BD MALDI Biotyper Sirius system (Becton, Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) with MBT Compass 4.1, from the MBT Compass library: Ver. 9.0.0.0 (8468MSPs) (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) database. The MALDI-TOF MS analysis using pure culture colonies was performed by direct transfer methods. Positive urine extracts were cultured on 5% sheep blood agar (Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) at 36 °C. The colonies of V. fluvialis were not small, and gram staining showed clusters of 2–5 cells . V. fluvialis produced H2S on triple-sugar iron (Kyokuto Pharmaceutical Co., Tokyo, Japan) and sulfide indole motility (Kyokuto Pharmaceutical Co., Tokyo, Japan) media at 36 °C. The MALDI-TOF MS analysis of these colonies identified V. fluvialis with a score of 2.24. The strain exhibited concordance with eight V. fluvialis strains cataloged in the MALDI Biotyper Sirius system, achieving a score of at least 2.
To determine the bacterial susceptibility to antibiotics, we measured the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of antibiotics against the strain of V. fluvialis isolated via the broth microdilution method using IA40 MIC-i with Dry Plates (Eiken Chemical) referring to the previous report . The MICs (µg/mL) were as follows: penicillin G, 0.5; ampicillin, 0.25; cephazoline, > 2; ampicillin/sulbactam, 0.25; imipenem, 0.25; ceftriaxone, > 2; vancomycin, > 1; levofloxacin, > 4; ciprofloxacin, > 2; trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, 5; and clindamycin, > 1.
Treatment was initiated with levofloxacin (LVFX) based on the exclusive identification of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in the bloodstream, pending consideration of antimicrobial susceptibility results for V. fluvialis, a process that may take several days. LVFX (500 mg/body every 24 h) was initiated on admission for 6 days intravenously and switched to oral administration of LVFX (500 mg/body every 24 h). After a total of 14 days of treatment, the patient recovered and was transferred to another hospital to improve activities of daily living.