A 70-year-old female presented to our hospital with complains of appetite loss and epigastric discomfort. Physical examination revealed unremarkable findings. Laboratory examination of blood showed: carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) level, 1369.1U/mL (> 37 U/mL); DUPAN-2, 330 U/ml (> 150 U/mL); and Span-1 210 U/ml (> 30 U/mL). Liver function tests were within normal range. On computed tomography (CT), an enhancing tumor measuring 15 mm was observed, which extended to the right secondary biliary confluence . The tumor was also associated with wall thickening of the right posterior glissonean pedicle, in conjunction of the perihilar tumor and a cystic dilatation of the segment 6 bile duct (B6), measuring 7 mm in diameter . No findings suggestive of lymphadenopathy or distant metastasis were noted. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed stenosis at the bifurcation of the posterior glissonean pedicle and diffuse dilatation of the B6. On aT1-weighted contrast-enhanced image, a 15 mm enhancing mass was observed on the dorsal side of the right hepatic hilum, extending to the posterior glissonean pedicle . The tumor was associated with irregular wall thickening at bifurcation of the posterior glissonean pedicle . Fluoro-deoxy-glucose–positron emission tomography (FDG–PET)–CT scan revealed an abnormal accumulation of FDG in the mass with a maximal standardized uptake value (SUV) of 4.6. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) demonstrated a stricture at the bifurcation of the segment 6 (B6) and 7 (B7) bile ducts . Any intraductal neoplastic lesions were not identified. Mapping biopsies of the bile duct were not performed. Nonetheless, the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma was confirmed through bile duct cytology . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with a MF + PI type ICC involving the right posterior glissonean pedicle. The imaging studies, including cholangiography or MRCP, revealed no evidence of infiltrative changes such as sclerosis and narrowing in the root of right hepatic duct. Therefore, an R0 resection was anticipated without requiring additional resection of the extrahepatic bile duct. The patient underwent a right hepatectomy and lymph node dissection along with hepatoduodenal ligament, postpancreatic head and common hepatic artery. Macroscopically, a 15 × 12 mm whitish, poorly circumscribed solid tumor was observed adjacent to the dorsal side of the posterior glissonean pedicle . Continuous with the perihilar tumor, the bile ducts at the intrahepatic secondary biliary confluence showed wall thickening with a whitish appearance. No gross intraductal tumor was observed in the dilated bile ducts. Histopathologically, the tumor was diagnosed as moderately differentiated adenocarcinomas with an irregular tubular pattern, exhibiting perineural and lymphovascular invasion . Diffuse micropapillary or sessile proliferations of columnar epithelial cells were observed in the posterior bile ducts. These lesions exhibited marked nuclear atypia, loss of nuclear polarity, and presence of mitoses, leading to a diagnosis of high-grade BilIN . Immunohistochemical results of the perihilar tumor showed MUC1 (2 +), MUC2 (-) and MUC5AC (3 +), and the BilIN lesions exhibited MUC1 (-). MUC2 (-), and MUC5AC (3 +) . The length of intraepithelial extension was approximately 120 mm. The high-grade BilIN lesions demonstrated continuous extension, and a transition between the BilIN lesions and the perihilar tumor was observed. Furthermore, two foci of invasive atypical epithelial cells were noted in peripheral hepatic parenchyma. The maximum size of each observed cell clusters was approximately two millimeters in diameter . Small clusters of atypical epithelial cells were observed in one regional lymph node. No neoplastic lesions were identified at the bile duct margin, and a 10 mm resection margin was achieved. This suggests that the BilIN lesions originated from a large duct, extended in the bile duct and involved the posterior glissonean pedicle, leading to diagnosis as a MF + PI type ICC. A schematic representation of the distribution of the high-grade BilIN, two foci of minimally invasions in the peripheral hepatic parenchyma, and a perihilar mass lesion is depicted in Fig. . The pathological diagnosis was ICC pT4N1M0 Stage IVA according to the TNM classification system. Adjuvant chemotherapy was administered using gemcitabine and S-1 for 12 months. As of the 5 years following resection, no recurrence has been observed.