A 67-year-old Caucasian male presented with a 4-month history of fever, weight loss, and fatigue. The patient had a history of ulcerative colitis (UC) on azathioprine (100 mg q.d.) and previous Bentall–De Bono surgical procedure in 2014; he also had cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator.
The onset of fever was in October 2018 and antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin/clavulanate did not improve the clinical condition; a colonoscopy excluded UC exacerbation.
Two months later, the patient was admitted to a small hospital; a transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was performed, showing hyperechoic material around the aortic valve and the valved tube, findings interpreted as post-surgical fibrosis.
Upon arrival at our ward (February 2019), the patient presented with the same symptoms; on physical examination, he had a mild systolic murmur on auscultation, no significant thoracic or abdominal signs; blood pressure was 125/75 mmHg, oxygen saturation was 98%, heart rate was 86 b.p.m.
Laboratory tests revealed only mild inflammation, all the collected blood cultures or markers of infections were negative (toxoplasmosis, syphilis, brucellosis, Mycobacterium Tubercolosis, β-D-glucan, gactomannan, urinary pneumococcical, and legionella antigens); we also ruled out viral infections (human immunodeficency test, Herpes Simplex virus, Cytomegalovirus, Epstein Barr Virus) or autoimmune diseases.
Transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed peri-prosthetic tissue changes: the space between the native vessel and the prosthetic valve and the aortic tube was occupied by echoic irregular material (10 mm of thickness), but ultrasound could not discriminate between septic or post-surgery material .
According to Duke's criteria, the patient had one minor criteria in keeping with possible IE, so we performed an 18F-FDG PET/CT scan, which showed two hypermetabolic areas, one around the prosthetic tube in the aortic bulb, 8 SUV, and the other in relation with the prosthetic aortic valve, 6.9 SUV .
Empirical treatment was commenced with daptomycin (750 mg q.d.). After several weeks, a serological test performed was positive for Coxiella burnetii (IgM phase I 1:1024, IgM phase II > 1:256, IgG phase I > 1024, IgG phase II > 1:1024), and consequently, the diagnosis of Q fever endocarditis was made.
The patient was moved to the Clinic of Infective Diseases to continue treatment with doxycycline (100 mg b.i.d.), and hydroxychloroquine (200 mg q.d.): rapid resolution of the fever was observed.
Two months later on TEE, the space between the native vessel and the prosthetic valve and aortic tube was occupied by isoechoic material, 4 mm of thickness, significantly reduced compared to the previous exam. 18F-FDG PET/CT showed persistence of the infectious process around the prosthetic valve and the valved tube, but SUV (4.8) and inflammatory extension were reduced .
After 1 month of therapy, in agreement with heart surgeons, the patient was discharged in good general conditions. We opted for a follow-up strategy based on clinical/laboratory response, using TEE and 18F-FDG PET/CT for imaging control.
In the first visit one month later, he reported good general condition and therapy was well tolerated. On TEE, the space between the native vessel and the prosthetic tube was 2 mm, a further significant reduction . 18F-FDG PET/CT demonstrated persistence of non-homogeneous uptake at the aortic bulb (SUV 3) and at the proximal portion of the aortic arch (SUV 2). At the prosthetic aortic valve plane, radiotracer accumulation persisted below the diagnostic significance level .
Stable health conditions were maintained until today.