A 39-year-old man, without a significant personal history, who consults to the thoracic surgeon for a 2-year history of non-irradiated sternal pain, exacerbated by intense exercise. In recent months, his quality of life worsened and a palpable sternal mass became evident. On physical examination he had, blood pressure 120/80 mm Hg in both arms, heart rate 82 beats per minute, respiratory rate 12 breaths per minute, SO2 97%, temperature 36.5 °C, there was no jugular engorgement or neck masses, upon inspection of the thorax, in the sternal area, there was a mass of more or less 10 cm, without inflammatory changes or ulcers, with a hard texture on palpation, without pulsation or collateral circulation on it, the heart was rhythmic without murmurs or gallops, respiratory sounds were normal, he had no abdominal masses, lower limb edema, or neurological deficit. He assists with a bone scan that showed osteoblastic changes in the sternal manubrium, suggestive of tumor vs infectious process. Additionally, he had a thoracic computerized tomography (CT) scan that evidenced an expansive lytic lesion, mainly in the manubrium but extending into to the third costoesternal joint, without compromising intrathoracic organs and with cleavage plane of the mediastinal vascular structures. There were no other associated lesions.
In a multidisciplinary board, the decision was made to perform a sternum, rib, and clavicle resection, followed by reconstruction. A literature search was carried out to find the best way to reconstruct the sternum, finding several alternatives, so we chose to study in-depth those that we had available in our country. We had to choose between using Polyether ether ketone (PEEK), poly-methyl-methacrylate (PMMA), or titanium. We had experience with PEEK and PMMA in the past, being the latter easier to manipulate intraoperatively, so we decided to go with it. After making the decision we looked into the image archive of our institution for thoracic CT images of patients with similar physical characteristics to our case, to plan the size and details of the prosthesis to be built. Then we compared the designed sternum with the patient's sternum to see if it would fit properly. For this process, the Mimics Innovative Suite software (Mimics Medical 21.0 and 3—Matic Medical 13.0) and then a 3D printer was used to obtain the bio model, from which the prosthesis was made .
Intraoperative findings were that of a large tumor of the sternal manubrium without the involvement of the clavicles or ribs bilaterally. A sternal resection was performed from the third intercostal space until the union between the first intercostal space and the clavicles. A thoracic wall reconstruction using the PMMA prosthesis and the osteosynthesis material to fix it to the thorax was performed, trying foremost to protect the physiological function of the sternum in the respiratory system. A plastic surgeon covered the material using pectoral and fasciocutaneous muscle flaps . The patient was then transferred to hospitalization, where he remained for a total of 7 days. He did not require admission to the intensive care unit or developed any infectious complications. At day 5 he initiated physical therapy. Histopathological results showed a cavernous hemangioma with negative borders and no other signs of malignancy . Follow up appointments with the thoracic surgeon and plastic surgeon were programmed for 48 h, 1–3–6 months after hospital discharge, and then in a biannual basis, with a chest radiography (x-ray). After 4 months, the patient had full mobilization of upper extremities with no compromise of sternoclavicular joint and normal respiratory function. At 10 months he was considered to be ready to resume work activities. His last appointment was on December 2019, showing excellent evolution, painless, no physical disabilities, and no evidence of mass regrowth.