A 32-year-old woman presented to the emergency department (ED) with complaint of resolved left-sided facial droop and a lingering paresthesia of her left upper extremity. Her medical history was relevant for recurrent otitis media infections; she was otherwise healthy and worked full time. She was not a frequent air traveller, nor did she have a history of scuba diving. Her symptoms began approximately six hours prior to arrival to the ED while she was aboard a flight across the country. She was not coughing, sneezing, or deliberately attempting a Valsalva maneuver when her symptoms started, but as the plane took off she experienced sudden, severe left ear pain and felt left-sided facial as well as left upper extremity numbness. She also felt that her face was “drooping” and when she checked her reflection, she noticed that she had droop on the entire left side of her face: she could not lift her eyebrow, could not smile or frown, was unable to close her eye and was drooling out of the left side of her mouth. She was given a warm compress for her ear by airplane staff and the symptoms resolved within approximately 30 minutes, although her ear pain remained.
Neither her droop nor her numbness was present by the time the plane landed. Her only lingering complaint was that of a “strange sensation” she could not describe in her left upper extremity. She specifically denied sensations of numbness, weakness or paresthesias after the event. Strength and sensation were fully intact. She presented to the ED with these complaints. On exam in the ED, her initial vital signs were within normal limits, and her neurologic exam was completely normal. Her National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale was zero. Her tympanic membranes were intact bilaterally, with subtle bulging of the left concerning for otitis media without signs of rupture.
Routine laboratory data was unremarkable; however, computed tomography (CT) was notable for small foci of air in the subdural space scattered along the left aspect of the outside of the superior sagittal sinus , as well as a focus along the left cerebellar tentorium. There was no midline shift or mass effect. Also noted was pneumatization of the squamosal portion of both temporal bones, and both petrous apices. A CT internal auditory canals was performed . Neurology, neurosurgery, and otolaryngology were consulted for management.
Her transient facial droop was attributed to an air pocket near the facial nerve that would have expanded with cabin pressure change, but had since been reabsorbed and therefore was not captured on imaging at the time of the patient’s presentation in the ED. A presumed defect in the dura was discussed by both neurosurgery and otolaryngology, although this defect was not identified on imaging. Otolaryngology recommended placement of a myringotomy tube after discharge from the ED. No acute surgical interventions were indicated as per neurosurgery.
The patient followed up with otolaryngology the following day and had uncomplicated placement of a myringotomy tube with aspiration of a thick mucoid effusion. She reported immediate resolution of her ear pain following placement. She was scheduled to fly back to her hometown and follow up with her local otolaryngology physician, as well as obtain repeat head imaging to confirm resolution of the PNC.