A 34-year-old North African woman with no specific past medical history was hospitalized, initially in another hospital, for the management of obstructive jaundice with a hepatic cystic lesion of segment I taken for a hydatid cyst that compressed the biliary convergence. She had undergone a resection of the protruding dome by laparotomy. Two months later, she was admitted for angiocholitis due to a probable recurrence of the hydatid cyst complicated by compression or rupture in the bile ducts. She was febrile 38.5 °C with mucocutaneous jaundice, dark urine, and discolored stools. A clinical examination found neither defense nor hepatomegaly or palpable mass.
Biological examinations revealed moderate cytolysis and cholestasis. Hydatid serology and serum tumor markers were negative: carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen (CA).
A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a hepatic cystic lesion of segment I, with parietal and septal enhancement after agent contrast injection; this lesion was ruptured in the biliary convergence.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a partitioned lesion, hypointense in T1 and hyperintense in T2, ruptured in the biliary bifurcation and causing dilatation of intrahepatic bile ducts, especially on the left side; the common bile duct (CBD) was also dilated with heterogeneous signal content . She underwent laparotomy by subcostal incision; the exploration noted a micronodular liver and the opening of her CBD allowed the extraction of membranes with a mucinous fluid issue, which raised questions about the diagnosis of hydatid cyst . A t-tube was placed in the CBD at the end of the operation. A histological study of the membranes as well as liver biopsies indicated a biliary cystadenoma without signs of malignancy associated to biliary cirrhosis. Postoperative cholangiography performed 1 month later revealed the persistence of the biliary cystadenoma .
Three months after this second surgery, we decided to perform radical excision after regression of jaundice and amelioration of blood tests. In fact, she underwent a left hepatectomy enlarged to segment I by laparotomy, because the cyst was ruptured in the posterior wall of the left hepatic canal, with large fistula, near the biliary convergence; a simple enucleation was impossible due to posterior location of the cyst and the adhesions of anterior surgeries. Her postoperative follow-up was simple and a histological study of the specimen confirmed the diagnosis of biliary cystadenoma without signs of malignancy.