A 57-year-old woman with a medical history of type 2 diabetes and hypertension presented to our institution with progressive abdominal pain 1 month after a gastric bypass surgery for weight loss. The patient had been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes and hypertension 2 years prior to presentation. Abdominal computed tomography showed multiple intra-abdominal abscesses, and therefore, she was started on treatment with intravenous antibiotics and abscess drainage. During hospitalization, she was noted to have hypertension while on her home antihypertensive regimen (160-175 mm Hg/70-95 mm Hg) and hypokalemia, with potassium levels of 1.9 mmol/L, unresponsive to a supplemental potassium chloride level of 60 mEq/d; therefore, the endocrinology service was consulted. On review of systems, she was found to endorse a 2-week history of hirsutism, difficulty climbing stairs, and easy bruising. Her physical examination result was significant for coarse hair on her chin, central adiposity, scattered ecchymoses, and proximal muscle weakness. She had small, supracervical fat pads and a slight dorsocervical hump. No abdominal striae were noted. Further workup revealed a random cortisol level of 45 μg/dL, an ACTH level of 114 pg/mL, and an elevation of urinary free cortisol (UFC) level to 898.6 μg/24 h. After administration of 1 mg of dexamethasone, her cortisol level decreased from 31.6 to 30.6 μg/dL, and after administration of 8 mg of dexamethasone, her cortisol level partially decreased to 11 μg/dL. Brain magnetic resonance imaging result was significant for a pituitary adenoma measuring 6 × 9 × 2 mm3. After administration of 1 μg/kg of corticotropin-releasing hormone, the ACTH level rose to 302 pg/mL and the cortisol level rose to 81.5 μg/dL, consistent with a diagnosis of pituitary CD. The patient underwent transsphenoidal resection for the removal of the pituitary tumor, and her postoperative cortisol level was 1.2 μg/dL. Prior to the surgery, the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) was consistently low, ranging from 19.1 to 21.0 seconds, whereas the prothrombin time and international normalized ratio were normal. During hospitalization, she received 5000 mg of unfractionated heparin subcutaneously 3 times daily and was started on twice-daily hydrocortisone. She was able to ambulate and was discharged for home on postoperative day 9; furthermore, heparin was stopped. Her aPTT at the time was 21.8 seconds (low). Five days later, she noted swelling of the left leg and pain and presented to the emergency room, where she was found to have 4 DVTs on the left and was started on apixaban. She underwent a thrombophilia workup 2 months later. A mutational analysis for factor V Leiden and prothrombin factor yielded negative results. The levels of proteins C and S, antithrombin, and antiphospholipid were within normal limits; however, the level of factor VIII (F8) was elevated to 217% (50%-150%). The D-dimer level, which was elevated at the time of thrombosis, had normalized. Six months after her DVTs, her F8 level normalized to 121%.