A 21-year-old female was admitted to our hospital complaining of fever and fatigue for 2 months. She was an editor and had been in good health until 2 months ago when she developed a spiking fever of 39–40 °C, dry cough, night sweats and fatigue. She went to a local hospital, and a complete blood count (CBC) revealed only mild anaemia . She was diagnosed with an “upper respiratory tract infection”. Cefprozil was administered, but her symptoms gradually worsened, and a growing mass, which was painful, was found on the right side of her neck. She reported no arthralgia, rash, weight loss or relevant family history.
Her physical examination upon admission revealed scattered rales on the right lung, splenomegaly and enlarged lymph nodes that had coalesced and were palpated in her right cervical region. The initial laboratory investigation showed peripheral pancytopenia (white blood cells (WBC) 2.28*109/L, HGB 87 g/L, PLT 71*109/L, Table ), elevated liver enzymes (ALT 192 U/L, AST 139 U/L, LDH 554 U/L) and hyperferritinaemia (Fer 4090 ng/ml). Natural killer (NK) cell activity was tested via a flow cytometry-based assay previously reported by Zhang et al. and was found to be reduced . Haemophagocytosis was found in the bone marrow aspirate . Initial serological investigations for common pathogens and autoimmune diseases were negative . A chest CT scan revealed bilateral nodules and right pleural effusion , but Gram staining, acid-fast staining and mycobacterial culture of sputum were negative. An ultrasound-guided puncture was performed on her right cervical lymph nodes. Ziehl-Neelsen staining revealed acid-fast bacilli, and further nucleic acid probes identified M. intracellulare. Histology from the biopsied tissue showed inflammatory necrosis and calcification without evidence of malignancy. Then, M. intracellulare was cultured from her peripheral blood and lymph node tissue. We suspected that the patient might have autoantibodies against interferon-γ, which led to her immunosuppressive state and susceptibility to NTM infection. Unfortunately, serum testing for interferon-γ autoantibody was not available in our hospital.
A regimen containing clarithromycin (500 mg BID po), rifampicin (450 mg QD po), ethambutol (750 mg QD po) and amikacin (0.4 g QD iv) was started to treat the disseminated M. intracellulare infection. HPS was also diagnosed according to the HLH-2004 criteria, and prednisone 60 mg QD po (1 mg/kg/d) was given to control the inflammation.
Her temperature soon became normal. Prednisone was gradually tapered (60 mg QD*2 weeks→40 mg QD*2 weeks→20 mg QD*2 weeks→↓5 mg/2 weeks until stop), and amikacin was stopped after 1 month, while clarithromycin, rifampicin and ethambutol were continued. She was in remission, and her cervical lymph nodes were unpalpable with normal CBC at the 6-month follow-up visit. The patient was then lost to follow-up.