A 27-year-old white female had congenital SOD. She presented with new, acute, recurrent, painless, bilateral, simultaneous, intermittent, stereotyped tonic conjugate upward eye deviation. The episodes of OGC were sometimes associated with dystonic body posturing. The initial episode was precipitated by a stressful psychosocial event where she met her biological sister for the first time in a loud and crowded restaurant. Thereafter, the OGC events were increasing in frequency and duration over the next few months. She retained consciousness and sphincter function and had no seizure activity during the episodes. The OGC events lasted several minutes to hours at a time and occurred 2–3 times per week. She had no bradykinesia, autonomic dysfunction, or orolingual dyskinetic movements.
Past medical history included intrauterine brain hypoxia secondary to maternal diabetes and cocaine use during pregnancy in her biological mother. The family history was otherwise unknown because the patient was adopted at birth. Neuroimaging showed a stable arachnoid cyst in the middle cranial fossa without hydrocephalus and pituitary hypoplasia. She had stable hypopituitarism on hormone replacement therapy with endocrinology. She had stable migraine without aura. Her medications include levothyroxine, clonazepam, estradiol, hydrocortisone, metoprolol, nitroglycerin, and progesterone. Serial magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed absence of the olfactory bulb, the tuber cinereum, and the anterior commissure in addition to optic nerve hypoplasia. Electroencephalography was normal, and she had no seizure clinically. The endocrinologic evaluation showed a thyroid-stimulating hormone level of 0.01 mIU/L consistent with normal suppression after levothyroxine replacement for hypothyroidism. The patient had normal cortisol and estrogen levels consistent with replacement therapy.
On neuro-ophthalmic examination, visual acuity was count fingers at 3 feet in the right eye (OD) and 20/400 in the left eye (OS) which was unchanged from previous documentation of her baseline from childhood. She had pendular congenital nystagmus and superimposed roving eye movements. She showed a −1 impairment in abduction and adduction in both eyes (OU). Her visual field was reduced to 10° OD and 30° OS. Her pupils were isochoric but poorly reactive OU. The anterior segment was unremarkable OU. Dilated fundus exam showed a small optic nerve bilaterally. The cup-to-disk ratio was 0.7 OU. There was flat hyperpigmentation on the left optic nerve suggestive of congenital hyperpigmentation, but a disk melanocytoma was in the differential diagnosis .
The patient was diagnosed with OGC and treated with carbidopa/levodopa with a marked reduction in her episodes of OGC at last follow-up. A repeat magnetic resonance imaging of the head showed no acute intracranial abnormality, and follow-up endocrinologic evaluation was stable. She was thoroughly pleased with the care she received and continues to follow up with neuro-ophthalmology.