A 67-year-old Japanese man visited our department complaining of pharyngeal pain. He had no appreciable medical or family histories, had smoked 30 cigarettes per day for 35 years, and had no drinking history. The patient had become aware of pharyngeal pain and had visited his general practitioner, but his condition did not improve.
At his initial visit to our department, laryngopharyngeal fiberoptic endoscopy revealed a neoplastic lesion in the left pyriform recess . Vocal cord fixation was also observed. Pathologic examination of a biopsy specimen revealed a poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and contrast CT showed a tumor occupying the left pharyngeal cavity and infiltrating the thyroid cartilage . Lymph node metastasis in the left side of the neck was confirmed, but no distant metastases were found. The patient was diagnosed with stage IVA hypopharyngeal cancer (T4aN2bM0) and received two cycles of docetaxel, cisplatin, and 5-fluorouracil as neo-adjuvant chemotherapy. Three weeks after neo-adjuvant chemotherapy, he was started on concomitant chemoradiation, consisting of 10 mg/m2 docetaxel on days 1, 8, 15, 22, and 29, and 3D radiotherapy, consisting of 2Gy fractions once daily for five days per week, for a total dose of 62.0Gy in 31 fractions. The dose to the whole neck was 40.0Gy, and the dose to the primary site was 62.0Gy. Although the patient complained of mild pain in the throat, he was able to eat a sufficient number of light meals.
At approximately one month after completing radiotherapy, we took a biopsy sample of his left hypopharynx under direct laryngoscopy to evaluate response to therapy, as biopsy is done after initial treatment in the UMCC (University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center) protocol 9520 . Pathologic examination showed no obvious presence of remaining tumor, and CT showed no obvious neoplastic lesions . The patient recovered his pretreatment vocal cord fixation and achieved a pathologic complete response (CR).
Later, as an outpatient, he gradually developed pharyngeal pain and dyspnea. Laryngopharyngeal fiberoptic endoscopy showed mucosal swelling in the pharynx and larynx. CT images of his neck, taken approximately eight months after the completion of radiotherapy, revealed a suggestive space-occupying lesion in the right lateral pharyngeal wall at the level of the epiglottis and a suggestive circumferential space-occupying lesion in the mucosa and airway constriction at the level of the thyroid cartilage. In detail, CT scans showed mixed masses of enhanced and non-enhanced lesions at both the epiglottis and thyroid-cartilage levels, strongly indicating tumor recurrence. Although we observed swelling of the surrounding soft tissues and segmentation or collapse of the thyroid cartilage, we did not observe defluxion of the arytenoid cartilage or abnormal gases contacting the cartilage . Dyspnea was gradually aggravated, and the patient underwent a tracheostomy. Under general anesthesia, we removed biopsy samples from his lateral pharyngeal wall and larynx. Pathologic examination of these biopsy samples revealed no remaining cancer. Because the significant mucosal edema suggested the possibility of undetected submucosal recurrent lesions, we took additional biopsy samples under general anesthesia, but pathologic examination again showed no evidence of remaining cancer, although significant tissue degeneration and necrosis were observed. After a tentative diagnosis of radionecrosis after radiotherapy, the patient was treated with steroids and antibiotics. His laryngeal edema and swelling in the right lateral pharyngeal wall improved gradually, resulting in significant reductions in pharyngeal pain and pain during swallowing, allowing the patient to ingest solid foods. Moreover, the space-occupying lesion, which had been suspected as being tumor recurrence, had disappeared . After CT evaluation, the tracheostomy was successfully reversed.
Two years after primary treatment with radiation, no evidence has been found of tumor recurrence. The patient's speech and deglutition were preserved, and his voice quality was within normal limits.