A 64 year-old woman presented to the emergency department complaining of severe diffuse abdominal pain, associated with multiple episodes of vomiting, rectal bleeding and diarrhea. Pain was acute, dull, non-radiating, increasing in severity in the last 24 h. She had no relevant medical history except for a microcytic anemia and an atrophic gastritis with chronic Helycobacter Pylori (HP) infection. The physical examination revealed abdominal distention and rebound tenderness in epigastrium and right quadrants, positive Blumberg’s sign and absence of bowel sounds.
Blood tests showed a white blood cell count of 13,600/mm3, an hemoglobin of 8,5 g/dL with a mean corpuscolar volume of 582 fL, prothrombin time/international normalized ratio of 17,8 s/1,3, protein level of 3,5 g/dL and albumin of 21 g/L.
Arterial blood gas analysis showed 2,7 mMol/L (ref. 0,9−1,7 mMol/L) lactate acid level.
An US examination showed free abdominal fluid and portal vein thrombosis. Hence a CECT was performed and revealed a massive thrombosis of right intrahepatic portal branches, portal vein, superior and inferior mesenteric veins with associated extended acute venous ischemia of the small bowel, colonic wall thickening with normal contrast enhancement and abundant peritoneal effusion .
The patient was referred to the emergency surgery department. An explorative laparotomy revealed the presence of abundant bloody ascitic fluid and edema of the mesentery and of the entire small bowel; furthermore evidence of venous infarction of about 130 cm of the terminal ileum was found, and thus surgical resection was performed. The bowel was left in discontinuity and an open abdomen management was adopted to better assess intestinal viability. After surgery, the patient was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Antibiotic prophylaxis, blood transfusions, total parenteral support nutrition, as well as anticoagulation with low-molecular-weight heparin infusion were immediately initiated. The second look surgery was planned 48 h after the first operation and a terminal ileostomy was performed. The patient was extubated the following day and discharged from ICU two days after extubation.
The following work-up showed no evidence of malignancies or other acquired risk factors for PMVS thrombosis except for an atrophic gastritis with chronic HP infection. Investigations to detect any prothrombotic disease revealed only a mild protein S deficiency.
The patient was discharged from the hospital on the 15th postoperative day, after switching anticoagulant therapy on warfarin; new oral anticoagulants could not be administered for an acute kidney injury likely due to dehydration because of the ileostomy. Besides, the patient had begun the HP eradication therapy.
After three months, the PMVS thrombosis was completely resolved and the patient could undergo surgery to have her bowel continuity restored.
At the 1-year follow-up, the patient was in good clinical condition, with no further episodes of thrombosis, HP eradication confirmed at gastric biopsy and improvement of microcytic anemia and creatinine levels.