A 59-year old lady presented to her primary care physician (September 2017) with a 4-week history of vaginal bleeding and weight loss. She was referred urgently to a tertiary gynaecology-oncology centre for further investigations. Initial evaluation consisted of blood tests, hysteroscopy and CT imaging of the chest, abdomen and pelvis. Her case was evaluated at the gynaecology oncology multi-disciplinary team (MDT) meeting and a provisional diagnosis of endometroid EC (likely stage 3) was agreed. It was recommended to proceed initially for surgical management.
The patient had a past medical history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus and most significantly, idiopathic mast cell activation disorder (MCAS) with a persistently raised tryptase. This condition initially presented 7 years ago with recurrent anaphylaxis. A plethora of different triggers have been established including foods (such as chicken, various nuts and seeds) and mast cell triggering drugs such as penicillin and macrolide antibiotics, experiencing both immediate and delayed reactions (up to 48 hours later). This condition was managed at a specialist allergy centre and she took a number of mast cell stabilising/allergy medications including sodium cromoglicate, fexofenadine, ketotifen, montelukast and cetirizine. She also took intermittent short courses of corticosteroid (two courses in past year) following severe reactions. However, despite these measures she continued to experience recurrent anaphylaxis with between two to four life-threatening episodes annually. Patch testing of potential triggers proved inconsistent and unreliable, failing to delineate any definitive triggers.
Recommended surgery consisted of a hysterectomy and salpingo-oophorectomy. Due to her diagnosis of MCAS her operation required meticulous planning, avoiding drugs with proven or theoretical high risk of mast cell activation such as muscle relaxants (e.g. atracurium), anaesthetic drugs (e.g. thiopental) and opioid analgesics (e.g. morphine). The operation proceeded and had no significant complications. She made an excellent recovery and was discharged five days after admission. Following surgery her case was re-discussed at the gynaecology oncology MDT with definitive histology from the operation. Her diagnosis was confirmed as a fully resected (R0 resection) stage IIIA grade 2 endometroid EC with lymphovascular space infiltration. Due to these high risk features she was referred to the oncology team for consideration of adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy.
Currently guidelines for adjuvant treatment in EC recommend between four and six cycles of chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel followed by radiotherapy.
, However, in the context of administering chemotherapy in MCAS there are currently no guidelines or case reports to guide management. This patient was reviewed in the oncology clinic and these issues were explored. Due to her higher risk of reoccurrence she wished to attempt adjuvant chemotherapy to minimise the disease reoccurrence risk.
Liaising with her allergy team, consideration was given to patch test for both carboplatin and paclitaxel, however given the previous unreliability of this test, time scale and the lack of utility for predicting sensitivity to taxanes, this was not deemed appropriate. Taking into account her risk factors for hypersensitivity (MCAS, postmenopausal) it was agreed to proceed cautiously with a staged approach of 4 cycles every 3 weeks of adjuvant chemotherapy (carboplatin and paclitaxel).
The first step to ensure accurate dosing of her chemotherapy (particularly carboplatin) was to estimate her renal function. Therefore, a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) analysis with 51Cr- ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA) was performed. Mild allergic phenomenon has been reported with administration of 51Cr-EDTA, however the incidence has not been quantified but is believed to be low. Therefore, as a precautionary measure she was pre-treated with an intravenous antihistamine (chlorpheniramine 10 mg) thirty minutes before proceeding. This investigation was completed satisfactorily without incident.
The preferred chemotherapy regimen is currently carboplatin and paclitaxel given every 3 weeks. No trials exist comparing the efficacy of either single agent in the adjuvant setting. However, when evaluating the single agent response rate in metastatic EC chemotherapy naïve patients and the hypersensitivity risk of each drug, it was agreed to initially commence with carboplatin, adding paclitaxel in later cycles if no allergic sequalae or other problems had been encountered.
Traditionally this chemotherapy regimen is given as an outpatient. However, due to her risk of hypersensitivity reactions and having previously experienced both immediate and late-onset severe hypersensitivity reactions to drugs, it was agreed she should receive chemotherapy as an inpatient. To minimise her risk of hypersensitivity sequalae she would also receive pre-medication enhancement drugs and carboplatin as part of a phased 4-step regimen (see ). Phased carboplatin desensitization regimes have been developed to induce short-lived tolerance to facilitate administration in patients who initially developed significant carboplatin hypersensitivity and was deemed appropriate for use in this setting to enhance safety.
The night before her chemotherapy she took oral corticosteroid, antihistamine and H2 receptor antagonist (in addition to her normal mast cell stabilising medications) before being admitted to hospital on the morning of planned treatment. On admission she had her bloods re-checked for suitability and a physician safety assessment to confirm fitness for treatment. She received pre-medication with intravenous corticosteroid, antihistamine, 5HT3 receptor antagonist and H2 receptor antagonist thirty minutes before chemotherapy. The patient’s total dose of carboplatin (560 mg) was calculated based on the Calvert formula (see ) with an area-under the curve (AUC) of 5. This was prepared in four increasing concentrations of the total dose: 0.1%, 1%, 10% and standard infusion concentration following a predefined protocol.
, Each infusion was administered over 30 minutes, except for the highest concentration which was given over 1 hour. Prior to proceeding to the next concentration level, she was examined for signs of hypersensitivity. She completed the treatment without any complications and was observed overnight as an extra-precaution before being discharged.
Following successful treatment without any hypersensitivity sequalae she was reviewed in clinic and consideration given to the stage of her treatment. She reported some constitutional symptoms such as fatigue and dry skin, however overall tolerated the treatment well. After careful consideration it was agreed for her next treatment cycle to continue with the carboplatin desensitization regimen and if she continued to tolerate this without complication, to receive paclitaxel the following day. Paclitaxel has a higher risk of immediate hypersensitivity reaction, therefore was given at a slower infusion rate (normally 3 hours) of 6 hours. As per the standard protocol the pre-medication corticosteroid dose (dexamethasone 20 mg) was also increased. She attended for cycle 2, three weeks after her first and received her chemotherapy without incident and was discharged after completing the second infusion.
For the third cycle as she had tolerated both drugs without incident, it was agreed she should continue to receive the drugs as an inpatient on consecutive days. However, as she had not experienced any problems with carboplatin, she should receive this normally (over 1 hours), not via the desensitization protocol and the paclitaxel infusion at the normal rate the next day. This cycle was again completed without any significant adverse events.
For her final cycle she was given carboplatin and paclitaxel on consecutive days as an outpatient but continuing with the enhanced pre-medication. Unfortunately, on the second day during the paclitaxel infusion, she developed a minor hypersensitivity reaction (flushing, back pain). Her infusion was immediately stopped, and she was treated with intravenous hydrocortisone and chlorpheniramine. She responded well to this management and her symptoms stopped within 30 minutes and was able to complete the infusion at a slower (6 hours) infusion rate.