A 62-year-old female patient was referred to our institution for further diagnostic workup of elevated liver enzymes and incidental cholelithiasis. She complained of worsening jaundice, nausea and vomiting, dark urine, and a 25-pound weight loss at the time of admission. Liver function results were as follows: aspartate aminotransferase 43 U/L and alanine aminotransferase 53 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 442 U/L, albumin 3.2 g/dL, bilirubin total 2.5 mg/dL, and bilirubin direct 1.5 mg/dL. An endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography showed strictures of the common bile duct suggestive of primary sclerosing cholangitis. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan revealed an ill-defined, low-attenuating soft tissue mass in the porta hepatis with biliary duct dilatation, but no intrahepatic mass was identified. Based on these findings, a preoperative diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma secondary to primary sclerosing cholangitis was made. The patient underwent a common bile duct resection, cholecystectomy, and Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy. The mass was completely removed and sent to pathology for confirmatory diagnosis. Histologic sections of the left and the right bile ducts showed a histiocytic cell proliferation that consisted of mononuclear bean-shaped cells with cleaved nuclei and abundant cytoplasm admixed with eosinophils . Sections of the adjacent liver showed variable bile duct proliferation, focal bridging and periductal fibrosis, and cholestasis. Immunohistochemistry revealed neoplastic cells that were positive for S100 , CD1a , CD68, CD14, and lysozyme. Electron microscopy of the tumor cells demonstrated the presence of Birbeck granules in the majority of histiocytes examined. These findings confirmed the diagnosis of LCH. The patient underwent a whole-body imaging to look for other areas of disease involvement, but the studies were negative. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with 5 courses of cladribine and was disease-free for 14 months after which she developed bacteremia due to a polymicrobial biliary infection from a chronic indwelling biliary drain. On admission, imaging studies did not reveal any evidence of malignancy. The patient went into septic shock, and despite therapeutic measures with antibiotics, vasopressor support, and volume resuscitation, she expired. An institutional review board waiver of consent was obtained for publishing the case report.