A 26-year-old man was referred to our emergency department; he complained about bilateral red eye associated with a loss of visual acuity (VA) starting 1 week ago. His medical history was remarkable for grade IV chronic kidney disease secondary to genitourinary malformation and under treatment with hemodialysis. He developed secondary hypertension, which was managed with oral antihypertensive drugs.
His VA was ‘hand motions’ in both eyes. The anterior segment examination revealed bilateral subconjunctival hemorrhage with no signs of intraocular inflammation. Dilated fundus examination evidenced serous retinal detachment with macular involvement . No retinal tears were observed in the peripheral retina examination with scleral depression. However, curvilinear whitish lesions scattered throughout the peripheral retina were observed. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) scans confirmed the presence of subretinal fluid in the macular region .
The patient was uncompliant to oral antihypertensive therapy and dialysis treatment. His blood pressure measured 180/110 mm Hg. A systemic workup was conducted with the only relevant finding of a significantly increased creatinine value (17 mg/dl). Oral antihypertensive therapy and dialysis were initiated in order to control the kidney failure and the arterial hypertension.
One week later, his VA improved to 0.3 in both eyes. Dilated fundus examination demonstrated a significant regression of the retinal detachment. After 2 weeks, his VA improved to 0.5 in both eyes, showing a subcomplete resolution of the exudative detachment in his right eye and a persistence of subretinal fluid in the macula and the inferior retina in his left eye .
As the retina reattached, splinter hemorrhages and retinal vascular tortuosity were observed, thus supporting the hypertensive origin of the retinopathy. Likewise, the whitish areas remained unchanged , especially in the retinal periphery. We assume that this might be secondary to ischemia of the underlying retinal pigment epithelium and the choroid. A longer follow-up could not be performed because the patient did not show up for his scheduled visits.