An 80-year-old woman with abdominal pain and nausea was transported to our hospital and diagnosed with bowel obstruction arising from sigmoid colon cancer . A colonic stent was inserted to alleviate the bowel obstruction. She had hypertension and dyslipidemia and a history of a previous appendectomy for acute appendectomy and hysterectomy for hysteromyoma. She had no family history of NF1 or any other genetic syndrome. A computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast revealed a liver tumor (30 × 20 mm) in segment 3, suspected metastasis of sigmoid colon cancer, and an enlarged lymph node (10 × 10 mm) around the abdominal aorta . Blood test revealed an increased carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) score (10.07 ng/ml) and normal cancer antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) score (5 ng/ml). Sigmoid colon cancer with a single liver tumor and a distant lymph node metastasis was diagnosed. We planned a subsequent resection procedure to ensure complete tumor resection. After inserting the colonic stent, her abdominal pain and nausea was disappeared, she could take a meal and was discharged to her home.
She subsequently underwent gadoxetic acid enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (EOB-MRI) and a whole-body 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography–CT (FDG-PET–CT) to search for additional liver and distant metastasis or the other primary lesion. MRI(T1) scan showed the liver tumor and enlarged lymph node had irregular margins and were low signal lesions. MRI(T2) showed the liver tumor was a heterogeneous high signal lesion and the enlarged lymph node was a regular high signal lesion. EOB-MRI showed the same findings as the contrast-enhanced CT scan and metastasis of colon cancer was confirmed . Moreover, PET–CT showed the sigmoid colon cancer (SUV max: 11.2) and the liver tumor (SUV max: 10.9) and the enlarged lymph node (SUV max: 3.5) had intense FDG uptake lesions . Liver and distant lymph node metastasis was confirmed and we made a plan for a two-stage operation of the colon cancer and the metastatic lesions because laparotomy resection was needed for the retroperitoneal lymph node. Laparoscopic sigmoid colectomy was performed first and the patient was discharged without any complications on the 10th postoperative day. Pathological examination showed a tubular adenocarcinoma [Type 2, 65 × 20 mm, moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, pT4(SE), L1, V1, Pn1, pN2a (4/16), M1b, pStage IVb] according to the 8th UICC classification. Next, a laparotomy for the metastatic lesions was performed to ensure complete lymph node dissection. A partial hepatectomy (S3) and lymph node dissection around the abdominal aorta was performed 1 month after the first surgery. The retroperitoneal tumor was a white and elastic, soft, and 7 × 8 mm in size. She was discharged without any complications on the 11th postoperative day. Histopathological examination of the liver tumor showed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, compatible with metastasis of sigmoid colon cancer. However, the tissue regarded as the enlarged lymph node was diagnosed as a neurofibroma (S-100: positive, CD34, c-kit, desmin: negative, and Ki-67: 2%) and not colorectal cancer metastasis . There are no lymph nodes and nerve tissue in the resected tissue. Moreover, it was supposed that the neurofibroma derived from a right brunch of sympathetic nerve trunk around aorta. No metastasis and recurrence have been observed for 11 months.