A 48-year-old male was admitted to our hospital with sudden weakness in his left limb.
Two hours before his arrival, he suddenly developed weakness in his left limb and was unable to stand while working. The neurological examination showed a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 8 and a left hemiparesis. An urgent head computed tomography (CT) examination revealed massive right temporal hemorrhage . The patient underwent an emergent frontoparietal decompressive craniectomy with a duraplasty, and the hematoma was completely evacuated. A mass of abnormal blood vessels founded in the hematoma cavity during the operation was removed. Postoperative pathological examination revealed malformed blood vessels . On the 1st d after the operation, the patient was fully awake with normal communication and directional movement of the right limb but had left hemiplegia. The head CT shows that the hematoma has been completely cleared, and the midline is almost in the middle . The CT angiography shows normal cerebral vessels . Although the flap pressure was not high, 50 g of 20% mannitol was given every 8 h to reduce local edema. On the morning of the 7th d after the operation, after an intravenous drip of 50 g of mannitol in the Fowler’s position, the neurological function of the patient continued to deteriorate, the right pupil dilated to 4 mm and the left to 2 mm. An urgent head CT revealed increasing midline shift, transtentorial herniation, and brainstem compression .
The patient had no history of systemic diseases.
Neurologic examination revealed a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 8, with no eyes open. The pupils dilated to 4 mm on the right and 2 mm on the left, with left hemiplegia.
On the 7th d after the operation, the patient underwent a blood cell analysis and examinations of blood electrolyte, liver function, and renal function. The test results were all normal, except for a slight decrease in the blood sodium concentration (130.3 mmol/L) and chlorine concentration (94.3 mmol/L). On the 8th d after the operation, examination of blood electrolyte showed sodium concentration (132 mmol/L) and chlorine concentration (95.6 mmol/L).
An urgent head CT revealed increasing midline shift, transtentorial herniation, and brainstem compression .