A 20-year-old man who was diagnosed with XLA 3 months after birth was treated periodically with IVIG. Mild renal dysfunction developed at 19 years. Serum creatinine (Cr) and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) were 1.5 and 30 mg/dL respectively, and urinary β2-microglobulin was elevated. The patient was admitted to our department for further evaluation and treatment.
Urinalysis on admission showed specific gravity of 1.017, 1+ qualitative protein, and 0.14 g/day quantitative protein. Microscopy showed 1 to 4 red blood cells per high-power field (HPF). White blood cells were 1 to 4 per HPF. Urine β2-microglobulin was 32550 μg/day (normal, below 250), and N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase was 17.9 U/L (normal, 0.3 to 11.5). Creatinine clearance was 39.2 mL/min/1.73 m2 (normal, 65 to 142). The findings suggested tubular interstitial disorder causing renal dysfunction. No uveitis was detected. On hematologic examination, the red blood cell count was 548 × 104 /μL; white blood cell count, 8400 /μL; platelet count, 15.5 × 104/μL; and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 4 mm/hour. In serum, Na was 142 mEq/L; K, 3.9 mEq/L; C-reactive protein, 2.8 mg/dL; BUN, 30 mg/dL; Cr, 1.29 mg/dL; and cystatin C, 1.96 mg/L (normal, 0.56 to 0.87). In sum, inflammatory markers were mildly elevated and moderate renal dysfunction was present. The IgG concentration was 685 mg/dL (normal, 870 to 1700 mg/dL); and IgM, below 20 mg/dL (normal, 33 to 190 mg/dL). Complement components were normal. Serum IgG4 concentration was below 1% of total serum IgG concentration. All autoantibodies were absent (antinuclear, anti-DNA, rheumatoid arthritis hemagglutination antibodies, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide, anti-SS-A/Ro, anti-SS-B/La, and myeloperoxidase-ANCA). On investigation for pathogens, cytomegalovirus pp65 antigen, anti-VCA IgM antibody, and γ-interferon specific for tuberculosis were not detected. Adenovirus, herpes simplex virus, and BK virus were not detected by real-time polymerase chain reaction. Lymphocyte stimulation tests (DLST) with D-mannitol, glycine, and polyethylene glycol (all components of the patient’s γ-globulin preparation) were negative. No physical, laboratory, or radiologic findings suggesting Castleman disease or malignant lymphoma were demonstrated.Examination of renal biopsy specimen showed marked mononuclear cell infiltration in the interstitium , and loss of tubular epithelial cells, cloudy degeneration, and irregularity of the basement membrane in some renal tubules. Some glomeruli showed cellular crescent formation and fibrosclerotic lesions. Fluorescent antibody staining detected granular depositions of IgG and complement component C3 in the tubular basement membrane. By electron microscopy , electron-dense deposits were observed in the tubular basement membrane. Immune cells infiltrating in the tubulointerstitium were predominantly CD3 antigen-positive lymphocytes (T-cells; Figure e), but not IgG4-bearing cells .
Steroid therapy was administered including methylprednisolone pulse therapy followed by prednisolone (PSL). Urinary findings and renal function slowly improved, and progress continued after gradual dose reduction. Although the patient still is receiving IVIG therapy, urinary abnormalities and renal function deterioration have not recurred.