A 59-year-old man of Indian origin was admitted with a 2-week history of systemic upset, fever and rigors. His past medical history included duodenal carcinoma with liver metastases for which he had undergone a Whipple’s procedure 5 years earlier, followed by adjuvant chemotherapy and immunotherapy. In the month prior to presentation, chemotherapy had been reinstituted for disease progression. In addition, he had type II diabetes mellitus, previous immunotherapy-related colitis and was receiving therapeutic low molecular weight heparin for a recent pulmonary thrombo-embolism. Clinical examination revealed normal heart sounds with no audible murmurs or external stigmata of endocarditis. Blood pressure was 128/70 mmHg. Heart rate was 90 b.p.m.
His 12-lead electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm. Laboratory data revealed elevated inflammatory markers. His blood cultures were positive for Enterococcus feacium. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a linear structure in the region of the MV apparatus at the annular level seen best in the apical three-chamber view . The attachments were not clearly identified, but MV function appeared unaffected with no regurgitation or stenosis. All other valves were structurally and functionally normal. Left ventricular size was normal with an ejection fraction of 60%. Both atria were of normal size, right ventricular size and function were also normal, and there was no evidence of pulmonary hypertension. Intravenous antibiotics consisting of Ertapenem and Teicoplanin were commenced based on sensitivities to the cultured organism, with the intention to cover for suspected infective endocarditis.
The sepsis responded well to antibiotics, and after 2 weeks of treatment, he underwent 2D and 3D transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) to further assess the MV. Imaging in the mid-oesophageal plane revealed a 2.3 cm long, thin fibrous band attached to the posterior mitral annulus, and extending to the base of the middle scallop of the anterior MV leaflet causing localized tethering, but no mitral valve dysfunction (, S). The band appeared mildly thickened in its mid-segment but no mobile component or focal soft tissue masses were identified . The other valves were also structurally and functionally normal. A sessile soft tissue mass with a maximum dimension of 1.4 cm was noted at the roof of the right atrium, consistent with thrombus with no obstruction to vena cava drainage. Saline microbubble contrast echocardiography showed that the inter-atrial septum was intact, with no evidence of a shunt defect.
The patient’s course was uncomplicated and the sepsis was thought to have originated from disease progression of his duodenal carcinoma and subsequent immunotherapy-related colitis rather than infective endocarditis. The mitral annular fibrous band was felt to represent a bystander anatomic variant causing no disruption to MV function and most likely unrelated to the sepsis; therefore no intervention was required.