A 60-year-old non-alcoholic, non-diabetic, normotensive Indian man of the state of Uttar Pradesh, working in printing press was brought to our emergency department with history of altered sensorium and abdomen distension of two days’ duration. There was history of slow mentation, cognitive decline characterized by inattention, and difficulty in finding words which prevented him from performing routine activities for the last three months. He also had behavioural disorder in the form of agitation, hallucinations and delusions of persecution. He had constipated bowel habits. There was no history of any drug intake.On examination he was drowsy. He had a hoarse voice, dry skin, puffy face, madarosis and cold extremities. He had a distended abdomen (Figure ) with absent bowel sounds. He had sluggish deep tendon reflexes all over. Chest and cardiovascular examinations were normal.Laboratory investigations revealed macrocytic (mean corpuscular volume: 100) hypochromic anaemia (haemoglobin: 9.1g/dL) with leucopenia (total leukocyte count: 3900 per mm). His blood sugar, liver function test, kidney function test, arterial blood gas and electrolytes were within normal limits. His urine examination was normal. He had a sterile septic profile. A chest X-ray and ECG were normal. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed gaseous distention with dilated bowel loops. An X-ray of his abdomen showed features of obstruction with dilated gut loops and air-fluid levels (Figures and
). Axial contrast-enhanced computed tomography image of his abdomen showed dilated bowel loops (Figure ). A whole body computed tomography (CT) scan was inconclusive. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, antinuclear antibodies and human immunodeficiency virus serology were normal. Physical examination of his thyroid gland was unremarkable. A CT scan showed his thyroid gland to be diffusely atrophic with decreased attenuation. A thyroid profile revealed TSH of 76.52μIU/mL (normal: 0.39 to 3.55μIU/mL) with free thyroxine (FT4) of 0.1ng/dL (normal: 0.75 to 1.54ng/dL) and free triiodothyronine (FT3) of 0.42pg/mL (normal: 2.0 to 4.9pg/mL). His serum anti-TPO antibody level was 581 units/mL (normal: <60 units/mL). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain showed mild diffuse cerebral atrophy; fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence showing prominent bilateral cortical sulci and Sylvian fissures with bilateral periventricular ooze (Figure ), T2/FLAIR hyperintensities in bilateral periventricular and sub-cortical white matter suggestive of chronic ischemic changes were found (Figure ). An electroencephalogram was normal. CSF examination showed reactivity for anti-TPO antibodies with elevated proteins and normal sugar level.
Special investigations were carried out, such as glucose hydrogen breath test was normal, serum cobalamin level was 532ng/L (normal 180 to 1000ng/L), blood lead level was 2.19μg/dL (normal: <25μg/dL) and gut manometry showed change in the frequency of the slow wave oscillations of smooth muscle electric potential features suggestive of intestinal dysmotility.
Final diagnosis of overt hypothyroidism with HE with pseudo-obstruction was made. He received hydrocortisone 200mg/day IV for a period of seven days which resulted in a significant improvement in his clinical condition after the third day of treatment. He became alert, oriented with time, place and person, and responded well to verbal commands. His mini-mental score was 14/30; it was not possible to compute this score earlier because he presented with altered sensorium. The treatment was maintained by tapering the dose of prednisone over a period of six weeks. He received levothyroxine 100μg/day orally from the second day of his diagnosis. His pseudo-obstruction was managed conservatively with Ryles tube suctioning, proctoclysis enema, metoclopramide and erythromycin. His bowel sounds resumed and he passed flatus on the second day of his admission. However, his abdominal distension regressed slowly over a period of one month. One month after discharge, he had remarkable improvement in all parameters including memory and cognition that made it possible for him to return to routine work. His CSF was re-examined after six weeks of steroid therapy and it was normal. His mini-mental score improved to 28/30 at six weeks of his follow up. Currently he is on levothyroxine 75μg/day with latest thyroid profile of: TSH of 4.3μIU/mL, FT4 of 1.2ng/dL, FT3 of 3.45pg/mL and anti-TPO antibodies level of 85 units/mL.