A 62-year-old Caucasian man with a history of chronic alcohol abuse presented to the emergency department with complaints of shortness of breath and confusion of three days' duration. The patient's vital signs were stable except for sinus tachycardia of 110 beats/min. The patient was confused, lethargic and pale. His physical examination was remarkable for scleral icterus, shifting dullness, hepatosplenomegaly and bilateral lower-extremity pitting edema. There was no significant peripheral lymphadenopathy, and there was no evidence of hypertension.
The complete blood count revealed anemia with a hemoglobin level of 4.5 g/dL, a reticulocyte count of 25.82% and normal white cell and platelet counts. Hemolysis was confirmed by elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 447 U/L and low haptoglobin of 9.18 mg/dL. Red blood cell agglutination, polychromasia, target cells and spherocytes were seen on a peripheral smear. The direct Coombs test was positive for complement C3d and immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody, which were identified as anti-I cold agglutinins at 4°C.
The diagnosis of renal insufficiency was made on the basis of the patient's glomerular filtration rate of 40.84 mL/min/1.73 m2 (creatinine level of 2 mg/dL). His liver function tests were significant for an elevated total bilirubin level of 5.3 mg/dL, a direct bilirubin level of 1.8 mg/dL and an ammonia level of 136 μM/L. His albumin and total protein levels were 3.1 g/dL and 7 g, respectively. The patient's hepatitis profile was negative, and no cryoglobulinemia was observed.
Although our patient did not have gastrointestinal bleeding or hematuria, his urine was reported to be dark on several occasions, which was precipitated by exposure to cold. Additionally, marked drops in hemoglobin and haptoglobin levels were noted after exposure to cold. Proteinuria on urine analysis prompted a 24-hour urine collection, which was significant for nephrotic range proteinuria of 15 g/day. Serum whole complement activity (CH50) level was reduced with normal complement C3 and C4 levels. No monoclonal spike was observed in serum or urine electrophoresis.
Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection, infectious mononucleosis, systemic lupus erythematosus and human immunodeficiency virus were ruled out. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis was remarkable for hepatosplenomegaly. Subsequently, the patient underwent a bone marrow biopsy that showed a hypercellular marrow with erythroid hyperplasia, but no evidence of dysplasia or lymphoma. A liver biopsy revealed stage IV fibrosis with no evidence of malignancy. This finding was thought to be secondary to the history of alcohol abuse.
During the hospital course, the patient underwent transfusion with several units of incompletely matched packed red blood cells through a warmer and was started on intravenous methylprednisolone therapy. In spite of corticosteroid therapy, the patient's hemoglobin did not improve, and he continued to require blood transfusions almost daily. Consequently, a daily regimen of plasmapheresis was initiated.
Partial resolution of the hemolytic process was observed while the patient was treated with daily plasmapheresis with 5% albumin, at a volume of 3L to 4L. A total of seven daily plasmapheresis treatments were performed, which resulted in a gradual decrease of the patient's LDH and bilirubin and a rise in his level of haptoglobin. However, the patient still required almost daily blood transfusions. On the basis of earlier reports indicating an anecdotal benefit of rituximab treatment for immune cytopenias, plasmapheresis was discontinued and our patient was placed on rituximab therapy at a dose of 375 mg/m2 every week. A total of four doses were administered over a period of four weeks. Although an initial increase in LDH level after the initiation of rituximab treatment was noted, there was no evidence of worsening hemolysis. After the first two courses of rituximab therapy, the patient showed a marked clinical improvement. His hemoglobin level stabilized , and he no longer required blood transfusions.
Subsequently, he was discharged to home with continued follow-up as an outpatient. He was also started on β-blockers and calcium channel blockers for high blood pressure at the time of discharge. During outpatient follow-up, the patient's proteinuria level decreased from 15 g per 24 hours to 5.5 g per 24 hours. A renal biopsy was performed and demonstrated nodular glomerulosclerosis with no evidence of immune complex deposition. At his two-year follow-up examination after the initial rituximab therapy, the patient continued to be transfusion-independent and his last hemoglobin level was 12.5 g/dL. Another renal biopsy was performed and demonstrated nodular mesangial widening with increased matrix and tubular basement membrane thickening without deposits visualized on light microscopy. On the basis of the findings of light and electron microscopy and immunopathology, a diagnosis of nodular glomerulosclerosis with no evidence of immune complex deposition was made. These changes can be seen in patients with diabetes or even in healthy individuals. At his two-year follow-up examination after the initial rituximab therapy, the patient continued to be transfusion-independent and his last hemoglobin level reading was 12.5 g/dL. His hospital course was complicated by the development of steroid-induced diabetes mellitus, warranting insulin use during his hospitalization. His diabetes resolved after the discontinuation of steroids.