We report on a 60-year-old man with an unclear liver tumour of the left liver lobe. Increasing abdominal pressure, finally emanating to the left thorax, indigestion, and night sweat.
Symptoms increased for two months.
No special notes.
Sixty-year-old man with an unclear liver tumor of the left liver lobe.
Symptoms comprised increasing abdominal pressure, finally emanating to the left thorax, indigestion, and night sweat over two months. Weight loss or exhaustion were not perceived.
Leukocytes, aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase, and lactate dehydrogenase were mildly elevated, liver enzymes in the normal range. C reactive protein was mildly elevated at first but increased significantly with aggravation of symptoms.
Contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a voluminous exophytic tumor arising from liver segment III, with atrophy of the left liver lobe, compression of the liver hilus and the left colon flexur . Radiological diagnosis of hemangioma remained unclear because of blurred tumour boarders and multiple tumour satellites in the adjacent liver parenchyma.
Intraoperatively a solid and spongy dark red tumour measuring 10.5 cm was detected, with multiple small satellite nodules (0.1-0.9 cm) in the neighbouring liver parenchyma , reminding of metastasis.
Histology revealed a main vascular tumour with a fibrous capsule , with multiple diffusely spreading unencapsulated capillary tumour foci at the periphery , readily identifiable through dilatated vessels with intravascular hemocongestion and capillaries in a retiform pattern, with interposed trabecula of liver parenchyma . The vessels were lined by flat inconspicious endothelial cells without mitotic activity. Immunohistochemistry (CD34, ERG and Fli1) highlighted the vascular nature . No pathological nuclear TP53 accumulation or proliferative activity was found . Capsule-like fibrosis was only observed around the main tumour, whereas satellite nodules lacked a fibrous interface with the adjacent liver parenchyma. Sometimes, small bile ducts and sparse lympho-plasmocytic inflammatory infiltration surrounded the main tumour.