A 69-year-old Caucasian male with a past medical history of hypertension and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) secondary to IgA nephropathy was managed with peritoneal dialysis (PD) for 1.5 years. His sister consented to provide a kidney and transplantation was performed in 2004. His post-transplant course was uncomplicated and immunosuppression was maintained with tacrolimus and sirolimus. In October 2010, he developed BK viremia and nephropathy, which was treated with leflunomide and a decrease in the tacrolimus dose. His course was further complicated by multiple cutaneous squamous carcinomas and a cutaneous basal cell carcinoma treated with Mohs surgery. In February 2013, he developed gross hematuria, which prompted further work-up. Masses identified by cystoscopy were sampled by transurethral resection and pathology showed high-grade invasive urothelial carcinoma of the bladder. In April 2013, he underwent radical cystectomy, prostatectomy and left pelvic lymphadenectomy (pT3pN0) with the discovery of an incidental adenocarcinoma of the prostate (Gleason 3 + 3 pT2c). Both native kidneys and ureters were removed and an ileal conduit created. He did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy because of the immunosuppression (prednisone, tacrolimus and sirolimus, which was later switched to mycophenolate mofetil) and chronic kidney disease.
He was followed with active surveillance and imaging every 6 months. In March 2015, MRI demonstrated extensive retroperitoneal abdominal and pelvic adenopathy and a mass in the right upper pole of the transplant kidney while the patient was completely asymptomatic and kidney function unchanged. Urine cytology was positive for malignant cells that were shown to be of female origin by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with 2–8 copies of the X chromosome and no copy of the Y chromosome . CT-guided biopsies of the kidney mass and a lymph node were positive for urothelial cancer. SNP microarray-based chromosome analysis of the lymph node using the I Scan® System with Infinium® OExPls CytoConsortium Array BeadChip (Illumina, Inc, San Diego, CA) demonstrated about 50 % of cells had an XY complement, while the remainder showed a XX genotype. Additional chromosomal aberrations included amplification of regions of 1q, 6p, and 10p and loss of 8p, findings that are consistent with the diagnosis of urothelial cancer. However, the origin of the cancer by single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis could not be assigned due to equal percentage of the genotypes determined by equal sex chromosome distribution as mentioned above. Pathology and FISH were compared to his original high-grade urothelial carcinoma, which demonstrated aberrations common to urothelial cancer, but not identical to the more recent sample indicating a new clonal process.
In June 2015, he underwent transplant nephrectomy, peritoneal dialysis catheter placement, excision of the ileal conduit and parastomal hernia repair. Pathology of the explant demonstrated a 4.6 × 4.4 × 4.1 cm, high grade urothelial carcinoma (pT3) with lymphovascular invasion in the background of severe chronic glomerulosclerosis. The malignant cells were CK7 positive, CD10 partially positive, and CD34 negative. FISH for the X and Y chromosomes performed on the urothelial carcinoma from the explanted transplant kidney confirmed that the malignant cells were of female donor origin . All immunosuppression was discontinued and PD was resumed. Initial follow-up scans at 3 months demonstrated no new sites of metastasis and decrease in the size of retroperitoneal lymph nodes (LNs) with the index LN shrinking from 1.9 to 0.8 cm. Repeat scans after an additional 3 months also found no new sites of metastasis and further reduction of the index LN size to 0.7 cm. The most recent scans done 1 year after initial diagnosis continue to show no evidence of disease and stability of the index LN size at 0.7 cm. He has resumed all regular activities and has a completely normal ECOG (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group) performance status (i.e., ECOG = 0).