A 65 years-old female was admitted to neurological emergency unit with acute onset of aphasia and brachiofacial hemiparesis of the right side (National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale-score of 3). Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) displayed an acute Middle cerebral artery (MCA) infarction (left side), . Pulsed Doppler-sonography of the carotid- and vertebral arteries and transcranial Doppler excluded etiological pathologies. The patient has been suffering from an osseous metastasized pulmonal adenocarcinoma (Pancoast tumor; cT4, cN2, cM0, UICC stage IIIB) since 2015 and was treated first line with Cisplatin/Pemetrexed. Due to progress in disease, treatment was switched to Docetaxel and Nintedanib in 2016. Based on a severe hepatopathy, Nintedanib was exchanged for Nivolumab in 2017. Three months before admission, bone metastasis of the rib was treated by radiotherapy. The MRI at admission revealed incidentally three small cerebral lesions compatible to clinical inapparent metastases. Concomitant diseases were renal failure (stage 3A), degeneration of the lumbar spine, hypercholesterinemia, resection of a cystadenoma of the right ovary in 2016, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and tumor-associated thrombosis of the left lower limb in 2016 with subsequent oral anticoagulation with Apixaban. A conservative approach with persistent Apixaban therapy and early rehabilitation was initiated. Three days later, the patient complained about acute chest pain. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed an extensive anterior myocardial infarction ), leading to coronary angiography. An embolic obliteration of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) was successfully treated by primary percutaneous coronary intervention with manual thrombus aspiration ), followed by antithrombotic therapy with Acetylsalicylic acid (100 mg/day) and Enoxaparin sodium (0.4 mg/day).
Histological examination of the LAD-embolus revealed coagulated poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical analysis yielded a TTF-1 negative, CK7 positive and PD-L1 positive (TP-Score of 90%) tumor cell staining result, corresponding to the primary TTF-1 negative pulmonary adenocarcinoma with typical lepidic growth pattern . During chemotherapeutical treatment and checkpoint inhibition with Nivolumab, a dedifferentiation and upregulation of PD-L1 presumably took place. A complementary transesophageal echocardiography discovered a large patent foramen ovale (PFO) and a tumor mass floating in the right atrium with two tumor plugs inserting in the fossa ovalis ) as a prove for cerebral and coronary tumor embolization via the PFO.
Fifteen days after hospitalization the patient underwent complete surgical resection of the right atrial tumor mass and PFO closure ). Histological examination of the fragile tumor mass verified it as a metastasis of the pulmonal adenocarcinoma . After an initially inconspicuous postoperative course, the patient was noticed with an insufficient increase in consciousness and hemiparesis of the left side during monitoring at the intensive care unit. Computer tomography displayed early infarction sings in the right MCA area through combined occlusion of the right internal carotid artery and MCA and several small cortical lesions with beginning cerebral ischemia and brain edema of the right hemisphere in the manner of pre-/intraoperative malignant embolism. Due to the lack of promising therapeutic options, the patient received best supportive care until she died 36 h later.