A 61-year old Chinese male presented with recurrent chest discomfort on exertion for 3 months and one episode of presyncope on exertion one day before referred to our hospital. 11 months ago, the patient had received aortic valve replacement, because of congenital bicuspid aortic valve, with a 21-mm Hancock II porcine bioprosthesis (Medtronic, Inc, Minneapolis, MN, USA) implanted following the protocol provided by the manufacturer. Postoperative transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed normal function of bioprosthesis and he made an uneventful postoperative hospital course. The patient was discharged on 10th postoperative day and was on anticoagulation therapy with warfarin (target international normalized ratio (INR): 1.8-2.5) for 6 months. He continued to follow up at our hospital postoperatively.
After the patient’s emergent hospitalization, full laboratory workups and imaging tests were performed. Physical examination detected tachycardia, a III grade systolic murmur in the aortic valve area and diffuse moist rales in both lungs. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) detected a severe aortic bioprosthesis stenosis, with a mean transvalvular gradient of 58 mmHg, a peak velocity of 4.95 m/sec , and an aortic valve area of about 0.6 cm2 . Left ventricular function had also deteriorated, compared with previous TTE 9 months ago, with an ejection fraction of 45%. The coagulation function test showed the INR in the target range. The other tests, including complete blood cells, blood chemistry, cardiac enzymes and blood gas analysis, were unremarkable. Because of poor recognition of BPVT, early bioprosthetic valve failure was considered as the major reason for the increased transvalvular gradient across the aortic bioprosthesis. However, the patient remained in significant hemodynamic instability despite of intravenous application of diuretics and inotropics. Due to his progressive decompensated heart function, a decision of emergent salvage procedure was made after comprehensive consideration.
Intraoperatively, regular cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established after re-sternotomy. Surgical exploration of the aortic bioprosthesis revealed thrombosis of the three cusps on the aortic side, limiting the opening of the valve. In addition, we noticed that the thrombus uniformly and loosely adhered to the aortic side of all the leaflets inducing diffuse valvular thickening and resulting in restricted leaflet motion and stenosis . In consideration of patient’s poor heart function and loosely adhesion of thrombus, thrombectomy, compared with redo valve replacement, seemed to be the better choice which can provide shorter aortic cross-clamp time and CPB time, less ischemic myocardial damage and a favorable short-term prognosis. The thrombectomy was successfully performed and the CPB weaning was uneventful. Finally, the aortic cross-clamp time was 25 min and the CPB time was 41 min.
The postoperative microbiological investigation was negative and the histopathological analysis demonstrated thrombus composed mainly of platelets, erythrocytes and fibrin. The patient was discharged on warfarin with a target INR of 2–2.5 for 6 months and was followed up for over 3 years without transvalvular gradient increasing.