A radiographic examination of the left wrist was performed in a 17-year-old Colombian man as a result of a direct incidental trauma. No fracture was seen, but an osteolytic area was found in the ulnar meta-epiphysis. The initial diagnosis was ‘juvenile bone cyst’. The patient presented with a painful swelling at the wrist dorsal ulnar side, about 2.5 cm, in the absence of any epidermal dyschromias. The skin was elastic and smooth. Wrist examination showed a range of motion (ROM) of 45 ° of extension, 70 ° of flexion, 15 ° of radial deviation and 10 ° of ulnar deviation; pronation, supination and circumduction were painful. Contralateral wrist ROM was normal. The diagnosis of ‘juvenile bone cyst’ did not seem right and a second radiographic examination was performed. At this time, a multilocular osteolytic area inducing an expansion of the distal ulna was seen. A cortical bone interruption was also visible. Although the patient had been the victim of a trauma, this was a poor prognostic sign. Therefore an Magnetic resonance imaging examination was performed. It showed a hypointense signal in the T1 sequences and a hyperintense signal in the short TI inversion recovery (STIR) sequences, characterized by enhancement after contrast administration, due to the presence of newly formed tissue .
After an incisional biopsy, the diagnosis of GCT was finally made, although it was in an atypical site.
The lesion was classified as a grade II with fracture , according to the Campanacci Classification and as a stage II according to the Enneking Classification for benign bone tumors .
Subsequently, the patient was surgically treated with intralesional curettage, adjuvant therapy with 5% phenol and a synthetic bone graft reconstruction.
A cortical bone rawplug was removed through a skin incision at the dorsomedial side of the deformity. Accessing the cystic cavity revealed a gelatinous ‘chocolate brown’ material, with many areas of darker color.
The cavity was carefully emptied and curetted , and then 5% phenol was applied in three cycles , with subsequent neutralization by hydrogen peroxide.
Then, using synthetic cancellous bone substitutes, a bone defect fill was performed and the bone rawplug was synthesized using a cannulated screw .
A clinical and radiographic follow-up was performed one, three, six, 12, 24 and 48 months post-operatively to evaluate the bone consolidation. Chest radiographs were performed every six months. Within the first post-operative month, the patient completely recovered the wrist ROM. After 3 years, there have been no signs of recurrence.