Patient aged 19 years old, male, university student and resident in central Morocco. He presented for 3 years a painful swelling on the left side a few days after the installation of a dental prosthesis, the patient was put under amoxicillin by his dentist without improvement, the evolution was marked by the appearance of a fistula facing the chin with pus. Faced with no improvement, the dentist referred him to us for further treatment.
The patient has been followed for osteopetrosis since childhood with a history of two fractures of the right and left femur following a minor trauma that was treated orthopedically.
No notion of similar cases in the family and no notion of consanguinity. No notion of allergy.
On admission to hospital, clinical examination revealed the presence of pus in the endobuccal area with chin fistula. The biological examination revealed a hemoglobin level of 12 g/l, the rate of GB 12000/mm. The panoramic X-ray showed persistent dental germs with foci of mandibular osteitis. 5 days later, the surgical intervention was performed by the chief professor of our department who has 16 years of experience, the patient under general anesthesia was given a sequestrectomy with extraction of 3 dental germs and was put under intravenous antibiotic therapy based on amoxicillin - clavulanic acid for 6 days and then relayed orally for 15 days. The pathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of osteomyelitis.
The patient was lost to follow-up for 6 months and was then seen at the clinic, where 3 skin fistulas with pus discharge were discovered, and the presence of mandibular bone sequestres visible on endobuccal examination.
The patient was depressed due to the continuous pus flow in the fistulas and therefore the absence of dentures (due to the persistence of mandibular osteomyelitis) prevented him from continuing his university studies. After a multidisciplinary team of dentists and psychiatrists, the decision was made to perform a second surgery with antidepressant treatment.
He again underwent a sequestrectomy with extraction of 4 teeth with ectopic aspects and curettage of the surrounding bone which appeared to be necrotic, then the 3 skin fistulas were removed and an attempt was made to cover the mandibular bone. The patient was put on ciprofloxacin (1g per day in two doses) intravenously for 5 days and then relayed orally.
The patient was seen at points J1, J7, J14 and J28 where two persistent fistulas were observed with denudation on the left side of the mandibular bone, a new bacteriological sample was taken and the patient is still on Ciprofloxacin.