A 45-year-old Caucasian male with CF presented to the emergency department with severe neck and shoulder pain, limited range of motion in his neck and arm, and dysphonia. The patient reported feeling pain for the past 10 days and suspected the pain was due to a muscle injury from lifting weights. The patient’s primary concern was unresolved pain and difficulty speaking. He reported a low-grade fever 5 days prior, which responded to acetaminophen. He reported severe pain, which was not effectively controlled with ibuprofen or acetaminophen. Current medication regimen included Myfortic, tacrolimus, prednisone, ganciclovir, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, and pancreatic enzymes.
The patient was suspected to have CF shortly after birth due to a meconium ileus. Genetic testing revealed the following CF mutations: F508del and c.3846G > A. He had several distal intestinal obstructions during infancy and childhood that required surgery. Recent past medical history included bilateral lung transplant 6 years ago, cervical fusion 4 years ago to treat paresthesia of fingertips caused by spinal cord compression, and wisdom teeth extraction 6 months ago.
The patient was afebrile upon admission. Physical examination revealed enlarged cervical lymph nodes, no apparent throat mass, and no respiratory distress. Diagnostic labs revealed WBC 22,000/uL, CRP 211 mg/L, and INR 6. Initial differential diagnosis included bacterial or viral throat or upper respiratory infection. Cross sectional imaging revealed a large abscess in the retropharyngeal space between vertebrae C2 and C7 with meningeal inflammation and spinal cord compression . The immediate concern was airway obstruction and need for possible intubation. The patient was admitted under the Otolaryngology (ENT) service with consults to neurosurgery and transplant teams. The neurosurgery team suggested immediate surgery due to spinal cord compression, but the markedly elevated INR which suggested significant sepsis and difficulty clotting prevented the team from moving forward with surgery. The patient was started on Zosyn as broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage until the infecting organism could be isolated. Blood cultures were drawn and revealed Streptococcus pneumoniae bacteremia. The patient was then switched to high-dose ceftriaxone. The immunosuppressive regimen included Myfortic, tacrolimus, and prednisone. The tacrolimus dosage was slightly reduced to keep the patient on the lower side of therapeutic immunosuppression (five with a range from five to eight). After 48 h of IV antibiotics, the RPA was drained, cultured, and irrigated by the ENT team using a transcervical approach. Around 50mls of purulent fluid was drained from the prevertebral/retropharyngeal space. The hardware from prior cervical fusion was discovered to be infected. The hardware was loose due to infection within the bone itself. The anterior cervical internal fixation hardware from vertebrae C3 through C7 was removed by the neurosurgical spine team as it was a source of infection and had become unstable. The patient received 8 weeks of high dose intravenous ceftriaxone for S. pneumoniae bacteremia. The source of infection was determined to be from the patient’s wisdom teeth extraction 6 months prior to RPA. The patient followed up with the ENT team to assess abscess healing 1 week after discharge and followed up with infectious disease and transplant teams 4 weeks post discharge. Subsequent MRI 1 month later showed resolution of the abscess and acute inflammation . The patient’s immunocompromised status complicated the healing of the RPA. The length of intravenous antibiotics had to be extended two additional weeks to fully treat the abscess. The patient’s prior cervical fusion also complicated the healing process as the hardware had to be re-installed 3 months after removal due to new onset of paresthesia of fingertips secondary to nerve compression.
The experience of having a RPA was scary. Initially, I thought I just had a muscle injury. To go from thinking I had a simple injury to needing surgery was a shock. When the doctors realized I had a RPA, they were very adamant about the need for intubation, but I did not want to be intubated unless it was absolutely necessary. I refused elective intubation and luckily everything turned out fine. I had to stay on IV antibiotics at home for longer than expected due to my transplant medications. Overall, the experience was scary, and I am glad that chapter is behind me.