A 63-year-old man, who was a glass craftsman and a sewer cleaner, on haemodialysis for 19 years due to autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), was referred by his family doctor for suspicion of renal cyst infection after presenting with a persistent fever of approximately 38 °C, right lumbar back pain, and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) levels for the past 14 days. Although he had received intravenous ceftriaxone for two days and meropenem and levofloxacin for 12 days, he displayed no clinical improvement. On admission, he had a fever of 38.4 °C and negative blood and urine cultures . His blood tests revealed leucocytosis (9280/μL), thrombocytopenia (77000/μL), elevated CRP levels (11.09 mg/dL), and elevated procalcitonin levels (0.94 ng/mL). Plain computed tomography (CT) revealed a right renal cyst infection. Although treatment with intravenous ciprofloxacin (0.4 g/day) had been started, his clinical findings did not improve. Therefore, his treatment was changed to meropenem (0.5 g/day) on Day 9 to cover extended-spectrum β-lactamase-producing bacteria since meropenem had been reported to provide poor penetration into infected cysts but clinical improvement . Contrast-enhanced CT and plain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were also performed . They revealed a haemorrhagic cyst at the upper pole of the right kidney, which was suspected to be the cause of the infection; percutaneous drainage of the renal cyst was performed on Day 13, and 200 mL of fluid was drained. The subsequent drainage volume was approximately 20 mL daily for 1 week. After drainage, the patient’s body temperature reduced to approximately 36.7 °C. In addition, the leucocytosis, thrombocytopenia, elevated CRP, and procalcitonin levels were resolved. The drainage fluid culture was negative for bacteria, including anaerobes and fungi. Therefore, a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test of 16S rDNA using 27FN (AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG) and 1525R (AAAGGAGGTGATCCAGCC) primers was performed for purified DNA from the drainage fluid. On Day 30, it turned out that the obtained sequences were 99.7% identical (1500/1505 bp) to that of D. fairfieldensis ATCC 700045T(U42221). Therefore, on Day 31, his treatment was changed to oral metronidazole (1 g/day). The volume of drained fluid decreased to 0–2 mL on Day 34, and contrast-enhanced CT performed on Day 35 showed shrinkage of the renal cysts. His clinical findings normalised, and the drainage tube was removed on Day 36. The Japanese guidelines for treating renal cyst infection in patients with ADPKD recommend a treatment period of at least 4 weeks with antimicrobial agents . Therefore, on Day 38, he was discharged and asked to continue oral metronidazole for 4 weeks. After that, there was no relapse of the infection.