A 66-year-old Chinese male presented with a two-week history of gait imbalance, mild slurred speech and dysphagia. One week previously, he had been admitted to the local hospital, and investigations showed a normal brain computed tomography (CT) and a significant increase in serum blood glucose (22.6 mmol/L). The patient was diagnosed with 2 diabetes mellitus and managed with an insulin regimen and aspirin. Due to noncompliance with the drug therapy regimen, the patient’s symptoms progressively aggravated over the ensuing week. He did not have alcohol use disorder, and there no history of any significant chronic illness or surgery. Physical examination revealed that the patient was conscious and oriented to time, place and person, and his cranial nerves, motor strength and deep tendon reflexes were normal. He had dysarthria, mild dysphagia, and ataxia with bilateral dysmetria.
Laboratory evaluation revealed the following values: random blood sugar 27.59 mmol/L, haemoglobin A1c 15%, sodium137 mmol/L, potassium 4.37 mmol/L, urea 8.49 mmol/L, and creatinine 104 µmol/L. The measured serum osmolality was 319 mmol/L. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed normal biochemistry and cell counts along with a negative microbiological workup. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a sharply defined, symmetrically shaped lesion in the central pons with decreased signal intensity on T1 and increased signal intensity on T2 and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR)-weight imaging .
A diagnosis of CPM secondary to hyperglycaemia was made, and the management of a sliding-scale subcutaneous insulin regimen was initiated. According to sliding-scale insulin therapy, the initial insulin dose was set as 12 IU. The total dose of insulin was 0.6 IU/Kg/d, where in the basal dose and the premeal bolus account for 50% of the total dose each. For three premeal bolus, the insulin dose account for 40%, 30%, and 30%, respectively. The insulin dose was adjusted dynamically according to the results of the glucose monitoring. The glucose decreased smoothly and finally attained glycemic control target. The physical rehabilitation was prescribed for pseudobulbar palsy. Gradual improvement in the patient’s gait imbalance, slurred speech, and dysphagia was noted over the ensuing week. He was discharged at the end of the second week, and no changes were evident on repeat MRI. The patient’s symptoms, however, were further recovered. After six weeks of follow-up, the patient had fully recovered to a normal state.