A 52-year-old Caucasian male was referred to our department for surgical intervention due to ileal stricture as a complication of CD. The patient reported no past medical history, but he could recall a few episodes of bloody diarrhoea during the three-year period before the CD diagnosis was established; diagnostic evaluation with colonoscopy was negative for gastrointestinal tract abnormalities at that time. He had shown poor compliance with the proposed medical treatment, and he had not received any kind of medication since the onset of CD. The index colonoscopy, at which CD was diagnosed, revealed an area of luminal narrowing in the ileum at approximately 70 cm proximally to the ileocaecal valve. Biopsies were taken, and the pathologic report was indicative of CD.
On admission, one day before surgery, the patient was afebrile, with regular heart and respiratory rates. During abdominal examination, he had regular bowel sounds with no tenderness or other signs of peritoneal inflammation, whereas the digital rectal examination did not reveal any pathological findings. Laboratory tests revealed a normal haemoglobin level of 14.6 g/dl, a normal white blood cell count of 8.8 x 103 cells/μL, a platelet count of 216 x 103 cells/μL, a normal CRP level of 0.1 mg/dl and an albumin level of 4.6 g/dl.
The extent of disease was preoperatively assessed with ileo-colonoscopy and magnetic resonance enterography (MRE). The aforementioned stenotic region in the ileum at approximately 70 cm proximal to the ileocaecal valve was present during ileo-colonoscopy; there was an additional finding of a large ulcer in the terminal ileum, which was marked with blue dye . The biopsies showed histologic features of mild chronic ileitis without indices of dysplasia or malignancy. The MRE revealed a long ileal segment demonstrating asymmetric mural thickening for a length of approximately 10 cm, with a homogenous enhancement pattern and imaging findings in keeping with possible pseudosacculations/pseudodiverticula formation and without prestenotic dilatation .
The patient underwent three-dimensional laparoscopy (3D HD Storz system, Germany), where segmental resection of the affected part of the ileum (approximately 30 cm) was performed with end-to-end double-layer ileo-ileal anastomosis. During careful inspection of the small and large intestine for lesions compatible with CD, we found multiple non-inflamed diverticula along the jejunum extending from the Treitz ligament to the proximal ileum. (, Video 1). Our patient had an uncomplicated post-operative period and was discharged on the fifth post-operative day.
Histopathological examination of the specimen showed focal inflammation and focal crypt architectural distortion compatible with CD in the active phase. The final diagnosis of the presented case was the stricturing phenotype of CD in the terminal ileum (based on the Montreal Classification of CD) with concomitant multiple SBD. The patient was referred to his gastroenterological team for further consultation regarding the appropriate post-operative management. At the 10-month follow-up, our patient was asymptomatic and without new episodes of intestinal haemorrhage.