A 62-year-old Caucasian man with a medical history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, Hepatitis C, and HIV (both carrier state) was admitted to the emergency room. The patient complained about palpitations and intermittent chest pain of crushing nature that began 3 days prior to admission, was not effort related and lasted several minutes each time. Physical examination was unremarkable; apical impulse was not displaced, heart sounds were regular, S1 and S2 were normal, without any murmurs, rubs or gallops; breath sounds were clear bilaterally without any rales, wheezes, or rhonchi. Blood pressure, pulse, and SpO2 were also within normal range. Electrocardiogram recording was obtained and showed sinus rhythm (80 b.p.m.) and left anterior hemiblock, without any signs of acute ischaemia. All laboratory parameters were within normal range, Troponin I was undetectable. The patient was admitted to the Cardiology ward for further investigation.
A thorough look in the patient medical records indicated that the patient underwent a diagnostic coronary angiography 4 year prior to present admission due to chest pain, demonstrating non-obstructive coronary disease.
During hospitalization, transthoracic echocardiography was performed and revealed a mild dilatation of the left ventricle (13 mm, normal range 6–12 mm); left ventricular diastolic dysfunction; mildly dilated left atrium (43 mm, normal range 20–40 mm); mild mitral regurgitation and dilated aortic root diameter (37 mm, normal range 20–34 mm) with mildly dilated ascending aorta (39 mm, normal range 20–38 mm).
The patient also underwent a diagnostic coronary angiography; after injection of contrast material to the left coronary system, a tortuous communication between the LMCA and the LAD artery was demonstrated , without any signs of stenosis along the mentioned arteries. The LCX showed a 99% ostial stenosis and a drug eluting stent was deployed with good angiographic result. At follow-up post-procedure, the patient reported a relief of his symptoms. On the next day, he was discharged in stable condition.
To the time of writing this case report (9 month after discharge), the patient did not have reoccurrences of the chest pain and he was not admitted again to any hospital.