A 21 years old male underwent uncemented modular total hip arthroplasty in 2002 for secondary arthritis of the left hip. The implants used were AML A PLUS 11.0 mm femoral stem, 28 mm COCR head and DURALOC acetabular liner and shell 50 mm (Depuy Orthopaedics, Warsaw, USA). He had good outcome in terms of pain relief and restoration of function. He lateral started working as a Policeman.
In January 2012, at the age of 31 years, he presented with acute onset pain and inability to move left hip while he was turning in bed. Plain radiograph of the hip confirmed dissociation of the components at the head and neck taper junction without dislocation ( and ). Due to anticipated difficulties in closed reduction, open reduction was performed. It was noted that there was wear of the acetabular liner and wear at the head and neck taper. Implants were reduced and patient was advised revision of total hip prosthesis.
As the facility for revision surgery was not available at our centre, he was referred to a higher centre for revision hip surgery. In April 2012, the revision surgery was performed using trochanteric osteotomy when it was noted that the acetabular shell and femoral stem were well fixed but there was failure of taper as seen by wear of the trunnion , which did not engage the femoral head taper, and there was wear of the acetabular liner . Similar changes of wear were noted in the dissociated head component. No abnormal reaction or changes in the peri-prosthetic tissues were noted.
Intra-operatively, attempts at attaching the new femoral head component with 2 different trunion changes failed, hence the full coated femoral stem was removed using proximal femur split. Femoral component was revised in full and acetabular liner was changed as the shell was well fixed.
Two years after revision surgery, patient reported no pain and was ambulating without support. The extended femoral osteotomy had healed well. There was evidence of heterotopic ossification resulting in some restriction of movements .