A 37-year-old man with multifocal glioblastoma multiforme and a Karnofsky Performance Score (KPS) of 90 was referred to the outpatient neurosurgery clinic of our hospital on 31 October 2018. He had two gliomatous foci in the left frontal and left parietal lobes. The patient had undergone surgical resection for his left parietal focus at another center 35 days before his presentation to our institution. He also underwent surgical resection at our institution for another lesion in the frontal lobe through a frontal craniotomy on 05 November 2018. He experienced episodes of focal seizures, which were controlled with levetiracetam 500 mg two times daily. The patient also reported having a paternal history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus type II. Our standard physical examinations showed a reduction in the muscle forces of the upper extremities (4/5 on both the left and right sides). Histopathological analysis of both foci revealed that these tumors were grade IV astrocytomas (glioblastoma multiforme). According to the immunohistochemistry and PCR tests, both foci were IDH1/2-wildtype, and the MGMT promoter was methylated under 5%. Standard radiation therapy was started on 25 November 2018, following which temozolomide (75 mg/m2/day) was taken 1 h before the initiation of radiation therapy for the first week and then continued separately for 54 days until 20 January 2019 . After the radio/chemotherapy was completed, the patient volunteered for participation in our stem cell-mediated gene therapy program for glioblastoma.
Our study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Medical Research at the Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences (License number: IR.SBMU.REC.1400.002). For all procedures performed in this study, the patient was informed about the experimental nature of the treatment, unexpected outcomes, and possible adverse events, and then, written informed consent was obtained.
Autologous bone marrow-derived MSCs were collected from the iliac bone in the operation room under sterile conditions. After the aspiration, 100 ml of bone marrow blood sample was diluted in Hanks' Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS, Sigma) at a ratio of 1:1. The patient was discharged a day after the procedure. Utilizing the protocol discussed in our previous study , samples went through a density gradient centrifugation by Ficol (density 1.077 g.L−1, Sigma) at a ratio of 1:3. Samples were then centrifuged, and their mononuclear cell layer was recovered from the gradient interface. To isolate mononuclear cells, the cells were centrifuged three times, with less gradient and reduced time for separating platelets. To characterize the isolated cells, they were resuspended in PBS, and they were incubated and conjugated with monoclonal antibodies containing CD73, CD45, CD44, CD90, and CD105 (eBioScience, Inc., San Diego, CA) and different dyes subsequently. Finally, these markers were determined using FACScan flow cytometry (PartecPAS III-Partec, Germany). The culture medium was then changed every 3 days till the cell number reached 5 × 105.
The Human Embryonic Kidney (HEK) 293 cell lines were obtained from the Iranian Biological Resource Center. Subsequently, these cell lines were cultured in high-glucose Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, Gibco, USA). This medium contains 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco, USA), 1% non-essential amino acids (Invitrogen, USA), and L-glutamine (2 mM, Gibco, USA). The cells were cultured under the standard conditions of 95% humidity and 5% CO2 at 37°C.
The thymidine kinase enzyme was cloned into the pCDH-CMV-MCS-EF1-copGFP plasmid (Stem Cell Research Center, Iran) that was previously digested with BamHI and EcoRI endonuclease enzymes (Thermo Fisher, USA). For lentivirus production, HEK-293T cells were co-transfected with pCDH-thymidine kinase, pSPAX2 plasmid (packaging plasmid contains Gag, Pol, Rev, and Tat), and pMD2 plasmid [containing glycoprotein (G) of vesicular stomatitis viruses (VSVs)] by calcium phosphate reagent (Sigma Aldrich, USA) . The supernatants were harvested every 12 h for 3 days after transfection and concentrated by ultracentrifugation at 47,000 × g for 2 h at 4°C. To express thymidine kinase in MSCs, these cells were cultured in DMEM/F12 (Gibco, USA) medium and then transduced with pCDH-thymidine kinase lentivirus. A total of 3 × 105 mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) were seeded in a T25 flask and subsequently transduced the next day by considering the multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 40 (TU/cell) after determination via the serial dilution transduction method. In addition, transduced cells with pCDH-TK were selected by puromycin (Sigma Aldrich, USA) (2 μg/ml) as a eukaryotic selective marker. Following the purification of transduced cells using puromycin, genetically modified MSCs were washed three times with normal saline (Iranian Parenteral and Pharmaceutical Company, Iran).
Flow cytometry and cell morphology assay confirmed the characteristics of isolated cells from the patient as MSCs. The cell population indicated the positive expression of CD44, CD90, CD73, and CD105 (94.8, 90.6, 95.1, and 52.5%, respectively); however, CD45 were not expressed (< 0.08%) (, ).
After virus production and concentration, the virus titration was determined by using flow cytometry. Following the titration of recombinant viruses, the mesenchymal stem cells were transduced with a certain amount of the virus (MOI 40) .
The patient was hospitalized a day before surgery. Under general anesthesia, through a new burr hole, an injection catheter was placed in the bed of the frontal tumor focus with the guidance of a direct intraoperative navigation system (using a 1.5T MR system, Siemens Magnetom Trio, Siemens Medical Systems, Erlangen, Germany, and Synergy Cranial Version 2.2, Medtronic, Louisville, Colorado). The patient then received 5 × 105 bone marrow-derived MSCs transfected by lentivirus containing HSV-tk enzyme in 1 cc volume via the injection catheter. The catheter was placed at the injection site for 1 min to prevent leakage. We administered 5 mg/kg of ganciclovir over 1 h and 48 h after cell injection. Ganciclovir was administered two times daily for 14 days (28 doses in total).
During the therapy, the patient was assessed for any adverse events based on the common terminology criteria for adverse events (CTCAE, version 4.3). Considering the adverse events of ganciclovir, blood and urine samples from the patient were obtained and analyzed regularly during hospitalization to assess hematologic toxicity and renal impairment.
The patient was followed up for tumor recurrence and progression using magnetic resonance imaging every 3 months. The MRI images were compared with those taken before the injection and checked by two independent neurosurgeons. The Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) was used for MRI assessments. In this criteria, recurrence or progression of the tumor was defined as having at least a 20% increase in the sum of the longest diameters of the target lesions .
After the cell injection, our patient was in a good general state and was conscious. The patient had a previous history of seizures, and because the regular seizure medication was discontinued, he experienced a seizure episode 3 months after gene therapy. Generally, adverse events and systemic complications were not observed.
After the injection on 19 February 2019, the patient's follow-up revealed a recurrence of the parietal focus on 09 December 2019. However, the frontal focus had a slight and unremarkable enhancement. On the last radiological follow-up (on 18 March 2020), the frontal focus showed no prominent recurrence; however, the size of the parietal focus increased and extended to the contralateral hemisphere through the corpus callosum . Eventually, the patient passed away on 16 July 2020 (progression-free survival (PFS) = 293 days, overall survival (OS) = 513 days) .