A 51-year-old Moroccan male with past medical history of type 2 diabetes mellitus presented to the emergency department for evaluation of his acute symptoms. He complained of epigastric pain and fatigue for 3 days. He was further reported to have bouts of nonbloody, nonbilious vomiting associated with poor oral intake. He denied any chest pain, fever, or cough. He had no change in bowel habits. He reported no contact with a sick person or recent travel history. His family and psychosocial histories were unremarkable. Upon documenting his medication history, the patient was on metformin regularly for 10 years for his diabetes. Dapagliflozin 5 mg was added to metformin 1000 mg daily 12 weeks prior to presentation. The symptoms started the day following completion of Ramadan fasting over a 30-day period. Fasting from food and drinks lasted daily for approximately 14 hours daily. He broke his fast with a three-course meal, starting with a light meal which was mainly based on fruits and fluids, a second course of protein-based items along with vegetables and carbohydrate-containing items. Finally, the meal was concluded with carbohydrate-based items. Drinks were consumed throughout the fast-breaking period.
Vital signs in the emergency department were documented as follows: Kussmaul’s pattern of breathing, with a respiratory rate of 22 breaths/min and a pulse rate of 112 bpm. The patient was otherwise alert and oriented. His chest and abdominal examination were unremarkable. DKA workup, blood sugar level, venous blood gas, and urine analysis were carried out; the results are presented in Table .
Initial blood workup revealed a random blood glucose of 13.5 mmol/l (243 mg/dL). The venous blood gas results showed severe metabolic acidosis with a high anion gap, pH of 6.9 and PCO2 of 20.4 mmHg with HCO3 of 4 mmol/L. The calculated anion gap was 30 mEq/L. Urine was positive for ketones and glucose. Based on the above presentation, euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis was diagnosed. The patient was resuscitated with 4 L of normal saline intravenously, and insulin at a dose of 1 unit/kg was initiated.
The cause of ketoacidosis was investigated to rule out other precipitants for acidosis. Complete blood work-up showed a mild increase in white blood cells at 16.5 × 109/L (normal range of 4.5–11.0 × 109/L) with a high neutrophil count of 14.56 × 109/L (normal range of 1.8–7.70 × 109/L). Inflammatory markers, such as C-reactive protein, were within the normal range. Furthermore, a 12-lead electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm with minimal nonspecific changes in the inferior leads, which could be related to increased respiration. However, cardiac enzymes were within normal range. The patient did not report any respiratory symptoms; therefore, a chest X-ray was not indicated.
He was admitted to a regular medical ward and was kept on insulin and sodium bicarbonate infusions. Metformin and dapagliflozin were not resumed. The patient’s condition improved and as did his metabolic parameters . The blood gas normalized, and the anion gap closed. His capillary blood glucose readings were optimal for the inpatient setting. The patient’s insulin infusion was bridged to subcutaneous insulin. He was discharged on insulin glargine 10 units at bedtime and aspart insulin 5 units before meals.