A 62 year-old male presented to hospital with exertional angina and past medical history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes, obstructive sleep apnea, allergic rhinitis, umbilical herniorrhaphy, and abdominal obesity with a body-mass index of 35. He also had known coronary artery disease with a myocardial infarction in 2007 requiring percutaneous intervention to the right coronary artery. He was initially trialed on medical management for his exertional symptoms, however worsening of the angina prompted a repeat coronary angiogram, which demonstrated severe three-vessel coronary artery disease with preserved left ventricular function.
As such, the patient was consented for coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), and subsequently underwent a triple CABG with anastomosis of the left internal thoracic artery to the left anterior descending artery, an in-situ skeletonized right internal thoracic artery to a large obtuse marginal artery, and a left endo-radial artery to the posterior descending artery. Large amounts of pericardial fat were noted at the time of opening of the pericardium. Total cardiopulmonary bypass time was 58 min and total cross-clamp time was 44 min. No blood products were required, and good graft flows were confirmed with a Medistim flowmetry device [Medistem ASA, Norway]. Postoperative transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) demonstrated normal biventricular function. The patient was brought to the Cardiac Surgery Recovery Unit in normal sinus rhythm, without any inotrope or vasopressor support.
Over the next few hours in the recovery unit, his serum lactate began to rise. The patient was initially responsive to fluid resuscitation, however, the lactate continued to trend upwards and by the next morning, was as high as 11.3 mmol/L. There was minimal drainage from the mediastinal chest tubes; approximately 300 ml of serosanguinous fluid over 12 h. Three electrocardiograms were performed over the course of the day, all of which were negative for any new S-T changes. A TEE demonstrated a structure compressing the right ventricle (RV) and right atrium (RA), though ventricular function was preserved with no new regional wall motion abnormalities. (Additional file A)) A CT Chest was performed to delineate the structure along the right heart and significant mediastinal and paracardiac fat was identified, though without evidence of compression . Despite a positive fluid balance of 5.5 L, vasopressors continued to increase, with a peak norepinephrine of 16 mcg/minute and vasopressin of 2.4 units/h. Given the hemodynamic instability and inability to wean mechanical ventilation, the decision was made to take the patient back to the operating room for re-exploration, approximately 24 h after his initial operation.
In the operating room, the previous sternotomy incision was reopened and sternal wires removed. Minimal thrombus was encountered in the mediastinum. However, a large amount of (now edematous) fat was identified encircling the heart. As such a radical anterior lipectomy was performed with electrocautery, including the entire thymus, bilateral pleural fat pads, and mediastinal fat superiorly around the innominate vein and inferiorly, down to the pericardio-diaphragmatic junction . A total of 250 g of fat was removed . Hemostasis was ensured, and new mediastinal chest tubes were inserted before closing the chest.
Upon completion, the patient continued to be in normal sinus rhythm, however, now required half the vasopressors needed prior to the case. Additionally, the transesophageal echocardiogram revealed improved RA and RV filling. (Additional file B) The patient was brought back to the Cardiac Surgery Recovery Unit, where he was extubated and completely weaned from vasoactive medications shortly thereafter. He continued to progress well, and was discharged home on postoperative day 5 with no outstanding concerns.