A 49-year-old man presented to another hospital complaining of an anterior chest pain. A chest computed tomography (CT) showed an anterior mediastinal mass that had cystic changes and the patient was referred to our hospital for examination and treatment. The physical examination showed no signs or symptoms of systemic or autoimmune disorder including myasthenia gravis (MG) such as muscle weakness. No definitive diagnosis of MG was made at our department of neurology. His laboratory test results revealed elevations in an anti-acetylcholine receptor antibody (AChR-ab) level (3.5 nmol/L). The contrast-enhanced CT on admission showed the size of tumor was 60 × 30 × 55 mm in diameter and the boundary with the pericardium or left brachiocephalic vein seemed to be partially unclear . CT also showed a low-density area found in a part of the tumor . The tumor was suspected to be an invasive thymoma without MG, with infiltration into the pericardium and left brachiocephalic vein, clinically Masaoka stage III.
A surgical resection was conducted through a median sternotomy. The tumor was located on the left upper portion of the thymus. It showed a strong inflammatory adhesion of the surrounding tissues of the thymus, especially the left brachiocephalic vein, left upper lobe and left phrenic nerve though there was no invasion into the pericardium. We performed an extended thymectomy combined with partial resection of left brachiocephalic vein, left upper lobe and left phrenic nerve . The total length of the operation was 246 min, and the amount of blood loss was 160 ml. The patient was discharged 8 days after the operation with no chest pain and no postoperative complications.
Microscopically, the operative specimen showed that the tumor was 59 × 47 × 21 mm, and consisted of a solid lesion with a cystic component. Polygonal atypical cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and round nuclei were proliferating in sheet form. In the upper part of the tumor, there was an extensive hemorrhagic necrosis suggesting infarction . The tumor had infiltrated partially into the surrounding adipose tissue, but it did not invade the phrenic nerve, left brachiocephalic vein and left lung. Based on these findings, the mass pathologically classified as WHO type B2 and Masaoka stage II.
Microscopic findings also showed, around the thymoma, there were many cysts lined with the cubic epithelium and the atypical squamous epithelium. There was an eosinophilic reservoir including cholesterin crystals in the cysts, and Hassall corpuscles in the cystic wall, accompanied by a mild chronic inflammatory infiltration. According to these findings, we diagnosed thymoma with MTCs .