A 55-year old man visited our hospital for evaluation of epigastric pain and poor oral intake of 2 months duration. A gastroscopy demonstrated a deep ulcerative lesion in the lesser curvature side of the pre-pyloric antrum and a large amount of food retained in the stomach because of GOO . The biopsy revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma.
An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed thickening of the gastric wall, adjacent fat infiltration, and a large amount of food in the stomach, suggesting passage disturbance. The CT scan also showed enlarged lymph nodes along the common hepatic and left gastric arteries, multiple enhancing omental masses, nodular peritoneal thickening suggestive of peritoneal carcinomatosis, and multiple hepatic metastases .
The serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 343 ng/ml and the carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 level was within normal limits. The patient was diagnosed with unresectable gastric cancer with GOO and several incurable factors. The clinical stage was stage IV (cT4N2M1). The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status was grade 1 .
The patient underwent a laparoscopic gastrojejunostomy for palliation of the GOO. The peritoneal drainage catheter was placed during the laparoscopic procedure. During laparoscopic inspection, there were several metastatic nodules on the omentum. One of the nodules was biopsied and confirmed to be metastatic adenocarcinoma. On the 3rd and 12th days after surgery, for intraperitoneal chemotherapy, 40 mg of docetaxel and 150 mg of carboplatin were introduced over 2 hours in 1000ml of saline. Hyperthermia was not used in the intraperitoneal chemotherapy. Simultaneously, he received 85 mg/m2 of oxaliplatin on the 1st day as a 2-hour infusion followed by 600 mg/m2 of 5-fluorouracil (FU) as a 22-hour infusion for 2 days (FOLFOX regimen) from the 8th post-operative day repeated every 2 weeks.
After six courses, a CT scan revealed marked reduction in the size of the hepatic metastases, and the tumor markers returned to normal levels. After the completion of nine courses of chemotherapy, the gastric wall thickening, metastatic foci in the liver, omental infiltration of the metastatic nodules, and enlarged lymph nodes noted on CT scan resolved . Positron emission tomography (PET) scan showed no metabolic evidence of malignancy. A gastroscopy showed an ulcerated scar in the antrum and the GOO and passage disturbance had also resolved .
No malignant cells were detected on the endoscopic biopsy specimen, and a CR was determined according to the response evaluation criteria in solid tumors (RECIST) guideline.
He underwent a radical subtotal gastrectomy with a D3 lymph node dissection 4 months after the initial palliative surgery. The pathologic results showed no residual primary tumor and no lymph node metastasis of 43 dissected lymph nodes. There was no peritoneal metastatic focus in the surgical specimen including omentum and visceral peritoneum. Postoperatively, he received oral chemotherapy with daily 600 mg of doxifluridine for 12 months. He maintained a CR for 18 months after the last operation.