A 60-year-old woman with a previous history of severe COPD classified as GOLD D was admitted to the hospital with acute hypercapnic respiratory failure due to a COPD exacerbation. She reported three days of worsened dyspnea, larger production of sputum and low fever. She was an ex-smoker of 120 pack.years and had been diagnosed with COPD 10 years earlier. Despite optimized medical treatment, she had limiting dyspnea and severe obstruction on pulmonary function tests (FEV1 of 0.48 L-19% of its predicted value). In the emergency room, she was initially treated with NPPV, but after 30 min her respiratory pattern had not improved, arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH = 7.18 and PCO2 = 82, so she was intubated, mechanically ventilated and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU).
On the first two days of mechanical ventilation she was sedated with fentanyl and propofol and ventilated in pressure controlled mode using an ICU ventilator (Servoi, Maquet, Sweden). She received antibiotics, bronchodilators, and methylprednisolone, and on the third, day sedation was changed to dexmedetomedyne and the ventilatory mode was changed to pressure support, with a PEEP of 5 cmH2O, pressure support of 10 cmH2O over PEEP, and FIO2 of 50%. On the fourth day on mechanical ventilation she showed significant improvement and dexmedetomedyne was reduced to low doses to submit her to a spontaneous breathing trial (SBT). An EAdi catheter (Maquet, Sweden) was inserted as part of a clinical trial (NCT01137271), which evaluated Neurally Adjusted Ventilatory Assist (NAVA) during spontaneous breathing trials (SBT). The catheter was positioned according to manufacturer’s instructions and adequate position was checked using a specific screen in the ventilator, similarly to previous studies and its adequate position was checked before each recording. EAdi was captured at 100Hz using ServoTracker v4.0 (Maquet, Sweden) for five minutes at each situation of interest. We processed and analyzed the data using MatLab (Mathworks, MA, USA), which automatically detected the initiation and termination of inspiratory efforts, and calculated peak EAdi. Respiratory rate (RR) was calculated by dividing the number of respiratory cycles by the number of minutes in each recording. We excluded cycles with artifacts and averaged all the cycles in each five-minute recording to generate mean values for EAdi for each situation .
The patient was submitted to an SBT in pressure support, with PEEP of 5 cmH2O and pressure support of 5 cmH2O, for 30 min. We used standard criteria of SBT failure, such as respiratory rate greater than 35, reduced tidal volume, agitation or diaphoresis, hypoxemia, among others. She didn’t present any of these criteria and was extubated. In our ICU, we regularly use NPPV after extubation to prevent acute respiratory failure for high risk patients, and a few minutes after extubation, while we were preparing to install NPPV, we observed clinical signs of increased respiratory effort, including retraction of the intercostal spaces and accessory muscle recruitment. At this moment, we noted that EAdi was higher than during MV, over 90 μV. After the start of NPPV, EAdi decreased substantially, which was compatible with muscle unloading promoted by NPPV . Over the following days, the EAdi signal was used to monitor and compare respiratory effort during NPPV and spontaneous breathing .
The patient was kept in NPPV in a dedicated NPPV ventilator (V60, Philips, The Netherlands) in bi-level mode (inspiratory support over an expiratory pressurization), with a total face mask (Performax, Phillips Respironics, PA, USA) almost continuously for the next two days, with 30-min intervals of spontaneous breathing with a nasal oxygen catheter every six hours. On NPPV, the patient reported less dyspnea, and clinical signs of respiratory effort were less prominent as compared to spontaneous breathing. She received clonazepam 2 mg twice a day and quetiapine 50 mg twice a day to control anxiety and facilitate sleep.
Once a day, we recorded EAdi for the last 5 min of NPPV and for the last 5 min of spontaneous breathing. On the first two days, EAdi gradually decreased on NPPV .
On the third day, EAdi on NPPV was no longer significantly lower than in spontaneous breathing and NPPV was weaned. After 6 days of ICU stay, she was discharged to a clinical ward, and three days later she was discharged home.