Girl M. 4 years old, entered the clinic with complaints of parents for growth retardation, pain in the lower limbs and stiff joints. The genealogy analysis found that the marriage was unrelated, parents were young and healthy, the girl was the only child in the family.
The girl was from the first pregnancy, complicated by an acute respiratory viral infection in the first trimester. The birth was at 40 weeks of pregnancy. Body weight at birth was 3170.0 g, body length was 52 cm. Early motor development proceeded with a slight delay: she began to support the head at the age of 2.5 months, sit at 9 months, and walk at 15 months. The first words began to be pronounced at the age of 12 months.
At the age of 18 months, there were complaints about the short stature of the child, stiffness of the joints. After analyzing the karyotype, which revealed a partial deletion of the long arm of chromosome X - 46, X, del (X) (q 22.1), Turner syndrome was diagnosed. However, due to the presence of a Hurler-like facial phenotype, a genetic doctor suspected type I mucopolysaccharidosis (Hurler syndrome). The study of GAG urine by the method of one-dimensional electrophoresis revealed an increased renal excretion of heparan and dermatan sulfates, which is typical for mucopolysaccharidosis I, II and VII types.
When the girl was admitted to the clinic, her indicators of physical development were disharmonious: the body length (100 cm) corresponded to 3–10 percentile; body weight (17 kg) 90–97 percentile; the head circumference (54 cm) indicated macrocephaly and was above 97 percentile. Pronounced phenotypic features were noted : rough facial features, sunken nose, full lips, eye hypertelorism, macroglossia, short neck, low position of the auricles, stiffness of large and small joints, equino-varus deformity of the feet, kyphosis of thoracic spine. The hair was dark, eyes - brown, cornea is transparent without visual signs of turbidity. The child’s psychomotor development corresponded to her age: phrasal speech and adequate reaction to the environment. The muscle tone was moderately reduced. Active and passive movements were limited in large and small joints. Tendon reflexes from the hands and feet were alive, pathological reflexes were absent. She was able to walk independently. The examination of the heart revealed a sinus tachycardia with a heart rate of 133–143 per minute, normal position of the electrical axis of the heart, incomplete blockade of the right leg of the bundle, and a slight decrease in the repolarization processes in the myocardium in the form of the T wave flattening. The echocardiogram detected degenerative changes of the mitral and aortic valves with insignificant stenosis, the presence of diagonal trabeculae in the cavity of the left ventricle, and normal dimensions of the heart cavities.
The ultrasound scanning of the abdominal organs and kidneys revealed hepatic splenomegaly (6.5 and 3 cm, respectively) with diffuse changes in the liver parenchyma and a large number of enlarged lymph nodes in the gates of the liver and mesenteric lymph nodes. An increase in the gallbladder and thickening of its wall were also revealed. An increase in kidney volume and bilateral nephroptosis was diagnosed.
The ultrasound examination of the pelvic organs showed the location of the uterus in a typical place, its outline was even and drop-shaped, and the structure of the myometrium was homogeneous. At the site of the projection of the right ovary, the avascular structure was of somewhat reduced echogenicity, an oval shape, 1.0 × 0.5 cm in size with a clear and even contour of the homogeneous structure. The left ovary could not be clearly visualized.
The radiographic examination of the hands revealed coarsening and expansion of the phalanx, hypoplasia of the terminal phalanges, and a backlog of bone age for 1.5 years. Radiography of the shins and knee joints showed valgus deformation of the shins of the legs, flattening of the epiphyses, and osteoporosis.
Radiography of the hip joints, thoracic and lumbar spine noted asymmetry of the pelvic bones with a decrease in the head of the femur; flattening of the thoracic vertebrae and their cuboid shape in the lumbar region. All these x-ray changes, according to the conclusion of a radiologist, are characteristic of mucopolysaccharidosis, mostly of types II and I.
The examination of the oculist revealed a high degree of myopia with astigmatism of both eyes.
Clinical blood and urine tests revealed no pathology. Biochemical indicators, reflecting the state of the main types of metabolism, were normal.
The results of the study of the amino acid spectrum of blood serum and urine corresponded to physiological values. The level of thyroid hormone, thyroid stimulating hormone and somatomedin C in the blood serum was normal.
The study of lysosomal enzymes showed normal alpha-L-iduronidase activity and a sharp decrease in the activity of iduronate sulfatase in dry blood stains: 0.001 μM/l/h, at a rate of 2.5–50 μM/l/h. The result of molecular genetic analysis in exon 9 of the IDS gene revealed a new, non-registered (in the international database of HGMD professional) deletion in the hemizygous state. This deletion was not detected in the girl’s father, but was detected in the mother in a heterozygous state.