A 70-year-old female with a history of atrial fibrillation, hypercholesterolemia, and migraine with aura was referred to the neurology outpatient clinic due to lower extremity pain. Her medical history included a lower back surgery due to spondylolisthesis 19 years earlier (laminectomy LIV-V and spondylodesis LIV-V/LV-SI) with postoperative right LV-SI nerve root damage and motor weakness.
The patient reported 1-year history of neuropathic pain bilaterally in the heels and lateral parts of the feet that had gradually progressed proximally up to the shins. In addition, the patient had noticed new-onset involuntary movements of the toes, which she described as cramps and twitching.
On clinical examination, there was mild weakness in the distal lower extremity motor strength together with incomplete right peroneal paresis, partial distal lower extremity sensory loss, bilateral loss of the Achilles reflex, and the gait was affected by the right-sided peroneal paresis. There was a continuous involuntary movement bilaterally in her toes at rest (online suppl. video). These movements could be stopped with a gentle touch on the toes or by asking the patient to focus on stopping the movement. Otherwise, her neurological examination was unremarkable.
Before the onset of the involuntary toe movements, the patient had undergone lumbar spine MRI, which was unremarkable, and ENMG showing old bilateral LV and right SI nerve root damages. Cervical and thoracic spine MRI and laboratory examinations were unremarkable. PLMT was diagnosed based on the clinical phenomenology.
Several medications failed to alleviate the symptoms and were discontinued due to lack of efficacy. The inefficacious medications included NSAIDs, paracetamol, paracetamol+codeine, oxycodone, tizanidine, amitriptyline, gabapentin, tramadol, lamotrigine, and levodopa. The patient developed anxiety and depression because of her disabling symptoms, which were partly alleviated with oxazepam and escitalopram. Mild benefit was obtained with clonazepam and pramipexole, but both were discontinued due to side effects. Finally, a combination of gabapentin (600 mg three times per day) and baclofen (15 mg three times per day) provided partial benefit for pain but not for the involuntary movements. At this point, the patient declined from botulinum toxin injections due to fear of side effects.
The patient received repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) treatment to several targets, including the primary motor cortex (bilateral lower limb M1 representation, 10 Hz), supplementary motor area (bilateral SMA, 1 Hz), right secondary somatosensory area (S2, 10 Hz), and left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) (10 Hz). No significant benefit was achieved for either pain or movement disorder. In addition, the symptoms did not respond to transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) either. tDCS was carried out with the cathode over the bilateral SMA and the anode over the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (2 mA, 20 min per session, 15 sessions in 3 weeks). Dorsal column stimulator was declined because of the anticoagulant therapy.