A 6-year-old female intact, indoor only, Siamese cat presented with an 8-week history of vomiting, which was described as having progressively worsened over the duration of clinical signs. The vomitus was initially described as partly digested food. No dysphagia or regurgitation was noted by the owner. During the initial period, the cat continued to eat, but at presentation it was reported to have demonstrated hyporexia/anorexia for 2 weeks. During this time, the cat was reported to have ‘vomited’ clear fluid only. The cat was reported to demonstrate frequent episodic gagging. On examination, the cat was found to be markedly underweight (body condition score 2/9). She was dull and estimated to be approximately 8% dehydrated. Physical examination revealed mild bilateral enlargement of the mandibular lymph nodes and halitosis with stertorous pharyngeal sounds. Thoracic auscultation was unremarkable, heart rate was 160 bpm and respiratory rate was 36 bpm. Abdominal palpation revealed cranial abdominal discomfort and gas-filled loops of intestine. The systolic blood pressure was 130 mmHg (Doppler). Blood samples were taken for acid–base, coagulation, complete blood count and serum biochemistry; these demonstrated mild alkalosis, pH 7.48 (reference interval [RI] 7.25–7.45), prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (42.5 s, RI 10–20) and an elevated white blood cell count (WBC) (21.8 × 109/l, RI 7.0–20.0 × 109/l) due to neutrophilia (18 × 109/l, RI 2.5–12.8 × 109/l). The chloride was decreased (109 mmol/l, RI 117–140), as was the phosphate (0.85 mmol/l, RI 1.4–2.5) and albumin (22.4 g/l, RI 28–39), while the fibrinogen was increased (7.6 g/l, RI 2–4) and glucose (10.8 mmol/l, RI 3.3–5.0). Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a large volume of gas throughout the gastrointestinal tract, limiting the examination. The gastric wall and intestine demonstrated normal layering and thickness (0.21–0.27 mm). There was a small amount of non-shadowing, echogenic, gravity-dependent material within the gallbladder. The hepatic parenchyma and gallbladder wall were unremarkable. Both adrenal glands were mildly enlarged (width of 0.5 cm on the left and 0.54 cm on the right). In addition, there was a 2.25 cm-diameter anechoic, fluid-filled mass noted in the caudal abdominal cavity; this was thought to be an ovarian cyst. No other abnormalities were identified; however, full assessment was hindered by the presence of luminal gas.
Conscious radiographs of the thorax and cranial abdomen demonstrated an ovoid shape (5 × 3 cm in size) with gas-filled opacity surrounded by a thin, soft tissue wall, located in the caudodorsal thorax, between the aorta and the caudal vena cava; distension by gas of the esophagus was seen cranial to the previously described structure . There was marked and generalized gas distension of the small intestine; part of the stomach was still seen within the abdominal cavity. Based on the radiographic findings, a diagnosis of hiatal hernia was made with a potential differential of a gastro-esophageal intussusception.
In the light of the clinical progression, acid-base imbalances and static radiographic findings, emergency surgical exploration was advised. Before surgery the cat was placed on 0.9% normal saline, and both the pH and electrolytes were monitored closely. Surgical exploration identified a hiatal hernia, with the body of the stomach having entered the mediastinum via the esophageal hiatus, consistent with a type II hiatal hernia. The hernia was reduced, and phrenoplasty and esophagopexy was performed. In addition, a left-sided gastrostomy tube was placed. The cystic ovary was identified, and an ovariohysterectomy was performed. On recovery from anesthesia, thoracic radiography was repeated . There was no esophageal distension appreciable on the follow-up radiograph, and the gas-filled structure in the caudodorsal thorax was no longer visible. Free gas in the peritoneal space was seen secondarily to surgery.
Postoperatively, the cat was hospitalized for 10 days with the gastrotomy tube in place. However, during this time the tube was not used, as the cat started eating well, with no further vomiting.