A 79-year-old man was admitted to the intensive care unit on November 2017 for a ruptured penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer of the ascending aorta identified on CT scan .
He had a significant past medical history: end-stage renal failure undergoing dialysis, and myocardial infarctions with previous stentings (the last infarction dating back 10 months). Earlier in the day, the patient had presented with severe retrosternal chest pain for which a myocardial infarction was initially suspected, but the electrocardiography and the transthoracic echography performed in emergency excluded the diagnosis. A CT scan was realized and showed a local aortic plaque rupture of the ascending aorta with active contrast leakage, the patient was then transferred to our institution.
At admission the patient was haemodynamically stable with good blood pressure, a normal pulmonary auscultation with oxygen saturation at 100%, and no more pain. The patient was considered for open cardiac surgery but was evaluated at a high mortality risk based on his age, his medical history, and significant calcifications on his aorta. Our vascular surgical team decided then to perform an endovascular repair.
In emergency, an off the shelf endovascular stent graft was used. The rupture measured 12 mm and was located at just a few millimetres proximal to the IA. The ascending aorta measured 8 cm from the coronary sinuses to the IA. The largest diameter measured along the length of the ascending aorta was 33 mm . The shortest available off the shelf thoracic stent graft was the 10 cm length Conformable GORE® TAG® Thoracic Endoprothesis (WL Gore & associates, Flagstaff, AZ, USA).
In a hybrid operative room, first we performed an IA debranching with a left to right common carotid bypass through a cervicotomy using GORETEX vascular graft (8 mm). Via a transfemoral approach, the IA was embolized with a plug emplatzer (16 mm). Then, we considered a femoral approach to place the stent graft, but due to bad femoral access and after determining the working length of the delivery catheter would be insufficient to reach the most proximal landing in the ascending aorta, we decided a transapical approach would be necessary. A 24-Fr introducer sheath was placed through a left ventricular transapical approach by using a mini-thoracotomy. The endograft was deployed under rapid pacing with three-dimensional image fusion-guided thoracic endovascular aortic repair . The intra-procedural aortography demonstrated a well-positioned endograft with successful seal of the rupture.
During post-operative period, the patient underwent an ischaemic stroke with sudden right hemiparesis for 48 h followed by complete recovery. The patient was discharged from the intensive care unit at 19 days and from the hospital at 30 days with an antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 75 mg).
The post-operative CT scan showed a successful exclusion of the rupture . Eight months after surgical treatment, the patient is in an excellent neurological condition without sequelae, and he recovers a quality of life equivalent to the previous state.