An eight-year-old boy was referred to our department due to recurrent meningitis. The parents reported the occurrence of a minor head trauma at the age of 15 months (falling from a stroller), and initiation of watery nasal discharge since then. The first episode of meningitis happened 3 months later and recurred 6 times in the next 4 years. At the age of 6 the boy was admitted to the neurosurgery department of a district hospital and, most probably because of the suspicious nasal discharge, a craniotomy was performed through a bicoronal approach to seal the assumed leakage at cribriform plate and the adjacent floor of the anterior fossa. In the 2 years following surgery the patient had no episodes of meningitis but he had had 2 attacks of meningitis in the past 6 months before being admitted to our department at a tertiary referral university hospital.
During the performance of a comprehensive otologic history the patient turned out to have hearing impairment in his right ear, which the parents maintained had happened after the first episode of meningitis. He had watery nasal discharge with an undetermined source (diagnostic tests couldn’t prove the discharge was CSF). The oscopic exam was normal but an audiogram showed right ear deafness and the tympanogram was type A on both sides. The high resolution CT revealed an anomaly in the inner ear on the right side .
The anomaly was most likely a mondini variant with associated defects in the lamina cribrosa and in the stapes footplate. An MRI was also completed which showed that the middle ear was partially filled with fluid and there was some collection of fluid in the paranasal sinuses .
Summing up our pre-operative information, we deduced that the inner ear was the culprit but the suspicious nasal discharge, temporary cessation of meningitis episodes after the craniotomy, obliterating anterior fossa floor, and fluid accumulation in the paranasal sinuses all challenged this presumption. Moreover, the small chance of simultaneous CSF otorrhea and rhinorrhea from two separate sources was another point we considered. So we decided to make the final diagnosis in the operating theatre. After inducing anesthesia we used an intrathecal dye; 20mg fluorescein diluted in 10 cc of the patient’s own CSF was injected into L3–L4 space. Initially, an endonasal endoscopy was performed. While implementing the maneuvers to increase intracranial pressure no dye was detected in the nose and in sinuses but a green-colored fluid was noticed in the nasopharynx coming out of eustachian tube orifice. Next we did an otomicroscopic examination and saw that the intact membrane had an accumulation of green fluid behind it .
An exploration of the middle ear was then performed and a defect in the footplate was detected. To correct the problem we did a stepedectomy and the vestibule was obliterated with an oversized muscle plug and then covered by a facial graft. The leakage stopped and the patient was discharged within 4 days. The patient was monitored for the following 18 months during which no significant events occurred.