A 55-year-old obese postmenopausal Hispanic female, with a body mass index (BMI) of 30.5 kg/m2, presented to the emergency department in January 2019 with a 2-day history of diffuse and cramp-like abdominal pain that was worsened by eating. She denied nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, blood in the stool, abdominal trauma, recent surgery, and traveling. Medical history revealed moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) without a history of recent exacerbation. Medications included Ventolin as needed, Symbicort, Spiriva without any new adjustments, and testosterone pellets implanted 2 months prior for treatment of reduced libido. She denied smoking, alcohol, and drug use. Family history was unremarkable. On physical examination, the patient had oxygen saturation of 95% on ambient air, heart rate 104 beats per minute, blood pressure 135/80 mmHg, and temperature 97.7 °F. Moreover, she exhibited unlabored bilateral breathing with good air entry, and her lungs had bibasilar reduced breath sounds, no chest wall retractions, and no use of accessory muscles.
The abdomen was soft, distended, tender to palpation in the mid-abdomen and right subcostal area, reduced bowel sounds throughout, and no rebound tenderness or guarding. Laboratory studies revealed hemoglobin 17.5 g/dL, hematocrit 52%, leukocytes 9600 per μL, aspartate aminotransferase 55 units per L, alanine aminotransferase 62 units per L, lactic acid 1.4 mmol/L, lipase 98 units per L, a negative fecal occult blood test and basic metabolic panel, urinalysis, and PT/PTT within normal limits. Abdominopelvic CT scan with contrast revealed portal vein thrombosis extending to the mesenteric vein . Further evaluation excluded known causes of inherited and acquired prothrombotic states. Additionally, testosterone levels were 182 ng/dL. Hematology–oncology suggested a developed prothrombotic state possibly precipitated by TRT, chronic hypoxia, and obesity. Patient treatment consisted of anticoagulation with low-molecular-weight heparin, which gradually improved her abdominal pain. A follow-up abdominal CT scan on day 3 of anticoagulation showed partial portomesenteric vein recanalization . The patient was later discharged with rivaroxaban for 6 months of anticoagulation therapy and was advised against further HRT. Three months after discharge, she had hemoglobin of 14.5 g/dL and no evidence of prior symptoms or signs of portal hypertension.