A 5-year-old Chinese girl was admitted to our hospital because of her upper-limb high blood pressure. Regular echocardiography revealed coarctation of the aortic arch; this was confirmed by computed tomography (CT), which also showed her left superior pulmonary vein draining into the vertical vein without ASD . She exhibited no special clinical symptoms and the pregnancy ultrasound screening in the prenatal diagnosis of fetal heart defects of the patient was negative. Her upper-limb blood pressure was approximately 110/90 mmHg, whereas her lower-limb blood pressure was approximately 75/50 mmHg.
General anesthesia was induced. Before surgery, we lowered the patient’s body temperature to 35 °C. She was placed in a right lateral position, and thoracotomy was performed through the fourth intercostal space. The aortic arch, anomalous pulmonary vein, descending aorta, and vertical vein were dissected and encircled. After clamping both sides of the coarctation and clipping it out, we sutured the descending aorta with an end-to-end anastomosis. After the coarctation was corrected, we detached the anomalous left superior pulmonary vein from the vertical vein, which we then closed by continuous suturing. Next, we sutured the left superior pulmonary vein to the left atrial appendage. Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography showed no pressure gradient or laminar flow through the anastomosis after blood flow was resumed. After surgery, her upper-limb blood pressure was approximately 90/60 mmHg, whereas her lower-limb blood pressure was approximately 80/50 mmHg. The patient was successfully extubated in the pediatric intensive care unit approximately 2 h after surgery. During this surgical procedure, we used just one unit of platelets in case of anastomotic leakage. One year after surgery, echocardiography demonstrated complete anastomosis of the aorta and the left atrial appendage and there were no pressure gradients both at the site of the coarctation repair and the pulmonary vein re-implantation at the LA. CT scan revealed that the forms of the left superior pulmonary vein and descending aorta were improved.