The patient was a 26-year-old woman. She was admitted to our hospital because of a massive hepatic tumor, which was detected incidentally during investigations for hepatic disorders. She had no history of oral contraceptives. Hepatitis B virus surface antigen and hepatitis C virus antibody were both found to be negative. The patient’s blood tests showed aspartate aminotransferase, 26 U/L (normal range, 5–30 U/L); alanine phosphatase, 14 U/L (normal range, 10–30 U/L); gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, 260 IU/L (normal range, 10–47 IU/L); total bilirubin, 0.7 mg/dL (normal range, 0.2.1.2 mg/dL); carcinoembryonic antigen, 0.9 ng/mL (normal range, < 5.0 ng/mL); carbohydrate antigen 19–9, 9.0 U/mL (normal range, < 15 U/mL); alpha-fetoprotein, 1.1 ng/mL (normal range, < 15 ng/mL); and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II, 192 mAU/mL (normal range, < 15 mAU/mL). An indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min was 4.2% with Child–Pugh grade A. Enhanced computed tomography showed a 150-mm-diameter enhanced tumor on the right hepatic lobe , with a clear border between the tumor and the peripheral tissue. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging also showed an enhanced tumor , with no intensity difference compared to the background liver in the diffusion-weighted images . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography showed a slightly high 2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose uptake in the tumor (maximum standard unit value = 2.7) . Based on these findings, we performed right lobe hepatectomy because malignancy, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), could not be excluded. The tumor was yellowish-brown, with demarcating borders, measuring 155 × 140 mm . Histopathological findings showed diffuse proliferation of the hepatocellular cells, with poor atypia . Although some tumor cells had doublet nuclei, no difference in nuclear size, nuclear chromatin, or karyomitosis was observed. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of hepatocellular adenoma was made. Immunohistochemical analysis was positive for membranous β-catenin, negative for nuclear β-catenin, diffusely positive for GS, positive for LFABP, and negative for SAA and CRP . The non-tumor tissue showed similar membranous β-catenin staining (Additional file : Figure S1). Based on these findings, the tumor was diagnosed as UHCA. Next, we extracted DNA from the tumor and non-tumor tissues using the DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (QIAGEN, Germany) and performed DNA polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using primers to amplify β-catenin (CTNNB1) exons 3, 7, and 8 . The primers designs were referenced from Rebouissou et al. . The primers of exon 3 were designed to detect sequences between exon 2 and exon 4. Electrophoresis of PCR products from exon 3 showed two different bands (No. 1 and No. 2) from the tumor and one band from non-tumor DNA . The same length bands were detected in exon 7 and 8 . We extracted the DNA from each gel, including the bands, and performed direct DNA sequencing. The amplicon of No. 1 band (approximately 530-bp) was detected only from the tumor tissue but not from the non-tumor tissue and showed a large deletion of 631 bp from the intron between exon 2 and exon 3 to exon 4 . Based on these results, we concluded that the tumor had a β-catenin mutation. The amplicon with a band around 1100 bp (No. 2) was considered to be contaminated from non-tumor tissue. There was no mutation in exon 7 and 8 of the tumor. According to these findings, the tumor was demonstrated to have a mutation that had a large deletion including the beta-transducin repeats-containing protein (β-TrCP) binding site.
The postoperative course was good, and the patient was discharged 13 days after the surgery. No recurrence has been observed for 1 year.