The patient was a 22-year-old Mongolian female without sexual experience. She had a height of 174 cm and weight of 65 kg. Her menstrual cycle has been regular since her menarche at the age of 12. There was no remarkable individual or family history. She went to a hospital due to persistent low back pain for 1 week. Abdominal CT examination revealed multiple low-density masses with calcification in bilateral adnexal areas, which were presumed as uterine fibroids originate from the broad ligament. The patient was then transferred to our hospital for treatment. On general examination, she was of average build and nutrition. There was no pallor, and her vitals were stable. She had no sign of androgen excess. Abdominal examination revealed a firm, solid mass corresponding to 16 weeks of gestation. The edge of the mass was not palpable. Transabdominal ultrasound revealed a normal-sized uterus and bilateral adnexal masses, which were presumed as ovarian tumors with malignant potential. In order to evaluate the primary and metastatic lesions through a whole-body tomography and metabolic imaging, she underwent a positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) examination. PET/CT showed the following characteristics : 1) multiple high-density nodular masses in the lower abdomen and pelvic cavity with multiple calcifications,2) extensive nodular calcifications in the falx cerebri and tentorium cerebelli. The 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake of the masses was mildly increased, with maximum standardized uptake value of 3.9. Meanwhile, it was identified asymmetry in her bilateral thorax with a slight collapse in her left side, and scoliosis of thoracic spine. Her serum calcium and phosphorus were within the normal range. Serum cancer antigen 125 (CA125) slightly increased to 35.10U/ml (Normal: ≤ 35U/ml), while human epididymis protein 4 (HE4) was 29.2 pmol/l and serum inhibin A was 7.4 pg/ml both within the normal range. We decided the patient be indicated for the surgery.
We made a 15-cm incision in the lower abdomen. Intraoperative findings on laparotomy showed that there was no uterine myoma or ascites. Extremely rigid tumors were found in both ovaries. The left ovary presented as a white solid mass of 12 cm in diameter in irregular shape, with bumps of varying sizes and rich blood vessels visible on the surface. No obvious normal ovarian tissue was found in the left ovary. The right ovarian tumor presented as a white solid mass of 8 cm in diameter with irregular shape and multiple nodules . Normal ovarian tissue of the right ovary was observed. No abnormality was found during exploration of the pelvis and abdomen. She underwent left salpingo-oophorectomy and right ovarian-sparing tumor resection. Microscopically, the bilateral tumors demonstrated spindled cells and frequent calcifications within a collagenous background, consistent with an ovarian fibroma .
The patient reported regular monthly menses after surgery. Although she did not report any skin lesion, we reviewed the imaging and pathology findings and considered the possibility of NBCCS. We recommended her to enhance sun protection in daily life, and further asked for some additional information. She reported that she had no relatives of diagnosed NBCCS. Her mother reported no abnormality in her birth, growth, vision/hearing, dentition, and development. She reported that she had multiple palmer pits which appear to be more obvious after bath .
We strongly recommended the patient to undergo a full dermatologic examination and to receive genetic testing and counseling. No basal cell carcinoma was found in dermatologic examination. The patient underwent germline testing for PTCH1, PTCH2, SUFU, SMO, GL1, and GL2 gene. A heterozygous variation of c.1818delG was detected in PTCH1 . This mutation is a frame shift mutation, which is a loss of function mutation. Then we provided follow-up regime to the patient based on a guideline of the British Association of Dermatologists for the clinical management of NBCCS , and we also recommended her parents to receive genetic testing in order to providing presymptomatic screening.
Informed written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images.