A 56-year-old woman was complaining about decrease in vision on her left eye.
Prior ocular history involved corneal leucoma on her right eye due to a previous herpes infection . She was currently on the waiting list for a corneal transplantation.
At the ophthalmologic emergency unit, she was diagnosed with a retinal detachment due to an intraocular mass in her left eye . She was sent immediately to the retinal division where ultrasound, ocular biomicroscopy, and wide-field photography were performed . Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/80 on her right eye and 20/200 on her left eye. Intraocular pressure was 14 mm Hg in her right eye and 17 mm Hg in her left eye. The right cornea was opaque due to leucoma . Ocular examination of the left eye revealed an elevated pigmentary choroidal tumor, covering the temporal half of the fundus and accompanied by an exudative retinal detachment involving the macula . B-scan ultrasound confirmed the presence of a choroidal melanoma, showing medium internal reflectivity on A-mode and large size (longitudinal diameter >10 mm; anterior-posterior diameter >16 mm). General oncology screening ruled out systemic dissemination. Macular optical coherence tomography (OCT; Cirrus HD-OCT, Zeiss, Germany) showed a smooth dome-shaped choroidal elevation compatible with choroidal melanoma and associated retinal detachment. Due to the large tumor size, the patient decided to undergo enucleation, after being informed about different treatment options (brachytherapy and enucleation). The patient showed her willingness to use the cornea of the left eye as a transplant for her right eye. After discussion with the ethical committee, its approval, and signing informed consent, the patient underwent enucleation of her left eye . The enucleated sample was examined by a pathologist and found to be free of melanoma cells in the corneolimbal tissue. Afterwards, trepanation of the donor cornea button was performed, and the cornea was transplanted to the right eye .
The patient has been followed for over 60 days without any sign of corneal transplant rejection, and her left eye was according to the enucleation protocol. BCVA in her right eye improved to 20/40 .