A 13-year-old Caucasian girl was admitted as an in-patient to our Pediatric Ward. During the first consult in the Pediatric Emergency Room, the family described a history of intermittent fever up to 39°C during the past month. She had no history of pruritus, but described some weight loss and night sweating. The physical examination showed some paleness and a discrete rash in her upper body. The chest X-ray showed a right-sided mediastinal enlargement and a left parahilar bulging. At this time, a complete blood count revealed levels of hemoglobin at 10.4g/dL, a whole blood count of 8.2×109/L and platelets of 511×109/L. She also had a slightly elevated lactate dehydrogenase of 582U/L and C-reactive protein of 5mg/dL. Thoracic computed tomography (CT) described a bulky mass within all mediastinal compartments, extending to the left pulmonary hilum and displacing the vascular mediastinal structure without invasion. It was described as an extensive agglomerate of lymph nodes. The abdominal CT described an increased number of normal-sized lymph nodes in the mesenteric root. Considering these results, the hypothesis of a neoplastic disorder or an inflammatory disease, such as histoplasmosis or paracoccidioidomicosis was considered.
As fever persisted, serology for cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, toxoplasmosis, aspergillosis, histoplasmosis, brucellosis, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, rickettsiosis, and paracoccidioidomicosis were requested and the results were negative. Meanwhile, her parents informed us that the child had regular contact with an aunt who works as a health agent in a public health clinic that treats patients with tuberculosis (TB). After this information was elicited, three samples of acid-fast bacilli sputum-stained smears were ordered, and all the tests were negative; simultaneously, a tuberculin skin test was ordered and resulted positive 72 hours after inoculation (15mm of induration). About the same time a positron emission tomography (PET) scan was performed in order to clarify the diagnosis. It showed multiple areas of anomalous concentration of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) in the thoracic region, corresponding to coalescent lymph nodes in the right anterior and posterior mediastinal and left peribronchial clusters of lymph nodes, with standard uptake value (SUV) between 5.6 and 6.3 . These findings were considered highly suspicious for neoplastic disease, and a tissue biopsy was recommended. The patient underwent a mediastinal biopsy through a thoracotomy, which enabled the recovery of a fragment of the posterior mediastinal mass. The fragment was described as yellowish, wrinkled and with a caseous appearance. Hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections of lymph nodes revealed distinct and well-formed epithelioid cell granulomas . There was complete effacement of lymph node architecture by these granulomas. Variation in the size of the granulomas was observed as well as wide areas of caseation and compressed granulomas with fibrosis. Perinodal and perivascular granulomas were seen. The capsule in all biopsies was intact and showed thickening. Pericapsular fibrosis and fibrosis within the granuloma were noted. Giant cells of the Langhans type within the granulomas were seen frequently. Typical caseation necrosis in the center of the granulomas was observed . A meticulous search for bacilli using Ziehl–Neelsen stain was performed and scanty and only occasional bacilli were found in the epithelioid cells and caseating necrotic material (not shown). Based on these findings, the final diagnosis was tuberculous lymphadenitis.
The TB treatment prescribed was rifampicin and isoniazid, and the child showed gain of weight and fever recrudescence during the first 6 months on medication. The follow-up chest CT after 1 year of therapy showed an improvement in the size of her mediastinal lymph nodes.