Our work is a single case report and has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria [, ].
A 60-year-old man with the following history: operated for a right parotid tumor by ENT department in 1998 and in 2010 complicated by sequelae of facial palsy. He received immediately a short-term post-operative corticosteroid therapy and ophthalmic eye drops based on artificial tears. He was referred to our department's consultation for specialized care. No other personal or family history was raised during the patient interrogation. He complained of a longstanding facial palsy of the right hemi-face, unable to lift the side of his mouth.
Initial physical examination showed a depression in the right parotid region , grade III facial paralysis with a drooping right labial commissure, erasure of the right naso-labial fold and right frontal wrinkles, attraction of the mouth on the healthy side with inability to whistle, incomplete closure of the eyelashes on the affected side, also we noted the blink reflex during conversation .
The electroneuromyogram (ENMG) showed a neuro-praxis of the right facial nerve with decreased amplitudes and no signs of activity at rest.
Based on the positive medical history and clinical examination, surgery was indicated and performed by the chief professor of our department who has 15 years of operative experience. The surgical procedure had the aim of resuscitating the labial commissure by lengthening temporalis myoplasty . In a first step in the temporal region: A hemi-coronal incision was made with sub-galeal detachment and a release of the temporal muscle was performed. Second, at the labial commissure, a naso-labial approach was performed, osteotomy of the coronoid process with tunneling and recovery of the temporal muscle, followed by suture of the temporal muscle tendon with the orbicularis muscle and the modiolus.
On the seven day, the scar was clean and non-inflammatory with no subgaleal hematoma and the patient started facial physiotherapy after the 3rd week.
Postoperative periods were favorable with complete recovery at the 30-day follow-up visit.
Routine follows up 3, 6, and 12 months later showed an improvement of facial dynamics.