A 61-year-old Caucasian woman with a 17.5 pack year history of smoking presented with recurrent right-sided ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) one year after lumpectomy, partial breast irradiation, and sequential treatment with tamoxifen and raloxifene. In addition to a right-sided mastectomy with sentinel lymph node biopsy, the patient chose a prophylactic left-sided mastectomy and declined reconstruction. After we obtained her informed consent, the patient was included in the comparative surgery clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT00943605). This study was approved by the institutional review board of WellStar Kennestone Hospital (Marietta, GA, USA) and is being conducted in accordance with all ethical standards for human clinical research. According to the randomization protocol, SOC was used for the left-sided (prophylactic) mastectomy and the PlasmaBlade was used for the right-sided (interventional) mastectomy with sentinel lymph node biopsy.
Anesthesia was induced, and the patient was prepared and draped in the usual sterile fashion. For the left-sided mastectomy, an elliptical, Y-V advancement flap-type incision was made laterally using a number 10 scalpel blade to minimize the risk of a dog-eared deformity resulting from a large deposit of subcutaneous fat. The tissue flaps were developed down to the muscle fascia with a traditional electrosurgical device set on Coag 35W (Valleylab E2516 Electrosurgical Pencil with E1551X standard stainless steel electrode and ForceTriad™ Generator; Valleylab, Inc., Boulder, CO, USA). Using the same instrument and settings, the breast was dissected off the chest wall in a mediolateral direction with the pectoralis fascia included. The remaining attachments of the breast to the serratus anterior were divided and followed superiorly to the base of the axilla. The incision was reapproximated using 5-0 and 4-0 polydioxanone sutures and 1-inch SteriStrip™ adhesive skin closures (3M, Inc., St Paul, MN, USA). Tegaderm™ transparent dressing (3M, Inc.) and Telfa™ Ouchless non-adherent dressing (Covidien, Inc., Mansfield, MA, USA) were used for the dressing.
Prior to incision of the right breast, 2mL of methylene blue diluted with 3mL of normal saline were injected into the subareolar region. The PEAK PlasmaBlade 4.0 with PULSAR Generator (PEAK Surgical, Inc.) was then used to create a standard elliptical skin incision (Cut 5: 2W) and to develop the subcutaneous dissection down to the muscle fascia (Cut 6 for dissection and Coag 7 for bleeding control). The breast was then dissected off the chest wall, and the incision was closed and dressed in a similar fashion to the left breast. The patient left the operating room in stable condition and was discharged to home the following morning. The total estimated blood loss from both sides was 50mL.
Intra-operative and post-surgical pathology indicated that the DCIS was non-invasive, with no evidence of disease in the left breast or the right sentinel lymph nodes. The patient was first followed up six days after surgery, and both operative sites were noted to be healing well, with good contour and skin edges approximating as expected . However, at 16 days following surgery, the patient presented with drainage from her incision and an approximately 9cm2 area of necrosis directly superior to the left mastectomy (SOC) incision line . The surgical site on the right side was noted to be clean, dry, and intact. Although the patient was afebrile, amoxicillin-clavulanate prophylaxis was prescribed, and, upon further examination and debridement, the wound was found to undermine in all directions, extending to the sternum and axilla. Subsequently, complete revision and closure of the incision was performed. Following these interventions, the wound healed progressively over the next seven weeks , although a 2cm2 area reopened before healing completely approximately 10 weeks post-operatively .