A 70-year-old bisexual man was admitted with generalized myalgia and abdominal pain lasting for 7 days. Three months earlier, he was diagnosed with HIV infection during the evaluation of a fever. The initial HIV RNA level was 36,500 copies/mL, with 114 CD4+ lymphocytes/μL, which were consistent with the definition of AIDS although the exact timing of HIV infection was unknown. At that time, abdominal and chest computed tomography (CT) showed no abnormality and an ophthalmologic examination showed no evidence of ocular disease. In addition, anti-cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgG was positive. For 3 months, he was treated with an integrase strand transfer inhibitor (INSTI)-based regimen (elvitegravir, cobicistat, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, and emtricitabine) and showed good adherence.
At the time of the current admission, his vital signs were: blood pressure, 110/80 mmHg; pulse rate, 98/min; body temperature, 38.0 °C; and respiratory rate, 20/min. There was no localized tenderness of the abdomen on physical examination. The laboratory findings showed anemia (hemoglobin, 9.7 g/dL), thrombocytopenia (platelets, 53 × 103/mm3), acute kidney injury (creatinine, 1.8 mg/dL), and an elevated lactate dehydrogenase level (LDH; 6608 U/L). No HIV-RNA was detected (< 20 copies/mL), and there were 256 CD4+ lymphocytes/μL. Abdominal CT revealed multiple liver masses , and a core needle biopsy was performed to differentiate between liver abscess and malignancy. An atypical lymphocytic population composed of medium-sized basophilic cells was observed on hematoxylin and eosin staining . Immunohistochemistry was positive for the B cell markers CD20 and CD79a , and the Ki-67 labelling index approached 90%. The tumor cells were also positive on EBV in situ hybridization . The liver lesion was diagnosed as Burkitt’s lymphoma. An additional diffuse hypermetabolic bone marrow lesion was found on positron emission tomography-CT (PET/CT), and he was confirmed to have stage IV Burkitt’s lymphoma by the Lugano classification.
Three cycles of antineoplastic chemotherapy based on rituximab plus fractionated cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone (R-hyper-CVAD) were administered, and two cycles of methotrexate were given via an intrathecal route. The HAART was replaced with another INSTI-based regimen (raltegravir, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, and emtricitabine) after considering potential drug interactions. Interim PET/CT showed a partial response with marked improvement of the lymphomatous involvement in the bone marrow and liver, but hypermetabolic para-aortic, aortocaval lymph nodes remained 3 months after initiating chemotherapy.
Just after the third cycle of R-hyper-CVAD, the patient suddenly complained of decreased visual acuity and an ophthalmologist diagnosed CMV retinitis. At that time, there were 56 CD4+ lymphocytes/μL, but no HIV RNA was detected (< 20 copies/mL). Intravitreal and intravenous ganciclovir were used for induction therapy, and valganciclovir maintenance therapy was continued. Chemotherapy was stopped after the third cycle of R-hyper-CVAD due to intolerance and the CMV retinitis. Four months after discontinuing the chemotherapy, PET/CT showed disease progression in the para-aortic, aortocaval lymph nodes, and newly developed lymphomatous involvement was seen in the paravertebral and cardiophrenic space.
Ten months after discontinuing systemic chemotherapy, the patient developed swelling and pain in his right thigh. CT showed edematous changes and skin thickening in this area , but there was no remarkable size increase in the inguinal lymph nodes. There were 129 CD4+ lymphocytes/μL, and HIV RNA was undetectable. A skin punch biopsy was performed because it was unclear whether the manifestation was related to the Burkitt’s lymphoma. The biopsy specimen was composed predominantly of plump spindle cells with intervening vascular spaces . Despite the bland cytology of the tumor cells, frequent mitotic figures were seen and the tumor was infiltrating the dermal collagen fibers. The tumor cells were positive for CD31 and HHV-8 latent nuclear antigen-1 (LNA-1) by immunohistochemistry . The histology was consistent with KS. Twenty Grays of radiation were given in five fractions without systemic chemotherapy. Two months after radiation therapy, multiorgan (bone, liver, and pericardium) lymphoma aggravation led to his death.