A 55 year-old Caucasian male was admitted to the hospital with complaints of worsening generalized weakness. He had a past medical history of tobacco abuse with a 60-pack-year smoking history without any other pertinent medical and family history. At initial presentation, the patient was seen at an urgent care with complaints of a new skin nodule on his right upper back. The patient was referred to dermatology via urgent care, but the patient was lost to follow up. Two months later, it grew and ulcerated, prompting a surgical consult by his PCP for biopsy and excision . The ulcerated skin lesion became painful and developed purulent drainage requiring antibiotics. During this time, he also noticed weight loss, loss of appetite, and worsening constipation. He denied coughing, hemoptysis, shortness of breath, or any other respiratory symptoms. On physical examination he had normal vital signs and was cachectic. He had a post excision wound on the right upper back measuring about 10 cm in greatest diameter surrounded by mild erythema with sutures in place . No drainage was noted. He had three palpable, non-tender and freely mobile right posterior cervical lymphadenopathy measuring 2 cm × 2 cm in size. On auscultation of lungs, he had equal air entry bilaterally and was without wheezes or crackles. Otherwise, he had a unremarkable physical exam including normal cardiac exam. Lab work revealed hypercalcemia of 16.3 mg/dL, which was corrected for his albumin. PTHrP was elevated with a low normal PTH. Renal function was normal . Chest x-ray revealed a large cavitary lesion in the right upper lung lobe and right hilar adenopathy or a mass . CT chest with contrast showed extensive malignancy most significantly involving the mediastinum, right hilum, and right upper lobe with areas of interstitial thickening and nodularity in the right upper lobe and right middle lobe and Indeterminate partially exophytic mass in the posterior upper right chest measuring about 3.8 × 6.2 cm . He underwent bronchoscopy with endobronchial ultrasound which showed a large subcarinal mass and a small fixed, friable, irregular, oval and vascular lesion with less than 25% obstruction in the right main stem . The histopathology report of the skin lesion was consistent with metastatic poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma, mainly invading the dermis and subcutaneous tissue with no dysplastic changes in the epidermis. Smaller nodules were also invading the angiolymphatic vessels. The sections of surgical margins were free of tumor cells. Bronchial washings and FNA of hilar lymph node pathology results confirmed non-small cell carcinoma favoring squamous cell carcinoma. They stained positive for p40 and negative for TTF1. The tumor cells PD-L1 membranous positivity was 5%. Our patient had LSCC and nonkeratinizing SCC in his skin biopsy which made it more likely that it was Stage IV LSCC with metastasis to the skin than a primary cutaneous tumor in addition to the primary pulmonary tumor.
Further work-up including CT abdomen and pelvis with contrast showed no metastatic disease . MRI brain showed no metastatic lesion and bone scan was only significant for diffuse increased osseous activity without focal suspicious lesion. The hypercalcemia was resolved with intravenous fluid resuscitation and zoledronic acid. Oncology evaluated the patient and planned to start chemotherapy and immunotherapy as outpatient. No therapeutic intervention or further work-up was completed as the patient’s clinical and functional status severely declined during his hospital stay and was later discharged with hospice. His baseline functional status prior to admission was being able to do activities of daily living independently and ambulated on his own. He later expired a month after hospice stay or 4 months after initial presentation.
The most notable diagnostic challenge was the unusual presentation of the skin lesion as the initial presentation for LSCC which delayed the initial pulmonary work-up. Especially since the patient presented with a fungating lesion without pulmonary symptoms which led investigations towards primary dermatologic cancer. The elevated calcium and PTHrP were the first diagnostic clues which started the diagnostic workup for lung cancer. Before the pulmonary workup, it was thought that the patient had a basal or squamous cell carcinoma of the skin which was pending a biopsy report after surgical excision at that time. There were minimal cultural, linguistic, and financial challenges in caring for this patient.