A 56-year-old woman with iritis and high intraocular pressure (IOP) visited our hospital and reported visual loss in her right eye. The visual acuity (VA) was 20/2000 in the right eye and 20/13 in the left eye. The respective IOPs were 56 mmHg and 18 mmHg measured using Goldmann applanation tonometry. Slit-lamp microscopy revealed a large number of iris nodules of different sizes over the entire surface of the iris with keratic precipitates and mild inflammatory cells in the anterior chamber of the right eye . The grade of anterior chamber cells was + 1 based on the Standardization of Uveitis Nomenclature Working group. Peripheral anterior synechiae were seen all around by the gonioscopy. Anterior-segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT) (CASIA, Tomey, Nagoya, Japan) showed a thickened inferior iris in the right eye on a B-scan image . Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) (Tomey) showed angle closure at the 4 o’clock position in the right eye . A late-phase fundus fluorescein angiography image showed hyper-fluorescence of the optic nerve in the right eye characteristic of severe glaucomatous optic neuropathy . Goldmann visual field perimetry found only central 5 degrees of vision remaining in the right eye . In contrast, the Humphrey Field Analyzer (Carl Zeiss Meditec Inc., Dublin, CA, USA) showed that the visual field in the left eye was normal using the 30–2 SITA-Standard program in standard automated perimetry.
The family history was unremarkable. The medical history showed urethral stones and a suspected autoimmune disease 1 year previously, but the details were unknown. Serum testing showed a high rheumatoid factor value (46 IU/mL), high antinuclear antibody titers (1:640), and high Immunoglobulin E levels (226.1 IU/mL). No abnormalities were found on chest radiographs and electrocardiograms. Five-S cysteinyl-dopa (5-S-CD), a melanin-related metabolite, was measured in the serum and aqueous humor to identify a melanin-related tumor such as malignant melanoma . The value was 6 nmol/L in the serum, which was within the normal range (1.5–8.0 nmol/L); however, the value was 9.5 nmol/L in the aqueous humor, which was slightly higher than the normal range . To determine if the tumor was malignant, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) were performed but showed no obvious findings suggestive of a malignancy . In the brain, an early single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) image showed slight accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose in the right eye compared with the left eye, but there was no difference between both eyes in the late images . These results suggested the low possibility of a malignancy.
The IOP in the right eye decreased to within the normal range by treatment with a dexamethasone eye drops 4 times daily and multiple anti-glaucoma eye drops, but a few months later the IOP increased to over 40 mmHg and was unresponsive to therapy.
We performed a trabeculectomy, and an iris specimen obtained during iridectomy was pathologically diagnosed. Giemsa staining did not show an obvious papillary structure . Furthermore, the pigment epithelial cells showed little nuclear dysplasia, and no cells with a high degree of atypia causing stromal infiltration were seen by de-melaninization treatment . Slight chronic inflammatory infiltration was found in the interstitium, but there were no positive findings of malignancy. Seven years postoperatively, the inflammation has not recurred. Slit-lamp and AS-OCT evaluations showed that the filtering bleb was maintained, and the IOP was stable at around 10 mmHg with timolol eye drops . The numerous iris nodules of different sizes seen at the first visit gradually shrank and had a sand-like appearance and were inconspicuous after trabeculectomy; posterior iris synechiae were observed around the pupil . It was difficult to maintain the VA and residual visual field because of the severe degree of preoperative glaucomatous optic neuropathy. In contrast, small linear keratic precipitates were seen in the left eye; however, no obvious inflammation or increased IOP occurred during the entire course .