A 32 year-old male was admitted to an intensive care unit after right-sided nephrectomy, evacuation of retroperitoneal hematoma and removal of tamponade from the abdominal cavity. The patient previously suffered from polytrauma in the chest, abdomen and right hip. Whole body CT excluded intracranial injury, however, it showed a contusion of the right lung, a major laceration of the right kidney, minor laceration of the right liver as well as an extensive retroperitoneal hematoma along with fractures of the left clavicle, first left rib and right iliac crest. At admission the patient was sedated, analgesied and hemodynamically stable. After the consultation with urologist and abdominal surgeon CT angiography and embolization of the right renal artery were carried out first. Subsequently, emergency surgery was performed with removal of large retroperitoneal coagulum and right-sided nephrectomy. Major bleeding occurred from the vein cava inferior shortly after the removal of retroperitoneal coagulum suggesting some vessel damage during the accident. In order to stop the bleeding and to perform haemostasis, the vein had to be temporarily compressed. The patient was hemodynamically stable at all times, however, due to major bleeding, blood preparations were administered. He received totally 4 units of packed RBCs, 5 units of fresh frozen plasma, 1 unit of platelets, 2 g of Hemocoplettan (CSL Behring, Germany), 1 g of transexsamic acid and 1500 ml of colloids. About 600 ml of blood volume was returned along with the use of Cell Saver (Haemonetics, USA). The total blood loss was estimated to be at least 2000 ml. Shortly after the surgery the patient needed transfusions of fresh frozen plasma and clotting factors as well as packed RBCs due to continuation of the haemostatic disorder with thrombocytopenia and prolonged aPTT. Laboratory screening assays performed in the next two days showed persistent thrombocytopenia, high-level of fibrinogen with a strong increase of D-dimer, prolonged aPTT and a low level of antithrombin. After the first two days, he was translated to spontaneous breathing and eventually extubated. On the third day, he presented sudden onset of hemodynamic instability, therefore incapable of standard CTA diagnostic evaluation. Urgent and relevant transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiograms were performed, which showed a massive thrombus in the pulmonary trunk along with the straining of the right ventricle.
PMT was performed due to its prompt availability and patient’s contraindications for systemic thrombolysis. Intervention was performed under general anesthesia through the right transfemoral catheterization with an insertion of a 10 F leading catheter. Angiography demonstrated an extensive thrombotic mass in the pulmonary trunk, expanding to the right basal and segmental arteries, however, no major defect was detected in the left pulmonary artery. Long-term PMT was attempted, for approximately 70 min in total, using aspiration with mechanical thrombectomy devices Aspirex 10 F, 6 F (Straub Medical AG, Switzerland) and Rotarex 6 F (Straub Medical AG, Switzerland), manual aspiration, balloon dilatation and fragmentation with a pigtail. During the intervention 10.000 units of heparin was administered. No major improvement was achieved and the patient became hemodynamically unstable. Local intra-clot administration of 15 mg of Actylise (Boehringer Ingelheim, Germany) was applied at the beginning of resuscitation, however, without any significant improvement and the patient died.
Pulmonary thromboembolus was acquired within 48 h after the unsuccessful PMT procedure in routine autopsy where high-risk PE was confirmed as the main cause of death. Three major samples obtained from a large thromboembolic mass were carefully removed from the surrounding tissue and rinsed with isotonic saline of 0.9% w/v of NaCl, pH 7.4. The same samples were subsequently fixated in 10% buffered formalin for 48 h. After the fixation they were cut longitudinally and embedded in paraffin. Serial 5 μm thick cross-sections were cut from each sample. Pathologic features were initially estimated using histological sections stained by haematoxylin-eosin (HE), while an acid Picro-Mallory (PM) stain was used to reveal fibrin layers (clear red), RBCs (yellow) and the presence of connective tissue (blue). Subsequently, the sections were immunohistochemically stained against RBCs (GPA), platelet components (CD61) and fibrin using monoclonal antibodies (Anti-Human Glycophorin A, β-3 integrin Anti-Human CD61 and Polyclonal Rabbit Anti-Human Fibrinogen, DakoCytomation, Denmark). Monoclonal mouse anti-human antibodies against Col I (Sigma Aldrich) were used additionally to visualize a possible presence of collagen inclusions in the thromboembolus. Immunohistochemical staining was performed using a Ventana Bench-Mark automatic stainer with a streptavidin-biotin peroxidase complex and diaminobenzidinetetrahydrochloride as a chromogen.