A 15-year-old male with a non-significant health or social history presented for an office visit with left knee pain, swelling, and inability to bear weight after being tackled from the rear while playing football. X-rays ( and ) were negative, but the patient could not extend his knee past 30 degrees. Subsequent MRI revealed a distal neurovascular injury and an avulsion of the tibial plateau involving both tibial eminences. There was approximately 6 mm of proximal retraction along the anterior osseous margin. Because the fracture protruded over the medial meniscus and intrameniscal ligament, closed reduction was determined to be ineffective (-). There was no discrete ACL fiber disruption nor other ligament or meniscus damage noted on the MRI. Regarding the extensor mechanism, there was no significant tendinosis or discrete tear. The patella was uninjured and positioned within the femoral groove. There was a large joint effusion with internal complexity and synovial thickening.
Following appropriate clearances, the patient was taken to the operating room for an all-arthroscopic reduction and internal fixation. Pre-operative antibiotics were administered within 1 h of incision. Venous thrombosis prophylaxis was ordered including a unilateral sequential compression device. The leg was positioned in extension and blocked at 30 degrees. Once diagnostic arthroscopy began, the eminence fracture was observed to be displaced and involving the anterior half of the medial tibial plateau . As noted in the MRI, the fracture was overlying the anterior horn of the medial meniscus and intrameniscal ligament. In addition, the hematoma was visualized above the tibial plateau .
Arthroscopic repair of the fracture began with removing the early fracture callus and fracture hematoma . A probe was used to guide the eminence fracture underneath the intrameniscal ligament and anterior horn of the medial meniscus . The fragment was sutured into place using heavy non-absorbable sutures that were passed through the ACL and proximal tibia using interosseous bone tunnels and ACL tibial guides ( and ). The sutures were tied over a bone bridge for secure fixation and the range of motion was tested to ensure proper extension. Further diagnostic arthroscopy was performed to assess the medial and lateral meniscus, ACL, posterior cruciate ligament, and additional chondral injury before draining the knee and locking it into extension using a hinged knee brace ( and ).
Two-week follow-up X-rays showed a reduction of the eminence fracture . A brace and crutches were used until 6 weeks post-operation, at which physical therapy was started to improve the range of motion.