A 55-year-old right-handed female was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for an SAH caused by the rupture of a left internal carotid artery (ICA) paraclinoid aneurysm . The patient had no previous medical history, and her hearing was normal before this episode. On admission, her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 15/15, corresponding to Grade I according to the World Federation of Neurological Societies grading scale. Under general anesthesia, the left ICA paraclinoid saccular aneurysm was successfully treated by endovascular coil embolization with a stent assist (Neuroform EZ™; Stryker Neurovascular, Fremont, CA) . Urokinase (12000 units) irrigation from a lumber drainage on days 1 and 2 cleared the thick SAH in order to prevent forthcoming vasospasm.
In order to prevent vasospasm, she was treated with induction of mild hypertension and hypervolemia. Oral administration of cilostazol was also done for the purpose. She did not show any neurological deficits and MR angiogram did not show any angiographical vasospasm postoperatively. However, she suddenly developed acute bilateral deafness on day 7 even though she had no history of hearing impairment. Because of the deafness, verbal communication was difficult. Although spontaneous speech and some recognition of verbal and nonverbal sounds existed, bilateral hearing loss and an auditory agnostic component were present and communication was confined to writing. The patient's ability to read and write and execute written tasks was preserved. The external auditory meatus, tympanic membrane, and vestibular function were normal. Conservative air conduction audiometry demonstrated severe hearing loss bilaterally. The MR angiograms demonstrated severe vasospasm in the right middle cerebral artery (MCA) and moderate vasospasm in the left MCA . The diffusion-weighted (DW) images revealed high signal intensity at the right insular cortex and left superior temporal gyrus, indicating acute infarction due to vasospasm . Compared with conventional perfusion techniques, advantage of arterial spin-labeling (ASL) is the avoidance of intravenous contrast administration. ASL showed mild hypoperfusion in both temporal lobes including the auditory cortex . The right side was more extensively involved than the left. Left-sided areas included part of the Heschl gyrus suggesting that the hearing difficulty originated in the cortex.
Immediate conventional catheter digital subtraction angiography was done and it showed severe vasospasm in the right MCA and moderate vasospasm in the left MCA. We decided to expand the narrowed MCA chemically. A microcatheter (Tangent™; Stryker Neurovascular, Fremont, CA) through a 6F guiding catheter (Envoy™; Cordis, Miami Lakes, FL) over a 0.014-inch guidewire (Transend EX™; Stryker Neurovascular, Fremont, CA) was advanced to the right M1 . Papaverine was administered intraarterially directly within the right MCA (2 mg each, total 20 mg). This resulted in transient angiographic improvement . At this time, she was able to hear almost normally. Therefore, we concluded the endovascular treatment and she underwent the conventional augiometry again. She could hear the lowest level of the device bilaterally . After that, she did not have any deficits and was discharged in a week without hydrocepharus.