During a periodic visit to a health surveillance program, a heart murmur was found in a 40-year-old white man. He was employed as metalworker; he did not refer cardiovascular risk factors, had no significant medical history, did not consume drugs, and was totally asymptomatic. A cardiovascular examination did not show signs of congestive heart failure. His blood pressure was 130/55 mmHg. A standard electrocardiogram was normal.
He was referred to our Cardiology Unit for transthoracic echocardiography. The transthoracic echocardiography showed: a left ventricle with normal dimension, wall thickness, and global and regional function; a severe aortic valvular regurgitation ; and the suspicion of a dysmorphic valve that could not be better specified due to a poor acoustic window.
A transesophageal echocardiography was performed, which confirmed the presence of a severe aortic valvular regurgitation ; the short axis view showed an aortic valve characterized by four cusps of almost equal size, with a regular profile and without degenerative modifications . The examination did not reveal any further anomalies.
He was admitted to hospital. A cardiovascular examination did not show signs of congestive heart failure. His blood pressure was 130/50 mmHg and his temperature was 36.5 °C. Pulsus bisferiens was detected by palpating his carotid pulse (less evident in brachial pulse). No other physical abnormal findings were detected. A neurological examination was reported as normal. Routine blood tests were done, which revealed good blood count and good renal and hepatic functions. A stress test was not done. Before the cardiac valve surgery, our patient underwent coronary angiography that showed normal coronary arteries.
He underwent an aortic valve repair by tricuspidization technique, which was preferred to valve replacement because we did not want to expose our 40-year-old patient to valve-related risks across his lifespan.
He was treated with orally administered anticoagulant for 1 month after surgery. At 6-month follow-up visit he was asymptomatic and echocardiography detected only mild residual aortic regurgitation; he did not receive ongoing therapy.