A 63-year-old male patient was hospitalized for a neuro-ischaemic diabetic foot ulcer in the diabetology department of our institution on 18 March 2020. He had several cardiovascular risk factors, including type-2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and was an active smoker. He had no history of heart disease, but had undergone percutaneous transluminal angioplasty of the right femoral artery 5 years earlier.
The patient reported no respiratory symptoms upon admission, but had complained of mild fever (38.5°C) for the last 5 days. Three days before hospitalization, he was prescribed a combination of amoxicillin 1000 mg and clavulanic acid 125 mg t.i.d. with no effect on fever.
Shortly after admission, the patient became severely breathless and hypoxic (Sp02 85%) with a severe increase in blood pressure (226/118 mmHg). Physical examination showed normal cardiac murmurs, tachypnoea, and crackles in both lung fields without any other signs of congestion. No significant repolarization abnormality was observed on electrocardiogram (ECG). An echocardiography showed normal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), high left ventricular filling pressure (E/E′ ratio at 23), and systolic pulmonary artery pressure (45 mmHg). The chest X-ray showed bilateral perihilar airspace opacity with dilatation of the main pulmonary artery . Based on the clinical presentation, a diagnosis of acute pulmonary oedema was made and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) with strict respiratory isolation. The patient recovered within an hour on continuous positive airway pressure non-invasive ventilation, nitrates, and diuretics, allowing for complete oxygen weaning. Because of systematic suspicion of COVID-19 in patients with respiratory failure and fever, polymerase chain reaction was performed on a naso-pharyngeal swab and returned positive for -CoV-2. In addition, blood tests showed a biological inflammatory syndrome [leucocytes 18 G/L, C-reactive protein 143 mg/L (N < 6 mg/L)], with negative cardiac troponin <0.015 µg/L (99th upper reference limit 0.045 µg/L) and elevated N-terminal-pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (2733 ng/L).
Twelve hours later, the respiratory state of the patient deteriorated with persistent hypoxaemia (PaO2 57 mmHg) despite ventilation with a high oxygen concentration mask (6 L/min). Although the patient had no chest pain, an ECG showed anterior ST-segment elevation. The patient received 4000 IU of intravenous unfractionated heparin, 250 mg of intravenous aspirin, and 180 mg of oral ticagrelor, and the patient was taken to the cathlab 150 min after the first abnormal ECG for emergent coronary angiography. The ECG recorded upon arrival in the cathlab showed persistent ST-segment elevation in the anterior leads with reciprocal changes in the inferior and lateral leads . The patient wore a surgical mask during the coronary angiography, while the interventional cardiologist and cathlab nurses wore protective equipments—including N95 mask, mobcap, gloves, plastic glasses, overshoes, and sterile gowns above the lead aprons—as advised by the local infection control unit, which was present during the procedure. A tight stenosis of the mid-portion of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) was found, with normal (TIMI coronary grade flow 3) flow. In addition to the culprit LAD stenosis, a tight ostial stenosis of the obtuse marginal branch and an intermediate stenosis of the dominant mid-circumflex artery were observed. A biodegradable polymer, everolimus-eluting stent (Synergy, Boston Scientific) was deployed at the culprit site 37 min after the arrival in the cathlab with an optimal result . No attempt was made to stent non-culprit stenosis.