A 39-years old male had a low back pain without any particular cause, following chest pain, right hip pain, and bilateral foot pain. One year after these symptoms, he experienced enlarging elastic soft masses in plantar side of the right hallux . He had no remarkable family history of metabolic bone diseases. He was 172.6 cm tall and 63.8 kg weight (Body mass index = 21.4 kg/m2) at the time of his first visit. Laboratory testing of serum samples revealed normal calcium level of 9.3 mg/dl (normal range: 8.7-10.3 mg/dl), low phosphorus level of 1.9 mg/dl (normal range: 2.5-4.5 mg/dl). Alkaline phosphatase was elevated as noted to be 1245 U/l (normal range: 115–359 U/l). Serum level of FGF23 (215 pg/ml) was at least 4-fold higher normal range (normal range: 10–50 pg/ml). Urine testing revealed an elevation in phosphorus concentration coincident a reduction in tubular phosphate reabsorption. Plain radiographic images showed cystic radiolucent shadow in right fourth metatarsal bone, left third and fourth metatarsal bone, and in right pubis . Bone scanning revealed an increased uptake in the bilateral rib, right pubis, bilateral tarsus, right fourth metatarsal bone, left third and fourth metatarsal bone . Enhanced MRI showed that three soft tissue tumors were presented along with right flexor hallucis longus muscle tendon and one tumor in right first distal phalanx . Taken together, this case was diagnosed as TIO and these tumors were expected to be responsible for overproduction of FGF23. To ascertain our diagnosis, systemic venous sampling for the measurement of FGF23 was conducted. Of note, serum concentrations of FGF23 in right common iliac vein and in right external iliac vein were higher than other veins . These data indicated that tumors in right hallux detected with MRI were responsible for the osteomalacia. Thereafter, tumors of flexor tendon were resected with the wide margins. Tumor of distal phalanx found in adhesion section of flexor tendon was easily excised from surrounding bone. Histological examination of the three tumors located on flexor tendon showed oval-shaped mesenchymal cells densely populated in fibrous background. Moreover, osteoclast-like giant cells and histiocytes were sparsely found in these tumors associated with multifocal haemorrhage and hemosiderin deposition. Mitotic activity and necrosis were absent . On the other hand, the tissue excised from distal phalanx consisted of hyaline cartilage and bone tissue showed no tumor .
The serum level of FGF23 dramatically decreased to be 47 pg/ml and phosphorus level returned to normal (3.9 mg/dl), within one hour after the surgery. Serum concentration of FGF23 became 10 pg/ml one day post-operation. Moreover, systematic pain was gradually improved, and disappeared two months after surgery.