A 77-year-old Saudi female, known case of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, bronchial asthma and liver cirrhosis secondary to hepatitis B virus with child-pugh score B, presented to the emergency department with acute onset of confusion and decreased oral intake for three days. Her symptoms were associated with restlessness, insomnia, amnesia and deterioration in functional status. One month prior to her presentation, the patient was diagnosed with asymptomatic COVID-19 and continued to have a positive swap upon presentation. No history of weight loss, night sweats, or gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea or vomiting. Her examination was only significant for an old healed laparotomy scar, and right upper quadrant tenderness.
Laboratory findings upon admission are summarized in . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans of the abdomen demonstrated the presence of multiple hypodense liver lesions, the largest measuring around 8 x 5 x 5 cm with direct communication between the gallbladder and right hepatic lobe as illustrates. Furthermore, these lesions were associated with left portal vein thrombosis as shown on . All these findings were suggestive of a locally advanced gallbladder malignancy. To help differentiate between oncological and inflammatory entities, tumor markers were assessed. CA19-9 was markedly elevated exceeding 12000 U/mL, similarly, CA-125 reached up to 622 U/mL, as included in .
The patient was started on anticoagulation, namely, enoxaparin therapeutic dose 1 mg/kg for portal vein thrombosis. One day after initiation of anticoagulation, she developed an episode of massive hematochezia, followed by hypotension and hemoglobin dropped from 11 to 7.5 g/dL. She was managed conservatively by blood transfusion and fluid resuscitation. Anticoagulation was held for 2 days until her clinical stability was ensured, and after weighing benefits and risks, anticoagulant was restarted at prophylactic dose.
Liver biopsy was obtained to identify the nature of the lesion. It showed a poorly differentiated carcinoma with a pancreaticobiliary origin supporting the diagnosis of primary gallbladder carcinoma with liver metastasis. Thereafter, the patient was referred to a specialized center to be started on chemotherapy.