A 5-day old full-term female baby, delivered by cesarean section, 2880 g of birth weight, was referred to our hospital because of intermittent cyanosis. She had frequent choking with an excessive volume of yellowish-green saliva at the third day of born. Airway examination showed normal mouth opening and neck movements with no facial anomalies. After admission, her respiratory function continued to deteriorate and endotracheal intubation and ventilator assistance became necessary. Tracheal secretion of a large volume of yellowish-green fluid persisted and three-dimensional computed tomography (3D-CT) of the chest showed a fistula originating from the right bronchus, running distally along the esophagus, and passing through the diaphragm and into the intrahepatic biliary tract at the site of the esophageal hiatus. There was air in the intrahepatic biliary tract and in the common hepatic duct, along with a bilateral, mainly lower-lobe, pneumonia . CBBF was diagnosed accordingly. Ultrasonography and bronchoscopy confirmed the CT findings. The flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy identified the opening of the fistula in the right main bronchus. A contrast x-ray examination of the fistula was performed during bronchoscopy. Contrast flowed from the opening in the bronchus through the fistula and into the biliary tract, the gall bladder, and the duodenum . So the preoperative diagnosis was: 1. bronchobiliary fistula; 2. neonatal pneumonia; 3. gastroduodenal reflux; and 4. congential heart disease.
Preoperative treatment measures included CPAP ventilation (see Table for blood gas results), gastrointestinal decompression and fasting, inhibition of gastric acid secretion, promotion of gastric peristalsis, antibiotics, parenteral nutrition, myocardial nutrition, sedation analgesia, and precise fluid management and keep elevation position to encourage consolidation of the biliary contents to distal lung. Due to the rarity of the disease, it was spent in the preoperative diagnosis process for a relatively long time after hospitalization. And the baby was scheduled for endoscopic cholangiography and thoracoscopic right bronchobiliary fistulectomy under general anesthesia on the second day after the diagnosis.
Anesthesia: The patient was 16 days old on the day of surgery with 2.2 kg of body weight, and golden-yellow lung secretions persisted . Taking into account the preoperative examination confirmed that the fistula is away from the tracheal carina, and the fact that CPAP had no obvious abdominal distension symptoms before surgery, the tracheal intubation catheter is placed in the main airway, away from the fistula. In view of the tracheal intubation when entering the operating room, we take more safer method of inhalation anesthesia induction. During anesthetic maintenance, sevoflurane combined with intravenous remifentanil was adopted. In addition to regular monitoring, invasive arterial pressure monitoring, intermittent blood gas analysis, and continuous cerebral oxygen saturation (ScO2%) monitoring were also performed. Due to the lack of neonatal bronchial obstruction at the time, we did not perform lung isolation techniques and respiratory management as planned [, ]. The lungs, particularly the left lung, were infiltrated with iodinated contrast agent during contrast examination of the biliary tree (5 mL intrahepatic iodine tracer), and this was mostly cleared by immediate endotracheal suction. The contrast examination confirmed the right-sided bronchobiliary fistula and showed a normal extrahepatic biliary tract . Bilateral lung sounds returned to baseline after suctioning of the contrast agent from the lungs and the SpO2 remained above 85%. At this point, thoracoscopic fistula resection was attempted. The initial pneumothorax parameters were: CO2 inflation pressure 3 mmHg with flow rate adjusted to 1 to 2 L/min under pressure controlled ventilation with PIP 20 to 23, PEEP 4 to 5 mmHg, frequency 30 to 32 breaths/min, and I:E 1.5 to 1.8. In spite of the normal bronchial breath sounds after suctioning, there was persistent hypoxemia and increased airway resistance during thoracoscopy. Intermittent manual assist ventilation was adopted to maintain oxygenation to the greatest extent possible to ensure that cerebral oxygen saturation did not fall below 20% of baseline. But finally, considering the safety of the patient and difficult exposure the procedure was converted to an open access. Arterial blood gas analysis before, during, end operation, during thoracoscopy、thoracotomy and at the time of entering NICU are summarized in the Table .
Ventilator management during thoracotomy remained problematic, with high airway pressure, low tidal volume, and intermittent hypoxemia during thoracotomy. Breathing parameters include pressure-controlled ventilation combined with intermittent manual inflation management to maximize tidal volume and inhalation time to ensure oxygen supply. And the peak inspiratory pressure was limited to less than 28 mmHg. The patient developed a metabolic acidosis with base excess = − 11 and lactate = 4.5, which was corrected by intravenous sodium bicarbonate infusion. In view of the long operation time, about 8 ~ 10 ml/kg of intravenous isotonic saline including glucose (1 ~ 2% isotonic solution with sugar) supplementation and equal volume of RBC transfusions according to blood loss were given to maintain effective perfusion of the microcirculation and adequate blood pressure and urine output. Phenylephrine was prepared to maintain the blood pressure within 20% of the baseline value if needed. The ScO2% fluctuated in response to fluctuations in the SpO2, and at one point, the ScO2 fell to 38% (basal value 58%). Although this was a fairly short-term episode, it is nonetheless worthy of attention. When the SpO2 improved, the ScO2% returned to approximately 50%.
A retrograde methylene blue injection was performed for precise positioning of the fistula, and once again, both lungs were infiltrated and immediate suctioning was required. The total operative time was approximately 5.5 h, and the infant remained intubated postoperatively and was transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) after surgery. Postoperative histopathological examination confirmed that the resected fistula originated from the bile duct. Biliary epithelial cells were found at the margin of the bronchial fistula and there was interstitial cholestasis.
Normal oxygenation and arterial blood gases were maintained by CPAP ventilation with PEEP of 5 cm H2O and FiO2 of 0.4 (see Table for blood gas values). Prolonged postoperative ventilator support was necessary because of persistent pneumonia, and the initial attempt to remove the thoracic tube failed because of acute pneumothorax and subcutaneous emphysema. The patient also had cholestasis and developed a chylothorax during the recovery stage. Drainage of chylous fluid from the thoracostomy tube gradually diminished as gastrointestinal decompression and use of intravenous methylprednisolone, NPO, and parenteral nutrition with antibiotic therapy were continued, and oral feeding was resumed without adverse reactions once the thoracic drainage was minimized. After 43 days in hospital, the infant recovered well and was stable for discharge. There were no neurological complications during follow-up after 4 months.