In January 2019, a 5-year-old girl was hospitalized with intermittent fever, cough and shortness of breath for two months and she had recurrent lower respiratory tract infection from infancy. There was no family history of PIDs and consanguineous marriage. On admission, she had difficulty breathing. Stridor and moist rales were revealed by auscultation. Rash, lymphadenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly were all absent. HIV was negative according to a serum-specific antibody test and HIV viral load. Humoral immunoassay showed decreased serum immunoglobulin G (IgG), IgA and IgM, but the serum IgE level was normal. Lymphocyte counts were all in their normal range on admission, including CD4+ subsets, CD8+ subsets, natural killer (NK) cells and CD19+ subsets. The nitroblue tetrazolium test (NBT) was normal .
High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) showed small airway obstruction lesions, and bilateral diffuse infiltration and local bronchiectasis in both lungs . Electronic bronchoscopy showed heavy yellow-white purulent secretion in the airway, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) for culture yielded T. marneffei . By the same token, high-throughput sequencing detected T. marneffei in BALF. In accordance with pathogenic status, amphotericin B deoxycholate at 20 mg/day was commenced as the primary antifungal therapy for 14 days with good clinical response, and the patient was discharged with oral itraconazole prescribed for 4 weeks.
One month after discharge, she presented to the emergency department with shortness of breath and oedema of eyelids and limbs. HRCT showed multiple patchy ground-glass opacities that manifested as mosaic attenuation . Culture of T. marneffei was negative in BALF and blood during this hospitalization. A restrictive abnormality with reduction of diffusion capacity was mainly found in pulmonary function. She was treated with intravenous Ig (400 mg/kg/day) for 3 days as well as aerosol inhalation of budesonide. After 10 days of treatment, the dyspnoea was relieved and she was discharged with recommended continued use of a Symbicort Turbuhaler.