A 53-year old man presented in the emergency room because of suddenly onset of chest pain, nausea and then syncope for several minutes. Previous medical history included neurodermitis for which ebastine and ketotifen were given but proven ineffective, so thalidomide (150 mg/d) therapy was initiated 2 weeks before; medical history also included hypercholesterolemia and simvastatin taking. No other medication including corticosteroids was reported and electrocardiography (ECG) in the past was almost normal . The patient did not exhibit any other established risk factors for coronary artery disease, such as obesity, diabetes, hypertension or family history, with the exception of current smoking. Physical examination on admission revealed a heart rate of 47 bpm, blood pressure of 96/61 mmHg and normal SpO2 (98 % without oxygen). The 12-lead ECG showed sinus rhythm with a first-degree AV block and complete right bundle branch block (CRBBB), and I, aVL, V2-4 leads ST segment elevation ; about 1 h later repeated ECG showed third-degree AV block but no ST-T dynamic change . So the diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome was suspected. The treatment of aspirin and clopidogrel was initiated for anti-platelet after which patient’s chest pain relieved partially, but intravenous nitroglycerin was avoided because of relatively low blood pressure and slow heart rate. 1 h after presentation, emergency coronary angiography was conducted and demonstrated no flow-limiting lesions in coronary arteries except minor atherosclerosis , and meanwhile temporary pacemaker was implanted . Hours later the patient was admitted into cardiac care unit, blood tests showed LDL-C level 2.23 mmol/L and cardiac troponin I (cTnI) level elevated significantly (maximum 50.83 μg/L reached at 24 h after symptoms onset, normal upper limit was 0.04 μg/L; Fig. ). And echocardiography only showed hypokinesis of middle and inferior segment of anterior wall with normal ejaculation fraction (EF) of 53 %, without tricuspid regurgitation or pulmonary hypertension, and no evidence of left or right-sided heart thrombi or right-left shunt was found; 99mTc-MIBI myocardial perfusion single photon emission computed tomography showed reduced perfusion in the middle anterior wall of left ventricle; and further cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed thinning of apical anterior wall of left ventricle and subendocardial late gadolinium enhancement . So it was likely that acute coronary event had happened. In CCU we continued aspirin for anti-platelet, but 2 days later patient’s SpO2 fell to 95 % at 10 L/min oxygen with reservoir mask, and D-dimer level elevated significantly (3.06 mg/L, normal range within 0.55 mg/L). Further ultrasound examination found no thrombi in deep veins of both lower limbs, but computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) revealed scattered embolism of subsegmental pulmonary arteries of both sides . Tests for hypercoagulability was ordered and demonstrated normal coagulation parameters (also including factor V Leiden mutation and levels of protein C, protein S and anti-thrombin III), normal homocysteine level, negative anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, lupus anticoagulant and tumor markers. So thalidomide was thought to be the cause of hypercoagulability, and this medication was ceased immediately; therapeutic low molecule weight heparin was initiated and then switched to warfarin with a target INR of 2 ~ 3, and nifedipine was given for coronary spasm. The patient reported no symptoms after therapy modification and SpO2 rose up to normal (97 % without oxygen) gradually, and third degree AV block also disappeared during hospitalization with temporary pacemaker removed . After discharge, patient was followed up over a period of 12 months, and warfarin was continued for 3 months with appropriate INR. No further recurrences of chronotropic or ischemic cardiac symptoms were reported.