A 44-year-old lady from Mazandaran, a province in the north of Iran, presented with decreased vision in both eyes since 8 months ago. During this period, she had frequent ophthalmological consultations where she received symptomatic treatment, including topical corticosteroids, without any improvement. The only notable finding in her history was that her husband had died 8 years earlier due to pulmonary tuberculosis.
On admission, best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 1/10 in both eyes, and slit lamp examination showed 3+ vitritis, and 2+ anterior chamber reaction, bilaterally. Fundus examination showed macular edema in both eyes; otherwise, the examination was unremarkable. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed severe cystoid macular edema in both eyes [Figures and ]. FA showed early foveal hyperfluorescence and diffuse punctate leakage in and around the macula; there was also late hyperfluorescence of the optic disc in both eyes [Figures and ].
Laboratory workup showed 21 mm skin induration in reaction to tuberculous skin test (TST), and was negative for syphilis, sarcoidosis, and lyme disease. Chest X-ray was unremarkable. She rejected to undergo intraocular fluid aspiration for microbiologic and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) studies.
Considering the data, presumed ocular tuberculosis (POT) was the most probable diagnosis. Infectious disease consultation was sought and there was no evidence of tuberculosis in other organs. The infectious disease specialist recommended anti-tuberculous therapy (ATT) and the patient received a regimen including rifampicin (600 mg/day), isoniazid (300 mg/day), pyrazinamide (150 mg/day) and ethambutol (1000 mg/day) for 2 months, followed by an additional 4 months of therapy with rifampicin (600 mg/day) and isoniazid (300 mg/day), in addition to vitamin B6 (40 mg/day) along the course.
One month after ATT, BCVA was improved to 8/10, anterior chamber and vitreous reaction had resolved and macular edema was decreased. In the next examination, 6 months after initiating ATT, both eyes had BCVA of 10/10. There was no vitreous reaction, no macular edema and fundus examination was unremarkable [Figures and ]. OCT showed complete resolution of macular edema but a fine epiretinal membrane was present temporal to the fovea in the right eye [Figures and ]. In the next examination 6 months later, and also at final examination 18 months after discontinuation of ATT, there were no signs of recurrence in either eye. At final exam, BCVA of the right eye was 7/10, and that of the left eye was 8/10. There were epiretinal membranes in both eyes, more severe in the right eye as shown on OCT [Figures and ].