A 3-year-old girl presented with plaques and white scales on the neck that had been present for 1 month. She was diagnosed with psoriasis at the local primary hospital and treated with topical steroid ointments, with no improvement in the skin lesions. Moreover, moist red flat patches were now observed in the perianal region during these treatments with topical ointments. As the lesions gradually increased, the caretaker brought the child to our outpatient clinic for assessment.
On physical examination, the child presented with erythematous plaques containing white scales on her head, neck, and thighs , along with moist verrucous plaques in the vulva and perianal areas . No skin lesions were observed on the palms and soles, nor was there any evidence of oral mucosal lesions, lymphadenopathy, or alopecia. Skeletal and neurological examinations were normal. While the skin lesions on the neck and thigh were suggestive of psoriasis or pityriasis rosea, the additional presence of lesions around the vulva led us to consider syphilis.
Laboratory examination results revealed that the complete blood count, liver and renal function tests were all normal and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serology was negative. However, results from T. pallidum particle agglutination (TPPA) and the rapid plasma reagin circle test (RPR test) were positive, with the RPR test being positive at a dilution of 1:64. An examination of a scraping sample from the perineum lesions using a direct fluorescent antibody test demonstrated multiple spirochetes. This test is to label the specific anti-Treponema pallidum monoclonal antibody with FITC Anti-Treponema pallidum antibody (ab20719) at the dilution of 1:10. If T. pallidum is present in the specimen, it will be specifically bound by the antigen and antibody, and an apple green color can be seen under a fluorescence microscope. .
The child was diagnosed as acquired secondary syphilis and treated with an intramuscular administration of benzathine penicillin at 50,000 IU/kg/week for 3 weeks according to the Chinese syphilis treatment guidelines of 2009. Three months after treatment, all lesions completely disappeared and RPR test results were now negative. Follow-up at 12 months, indicated no disease relapse and results of RPR and HIV tests were negative.
The parents of the child were astonished by the diagnosis. They reported that the child experienced a normal birth with no abnormal laboratory results at birth and they themselves denied any history of syphilis or promiscuity. Their tests for syphilis were negative. We examined the child’s hymen and anal, no signs of sexual behavior were observed. The patients and care givers also didn’t find any evidence of being sexual abused of the child in daily life. As the parents indicated that the girl was usually cared for by the grandmother, further assessments were directed to the grandmother. Results from laboratory examinations performed on the grandmother revealed that TPPA and RPR were positive, with a RPR titer of 1:64, while the physical examination failed to identify any skin lesions. When interviewing the grandmother, she indicated that she would routinely pre-chew or pre-warm the food before spoon-feeding it to the child, in this way effectively resulting in a mouth-to-mouth transmission. This feeding method continued during the period when she had acquired syphilis and been in the stage of syphilis transmission, a process which often occurs among the elderly in many countries .