We describe the case of a healthy 12-year-old male athlete with SLJ syndrome and acute PSA. The patient reported chronic anterior knee pain 4 months before related to repetitive high jumping activity. Clinical findings and MRI were compatible with SLJ syndrome . The patient’s activity level was reduced to a minimum, and after 3 months of conservative treatment he initiated high jumping activity.
Four months following the first symptoms of SLJ syndrome, the patient reported severe knee pain and loss of function after performing a high jump. He was referred to our outpatient clinic with a swollen, painful left knee and difficulty with weight bearing. Examination revealed haemarthrosis with tenderness over the patella, limited range of motion and a palpable defect of the patellar tendon. The patient was unable to perform a straight-leg raise. Plain radiographs (X-ray) and MRI confirmed an inferior pole PSA , and surgery was indicated.
Under general anesthesia, the PSA was fixed with double trans osseous ultra-high strength tapes. A midline skin incision was used. The subcutaneous layer and the bursa were incised sharply showing a blood-infiltrated periosteum, which was incised longitudinally. Careful surgical exposure is mandatory to avoid transient ischaemic changes or an avascular necrosis of the proximal pole, because the blood supply of the immature patella originates predominantly from the anterior surface of the distal pole . The entire periosteum was torn from inferior patella pole and peeled off the anterior patellar surface. The superior patellar pole and quadriceps tendon insertion were intact . Two vertical bone tunnels were drilled in the patella . A FiberTape® was first used, with one end passed through the lateral tunnel from distal to proximal and whipstitched the distal quadriceps tendon . A TigerTape™ suture (Arthrex, Naples, Florida) was then passed from distal to proximal, one end in each tunnel . The FiberTape® was shuttled back down the medial patellar tunnel and whipstitched the proximal patellar tendon where it was tied down in 90° of flexion . Both ends of the TigerTape™ were used to close the periosteum from proximal to distal over the anterior patellar surface in a shoestring suture technique and tied down over the proximal patellar tendon .
Postoperatively, the knee was immobilized with a locked knee brace (M.4 X-lock®, MEDI) in full extension and weight bearing was restricted for 6 weeks. The postoperatively X-ray showed a correct patellar height . Physical therapy was started immediately with full passive range of motion. At seven weeks postoperatively, the patient began active range of movement and partial weight bearing with 20 kg increments per week. At the 3-month follow- up visit the patient was able to ambulate brace free. Control MRI shows a healed periosteum and patellar tendon . At 2-years follow up the patient described to be able to play soccer 3 times a week in the soccer club without pain. Ice hockey was also played without problems. Only slight pain by prolonged sitting and slight atrophy was described. The Kujala score at 2-years follow up was 96, Lysholm score 100, Tegner score 9, and VAS score 0.