A 70-year-old Japanese man who complained of dysphagia was admitted to our hospital. He had a medical history of using medications for type 2 diabetes mellitus, percutaneous coronary intervention for coronary artery disease, and radiotherapy for laryngeal cancer. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed an ulcerative and infiltrative type of tumor in the middle of the thoracic esophagus. Chest computed tomography (CT) scan did not reveal the presence of any lymph nodes and distant metastases. The diagnosis was T3N0M0 esophageal squamous cell cancer. The patient received two courses of adjuvant chemotherapy comprising 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and docetaxel plus cisplatin (DCF regimen; 5-FU 600 mg/m2: days 1–5, docetaxel 60 mg/m2: day 1, and cisplatin 60 mg/body: day 1). Thoracoscopic esophagectomy, gastric tube reconstruction via the retrosternal route, and cervical esophagogastrostomy with circular-stapled end-to-side anastomosis were performed. On the 4th postoperative day (POD), flare, pus discharge, and saliva outflow from the cervical wound were observed, and cervicotomy with a wide opening was performed. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a partial defect in the necrotic wall of the gastric tube at the anastomosis, and air bubbles were appearing in the cervical wound. The patient was initially treated conservatively with drainage tube placement and antibiotic intravenous (i.v.) administration of tazobactam/piperacillin (4.5 g) three times a day, for establishing of a controlled infection around the anastomotic leakage. The patient received nutritional management with a combination of central venous and tube feeding, and blood glucose levels were controlled with insulin administration. Body weight and serum albumin levels were 50 kg and 3.1 g/dL on the 30th POD and recovered to 50.5 kg and 3.4 g/dL after 4 weeks, respectively. At the same time, HbA1c was unchanged from the preoperative level (6.6%) and serum C-reactive protein was close to normal level. However, the patient developed refractory anastomotic fistula, and Enterobacter cloacae was isolated from the culture of the cervical wound. On the 60th day following the initial surgery, the left sternoclavicular joint was partially resected to widen the surgical field, and necrotized tissue debridement and free jejunal autograft transfer were performed as salvage reconstruction. The jejunum was transected at the level of the second jejunal vessel, and was joined to the distal end of the cervical esophagus and the proximal end of the residual gastric tube in an end-to-end anastomosis. The jejunal artery and vein were anastomosed to the right transverse cervical artery and the right internal jugular vein, respectively. Further, the free jejunal autograft was covered with the pectoralis major muscle flap . In addition, a blood-rich pectoralis major muscle flap and two suction drain placements eliminated dead space to prevent osteomyelitis. A feeding jejunostomy tube was placed for nutrition. However, on the 15th day following the second surgery, the patient complained of gradual worsening of lumbago. Upon clinical examination, the patient was febrile a temperature of 38.2 °C, and he was experiencing pain in the lumbar spinal area. Neurological examination revealed weakness in both the legs. However, the sensibility and perception of the patient did not change. The following laboratory examination results were obtained: white blood cell count (WBC) count 9200 /μL (normal range 4000–8500 /μL) and C-reactive protein (CRP) level 9.86 mg/dL (normal range < 0.03 mg/dL). The presence of inflammatory foci was not observed on chest radiography and abdominal ultrasonography. E. cloacae was isolated from the arterial blood cultures. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine at the L4–5 revealed an obvious decrease in the signal intensity on T1-weighted images and an increase in the signal intensity on T2-weighted and short tau inversion recovery (STIR) images, as confirmed based on the typical appearance of pyogenic spondylodiscitis . The infection might be attributed to the hematogenous spread of the infection from the refractory anastomotic fistula in the neck. After intensive treatment with intravenous antibiotics, tazobactam/piperacillin 4.5 g (i.v.) three times a day for 4 weeks and cefepime 1 g (i.v.) twice a day for the succeeding 4 weeks, oral antibiotic (trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole 4 g/day for the last 4 weeks) was administered until the levels of the laboratory markers, including WBC and CRP, normalized. Spinal immobilization via lumbar fixation using a corset was continued. The patient’s lumbago and pyrexia gradually diminished, and the CRP and WBC levels decreased. Oral intake was started on the 14th POD, which was the time when the anastomotic fistula closed. The patient took small amounts of food orally. However, he remained dependent on the feeding jejunostomy for most of his nutritional intake. After 12 weeks of antibiotic administration, the patient was free from pain, and no signs of infection were observed. Thus, the administration of antibiotics was discontinued. The patient was discharged from our hospital and was receiving maintenance therapy for cancer. Eventually, he recovered. However, pleural disseminations were observed on the chest CT scan that was conducted during the follow-up 2 years after the initial surgery. The patient died 50 months after the initial surgery. However, the symptoms of infectious and neurological disorders did not recur until the patient’s death.