We report the case of a 10-year-old Angolan boy with homozygous sickle cell anaemia. An international aid organization sponsored the medical treatment for the boy and his brother, who was one year older and who also had SCD. Both boys are of African origin.
The two boys were admitted to our hospital because of chronic necrosis at several sites and fistula of the long bones. On admission, the boys were severely ill and had been ravaged by the effects of chronic SCD. Their heights and weights were below the 3rd percentile (compared with children of Central Europe), and they had muscle hypotrophy, signs of chronic hypoxia and chronic hepatitis B. The 10-year-old had malaria quartana, and his older brother had terminal renal insufficiency. Episodes of acute chest syndrome were not reported for both of them.
The 10-year-old boy was unable to walk because of multiple aseptic bone necrosis of the right tibia bone, the left femur and the lower leg. Imaging revealed pseudarthrosis, a fractured left fibula and a completely destroyed left tibia. An older healed fracture of his left femur was malpositioned. The lower leg bones were destroyed and could not be reconstructed, and an exarticulation had to be performed at the knee joint. In addition, multiple sequestrectomies had to be performed on the patient. Due to a hard estimation of blood loss and duration of the whole procedure, this kind of surgery is considered high risk.
On admission, the boy had the following laboratory parameters: severe anaemia, with 3.9 mmol/l haemoglobin and a haematocrit of 0.19; a 14.7% increase in reticulocytes; and positive results for the HbS solubility test. Haemoglobin high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) revealed an HbS fraction of 81.7%, HbA2 of 4.7% and HbF of 3.0%. The C-reactive protein level was at 70.5 mg/litre. The overall bilirubin was 52 μmol/litre and the direct (conjugated) bilirubin was 21 μmol/litre. Hyponatraemia was 131 mmol/litre. The test for hepatitis B surface antigen was positive, as was the test for the hepatitis B envelope antigen. The result of the hepatitis B envelope antigen test was negative, but there was evidence of Plasmodium malariae. Sonography showed nodular parenchyma and cholecystitis. The boy weighed 22 kg.
During preoperative care, a partial exchange transfusion was performed because of the high percentage of HbS. The surgical risk was also valued as very high due to his reduced health condition and multiple foci with probable prolonged duration of surgery. Meanwhile, blood loss was hard to estimate. One day before surgery, 1200 ml of blood (equivalent to 70% of his blood volume) was removed via the femoral artery for over 200 minutes. The blood was replaced using red blood cell concentrate and normal saline (1:2) This partial exchange transfusion decreased the HbS fraction to 21.6%; afterwards, haemoglobin HPLC revealed that his HbA2 was 7.4% and HbF was 1.9%. The haemoglobin was 7.5 mmol/litre, and the hematocrit was 0.36.
On the day of the surgery, the boy received 3 mg of Midazolam intravenously. The oxygen saturation was monitored using pulse oximetry. His body temperature was monitored via a rectal temperature sensor and was kept stable within a tight range (37.0 ± 0.5°C) by increasing the temperature of the operating room, use of heat conduction with special equipment, and heat convection (warm touch).
General anaesthesia with endotracheal intubation was performed as total intravenous anaesthesia using Propofol and Fentanyl. Cisatracurium was used as a muscle relaxant. Surgery was performed with an arrest of the blood supply around the thigh. The overall blood loss during the procedure was approximately 600 ml and was substituted using a balanced electrolyte solution, hydroxyethyl starch, 1 transfusion unit of red blood cells and 1 transfusion unit of fresh frozen plasma. Circulation parameters were kept stable during the surgical procedure. Conditions that could have triggered an acute exacerbation of SCD, such as hypoxia, hypovolemia, hypothermia and hyperviscosity, were prevented by monitoring his vital signs and maintaining them within tight ranges. Anaesthesia from the beginning up to the end of surgery lasted 80 minutes.
Postoperative care, including fluid management and weaning off the respirator with extubation on the day of the surgery, was provided by the hospital's Pediatric Intermediate Care Unit. Pain was managed using Paracetamol and Piritramid intravenously as needed.
After the surgery, the boy complained of a relapsing upper abdominal pain. Laboratory parameters showed increased markers for cholestasis. After an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, a cholecystectomy was performed four weeks after the initial orthopaedic surgery, which revealed severe cholecystitis. Without further transfusions at the time of abdominal surgery, the HbS fraction was 34.5%; HPLC revealed that HbA2 was 1.1% and HbF was 1.5%. The haemoglobin was 7.1 mmol/litre, and the hematocrit was 0.35. Due to the modest level of Hbs fraction, we planned a substitution of blood loss. During cholecystectomy, which lasted for 45 minutes, one unit of red blood cell was transfused. Table presents the time course of haematological data and surgical procedures.
Meanwhile, the boy's 11-year-old brother was suffering from heterogeneous sickle cell disease with a lower HbS fraction. On admission the boy had the following haematological parameters: severe anaemia at only 2.0 mmol/litre haemoglobin and a haematocrit of 0.09. HPLC revealed an HbS fraction of 32.3%, HbA2 of 2.3%, and HbF of 1.1%. He had to undergo several surgeries, including sequestrectomies, drilling of the medullary cavity and implantation of special devices to release antibiotics. Due to HbS fraction of 32.3%, we performed a substitution rather than exchange of the blood he lost. In the course of surgeries he lost a lot of blood, on the order of his whole blood volume, which was substituted successfully with red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma and balanced electrolyte solution. Table shows the time course and haematological data for this boy.
On admission he suffered from severe renal insufficiency and had to be treated with dialysis. The boy underwent a total of seven surgical procedures and did not develop any complications known to be associated with SCD. The surgeries lasted between 30 and 90 minutes. General anaesthesia was performed on the patients as described previously.