A 53-year-old woman presented to the hospital with a neck mass in her left lateral cervical region.
The patient’s symptom started 2 mo prior and she had not received any treatment in that period.
The patient had a free medical history.
The patient denied any relevant personal family history, particularly for thyroid issues.
A nodule of approximately 0.8 cm in diameter was found in the right lobe of the thyroid gland. It was not tender and easily moved upward and downward when she swallowed. A firm mass of roughly 1.0 cm was palpated in the left lateral cervical region.
Thyroid function and autoimmune antibody were all in normal ranges, except for the anti-thyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibody (787.40 IU/mL; normal range: 0-9 IU/mL). Routine blood indexes were all within normal range. Tests for serum tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic antigen, alpha-fetoprotein, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, CA242, cytokeratin 19 fragment and squamous cell carcinoma antigen, were all negative.
Ultrasound (US) examination showed a 7.8 mm × 7.4 mm heterogeneous hypoechoic nodule in the right lobe of the thyroid gland (Thyroid Imaging Reporting and Data System category 4B). In addition, several abnormal LNs were detected in level V; the biggest one being approximately 14.0 mm × 7.0 mm in size .
US-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy was taken for further evaluation. It indicated that the nodule in the right lobe was PTMC, and the LN was malignant. We preliminarily concluded that this patient suffered from PTMC accompanied by CLNM.
The patient underwent total thyroidectomy and radical cervical neck dissection (bilateral central LN and left lateral LN). Postoperative pathology found isolated PTMC in the right lobe, which was also supported by the findings of immunohistochemical analysis [CD56 (partly positive), HBME-1 (negative), galectin-3 (positive), CK19 (partly positive), TPO (negative), Ki67 index (1%)]. Surprisingly, the bilateral central cervical LNs (n = 16) were all disease-free. Metastasis was found, involving one LN in the left level V and one LN in levels III and IV . Immunohistochemical analysis of the metastatic LN in left levels III and IV were positive for galectin-3 and CK19, and were negative for CD56, HBME-1 and TPO. The Ki-67 index of 1% indicted that the left lateral CLNM in levels III and IV had originated from the thyroid.
No local relapse was found by US at the next 3-mo follow-up. The patient intended to receive iodine-131 therapy; however, she was admitted to our hospital for a large mass in her left breast 1 mo later. Mammography showed a mass of approximately 3.7 cm ´ 2.6 cm in the left breast, which was highly suspicious of malignancy (Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System 5). US also showed several abnormally enlarged LNs in the left axillary, supraclavicular and level V. US-guided core needle biopsy was taken for the breast mass, which revealed infiltrative carcinoma originating from the breast by pathology and immunohistochemical analysis. US-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy was taken for the suspicious LNs, including the left axillary, supraclavicular and level V, which were all determined to be malignant. It was unknown whether the CLNM in the supraclavicular and level V area originated from the thyroid or breast. The patient underwent another thyroid US. Several hypoechogenic structures could be detected in levels IV and V with irregular shape, obscure boundary and unclear lymphatic hilus. The findings were highly suspicious of metastatic LNs, and we first considered origination from the breast . No distant metastasis was found upon further examination.