A 13-year-old Indian boy, resident of Bihar, India, presented to the hematology out-patient department with a history of progressive abdominal distension of 9 months’ duration and low grade fever of 2 months’ duration. He complained of associated weakness, fatigue and weight loss. There was no history of jaundice or enlarged lymph nodes. Evaluation at another center at presentation had shown amastigote forms of Leishmania in his bone marrow (BM) for which he was treated with liposomal amphotericin B 0.6mg/kg for a total of 21 days with some clinical improvement. At 8 months after the end of treatment, he presented with recurrence of fever and anemia. A repeat aspiration done at this stage showed no Leishman-Donovan (LD) bodies, however, 30% blast-like cells were encountered. With a clinical suspicion of hematolymphoid malignancy, he was referred to our center.
Examination at our center revealed a thin boy with pallor and petechial rash over his chest. No enlarged lymph nodes were palpated. An abdominal examination revealed distended abdomen with multiple dilated veins. His liver was enlarged 10cm and his spleen was enlarged 20cm below the costal margin extending up to his right iliac fossa. A computed tomography scan of his abdomen showed massive hepatosplenomegaly with prominence of portal vein and mild ascites. No enlarged mediastinal or retroperitoneal lymph nodes were identified.
Investigations revealed hemoglobin of 76g/L, white blood cell count of 17.28×109/L with 76% atypical medium to large-sized lymphocytes seen on peripheral blood smears , a platelet count of 40×109/L, and elevated lactate dehydrogenase of 1024IU/L. Viral serology for hepatitis B, C and human immunodeficiency virus 1 and 2 was normal. A direct Coombs test was negative. A BM examination repeated at our center showed normoblastic erythroid precursors, normal myelogram and inadequate megakaryocytes. A predominant population (50%) of atypical large-sized lymphoid cells with oval to indented nuclei was seen. No LD bodies were demonstrated. Immunophenotyping of gated lymphoid cells on marrow cell suspension showed CD3+, CD2+, CD7+, CD56+, T-cell receptor (TCR) γδ+, TCR αβ–, and CD4– CD8–. Negativity for B cell markers (CD19, CD10, CD22, CD79a); myelomonocytic markers (myeloperoxidase, CD64, CD117) and immaturity markers (CD34, human leukocyte antigen-DR, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase) were seen. A BM biopsy showed monomorphic intrasinusoidal and interstitial infiltration of neoplastic lymphocytes , which were highlighted by T-lineage markers on immunohistochemistry. Previous BM smears were reviewed and showed no atypical lymphoid cells. In view of the immunophenotype, a diagnosis of HSTCL in a background of VL was established. Cytogenetic evaluation on BM sample showed 45, X,–Y,i(7)(q10). The patient, however, had an episode of massive upper gastrointestinal bleeding and died prior to being started on chemotherapy. An autopsy was not performed.