A 33-year old man without any medical history was admitted to our hospital because of a sore throat and dry cough for 2 months. He also presented recurrent fever and weight loss of more than 10% in the meantime. The patient was admitted to the infectious department of our hospital. On admission, the physical examination found the left tonsil being grade II swollen, with pus coating the surface. He breathed at 25–30 times per minute; no audible rale was heard on the auscultation. The computed tomography (CT) found an oval soft tissue mass in the oropharyngeal cavity, with some gas shadows in the lesion . The pulmonary CT scan found multiple lesions distributed among both lungs. Among them, most appeared as ground-glass subsolid nodules, some showed consolidation, and the lesion in the right upper lobe showed a mass-like appearance . The C-reactive protein was 42.37 mg/l (normal range: 0–8 mg/l), the procalcitonin was 0.09 ng/ml (normal range: 0–0.5 ng/ml), the white blood cells count was 4.5 × 10 E9/l (normal range: 4.0–10.0 × 10 E9/l), and the serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was 718 U/l (normal range: 109–245 U/l). Candida albicans were detected by throat swab. The patient was initially diagnosed with the tonsil abscess and pneumonia, which were possibly due to complex infection, including the bacterial and fungal infection. The patient received combined treatment with meropenem, linezolid, and caspofungin for more than a week. However, the initial treatment showed no effect. The results of a series of tests came out, showing that (1,3)-beta-d-glucan (G test) and galactomannan (GM test), sputum culture, acid-fast smear, gomori methenamine silver stain, and respiratory virus screening were all negative. Then the otolaryngologist was consulted, and surgical debridement was performed. During the surgery, a lot of hyperplastic and necrotic tissues were found in the oropharyngeal cavity, and the left tonsil was grade II swollen and festered. The pus and necrotic tissue were debrided, and the left tonsil was taken off. The histopathology found that the tonsil was absent of normal structure, mainly composed of medium-sized cells, with abundant cytoplasm, and the mitotic images can be seen. On immunohistochemical staining, these atypical cells were positive for CD-2, CD3, CD30, CD56, c-Myc, TIA-1, and granzyme B, while CD5, CD10, CD20, CD21, CD23, Bcl-2, Bcl-6, MUM1, PAX-5, CyclinD1, and ALK were negative. Epsteine Barr virus encoded RNA (EBER) in situ hybridization was strongly and diffusely positive in the cells. The Ki-67 proliferation index showed 80% nuclear staining . The serum EBV DNA level was 1.72 × 10 E6 copies/ml in the test after surgery. These findings were consistent with ENKL. While the patient got refractory hypoxemia immediately upon arrival in the ICU after surgery. The bedside chest radiograph showed bilateral diffuse opacities in the lung , and ARDS was diagnosed. The CRP increased to 96.16 mg/l, and the PCT increased to 1.09 ng/ml. We continued the experimental anti-infection therapy of meropenem, linezolid, and caspofungin. While following sputum cultures were still negative. Although the CRP and PCT declined gradually to 55.70 mg/l and 0.32 ng/ml respectively, the hypoxemia didn’t resolve. The patient got deterioration rapidly, with the LDH surging to 1660 U/l. He died of ARDS on the 5th day after surgery.