A 66-year-old female with a past medical history of hypothyroidism, type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and bipolar disorder presented to the emergency department (ED) for fatigue, depression, and tremors. Most of the history was provided by the patient’s son, who estimated that the symptoms had been occurring for 3–7 days. The patient also reported decreased appetite and decreased fluid intake. She reported taking her medications as prescribed. Her home medications included lithium 300 mg twice daily, levothyroxine 88 micrograms daily, bisoprolol-hydrochlorothiazide 10–6.25 mg daily, and atorvastatin 80 mg daily. The patient denied any abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, dysuria, fever, headache, syncope, or shortness of breath.
On initial presentation, the patient had a heart rate of 34 beats per minute, blood pressure 157/59 millimeters of mercury, oxygen saturation of 100% on room air, respiratory rate of 14 breaths per minute, and a temperature of 97.5° Fahrenheit. On her initial physical exam pertinent findings included somnolence, although she answered questions appropriately, mild tremors of the upper and lower extremities, and marked bradycardia.
An electrocardiogram was completed and demonstrated a third-degree heart block. A lithium concentration of greater than 3 mEq/L (reference range: 0.60–1.2 mEq/L, with 3 mEq/L the maximum detectable in our laboratory) was detected. A send-out test determined her initial lithium concentration to be 3.8 mEq/L (0.5–1.2 mEq/L). Other pertinent abnormal labs included sodium 130 mEq/L (135–145 mEq/L), creatinine 1.89 mg per deciliter (dL) (0.40–1.10 mg/dL), and glomerular filtration rate 27 (reference range: >60). Given the bradycardia with prolonged QRS complexes and QTc intervals with lithium toxicity, our bedside medical toxicology consultation service recommended normal saline, two ampules of sodium bicarbonate, and two grams of magnesium sulfate. However, the patient developed worsening encephalopathy, and hemodialysis (HD) was recommended. She was taken to the catheterization lab to have a temporary transvenous pacemaker placed.
Throughout her intensive care unit (ICU) stay, the patient underwent emergent dialysis, which resulted in improvement of her mental status and laboratory abnormalities. The third-degree heart block, however, had not resolved. A permanent Medtronic DC pacemaker was subsequently placed .