A 70-year-old woman was referred to our clinic for blurry vision with painful redness in the right eye for 1 month. She had undergone phacoemulsification and intraocular lens implantation in the right eye 10 days before the onset of ocular symptoms. On day 1 post-operation, her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in the right eye was 20/20. Then, on day 10 post-operation, she complained of acute blurry vision and painful redness; her intraocular pressure (IOP) was 35 mmHg in the right eye, and there was mixed conjunctival congestion and corneal edema. However, no keratic precipitates, flare, or cells in the anterior chamber were observed. She received focal prednisolone acetate and brimonidine eyedrops for the right eye. On day 17 post-operation, her VA in the right eye was 20/33, and the IOP in the right eye was 11 mmHg, and she underwent retro-hemispheric injection of 20 mg of triamcinolone acetonide. On day 26 post-operation, her VA in the right eye was reduced to 20/333, and the IOP was 7 mmHg, vitreous opacity was subsequently recorded in her medical chart. On day 27 post-operation, the patient underwent an intravitreal vancomycin injection in the right eye. On day 34 post-operation, fibrinous exudation in the anterior chamber in the right eye was recorded. She was referred to our clinic as her VA was still declining. Her past medical and family history were unremarkable, except for hypertension for 3 years. She had no history of prior herpetic keratitis or anterior uveitis.
Upon initial examination, her visual acuity was 20/400 OD and 20/20 OS. The IOP was 8 mmHg in the right eye and 15 mmHg in the left eye. An examination of the anterior segment of the right eye revealed mixed conjunctival congestion, corneal edema, pigmented keratic precipitates, 1 + cells in the anterior chamber, posterior synechia, pigmented fibrin attached on the anterior surface of the intraocular lens, and hemorrhage of the iris . A retinal exam showed dense vitreous opacity but no necrotic or focal retinal lesion in the right eye . Results of the anterior segment and retina exam of the left eye were unremarkable. Ocular ultrasound showed dense vitreous opacity in the right eye . OCT of the right eye showed that macular area was attached . The corneal thickness was 527 μm in the left eye and 444 μm in the right eye. The corneal endothelial cell density was 1,584/mm2 in the left eye, and not detected in the right eye.
The bacterium and fungal culture results for the vitreous biopsy collected from the right eye were negative. The aqueous humor collected from the right eye was positive for HSV by next-generation sequencing analysis, and no other virus, bacteria or fungus was detected. HSV-1 was further confirmed by a real-time-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test of aqueous humor collected from the right eye with a titer of 9.42 × 104/ mL. A diagnosis of herpetic uveitis in the right eye was made based on the clinical presentation and diagnostic tests results of the intraocular fluid. The patient underwent intravitreal ganciclovir (2 mg/0.1 mL) injections once weekly for 4 weeks and received oral valaciclovir (0.5 g 3 times daily) for two months. Three months after starting the antiviral therapy, her VA in the right eye had improved to 20/33, and the inflammation in the anterior chamber and vitreous body had vanished .