A 20 year old female was referred to our Medical Oncology department after a gastric antrum GIST resection. A subtotal gastrectomy revealed a pathologic specimen compatible with an epithelioid GIST variant localised to the muscularis propia. The diameter of the tumor was 1.8 cm and the mitotic count rate was of 18 per 50 HPF (high-power field). IHC assays revealed that the cells presented a strong positive expression of CD117 (KIT) and DOG1, which supported a GIST diagnosis. The tumor was classified as a pT1pN0 (0/1) with a high mitotic rate - stage II – according to the eighth edition of TNM classification. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology (AFIP) criteria calculate the risk of this tumor relapsing and/or progressing as zero, due to the low number of published cases. The mutational analysis revealed that the tumor was KIT and PDGFRα WT. After complete resection, a whole body computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast was performed, revealing no signs of metastases. Two years after the initial diagnosis, during the follow-up, a CT scan, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the liver and a positron emission tomography (PET) were performed. These procedures revealed the presence of multiple hepatic metastases. After confirmation of resectability, she underwent surgical resection of the hepatic metastases and postsurgical image studies confirmed no evidence of disease so, in accordance with current medical evidence in patients with complete resection of WT GIST, adjuvant treatment with imatinib was not delivered. At present, the patient is 26 years old and she has no evidence of active disease.
Because of the age at presentation and the molecular features of her tumor, the patient was sent to our Hereditary Cancer Genetic Counseling Unit for further investigations. Complete physical examination was irrelevant and no typical phenotypic features suggestive of a specific syndrome were detected. The family history of the patient seemed to be unremarkable: she has a 19 years old healthy brother. Her parents, 51 years old, had no history of any diseases. The maternal family history was anodyne but the paternal family history included a grandfather who had died at the age of 52 as a consequence of a pituitary adenoma. He was diagnosed when he was 30 years of age and he received radiotherapy treatment. There was no history of other tumors (paraganglioma, pheochromocytoma, GIST or pulmonary chondromas) or other significant diseases in maternal or paternal lines.
On the basis of the described molecular features of diagnosed GIST, age at presentation and in a spite of an apparently irrelevant family history, we decided to perform SDHx germline analysis in peripheral blood, after performing pretest counseling and obtaining informed consent.