This is the case of a 66-year-old man with a history of an enlarging mass on the upper eyelid of the right eye for the past 3 weeks. The primary ophthalmologist characterized the mass as a chalazion. His functions and habits were normal – no blood in the urine and no painful micturition. Past medical, family, and psychosocial history was normal. Ophthalmological status showed normal visual acuity and intraocular pressure in both eyes. Slit-lamp examination revealed a hard, pearl-like mass with a diameter of 7 × 10 mm in the central part of the upper eyelid margin of the right eye. The mass is red in color, covered with telangiectasias, with preserved eyelashes at the tumor site . Initial nuclear cataract and normal fundus status were present. The findings of the left eye were unremarkable.
The patient underwent complete extirpation of the tumor tissue and blepharoplasty with stitches on the upper eyelid of the right eye. The pathohistological findings showed the following: material covered with partially ulcerated epidermis, made of trabecularly arranged, polymorphous, polygonal cells with clear cytoplasm. The tumor is well separated from the surrounding tissue, the tumor cells are mitotically active, and there are pathological mitoses. No necrosis was found. Histology and immunohistochemical expression indicate metastasis, most likely kidney cancer. The tumor does not reach the edges of the skin sample in the examined histological sections .
After obtaining the pathohistological findings, we performed a total physical examination to determine the origin of the primary tumor. Complete blood count was normal, except for slightly elevated leukocytes (12.7 × 109/L) and segmented neutrophils (9.0 × 109/L). Chemistry laboratory findings showed elevated values of bilirubin (37.8 μmol/L), blood glucose (7.7 mmol/L), and C-reactive protein (16.3 mg/L). Urine tests, including microscopic examination, were normal.
Abdominal ultrasound revealed an expansive formation, located in the area of the lower pole of the right kidney, with the largest diameter of about 7.5 cm, which mostly indicates a neoplasm. A fatty liver was diagnosed without focal liver pathology, while the findings of the left kidney, pancreas, bile ducts, and spleen were normal.
Abdominal computed tomography with intravenous contrast confirmed an expansive mass in the lower pole of the right kidney in transverse layers, with firm, undulating borders, 7.3 × 5.6 cm in diameter, with areas of necrosis and inhomogeneous contrast enhancement suggestive of a primary neoplastic process. The left kidney was unremarkable. There were no enlarged lymph nodes, ascites, and metastases .
After examining the aforementioned findings, the patient was transferred to the Department of Urology. A total nephrectomy of the right kidney was performed. The pathohistological findings showed a kidney with dimensions of 13 × 5 × 6 cm, with a well-limited tumor with a diameter of 6 cm in the lower pole, gray in color, which macroscopically does not penetrate the capsule and with up to 20% necrosis . There were no pathohistological findings on the adrenal gland, blood vessels, and ureter. Histologically, this finding, according to the WHO 2004 classification, indicates ccRCC of nuclear grade 3 . The tumor was classified as stage T1bN0M1, according to the TNM cancer staging system .
One month after the nephrectomy, the patient was referred to an oncologist for the administration of the drug sunitinib malate, which inhibits receptor tyrosine kinase. The recommended dose of sunitinib malate was 50 mg orally daily for 4 weeks, followed by 2 weeks off treatment (4/2 schedule). Adverse and unanticipated events were not reported.
Six months after tumor excision, the patient was tolerating the therapy well. There are no signs of local tumor recurrence or new metastases in the eye or anywhere else in the body .
A timeline summarizing the main events of this case is that the patient underwent total extirpation of the eyelid tumor the day after the ophthalmological examination. The pathohistological findings showed metastases of renal carcinoma, and the primary tumor was confirmed by ultrasound and CT. The patient underwent total nephrectomy and received sunitinib malate as adjuvant therapy. The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report, attached as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).