We present two sisters affected by CRB1gene mutation.
A 58-year-old female patient visited the retina clinic in the North Devon District Hospital (NDDH), Barnstaple, UK in April 2012. She had a long history of poor vision and complained of further deterioration of vision in both eyes; she was referred to the clinic by her general practitioner (GP).
The patient had suffered from significant ocular problems since childhood. The condition progressed rapidly, and she was registered as blind after a few years. She was previously diagnosed with severe macular dystrophy in both eyes at the Moorfields Eye Hospital, London. A differential diagnosis suggested a possibility of fundus flavimaculatus, Sorsby's dystrophy, and Best vitelliform macular dystrophy. The patient underwent fluorescein angiography at the Moorfields Eye Hospital which revealed profound atrophy of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) at the posterior pole in both eyes along with widespread retinal edema and microvascular changes. She also underwent electrophysiological testing at that time, which included electroretinogram (ERG) and electrooculogram (EOG). ERG and EOG were both performed on an in-house manufactured electrophysiological visual evoked potential machine called the “Observe-reviewer” system at the Moorfields Eye Hospital, UK. The EOG was reported to be abnormal and showed no light rise in either eye. The ERG was performed with gold foil recording electrodes according to the international standards. It showed very low scotopic and photopic responses on both sides. Her rod ERG showed almost no response and there were very small “a” and “b” waves which were markedly delayed on both sides. The single flash cone ERG response also had a very small amplitude with significantly delayed latency and the single flash cone ERG “b” wave amplitude was recorded to be less than the half of a normal response. In summary, her full-field ERG was abnormal for rods and cones, both being very reduced and delayed.
Her family history revealed unknown eye problems in her younger sister as well.
On examination in the clinic at NDDH, the woman could count fingers using both eyes and the vision did not improve with pinhole examination. She had an unremarkable anterior segment examination with clear lenses. Pupil reactions were sluggish on both sides. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was in the normal range in both eyes. Retinal examination revealed retinal pigmentation with some bony spicules mainly affecting her macular areas along with paravenous pigmentation seen in some areas of both eyes as observed from her fundus photos [Figures 1 and 2]. Macular examination did not show signs of macular edema. She had mildly pale optic discs bilaterally. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) scan was performed with Topcon 3D-OCT 2000 series model (Topcon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) which showed outer retinal layer atrophy along with pigmentation in the macula and no macular edema bilaterally [Figure 3].
The patient had a genetic testing for her eye condition at the closest genetic testing center in 2012 on a specialist's advice. The molecular and genetic testing results were received in 2014, and the reports showed that she carried a compound heterogenous pair of alterations in the CRB1gene that is associated with RP (type 12) and LCA type-8 due to the mutation. The geneticist reported that more appropriate designation is LCA-8 as one of the alleles is a null allele which is more frequently associated with LCA type-8. The methodology used for genetic testing was a next-generation massively parallel sequencing with a panel of 105 genes associated with retinal dystrophy. The abnormal findings were then confirmed through Sanger sequencing. The patient's detailed results for both CRB1genes having mutations were CRB1c.498_506del9 p.(IIe 167_Gly169del) and CRB1c.2688TA p.(Cys896Ter). She was then identified as harboring CRB1gene mutation causing LCA type-8 with retinitis pigmentosa spectrum in both eyes.
A 53-year-old lady was examined in the eye clinic at the NDDH in September 2015 as referred by her GP as she had problems with her right eye vision since a young age like her older sister. She also underwent a genetic testing several months ago. She was initially diagnosed as having probable age-related macular degeneration based on clinical examination at the Moorfields Eye Hospital. She also had an ERG (done with Observer-reviewer system machine at the Moorfields Hospital, UK) which was performed with gold foil recording electrodes according to the international standards and was found to be subnormal on the right side with lower level responses. Rod-specific ERG-b wave amplitudes were 145 µV on the right and 270 µV on the left sides, respectively. Bright flash ERG “a” and “b” wave amplitudes were 170 µV and 280 µV in the right eye and 305 µV and 560 µV in the left eye, respectively. She also had a pattern ERG P50 which was also found to be subnormal (0.6 µV) on the right side being reported as a delayed pattern ERG. The EOG (also done with Observer-reviewer system machine at the Moorfields Hospital, UK) was essentially normal for both eyes. The EOG light rise was 185% in the right eye and 200% in the left eye.
The patient complained of poor vision in her right eye. On examination in the eye clinic, the best corrected visual acuity was 6/36 in the right and 6/6 in the left eye. Anterior segment examination was normal and unremarkable. IOP was in normal range on both sides. On dilated funduscopy, a central macular atrophy with a mottled fundus appearance on the right side and an eccentric atrophic patch on the left side, just above the macular area, sparing the macula, were observed which were also visible in the fundus photos [Figures 4 and 5]. Optic discs were found to be normal on both sides. An OCT scan was performed with Topcon 3D-OCT 2000 model which revealed RPE atrophy in the right eye along with thinning of the outer retinal layers [Figure 6] and a less marked foveal sparing RPE atrophic patch in the left eye. The genetic testing in her case was done through Sanger sequencing, like her sister. Her genetic testing results showed a compound heterozygous genetic mutation of both CRB1genes which was exactly similar to her older sister. Her detailed results for both CRB1genes having mutations are CRB1c.498_506del9 p.(IIe 167_Gly169del) and CRB1c.2688TA p.(Cys896Ter). Geneticist confirmed that the mutations were affecting both alleles of the CRB1gene and since both of them were nonsense mutations, they were securely pathogenic and not carrier genes; this causes LCA-8. Hence, she was considered to have a milder phenotype of LCA type-8.