A 3.3 kg full term African American female infant was delivered at a community hospital by cesarean section secondary to fetal bradycardia and suspected macrosomia to 37 years old G8P5 mother. The pregnancy was complicated by gestational diabetes mellitus and pregnancy-induced hypertension. Apgars were 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 minutes respectively. No neck mass was reported on prenatal ultrasound. The lack of maternal fetal medicine specialists at the community hospital might explain the quality of prenatal ultrasound. In the well baby nursery at the community hospital a right neck mass was noted. Due to history of spitting on regular infant formula, soy-based formula was started, but without improvement. She was transferred to the Regional Neonatal Center for further evaluation and management of the neck mass.
The baby was on room air for 1 week when she developed stridor. The neck mass had increased in size and a Pediatric ENT consult was obtained. An MRI demonstrated "a cystic lesion in the nasopharynx and right neck which inferiorly followed the course of the right carotid artery probably consistent with cystic hygroma" [fig. ]. The mass continued to increase in size so a follow-up MRI and MRA were done. MRI showed increase in size of right posterior retropharyngeal to right neck cystic mass measuring 4.1 cm and displacing the trachea and oropharynx to the left and the right carotid artery posteriorly and laterally [fig. ]. MRA showed the right common carotid artery displaced posteriorly and laterally without definite hemodynamic stenosis. But it is possible that neurovascular and respiratory structures of the neck were compressed during labor to cause fetal bradycardia. Carotid duplex ultrasound was recommended, which was severely limited due to displacement of vessels, presence of the mass and small size of the neck. To reduce fluid build up in the neck mass, the patient was started on 0.1 mg/kg of dexamethasone every 6 hours after the first MRI. She was later intubated for stridor and concern of potential airway obstruction. A team of pediatric otolaryngologists and pediatric surgeons was assembled to address the mass. The otolaryngologist decided to approach the mass via a cervical incision. Imaging studies demonstrated that the mass extended inferiorly to the aortic arch and a sternostomy had been planned. Intraoperatively the mass was found to be limited to the neck, so a sternostomy was not necessary. A hemithyroidectomy was required when the cystic hygroma was found to be inseparable from the right half of the thyroid. Dexamethasone was tapered over 2 weeks. She was observed for 24 hrs after the steroid taper. Endocrinology was consulted after the hemithyroidectomy. Initial thyroid function tests were normal except for mildly elevated T4 [13.9 μg/dL]. PTH was also normal [50.8 pg/L]. Genetics was consulted and chromosomal analysis showed 46 XX. The patient was noticed postoperatively to have a weakness of the right lower lip, consistent with neuropraxia involving the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve. This deficit is expected to correct with time.