A 44-year-old woman, never smoker, was referred to our hospital 18 months ago due to chronic productive cough. She had asthma treated with inhalation therapy and allergic rhinitis. Chest computed tomography showed centrilobular nodules and bronchiectasis in the middle lobe and in the bilateral lower lobes . Despite treatment with erythromycin and expectorants, her chronic respiratory symptoms worsened. Subsequently, a rapid growing mycobacterium (RGM), strain TY81, was cultured repeatedly from her sputum; however, its species/subspecies could not be identified by conventional methods such as AccuProbe (Gen-Probe Inc., San Diego, CA, USA), COBAS AMPLICOR (Roche Diagnostic, Tokyo, Japan), or DNA-DNA hybridization assay (Kyokuto Pharmaceutical Industrial, Tokyo, Japan). Therefore, we diagnosed her as NTM-PD of unidentifiable mycobacteria in accordance with the American Thoracic Society/Infectious Diseases Society of America (ATS/IDSA) criteria for the diagnosis of NTM-PD . Multilocus sequence typing revealed that the unidentified mycobacterium was genetically close to M. mucogenicum .
We performed a whole-genome analysis of TY81 and obtained the complete genome sequence (AP023362-AP023365). The DNA G + C content of the type strain was 67.18 mol%. The mean nucleotide identity (ANI) to M. mucogenicum was 93.3% and was the maximum value obtained among the type strains of 175 NTM species . Phylogenetic analysis using the 16S rRNA sequence suggested that TY81 was closely related to M. mucogenicum and related strains. The TY81 strain satisfied three of four conserved signature indels of Mycolicibacterium . The three conserved signatures were a 5 aa insertion of GDAQS at positions 197–201 in the LacI family transcriptional regulator gene, a 1 aa insertion of proline at position 60 in the CDP-diacylglycerol-glycerol-3-phosphate 3-phosphatidyl transferase gene, and 1 aa deletion at position 128 in the CDP-diacylglycerol-serine O-phosphatidyl transferase gene. The protein of Cyclase gene (Accession number; WP_066808156) was not detected by homology search using protein-protein Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLASTp) with the threshold of 90% of similarity.
Moreover, we performed additional examination, concerning 16S rRNA phylogeny may not distinguish between closely related species . A comparison was made among TY81, the six strains of M. mucogenicum and the type strains of M. phocaicum and M. aubagnense by calculating the ANI values and constructing the phylogenetic tree based on core genomes consisting of 455 genes (Supplementary Fig. ). The results from both analyses were consistent that all strains belonging to M. mucogenicum group are distinct from TY81. Note that the 4 of 6 strains of M. mucogenicum were closer to M. phocaicum as seen in Behra et al.10. Considering the genetic characteristics described above, we suggest that the TY81 strain is a novel species. The scientific name proposed for this species is Mycolicibacterium toneyamachuris sp. nov. with RIMD 1333001T as the type strain. The bacterium was named ‘Mycobacterium toneyamachuris’ after the place where it was discovered.
M. toneyamachuris is a gram-positive, acid-fast, aerobic, anaerobic, non-pigmented and non-motile bacillus. Colonies were grown on 2% Ogawa-medium, Tryptic Soy Agar (TSA), and 5% Sheep Blood Agar and appeared greyish without pigmentation (Supplementary Fig. ). Growth was observed within 7 days at 25, 30, and 37 °C temperature with optimal growth at 37 °C.
Currently, the treatment of NTM-PD caused by rare species/subspecies is a process of trial and error. It often starts with the drug regimen clinically used for closely related species/subspecies, which is modified by in vitro drug sensitivity test results . Because the closest species/subspecies to our strain was M. mucogenicum, an RGM for which macrolides, quinolones, and amikacin are the most commonly used drugs , we started combination therapy with clarithromycin (CAM) 800 mg/day, moxifloxacin (MFLX) 400 mg/day, amikacin (AMK) 400 mg/day, and imipenem/cilastatin (IPM/CS) 1500 mg/day. Her clinical symptoms and chest computed tomography 2 months after starting chemotherapy showed significant improvement .