A 16-year-old adolescent male who had developed interstitial nephritis at 10 years of age received a preemptive living donor renal transplant. The patient had a history of hypospadias surgery at the age of 6. Urethrography was performed before surgery, and a stricture of the pendulous urethra was detected. An 8-Fr Foley catheter was placed during surgery because there was resistance to a 12-Fr catheter insertion. A 16-Fr catheter was placed as a suprapubic cystostomy because a urine drainage failure was expected with a small diameter Foley catheter. The 8-Fr Foley catheter was removed immediately after surgery.
Graft function was good, and his serum creatinine level was 1.1 mg/dL at 5 days after transplantation. The patient received a combination of immunosuppressive therapy with methylprednisolone, tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and basiliximab. Cystography was performed 8 days after transplantation. The first desire to void and strong desire to void yielded 200 and 400 mL, respectively. There was no urine leakage, and the cystostomy catheter was removed the next day (day 9). The patient's urine volume decreased and body weight increased after catheter removal. On day 10, the patient complained of strong lower abdominal pain, and his serum creatinine level was elevated to 1.8 mg/dL. Computed tomography was performed, and fluid collection around the transplanted kidney and bladder was detected . An 8-Fr Foley catheter was again placed in the urethra because urine leakage from the cystostomy extraction hole was suspected. Urine in the bladder was aspirated via the urethral catheter every hour to prevent drainage failure.
Once the urethral catheter was in place, the retroperitoneal fluid gradually decreased, his lower abdominal pain was reduced, and the serum creatinine level improved to 0.9 mg/dL. On day 21, a voiding cystourethrography was performed , and as no leakage was observed, the urethral catheter was removed. Because then, the patient has had no trouble urinating and the graft function has been good.