An 89-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our outpatients clinic with a left-sided neck lump which she had had for six months. It had started as a small pea-sized lump and developed into a 3 cm × 4 cm smooth, fixed mass . It had grown relatively slowly and the woman has been otherwise healthy throughout. She reported no pyrexia, dysphagia, weight loss, night sweats or hoarseness. Accompanied by her niece, our patient made it clear that, if it was malignant, she wanted it treated conservatively.
A further history revealed that she had a three-year history of recurrent neck swellings that progressed to abscesses, continuously discharging and healing slowly.
On closer physical inspection, there was visible scarring from a previous abscess approximately 5 cm inferior to this mass on her left side. As can be seen in Figure and Figure , on our patient's right side there was an old, slowly healing abscess that has been present for over a year.
Our patient had always enjoyed good health, with the only other significant past medical history being a splenectomy, resulting in taking life-long daily penicillin. The abscesses were treated by her general practitioner with recurrent antibiotics and frequent dressings. Previous swabs from the neck abscess, sent by her general practitioner, did not grow the tuberculous organism.
Our patient agreed to have further investigations. A chest X-ray and fine needle aspiration (FNA) were performed. The chest X-ray showed chronic fibrotic changes and no evidence of TB infection. The FNA contained necrotic debris and foam cells; acute inflammatory cells were not prominent and granulomata were not seen. Ziehl-Neelsen staining was performed and no acid-alcohol fast bacilli were seen. The features found represented a partially treated skin abscess but the negative staining did not exclude the possibility of TB. Part of the aspirate was submitted to microbiology for conventional and TB culture.
The differential diagnosis included neoplasia, tertiary syphilis, deep fungi (for example, sporotrichosis, actinomycosis) and chronic granulomatous disease.
Three weeks after submitting the aspirate to microbiology for culture, TB was confirmed. The infectious disease team took over our patient's care immediately. Our patient underwent various tests, including liver function tests, urea and electrolytes test, HIV screening and visual acuity prior to commencing the anti-TB regime.
Our patient was started on ethambutol 700 mg to be taken in the morning, rifampicin 450 mg, isoniazid 300 mg, pyrazinamide 900 mg and pyridoxine 20 mg. Within two months she showed a significant improvement, and after four months there were visible scars only.