A 74-year-old Caucasian male from Italy with chronic renal failure, ischemic heart disease, congestive heart failure, hypertension, diabetes mellitus and a history of gout presented to the emergency department with acute left-sided knee pain due to contusion after a recent fall. Other joints of the left extremity were not affected. After exclusion of acute hemarthrosis, internal knee derangements and musculotendinous strains by physical examination and radiograph, he was discharged home with the knee immobilized with an elastic wrap and crutches for pain associated with weight bearing. Three days later, severe pain, redness, swelling, and disability developed in the ankle of the same leg. Signs of inflammation extended beyond the confines of the ankle. Acute arthritis was suspected and, after exclusion of venous thrombosis by Doppler ultrasound, the patient was admitted for diagnostic work-up and treatment. His regular medications included daily oral carvedilol 18.75 mg, simvastatin 20 mg, ramipril 5 mg, amiodarone 200 mg, metformin 750 mg, omeprazole 20 mg, furosemide 125 mg, and warfarin 2.5 mg. The patient denied using herbal or over the counter products. He was independent in activities of daily living. There was no history of abdominal trauma.
Investigations before final diagnosis included blood and urine tests that showed elevated uric acid of 12.9 mg/dl (normal range, 2.5-8.0 mg/dl), mild leukocytosis, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein, hyperglycemia, and a reduced glomerular filtration rate of 34 ml/min; blood cultures were negative, liver function tests, amylase and serial troponins were normal. Knee radiographs excluded signs of stress fracture or traumatic process on bone or joint. A chest radiograph demonstrated signs of congestive heart failure; serial electrocardiograms confirmed atrial fibrillation but did not show signs of myocardial ischemia. Gouty ankle arthritis was diagnosed without joint aspiration; 100 mg diclofenac were administered for pain relief, metformin was stopped and normal saline was infused because of preexisting stage 3 moderate renal insufficiency. With no beneficial effect after 24 hours, the patient received second-line therapy with 1 mg colchicine orally. However, because of gastrointestinal toxicity, colchicine was stopped after the first dose. Instead, oral prednisone 40 mg/day was administered for three days and was effective.
Transient oliguric acute renal failure observed during the course of steroid treatment was interpreted as a side effect of NSAID aggravated by colchicine (rise in creatinine value from 2.4 to 5.2 mg/dL; normal range 0.5-1.4. mg/dL). During resolution of acute renal failure over the following four days, atypical chest and upper abdominal pain developed with worsening leukocytosis (rise of white blood cell count from 10,600/µL to 15,400/µL mg/dL; normal range 4,800-10,800/µL). With abdominal ultrasound showing a small amount of ascites and finally free air visible in abdominal radiograph, colonic perforation was diagnosed. Underlying diverticular disease was discovered at the time of surgical therapy consisting of resection and temporary colostomy. The postoperative clinical course was uneventful with no infectious complications other than peritoneal irritation. Allopurinol at a dose of 300 mg daily was prescribed for symptomatic hyperuricemia at 6 weeks after completion of surgical treatment.