A 41-year-old, systemically healthy female presented to the Clinic of Hassan II University, Casablanca, Morocco, with esthetic complaints related to GR . Upon intraoral clinical examination, a deep Miller Class III GR was detected on the buccal aspect of the tooth #2. The root apex was exposed entirely and a degree 3 Muhlemann mobility associated to a tooth extrusion was diagnosed. Probing examination revealed pockets of 6 mm on the buccal and palatal mesial aspect and pockets of 5 mm on the buccal and palatal distal aspect. Radiograph showed an advanced vertical bone loss on the mesial and distal aspects of the tooth with an apical lesion and mild root resorption. Thermal pulp tests indicated necrotic pulp. Occlusion was checked, and there was an occlusal trauma. A diagnosis of a periodontal-endodontic lesion in the tooth #2 was then confirmed. After oral hygiene instructions, the patient received mechanical therapy (scaling and root planing) associated with antimicrobial drugs (amoxicillin 500 mg+metronidazole 250 mg 3 times a day during 7 days). An endodontic treatment was performed on the tooth #2 . Two months later, based on the analysis of the possibility of tooth maintenance and on the patient's choice for a more conservative procedure, the decision was made to preserve the tooth. The aims of the corrective phase of the treatment were to cover the GR, to augment KT around the tooth #2, and to correct the occlusion by an orthodontic treatment. The chosen treatment for root coverage consisted of a lateral positioned flap (LPF) (there was a sufficient band of keratinized tissue (KT) laterally to the recession) . Following local anesthesia, the recipient site was prepared to accommodate the LPF . First, a V-shaped incision in the peripheral gingiva in the GR area was made followed by a wide external beveled incision on the mesial aspect and an internal beveled incision on the distal aspect creating close adaptation of the flap. An internal beveled incision toward the alveolar bone crest from the free gingival margin of the donor site was performed and continued by a distal vertical releasing incision extended to the alveolar mucosa. After that, a partial-full-thickness flap was raised. After flap incision and dissection, the exposed root surface was carefully planned with a hand curette. The prepared flap was positioned laterally to cover the GR and the removed epithelium from the mesial area of tooth #2, which was stabilized with discontinued periosteal sutures . At 6 months, a consistent reduction of baseline recession depth (2/3 of initial baseline or 70% of root coverage) was observed and an orthodontic treatment was then started in order to correct traumatic occlusion .
After 6 years of follow-up, clinically significant recession reduction (RR) (70% of root coverage), keratinized tissue (KT) augmentation (5 mm), and clinical attachment level gain were achieved. No bleeding on probing was observed during or after orthodontic treatment, and no GR was observed at the donor site . Regarding patient centered outcomes (recession reduction, color, and thickness of soft tissue), the patient showed a higher satisfaction.