A 76-year-old man with a height of 163 cm and weight of 65 kg complained of a cranial foreign body for 26 years and local purulent discharge and pain for 20 days. The patient sustained head and facial trauma 26 years ago after collapsing following an altercation with others. Due to the limited medical resources and absence of radiation equipment during that period, the patient received only debridement and suturing. Furthermore, due to the patient’s favorable postoperative recovery and financial constraints, no additional medical interventions were pursued. An X-ray obtained 8 years ago revealed a knife-shaped foreign object inside his skull causing persistent purulent discharge from his right cheek. He had experienced frequent headaches, blurred vision, and limb weakness over the past 6 months. Because the local hospital was limited in providing care for certain medical conditions, he was transferred to the Department of Otorhinolaryngology in our hospital on 26 March 2020. The patient underwent surgery for intestinal obstruction 20 years prior and had no preexisting conditions. This case report was approved by the hospital ethics committee, and an informed consent was obtained from the patient.
Preoperative ECG and 24 h dynamic electrocardiogram showed sinus bradycardia with 35–50 BPM and multi-lead ST-T alterations. A chest CT revealed bilateral pleural effusion and calcification in the left lung. There were metal foreign bodies in the right temporal and orbital regions, discontinuous bone in the right temporal bone, orbital wall, and sphenoid sinus, and involvement of the right optic nerve, according to the results of paranasal sinus CT, cranial neck CTA, and skull reconstruction .
On April 2, 2020, the foreign bodies were removed from the compound operating room. Before surgery, multidisciplinary consultations were held in the departments of otorhinolaryngology, anesthesia, cardiology, neurology, neurosurgery, CT imaging, etc., to enhance preoperative evaluation, treat hypoproteinemia, and manage infection.
After entering the compound operating room, BP, HR, SpO2, ECG, and BIS were routinely monitored, an intravenous line was secured in the left upper limb, and an invasive arterial line was secured in the right radial artery under local anesthesia. Following the verification of unimpeded mask ventilation, oxygen denitrogenation was initiated for a duration of 8 min, followed by the induction of anesthesia using 2 mg of midazolam, 10 mg of etomidate, 20 μg of sufentanil, and 16 μg of cisatracurium prior to tracheal intubation. Target-controlled infusions of propofol and remifentanil and occasional injections of cisatracurium were used to maintain anesthesia. A lung-protective ventilation approach was utilized, and end-tidal carbon dioxide (PETCO2) was maintained at 35 ~ 45 mmHg with tidal volumes 6 ~ 8 mL/kg, PAW < 20 H2O, PEEP 5 ~ 8 cmH2O, and FiO2 0.3 ~ 0.5 to ensure SpO2 > 96%. A blood transfusion machine was connected to stop any unexpected bleeding.
The surgical incision was made on the right temporal infected wound. The tissue surrounding the foreign body was separated, and the hilt was located and revealed. The pus was cleared under the nasal endoscope to avoid the interference of a large amount of blood. The surrounding adhesive tissue was loosened, and the precise location of the knife and adjacent tissues was checked. To address local blood oozing and to facilitate smooth drainage through the sphenoid sinus, a hilt of approximately 10 cm was delicately removed from the temporal incision under direct view of the nasal endoscope . The operation was completed successfully after 3 h with no residual foreign body, cerebral hemorrhage, hematoma, or damage to the brain abscess capsule. The patient resumed spontaneous breathing after 10 min, and after 30 min, he was fully awake. After a thorough review, the tracheal tube was removed, and the patient was sent to the neurological intensive care unit (NICU).
The condition of the right eye steadily improved 6 h after the first surgery. Multiple brain abscesses were discovered during postoperative MR examination . On the 3rd postoperative day, the intracranial abscess was punctured and drained under monitored anesthesia care (MAC). Blood and pus samples were subjected to a drug sensitivity test and bacterial culture, respectively. Postoperative recovery went well. After the second surgery, the motor function and muscle strength of the left upper and lower limbs gradually improved. There were no signs of widespread infection. He was discharged from the hospital on April 11 after a CT scan showed no abnormalities .