A 71-year-old woman was admitted to hospital on May 21, 2020, because of “repeated knee pain for 10 years, aggravation on the right side with activity restriction for 5 months.” The patient had a 10-year history of the disease and received conservative treatment for a long time. The right knee joint pain was significantly aggravated within the last 5 months, accompanied by claudication and limited functional activity to seek surgical treatment. Plain X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scans showing bilateral knee osteoarthritis with varus deformity, especially on the right side , right hip, knee, and ankle (HKA) angle, 4 degrees, medial proximal tibial angle (MPTA), 84.8 degrees. Physical examination showed that the bilateral knee varus deformity, right flexion contracture of 20 degrees, bilateral knee joint medial tenderness, percussion pain, right knee joint range of motion of 20 to 90 degrees, left the range of motion of 0 to 120 degrees. The bilateral knee joint lateral stress test and the patellar grinding test were both positive, while the drawer test was negative. The Knee Society Score (KSS) score was 64 on the left knee and 20 on the right. Based on the medical history and physical examination results, and considering the patient's age, we decided to perform the right total knee arthroplasty. Three-dimensional virtual images before operation show severe articular cartilage wear and severe fixed flexion deformity of the right knee joint , and this will make osteotomy lose important anatomical landmarks and seriously affect the accuracy of the osteotomy, especially for beginners. In the process of knee arthroplasty, there are strict requirements on the cutting angle, direction, and thickness of osteotomy, because these indicators are extremely important for the recovery of the line of force, the correct placement, and the stability of the prosthesis. Given this situation, we decided to use mixed reality technology for intraoperative guidance to ensure the accuracy of the osteotomy, in order to provide reference experience for the application of MR technology in TKA.
Before the operation, high-resolution CT (Philips, Eindhoven, Netherlands) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Siemens, Berlin, Germany) plain scans were performed to collect 3D structure data of the operation area. The CT and MRI data of the operation area (DICOM format) were imported into the computer and reconstructed by Mimics19.0 (Materialize, Leuven, Belgium) software. Different colors are used to distinguish different anatomical structures; thus, obtaining a “three-dimensional digital model of the knee joint” . Using the digital model, the patient's disease characteristics are analyzed, and the operation plan is made, including the angle and direction of the distal femoral osteotomy plane , the determination of the osteotomy plane of the tibia, and the location and size of the prosthesis . Taking the medial space of the knee joint as the reference point, the thickness of medial femoral osteotomy was 10 mm, the thickness of lateral femoral osteotomy was 8.3 mm, the thickness of medial tibial osteotomy was 3.8 mm, and that of the lateral tibia was 7.2 mm, the HKA angle was 180 degrees, the distal femoral lateral angle (LDFA) was 90 degrees, the femoral condylar shaft angle (sagittal plane) was 90 degrees, the MPTA angle was 90 degrees, and the posterior tibial slope angle was 3 degrees. The digital model is printed into a solid model by using 3D printing technology , as the reference instrument during the operation. The digital 3D data of the anatomy of the surgical area and the reference landmarks designed before the operation are input and opened using the helmet display HoloLens 2 (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, W A, USA) , through a personal computer (Lenovo Group, Beijing, China), and a pre-designed special automatic matching system the MiDIVI intelligent cloud platform (Jinse Medical Information Technology Co., Ltd., Changzhou, China), and the whole operation process is completely simulated to have an accurate grasp of the surgical process.
The operation was performed using the median knee approach and the medial parapatellar approach. After lumbar plexus and sciatic nerve block anesthesia, the patient was placed in the supine position, disinfected, then the sheets were spread. When the flexion of the right knee joint is 45°, the incision through the median approach is ~15 cm, the subcutaneous tissue and muscle are separated in turn, and then the medial parapatellar incision is made to cut open the joint capsule and turn the patella to the outside. The registration method of MR technology is the volume amplification method, which has been introduced in our previous article and implemented by MiDIVI intelligent cloud platform. Briefly, On a relatively constant position of the bone, we select a bony landmark and design a reference registration instrument, which is fixed with the selected bony landmark to form a whole. The registration landmarks on the reference registration instrument are identified in vitro to achieve registration in vivo, thereby enabling registration of the entire surgical field. Under the guidance of the engineer, the reference instrument for registration is installed on the side of the femur, and then, after wearing HoloLens 2, the operator opens the automatic registration software MiDIVI intelligent cloud platform for registration to coincident the three-dimensional virtual femur with the patient's real femur . According to the position and direction of the osteotomy designed before the operation, the osteotomy positioning plate is installed, and the osteotomy is performed under guidance . After the completion of the femoral osteotomy, the registration reference instrument is installed on the tibial side, and the three-dimensional virtual tibia is coincident with the real tibia . Similarly, according to the position and direction of the osteotomy designed before the operation, the tibial osteotomy positioning plate is installed, and the osteotomy is performed under guidance . The test mold was installed according to the size of the prosthesis designed before the operation, and the knee extension test showed that the knee extension space was appropriate, and the force line was satisfactory. The operative field is washed repeatedly with normal saline . The tibial plateau prosthesis No. 2 is placed with bone cement (PS, Attune, DePuy Synthes, USA), followed by femoral prosthesis No. 4 until the bone cement hardened, and then 6 mm polyethylene gasket is placed. Re-examination showed that the movement of the knee joint was good, the track of the patella was good, and the line of force was satisfactory. The total operation time was 1 h and 30 min, and the intraoperative bleeding was 50 ml.
Post-operatively, the patient was treated with cefoxitin to prevent infection. The post-operative CT data on the second day after the operation are imported into the computer and reconstructed using Mimics19.0 software to obtain the “post-operative three-dimensional digital model” , and compared with the pre-operative operation plan. After the operation, the medial femoral osteotomy thickness of 9.6 mm, lateral of 7.3 mm, the medial tibial osteotomy thickness of 4.0 mm, lateral of 7.8 mm, the HKA angle of 180 degrees, the LDFA of 90 degrees, the femoral condylar shaft angle of 89 degrees, the MPTA angle of 90 degrees, and the posterior tibial slope angle of 5 degrees. The X-ray film on the second day after operation shows that the position of the prosthesis is satisfactory, and the force line is good . The range of motion of the knee joint on the operative side is basically in the normal range. The second day after the operation, the patient began to walk with the help of a walker, and the recovery was good. The patient was discharged on the third day after the operation. The X-ray film 3 months after operation showed that the position of the prosthesis and the force line also was good . And there were no obvious operative complications.