A 29-year-old male presented with persistent chest pain and was admitted to our emergency department eight hours after chest pain initiation. According to the patient, the chest pain was at its worst for the first four hours and remained the same for the following four hours. The patient reported that the chest pain began in the middle of the night while sleeping after smoking tobacco and ingesting the drug Nas. The patient had begun daily use of the Nas drug (a moist, powdered tobacco snuff) approximately one month prior. The patient was a construction worker staying in a room with a poor heating system and an elevated risk of carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning, as a young coworker had suffered from CO poisoning in the same room the previous night. Along with chest pain, the patient also experienced vertigo and lightheadedness. At presentation, vital signs were stable, and mild bibasilar lung rales were present. The ECG is illustrated in .
Differential Diagnosis, Investigations, and Treatment
The ECG revealed a right bundle branch block with ST elevations of 1-2 mm in leads V1 and V2 and 1 mm diffusely. This ECG was compatible with epicardial coronary occlusion, pericarditis, myocarditis, and global myocardial ischemia due to hypoxemia. Due to the lack of coronary angiography and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) at the hospital, the patient was immediately transferred to the coronary care unit (CCU) after being diagnosed with STEMI by the attending physician. Before being transferred to the CCU, the patient was administered supplemental oxygen via nasal cannula, statin, dual antiplatelet, and nitrates in the emergency department. The echocardiography performed in the CCU at the bedside revealed akinesia in the anterior circulation segments with an ejection fraction of approximately 15%. Ten units of Reteplase were administered and then repeated 30 minutes after the patient’s arrival in the CCU. Positive cardiac markers were reported, and a complete blood count revealed leukocytosis. Blood pressure was approximately 100/55 mmHg, and basilar rales were still present. Multiple episodes of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia and accelerated idioventricular rhythm led to a partial resolution of his chest pain and ST-segment elevation.
The patient was referred to a PCI-capable center for coronary angiography, shown in clips 1-4. The patient had ectasia of the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery with a slow flow pattern, a thrombus in the same area, a severed diagonal branch, and a significant lesion between the two ectatic proximal and mid portions of the right coronary artery (RCA). Considering the lesions and the thrombus burden, it was decided that the patient would receive a dual antiplatelet and anticoagulant during admission and novel oral anticoagulants (NOACs) after discharge, with no intervention on the lesions.
Outcome and Follow-up
The patient was discharged in good health without chest pain while on dual antiplatelet, statin, and rivaroxaban treatment. Furthermore, the patient was administered a beta-blocker, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, and a mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist. Twenty days after the event, the individual returned to the primary care center with exertional chest pain. ECG exhibited no new changes. Echocardiography was performed on the patient, as shown in clips 5-7. The patient had an improved ejection fraction of approximately 25% with significant wall motion abnormalities in the anterior segments. The treatment dosage was increased, and nitrates were added to the regimen. The patient reports normal health approximately 28 days after the incident.