A 51-year-old African American woman with a limited medical history significant for depression and polysubstance abuse was brought to our emergency department by her boyfriend because of her bizarre behavior, nonsensical communication, and listlessness. As per her boyfriend, the patient was seen inhaling cocaine on the night prior to admission to the hospital. Owing to her altered mental status, her history was obtained from her boyfriend and sister and was limited because of their limited knowledge of the patient’s previous health issues. However, upon further questioning, it was discovered that the patient’s family history was significant for maternal chronic kidney disease, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension. Furthermore, it was revealed that the patient was unemployed, used tobacco, had substance abuse issues specifically with cocaine and heroin, and had abstained from alcohol use for over 10 years. The patient’s initial vital signs were significant for a body temperature of 36.7 °C, heart rate of 60–70 beats/minute, blood pressure of 113/73 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 20 breaths/minute. Her initial physical examination revealed that she was an awake and alert obese African American woman appearing to be her stated age, was confused and very agitated, and was not following commands. She had intact corneal and pupillary reflexes and clear lung sounds. She had regular heart sounds with no murmurs, rubs, or gallops and had a soft nontender abdomen. Additionally, the result of her neurological examination was negative for muscle rigidity, nystagmus, or diffuse hyperhidrosis. However, her examination revealed generalized confusion and agitation. Her pupils were round but sluggishly reactive to light bilaterally. She opened her eyes upon command and moved all four extremities spontaneously, withdrawing appropriately to noxious stimuli, and she exhibited dysarthria.
The result of her urine toxicology was positive for cocaine, opiates, and benzodiazepines. The results of her laboratory studies were unremarkable, with the exception of a potassium level of 3.1 mEq/L. After blood cultures were drawn, empirical intravenous vancomycin and cefepime were initiated for possible encephalomeningitis. The findings of initial unenhanced computed tomography (CT) of the brain were negative for any acute changes. Etomidate and rocuronium were administered for the patient’s agitation, and she was intubated and started on a propofol infusion.
On day 3 of admission, when the patient had been weaned off sedation and paralytic therapy, she demonstrated decorticate posturing, intact gag and cough reflex, positive Babinski reflexes bilaterally, and intact pupillary reflexes. The patient’s motor strength was dramatically decreased in both upper and lower extremities. She was obtunded, unable to follow commands, and opened her eyes spontaneously. On day 4 of admission, she was minimally responsive to commands and was able to communicate only with vertical eye movements. Repeat noncontrast CT showed hyperdensity in the basilar artery, suggestive of occlusion due to thrombosis, which was not present in the initial CT findings . Findings of lumbar puncture with cerebrospinal fluid examination and electroencephalography (EEG) were unremarkable. MRI showed large foci of abnormally restricted vessels of the brainstem with recent infarction, occurring bilaterally with no observed hemorrhage . MRA revealed complete loss of flow-related signal within the distal basilar artery .
Tracheostomy and a percutaneous gastrostomy tube were placed, and supportive care with rehabilitation was initiated. The patient died 2 weeks later of suspected aspiration; however, no autopsy was performed, because her family declined the option.