The patient was an 18-year-old woman with Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) on hemodialysis due to probable kidney dysplasia, with a history of developmental delay due to hydrocephalus (presents ventriculoperitoneal shunt). The preoperative and admission chest radiographs were normal. PPD or IGRA tests were not performed, since they were not part of the current pre-transplant routine. The recipient did not have a medical history suggestive of tuberculosis.
She underwent a kidney transplantation from a deceased donor on 7/10/18. The donor was standard criteria one: a 17-year-old male, whose cause of death was self-extermination (hanging). His creatinine level was 1.55 mg/dL. He was induced with thymoglobulin (panel-reactive antibody, 29%) and maintained with tacrolimus (0.1 mg/kg), mycophenolate sodium, and prednisone. At the time of donation, there was no pulmonary disease report and no chest X-rays were performed. The donor did not have a history that suggested the diagnosis of previous TB.
After the transplant, the patient evolved with immediate graft function and was discharged at the seventh postoperative day with creatinine level at 1.16 mg/dL. She was readmitted at 37th postoperative day with fever and cytomegalovirus positive antigenemia (11 cells) and was treated with ganciclovir for 14 days, but maintained the daily fever. Abdomen ultrasonography and chest X-ray were normal at this time, and sequential cultures (blood and urine) were positive for Leuconostoc mesenteroides, being treated with association of ampicillin and gentamicin, although the daily fever persisted.
After 2 weeks of hospitalization without resolution of the clinical condition, a chest computed tomography (CT) was performed, which showed diffuse micronodular disease compatible with miliary TB and abdominal fluid adjacent to the middle third of the transplanted kidney; this fluid fistulized through the skin. At this time, the medical team of the contralateral kidney transplant was contacted who informed that their patient presented a similar condition, being diagnosed with tuberculosis from the donor and had to undergo graft nephrectomy. Also, that team identified in the donor history a hospital admission for complicated pneumonia with pleural effusion one month before his death.
Our patient presented a positive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Koch's bacillus in the urine, and a positive Acid-Alcohol Resistant Bacilli (AARB) test in the fluid drained from the surgical wound, shown in . After confirmation of TB diagnosis, the team decided to maintain the graft and started specific treatment with Coxip (rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol) along with the suspension of immunosuppressive medication. The Coxip scheme was maintained for 12 months. Prednisone was reintroduced 12 days after the start of TB treatment, and the rest of immunosuppressive medications was resumed after 8 weeks. The creatinine level after the end of TB treatment was 0.85 mg/dL. The patient is presently in outpatient follow-up on tacrolimus, sirolimus, and prednisone and has a creatinine level at 0.76 mg/dL.