A post-menopausal woman, aged 61 years, visited The Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of Qingdao University after finding a painless lump in the right breast 1 wk previously.
The patient felt a painless lump in the right breast while taking a bath accidentally.
The patient suffered from a poliovirus infection over 50 years ago, which was diagnosed as poliomyelitis. She gave birth at the age of 25 but did not breastfeed, and she experienced irregular menstrual cycles and had no family history of cancer. The patient is right-handed and can write and walk around without crutches or a wheelchair.
She was diagnosed with invasive breast cancer by core needle biopsy (CNB) after hospitalization. A physical examination of the patient revealed a 1.0 cm × 1.0 cm, 1 cm from the nipple, non-tender mass in the upper outer quadrant of the right breast. No mass was palpable in the left breast and no tumescent lymph node was palpable in the bilateral axilla and supraclavicular fossae. A general physical examination revealed that her vision was clear, and both eyeballs moved freely without diplopia or nystagmus in any direction. Her left limb muscle strength, muscular tension, and tendon reflex were normal, whilst the right limb muscle strength was reduced, and she experienced muscle hypotonia and tendon areflexia. Her abdomen was slightly protruded and the size of her liver and spleen was normal, while both lower limbs were not swollen.
Laboratory examinations were normal.
Breast ultrasound revealed a hypoechoic nodule approximately 0.8 cm × 0.8 cm in size in the upper outer quadrant of the right breast, with an irregular shape, obscure boundary, heterogenous internal echo, and punctate blood flow signals, which was classified as breast imaging reporting and data system (BI-RADS) 4b . However, no tumescent lymph node was detected in the right axillary or supraclavicular region. Preoperative contrast enhanced spectral mammography identified an irregular and hard-density mass of 1.0 cm × 1.0 cm in size in the upper outer quadrant of the right breast, which had an obscure boundary with no abnormal calcification, and was significantly enhanced and classified as BI-RADS 4b . A breast MRI scan revealed an ill-defined mass with uniform equal signal intensity. Axial diffusion weighted imaging (b = 800) identified the mass with high signal intensity. Axial and sagittal post-contrast fat-saturated T1-weighted MRI showed a 0.8 × 0.9 cm enhancing irregular mass at the 9-10 o'clock position, approximately 6 cm from the nipple . Finally, a chest computed tomography scan was used to identify the atrophy occurring in the right pectoral muscles (pectoralis major, pectoralis minor, subclavius, and serratus anterior), teres major, subscapularis muscle, and latissimus dorsi muscle .