A 55-year-old lady presented to the outpatient department with complaints of swelling on volar aspect and restriction of movement of the right thumb for 1 year. She gave a history of non-specific blunt trauma to the right thumb 6 months before the onset of swelling following which she had mild pain for a period of 1 week, which resolved with rest and oral analgesics. The swelling presented insidiously initially the size of a pea which gradually progressed to a current size of 6×1.5×1 cm.
On local examination, a single irregular swelling of soft-to-firm consistency on the volar aspect of the right thumb extending from the distal aspect of the proximal phalanx over the interphalangeal (IP) joint to the distal phalanx was noted. Swelling was well defined with a smooth surface. Overlying skin showed no signs of local inflammation or adherence. There was restriction of movement at the IP joint due to mass effect. There was no area of paresthesia over the thumb and capillary refill was normal. Routine blood investigations were within normal limits.
Plain radiographs of the hand in anteroposterior and oblique views showed a localized soft-tissue swelling on the volar aspect of thumb with cortical erosions seen on the articular surfaces of IP joint, more on the proximal phalanx than distal . Ultrasonography showed heterogeneously hypoechoic lesion of size 2.8×1.8×2.3 cm on the anteromedial aspect volarly at the IP joint with underlying erosion of bony cortex.
Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) showed scant cellularity comprising of few osteoclastic type of giant cells with few mononuclear cells against a hemorrhagic background suggestive of GCTTS. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a well-encapsulated lesion of altered intensity of size 2×1.8×4 cm on the anteromedial aspect of volar surface arising from flexor pollicis longus tendon with infiltration and focal breach at IP joint. It appeared heterogeneously hypointense on T2, isointense on T1-weighted images, hyperintense on PDFS with areas of blooming on gradient sequence, and post-contrast enhancement - princeps pollicis being the feeding vessel. Cortical erosions on the palmar surface of proximal and distal phalanx were noted .
An open excisional biopsy was planned. Under sedation and local anesthetic block, a tourniquet was applied using the finger of a sterilized glove. A Z-shaped Bruner’s incision was taken directly over the most prominent part of the swelling. The mass was carefully dissected off the flexor tendon preserving the cutaneous nerve and vessel. The A1 and A2 pulley along with the tendon were intact. Closure was done in two layers and tourniquet was released. A polyploidal lobulated fibrofatty mass was obtained which was sent for histopathological examination. Histopathological examination showed a mixture of osteoclastic multinucleated giant cells, xanthoma cells, and chronic inflammatory cells in a collagenous matrix - typical of GCTTS .
Post-operative period was uneventful. 6-month follow-up showed no evidence of recurrence on clinical and radiologic examination. Flexion at the IP joint and metacarpophalangeal joint of thumb were unrestricted with normal capillary refill.