A 21-year-old male right hand dominant student got a cricket ball injury to the right ring finger. He presented to us 15 days post-injury with pain and inability to move the proximal interphalangeal joint (PIPJ) in the right ring finger. His radiograph showed volar lip fracture with dorsal subluxation of the PIP joint. The volar fragment involvement was <30% . We performed for dynamic distraction frame called “pins and rubbers traction system” application under local anesthesia so that he could start early active movement. Postoperatively, the pins and rubber traction frame was well placed and did not hamper other digits activities . The X-ray showed excellent PIP joint reduction and good alignment of the volar lip fragment .
Post-surgery, from day 1, we advised him to do active movement at the PIP joint in the ring finger 5 times every four hourly.
Fifteen days post-surgery, though he had 20°–70° movement in the PIP joint, he noticed lengthening of his digit as compared to the left ring finger but did not inform to author. At 3 weeks after surgery, the patient felt that fingertip was colder and less sensate than other digits and the length of the ring finger was same as the middle finger of same hand.
At this point, the patient was called to the emergency department where author confirmed vascular compromise in the digit and got his X-ray radiography done. The author noticed more than 1.5 cm of over distraction in the PIP joint . The distractor frame was immediately removed in the casualty, and the patient was given a static finger extension splint.
After 1 week of frame removal, reexamination was done. The finger was vascular (capillary filling of <2 s) and sensate (2-point discrimination of 4 mm). The length of the digit was near normal as the left ring finger. The PIP joint was flail, probably because of over stretching of the collateral ligaments. The active range of movement was from 20° to 40°. After 6 weeks, X-ray was repeated, which showed volar plate calcification with volar lip fragment and volar subluxation of the PIP joint .
Patients were given the option of PIPJ joint arthrodesis or to consider volar exploration, excision of calcified fragment, and volar plate arthroplasty with guarded prognosis.
We performed excision of calcified fragment and volar plate arthroplasty .
The patient was advised to start range of movement exercises after 2 weeks. At 8 weeks post-operative period, the patient regained 20–90 degree movement in the PIP joint of the ring finger without pain .