A 71-year-old male, followed for 5 years for diabetes mellitus presented to the University Eye Clinic for yearly examination. Patient had no complaints including blurry vision, metamorphopsias or scotomas. He had a history of stable, well-controlled diabetes mellitus 2 with a hemoglobin A1c of 6.5 the month before. On record, patient never had a hemoglobin A1c above 7.0. He also had a past medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia and prostate cancer 19 years prior which was cured after a complete resection. His medications included atorvastatin, metformin, glimepiride and losartan. On examination his best corrected visual acuity was 20/30–2, 20/40–2 and intraocular pressure 11, 14 mmHg in the right and left eyes respectively. Pupillary examination, extraocular muscles and confrontation visual fields were all within normal limits. Slit lamp examination showed a right upper eyelid nevus and bilateral nasal pterygium stable for many years.
On fundus examination of the left eye, a large juxta-foveal aneurysm with surrounding intraretinal fluid was present inferior to the fovea. Both eyes had scattered microaneurysms and mild peripheral retinal degeneration nasally. Initially, Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) of the right eye was normal . The left eye revealed a spheroid lesion in the inner retina with a hyperreflective wall and hyporeflective lumen harboring some irregular hyperreflective content. The hyaloid was lifted. . Fluorescein angiography (FA) of both eyes revealed scattered microaneurysms in early frames . The left eye revealed a large, hyperfluorescent lesion inferior to the fovea with associated leakage in late frames . As patient’s vision was unaffected, he was recommended to return in 3 months’ time. Due to social distancing regulations from the coronavirus pandemic, patient had a tele-visit at that time where he reported no visual changes.
On subsequent in-person visit, 7 months after initial visit, patient reported no visual changes and maintained a visual acuity of 20/30–2 and 20/40–2 of the right and left eyes respectively. OCT of the right eye was normal . OCT of the left eye revealed a spheroid lesion with a hyperreflective wall, relatively dark lumen, intraretinal cystic spaces and new subretinal fluid. The hyaloid was lifted. . FA of both eyes revealed scattered microaneurysms. The left eye revealed a large, hyperfluorescent lesion inferior to the fovea with leakage and staining that appeared significantly more hyperfluorescent in late frames from prior FA . Follow-up visits at 12- and 18- months revealed a stable lesion with resolving intraretinal and subretinal fluid and no change in visual acuity. Patient continued to be closely monitored without treatment.