A 34-year-old woman reported a one-year history of amenorrhea and headache. She had no complaints of galactorrhoea or other symptoms. Primary laboratory tests revealed hyperprolactinemia of 140 ng/mL . Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed for the patient, which showed a mass lesion in the pituitary stalk, extending to the chiasm and adenohypophysis (14 × 12 × 12 mm) . The lesion was isointense on T1-weighted images compared to the adjacent grey matter and demonstrated bright homogenous enhancement after contrast administration. Hormone tests excluded the overproduction of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), growth hormone (GH), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) by the tumor and indicated secondary hypogonadism.
The perimetry did not show any visual field impairments. The prolactin test was not repeated after serum sample dilution during the initial examination at the outpatient hospital. Despite the discrepancy between the tumor size and the prolactin level, the hook effect was not excluded, and the mass was regarded as a macroprolactinoma. The patient was prescribed cabergoline (0.25 mg per week), which significantly reduced the level of prolactin below the reference range (< 0.6 ng/mL); however, it did not lead to the recovery of menstrual function. Cabergoline was subsequently discontinued, and the patient was asked to return for a follow-up visit within one month. However, she was lost to follow-up and did not return to the hospital at the appointed time. Few months later, she noticed deterioration of eyesight, blurred vision, and narrowing of the visual field in both eyes. Accordingly, she scheduled an appointment at the Endocrinology Clinic of I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University. The follow-up non-contrast MRI study (nine months after the primary MRI) indicated deterioration of the patient’s condition. The mass had increased in size up to 20 × 21 × 23 mm, and the pituitary stalk was significantly enlarged .
The T1-weighted images indicated a hypointense zone with numerous cystic transformations at the center of the lesion, probably due to central necrosis. The lesion had no distinct boundaries and was indistinguishable from the pituitary stalk. The tumor was spreading into the suprasellar cistern, squeezing and displacing upward the chiasm, and pushing the anterior cerebral arteries outwards. The prolactin level was 132 ng/mL. The ophthalmological examination revealed partial optic nerve atrophy, retinal angiopathy, and heteronymous bitemporal hemianopsia.
Considering the continuous tumor growth and progression of sellar syndrome, the patient underwent a transnasal removal of the sellar mass. According to further histological and immunohistochemical analyses, a malignant glioma with polymorphism of cells and nuclei, mitoses, and pronounced proliferation of vascular endothelium was confirmed. The immunohistochemical study revealed the positive expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), as well as S100 expression in the tumor and CD34 expression in the vascular endothelium. The Ki-67 value for the tumor was measured to be 15%. Therefore, a diagnosis of high-grade malignant glioma (HGG) was confirmed, and tumor growth from the pituitary funnel or neurohypophysis could not be ruled out.
The patient’s vision remarkably improved after surgery. However, she developed diabetes insipidus and panhypopituitarism (secondary hypothyroidism, secondary hypocortisolism, and secondary hypogonadism), requiring chronic hormone replacement. Postoperative contrast-enhanced MRI showed signs of residual tumor in the sellar region up to 9 × 11 mm, with inhomogeneous contrast enhancement . The patient was prescribed a chemoradiation therapy (56 Gy, 140 mg of temozolomide per day during the entire period of radiation therapy, followed by 340 mg of temozolomide per day for five days with a break of 23 days in 12 cycles).