A 60-year-old man diagnosed with developmental dysplasia of the right hip underwent CoHXLPE THA through lateral approach at local hospital in 2017. The patient’s first THA as performed by a sophisticated surgeon, although he was admitted in a local hospital. The BMI of this male patient was 22. The DDH classification of the patient was Crowe III, as it can be seen in Fig. . The operation time was 75 min, and blood loss was 260 ml. A 50 mm porous coated shell, HXLPE liner, 36 mm ceramic head and fully coated stem were inserted. No osteotomy was needed for reduction of the hip. No complications during and after surgery were found. The reduction of hip joint was slightly tense during primary THA, but the original outcomes were satisfied. However, after 32 months, he reported weight-bearing pain in his right hip with no obvious reasons. Plain radiographs of the pelvis showed that eccentric wear existed at the superolateral part of the prosthesis . The patient hesitated to receive surgical treatment and, meanwhile, he did not stop weight-bearing. The right hip pain continued for 7 months. Plain radiographs and CT scan of the pelvis showed accelerated wear and large amounts of metal particles, of which HXLPE liner was penetrated and partial inner wall of acetabular shell was worn .
Infection was excluded before revision, as the white blood cell count, C- reactive protein level and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were negative. Metal ion concentrations in the blood were not measured because this was not covered by his health insurance. 3D computed tomography reconstruction revealed numerous metal debris around hip joint, and the worn between ceramic head and the acetabular shell . Intraoperatively, large amounts of metal debris distributed within the joint cavity, abductor and fascia lata . Superolateral part of the HXLPE liner was penetrated, loosen and migrated. Surface of the ceramic head was also covered by metal debris . The inner wall of acetabular shell became thin due to wear , however, it was well-fixed. The stem was stable to be left in situ. Good bone ingrowth was found at the back of the cup Metal debris migrated into the bottom of the acetabulum through the screw holes. Excessive debridement of granulomatous tissue and metal debris was performed. Two millimeter larger shell was inserted without bone graft, and three screws were used to enhance the primary stability. Ceramic head and HXLPE liner were also exchanged. Intravenous antibiotics was used for 3 days after operation. A drainage tube was inserted and removed 24 h after surgery.
The patient was permitted partial weight-bearing 3 days after surgery, and fully weight-bearing after 4 weeks. The muscle strength recovered 4 weeks after operation. The anteversion angle, abduction angle were all within normal range. Plain radiographs of the pelvis showed ideal size and position of the prosthesis . Pain was relieved at 3 weeks follow-up, and the patient returned to normal life 8 weeks postoperatively.