A 64-year-old man was referred to our hospital after a 12 mm subepithelial lesion in the sigmoid colon was discovered incidentally on screening colonoscopy . The referring physician’s biopsy report stated that only non-specific mucosal changes were observed. The patient had a history of hypertension treated with calcium channel blockers and angiotensin II receptor blockers, type 2 diabetes mellitus treated with a selective dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor, and atrial fibrillation treated with a direct oral anticoagulant. He was in his ordinary state of health, had regular bowel movements, and denied any abdominal symptoms.
Follow-up colonoscopy conducted 2 months later revealed that the tumor had disappeared completely, leaving numerous edematous, submucosal tumor-like protrusions presenting as skip lesions throughout the sigmoid colon, over a length of 15 cm . Some lesions had fine white granular opacities on their surface on NBI, while others did not . All lesions displayed elongated crypt openings, increased width of intervening parts, and no visible microvessels on magnifying NBI . Endoscopic ultrasound revealed mild, homogeneously hypoechoic thickening of the first layer (superficial mucosa) with no apparent second layer (deep mucosa) involvement . Six tubular adenomas (4 in the transverse colon, 2 in the sigmoid colon), one serrated adenoma in the sigmoid colon, and four hyperplastic polyps in the sigmoid colon were resected during the same session. One of the resected hyperplastic polyps in the sigmoid colon was located on top of one of the elevated lesions with white granular opacities . Computed tomography with contrast was unremarkable, confirming no clear tumor or thickening of the colonic wall.
Multiple biopsies of the thickened mucosa all revealed proliferation of uniform spindle-shaped cells in the lamina propria . Eosinophilic cytoplasm with unclear cell borders and tapered or elongated nuclei were observed. Crypts and goblet cells were preserved. Edema and mild lymphocytic and plasma cell infiltration were observed in the interstitium. Schwann cells positive for S-100 protein and negative for CD34, CD56, and NFP were identified on immunohistochemistry . Stains for pan-cytokeratin (AE/AE3) and desmin were also negative, as were chromogranin A and synaptophysin stains conducted on biopsies which included submucosal tissue.
Upon detailed questioning, the patient denied any personal or family history of café au lait spots, neurofibromatosis, or thyroid or adrenal disease which could suggest MEN 2B or NF1. No relevant findings were found in a dermatological examination, laboratory tests, or in imaging studies. Based on the above, the patient was diagnosed with multiple MSCH of the sigmoid colon.
The patient remains asymptomatic without treatment during 18 months of follow-up. However, the multiple MSCH lesions in the sigmoid colon remain unchanged despite frequent colonoscopies. Pathological findings consistent with MSCH are also observed on follow-up biopsies taken at every colonoscopy.