A 29-year-old male was first diagnosed with ALL in May 2019 when he presented with dizziness, fatigue and occasional blackness. At that time, hematological examination showed a hemoglobin level of 56 g/L (normal range: 120-140 g/L), a platelet count of 31 × 109/L (normal range: 100–300 × 109/L), and a white blood cell count of 285 × 109/L (normal range: 8–10 × 109/L) with 82.5% primary and juvenile lymphocytes. The phenotypes of leukemic blasts in bone marrow by flow cytometer were CD10+, CD19+, CD34+, CD45dim+, CD123 + and HLA-DR+. Chromosomal analysis showed that BCR/ABL fusion gene was positive and translocation occurred on chromosomes 9 and 22. Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of Philadelphia chromosome-positive ALL. He achieved complete remission after the first induction chemotherapy and dasatinib administration as well as 3 courses of consolidation chemotherapy. He then underwent HLA-matched sibling allogeneic HSCT. The conditioning regiment was BUCy + VP16 (cytarabine 2 g/m2 for 2 days, Busulfan 0.8 mg/kg q6h for 3 days, cyclophosphamide 1.8 g/m2 for 2 days, etoposide 24 mg/kg for 2 days and anti-thymocyte immunoglobulin 2.5 mg/kg for 2 days) and prevention strategies for graft versus host disease included methotrexate and cyclosporine. He did not receive cranial irradiation. He had no CNS involvement pre-transplant and had received 5 times of intrathecal chemotherapy for CNS leukemia prophylaxis before HSCT. Dasatinib was also used to prevent leukemia relapse 1 month after transplantation, but it had to be stopped and replaced by imatinib because he developed moderate pleural effusion 1 month after oral administration of dasatinib. The patient had been arranged to bone marrow and peripheral blood examination for relapse of leukemia, as well as fundus examination for cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis due to his preceding CMV viremia after HSCT every month. He had remained asymptomatic without bone marrow or peripheral blood involvement or CMV retinitis after more than 1 year of follow-up. There was no prior history or evidence of ALL CNS involvement throughout his clinical course. A routine hematological examination 1 month before the onset of ocular symptom revealed no evidence of leukemic blasts by morphological and flow-cytometric analysis in bone marrow. In August 2020, in the course of a regular fundus examination for CMV retinitis, he complained of a mild blurry vision in both eyes with no headache or other systemic features. The visual acuity was 20/40 in each eye. Anterior segment examination was unremarkable in both eyes. Dilated fundus examination revealed significant optic nerve edema and linear peripapillary hemorrhages bilaterally . CT brain demonstrated no abnormality. Laboratory investigations including complete blood count, liver and renal function tests and infected markers were normal. We performed lumbar puncture and the initial cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure was 29 cm of water. CSF sampling was performed on suspicion of extramedullary recurrence of the disease, and revealed the abundant of leukemic blasts. The results of bone marrow smear showed that no naive cells were found and minimal residual lesions detected by flow cytometer and BCR-ABL/ABL (P190) fusion gene were both negative. This patient was diagnosed with recurrent ALL with isolated CNS relapse, and was treated immediately with nilotinib at a dose of 400 mg, twice a day. He also received cytarabine and methotrexate for intrathecal injection twice a week until no leukemic blasts were detected in CSF. Over the next 9 months, serial lumbar puncture test results showed an absence of blast cells. In June 2022, a recent ophthalmic examination showed that the patient’s vision had improved to 20/20 in each eye with reduction in optic nerve edema .