A 56-year-old man presented himself at orthopedics outpatient department with spontaneous onset bilateral heel pain for the past few months. The pain was more in the morning as soon as he gets up from bed and persisted throughout the day with variable intensity. He has no medical comorbidities such as obesity, diabetes, hypertension, autoimmune disease, and rheumatic disorder. He was a sedentary office worker with no history of smoking; however, he was a social drinker.
His both heel’s physical examination revealed point tenderness over the medial aspect of both heels on the plantar aspect with mild swelling. His medial plantar arch was well maintained and no neurological disturbance over the foot was detected.
Based on clinical presentation, diagnosis of plantar fasciitis was made and he was advised for a plain X-ray of both heel axial and lateral view which revealed a bilateral paired calcaneal spur (proximal spur was about 4 mm long and distal spur 3 mm long in both heel), as shown in . Ultrasonography of both heels showed thickened plantar fascia. Other hematological and rheumatological investigations were unremarkable, as shown in .
There are various pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatment modalities available. Still, patients are usually suffering from heel pain due to the lack of standardized treatment modalities used clinically. Non-pharmacological treatment modalities include ultrasound, radiofrequency, extracorporeal shock wave therapy, laser therapy, silicon medial arch support, modified shoes, splints, physiotherapy, stretching, and taping. Pharmacological therapy includes non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, local steroids infiltration, and local infiltration of steroids combined with a long-acting local anesthetic agent. Our patient received combined pharmacological therapy ( non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, Naproxen 500 mg twice a day for 7 days and non-pharmacological treatment modalities, ultrasound therapy with the dose at 0.5 w/cm 2, 3 MHz, pulsed 1:4, for 8 min, for 7 days, with this combined therapy, he has improved as far as in pain intensity is concerned.