A 71-year-old Japanese man presented at our hospital due to left anterior chest pain and an abnormal chest computed tomography (CT) scan showing a 40 × 33 × 30-mm tumor located at the left anterior apex of the thoracic inlet. This tumor had invaded the first and second rib and was located near the subclavian vein . This patient has chronic renal failure and is undergoing peritoneal dialysis.
We performed bronchoscopy to make a definitive diagnosis but were unable to obtain a diagnosis. 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography showed an increase standard uptake value in the tumor . There was no significant distant metastasis. We did not performe neoadjuvant therapy because we determined that this tumor was resectable. Therefore, we performed surgical resection for this superior sulcus tumor located at the anterior apex of the thoracic inlet because the tumor was suspected to be local invasive lung cancer.
The surgical procedure included three steps. The diagram of the surgery and surgical view are shown in . First, we performed VATS (Video-assisted thoracic surgery) exploration via the left thoracic cavity. We then confirmed the resectability and lack of dissemination. Second, via the transmanubrial approach, we obtained tumor-free margins of the anterior cervical structures. The tumor was located near the subclavian vessels, and we were able to remove the tumor from these major vessels safely. We then disconnected the anterior first and second ribs using a wire saw. We were able to cut off the tumor invading anterior chest wall before closing the anterior wound. After that, we reconstructed the anterior chest wall using Gore-Tex Dual Mesh (Japan Gore-tex Inc., Tokyo, Japan) and closed the anterior wound. Third, through VATS in the left lateral decubitus position, we performed left upper lobectomy and mediastinal lymph node dissection. The operative time was 8 h 7 min, and the amount of intraoperative bleeding was 580 ml.
Pathologically, complete resection was achieved. The pathological diagnosis was stage IIB squamous cell carcinoma (p-T3N0M0). The patient was discharged from our hospital 13 days after surgery. This surgery was successful, with no postoperative complications.