A 59-year-old woman who presented with a one month history of lower abdominal pain and intermittent watery, bloody stool was admitted to our hospital. On physical examination, she was found to have right lower quadrant abdominal tenderness without guarding. Blood tests revealed anemia and C reactive protein was slightly elevated. Her past medical history included hysterectomy due to multiple myomas 25 years earlier and segmentectomy of right breast 3 years ago. Patohistological diagnosis of breast lesion was fibrocystic breast disease with usual and atypical intraductal epithelial proliferation and foci of adenosis without sign of intraductal or invasive carcinoma. Her mother and brother died from conventional colon cancer in age of 69 and 63 years, respectively. Father died of small cell lung cancer in the age of 67 years. Colonoscopy was performed and showed large tumor in cecum and initial part of the ascending colon. A biopsy confirmed malignant nature of the process and diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma was suggested. Abdominal CT showed large tumor in cecoascending region of the colon and enlarged regional lymph nodes. Signs of distant metastasis are not found. Chest X-ray was unremarkable. A right hemicolectomy with removal of adjacent pericolic lymph nodes was carried out.
Grossly, in the cecoascending region, an ulcero-proliferative, whitish-gray tumor measuring 9 cm in maximum diameter was found . Microscopically, the tumor consisted of nests of focally keratinizing, atypical, squamous epithelial cells . Approximately 70% of the tumor showed acantholytic changes and acantholysis was equally distributed through the entire tumor . In the lumen-like pseudoglandular spaces, detached keratinocytes and inflammatory cell were detected . Tumor cells were large with bright eosinophilic, focally glassy cytoplasm and vesicular nuclei with small to medium sized nucleoli . The spindle cell carcinoma elements were not found. The tumor infiltrated all layers of the bowel wall and spread deeply into the surrounding fatty tissue. Twenty-two lymph nodes received with the specimen did not show any metastases.
Immunohistochemical staining was performed following the microwave streptavidin immunoperoxidase (MSIP) protocol on DAKO TechMate Horizon automated immunostainer using the following primary antibodies: cytokeratin (CK) AE1/AE3, CK7, CK 20, CK MNF116, EMA, E-cadherin, beta-catenin, p63, p16, CD31, CD34, CEA, estrogen, progesterone (all antibodies were purchased from DAKO, Denmark). Appropriate positive and negative control was used for each antibody. Periodic acid Schiff and alcian blue staining were made following the standard procedure.
Immunohistochemically tumor cells were diffusely positive for CK AE1/AE3 and focally positive for epithelial membrane antigen and syndecan 1 . All other tested antibodies showed negative reaction. Periodic acid Schiff and alcian blue staining showed no intracellular or extracellular mucinous material in the tumor, including acantholytic and pseudoglandular areas. The microscopic features of the tumor-cecum mucosa boundary indicated primary tumor and the diagnosis of acantholytic squamous cell carcinoma of the cecum were suspected. Additional extensive examination was recommended to exclude possibility of metastatic carcinoma. The patient underwent gynecological, head and neck and pulmological examination. Clinical examination and pelvic and breast ultrasound, mammography, head and neck and lung MRI found no additional tumor. Finally, the patient underwent whole-body PET/CT scan which also showed no additional tumors. After the exclusion of possible metastatic disease the diagnosis of primary acantholytic squamous cell carcinoma of the cecum was confirmed.
The patient had no complications during the postoperative course and was discharged 12 days after surgery with suggested oncological examination and treatment. Additional chemotherapy was performed and the patients received 5-florouracil and folinic acid during six months. Radiation therapy was not applied. Six months after surgery the metastasis in small intestine and recurrence in the abdominal cavity at the site of surgery appeared and had the same morphological characteristic as the primary tumor in the cecum.