A 75 year old female presents to her General Practitioner with symptoms of lethargy, weight loss and occasional vomiting. Abdominal examination reveals a large mass in the epigastrium and blood investigations reveal a microcytic anaemia with a Haemoglobin of 9.4 g/dL. Her only past medical history includes atrial fibrillation and a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy for benign disease.
She is urgently referred for further investigation. Computed Tomography (CT) scanning demonstrates a 13 cm multi-loculated mass adjacent to the anterior wall of the stomach radiologically suspicious for a Gastro-intestinal stromal tumour (GIST). A subsequent PET-CT scan also demonstrated multiple peritoneal seedlings . Upper Gastro-intestinal Endoscopy showed extrinsic compression of anterior gastric wall, with possible communication to a pus filled cavity. Unfortunately, multiple biopsies failed to yield a histological diagnosis.
At diagnostic laparoscopy (performed to obtain tissue diagnosis and assess potential tumour stage), the large mass anterior to the stomach was biopsied as were the peritoneal seedlings. Histology demonstrated a malignant GIST, strongly positive for CD117. She was discussed at the regional Upper GI Multi-Disciplinary meeting, and the decision made to commence systemic oncological therapy with Glivec (Imatinib).
Encouragingly, her response to treatment was excellent and within one month a demonstrable radiological improvement was noted . At ten months there was no evidence of residual disease on PET-CT . As per unit procedure, she subsequently entered a routine follow up protocol which included regular clinical and radiological review.
Unfortunately, although she remains clinically asymptomatic, a follow up PET-CT (approximately 22 months from initial diagnosis and commencement of treatment) demonstrated a small discrete focus of uptake within the internal oblique muscle on the right side . This correlates with the location of the port site used at the time of diagnostic laparoscopy.
In light of the confirmation of a port site metastasis (PSM), she is due to be discussed again in the MDT meeting prior to making a final decision regarding further treatment. The evidence base for the treatment of port site recurrences originating from common tumours is limited. In the context of this particular case i.e. a GI Stromal tumour, it is non-existent.