The patient is a 49-year-old female who presented with 6 weeks of severe low back pain and left-sided radiculopathy with focal bilateral S1 numbness on neurological exam. Her lower extremities exhibited full strength.
The lumbosacral MR imaging (MRI) with and without contrast revealed small enhancing lesions in the vertebral bodies of T3, T12, L2, and L3, and a large enhancing lesion of the S1 body with epidural extension causing central canal stenosis and compression of both descending S1 nerve roots . The CT showed an S1 lytic lesion with an accompanying pathologic fracture. There was also a lytic lucency involving the left iliac wing . The patient underwent a CT-guided biopsy of the lytic sacral lesion within 36 h of admission. The following day, the patient had urinary retention and she emergently underwent a L5 to S2 laminectomy for decompression of stenosis; additionally, an open sacral tumor biopsy was performed. The patient was able to void on postoperative day 1; however, within a few days, she developed increasing pain in her back, buttocks, and down the back of both legs. The follow-up MRI showed progression of the tumor at S1, increased anterior subluxation of L5 over S1, and recurrent central canal stenosis .
Due to the increased pain, the patient was placed on multiple medications including intrathecal opioids, without any relief. At this point, we felt that resection of the mass followed by stabilization would improve the patient’s pain, improve her function, as well as reduce her tumor burden.
An L4 to sacroiliac instrumented fusion with bilateral transpedicular sacral tumor debulking and S1 reconstruction with a cement-infused chest tube interbody prosthesis was planned.
Using navigation assistance, pedicle screws were placed bilaterally at L4 and L5, along with two S2-alar-iliac (S2AI) screws on each side. The tumor was readily identified and resected easily with suction. We then measured 24 mm between the inferior endplate of L5 and the superior endplate of S2 from the repeat intraoperative CT obtained after screw placement.
A 32-French chest tube (10.7 mm diameter) was cut to span the L5 to S2 defect. Two small windows were cut on the lateral surface of the chest tube through which cement would be injected. Two small stab incisions were made, superiorly and inferiorly, lateral to the midline lumbar incision, to allow the cement infusion cannulas to be inserted and angled appropriately to engage in the holes made along the lateral surface of the chest tube. A temporary rod was placed between the left L5 and S2AI screws. Under c-arm fluoroscopy, the chest tube strut was inserted into the corpectomy defect, inferior to the right-sided L5 nerve root and lateral to the right-sided S1 nerve root. The chest tube fit nicely onto the S2 endplate which measured 18 mm in anterior-posterior dimension. The lateral cement cannulas were then inserted percutaneously, engaged in the lateral chest tube holes and cement was injected to fill the implant through the inferior hole. The cement filled the strut graft until appropriate contact at both endplates was achieved . After the cement hardened, we fashioned two rods that would engage the posterior L5-S1 screws in-situ without reduction. Three 5.5 mm rods were placed — the third rod was used to provide extra stability to the construct . A final intraoperative CT scan showed all hardware to be in satisfactory position .
Within 5 days, the patient was able to walk a few steps and had significant pain relief. On postoperative day 8, chemotherapy was initiated with cisplatin and doxorubicin. Six months postoperatively, the patient remains on chemotherapy, is neurologically intact, with a follow-up CT showing all hardware in good position without tumor recurrence.