A 5-year-old boy of Middle Eastern origin presented to us with skin lesions, abdominal distension and red-colored urine. He was the second child of a first-cousin consanguineous marriage. The first child had died at birth due to cord strangulation. Our patient was the product of a full-term pregnancy without antenatal care; delivery was normal, carried out at a hospital, and the infant cried immediately after birth. His birth weight was small (2200 g), and his head circumference was normal (33 cm) with a wide anterior fontanel (10 × 7 cm). His condition started at birth with poor and decreased suckling activity, reddish urine and ecchymosis all over his body. His coloration was pale with no bleeding, jaundice or fever. Physical examination at that time revealed a parasternal soft pansystolic murmur, splenomegaly located 6 cm below the costal margin (BCM) and a liver that was palpable 2 cm BCM. The differential diagnosis included hemolysis, metabolic diseases, septicemia, TORCH, congenital leukemia and mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS). An ophthalmological examination showed bilaterally sloughing corneas, dry eyes, early lens opacity and bilaterally hyperpigmented retinas. He was admitted to the hospital and was treated as a case of neonatal septicemia; he received antibiotics, multiple blood transfusion, and l-thyroxine for 2–3 months. There was no improvement in his symptoms and the family traveled abroad for further investigations. The results of the complete blood count and the thyroid function tests done at birth can be seen in Table .
Other tests that were conducted included the following: a blood smear, which showed normocytic normochromic anemia; a normal osmotic fragility test; and a negative Coombs test. Partial thromboplastin time (PTT), prothrombin time (PT), liver and renal function tests were also within the normal range. A TORCH screen was negative; a bone marrow aspiration was normal with no evidence of leukemia or myelofibrosis. An echocardiogram revealed a perimembranous ventricular septal defect (VSD). An abdominal ultrasound revealed huge splenomegaly with a patent portal vein. A DNA study was also done and revealed heterozygosity for alpha thalassemia, which goes along with the diagnosis of having the alpha thalassemia trait. Other tests performed ruled out Gaucher’s Disease and MPS. The patient’s ammonia and lactate levels were normal, while his serum ferritin level was elevated (449 mg/ml). The results of a skeletal survey were normal. The patient was managed with regular blood transfusions (2–3 times per month) and an iron-chelating agent (Desferrioxamine).
At the age of 10 months, the patient exhibited an increase in abdominal distension, with eruption of brownish-stained teeth, while continuing to have reddish urine. At the age of 22 months, he started developing vesiculobullous skin lesions in sun-exposed areas (face, hands and feet). The lesions left behind hypopigmented areas upon recovery. At 30 months of age, and due to improvement, blood transfusions were stopped, however, the skin lesions progressed , and the red urine and brown teeth persisted . Continued investigations showed elevated serum ferritin levels, turbid urine with more than two proteins, elevated urobilinogen levels, an RBC count of 10–12 cells/HPF, and numerous WBCs. Furthermore, a culture of the urine grew E. coli. To rule out other hemoglobinopathies that cause hemolysis, we performed a hemoglobin electrophoresis test that showed a result of Hemoglobin AA. This meant that the patient had a normal hemoglobin electrophoresis result and a normal hemoglobin as seen in adults. At the age of 5, his condition progressed with symptoms of worsening skin lesions and persistent red urine and anemia. The patient came to our hospital for a consultation, and we diagnosed him clinically as having congenital erythropoietic porphyria. Tests were ordered to confirm this diagnosis and revealed the following results: Uroporphyrin I concentration = 28.1 mmol/ml (normal value range is 0–4); Coproporphyrin I concentration = 10.8 mmol/ml (normal value range is 0–6); Uroporphyrin I test in RBC = weakly positive; and Heptacarboxyl porphyrin levels = 33.4 (normal value range is 0–2). Although the presence of Heptacarboxyl porphyrins is normally in line with a diagnosis of hepato-erythropoietic porphyria (HEP) which has the same clinical manifestations as CEP, it can also be present in cases with CEP itself [, ]. We relied in our diagnosis on the clinical manifestations of the disease and on the presence of uroporphyrin I and coproporphyrin I, which occur only in CEP as a result of an absence of UROS activity. Furthermore, erythrodontia and an elevated ferritin serum levels are not features of HEP . Further studies to detect the presence of mutations in the UROS and GATA1 genes are needed to confirm the diagnosis, but we were not able to perform these experiments due to the unavailability of the tests in our country.
The final diagnosis for this case was congenital erythropoietic porphyria. The mother was advised to keep the patient away from the sun in order to avoid further damage to his skin. The patient was prescribed frequent blood transfusions, and was given a regimen of desferrioxamine and vitamins.