A 78-year-old male with a history of Type 2 diabetes and hypertension was being treated with a non-dihydropyridine calcium antagonist and thiazides. He was admitted to our centre with decompensated heart failure Class III New York Heart Association (NYHA). During the physical examination, an early diastolic decrescendo murmur was heard best at the third intercostal space on the right. The echocardiogram revealed severe aortic regurgitation, with a central regurgitant jet, dense vena contracta measuring 7 mm, pressure half-time of 188 ms, effective regurgitant orifice area of 32, and regurgitant volume of 62 mL. There was also dilatation of the aortic root and a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 52% with a left ventricular end-systolic diameter of 26 mm/m2.
During the use of the aetiological approach, bicuspid pathology and infective endocarditis were ruled out. The coronary angiography showed no angiographic lesions. However, due to the patient’s high surgical risk (STS score 8.1% and frailty), the heart team decided to continue medical treatment by adding angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs). Unfortunately, there was no improvement in the patient’s clinical state. Therefore, TAVR was considered the best approach in this scenario.
During the planning of the procedure, a tomography revealed dilatation of the aortic root measuring 50 mm in the sinuses (non-coronary sinus 43 mm, left coronary sinus 41 mm, right coronary sinus 42 mm) and an annulus perimeter of 105 mm . There was no presence of calcium . These characteristics indicated a high risk of migration, so a decision was made to use the Edwards SAPIEN 3 valve #29.
With a bilateral femoral arterial approach and under sedation, with pacing at 180 b.p.m., the Edwards SAPIEN 3 valve #29 was placed, with an oversizing of 15% ( and ). Unfortunately, during the post-deployment control aortography, the aortic valve migrated retrogradely into the LV (; , ). After removal of the Lunderquist guidewire, rotational movement of the valve was observed in the ventricular cavity, autonomously introducing itself into the aortic annulus of the LV in reverse position (; , ). After this unexpected complication, the patient immediately became hypotensive, and this was arrested with pulseless electrical activity. We started cardiopulmonary resuscitation (basic life support) for 6 min, and the Lunderquist guidewire was promptly introduced to displace the leaflets and improve antegrade flow. To address the situation, we decided to implement a rescue measure by placing a second valve. Through the Lunderquist guidewire, the second valve was deployed with annular implantation and an oversizing of 20% (; , ). Control aortography showed adequate placement with the normal antegrade flow without the presence of leakage or valve insufficiency (see , ). Post-procedure, echocardiographic parameters reported a mean gradient of 8 mmHg and a velocity of 1.8 m/s. The patient was discharged on Day 5 after the procedure, without any neurological damage.