A cachectic 80-year-old Caucasian man presented with lumbar pain. He had had a gastrectomy and splenectomy 20 years earlier for gastric cancer. Two years earlier, a stent had been placed in his left iliac axis for claudication occluding the origin of his internal iliac artery. Also, a high thigh amputation had been performed on his right leg 15 months earlier. An infrarenal aortic aneurysm with a maximum diameter of 3.5 cm had been diagnosed 12 months earlier. He also presented with artrial fibrillation, severe emphysema, and a history of stroke with an incomplete left hemiparesis.
A computed tomography (CT) examination revealed a 5.9×5 cm infrarenal aortic aneurysm with destruction of his fourth lumbar vertebra. No extravasation of contrast agent was detected . His aneurysm started 0.9 cm below his renal arteries and extended into his aortic bifurcation. The examination also revealed an occlusion of his right external iliac artery and severe calcifications of his left pelvic axis. Our patient was considered to be at high risk for any procedure requiring general anesthesia.
The clinical history of back pain and the erosion of his lumbar vertebra were suspicious of a pending rupture of the aneurysm. Considering the multiple surgical risk factors, we chose an endovascular treatment. The long, calcified occlusion of his right external iliac artery and his right common femoral artery could not be recanalized to place an aortic-biiliac stent graft. Therefore, his right common iliac artery had to be embolized to prevent endoleakage, and an occlusion of the formerly patent proximal portion of his remnant right internal iliac artery had to be accepted. This approach was chosen since collaterals over the epigastric artery were considered sufficient to preserve the viability of the right stump. After crossover access was gained, coils were placed via a microcatheter. The aortic stent graft and the iliac leg extension (Endurant ENUF2514C105EE, ENLW1613C95EE®; Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) were advanced via our patient's left pelvic axis, successfully excluding the aneurysm. A control angiography revealed no endoleakage. A short dissection of his left external iliac artery was treated by an uncovered balloon-expandable stent .
After this intervention, his back pain resolved. A CT-guided biopsy of his fourth lumbar vertebra revealed a hematoma, and an inflammatory process could be ruled out. CT also confirmed a correct placement of the stent graft without endoleakage. Our patient developed no signs of gluteal ischemia and was discharged two days later. He was well when last seen three months later.