A 76-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our tertiary care hospital on two separate occasions. She had a medical history significant for hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, hypothyroidism, no congestive heart failure (CHF), no evidence of coronary artery disease visualized by catheterization two years prior to her initial presentation, and a normal baseline left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 55% to 60%. In each episode, she presented without evidence of existing physical or emotional distress.
At her first presentation, she arrived at the emergency department with the onset of aphasia in the setting of hypertensive emergency (blood pressure (BP) 226/100 mmHg). Her aphasia was isolated and transient, and her physical examination was otherwise unremarkable. Because we were concerned about an acute intracerebral event in the setting of hypertensive emergency, computed tomography and diffusion-weighted MRI/magnetic resonance angiography (MRI/MRA) of the brain were performed, both of which showed no evidence of acute ischemia, hemorrhage, or cerebral edema. She was admitted for work-up of acute stroke and transient ischemic attack and treatment of her hypertensive emergency. Her aphasia resolved within 24 hours after onset, and a modest reduction in BP was achieved. Shortly after admission, however, she developed acute onset of dyspnea, and rales were heard bilaterally during her physical examination.
In light of these new symptoms, a chest X-ray was ordered, which revealed bilateral pulmonary vascular congestion. Her electrocardiogram (ECG) was unremarkable for ST elevation or depression, though she was found to have elevated cardiac enzymes on serial measurements (troponin I levels 0.8 ug/L and 0.90 ug/L, respectively). An echocardiogram obtained at that time revealed apical akinesis and depressed LV systolic function, with a LVEF of 25% and a possible apical thrombus . Cardiac catheterization was planned to assess whether the patient had acute CHF secondary to possible acute myocardial infarction. The patient and her family refused to allow us to perform the procedure, however, as she had had a normal cardiac catheterization two years earlier.
Given the clinical, laboratory, and echocardiography data, the patient was started on anti-platelet and anti-coagulation therapy and optimized on heart failure treatment for presumed CHF secondary to ischemic cardiomyopathy. Her symptoms improved, and she was discharged from the hospital with follow-up planned in the out-patient clinic. At one month post-presentation, an echocardiogram revealed complete improvement of LV function back to baseline level (LVEF of 55%) and no evidence of wall motion abnormalities or thrombus .
Seven months after her initial presentation, the patient returned to the emergency room for ataxia, dizziness, and associated nausea without focal neurological symptoms. MRI/MRA of her brain was inconclusive, and clopidogrel was added to her treatment regimen based on the suspicion of vertebrobasilar insufficiency. At the time of presentation, an ECG revealed new T-wave inversions in the anterolateral leads and QT prolongation (QTc 490 milliseconds), along with elevated levels of troponin I on serial measurements (0.50 ug/L, 0.89 ug/L, and 0.91 ug/L, respectively) Additionally, during this hospital stay, she again developed symptoms of CHF with worsening shortness of breath, orthopnea, and pedal edema. Her echocardiogram showed a LVEF of 15% to 20% with apical and septal akinesis but without evidence of thrombus . The patient was treated for CHF and was stable with resolution of her symptoms at the time of discharge. As before, an echocardiogram obtained at her one-month follow-up examination showed complete reversal of her LV systolic function to her normal baseline without evidence of any wall motion abnormality .