A 44-year-old Hispanic female with a history of anxiety presented to the Emergency Department with a two-week history of exertional dyspnea. She also had associated dry cough, chills, pleurisy, lightheadedness, and fatigue. At the time of presentation to the emergency department, her vitals were notable for tachypnea and hypoxia, requiring a high-flow nasal cannula. In addition, a chest x-ray revealed patchy bibasilar airspace opacities with peripheral involvement (see appendix, ). A CT pulmonary angiography (CTPA) revealed bibasilar ground glass airspace disease without evidence of filling defects (see appendix, ). Laboratory tests on arrival were notable for leukocytosis, elevated prothrombin time (PT), D-dimer, lactate dehydrogenase (LD), and fibrinogen (see appendix, ).
On day of admission to the general wards, the patient’s presentation was concerning for COVID-19 and/or community-associated pneumonia, therefore, she was started empirically on Dexamethasone (6 mg, intravenously, daily [Mylan Laboratories Ltd., Hyderabad, IN], Low Molecular Weight Heparin (LMWH; enoxaparin; 40 mg, subcutaneously, daily [Meitheal Pharmaceuticals Inc., Chicago, USA]), Ceftriaxone (1 g, intravenously, daily [Sandoz GmbH, Kundl, AUT]) and Doxycycline hyclate (100 mg, oral, twice daily [Amneal Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd., Ahmedabad, IND]). However, point of care (POC) and multiple SARS-CoV2 RNA tests returned negative on day 2 of admission.
On day 2 of admission, the patient became increasingly encephalopathic and hypoxic, and was subsequently intubated, placed on high ventilator settings, and transferred to the ICU for higher level of care (see appendix, ). Her hypoxia improved minimally with inhaled nitrous oxide (iNO) and proning on day 3 of admission. On day 4 of admission, she was found to have tracheal bloody secretions, therefore, bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed on day 5 of admission and revealed moderate erythema with residual blood seen throughout. Sequential BALs were consistent with diffuse alveolar hemorrhage with negative cultures (see appendix, ). An extensive autoimmune and infectious work-up was also performed on day 5 of admission and was unremarkable (see appendix, & ).
Further history was obtained from the patient’s family members on day 5 of admission, who stated that the patient had received bilateral gluteal and lip injections with silicone from an unlicensed professional. She had received these routinely over several years and a few days prior to her onset of symptoms. On receiving this information, it was concluded that the patient was experiencing diffuse alveolar hemorrhage secondary to suspected silicone embolism syndrome.
Following review of the literature on day 6 of admission, the patient was initiated on high-dose methylprednisolone (60 mg, intravenously, every 6 hours [Pharmacia & Upjohn Co, Division of Pfizer Inc., Kalamazoo, USA]) for management . Initially, a lung biopsy was considered to confirm the diagnosis of silicone embolism syndrome. However, due to the patient’s high oxygen requirements, this was not carried out due to safety concerns and was postponed.
After ten days of high-dose steroids, from day 6 to day 15 of admission, the patient’s clinical status improved, and therefore, biopsy was deferred knowing that it would not change the overall outcome. The patient was eventually discharged home on a prednisone taper (Deltasone®; 40 mg, orally, daily for 7 days and then subsequent halving of dosage over the next 3 weeks [Oculus Innovative Sciences, Petaluma, USA]).