On T = 0, a 32-year-old Albanian woman from a rural area in Kukes, Albania, was hospitalized at the University Clinic of Infectious Diseases in Tirana, Albania. Our patient started complaining 3 days after being bitten by a tick while working in her garden (our patient was working with animals). The time period between the onset of symptoms and referral to the hospital was 4 days. This was a case of a patient with no history of traveling to another CCHF-endemic area. The signs and symptoms were nausea, vomiting, headache, myalgia, and fever of 40 °C. The physical findings included hepatomegaly, petechia, metrorrhagia, (without gynecological history). The cardiac and respiratory examination showed hypotension, relative bradycardia, and tachypnea. Flapping tremor and fetor hepaticus were found, indicating hepatic encephalopathy. Central nervous system dysfunction presented confusion and disorientation. No renal failure was observed in the laboratory tests. There was hematuria (3.3 g) in her urine sample. Initial laboratory values were remarkable for thrombocytopenia and showed elevated liver enzymes. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 32 mm/h. Her platelet count was 27,000/mm3, white blood cell count was 1,300/mm3, and hemoglobin 11.5 gr/dL. Her aspartate aminotransferase level was 3650 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase level was 1767 IU/L, and bilirubin level was 2.7 mg/dL. The second day, she was transferred to the intensive care unit because of her worsening condition. CCHFV was detected from a blood sample drawn on the second day with a positive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test for specific CCHF immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies and isolation of the CCHF genome by nested reverse transcriptase C-reactive protein (CRP).
The test results for antinuclear antibodies, anti-smooth muscle antibodies, and anti-liver-kidney antibodies were negative. HbsAg results were positive while, anti-Hepatitis A Virus antibodies (anti-HAV) IgM, Hepatitis B core (HBc) IgM, HBc IgG, Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) and anti-Hepatitis E Virus (HEV) were negative. A direct Coombs test was negative. Toxic hepatitis was excluded. Serological testing was performed for detection of Leptospira, Salmonella, Rickettsia, Brucella, and Toxoplasma species, agents of Lyme disease, herpes, and cytomegalovirus and came out negative. Oral ribavirin was administered within a mean of 10 days after the onset of symptoms at the dosage recommended by World Health Organisation (WHO) (30 mg/kg as an initial loading dose, then 15 mg/kg every 6 h for 4 days, and then 7.5 mg/kg every 8 h for 6 days). The intravenous form of ribavirin was not available in Albania. The patient was hospitalized for 22 days.
Details of the laboratory progress of our case during her hospital stay are in Table .