A 91-year-old woman was admitted to Shimane University Hospital because of loss of appetite. Two years prior to this hospitalization, at the age of 89, computed tomography (CT) scans incidentally revealed a 55 mm tumour in the right lobe of the thyroid gland, mediastinal lymphadenopathy, and multiple pulmonary nodules. Fine-needle aspiration cytology demonstrated nuclear grooves in the tumour, which formed small follicular structures, but intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusion was not observed. Cytology could not specify the type of thyroid cancer. Due to her age, she did not wish to receive aggressive management to treat the histologically unidentified thyroid cancer with multiple metastases. Her thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) was under the detection limit, and she had subclinical thyrotoxicosis (free thyroxine (FT4) 1.0 ng/dL) with high thyroglobulin (Tg) levels . She did not have any symptoms. We discussed the risks and benefits associated with anti-thyroid treatment with her and her family, and they chose no specific treatment for her thyrotoxicosis. Until 2 months prior to hospitalization, her condition was unremarkable. Two weeks before admission, however, she demonstrated overt thyrotoxicosis (free triiodothyronine (FT3) 9.2 pg/mL, FT4 2.4 ng/dL, and FT3/FT4 ratio 3.8) without overt symptoms. She was prescribed potassium iodide (KI) (50 mg); however, her general status worsened to include loss of appetite. She was hospitalized to improve her general status and to treat thyrotoxicosis.
Six months after the thyroid tumour was diagnosed, she experienced a pathological left hip fracture due to bone metastasis. She also had a history of cerebral infarction treated with an antiplatelet drug. Her activities of daily living were generally suitable before the emergency admission.
Her height was 143 cm, her body weight was 29.3 kg, and her body mass index was 14.3 kg/m2. The Glasgow coma scale score was E4V4M6. Her blood pressure was 167/100 mmHg, pulse rate was 160/min, body temperature was 38.4 °C, oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 97% (room air), and respiratory rate was 26/min. Her anterior neck was markedly swollen without overt pain. The other physical findings were unremarkable except for mild pitting oedema of the bilateral lower extremities.
The laboratory findings on admission are shown in Table . She had extreme thyrotoxicosis above the sensitivity limits (TSH < 0.003 μU/mL, FT3 > 25 pg/mL, FT4 > 8 ng/dL). The presence of fever, severe tachycardia, impaired consciousness, and heart failure suggested thyroid crisis. TSH receptor antibody and Hashimoto thyroiditis-related antibodies were all negative, suggesting that her thyrotoxicosis was caused by thyroid cancer or destructive thyroiditis. A CT scan identified an enlarged thyroid tumour and metastases . Ultrasound revealed diffuse enlargement of the right lobe of the thyroid gland with increased blood flow . An electrocardiogram showed severe sinus tachycardia without atrial fibrillation. Echocardiography revealed diffuse asynergy, suggesting takotsubo cardiomyopathy, likely due to the aberrant sympatho-adrenergic activation induced by thyrotoxicosis. The ejection fraction was 22%. The presence of infection was excluded by physical examination, CT images acquired at the time of hospitalization and only minor elevation of an inflammatory marker. Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)-induced hyperthyroidism was also excluded.
Despite treatment with KI, her thyrotoxicosis worsened. Considering possible augmentation of her thyrotoxicosis by the administered iodide, the KI was discontinued. Treatment with intravenous hydrocortisone and oral thiamazole was initiated; however, due to her severe illness, the oral administration of thiamazole was not possible. The maximum dose of landiolol also failed to manage her tachycardia. Her condition deteriorated progressively, and she died on the fifth day of hospitalization.
After a discussion with her family, an autopsy was performed.
The thyroid was slightly hard and was weakly adhered to the trachea . The tumour invaded the sternothyroid muscle, lymph nodes, and veins over the thyroid capsule. The cut surface showed a white solid mass with central haemorrhagic necrosis. The histological images revealed mainly formed nodules with thyroid follicles of various sizes invading the surrounding tissues, but they were mixed with atypical spindle tumour cells proliferating solidly without follicles . After immunostaining, the spindle tumour cells were positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, CAM5.2 and paired box gene 8 (PAX8) and negative for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), Tg, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), and p53. Based on these findings, she was diagnosed with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) arising from follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC).
The FTC filtrated the trachea. There were well-defined white lesions in both lungs, which were histologically metastases of FTC . In addition, metastases were also observed in the hilar and superior mediastinal lymph nodes. No anaplastic cancer tissue was found in the metastatic lesions, which all showed findings of FTC. The ascending colon cancer that had been found before her death was moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma invading the subserosal tissue. However, the histological and immunohistochemical features of this tumour were completely different from those of thyroid cancer. No infarction in the cardiac wall or obstruction in the coronary arteries was observed.