An 18-year-old woman was referred to our department with a major complaint of a pain and swelling around the left distal femur. The symptom had been increasing for the past 6 months. She consulted a local doctor because her symptoms had not improved over time. Neither trauma nor injury was reported. Her previous history was also unremarkable, and no family history was found. A physical examination revealed swelling around her left distal femur and tenderness upon palpation. Neither ballottement of the left knee joint nor an evident soft tissue mass were observed. Laboratory tests revealed a threefold higher alkali-phosphatase level than the upper limit, but no other abnormal data, including the lactate dehydrogenase level and inflammation reaction, was found. A bone sclerotic lesion with periosteal reaction on the distal femur was found on X-ray . Computed tomogram (CT) of the left distal femur revealed a sclerotic and lytic lesion causing partial cortical destruction with soft tissue extension to the medial part of the surrounding muscles. No distant metastasis, including to the lung and regional lymph nodes, were observed on chest or abdominal CT. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an intraosseous lesion combined with an unclear circumscribed extraosseous mass, which was hypointense on T1-weighted and hyperintense on T2-weighted images. Unevenly contrasted lesion was observed on enhanced MRI . An open biopsy for the left distal femoral lesion was performed. Proliferation of pleomorphic spindle cells with nuclear atypia and brisk mitosis, producing a large amount of lace-like osteoid, were observed . A systemic Technetium-99 m scintigraphy (bone scan) revealed other bone lesions of the left occipital bone and right proximal humerus , in addition to the left distal femoral lesion , although no evident physical findings on either the right proximal humerus or left occipital bone were observed. However, a relatively strong uptake was observed at all three lesions. Thallium scintigram also revealed the strong accumulation of tracers only on the three bone lesions. A close examination by MRI revealed the enhancement of right proximal humeral bone lesion and left occipital bone lesion , the same as the left distal femoral lesion . Based on the histological findings, multiple bone lesions, and absence of visceral lesion, the clinical diagnosis of synchronous multicentric osteosarcoma (SMOS) was made. There is much debate in the previous studies as to whether it represents multiple primary tumors or metastatic disease. However, the case for multiple primary tumors was favored, because there was no obvious route for spread if the lungs were tumor-free, which was thought to rule out hematogenous metastasis. The prognosis of SMOS is generally considered to be poor according to the findings of previous studies [–].
She underwent five courses of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with a regimen of doxorubicin and cisplatin, which was the same as the standard regimen for the treatment of osteosarcoma. The dose of doxorubicin was 60 mg/m2, and that of cisplatin was 120 mg/m2. The chemotherapy was performed every three weeks. After the completion of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, the uptake of all lesions on the bone scan diminished , and the enhancement of all lesions on MRI decreased . The accumulation of tracers on thallium scintigram also decreased. The chemotherapy was observed to be highly effective based on the radiological findings. The alkali-phosphatase level dramatically decreased and become normal in laboratory tests.
Surgical treatment of wide excision for the primary lesion of the left distal femur and reconstruction with megaprosthesis was planned at 4 months after the diagnosis. The distal femoral lesion was widely excised with extraosseous lesion and biopsy tract, preserving popliteal artery, veins and sciatic nerve . The bone was cut at 3 cm proximal from the edge of the bone lesion. A portion of the vastus medialis and intermedius were excised along with the tumor. The iodine-coated tumor prosthesis [–] was used for reconstruction . The pathological findings for the excised specimen revealed total necrosis of the lesion , and free surgical margins for both the bone and soft tissue lesions of the left distal femur.
Since physical recovery from the primary surgery and wound healing were observed, adjuvant chemotherapy was resumed at seventeen days postoperatively for the residual lesions of the humerus and occipital bone. The regimen for an adjuvant chemotherapy was the same as a neoadjuvant chemotherapy. A mildly decreased cardiac function was observed on echocardiogram after the completion of the first course of adjuvant chemotherapy, and chemotherapy with another regimen of high-dose methotrexate (10 g/m2) and vincristine (2 mg/body) was performed for the second course of adjuvant chemotherapy. The improvement of cardiac function was confirmed, and the doxorubicin (60 mg/m2) and cisplatin (96 mg/m2, 80% dose of standard regimen) were given again for the third course of adjuvant chemotherapy. A total of eight courses of chemotherapy were completed, including three courses of adjuvant chemotherapy. The total dose of doxorubicin and cisplatin was 420 mg/m2 and 816 mg/m2, respectively. The humeral lesion had almost completely disappeared radiologically, and the occipital lesion was only slightly visible on images. Both the alkali-phosphatase level and the lactate dehydrogenase level remained normal in laboratory tests.
Tumor excision of both the humeral lesion and the occipital lesion, and reconstruction using a frozen autograft, rather than a tumor prosthesis or synthetics, was planned at 6 months after the diagnosis, because a histological analysis demonstrated that chemotherapy showed good efficacy in the treatment of the primary lesion. For the humeral lesion, the tumor location was identified using a fluoroscopy, based on preoperative MRI findings. For the skull lesion, the tumor location was identified with the assistance of a navigation system. At first, tumor excision for the occipital lesion was performed with a margin of at least 2 cm , and the excised bone was treated with liquid nitrogen for 20 min . The frozen autograft was dissolved at room temperature for 15 min, and washed by 0.3% iodine saline and distilled water . The autograft was returned to the original position with plate fixation . Then, hemicortical excision for the right proximal humeral lesion was performed with a margin of at least 2 cm, preserving axillary nerve, and then the excised bone was treated with liquid nitrogen for 20 min . The frozen autograft was dissolved at room temperature for 15 min, and washed by 0.3% iodine saline and distilled water . The autograft was returned to the original position with screw fixation .
Further chemotherapy was not administered after the second surgery because the adverse events due to chemotherapy, such as a myelosuppression and a mildly-decreased cardiac function, were observed. She was discharged from the hospital after the recovery from the surgery was confirmed. She was prudently observed under active surveillance, and underwent close follow-up examinations in an outpatient clinic every 3 or 4 months after discharge.
At 68 months’ follow-up after the detection of SMOS, a disease-free condition with neither local recurrence nor metastasis was obtained, and bone union for the humerus and skull lesion had also been achieved on images . The patient’s cardiac function was normal on an echocardiogram, and no other adverse events was observed at the last follow-up. Both the alkali-phosphatase level and the lactate dehydrogenase level remained normal in laboratory tests. An excellent function for both the upper extremity (30/30 points) and lower extremity (30/30 points) according to the International Society of Limb Salvage (ISOLS) score had been acquired. No neurological deficit was observed.