A previously healthy 4-year-old boy was admitted to our pediatric intensive care unit with a one-week history of spiking fever, coughing and a three-day history of severe mucous membrane and skin lesions. He received some cephalosporin and ibuprofen in another hospital for acute upper respiratory tract infection. However, after four days of treatment, he developed a higher fever and a raised erythematous rash.
On admission, the boy appeared unwell with temperature above 39°C and heart rate of 192 beats/min. The examination showed oral mucositis, vesicobullous lesions and skin detachment across the body .
Routine blood tests were unremarkable on admission. Biochemistry parameters were normal except for albumin (27 g/L [normal 35–55]) and serum sodium (126 mmol/L [normal 135–145]). Both erythrocyte sedimentation rate (61 mm/h [normal < 20]) and C-reactive protein (85 mg/L [normal < 10]) were markedly increased. The pathological and bacteriologic examinations indicated the absence of viral, mycoplasma pneumoniae and chlamydia pneumoniae infections and negative results of blood culture and galactomannan test.
The active intervention, anti-infection measures, fluid compensation, electrolyte balance, nutritional support and intensive care were initiated immediately after hospitalization with SJS. Meanwhile, high-dose IVIG (2 g/kg, single continuous infusion) was given since IVIG can inhibit Fas-FasL interaction and halt the progression of SJS. HLH was suspected when the patient’s condition continued to deteriorate with hyperpyrexia and pancytopenia. Routine blood monitoring revealed anemia (hemoglobin 79 g/L), leukopenia (white blood cell count 0.6 × 109/L) and agranulocytosis (neutrophils 0.01 × 109/L). Then the HLH was suspected and the ferritin, NK cells and soluble CD25 were measured. Also the bone marrow smear was performed.
The diagnosis of SJS-associated HLH was established since the patient fulfilled 6 out of 8 HLH-2004 diagnostic criteria . The laboratory tests showed hyperferritinemia (1031 μg/L), increased soluble CD25 level (8910 U/ml), decreased NK cell activity (1.02%) and hemophagocytosis in bone marrow .
Then pulse methylprednisolone (15 mg/kg/day) was administered for 3 consecutive days. The syndrome was considered to be in remission when the patient’s general condition improved, with normal temperature, ameliorated rash and normal routine blood examinations. Hereafter, methylprednisolone was continued at 2.5 mg/kg/day for another 3 days followed with appropriate rapid tapering by 20 mg every 3 days. His condition progressively improved, with normal hematological and biochemical laboratory parameters, inflammatory indices and ferritin level. On the day before discharge in good condition, the bone marrow aspiration was performed showing the absence of hemophagocytosis. Some known genetic defects including PRF1, UNC13D and STX11 were examined to exclude the familial HLH but no mutations were found.