A 50-year-old woman presented to our nerve clinic with left-knee pain, which had begun 7 years previously with no apparent inciting event. She described the pain as sharp, at times stabbing, and radiating down the lateral aspect of her leg to her foot. She was unable to flex the knee beyond 60° without increased pain. She also described extreme difficulty in ambulating, standing up from a seated position, walking on grass, and going down stairs.
Shortly after the initial onset of the pain, the patient had undergone common peroneal nerve decompression. This had provided initial relief of her symptoms, but the pain returned. Injections with lidocaine and cortisone provided only slight relief, and injection with triamcinolone into the knee caused an increase in pain. She referred herself to a spine center for the pain in December 2009 (she had visited this clinic previously for a lumbar and cervical spinal fusion) as the pain had been worsening over the course of the year. A lumbar-spine MRI and straight-leg raise test were negative. The spine surgeon did not feel the pain was spine-related and referred the patient to orthopedic surgery.
The orthopedist reached a diagnosis of patellofemoral syndrome, and recommended a patellar brace, foot orthotics, physical therapy, and an exercise program. This did not prove effective, and the patient sought a second orthopedics opinion. Knee arthroscopic surgery with lateral patellar release (anterior interval release, major synovectomy, denervation of the inferior pole of the patella and modified lateral release) was performed. This provided temporary relief; at follow-up 4 weeks after surgery she had minimal discomfort and her range of motion had improved (3–125°). The pain, however, returned to its original state, while MRI of the left knee remained negative. Non-contrast enhanced MRI was performed because there was no indication of tumor. Medications, including pregabalin, tramadol, gabapentin, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, were largely ineffective.
She was referred to the Pain Management Center at Stanford University Medical Center and ultimately assessed by a multidisciplinary team, consisting of peripheral nerve surgeons, anesthesiologist-pain physicians, and radiologists. They suspected scarring around the nerve resulting from her left common peroneal neurolysis, and complex regional pain syndrome was suggested as a possible diagnosis. The patient’s pain decreased following ultrasound-guided left popliteal scar neuroma radiofrequency ablation at 60°C and a popliteal block but returned to its pre-procedure state after 3 months.
The patient enrolled in our clinical imaging trial, which uses simultaneous 18F-FTC-146 PET/MRI in patients with chronic pain and controls. The study protocol was approved by the Stanford University Institutional Review Board, and all participants provided written informed consent that included permission to publish details and images. The scan revealed focal increased uptake of the radiotracer in the inter-condylar region of the left knee . MRI showed an irregular, mass-like but equivocal lesion of intermediate signal intensity in the same area on fat-suppressed proton density and T2-weighted images, appearing to represent a complex ganglion cyst or localized pigmented villonodular synovitis. Interestingly, there was no increased 18F-FTC-146 uptake at the scarring around the common peroneal nerve, where radiofrequency ablation had been performed. While this lesion had been present in MRIs obtained in previous years , it had not been noticed or commented upon.
The patient underwent arthroscopic removal of the intraarticular mass. During surgery, an area of inflammation was seen just posterior to the posterior cruciate ligament, matching the MRI. Biopsy showed mature adipose tissue with synovial lining, revealing the mass to be an intraarticular synovial lipoma .
In the weeks following surgery, her pain was well controlled and she was no longer taking narcotic pain medications. She went to physical therapy to improve strength and range of motion. At 1-year follow up, she had discontinued all medications and was completely free of pain. Upon physical examination, the site of surgery had healed well and she achieved full extension and flexion to 130°. MRI was performed and showed no evidence of a residual or recurrent mass.