A 3-year-old British African girl of nonconsanguineous parents presented to her local hospital with 4 weeks history of a firm, nontender, enlarging swelling arising over the sternum. A few weeks later, there was an additional swelling noted in her left side of her chest . This was preceded by 2 months history of manifesting constitutional symptoms of weight loss, lethargy and night sweats. There was no history of fever, cough, breathing difficulties, rash or any local trauma noted. She had been otherwise well prior to this, with no previous medical history or hospital admission. She was on Movicol sachets for constipation management and no other medications. She was born in Kenya and moved to the UK at the age of 1 year. Her immunisations were commenced in Kenya and completed on arrival to the UK as per the national UK schedule. She had received the BCG immunisation, though the scar was not easily visible; her mother confirmed that she had the immunisation. There were no significant associated sick contacts or TB contacts of note. The child’s mother had suffered from extrapulmonary TB approximately 18 years ago and required treatment. She had unfortunately developed side effects from the treatment, probably drug-induced hepatitis as suggested by the jaundice, which led to her treatment being interrupted, though she subsequently completed treatment. She has been well since then and asymptomatic.
On initial examination, the child appeared well nourished and comfortable on room air. She had no signs of respiratory related problems. There was 2 × 3 cm firm, nontender and nonmobile mass over the middle part of her sternum. She also had a second 1 × 1 cm firm, nontender and mobile mass on the left side of her chest. The rest of her physical examination was normal.
The initial blood tests at the local hospital demonstrated microcytic hypochromic anemia with elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 120 mm and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 89. On her initial presentation, she had a chest X-ray, which revealed increased opacifications in the right mid-zone and left upper zone that were thought to be infective in origin . The patient’s TB Quantiferon Gold test was positive. Her case was discussed further with the paediatric infectious disease team at the tertiary centre. The child had an extensive panel of investigations including repeat baseline bloods and TB Quantiferon test. Blood EBV PCR was performed, which was positive and presumed to be reactivation. CMV PCR and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1/2 antibody analysis were also performed, which were both negative.
She underwent an ultrasound-guided biopsy of both lumps. The biopsy result identified necrotic material, pus and areas of granulomatous inflammation including multinucleate giant cells. She had a CT scan at her local hospital that showed a presternal mass with rim enhancement suggestive of an abscess .
Ziehl–Neelsen staining was negative, though mycobacterial PCR was positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) target. Early secreted antigenic target of 6 kDa (ESAT-6) of MTB was positive, which suggested a mycobacterial and non-BCG infection.
This was followed by further imaging to exclude extrapulmonary involvement including MRI head and spine, which showed no features of TB. She had an ultrasound of the abdomen and pelvis, which showed hypoechoic rounded lymph nodes throughout the abdomen. Further immunophenotyping of PB revealed no detectable aberrant expression or maturation asynchrony on B cell, T cell, or natural killer (NK) cell.
She was commenced on quadruple antitubercular treatment: isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol hydrochloride and Zinamide. During her time at the tertiary centre, her inflammatory markers (CRP) peaked at 220 mg/L and she developed fever and required piperacillin/tazobactam, which was later switched to oral co-amoxiclav. She remained clinically well and was subsequently discharged to continue on antituberculosis therapy with further follow-ups scheduled. She is scheduled to have a repeat CT chest in 3–4 months. She has been clinically well and showing good signs of improvement, with the sternal swelling significantly decreasing in size. The treatment has been completed at 6 months with both swellings completely resolved .