A 17-year-old male sustained a 25-foot fall from a tree, resulting in multiple posterior spinal fractures from T9-12 with sagittal, anterior spondyloptosis at the T11/12 level. He presented with a full motor/sensory paraplegia at the T11 level (ASIA A spinal cord injury). Computed tomography (CT) of the thoracic spine showed acute fracture dislocation at the T11/T12 level, suggesting complete cord transection, and an epidural hematoma from T4-T12 [Figure ‑]. He also had a right lung contusion accompanied by a pneumothorax and small pneumatocele.
The patient underwent T10-L1 laminectomies with Ponte ostomies at T11/12 to facilitate reduction of the fracture from the lateral approach. This was performed to prevent fracture fragments from injuring the spinal cord during reduction. In the lateral decubitus position on a beanbag, a thoracotomy was performed to expose T10-T12 and complete a T11 corpectomy with adjacent discectomies. To reduce the dislocation, we used a Cobb to elevate T10 superiorly while manually pushing the distal portion of the spine from the patient's back. This was repeated multiple times for stepwise reduction of the bony elements, with deflation and re-inflation of the sandbag to maintain reduction, until adequate alignment was achieved [Figure ‑]. An interbody cage was then placed between T10 and T12. The patient was then turned prone again and was internally fixed from T8 to L2 with pedicle screws/rods [Figure and ].
His length of stay was 11 days. On postoperative day one, he exhibited neurogenic shock. His complete spinal cord injury with a T11 sensory level remained stable throughout to postoperative day 10. He began to regain some patchy sensation to the bilateral lower extremities levels starting 2 weeks after surgery, with return of sensation at the T11-T12 levels by 2 months post-operation. Although sensory function continues to improve, he remains paraplegic below T12. Three months post-operation, he started to develop a flexible scoliosis of his lumbar spine, which progressed [Figure and ], which was successfully managed with bracing.