A 59-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to a local hospital for evaluation of a liver mass detected during a regular medical examination. She had chronic hepatitis B and was treated with tenofovir. Abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed that the tumor had mosaic enhancement, with hepatic segments 4, 5, and 8 measuring 65 × 61 mm . The tumor was attached to the biliary confluence, bifurcation of the anterior–posterior Glissonian, and right portal vein trunk. An invasion to left portal vein trunk, left hepatic duct, and middle hepatic vein was suspected. The possibility of invasion into the right portal vein trunk could not be ruled out. No obvious invasion into the proper and right hepatic arteries was observed. Results showed that the tumor invaded the right anterior hepatic duct and right posterior hepatic duct (RPHD). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the tumor was hypointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images . The margin between the tumor and the normal hepatocyte was unclear. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) showed high FDG uptake with a standardized uptake value (SUV) of 11.15 . A liver biopsy of the tumor revealed moderate to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma that showed a tubular pattern that comprised small variably sized, irregular tubules in the fibrous stroma. On the basis of the above findings, the patient was diagnosed with mass-forming type ICC, T4N0M0 stage IIIB according to the 8th edition of the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC). At the time of diagnosis, indocyanine green (ICG) angiography for evaluating the clearance rate of ICG and technetium-99m-galactosyl human serum albumin (Tc-99m GSA) scintigraphy for evaluating the liver reserve were not performed; however, according to CT volumetry, the volume of the entire liver was 839 mL, while the volume of the posterior segment was only 200 mL. Curative resection by left trisectionectomy was anatomically possible; however, if performed, the remnant liver volume and the future liver remnant were predicted to be only 200 mL and 23.8%, respectively. Thus, it was difficult to perform an R0 resection in this patient. Chemotherapy combined with gemcitabine (GEM 1000 mg/m2, days 1 and 8) plus cisplatin (CDDP 25 mg/m2, days 1 and 8) (GC) was administered every 3 weeks. There were no serious adverse events during the course of chemotherapy. CT was performed once every 3–4 courses, and it was confirmed that the tumor was gradually reducing in size.
After a total of 10 courses of combination chemotherapy over 10 months, she was referred to our department for resection. Physical examination upon admission was normal. Hepatitis C virus antibodies were negative. Hepatitis B virus surface antigen and core antibody were positive. The serum tumor markers at the time of admission to our hospital were normal as follows: prothrombin induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II, 16 mAU/mL; α-fetoprotein, 2.6 ng/mL; carbohydrate antigen 19–9, 13.0 U/mL. Other laboratory results were normal. Her indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min (ICGR15) was 5.0%. According to the Child–Pugh classification, her liver function was stage A. She had grade A liver damage. Tc-99m GSA scintigraphy revealed the following results for the clearance index (HH15) and the receptor index (LHL5)—HH15: 0.544 (normal level > 0.5) and LHL15: 0.931 (normal level > 0.9). Thus, it was concluded that the liver reserve was preserved.
The size of the primary tumor had decreased to 38 × 35 mm (42% reduction). The tumor was close to the hilar plate and bifurcation of the anterior–posterior Glissonian, but farther than before chemotherapy on CT and MRI images . We considered that the tumor was unlikely to infiltrate the B8 and B5 levels of bile ducts and RPHD. FDG-PET/CT revealed that FDG uptake of the tumor had decreased (SUV max: 6.5) . Although the diagnosis after chemotherapy did not change the T4N0M0 stage IIIB (according to UICC), the effect of chemotherapy was classified as a “partial response” in the response evaluation criteria in solid tumors (RECIST). On the basis of the above findings, if extended left hepatectomy with resection of the caudate lobe could be performed (because we believed that the tumor was unlikely to infiltrate the B8 and B5 levels of the bile ducts and RPHD), we determined that a radical resection was possible. If extended left hepatectomy with resection of the caudate lobe was performed after chemotherapy, the entire liver volume (as measured by CT volumetry), remnant liver volume, and future liver remnant were predicted to be 857 mL, 436 mL, and 50.8%, respectively. To predict the remnant liver function, our facility uses the KGSA value (i.e., the ICG clearance rate using galactosyl), and the remnant KGSA (KGSA value × functional rate of the remnant liver), as reported by Okabayashi et al. . If the remnant KGSA is 0.05 or more, it is used as an index for favorable post-hepatectomy liver function. In this case, the remnant KGSA was 0.079, and it was determined that an extended left hepatectomy with caudate lobe resection was possible. After adding one course of chemotherapy, extended left hepatectomy with resection of the caudate lobe, resection of the extrahepatic bile duct, and local-regional lymphadenectomy of the hepatoduodenal ligament were performed . Biliary reconstruction was performed with bilioenteric anastomosis in the B5, B8, and RPHD.
The surgical specimens showed a whitish solid tumor of the mass-forming type, measuring 4.5 × 3.5 cm in size . Pathological examination of the specimens revealed a hyalinized scar tissue with necrosis that comprised most part of the tumor, and proliferation of the tumor cells in a small tubular or cord-like pattern (with a slit-like lumen) peripherally around the scar. Small tubules were composed of cuboidal tumor cells, which have round nuclei and scant cytoplasm. An irregular anastomosing pattern was observed frequently. Although the tumor was predominantly replaced by the hyalinized scar (which probably reflected the effect of chemotherapy), the tumor cells that had proliferated peripherally around the scar were composed of a small ductular component intermixed with a cord-like structure. A large duct-type component with mucin-secreting glands, which is typically seen in ICC, was not observed in the current case . Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for EMA and CD56 (NCAM). Based on the above findings, the tumor was diagnosed as a CoCC. Approximately one-third of the tumor was composed of viable tumor cells. The surgical margin was 1 mm, and R0 resection was achieved. Lymph nodes showed no metastasis.
Although mild bile leakage was observed during the postoperative course, bile leakage was discontinued after conservative treatment, and the patient was discharged on the 44th postoperative day. Adjuvant chemotherapy performed eight courses (4-week administration and 2-week withdrawal) of S-1 (TS-1; tegafur, gimeracil, oteracil potassium), at 100 mg/body per day. Approximately 14 months after the operation, abdominal CT and PET/CT showed no signs of tumor recurrence.