The 21 year old woman was admitted to our psychiatric ward as an emergency for the first time in 2010, reporting hallucinatory voices as well as persistent visual hallucinations (command to jump out of the window, blood running down the walls) and tried to harm herself by repeatedly smashing her head against the wall. Moreover, she demonstrated psychomotor agitation and suffered from alcohol intoxication with 1.98 promille. The psychotic symptoms remained after detoxication and the patient reported to have suffered from negative symptoms such as apathy and depressed mood during the previous six months. The patient was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia according to the international classification of disease (ICD-10), which is commonly used in clinical routine as well as psychiatric research. During the following three months the patient was admitted two more times, always in a floridly psychotic state with self-inflicted injuries and intoxicated with alcohol. Antipsychotic treatment comprised ziprasidone and quetiapine with no satisfactory effect. The patient was treated with ziprasidone only for a couple of weeks and in a low dose. Continuous was with quetiapine for almost two years in an initial dose of 500 mg and a maintenance dose of 100 mg daily, both without considerable effect. Dosage was reduced due to the patient’s pregnancy.
The patients’ first psychiatric contact occurred 2004 at the age of 14, when she was brought to a child psychiatrist because of unstable interpersonal relationships, self-consciousness, identity, and behavior difficulties. Auto-aggressive tendencies started at the age of 12. Because of acute distress, difficult adjustment to social situations and somatic manifestations, three more hospital admissions to child and adolescent psychiatry became necessary subsequently, all lasting but a few days.
According to her mother the patient was delayed in speech and motor skills and attended a school for learning-disabled children. At the time of consultation, a psychomotor retardation was still evident. The patient complained of frequent headaches. The findings of the neurological exam indicated an ataxia in speech (dysarthria) as well as motor coordination. In pediatric physical assessment somatosensory evoked potentials (SEP) recording (N. tibialis) and electromyography (EMG) (M. tibialis anterior) were normal, electroencephalography (EEG) was normal according to age. Brain MRI and angiography did not show any space-occupying lesion or vascular malformation. There were no detectable alterations of the purine and pyrimidine metabolism and electrophoresis of lipoproteins did not reveal any pathological results either.
One sample of serum was collected and serum was isolated by centrifugation (2500 x g/ 10 min) and kept at −80 °C until completion of recruiting phase. Serum was subsequently sent for diagnostic workup to the authors’ lab (Luebeck, Germany), and tested for the presence of antineuronal antibodies by means of a commercial immunofluorescence assay (Autoimmune Encephalitis Mosaic, Euroimmun, Luebeck, Germany).
Slides were incubated with patient samples at a starting dilution of 1:10. After incubation for 30 min at room temperature, the slides were rinsed with a flush of Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS)-Tween and incubated in PBS-Tween for at least 5 min. Bound antibodies were labelled using Fluorescein-conjugated goat anti-human immunglobulines IgG, IgA or IgM antibodies for 30 min and washed as described before. Samples were classified as positive or negative based on the intensity of surface immunofluorescence of transfected cells in direct comparison with non-transfected cells and control samples. Central nervous system (CNS) tissues were assessed for the presence of characteristic staining patterns indicative of the presence of antibodies against neuropil or other neuronal antigens in the patient’s sample. In a dilution of 1:320 the patient’s serum still showed antibody binding to GABAB surface antigen in the assay .
The patient refused plasmapheresis to remove the antibodies. Further diagnostic including CSF samples (to confirm the presence of receptor antibodies) and chest x-ray (to rule out a Small Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC)) were not performed for ethical reasons, since the patient accidentally got pregnant.
The Ruhr-University Bochum ethics committee approved the analysis (3250–08), and written informed consent was obtained from the patient.