An 88-year-old woman slipped and was found prone in her house by her caregiver and transported to the emergency department by paramedics. She was down for 2 h. Her medical history included thrombophlebitis, and she was taking 2.5 mg warfarin daily. She was alert on presentation. Her vital signs were as follows: respiratory rate, 24 breaths/min; peripheral capillary oxygen saturation was 98% (in room air); blood pressure, 130/60 mmHg; heart rate, 80 b.p.m.; temperature, 36.6 °C. Head and neck examination revealed a subcutaneous hematoma in the anterior cervical region which was 40 mm in diameter, non-pulsatile, not expanding, and not crepitus. Lungs were clear and no stridor at presentation. Neurological, cardiovascular, and abdominal examination were unremarkable. Computed tomography (CT) revealed RPH. CT angiography (CTA) showed extravasation around the hematoma . To establish hemostasis, an angiography was performed. She was not intubated because she was alert and her respiratory condition was stable. Laboratory analysis revealed that the prothrombin international normalized ratio (PT-INR) was 3.83. We administered 20 mg vitamin K and 1000 IU 4-factor prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC). It also revealed mild anemia and mild thrombocytopenia, but there were no other abnormalities. The radiologist placed 4-Fr-long sheath in the right femoral artery as an access site, thereafter performed coil embolization (Target XL 360®) without sedation. She was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) with the following vitals: respiratory rate, 17 breaths/min; peripheral capillary oxygen saturation was 99% (in room air); blood pressure, 124/63 mmHg; heart rate, 66 b.p.m.; temperature, 36.5 °C. She was alert. She had an uneventful course without undergoing intubation or developing any complications. On postoperative day 3, she was able to sit in a wheelchair, and she became ambulatory on postoperative day 5. She was downgraded from the ICU on day 12. There was no complication after leaving the ICU. It took time to adjust the referral, and she was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation on postoperative day 25. Her vitals at time of discharge were as follows: respiratory rate, 15 breaths/min; peripheral capillary oxygen saturation was 97% (in room air); blood pressure, 108/64 mmHg; heart rate, 66 b.p.m.; temperature, 36.0 °C. If dyspnea appeared, she was to refer to a radiologist without follow-up.