A 76-year-old man was referred to our clinic with a decrease in visual acuity due to a retinal detachment on his left eye. Six weeks earlier he had been treated with pars plana vitrectomy and silicone oil tamponade for a retinal detachment on his right eye in an external clinic. According to the surgical report, a drainage retinotomy was created to drain the subretinal fluid, since no retinal breaks were detected. The patient reported of uncomplicated cataract surgeries on both eyes in the past, and further ophthalmological and general medical history were unremarkable. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/80 on the right eye and 20/200 on the left with normal intraocular pressures. Slit lamp examination of both anterior segments revealed a slight chemosis but no other pathologies. Fundus examination of the right eye revealed few retinal hemorrhages on an attached retina with silicone oil tamponade (A). The left eye had a modest vitreous haze with serous retinal detachment and a protruding uveal swelling extending into the anterior chamber angle measuring 8.2 mm × 1.3 mm on ultrasound biomicroscopy (B,G). Moreover, some flat, small, and diffuse naevus-like melanotic changes of the retina were noticed on both eyes, right more than left. Optic coherence tomography (OCT) revealed a macular edema with subretinal fluid and hard exudates (E,F). Fundus autofluorescence (AF) revealed giraffe or leopard spots with intervening areas of increasing and decreasing AF (C,D).
Upon these findings, we carried out a more specific medical history, which revealed no known neoplasms but a weight loss of 10 kg over the last months, 30 pack years, and dark dermal spots of the mouth, breast, groin, scrotum, and penis that developed over the past eight weeks (A–C). With the suspected diagnosis of BDUMP, we initiated screening investigations, including computed tomography of the thorax and abdomen, and dermatological co-evaluation of the skin lesions. A biopsy of the hyperpigmentation of the lip was taken and revealed an acanthotic epithelium with basal hyperpigmentation and focal proliferation of melanophages but without evidence of malignancy, compatible with the diagnosis of a lentigo (D,E; for higher resolution images and greater magnification see ).
On thoracic computed tomography, subpleural consolidation and apical lesions of both lungs, as well as swollen hilar lymph nodes suspicious for metastasis, were unmasked . Apart from the aforementioned unintentional weight loss and consumption of cigarettes, other clinical signs suggestive of lung carcinoma such as chronic cough, dyspnea, and hemoptysis were not present. The patient was referred to our pulmonary clinic, in which a transbronchial biopsy was taken. The diagnosis of non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) with squamous cell histology was made (immunohistochemistry: PD-L1 20% positive, CK 5/6 and p40 positive; mutation status: KRAS and BRAF wild type). Further imaging staging analyses with abdominal CT, MRI of the head, and PET-CT showed no further lesions, leading to the TNM stage cT2a cN2 cM1a.
The patient underwent atypical segmentectomy via video-assisted thoracic surgery, and adjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin and vinorelbine was initiated. After therapy initiation, the patient decided not to be followed up at our pulmonary clinic, and refused any further treatment.