A 70-year-old man presented with anorexia and dysphagia. His past medical history was notable for type 2 diabetes, hypertension, chronic kidney disease requiring hemodialysis, and CCE. The CCE was triggered by a percutaneous coronary intervention in the context of myocardial infarction 7 years earlier. He had no history of smoking or alcohol abuse. Physical examination revealed cyanosis of both feet with dry gangrene of the distal toes but no livedo reticularis. The initial laboratory test results revealed a serum hemoglobin level of 8.0 g/dL, total white cell count of 9850/μL with 5.9% eosinophils (absolute eosinophil count, 581/μL; normal value < 500), serum carcinoembryonic antigen level of 3.2 ng/dL, and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 level of 15.3 ng/dL. Endoscopic examination revealed a type 4 tumor (Borrmann classification) circumferentially located, with invasion of the pyloric ring . Biopsy revealed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed focal circumferential wall thickening of the prepyloric antrum (T3) with several enlarged perigastric lymph nodes (N1) without any evidence of metastasis (M0). He underwent distal gastrectomy with Billroth 2 reconstruction. The right and left gastroepiploic arteries and right and left gastric arteries were resected, but the splenic and short gastric arteries were preserved. Lymph node dissection D2 was also performed. Postoperative histopathological findings revealed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with a TNM score of pT4aN0M0. Several cholesterol emboli were found within the gastric arterial walls .
On postoperative day 11, the patient developed abdominal pain without fever. Laboratory data revealed leukocytosis (white blood cell count: 17,190/μL) and an increased C-reactive protein level (21.13 mg/dL). Abdominal CT demonstrated a gastric wall discontinuity of the remnant stomach with fluid collection in the left subphrenic space. Gastric remnant necrosis was suspected, and an emergency laparotomy was performed.
Laparotomy revealed a necrotic gastric remnant. Most parts of the stomach, except for the greater curvature around the spleen, were completely necrosed . Total gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y reconstruction and abscess drainage were performed. The histopathological findings of the necrotic remnant showed total mucosal necrosis with cholesterol crystal emboli filling the arterioles . After surgery, anastomotic leakage occurred and was treated conservatively. However, he underwent emergency colostomy for perforation of the colon, which was due to the gastrointestinal involvement of CCE. CCE also aggravated his bilateral feet condition into amputation for gangrene. Although all of these deteriorations were treated, his superior pancreaticoduodenal artery aneurysm suddenly ruptured and he expired.