A 31-year old Tanzanian man presented to the Surgery clinic at *** General Hospital (an academic hospital of *** Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar) with two-year history of right groin swelling that becomes more prominent with standing and exertion, with episodes of discomfort in the same area but without intense pain. He had no comorbidities, there were no other gastrointestinal or urologic symptoms, and the systemic review was unremarkable.
The patient had normal vital signs. Abdominal examination showed a right groin swelling, not reaching down the scrotum, with no skin changes or discoloration, exhibiting a cough impulse but incompletely reducible, yet not tender. Genitourinary examination was otherwise unremarkable. These findings were clinically in favor of inguinal hernia. Laboratory tests were not done as the patient was young with no comorbidities. He was booked for daycare right inguinal mesh hernioplasty (Lichtenstein repair) . The patient was prepared in the classic manner for the surgery under general anesthesia. After incision and dissection, the hernia sac was found to be thick. Palpation revealed a texture of hard mass inside. The sac was opened distally, revealed the appendix with a hard mass on its tip (, ), and the cecum formed part of the sac wall proximally. Appendectomy was carried out from the same incision, followed by reduction of the cecum to the peritoneal cavity and closure of the sac, then completion of the hernia repair. Post-operative diagnosis was right indirect sliding Amyand Hernia with mass. The patient recovered smoothly and was discharged. Follow up was arranged 10 days after discharge in order to review the histopathology report.
At follow up, the wound was healing well with no surgical complications, histopathology showed periappendiceal necrotizing granulomatous inflammation with calcified parasitic ova, consistent with schistosomiasis (, ). Further subtyping of the Schistosoma was not possible due to the calcification of ova. The patient was informed about the histopathologic findings and was referred to infectious disease clinic.