A 50-year-old man was referred to our clinic with a 10-day history of high-grade fever accompanied with severe dyspnea, dry cough and thoracic pain. He is Moroccan in origin and was living in France (Paris and then Bordeaux) for 20 years with a yearly 2- to 4-week stay in his country of origin. Indeed, he was visiting his family in Morocco for two weeks in a farm with regular exposure to horses and horse sheds when he became ill. At admission, the patient had general status impairment with a 12-kg emaciation, body temperature at 39.5°C and crepitant wheezes in the left hemi-thorax. Blood investigations showed a WBC count of 21 700/μL (neutrophils, 81%), an ESR of 111 mm/h (normal, <15), a glucose of 7.4 mmol/L (normal, 3.6-5.8), a fibrinogen of 10 g/L (normal, 2-4), a procalcitonin of 24 ng/mL (normal, <0.5) and a C-reactive protein of 280 mg/L (normal, <5). A chest roentgenogram and a thoracic computerized axial tomography revealed a left-upper-lobe excavated infiltrate with pleural effusion . Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection was ruled out by serological testing and the patient was not immunocompromised (CD4+T cell count, 1355/μL). There was no recent or past history of alcohol intake. The only significative co-morbidity was a well-controlled type II diabetes mellitus. Other causes of defective immunity were also seeked, such as common immune variable deficiency, liver disease or malignancy.
Blood cultures were drawn twice and became positive after three days of incubation in an aerobic medium (Bactec plus aerobic/F-Becton Dickinson (BD) France) revealing diphteroïd, occasionally coccoïd non-motile gram-positive bacilli. The organism was sub-cultured on Columbia agar supplemented with 5% plain sheep blood (BD France) in aerobic and nutritive agar atmosphere at 37°C. Colonies produced in 24 h incubation were circular, mucoïd, slightly yellowish and about 2 mm . Firstly, physiologic tests realized in the API corynesystem (bioMérieux-F) strips were catalase positive, showed a positive reaction for pyrazinamidase, pyrolidonyl arylamidase, alkaline phosphatase, and acid production from glucose and maltose, were negative for oxydase, nitrate reduction, and urease. By this time, the attempt to identify the organism gave the numerical code 6100125 which corresponded, according to the system's database with the identification of Corynebacterium striatum/amycolatum with 88.7% similarity. Subsequently, a second API corynesystem was realized by the National Reference Centre for Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France and gave the numerical code 6100104. The phenotypic identification was not changed but the acid production from maltose was negative like for the type strain of C. mucifaciens (GeneBank accession no. Y11200). Concurrently, the alternative diagnosis of Rhodococcus equi was not definitely ruled out considering both the mucoid colony morphology, the clinical presentation as cavitary pneumonia, and the recent direct exposure to premises used to house horses as consistent environmental reservoir of the latter organism.
On this behalf, the numerical code 001199 was given to the isolate and complete sequence analysis of the 16 S rRNA gene from the isolate was carried out as described previously [,]. A total of 1,208 continuous nucleotides were determined. Sequence of isolate 001199 (GenBank accession no. ) was compared to all bacterial sequences available from the GenBank database by using the BLAST program and the MegAlign module of the Lasergene software (DNASTAR). A phylogenetic tree was generated by using the neighbour-joining algorithm . Our isolate was found to 0.8% of divergence with the type strains of C. mucifaciens. Thus, isolate 001199 was definitely identified to belong to the species Corynebacterium mucifaciens.
Besides, the antimicrobial susceptibility pattern showed the strain was susceptible for β-lactams, amino-glycosides and glycopeptides. Treatment was initiated with rifampicin-spiramycin combination and was not changed even when the coryneform bacterium identification was later moved to C. mucifaciens. The patient rapidly improved in the general condition with clinical cure after four weeks but the treatment was continued for three additional weeks. Consistently, chest radiography after four weeks showed a minimal residual homolateral pleuritis involvement. At the end of the treatment, thoracic computerized tomography showed complete radiological recovery. The patient was followed during five years after the episode without relapse.