We hereby report the uncommon case of a 26-year-old female patient, second gesture nulliparous with a first ruptured left ectopic tubal pregnancy treated by salpingectomy 3 years ago and a present 3-month pregnancy for which she has not yet benefited from an ultrasonography. She presented to our emergency department with severe pelvic pain radiating along the linea alba and an associated minor black vaginal bleeding. Physical examination revealed hemorrhagic shock with blood pressure at 84 mmHg systolic and 47 mmHg diastolic and tachycardia at 125 beats per minute. The abdomen was rock hard with acute tenderness in the hypogastric region. No metrorrhagia was found in the speculum examination and the vaginal examination found a short posterior cervix. Uterus was enlarged and left lateral vaginal pouch was extremely painful.
Qualitative urine beta-hCG test came back positive. Pelvic ultrasonography revealed an empty uterus of subnormal size. By rotating the endovaginal probe 30° to the patient's left, the gestational sac appeared with a 10.2 mm craniocaudal length embryo (corresponding to 7 weeks of amenorrhea) without cardiac activity. Gestational sac was found 6 mm lateral to the endometrium and was continuously surrounded by the myometrium with lateral myometrial width of 3 mm . There was also severe peritoneal effusion in the extending around the uterus and through the Morison's pouch. Diagnosis of a ruptured interstitial ectopic pregnancy was highly suspected and the patient was transferred to an operation room without delay.
The patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy under general anesthesia. On opening the peritoneal cavity, a massive hemoperitoneum was found with a mass in the left uterine tubal stump, with breach of myometrial thickness opposite the mass, bleeding profusely. The patient then benefited from a cornual resection and the bleeding was minimized by injection of vasopressin in the periphery of the area being removed. With the uterine margins still hemorrhagic, we added U-shaped hemostasis stitches on top of suturing the margins with a No1 Vicryl until complete closure and satisfactory hemostasis. The uterus, ovaries, and contralateral right tube had a usual appearance. The abdominal cavity was cleaned by saline washing and the abdomen was closed. Operative time was 56 min and total blood loss was evaluated at 200 cm3. The patient was transfused with 3 packed red blood cells intraoperatively and 3 packed red blood cells and 2 bags of fresh frozen plasma postoperatively. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged home on day 4 postoperatively.