A 48-year-old female, active smoker (36 pack-years) and without any occupational or environmental exposure, had been followed up for sporadic LAM since 2004. In her case, LAM was not associated with tuberous sclerosis complex. Initial computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed diffuse bilateral cysts with thin walls that are typical of LAM, in addition to retroperitoneal involvement with left iliac, hypogastric, and latero-aortic angiomyolipomas. In April 2004, a biopsy of a retroperitoneal mass was performed revealing fusiform proliferation of smooth muscle-differentiated cells within a rich vascular and adipose stroma, with strong positivity for HMB45 staining, evocative of an angiomyolipoma. In 2006, the patient developed New York Heart Association Class II dyspnea on exercise, along with a chronic cough. From 2006 to 2007, she received several sequential anti-estrogen treatments, specifically tamoxifen and letrozole combined with triptorelin, with stable respiratory function. In 2007, the patient exhibited lung function deterioration, which led to the prescription of the mTOR inhibitor sirolimus (2 mg once daily, while the daily dose for treating renal cancer is 10 mg daily), resulting in the disappearance of retroperitoneal lesions.
In 2013, CT showed a right apical lung mass, highly suggestive of cancer, due to its size, radiological features, and hypermetabolism (SUVmax = 4.8) on TEP-CT. Sirolimus was stopped owing to its immunosuppressive effect, which may have induced cancer development. First, a CT-guided biopsy was then performed despite pulmonary functional impairment, with pathological analysis revealing neither tumoral lesion nor LAM cells, but rather fibroelastosic scarring. The decision to monitor CT without immediately repeating transthoracic biopsy was made, owing to the very small lesion size in a patient with functional impairment. For this reason, we thought that performing such a biopsy would have been too risky .
Upon follow-up in 2015, due to the target lesions’ further growing while, another CT biopsy was carried out, showing mucin-producing adenocarcinoma (CK7+, CK20-, TTF1-) along with inflammatory stroma. EGFR and ALK testing proved negative. Additional molecular analyses revealed only a potentially oncogenic B-RAF mutation (c1406G > T; p.Gly469Val; COSM459) in exon 11. No c-met skip exon 14, PIK3CA, KRAS, or HER2 mutations were observed. PD-L1 immunohistochemistry testing was negative. No other distant lesion was observed. Cyberknife treatment of the lung lesion was carried out in April 2015.
However, a new patient assessment in July 2015 disclosed distant relapse in adrenal glands and left iliac lymph node, despite the thoracic lesion’s partial response. Due to high evidence of relapse on imaging, another tumor biopsy was not performed at that time. A first-line chemotherapy comprising cisplatin plus pemetrexed was initiated. As reassessment after two cycles in November 2015 showed local progression, a second-line treatment of weekly paclitaxel plus bevacizumab was initiated. In December 2015, performance status worsened from 1 to 2, with tumor assessment showing further progression in the adrenal glands.
Third-line therapy with nivolumab was started on December 11, 2015, given that no other viable treatment options were available. PD-L1 staining was negative at diagnosis and not tested again at relapse. Within 2 h of the first infusion, the patient developed complete right pneumothorax requiring pleural drainage. The persistence of pneumothorax at 48 h justified surgical pleurodesis, along with a 2-month hospitalization in the thoracic surgery department, owing to prolonged air leaking. A CT scan conducted 20 days after the only nivolumab infusion demonstrated a dramatic partial response in the lung and adrenal lesions . Given that the pneumothorax occurred very shortly after nivolumab infusion, we hypothesized that the complication would more likely have been caused by LAM, rather than being directly related to nivolumab. Accordingly, we resumed nivolumab in January 2016, with no other recurrence of this adverse event.
Since that time the patient’s performance status has been 1 and she proved able to undergo pulmonary rehabilitation while gradually resuming work. Treatment was well tolerated with no major safety issues. The patient developed Grade II hypothyroidism treated with hormone replacement therapy. Lung function tests and symptoms worsened progressively from June 2013 to May 2017 (decline of CVF from 3700 mL in June 2013 to 2250 mL in May 2017, the decline being progressive). A bronchoalveolar lavage was performed showing no evidence of infection, tumoral cells, or lymphocytosis. This worsening was not accounted for by infection, tumor progression, or visible nivolumab-associated pneumonitis upon CT-scan follow-up. The patient’s deterioration was, therefore, attributed to LAM. While we observed a decline in lung function tests, there was no accelerated decline of lung function tests during nivolumab treatment, nor was there any argument for a LAM exacerbation.
In May 2017, sirolimus, stopped since 2013, was reinitiated in conjunction with nivolumab. It was a collective decision that was shared with the patient, because of the ethical challenge raised due to the lack of scientifically-sound evidence. CT-scans were performed every 2 to 3 months, and lung function tests every 6 months.”
She presented without any undesirable effects with improving lung function tests and a good partial response continuing up to February 2018 .