A 37-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because of sudden headache and vomiting. She had no family history of aneurysms. Neurologic examination revealed slight disturbance of consciousness (Glasgow Coma Scale score, 14) and neck stiffness without any focal deficit. Brain computed tomography (CT) showed diffuse SAH (Fisher stage 3) and an arachnoid cyst of the right middle fossa (Figure ). Subsequent cerebral digital subtraction angiography (DSA) indicated a saccular aneurysm of the middle cerebral artery (Figure ). Because of the ruptured IA, a diagnosis of SAH (World Federation of Neurosurgical Society grade 2) was made. The patient had blue sclerae (Figure ), hypertension, and mitral regurgitation (New York Heart Association class 2), and had sustained repeated fractures of the extremities such as left elbow joint and left ankle joint prior to puberty. Her height was 158 cm (equal to the average height of Japanese women) with no major skeletal deformities. The patient’s son also had blue sclerae and a history of multiple fractures; however there was no history of bone fragility in her parents, two brothers or daughter. According to these findings, the diagnosis of OI type 1A was made during admission
.
Surgical clipping of the aneurysm was performed, and the patient was asymptomatic after one week. Follow-up DSA demonstrated a completely clipped aneurysm (Figure ). The patient underwent rehabilitation and was discharged from the hospital four weeks after admission.
The patient’s left femoral bone density was 0.752 g/cm2, which was in the Japanese female average. We also measured levels of serum bone metabolism markers, and they were within normal limits found in adult women; pyridinoline cross-linked carboxyterminal telopeptide of type I collagen, 1.1 ng/mL (normal range, <4.5); intact amino-terminal propeptide of type I procollagen, 16.6 μg/L (normal range, 14.9-68.8); tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase-5b, 147 mU/dL (normal range, 120–420); osteocalcin, 10 ng/mL (normal range, 2.5-13); and bone-specific alkaline phosphatase, 9.2 μg/L (normal range, 2.9-14.5).
We performed genetic analysis for a single nucleotide G/C polymorphism (SNP) of exon 28 of the COL1A2 gene, which was reported as a potential risk factor for IAs
. However, this SNP was not detected in this patient or five normal control subjects (Figure ). And no mutation of the COL1A1 or COL1A2 gene was detected with genetic analyses.