A 23-year-old man was admitted to Department of Ophthalmology for visual acuity decline in both eyes on July 28th, 2020, without other visual disturbances, headache or the other symptoms. He received allo-HSCT for ALL treatment one month ago. He reported that he was previously healthy, and his uncorrected visual acuity was 20/20 before. As for the past history of ALL , the patient was diagnosed with B-ALL because of "epistaxis and skin ecchymosis" in June, 2019. Subsequently, 7 cycles of hyper-CVAD chemotherapy were performed (from Jul 29th, 2019 to Mar 9th, 2020), followed by bone marrow transplantation on June 25th, 2020. One month later, red rashes were found all over the body, protruding from the surface of the skin .
Immediately, the ocular examinations were performed. The visual acuity was 20/300 without improvement by correction in both eyes. The intraocular pressure is 15 mmHg in right eye and 16 mmHg in left eye. The anterior segment was normal in both eyes, except for blunt pupillary light reflex (both direct and indirect). Fundus photography showed normal optic disc morphology with clear boundary, without obvious pallor . Visual field examination revealed central scotomas in both eyes . Visual evoked potential (VEP) showed prolonged P100 latency and decreased P100 amplitude at 60 and 15 arcmin in both eyes . The average retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickness was 99 μm and 106 μm in right and left eye, respectively . Macular optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed normal morphology . Optic disc OCT Angiography (OCTA) also showed normal capillary perfusion density . Meanwhile, there was not noticeable abnormality in optic nerve and brain by MRI . A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed no significant abnormality. The AQP4, MOG, GFAP and MBP tests were negative in both blood and CSF. Beside this, bacteria and fungi blood culture, as well as IgG and IgM of several viruses were performed to exclude the infectious etiology, which showed negative results.
After the multi-disciplinary consultation combined with departments of hematology, dermatology and ophthalmology, the rashes and optic neuropathy were considered GVHD probably, despite the routine use of anti-rejection medications after allo-HSCT, such as Cyclosporin A (CsA). As for the treatment, systematic steroid and neurotrophic medication were suggested, accompanied by potassium, calcium supplement medication and gastrointestinal protection medication until steroid withdrawal. In addition, Ruxolitinib was recommended by department of dermatology. Systematic steroid therapy lasted for one month from Aug 1st, 2020, while neurotrophic medication and Ruxolitinib continued with routine anti-rejection medication under regular follow-ups. We rechecked the ocular and dermal situations every week during the first month follow-ups, followed by every month in the next six months, and then every three months regularly. Two months later, the rashes gradually subsided. However, the visual acuity was not significantly improved until his last follow-up at Aug 10th, 2021.