A 13-year-old, right-hand dominant male, was brought to our clinic by his parents with a history of fall from bed while sitting. They presented to the clinic with complaints of pain and deformity over the left arm and inability to move the left upper limb due to pain. The patient was a previously diagnosed case of ASD, on regular medications in the form of anticonvulsants. On examination, a gross deformity was noted over the proximal third of the left arm, along with swelling, tenderness, and crepitus. The distal pulsations were normal and there was no neurological deficit. A provisional diagnosis of proximal humerus fracture was made, and a U-slab was applied along with arm pouch immobilization. Plain radiographs of the shoulder with full-length humerus were done in anteroposterior and lateral views along with ipsilateral elbow, radius-ulna, and wrist. The radiographs revealed a skeletally immature shoulder joint with a short oblique fracture through the proximal third of the humerus shaft. The bone surrounding the fracture site showed central, well-defined, geographic, loculated, and lucent lytic lesions in the meta-diaphyseal region of the proximal humerus, with a narrow zone of transition. There was endosteal thinning, denoting an expanding lesion, with no cortical breach, periosteal reaction, or soft-tissue involvement. A classical fallen fragment sign was noted . Radiographs of the elbow, forearm, and wrist were within normal limits .
Based on the history of a trivial trauma and pathological changes in the plain radiograph of the humerus, a pathological fracture was suspected and based on the age group and radiological appearance, the primary pathology was suspected to be a unicameral or simple bone cyst (UBC). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was done to determine the extent and severity of the lesion. It revealed a 70 mm long cystic lesion involving the metadiaphysis with few, small, and linear fragments in the inferior aspect of the cyst along with a completely displaced fracture. Hence, the MRI reported the possibility of a UBC with a pathological fracture, as suspected .
All the pre-operative workup was undertaken and the patient was planned for surgery. The surgery was performed under general anesthesia, with the patient in a semi-beach chair position and strict aseptic precautions. The fracture site was methodically exposed through the anterolateral approach until the fracture fragments were visualized. Once the fracture site was distracted, cystic collection was noted inside both fracture fragments with paper-thin cortex on either side of the fracture site. The cystic collection was scooped out and sent for histopathological reporting (HPR). Thorough curettage was done while making sure not to cause an iatrogenic fracture due to the poor bone quality. Fluoroscopy guidance was taken to ensure meticulous curettage on either side of the fracture. This was followed by a thorough wash with normal saline. 40 g of pre-treated, cancellous allograft was prepared and impacted inside both fracture fragments until uniform density was noted under fluoroscopy. Once homogeneity was obtained, the fracture ends were carefully manipulated and reduced. A 10-hole, titanium, and locking compression plate was then applied to the reduced fracture site, and fixed bicortically using 3.5 mm cortical locking screws wherein three proximal (38 × 2; 34 × 1) and three distal (24 × 1; 22 × 2) screws were inserted using fluoroscopy guidance . Care was taken to place and subsequently fix the plate distal to the proximal humeral physis. Construct integrity and stability were confirmed clinically and under fluoroscopy and the incision was closed in layers.
A U-slab was reapplied and no distal neurovascular deficit was noted postoperatively. One dose of 5 mg zoledronic acid was given intravenous over 1 hour on post-operative day 1. The patient was discharged uneventfully. Sutures were removed on post-operative day 14 with no sign of active infection. The HPR confirmed the diagnosis of a UBC with a microscopic picture of cyst walls showing fibroblastic proliferation with large amounts of adherent fibrin such as material and reactive new bone formation.
A plain radiograph was done at 4 weeks postoperatively which showed a healing fracture site with callus formation . Arm pouch and U-slab immobilization was continued for a period of 6 weeks. A plain radiograph done at 6 weeks postoperatively showed a healing fracture site with consolidating allograft following which passive movements of the shoulder and elbow were started . As it was difficult to obtain subjective clinical scores in the form of patient-related outcome measures, an objective assessment was done. The patient regained full range of movement by 12 weeks; however, strength of abduction was limited to 5 kgs. Complete rehabilitation of the patient, despite the ASD, was attained by 14 weeks postoperatively. At 1-year follow-up, the plain radiograph showed a well-healed proximal humerus with complete consolidation of the impacted allograft and no signs of recurrence of the lesion or fracture .