A 66-year-old Russian female was referred to our clinic for dull oppressive non-radiating retrosternal chest pain occurring on the 2nd day post-ablation. The patient had undergone an uneventful RVOT radiofrequency ablation 2 days earlier for frequent (>22 000 per day), drug-resistant (bisoprolol, sotalol, and propafenone) PVC due to frequent symptoms of skipped beats, palpitations accompanied by dizziness, light-headedness, and exertional dyspnoea. The patient also reported a history of well-controlled arterial hypertension (treated with the combination of enalapril and hydrochlorothiazide) and diabetes mellitus (treated with metformin), class 1 obesity (body mass index 33 kg/m2).
Activation and pace mapping techniques were used to localize the PVC source. The earliest focal endocardial activation was detected in the RVOT anteroseptal wall 1 cm below the pulmonary valve. Power-controlled, open-irrigated tip radiofrequency applications were performed in this area leading to PVC elimination. The temperature was limited to 44°C, the power output was 40 W, and the total radiofrequency ablation (RFA) duration was 300 s.
On readmission, the physical examination was unremarkable: the blood pressure was 125/80 mmHg, heart rate 75 b.p.m., respiratory rate 18, oxygen saturation 100% on room air. Heart sounds were muffled, without any heart murmurs (including pericardial rub); the second sound was accentuated in the aortic area during cardiac auscultation. Lungs were clear to auscultation with no crackles or wheezes.
Twelve lead electrocardiogram (ECG) at the time of presentation showed biphasic T waves in V1–V4 . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) did not reveal any signs of pericardial effusion or local myocardial abnormalities. Complete blood count did not show any abnormal changes. The high-sensitive C-reactive protein level was 3.38 mg/L (normal ranges: 1–3 mg/L). The measurement of cardiac troponin level was inappropriate due to the expected post-ablation elevation of cardiac biomarkers. The CMR showed local accumulation of pericardial fluid in front of the RVOT anterior wall, accompanied by adjacent oedema and pericardial contrast enhancement . The only significant finding on CCT, performed for comprehensive coronary anatomy assessment, was loculated pericardial effusion anterior to the right ventricle on the length of 2.5 cm and a 7 mm separation of pericardial layers which corresponds to changes detected by CMR. There were no signs of coronary artery injury significant coronary artery disease.
A non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug therapy (Diclofenac sodium 75 mg/daily for injection was chosen due to reported aspirin and ibuprofen allergy) was started. Both chest pain and ECG changes regressed shortly after anti-inflammatory therapy initiation . Therefore, anti-inflammatory therapy was discontinued in 3 days. There were no adverse effects associated with the therapy; the patient did not have any complaints or symptoms and was discharged within 5 days.