An 83-year-old Caucasian woman presented with a five-month history of pneumaturia and fecaluria and an acute episode of macrohematuria, leading to a high clinical suspicion of a colovesical fistula. Our patient also reported a weight loss of 5kg in a short period of time but had no other significant clinical history. The initial contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) clearly depicted the suspected colovesical fistula .
An OC was performed to investigate the colon for the potential presence of a colic neoplasm associated with the colovesical fistula. The OC was incomplete and progressed to only 35cm from the anal margin due to bad tolerance and a local inflammatory response related to severe diverticulosis.
CTC was requested after this incomplete OC. Our patient received a low residue diet for 48 hours and a 24-hour clear liquid diet prior to the CTC. Laxatives were also administered to allow colonic evacuation, as well as a stool marker for fecal tagging 24 hours prior to the CTC. Our patient was positioned in the left decubitus position and air was manually insufflated through an intrarectal small gauge Foley catheter according to our patient’s tolerance. Since the first scout image (with our patient in a supine position) revealed inadequate bowel distension, insufflations were continued and a second scout showed the presence of air in the pelvis but no colonic distension. Biphasic CT was performed, with our patient first in a prone position, then in a supine position. The second acquisition was realized after injection of 120mL of iodinated contrast media (Accupaque 350, GE Healthcare, Glattbrugg, Switzerland). The CT parameters were as follows: 120kV, 120mA (modulated) and 2mm slice thickness with an interval of 1mm, corresponding to a dose length product of 206mGy·cm for the non-enhanced phase and 436mGy·cm for the contrast-enhanced phase.
The images acquired showed a significant distension of her bladder, with an estimated volume of 1,350mL and filled with contrast, and the presence of an intravesical air-fluid level. There was no colonic distension. The two-dimensional multiplanar analysis of the images successfully revealed the fistulous tract between her bladder and her sigmoid colon but an analysis of her bowel lumen was not performed due to inadequate colonic distension (see Figure ). Cystoscopy revealed a vesical opening with fecal material leakage 2cm to 3cm superior to the left ureterovesical junction, with no extrinsic visible lesion. Our patient underwent a sigmoidectomy with resection of the fistulous tract. Histopathology revealed a severe diverticulosis with focal diverticulitis of her sigmoid colon that had perforated into her bladder. Fibrotic tissue was present, but no neoplastic cells were identified.