A 71-year-old man presented to our emergency room with acute respiratory distress. The patient had been discharged from the hospital 1 day previously, after an apparent recovery from a proven (PCR positive) COVID-19 infection. During the initial hospital stay, dyspnoea had been mild with oxygen saturation levels of 95% with 5 L of additional oxygen. Medical treatment had consisted of intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics, off-label chloroquine (loading dose of 600 mg, followed by 300 mg twice daily for a duration of 5 days) and dalteparin 5000 IU subcutaneously once daily as thrombosis prophylaxis. Over the course of 5 days, the patient recovered quickly with no dyspnoea and normal oxygen saturation levels at the time of discharge. The current respiratory distress had developed progressively over the course of 24 h.
The relevant medical history reports rheumatoid arthritis, dilating cardiomyopathy with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 35% since 2015, pulmonary emphysema and polycythaemia vera currently being treated with hydroxycarbamide 500 mg once daily. This therapy was continued during both hospital stays.
At the time of presentation, the patient was in shock with cold extremities, a tachycardia of 107 b.p.m., hypotension (86/50 mmHg), tachypnoeic (27 b.p.m.), and oxygen saturation levels of 95% with 15 L additional oxygen using a non-rebreather mask (FiO2 80%).
The electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia of 107 b.p.m., right axis, P pulmonale, incomplete right bundle branch block, prolonged QTc interval (520 ms), and negative T-waves in the precordial leads . These electrocardiographic findings were new compared to previous electrocardiograms. The changes were suggestive of possible pulmonary embolism, and the prolongation of the QTc interval was probably related to the previous use of chloroquine.
The laboratory findings included haemoglobin 16.3 g/dL, haematocrit 0.58 L/L, platelet count 1600 × 109/L, leucocyte count 45.6 × 109/L, lymphocyte count 1.7 × 109/L, prothrombin time 22.2 s, D-dimer 3.3 mg/L, international normalized ratio 1.6, lactate dehydrogenase 833 U/L, and C-reactive protein 35 mg/L. These findings pointed to a pro-thrombotic state.
Based on these initial findings, pulmonary embolism was suspected. The diagnosis of bilateral sub-segmental pulmonary embolism was confirmed on the computed tomography scan . Additionally, a contrast opacification of 3 cm in diameter in the right ventricular apex was noted . Based on this finding, the cardiologist was consulted and an echocardiogram was performed. The right ventricle was severely dilated with severely decreased systolic function. In the apex of the right ventricle, a large, mobile, multi-lobar mass (26 mm × 36 mm) was seen ( and Video 1). This was most likely thrombus given the bilateral sub-segmental pulmonary embolism in a COVID-19 patient. As treatment therapeutic dosage of dalteparin (12.500 IU subcutaneously once daily) was initiated. After 48 h, the echocardiogram was repeated and the thrombus was no longer present ( and Video 2).
Over the course of several days, the dyspnoea persisted despite high levels of supplemental oxygen therefore OptiflowTM Nasal High Flow therapy (FiO2 90%, 60 litres per minute) was initiated. No improvement was seen, and the decision was made to withdraw active treatment and start palliative sedation. The patient passed away several hours later. No autopsy was performed.