In May 1975, a 22-year-old Asian male person was helping to lift a beam with his co-workers, when the whole load of the beam and bar together struck against his left shoulder. He felt severe pain locally and developed complete tetraplegia at C-4 level. This person had been managing neuropathic bladder by indwelling urethral catheter size 12 French. Over a period of time, he developed erosion of urethra because of indwelling urethral catheter. Therefore, suprapubic cystostomy was performed in November 2008. Cystoscopy showed trabeculated bladder and no tumour was visible.
This person was never a smoker and was not a second-hand smoker. On 28 December 2009, this person started passing blood in urine. Ultrasound examination of urinary tract, performed on 29 December 2009, revealed right kidney measuring 10.3 cm and left kidney measuring 9.6 cm. There was mild right hydronephrosis and slight dilatation of the left collecting system. No renal calculi were seen. The outline of urinary bladder was normal with suprapubic catheter in situ.
In April 2009, flexible cystoscopy was performed through suprapubic cystostomy track, as false passages in urethra prevented insertion of cystoscope through urethra. Reddened areas were noted in the dome and two biopsies were taken. Histological sections were examined at multiple levels. Mild, active, chronic inflammatory cell infiltrate was seen . A fragment in part showed squamous metaplasia of surface epithelium. Towards one edge, surface urothelium showed mild nuclear enlargement and no staining for cytokeratin 20 was observed. This most likely represented inflammatory or reactive atypia rather than genuine dysplasia. There was no evidence of carcinoma-in-situ.
This patient continued to pass blood in urine. Therefore, a sample of urine was sent for cytology. Cytology revealed a very cellular specimen containing numerous neutrophil polymorphs together with scattered red blood cells. The transitional epithelial cells in this specimen showed mild nuclear enlargement, although the nuclear cytoplasmic ratio was not altered. In addition, scattered abnormal shaped squamous cells were present showing orangiophilic cytoplasm, containing mildly pleomorphic nuclei. These epithelial/nuclear changes were probably inflammatory, metaplastic and reactive in nature . However, the atypia in these cells warranted further investigations, for example cystoscopy.
In July 2010, ultrasound examination of urinary bladder was performed after instilling 150 ml of sterile 0.9% sodium chloride solution into the urinary bladder through suprapubic catheter. No gross bladder abnormality was demonstrated. Small amount of debris was noted within the urinary bladder. Repeat ultrasound examination, performed in August 2010, revealed normal position of the kidneys, no hydronephrosis or focal renal abnormality. The urinary bladder was empty.
Flexible cystoscopy was performed after four months after the previous cystoscopy. Flexible cystoscope was again introduced through suprapubic cystostomy track. Vision was poor, as the flexible cystoscope was damaged. A biopsy was taken from sloughing area. On this occasion, flexible cystoscopy was considered to be a sub-optimal procedure. Histological sections showed a piece of fibrino-purulent exudates, presumably from the surface of an ulcer, intermingled with superficial fragments of urothelium, which showed inflammatory changes only. There was no evidence of high grade neoplasia or carcinoma-in-situ. One or two of the fragments had a possibly papillary pattern, raising the possibility of a low grade papillary urothelial tumour, but virtually no stroma was included and the specimen was unsuitable for assessment of possible low grade neoplasia.
A specimen of urine was sent in cytospin fixative. Cytology of urine specimen showed essentially blood and inflammatory cells only, with only one or two epithelial cells included. The specimen was therefore unsuitable for assessment.
Computed Tomography of abdomen and pelvis, performed on 14 September 2010, revealed small simple cortical cyst in left kidney and a small opaque calculus in lower pole of right kidney. There was mild dilatation of right renal pelvis and proximal ureter. There was no opaque ureteric calculus. Urinary catheter was in situ. There was no pelvic pathology.
This patient continued to pass blood in urine. Therefore, a sample of urine was sent for cytology on 14 October 2010, which revealed singly lying and some monolayered clusters of transitional epithelial cells, in which the nuclei were showing a mild degree of pleomorphism, many with prominent nucleoli. Large numbers of acute inflammatory cells were present in the background, suggesting that the nuclear changes seen in the transitional epithelial cells were likely reactive/inflammation induced. However, the nuclear atypia was significant in many cells and, therefore, it was advised to follow this patient and repeat the urine examination at appropriate interval.
In view of cytological findings of significant nuclear atypia in many transitional epithelial cells, rigid cystoscopy was performed on 22 October 2010. Cystoscope was introduced with difficulty, as false passages were present in prostatic urethra. A growth was seen in the anterior wall of urinary bladder under the suprapubic cystostomy. Transurethral resection was performed. Histology showed multiple pieces of a poorly differentiated transitional cell carcinoma with a solid growth pattern. Large areas of necrosis were noted. There was invasion of lamina propria but no definite muscle was identified. There was no carcinoma-in-situ.
Magnetic resonance imaging of urinary bladder, performed on 29 October 2010, revealed 24 mm thick anterior bladder wall tumour involving full thickness of the bladder wall . There was streaking of the perivesical fat anteriorly, consistent with extravesical extension. 15 mm × 10 mm left iliac lymph node was noted. No other pelvic lymphadenopathy was present.
Computed tomography of chest, performed on 27 October 2010, showed clear lungs and no pulmonary metastases. Isotope bone scan revealed some focal increased tracer uptake in the right second rib posteriorly, which was of uncertain significance. There was increased uptake at the left gleno-humeral joint, which was probably related to an arthropathy.
This patient underwent radical cystectomy on 03 December 2010, nearly eight months after initial flexible cystoscopy. Sections of urinary bladder confirmed a poorly differentiated, grade 3 solid urothelial carcinoma at the fundus of the bladder, which extended just through the muscularis propria into perivesical fat but without causing an obvious extravesical mass . Perineural invasion was present. The surface urothelium showed limited carcinoma in situ.
Post-operative period was complicated by sepsis and abdominal distension. Twelve days after cystectomy, computed tomography of abdomen revealed markedly distended small bowel loops; small bowel dilatation was up to 5 cm. There was significant fluid collection on the right side of the abdomen: 15 cm in craniocaudal extent, 6.5 cm in transverse diameter and 5.5 cm in antero-posterior diameter. There was a small right subphrenic fluid collection and a 5 cm deep fluid collection in the pelvis. Whilst the right kidney previously had a prominent extra renal pelvis this had increased in prominence since the previous computed tomography examination of September 2010 and there was now right calyceal dilatation. The patient also developed moderate left hydronephrosis. Both ureters could be traced down to their insertion into the ileal conduit. Clinical history and computed tomography appearances suggested an anastomotic leak. The collection in pelvis was not accessible for percutaneous drainage because of overlying bowel loops. This patient was managed conservatively and he improved. Five weeks after cystectomy, ultrasound examination of abdomen revealed no hydronephrosis or perirenal collection.