A 68-year-old female patient was admitted to the Affiliated Hospital of Qinghai University due to the gradual enlargement of the right cervical mass for 3 months. No complaints of pain in the neck mass, hoarseness, difficulty breathing or swallowing. No history of radiation to the neck or family history of thyroid carcinoma. No iodine deficiency. Physical examination: We touched a palpable 2 × 2 cm mass on the right thyroid gland, firm, non-tender, unclear boundary, and moving up and down with swallowing. We also found a palpable 3 × 2 cm mass in the right cervical region with hard quality, no tenderness, unclear boundary and poor motion. Thyroid function is normal (T3, T4, TSH, TPOAb and Tg). Cervical ultrasound showed that a 2.1 × 2.0 cm heterogenous echoic nodules were seen in the right lobe of the thyroid gland (TI-RADS grade: 4a) and several hypoechoic nodules of different sizes were found in the left lobe of the thyroid gland, simultaneously there was an enlarged lymph node in right cervical region II about 3.1 × 2.6 cm, unclear boundary between the cortex and medulla, and disappearance of lymphatic hilum. Enhanced computed tomography(CT) of the thyroid suggests malignant thyroid occupancy in the right lobe, multiple small nodules in the left lobe, multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the right cervical space, some of which were fused to each other and measure approximately 3.32 × 3.14 cm .
The trachea mildly compressed and deviated to the left. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of the right cervical region II lymph node suggests squamous carcinoma metastasis. Fine-needle aspiration cytology of the right thyroid lobe (multi-site sampling) confirmed follicular neoplasm. In addition to thyroid lesions, there were no suspicious primary squamous carcinomas lesion in head, neck or distant organs after comprehensive clinical, endoscopic and imaging examinations (CT of the chest, head, whole abdomen and nasopharynx as well as gastrointestinal endoscopes and laryngoscopy). Subsequent multidisciplinary consultation considered that the metastatic squamous carcinoma of the right cervical lymph node was still likely to be thyroid-derived. The patient underwent total thyroidectomy and partial right cervical lymph node dissection (levels III, IV, VB&VI) after perfect preoperative preparation. At surgery, we observed that a huge mass about 2 × 2 cm occupied almost the entire right thyroid lobe, breaking through the fibrous capsule thyroid gland and adhering to the surrounding muscle tissue, but there is no invasion of the recurrent laryngeal nerve and trachea. Gross specimens showed a greyish-white, tough, partially calcified interior on incision of the mass. When lymph node dissection was performed, we found that the lymph nodes in the right cervical region II were significantly enlarged and it severe adhesions with the internal jugular vein and common carotid artery, fusion of metastatic lymph nodes into a mass encircling the carotid artery making it difficult to achieve complete separation and total removal, therefore a palliative resection was carried out. The postoperative pathology report confirmed follicular carcinoma with moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the right thyroid gland, with lymphatic vessel invasion, nodular goiter on the left thyroid gland.
There was no metastasis of the lymph nodes in the central region of the right neck. Of the 13 lymph nodes removed from the lateral neck region, 5 showed metastasis of squamous carcinoma. Immunohistochemical staining of the squamous cancer cells showed positive staining for PAX-8, P53, P40, P63, CEA, AE1/ AE3 and CK19, negative in thyroglobulin (Tg), TTF-1 and Bcl-2, and the Ki-67 labeling index was 40%.BRAFV600E mutation negative. Based on postoperative histomorphological and immunohistochemical findings, we identified this patient as having ATC-SCC subtype in combined with follicular thyroid carcinoma, and metastatic squamous carcinoma of the lymph nodes in the neck which originated from ATC-SCC subtype. According to the 8th edition of the AJCC/TNM staging system for thyroid cancer, the ATC-SCC subtype is stage IVB.
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) suppressive therapy and calcium supplementation were given after operation. Further treatment plans include iodine-131 treatment for the follicular component of the thyroid tumor, and systemic chemotherapy combined with neck 3D intensity modulated radiation therapy for the ATC-SCC subtype. The patient completed 2 cycles (1/25d) of 5-fluorouracil(750 mg/m2 d1-5) combined with cisplatin(30 mg d1-3) chemotherapy followed by neck radiotherapy. The initial radiotherapy dose was 600 cGy/3f, with a gradual increase to a planned dose of 6000 cGy/30f at a later stage, but our patient experienced severe side-reactions such as nausea and vomiting after completing the 4th cycle of radiotherapy and was given a palliative radiotherapy dose of 5000 cGy/25f in the 5th cycle after consultation with the patient and her family. The patient abandoned subsequent iodine-131 treatment. Residual lymph node squamous carcinoma metastasis in region II of the cervical after palliative resection invaded the right neck tissue extensively with localized skin fester, combine with cachexia, the patient died 7 months after surgery.