A 70-year-old Chinese man was presented in the study. The patient had the past medical history of diabetes, hypertension and cerebral infarction, and had received hemodialysis three times a week due to renal failure for 2 years. SHPT was confirmed in December 2016 since the serum PTH had elevated 100.3 pmol/l(normal range 1.6–6.9 pmol/l). Cinacalcet(at a dose of 25 mg per day) was prescribed based on the concurrent hypercalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. In April 2017, the PTH level was stable at 94.44 pmol/l due to his poor compliance, with normal calcium level(2.06 mmol/). Subsequently, the patient was given calcitriol pulse therapy(at a dose of 2μg for trice weekly) combined with low calcium dialysate(Ca2+, 1.25 mmol/l). Unfortunately, the PTH level bounced high up to 197.3 pmol/l dramatically. Since August 2017, the patient was constantly afflicted with the uncomfortable and irritating sensation in the legs urging him to walk or move his legs. Even worse, the patient had more complaints, such as loss of appetite, nausea, constipation, refractory hypertension, generalized weakness and sleep deprivation. Otherwise, he had an normal physical examination. Laboratory test revealed that serum albumin corrected calcium jumped up to 3.96 mmol/l and the alkaline phosphatase(ALP) level was 160u/l(normal range 45-125u/l), supporting the diagnosis of hypercalcemic crisis and tertiary HPT.
Moreover, several examinations were also completed to identify any possibilities. However, the patient had no bone pain or facture, and no abnormality was revealed in bone X-ray imaging. Besides, M protein and tumor markers were negative as well. Surprisingly, no abnormality was found in parathyroid ultrasound around neck. Given the threat of hypercalcemia crises, continuous renal replacement therapy(CRRT) with low calcium dialysate(Ca2+ 1.25 mmol/l) was applied instantly. Meanwhile, calcitriol pulse therapy was ceased while higher-dose cinacalcet(50 mg per day) was reused again. In addition, calcitonin was subcutaneously injected at a dose of 50u per day to lower the blood calcium, but poor response was achieved, and the serum albumin corrected calcium kept elevating to 3.77 mmol/l. Therefore, hormone therapy(intravenous injection of 40 mg methylprednisolone for 7 day, and oral administration of 20 mg prednisone until operation) was considered.
To our attention, the bone turnover makers, such as osteocalcin and I-type collagen prolongation peptide, had surpassed the upper normal limit(300 ng/ml and 1200 ng/ml, respectively), while the β-crosslaps was 5.96 ng/ml. In addition, the high bone turnover and remodeling rate, as well as the refractory HPT, had pointed to the presence of an ectopic parathyroid gland. Thus, the patient was further examined through computed tomography (CT). As expected, a contrast-enhanced neck CT scan had revealed a 2.5*1.9 cm mass in the upper region of anterior mediastinum, which had displayed nodular mixed density . More importantly, the Tc-99 m dual-phases parathyroid scan had detected a hyperfunctioning parathyroid gland in the same region. Consequently, it was concluded that the mass in the anterior mediastinum might be the ectopic parathyroid gland.
Despite of high anesthesia risk caused by hypocalcaemia, thoracic aortic calcification, and adherence to aortic arch, the mass was completely excised through video-assisted thoracoscopy . Biopsy was performed, and histopathological examination revealed a 2 cm well-encapsulated mass containing solid and cystic components. In addition, clear and transplant liquid could be observed inside the cyst, and a gray solid nodule had adhere to the wall. Microscope observation suggested that, the tumor was composed of the parathyroid gland chief cells, especially in the nodule.
Therefore, the calcium and PTH level had dropped stably within 10 days after surgery(2.12 mmol/l and 21.41 pmol/l, respectively), and they had been maintained for 3 months after surgery (2.30 mmol/l and 18.63 pmol/l, respectively). Besides, the phosphorus level(1.77 mmol/l) has dropped strikingly, while ALP bounced to 347u/l. The patient was then free from the restless legs syndrome and gastrointestinal distress. So far, he has been followed up for 16 months, and complications, including hungry bone syndrome, hypocalcemia, hemorrhage and infection, are not observed. On February 14th in 2019, the calcium, phosphorus, ALP and PTH were retested to be 2.42 mmol/l, 1.83 mmol/l, 70u/l and 13.77 pmol/l, respectively. Bone turnover had returned to normal level, since the levels of osteocalcin(121.3 ng/ml), I-type collagen prolongation peptide(213.5 ng/ml) and β-crosslaps (0.707 ng/ml) were reduced.