A 57-year-old Korean woman with a 10-year history of limping of the right leg due to the sequelae of neurocysticercosis, visited our outpatient clinic with complaints of progressive weakness in her right leg and numbness in her left leg. She reported that, although she was usually able to walk independently, the paralysis of her right leg had rapidly progressed over the previous month ago and she had been completely wheelchair-bound for the past month. She had no history of trauma, and she mentioned that the weakness of her right leg had progressed insidiously. She had been taking valproic acid since visiting the National Medical Center for seizures 30 years prior. She showed no definite side effects of this drug such as asthenia, tremor, dizziness, or drowsiness. At that time, NCC was suspected based on multiple calcified lesions in the left frontoparietal subcortical area on brain computed tomography (CT) ; however, she did not take anti-parasite medication because there was no viable cyst. She grew up in a rural area with rice fields and livestock consisting mainly of pigs. Although her family sometimes ate raw meat, the patient indicated that she had not enjoyed eating meat since childhood.
In the outpatient clinic, she was afebrile with stable vital signs. The patient was alert and exhibited no cognitive dysfunction. Her cognitive function was assessed using the Korean version of the Mini-Mental State Exam, and her score, higher than 24, was within the normal range. Neurological examination of the cranial nerves and upper extremities revealed no definite abnormalities. However, her right lower extremity exhibited severe (grade 0–1) weakness in all muscle groups with hyper-reflexia. In addition, her right lower extremity showed a decreased fine touch and vibration sensation. While the left lower extremity exhibited a normal motor grade, the patient reported decreased pain and temperature sensations on her left side below the T4 dermatome level. She was admitted immediately, and the medical team prepared for the possibility of emergency surgery while performing radiological and laboratory examinations. The next day, her right leg weakness had spontaneously improved to grade 3. Thereafter, her symptoms repeatedly increased and decreased during hospitalization.
Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a small ring-enhancing lesion in the right anterior aspect of her spinal cord at the level of T4, with extensive cord edema from T2 to upper T6 . Laboratory findings including leukocyte count, electrolytes, and tumor markers (including markers for tumors that metastasize easily to the spine, such as carcinoembryonic antigen, cancer antigen 15–3, squamous cell carcinoma antigen, and alpha fetoprotein) were normal. Serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for Taenia solium and Clonorchis sinensis antibodies were within the normal ranges. However, CSF analysis revealed increased leukocyte count (corrected count, 40/μL), which was lymphocyte dominant. In addition, the CSF was positive for aquaporin-4 antibody.
Inter-departmental discussions were conducted with neurology, radiology, and infectious diseases. Imaging findings in this patient did not reveal the typical scolex on MRI, and the aquaporin-4 antibody positivity could not exclude a diagnosis of ATM (especially neuromyelitis optica). The possibility of an intramedullary tumor also could not be excluded. Considering the ring-shaped lesion shown on MRI, her previous history of NCC, clinical presentation, and lymphocytic pleocytosis in the CSF, a spinal parasite infection (specifically NCC) was suspected for which she underwent an open biopsy.
The patient underwent surgery under general anesthesia in the prone position. The T3, T4, and T5 lamina were removed en bloc using an ultrasonic osteotome. When the dura was opened, the spinal cord exhibited no swelling or exophytic lesions and was essentially normal. Myelotomy along the posterior median sulcus revealed spiderweb-like structures and gliotic changes around the central canal but no definite scolex or tumorous lesions . Biopsy specimens were collected from the area suspected to be the enhancing nodule on preoperative MRI. After dural re-sealing, the laminar flap was secured using mini-plates. Histopathological examination revealed bluish ovoid foreign bodies, presumed to be parasite eggs, among glial tissues with the diffuse infiltration of mononuclear inflammatory cells . The 30–40-µm spherical eggs containing hook-like structures seemed compatible with the properties of eggs of the Taenia species .
After surgery, the patient exhibited immediate improvement in weakness to a grade 4 level and the tingling symptom in her left leg subsided. On postoperative MRI, the ring-enhancing lesion had disappeared, and the cord edema had somewhat improved. Postoperatively, intravenous dexamethasone 5 mg was administered four times a day at 6-h intervals (0.30 mg/kg/day) for a total of 4 days by reducing the dose by 5 mg per day. To reduce perilesional edema, oral antiparasitic drugs (albendazole [800 mg] once daily and praziquantel [1200 mg] four times daily) were administered for 14 days from the day after starting steroid administration. The patient was later referred for rehabilitation and was able to walk independently 6 months later.