A 15-year-old female, with height of 165 cm and predicted body weight (PBW) of 57 kg, fell from the sixth floor on January 9, 2023. She did not experience any loss of consciousness after falling injury, with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 14 (E4V5M5). Subsequently, she was promptly transferred to a local hospital where she received various treatments including intubation, blood transfusion, appendix repair, bilateral closed thoracic drainage, pelvic fracture external fixation, and traction of the right lower limb. Then she was transferred to our surgical intensive care unit (SICU) on January 12, 2023. The patient had a history of suspected depression. On admission, her general condition was as follows : temperature of 36.5℃; pulse rate of 132 beats/min; respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min; and blood pressure of 146/92 mmHg (on norepinephrine 0. 4ug/kg/min). She was in deep analgesia, sedation, and muscular relaxation. Both pupils were measured at 2 mm with dull light reflexes. The patient was admitted with mechanical ventilation using both assist-controlled ventilation (A/C) and volume-controlled ventilation (VC) modes with the following settings: tidal volume (VT) of 8.8 ml /kg of PBW; frequency of 14 times/min; fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 100%; positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 12cmH2O. The ratio of arterial oxygen partial pressure to fraction of inspired oxygen (P/F ratio) was 70.1 and peripheral oxygen saturation (SPO2) was 95%. She underwent a chest X-ray that showed multiple patchy shadows in both lungs with reduced transmittance . A chest computerized tomography (CT) scan indicated the presence of pulmonary contusion complicated with infection, and pleural effusion . The lung ultrasound indicated gravity-dependent distribution of pulmonary fluid . Based on the findings from the admission examination and previous medical records, an initial diagnosis of falling injury, systemic inflammatory response syndrome, severe acute respiratory distress syndrome, hemorrhagic shock, bilateral hemopneumothorax, and multiple organ dysfunction was established.
Initial therapy after admission was as follows: mechanical ventilation in A/C (VC) mode with VT of 7 ml/kg of PBW, frequency of 24 times/min, and FiO2 of 70%; fiberoptic bronchoscopy was performed to clear airway secretions; mesalamine (1.2ug/kg/min) for maintenance of circulation; fentanyl 0.5 mg (2.5ug/kg/h), midazolam 50 mg (0.1 mg/kg/h), and propofol 600 mg (1 mg/kg/h) for analgesia and sedation; vecuronium bromide 20 mg (2.1 ml/h) for muscle relaxant; polyene phosphatidylcholine 20 ml and ilaprazole sodium 10 mg once daily for stress-induced injury; piperacillin sodium and tazobactam sodium 4500 mg every 8 h for anti-infection; external fixation and traction for fractures. Restrictive fluid resuscitation was implemented with the target of mean arterial pressure (MAP) maintained at 70–80 mmHg and continuous gastrointestinal decompression with intra-abdominal pressure (IAP) below 20 mmHg.
Arterial blood gas analysis was repeated 8 h later and her P/F ratio was 95. FiO2 was then adjusted from 70 to 100%, while the rest of the parameters remained unchanged. We performed fiberoptic bronchoscopy several times and took serial arterial blood gas analysis. The patient’s PaO2 fluctuated at 70–90 mmHg, SPO2 fluctuated at 98–99% and P/F ratio was still less than 100. We considered that hypoxemia was associated with gravity-dependent atelectasis, so we performed lung recruitment for her. We took a stepwise increase in PEEP and gradually titrated PEEP to 20 cmH2O, however, her P/F ratio did not improve significantly. We did not further increase PEEP because of the high risk of pneumothorax. Prone positioning was contraindicated due to pelvic fracture and traction.
On day 2, the mesalamine was gradually discontinued as fluid resuscitation progressed. Continuous bedside electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring revealed that the heart rate fluctuated between 100 and 110 beats/min, systolic blood pressure between 90 and 110 mmHg, and diastolic blood pressure between 60 and 70 mmHg. SPO2 levels were lower compared to previous measurements and fluctuated between 92 and 96%. Intravenous furosemide at a dose of 20 mg was added at a rate of 2 ml/h to alleviate pulmonary fluid overload. The patient exhibited negative fluid balance following diuresis. Subsequent reevaluation of blood gas analysis demonstrated a P/F ratio of 85.5, without significant improvement in SPO2. Furosemide was discontinued due to elevated lactate levels.
Administration of vecuronium bromide and propofol was ceased. The ventilator mode was changed to APRV with initial parameter settings as follows: FiO2 100%; Phigh 27 cmH2O; Plow 5 cmH2O; release frequency of 18 cycles/min; and Tlow was adjusted to achieve termination of peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) equal to or more than 50% of PEFR. Following the transition to APRV mode, the mean airway pressure increased from 15 to 23 cmH2O, SPO2 gradually improved and reached 100%, and the P/F ratio was 350, indicating an amelioration of hypoxemia. FiO2 was then reduced to 50%, while the P/F ratio was 228.8. The patient’s sputum culture revealed the presence of carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii. Furthermore, the galactomannan (GM) test conducted on alveolar lavage fluid yielded a positive result, and bronchoscopy revealed minimal pseudomembrane adhering to the mucosa of the left main bronchus. Consequently, the antibiotic regimen was escalated with tigecycline 50 mg every 12 h, meropenem 500 mg every 8 h, and caspofungin 50 mg once daily.
No ventilator asynchrony occurred during APRV mode ventilation. From the third day of admission, a gradual weaning was implemented. The Phigh was reduced by 2 cmH2O, the FiO2 was decreased by 5%, and the release frequency was lowered from 18 to 12 cycles/min. We conducted serial blood gas analysis throughout this period during which the arterial oxygen partial pressure (PaO2) was maintained at 100–150 mmHg, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) at 30–40 mmHg and the P/F ratio at 250–350 . On day 12, when Phigh was reduced to 20 cmH2O and FiO2 decreased to 35%, she underwent a spontaneous breathing test (SBT) and successfully passed. Subsequently, she was extubated followed by noninvasive ventilation in Spontaneous/Timed (S/T) mode with FiO2 set at 30%, inspiratory positive airway pressure (IPAP) at 14 cmH2O, and expiratory positive airway pressure (EPAP) at 6 cmH2O. The following P/F ratio was 377.66. She was treated with a high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) the day after extubation.
During the patient’s hospitalization, we performed daily suction of airway secretions and controlled fluid intake and output . With the treatments of multiple organ support and protection, control of stress and inflammation as well as anti-infection, the patient’s condition gradually improved. Subsequent chest X-rays and CT scans revealed a progressive improvement in lung imaging and gradual resolution of pulmonary infection . After instituting APRV, there was no episode of air leak. On day 7, the intercostal drainage tubes were removed. On day 17, HFNC was replaced with the nasal catheter. She was transferred from the SICU to the Trauma Medicine Center later for further treatment. She underwent internal fixation of right femoral fracture and pelvis fracture. After 42 days of hospitalization, she was discharged from the hospital and maintained regular follow-up at our outpatient clinic.