The case of a 5-year-old male child that lives with his mother (28 years), father (36
years), and a younger brother is reported. The daycare center, which the child attends
full time, has made constant complaints since he started attending it due to his
aggressive and violent behavior.
Initially, the problems were restricted to constant verbalization about the wish to die
and the intent to kill himself and his classmates. Later, he began to display attitudes
such as spitting at and kicking teachers and classmates; isolating himself from the
other children and talking to himself; throwing feces at the other children; hiding
knives in his backpack ("I'll take it to kill," the boy said to his mother); and
physically threatening another child by putting a knife to their neck during lunch at
school.
The daycare center sought help at the Basic Health Unit of the area where it is located,
believing it to be a pathological condition. The HC chose to include the child and his
mother in a group of parents and children with learning problems, a solution that proved
to be ineffective, as the child's behavior persisted. The team then chose to use
medications to treat him. The medical record contained two consultations with a
psychiatrist, who gave a diagnosis of behavioral disorder and depressive disorder. He
was initially treated with sertraline 25mg, later replaced by risperidone 0.5 mg, but
side effects were observed, and the mother chose to discontinue the medication use.
The problem was reported to the UNICAMP's team of students due to the complexity of the
case, the strained relationship between the daycare center team and the HC, and the
failure of the applied therapeutic proposals; in spite of conversations, inclusion in
groups, psychological counseling, and use of psychiatric medications, the child's
behavior, considered by the teams as a pathological issue, persisted.
The group used tools such as drawings as a projective resource for the child approach
and family genogram after interviews with the mother. The decision to focus the
discussions with the daycare center and the HC on the problematization of the situation,
instead of discussing the prescriptions, showed to be a more effective approach to
include teams in the dialogue and get them involved in the case. In addition to
interviews with the different individuals involved and visits to the family and daycare
center to increase the understanding of the case, the concept of circle of security was
implemented during meetings with the teams, enabling them to apply this concept as a
strategy for the intersectorial care of the child.