A 63-year-old Caucasian man presented to his primary care physician with a 6-month history of intermittent right anterior neck and intraoral pain. The patient noted a tongue mass, which had grown substantially over the last several months. The mass made eating difficult at times and resulted in one episode of mild oral bleeding that resolved spontaneously. He was referred to our institution's department of otolaryngology/head and neck surgery for further evaluation.
The patient's past medical history is significant for RCC of the right kidney diagnosed 4 years prior and treated with right radical nephrectomy. An appropriate work-up at that time included a CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis and liver functions tests, all of which were negative for metastatic disease. He did not follow-up with his urologist as recommended after the surgery.
The physical exam revealed an erythematous, indurated 3 cm mass in the right anterior floor of mouth region that was tender to palpation. It was not fixed to the mandible and appeared vascular. The neck exam was positive for a 3 cm firm mass in the right thyroid lobe with no pathologic lymphadenopathy otherwise.
Biopsy of his anterior floor of mouth lesion was notable for persistent bleeding and revealed clear cell carcinoma, consistent with the patient's previous history of renal cell cancer . Histologic evaluation revealed the presence of a solid nest of epithelial cells with clear cytoplasm and small, round hyperchromatic nuclei . A rich vascular network was also noted. Immunoperoxidase testing was positive for CD10 and vimentin and negative for gross cystic disease fluid protein (GCDFP), S-100, HMB-45, muscle-specific antigen, and desmin, supporting the diagnosis of metastatic RCC .
Original surgical, pathology and postoperative records were eventually obtained revealing the discovery of suspicious lymph nodes near the renal hilum during his original nephrectomy. The resected lymph nodes were found to harbor metastatic carcinoma and the patient was referred to a medical oncologist at that time to discuss additional therapeutic options. Unfortunately, he did not seek further care for his metastatic RCC. After receiving the news of his biopsy results in our clinic, the patient decided to return to his original institution for further care and died of metastatic disease within several months.