D.M., a 72-year-old man, was admitted to our surgical unit on June 2014 with a radiological diagnosis of a suspected malignant lesion of the liver. In the clinical history: arterial hypertension, chronic renal failure and gout. He was obese (BMI 30) with a history of chronic alcoholic abuse. Among the surgical antecedents, a subtotal gastrectomy for peptic ulcer and a complex surgery for left renal cancer (left nephrectomy, distal spleno-pancreatectomy and reno-caval thrombectomy) in 1992, at the pathological examination, it revealed to be a pT3N0 well-differentiated renal adenocarcinoma, with neoplastic caval thrombosis.
After the surgery, he attended a regular follow-up, that was negative till April 2011, when the abdominal CT revealed the presence of a solid focal lesion in the eighth liver segment (size 2.3 cm) characterized by poor vascularization and fatty component; alpha-fetoprotein was negative. According to CT, the hepatic lesion was classified as an indeterminate nodule . MRI was not conclusive regarding the nature of the lesion and it was not typical neither for a hemangioma nor for metastasis . Also, positron emission tomography (PET) was negative for suspected malignant lesion of the liver, even if it has a low reliability in excluding a metastatic renal cancer. In consideration of the patient’s neoplastic history, an US-guided liver biopsy was then performed. The histological report was negative for neoplastic cells but a severe microvesicular steatosis was discovered, expression of alcoholic damage, together with an activation of Kupffer cells and a focal accumulation of histiocytis inside a granulomatous-like lesion, with enlarged cytoplasm containing crystals. At immunohistochemistry, vimentin was positive inside the histiocytis . So, at the end of the diagnostic phase, no suspect arose from the instrumental evaluation and the diagnosis was urate tophus of the liver. The patient continued the treatment of hyperuricemia based on oral allopurinol.
Owing to the risk of both primary and metastatic liver cancer, the patient was addressed to an instrumental follow-up each 6 months. After a first negative control, a progressive increase in the size of the hepatic lesion was noted (5.4 cm on October 2013). We took charge of the patient for the first time on May 2014. At this time, MRI showed exactly in the same area previously affected by the gouty lesion a solid nodule of 5.4 cm in size, characterized by irregular structure and rich in adipose tissue, suggestive for hepatocellular carcinoma with mosaic pattern; no evident cleavage was noted between the nodule and the middle and right hepatic veins . The patient was therefore submitted to CT-guided percutaneous biopsy. A macro- and microvesicular steatosis was noted without clear atypical components apart from scarce multinucleate cells; the reduction of the glycogen amount together with the straight reduction in the reticulin pattern suggested a nodule of adenomatous hyperplasia with incipient neoplastic transformation.
The patient was evaluated for surgery: he was classified as Child score A5 and MELD score 10. The viral hepatitis markers were negative. Due to the size (> 5 cm) and the site (adhesion to two suprahepatic veins) of the nodule, only surgery was considered as a radical approach. We tested the liver function and we found out a liver remnant volume after right hepatectomy of 20% with indocyanine green test (ICG) at 15′ of 16%). For these reasons, we preferred a conservative approach, also considering the good biological features of the lesion (expansive nodule with a complete capsule and favourable grading).
On June 4, 2014, we performed the resection of the VIII and the V hepatic segment; it was possible to spare both the hepatic veins . The post-operative course was characterized on day 3 by transient respiratory failure associated to pneumonia that required non-invasive respiratory support with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP); after 24 h, the support was stopped as the physiological respiratory function was restored. The following post-operative course was uneventful.
The histological examination of surgical specimen confirmed the presence of encapsulated hepatocellular carcinoma with favourable grading. The non-neoplastic hepatic parenchyma was characterized by 10% of steatosis without evidence of alcoholic cirrhosis. The suspected satellite nodules observed at the macroscopic examination of the specimen just at the border of the lesion revealed to be necrotic tissue including many needle-shaped structures typical for gouty tophi .
The patient has been followed up by our periodic checks since today and he is free from neoplastic disease; otherwise, no other systemic localization of tophi was discovered.