A 30-year-old female patient was referred to a neurology clinic for refractory headache since the age of 16 consisting of a burning sensation over the periorbital region extending posteriorly across the scalp. The pain was exclusively left sided with sharp demarcation at the midline, and which she described as ‘splitting her head down the middle’. Her headache was constant but punctuated by severe exacerbations lasting from days to weeks with an average frequency of four exacerbations per month. There was no light or sound sensitivity, but she reported a ‘droopy’ left eyelid, periorbital swelling and rhinorrhoea during exacerbations. The patient provided written informed consent to publish her case.
The patient’s headaches did not respond to acute therapy with paracetamol, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (including ibuprofen up to 800 mg daily and celecoxib 400 mg daily) or aspirin 800 mg. She used regular propranolol 20 mg two times per day over many years for migraine prophylaxis, which was ineffective. The headaches profoundly disrupted the patient’s quality of life, and she was unemployed at the time of review. She lived in a regional setting with limited specialist access and had never previously seen a neurologist.
The patient had no other medical history and her only regular medication was propranolol. Her mother suffered from migraine without aura, but no first-degree relatives experienced headaches with similar characteristics to the patient. Cranial nerve, funduscopy and upper and lower limb neurological examinations were normal. An MRI of the brain and angiogram did not demonstrate any cerebral or vascular abnormalities. After researching alternative treatment options for migraine, the patient underwent Daith piercing of the left ear 12 months before neurology review. She noticed a rapid and dramatic symptom improvement: her severe exacerbations resolved and her background pain improved to the extent that she did not require analgesia for a 2-month period. Due to this therapeutic response, the patient then elected to undergo Daith piercing of the right ear, which provided no symptom benefit.
Based on the clinical characteristics, the patient was commenced on an up-titrating dose of indomethacin for treatment of HC. At a dose of 50 mg three times per day, she experienced complete resolution of headache approximately 30 min after her third dose. Medication withdrawal several days later led to a recrudescence of her symptoms. She experimented with her indomethacin regimen and found that maintaining a daily dose of 25–50 mg reliably prevented headache recurrence. After approximately 1 month of therapy, she developed light headedness, anxiety and a distressing sensation of depersonalisation that resolved after ceasing indomethacin. She trialled topiramate 50 mg daily, which was self-ceased after 2 months due to lack of perceived benefit, and then underwent left-sided greater occipital nerve (GON) block. She reported a partial response to GON block over the following month with persistent background pain but only two mild exacerbations lasting under 24 hours, after which her headaches returned to their previous frequency and severity.