A 52-year-old female presented with a sudden onset of right-sided numbness and weakness that was accompanied by a left temporal cluster-like headache. No fever or prodromal infection was found at disease onset.
The family and personal history was unremarkable.
On physical examination, the height and weight of the patient were 154 cm and 56 kg, respectively. Vital signs were normal, as were heart, lung and abdominal exami-nations. Neurological examination showed intact mental status, with normal speech and comprehension. Mild 4/5 right-sided hemiparesis was present with normal tone in both the arm and leg, though no other focal neurological deficits were found. After admission, she complained of discomfort and tingling in the right leg, after which a generalized tonic-clonic seizure for 3 min occurred before it was stopped by a bolus of intravenous diazepam.
Laboratory tests, including D-dimer, lactic acid, and serum autoantibody levels, as well as thyroid function and tumor markers indicated no apparent abnormalities. Glucose tolerance and lactic acid movement tolerance tests were normal. A lumbar puncture was performed, and her open intracranial pressure was 180 mm H2O. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) testing showed that cell counts and protein, glucose, chloride, monoclonal antibody, adenosine deaminase, and lactate dehydrogenas levels were within normal ranges.
MRI demonstrated a lamellar left parietal lobe lesion predominantly involving the cortex, with hyperintensity on both diffusion-weighted imaging and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery . The apparent diffusion coefficient map revealed a preserved, isointense signal. No abnormalities were found by susceptibility weighted imaging or magnetic resonance angiography and venography . Due to the stroke-like onset pattern and MRI features, further thrombophilia screening was performed and showed decreased protein S activity. A diagnosis of cortical venous thrombosis was first proposed. Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes (MELAS) was also considered but temporarily excluded because of the incomplete manifestation and lack of genetic evidence. Anticoagulation therapy was initiated, and follow-up was performed to maintain the international normalized ratio (INR) within the target range.
Two months later, the patient was readmitted for subacute cognitive impairment. She was unable to identify and communicate with family members; she also had difficulty understanding questions or instructions and instead responded by repeating the word "nothing". During hospitalization, a secondary generalized seizure occurred, initially with eyes gazing to the right and then convulsion developing, which lasted for approximately 10 s before self-alleviation. Neurological examination suggested transcortical sensory aphasia, with fully covered limb strength. Blood tests and CSF examination were normal; INR was 2.21. On repeated MRI, new lesions were identified in the left temporal lobe and were also detected 10 days later in the right temporal lobe on radiological follow-up . Although the MRI signal characteristics are consistent with the initial findings, the original lesion in the left parietal lobe had been alleviated, with cortical atrophy. We further conducted magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), which revealed markedly elevated lactate (Lac) concentrations in the regions of interest in the left temporal lesion . Mitochondrial encephalopathy was diagnosed, and genetic testing using peripheral blood was performed. However, DNA testing for frequent MELAS and myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers syndrome mutations were negative. Because of the lack of symptoms of muscle weakness or pain, the patient declined our suggestion of performing a muscle biopsy. Anticoagulation therapy was terminated, and levetiracetam (1000 mg/d) was administered.
At 3 mo after her second admission, the patient was experiencing involuntary movement in her left limbs, with repetitive flexion/extension. An MRI scan showed a hyperintense signal abnormality in the right parietal lobe . Brachial biceps biopsy was performed. Histopathology revealed no abnormalities, and no necrotic or regenerating fibers were observed; ragged-red fibers and intense succinate dehydrogenase activity were not detected. Nonetheless, complete sequencing of mitochondrial DNA samples extracted from the biopsied muscle revealed a heteroplasmic m.10158T>C mutation, with a heteroplasmy level of 69.6%, in the mitochondrial complex I subunit gene MT-ND3. In contrast, this mutation was not found in her peripheral blood cells.