The patient is a 61-year-old male with a pertinent past medical history of diabetes mellitus who initially presented to our ophthalmology clinic with sudden vision loss in the left eye for four days. At initial visit, his best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/25 in the right eye and count fingers (CF) at 1 foot in the left eye; pupils were reactive without evidence of an afferent pupillary defect. IOP was 28mmHg in the right eye and 34mmHg in the left eye. His anterior segment examination was normal in both eyes; there was no evidence of neovascularization of the iris. Dilated funduscopic examination revealed a cup to disc ratio of 0.7 in the right eye, with normal macula, vessels and periphery. Left eye dilated examination revealed a cup to disc ratio of 0.5, no evidence of neovascularization of the disc, but there was macular edema, scattered intraretinal hemorrhages in the macula and periphery with tortuosity of the retinal vessels. He was diagnosed with a central retinal vein occlusion and ocular hypertension. He was treated with an intravitreal injection of bevacizumab and started on dorzolamide-timolol in both eyes for his elevated IOP.
At 1-week follow-up, his vision was stable in the right eye and had improved to CF at 5 feet in the left eye. IOP was 16mmHg and 12mmHg in the right and left eye, respectively. His exam was otherwise stable. He was lost to follow-up for 3 months, at which time he presented with left eye pain. At that visit, his BCVA was 20/30 in the right eye, CF at 2 feet in the left eye. IOP was 23mmHg and 42mmHg in the right and left eye, respectively. Anterior segment examination was normal in the right eye. In the left eye, there was microcystic edema of the cornea and a narrow anterior chamber but no evidence of neovascularization of the iris or angle. Gonioscopy revealed no angle structures visible in 270 degrees of the angle bilaterally. Dilated examination was stable in the right eye. Dilated examination of the left eye was also stable with a cup to disc ratio of 0.5 and scattered intraretinal hemorrhages in the macula and periphery and tortuous retinal vasculature. Given the bilateral gonioscopy findings, it was thought that the elevated pressure was potentially secondary to angle closure and a laser peripheral iridotomy (LPI) was attempted in the left eye. IOP after LPI was 28mmHg in the left eye. At 1 week follow-up, the patient was noted to have an IOP of 56mmHg in the left eye with neovascularization of both the iris and angle. An anterior chamber paracentesis and intravitreal bevacizumab injection were performed and the patient was started on oral acetazolamide extended release 500 mg twice daily. After discussion of the risks and benefits, the patient was consented for a combined phacoemulsification with AGV implantation in the left eye. Given the patient’s elevated IOP, evidence of neovascularization and optic nerve cupping, it was felt phacoemulsification alone would not obtain an acceptable IOP.
Intraoperatively, the patient was noted to have extensive posterior synechiae which were lysed with a Kuglen hook and a Malyugin ring (Beye, Wayne, PA) was used for iris expansion due to intraoperative floppy iris syndrome. Nuclear disassembly was unremarkable, and an intraocular lens was placed in the capsular bag. At the conclusion of the phacoemulsification, the main wound was closed with a 10 − 0 nylon suture. AGV placement was then performed in our standard fashion. A traction suture was placed for exposure, followed by a superotemporal conjunctival peritomy and dissection. The superior and lateral rectus muscles were isolated and the plate was sutured 8mm posterior to the limbus and secured using 8 − 0 nylon sutures. The tube was trimmed with a posterior bevel and placed in the ciliary sulcus with the edge of the lumen visible at the pupil margin intraoperatively. Placement of the tube lumen in front of the intraocular lens was confirmed using an anterior chamber cannula to manipulate the lumen. The tube was sutured to the sclera with a 7 − 0 Vicryl suture (Ethicon Inc, Somerville, NJ) and covered with Tutoplast (Katena Products, Inc, Parsippany, NJ) which was secured to the globe with Tisseel fibrin glue (Baxter International Inc., Deerfield, IL). The conjunctiva was reapproximated and secured with Tisseel glue and 8 − 0 Vicryl sutures (Ethicon Inc., Somerville, NJ). Viscoelastic was irrigated from the anterior chamber. The paracentesis wound and conjunctiva were checked and noted to be watertight at the end of the case. The patient was patched and shielded, instructed to stop oral acetazolamide and to follow-up the next day.
On post-operative day 1, the patient was noted to have stable CF vision in the left eye with an IOP of 45mmHg. Anterior segment examination revealed a deep anterior chamber with clotted blood noted inferotemporally and superotemporally. The conjunctiva over the AGV plate was injected with subconjunctival hemorrhage but was Seidel negative. It was presumed that the lumen of the tube was occluded with either viscoelastic or clotted blood; however, the patient dilated poorly and the lumen of the tube could not be visualized. The patient was restarted on maximum topical medical therapy and asked to follow-up the following day. The patient followed-up three days later, at which point his IOP remained elevated at 50mmHg, although, there was significant medication confusion and patient was admittedly non-adherent. Again, dilation was attempted but did not allow for a view of the tube lumen. The patient was restarted on his IOP lowering drops as well as atropine eye drops. At follow-up the next day, the patient’s IOP remained elevated to 45mmHg. After dilation, the tube lumen was visible at the edge of the pupillary border. The tube was embedded in the lens capsule and the lumen of the tube was noted to be located posterior to and was occluded by the anterior capsule . After discussion with patient, consent was obtained for Nd:YAG anterior capsulotomy which was performed with the following parameters: 1.6 mJ, 12 shots. During capsulotomy, the lumen obstruction was relieved and flow of aqueous was visible within the tube. After Nd:YAG capsulotomy of the anterior capsule, the tube lumen was free of obstruction and there was an immediate IOP reduction to 6mmHg . At one-week follow-up after Nd:YAG capsulotomy, IOP remained well controlled at 12mmHg and visual acuity was stable.