A 51-year-old Iranian female, with a history of advanced cervical cancer receiving neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy was referred and admitted to our department. She had no positive family history and any relevant genetic information, and psychosocial history. She did not used any specific drug. After the treatment course, the involvement of her uterus was presented. After placing a nephrostomy, she underwent total pelvic exenteration by a multidisciplinary team of surgeons at Firoozgar Hospital, a tertiary care referral hospital of Iran University of Medical Sciences, because of the recurrence of the cervical cancer.
After thorough physical examination, an Abdominal pelvic CT scan was performed which revealed a mass measuring 40 ∗ 74 ∗ 132 mm which originated from the cervix and invaded to the vagina, pelvic wall, rectum, ureter, bladder and piriformis muscle.
The patient underwent a deep sedation with … and …, according to the hospital guidelines. Supine position was adopted. Following a unanimous decision made by the multidisciplinary team, total abdominal hysterectomy bilateral salpingo oophorectomy, pelvic lymphadenectomy, resection of the vagina, rectum, anus, bladder, and urethra were performed. After the procedure and rigorous homeostasis, a bakri balloon as a visceral replacement for occupying pelvic cavity was placed. The Bakri balloon was inserted through the laparotomy incision and was placed inside the pelvic cavity.The balloon was filled with sterile saline solution (maximum capacity 500 mL) to settle in the space, then the balloon was inflated gradually with sterile normal saline solution up to the minimal volume that effectively fill the cavity. Continuous traction was used by the connection of the balloon shaft to a 1-Liter intravenous fluid bag which was hanged from the end of the bed as a mechanical hemostatic agent too. Surgery last about 3 h and was performed by a fully trained gynecologic oncologist with the help of surgical oncologist and an expert urologist .
The patient stayed in intensive care unit in the first day after the surgery and was discharged 5 days after the operation. The Bakri balloon was removed through the vagina 5 days after her surgery.
The patient received radiation for 3 months after her surgery, consisted of 5000 cGy. She was evaluated every month. The patient has been doing well in the absence of recurrence of the disease or any adverse effects during 6 months follow up after her surgery.
This case was reported according to Updating Consensus Surgical CAse REport (SCARE) Guidelines .