A 26 year old gentleman presented to our out-patient clinic at Al-Babtain Center for burns and plastic surgery with a 16 month history of a rapidly growing mass in the left gluteal region. Although this mass was interfering significantly with his daily normal activities, walking, anal hygiene and even with defecation, the patient did not search for treatment until that date when it became unbearable. Clinical examination revealed a huge well defined, polypoidal, cutaneous, fleshy mass of about 59 cm × 39 cm × 19 cm occupying most of the left gluteal and perianal area . The lesion had a narrower pedicle of about 20 cm × 30 cm. firmly attached to the underlying subcutaneous tissues. There were areas of peripheral necrosis associated with multiple patches of ulceration and foul odor. No pulsations or clinical thrill were identified. The systemic clinical examination was within normal limits. Hematological and biochemical work-up including CBC, renal function, liver function and coagulation profile all showed normal results.
Contrast enhanced MRI showed a huge irregular lobulated mass at the anal region extending outwards and inferiorly preserving the anal canal. The mass was mainly of fatty signal intensity with evidence of solid component that showed moderate enhancement suggestive of liposarcoma . Incisional biopsy was performed to establish a tissue diagnosis that primarily revealed histological features of lipofibroma of benign nature. Because of the huge size and the rapid growth of the lesion and the possibility of missing the diagnosis with our incisional biopsy; the decision was taken to completely excise the lesion with 1 cm free margin down to the sub-fascial plane above the gluteal muscles. The excised specimen weighed 2615 grams with subsequent surgical defect about 22 cm × 27 cm which was reconstructed with a split thickness skin graft .
Surprisingly, the final pathology described yellow to white firm serial section with occasional necrotic foci. Histological sections showed variable sized lobules separated by fibrous septa. The lobules were composed of relatively mature adipocytic proliferation with significant variation in cell size, with occasional atypical lipoblasts exhibiting evidence of nuclear atypia and hyperchromasia. Hyperchromatic stromal cells were also, identified in the thickened fibrous bands. Monovacuolated and multivacuolated lipoblasts as well mononuclear chronic inflammatory elements were frequently seen . Surface cutaneous tiny ulcerations were noticed and were partially replaced by inflammatory granulation tissue. Surgical clearance was adequate.
Post-operative CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis with oral and IV contrast were done as part of the metastatic workup and showed no abnormalities.
The case was discussed in the tumor board meeting and the decision was made to achieve an adequate loco-regional control by wide local excise. The operation was done in a left lateral decubitus position under general anesthesia with oro-tracheal intubation. Total excision of the lesion was done with a 2 cm free margin down to a deep sub-facial plane exposing the gluteal maximus muscle which was found to be free of the disease. The resultant soft tissue defect was covered with a split thickness skin graft taken from the left thigh. Part of the graft was lost because of a localized pseudomonas infection which healed completely with daily wound care and without surgical intervention. The final histopathology diagnosis was well-differentiated and well defined completely excised lipoma-like liposarcoma, therefore adjuvant radiotherapy was not indicated. The patient was followed for about 16 months showing no evidence of recurrence.