Forty eight-year old female patient was referred for root canal retreatment of the mandibular left second molar with periapical lesion. During anamnesis, patient complained of pain on mastication. The tooth was a pillar of a three-element bridge and did not respond to sensitivity tests. Periodontal probing was considered normal and radiographic examination revealed a small radiolucent area at the periapical region of the tooth . The treatment plan comprised of crown and metallic post removal and retreatment of the root canals of the second molar. During post removal, iatrogenic perforation of the mesial face of the distal root occurred .
Rubber dam isolation of the tooth was performed and the root perforation was assessed and treated under high magnification microscope (Carl Zeiss®, Oberkochen, Germany). Bleeding was controlled with copious irrigation with 1% sodium hypochlorite and application of hemostatic agent (ViscoStat®, Ultradent, Utah, USA) for 2 minutes .
The perforation was sealed with MTA-sterile saline paste (ProRoot MTA, Dental Tulsa; Dentsply®, DeTrey Konstanz, Germany) mixed in a 3:1 proportion. The paste was applied with a thin instrument (IPC-L, Cosmedent®, Chicago, USA) and adapted with a microbrush applicator moistened in distilled wa. The tooth was filled with a temporary restoration material (Cavit-G®, 3M ESPE, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA).
In a second appointment, after seven days, the root canal filling was removed with eucalyptol-based solvent, Gates-Glidden burs (Dentsply Maillefer®, Ballaigues, Switzerland) and K-files (Dentsply Maillefer®, Ballaigues, Switzerland). The working length was determined by using an apical locator (Root ZX, J. Morita®, Kyoto, Japan) and confirmed by periapical radiography root canal length measurements that also showed MTA in the drilling region .
All canals were instrumented using crown-down technique with Gates-Glidden drills #2 and #3 in the preparation of coronal and medium third and #30 and #35 files for the final preparation of the mesial and distal canals, respectively. The procedure was performed with copious irrigation with 1% sodium hypochlorite and ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid (EDTA®, Formula e Ação, São Paulo, SP, Brazil). The canals were dried with sterile paper points and obturated with gutta-percha points and AH 26® (Dentsply, DeTrey Konstanz, Germany) sealer using the lateral condensation technique . Tooth was restored using an intracanal post and metal-ceramic crown. The patient returned after three days reporting no pain.
After 6 months, the tooth remained asymptomatic. Clinical examination showed absence of pain, no response to sensitivity tests and normal periodontal probing. After three, seven and ten year, the tooth remained asymptomatic and in function. Periapical radiographies revealed absence of radiolucent area at the region of perforation and the periapices during follow-up appointments . Through the examination of Cone Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT) scans, absence of radiolucency at the region of perforation and periapices was confirmed .