An 18-year-old Japanese woman complaining of nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and diarrhea was admitted to our hospital on April 23, 2008. At the age of 12, she was diagnosed with SLE based on symptoms of malar rash, discoid rash, photosensitivity, leukopenia, and a high titer of anti-nuclear antibody. She had episodes of rash, abdominal pain and hypocomplementemia. She was treated with corticosteroid and other immunosuppressants (mizoribine or cyclosporine), but these proved inadequate in controlling her SLE activities. At the age of 16, she developed lupus nephritis (World Health Organization class II). One year prior to the current admission, she presented with fever, abdominal pain and diarrhea, and a diagnosis of lupus enteritis was made. She was treated with high-dose corticosteroid including pulse methylprednisolone and with monthly intravenous cyclophosphamide (500 mg per month). Although she recovered rapidly, her serum level of complement decreased as the prednisolone was tapered to 23 mg per day.
From April 20, 2008, our patient had gastrointestinal symptoms, including watery diarrhea and abdominal pain. On admission, she was not pregnant, had a clear consciousness, and had a body temperature of 36.7°C, pulse rate of 84 beats/min, and blood pressure of 108/74 mmHg. A malar rash was also found conspicuously. Her chest and cardiovascular examination revealed no abnormalities. She showed a generalized rigidity of the abdomen with rebound tenderness and no bowel sound. Her lower extremities had no pitting edema. Meanwhile, her laboratory examination revealed leukocytosis, elevated lactate dehydrogenase and D-dimer levels, and low complement activity . Results of her anti-dsDNA antibody, anti-cardiolipin antibody, lupus anticoagulant, anti-beta2-glycoprotein I antibody, proteinase-3-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, myeloperoxidase-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody tests were all negative. Her electrocardiographic examination showed a regular sinus rhythm. Her chest X-ray showed neither abnormal shadow nor pleural effusion. An X-ray film of her abdomen revealed distention of her small bowel and multiple fluid levels, but no free air beneath her diaphragm was found. Her ultrasonography revealed the presence of ascites, dilated bowel, diffuse bowel wall thickening, and submucosal edema . Computed tomography (CT) scans of her abdomen revealed ascites, distension of the bowel, diffuse bowel wall thickening (maximum of 8.4 mm), abnormal bowel wall enhancement, and mesenteric vessels with comb-like appearance, but pancreatic enlargement, hydronephrosis, and cystitis were not observed .
Our patient's systemic lupus erythematosus disease activity index (SLEDAI) score was 4. She received intravenous hyperalimentation and was treated with prednisolone (1.5 mg/kg/day) and cefmetazole sodium (2 g/day). Her nausea, diarrhea and abdominal pain subsided within a few days. Nine days after admission, her intestinal gas disappeared. However, her serum amylase and lipase levels were elevated in the absence of abdominal pain and her serum complement level decreased further (lowest C3, 32 mg/dl; C4, 3.1 mg/dl; CH50, <10 U/ml). As cyclophosphamide could not prevent the recurrence of her disease, we then adopted tacrolimus as an immunosuppressant. After administering tacrolimus, her serum amylase, lipase and complement levels gradually improved to within the normal range. No recurrence has yet been observed as of February 2009 despite a tapering of her prednisolone dose. Our patient is currently receiving daily doses prednisolone and tacrolimus at 18 mg and 3 mg, respectively. Her complement levels are as follows: C3, 61 mg/dl; C4, 7.3 mg/dl; CH50, 25.7 U/ml.