A 54-year-old male had the left proptosis pointed out on his regular health checkup. Subsequent computed tomography showed tumor in the left orbit. He was referred to our hospital for further evaluation. Physical examination was unremarkable except for the left proptosis with normal visual acuity (20/320 oculus dexter and 20/320 oculus sinister) and field. He had no diplopia, nystagmus, or stigmata of neurofibromatosis. Computed tomography showed an apparent proptosis of the left eye . Magnetic resonance imaging revealed well-demarcated tumor of 43 mm compressing the optic nerve medially [ and ]. Digital subtraction angiogram showed no apparent tumor blush or abnormal vessels. However, VasoCT showed some feeders from the ophthalmic artery, which is coursing around the anterior pole of the tumor . The differential diagnosis included cavernous hemangioma, schwannoma, and meningioma. Considering the tumor size and proptosis, we decided to perform surgical resection for definite diagnosis and to prevent visual dysfunction.
We administered general endotracheal anesthesia and placed lumbar drain. We positioned the patient supine with the head turned 20° to the right and fixed in Mayfield head holder. A curvilinear skin incision was made from just anterior to the tragus to the forehead behind the hairline. Skin flap and the temporalis muscle were reflected in two layers and frontotemporal craniotomy was done. Orbital bar was removed with bone saw lateral to the supraorbital foramen. The greater wing of the sphenoid was rongeured off until temporal dura was exposed. The lesser wing of the sphenoid was rongeured off toward sphenoid ridge until meningo-orbital band was exposed. The superior and lateral wall of the orbit was rongeured off to expose the periorbita. We incised the periorbita in between the superior and lateral rectus muscles and identified the tumor [ and ]. The tumor was grayish, firm, and the vascularity was mild. Internal decompression using cavitron ultrasound surgical aspirator was performed followed by the tumor dissection from the adjacent tissue and resection in a piecemeal fashion. The optic nerve was identified medially displaced near the orbital apex . After resection, we closed the wound in layers. Estimated blood loss was minimal.
Histology showed loosely proliferating spindle tumor cells (neurofibromatosis [NF] component) and nuclear palisading tumor cells (schwannomatous component). No clear border between the two components was observed. On immunohistochemical analysis, S100 protein was slightly and strongly positive in NF and schwannomatous component, respectively. Neurofilament staining showed axonal filament in NF component . Epithelial membrane antigen was negative. Ki67 was 1.2% in hot spots. The histopathological diagnosis of HNST, the WHO Grade I was made.
His postoperative course was uneventful except for abducens nerve palsy and ptosis. The postoperative imaging study showed completely improved proptosis and substantially reduced tumor as well as decompression of the optic nerve . He was discharged at a modified Rankin Scale of 1. His abducens nerve palsy and ptosis recovered completely 4 months after surgery.