A 32-year-old man with palpitations and exertional dyspnoea [New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III] for 2 years was referred to our centre. He had a family history of HCM. His previous medical history included cured tuberculous for 13 years and hypertension (highest to 167/108 mmHg) for 1 month. The patient had a 3/6 ejection murmur which was aggravated by the Valsalva manoeuver while the respiratory physical examination was normal. The 24 h ambulatory electrocardiography showed paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, and transthoracic echocardiogram showed an interventricular septum thickness of 18 mm, a resting left ventricular outflow tract gradient of 60 mmHg, and moderate mitral regurgitation with signs of systolic anterior motion of the mitral leaflet . Cardiac troponin I (cTnI) was within a normal range (cTnI: 8.08 ng/L). The patient was treated with metoprolol for 8 months before referral, and his heart rate was maintained at ∼60 b.p.m. The symptoms were not relieved by medical therapy. The coronary intervention team decided to conduct PTSMA based on the severe symptoms, high left ventricular outflow tract gradient, ineffective medical therapy, and patient’s preference.
Coronary angiography (CAG) showed no obvious coronary stenosis, and no obvious epicardial coronary artery compression was noted (see , and ). According to the CAG, we selected the first septal branch to perform PTSMA. The gradient was reduced to 14 mmHg immediately after operation.
The results of 24 h ambulatory electrocardiography after operation showed sinus rhythm, occasional atrial premature beats, frequent accelerated ventricular escape beats, and ST-T changes. The patient was monitored in intensive care and was discharged 12 days after the procedure with improved symptoms. The patient took metoprolol 166.25 mg daily and amlodipine 5 mg daily at discharge.
Two months after the procedure, the initial symptoms had worsened, and typical angina on exertion occurred. A transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated an interventricular septum thickness of 13 mm, and a left ventricular outflow tract gradient of 27 mmHg . Subsequently, CAG was performed owing to the new onset angina and inconsistency in symptoms and echocardiographic findings. Coronary angiography showed no obvious stenosis of the coronary arteries, but luminal compression of ∼90% was noted during cardiac systole in the middle part of the left anterior descending artery (see , and ). Coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA) was performed to clarify the reason for the luminal compression, and the results showed a MB in the middle part of the left anterior descending artery . The abovementioned symptoms were relieved after treatment with metoprolol 190 mg daily and diltiazem 60 mg daily. A follow-up interview was conducted at 6 months after discharge and the patient reported that all symptoms were relieved and did not reappear after discharge.