An eight-year-old boy living in a rural area presented to the Emergency Department of Mofid Children’s Hospital, Tehran, Iran, with dyspnea, cough and atypical chest pain from one month ago. The patient was otherwise healthy and had received standard immunization (including BCG). There was no relevant familial history and the patient had normal growth and development and the patient was otherwise healthy.
At the time of admission, his blood pressure and pulse rate were 105/65 mmHg and 98 beats per minute respectively. He had no respiratory distress and jugular veins were not prominent. Auscultation revealed coarse crackles in both lung and normal heart sounds. Physical examinations of other body systems were normal.
The Electrocardiogram showed a normal sinus rhythm with a normal axis. Laboratory investigations revealed a mild leukocytosis with mild eosinophilia (white blood cell count of 15,900/mm3 with differential count of neutrophil: 61%, lymphocyte: 29%, eosinophil: 7% and monocyte: 3%), erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 64 mm/hour and C-reactive protein of 2+positive. The alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (ALT) were within normal ranges. Plain chest X-ray, multiple bilateral areas of rounded consolidation were obvious; the cardio-thoracic ratio was normal . Subsequently, a Thoraco-abdominal computed tomography was performed, which demonstrated multiple cystic lesions in both lungs. Trans-thoracic echocardiography revealed a relatively large echo-lucent septated cystic lesion (measured 2.1*1.8 mm) with a thin outer wall and adhesion to the right ventricular free wall . There was no right ventricular obstruction and the cardiac function was normal. The abdominal as well as the brain computed tomography scan were normal.
Upon the computed tomography scan findings, the patient’s demographic origin and a positive.
Hem-agglutinin test for hydatid disease, the diagnosis of hydatid cyst was established. Accordingly, after a 5 day oral Albendazole course, the patient underwent surgery for resection of the lung cysts via bilateral thoracotomy.
Thereafter, the patient was referred to Shahid Modarres hospital, Tehran, Iran, which is a tertiary center of pediatric cardiac surgery for excision of the cardiac cyst. The patient underwent elective cardiac surgery through median sternotomy and cardio-pulmonary bypass (CPB). A small incision on the right atrium was made. In the examination through the tricuspid valve, the cyst was apparent within the right ventricle with attachment to the right ventricular papillary muscle . Intra-operatively, in order to prevent systemic contamination, the contents of the hydatid cyst was aspirated and the cavity of the cyst was washed with saline solution and then the cyst membranes were removed. The diagnosis of hydatid cyst was confirmed in pathologic examination. Medical therapy with Albendazole (15 mg/kg) for 3 months started. The post-operative course was uneventful and he was discharged on the seventh day. The outcome was favorable seven weeks after surgery and there was no clinical and echocardiographic recurrence.