A 53-year-old Caucasian woman consulted our department complaining of progressively worsening facial swelling and a feeling of "tension in the head," which she had first experienced eight days previously and had gradually worsened. Our patient had a history of locally advanced lung cancer (stage T2aN2M0-IIIa). It was first diagnosed three years before as a left upper lobe mass attached to the mediastinum and was treated with left upper lobe complete resection. The pathologic examination revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Our patient was subsequently treated with six cycles of taxane and platinum chemotherapy and radiotherapy at the primary site. It was decided to initiate a complete chemotherapy regimen for locally advanced lymph node disease N2. After two and a half years of follow-up, our patient was diagnosed with progressive disease (left supraclavicular nodes and sternum bone metastases), and at the time of examination, she was not receiving any treatment. Her physical examination revealed facial edema and thoracic and upper limb venous distension . The differential diagnosis included central venous obstruction or thrombosis, including SVCS. A chest radiograph showed no progression of the disease in either hemithorax at the time of symptom presentation . Her blood examination results were as follows: white blood cell count 5770/mm3, hemoglobin 8.4 g/dL, platelets 253 × 104/mm3, glucose 92 mg/dL, creatine 1.23 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 20IU/L, alanine aminotransferase, 10IU/L, alkaline phosphatase 107IU/L, lactate dehydrogenase 382IU/L, albumin 2.8 g/dL, total bilirubin 0.6 mg/dL, sodium (Na+) 141.4 mEq/L, potassium (K+) 4.3 mEq/L, calcium (Ca2+) 8.9 mg/dL, uric acid 4.1 mg/dL, international normalized ratio (INR) 0.94, and D-dimers 4300 μg/mL.
Our patient was clinically diagnosed with SVCS, and contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed to confirm the diagnosis. Enhanced neck CT demonstrated a major thrombus-like lesion inside her right jugular vein . The standard therapeutic treatment modality for SVCS is radiotherapy, but because of the CT angiography findings, our patient was sent to the catheterization laboratory for percutaneous stenting. The stenosis in the right jugular vein was transversed with a 0.35 inch guidewire (Bioart, Tokyo, Japan) and an 8Fr guiding catheter (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA). The obstruction was dilated using a 3.0 mm×80 mm balloon, and a stent (Dynamic Balloon-Expandable Stent; Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL, USA) of equal size (3.0 mm×56 mm) was implanted in her right subclavical vein. After the stent placement , our patient showed immediate relief of her symptoms, and she was discharged home the day after the procedure on anticoagulant therapy (warfarin, to maintain prothrombin time INR between 2.0 and 2.5). Five months after the stenting procedure our patient is still asymptomatic with no signs of SVCS on physical examination, and she is on oral anticoagulation treatment with an optimal therapeutic INR level.