A greater than 9-year history of hematuria was present, as was a greater than 1-year history of proteinuria.
A 49-year-old man was admitted to the nephrology department of Guang'anmen Hospital in November 2020. Nine years before this hospitalization, when the patient underwent a physical examination in the local hospital, the routine urine examination revealed 1+ blood, while urinary protein was negative and serum creatinine was normal. At that time, the patient had no obvious symptoms of discomfort, such as arthralgias, oral ulceration, or photosensitivity. Subsequently, the patient’s annual physical examination showed urinary occult blood fluctuating from 1+ to 3+, but the urinary protein was always negative, and the serum creatinine remained normal. Nearly 2 mo before admission, a routine urine examination showed 3+ blood and 3+ protein, and the patient was administered irbesartan 150 mg once a day. One day before admission, the patient’s urinalysis results revealed 3+ blood and 2+ protein, and the 24-h urine protein result was 5.158 g. In addition, the serum creatinine level was 133 μmol per liter.
The patient had a history of hypertension, hyperuricemia, and gout. He had hepatitis A as a child and was later cured.
The patient had a history of inhaling gasoline and diesel in his working environment and had a long history of smoking and drinking. He had no known allergic reactions to drugs or food. He denied a family history of kidney disease.
The patient’s vital signs were stable, and his blood pressure was 120/78 mmHg. His weight was 67 kg, and his body mass index was 23.2 kg/m2. The patient had mildly depressed edema in both lower limbs.
The novel coronavirus nucleic acid test was negative, and the novel coronavirus IgM antibody and IgG antibody tests were negative. The hepatitis B virus antigen, hepatitis C antibody, syphilis, and HIV tests were also negative. The other laboratory examination results are shown in Table . Subsequently, a positive anti-GBM antibody result was obtained at a titer of 68 RU/mL, though anti-nuclear antibodies and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were absent.
Renal ultrasonography revealed that the size of the kidneys was normal and that the echo pattern from the renal cortex was normal.
Chest high-resolution computed tomography (CT) showed small solid nodules in the lower lobe of the left lung.
Immunofluorescence staining showed linear deposition of IgG, kappa, and lambda along the capillary wall. IgG1 and IgG4 were the main subtypes of IgG, and granular and bolus-type deposits of IgA and C3 were seen in the mesangial area.
Light microscopy demonstrated glomerulosclerosis and ischemic sclerosis, and approximately 70% of glomeruli contained crescents, including small-cell crescents, small cellular fibrous crescents, cellular fibrous crescents, and fibrous crescents with sclerosis, accompanied by seriously damaged glomerular capillary loops and partial destruction of Bowman's capsules. In addition, the glomerular mesangial cells and matrix were slightly proliferative. Renal interstitial inflammatory cell infiltration was accompanied by fibrosis. In addition, there were vacuoles and granular degeneration of renal tubular epithelial cells, the hair margin of the small focus brush had deteriorated, and multiple lesions showed atrophy. Immunohistochemistry revealed granular deposition of C4d in the capillary wall, mesangial area, and arteriole wall.
Electron microscopy showed massive electron-dense deposits in the mesangial area. The pathological results were consistent with a diagnosis of type I crescentic nephritis with IgA nephropathy .