An 8-year-old boy was referred to the paediatric nephrology service with an incidental finding of persistent proteinuria during investigation for abdominal pain. He had no hematuria or glycosuria. He had normal serum albumin (42 g/L). Haematological, biochemical and immunological parameters were unremarkable. Specifically, C3, C4, ANCA and anti-GBM were negative and ANA was moderately positive (1:320). Renal function was normal (serum creatinine 0.52 mg/dL). Urinary albumin creatinine ratio was raised at 51.4 mg/mmol (normal < 3.5/mg/mmol) and protein creatinine ratio 92 mg/mmol (normal< 20 mg/mmol). Urine electrophoresis was 1.47 g/L with non-selective proteinuria pattern detected (normal< 0.10 g/L). Assessment for glycosuria, urinary light chains and urinary amino acids was negative. Urinary electrolytes were normal, and haematuria was absent on serial testing. Renal ultrasound, ophthalmology and audiology assessment did not demonstrate any abnormal findings. Renal biopsy demonstrated normal light microscopy and there was no evidence of immune complex mediated disease or other pathology. Podocyte foot processes were generally well preserved on electron microscopy, however there was global uniform thinning of the glomerular basement membrane .
Family history assessment revealed that his parents were first cousins, of Middle Eastern descent, with no known family history of renal disease or other comorbidity. Further investigation of the family revealed isolated proteinuria (urinary albumin creatinine 55.6 mg/mmol, protein creatinine 89.4 mg/mmol) in his 4-year old brother but not in either parent. His brother’s haematological parameters were unremarkable and remaining urinary investigations were within normal range apart from an elevated urinary protein electrophoresis (1.32 g/L). Chromosomal microarray in the older sibling revealed long continuous stretches of homozygosity (LCSH) representing ~ 4.5% of the genome, consistent with parental consanguinity. Shared regions of LCSH between the brothers were interrogated using the Genomic Oligoarray and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) evaluation tool© . Whole genome sequencing was performed on both affected individuals after informed consent (HREC/15/QRCH/126). Segregating variants were examined in the previously identified areas of LCSH and in all genomic areas in a curated list of glomerular disease associated genes . This revealed both brothers had a homozygous stop-gain variant NM_001081.3:c.4689_4690delTAinsAT; p.(Cys1563Ter) in exon 31 of the gene CUBN. Biallelic variants in CUBN have previously been associated with Imerslund-Grasbeck Syndrome (Megaloblastic anemia-1, Finnish type (MIM: 261100)) and one reported case of isolated proteinuria [–]. The c.4689_4690delTAinsAT variant is present in 47 individuals in the gnomAD database including a single homozygous individual. The variant is most common in the “South Asian” gnomAD population with an allele frequency of 0.0012. Based on this evidence the variant was classified as pathogenic according to ACMG criteria (PVS1, PM2 and PP1) . At four years of follow-up, the patient and his younger brother remain well with isolated proteinuria. Given the genomic diagnosis, biopsy of the younger brother was not required. Both were commenced on renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) blockade with a mild reduction in proteinuria (urine protein:creatinine 74.6 mg/mmol in the elder brother and 73.8 mg/mmol in the younger brother). Haematological parameters remained normal in both siblings.