A 67-year-old female patient first presented to our hospital in 2017 with a corneal decompensation following complex cataract surgery and iStent® implantation in her right eye a few months prior. A tumour in the anterior chamber was found to have existed since childhood (or even since birth), which had been monitored ophthalmologically for over 20 years. An iris leiomyoma or a juvenile xanthogranuloma had been suspected. In addition, there was a history of open-angle glaucoma on both eyes. In general, the patient suffered from depression, hearing loss on both sides and hypothyroidism following multiple strumectomies performed for recurrent goitre (two between 1960 and 1980 and one around 2000).
At presentation the patient complained of deterioration of vision in her right eye since cataract surgery and iStent® implantation. In the examination, the visual acuity was reduced to the perception of hand motions on the right eye, while it was 1.0 (decimal acuity, equivalent to 20/20) on the left eye. Slit-lamp microscopy revealed not only endothelial decompensation and pseudophakia but also anterior synechia and a whitish iris tumour originating from the iris adhering to the endothelium .
The anterior synechia formed by the tumour with the endothelium excluded a Descemet’s membrane endothelial keratoplasty as a therapeutic option. We therefore decided to perform a penetrating keratoplasty with en-bloc resection of the iris tumour and sector iridectomy at the end of 2019.
The tissue obtained was histologically examined after surgery. The haematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining of the tumour showed differently sized lumina lined by flat or cubic epithelial cells . These lumina were filled with PAS-positive colloid. Initial histological differential diagnoses considered in our case were ectopic lacrimal gland or sweat gland and iris adenoma [, ], which could be excluded upon further histological und immunohistochemical examination. Indeed, immunohistochemical staining showed that the lining cells were positively stained with antibodies against cytokeratin AE1/AE3 (cytokeratin 1–8, 10, 14–16 and 19), cytokeratin 18 and BerEP4. To confirm our final diagnosis of an ectopic thyroid tissue, we conducted immunohistochemistry using anti-thyroid-transcripting-factor-1 (TTF-1) and anti-thyroglobulin antibodies staining the tumour cells positive . Another differential diagnosis was a metastasis of a previously unknown follicular thyroid carcinoma. However, both the histologically benign aspect and the medical history (tumour known at least since childhood, multiple strumectomies without histological evidence of malignancy) did not support the latter differential diagnosis. Nevertheless, further examination of the thyroid was recommended to exclude a malignant tumour with certainty.
After uncomplicated surgery, the patient last presented to the clinic in mid-2020. The patient reported a subjective improvement in vision, but visual acuity was still poor compared to the left eye.
In the clinical examination, visual acuity had already increased from perception of hand motion preoperatively to 0.25 (equivalent to 20/80) with autorefraction. The still reduced visual acuity was attributed to uncorrected irregular corneal astigmatism after penetrating keratoplasty and advanced optic nerve damage from known open angle glaucoma. The corneal graft was clear and the two continuous sutures were tight. The anterior segment was free of irritation, the temporal iridectomy was open and the intraocular lens was in place. There was no evidence of tumour recurrence. The intraocular pressure was normal under treatment with travoprost on both eyes.
In addition, tumour screening was performed in the meantime to exclude metastasis of a previously unknown follicular thyroid carcinoma. The sonography and scintigraphy of the thyroid showed bilateral struma recurrence, which was more pronounced on the right side, without evidence of autonomy or nodules. Under levothyroxine substitution, the patient showed a euthyroid metabolic state (thyroid-stimulating hormone in the low normal range, as desired). Overall, the findings were stable compared to the previous findings in 2013.