A 24-year-old Dravidian woman presented with swelling in her left submental region of 10 months’ duration which was gradually increasing in size. There was no history of pain, fever or odynophagia. Apart from a full-term delivery by Caesarean section 2.5 years earlier, there was no other significant past history. On examination, she was averagely built with a pulse rate of 78/minute and a blood pressure of 100/70mmHg. On local examination, a swelling was seen in her left submental region measuring 4.0×3.0cm . The swelling was mobile and non-tender. There were no lymph nodes palpable in her neck. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a well-defined contrast-enhanced round to oval mass in her left sublingual region appearing isointense on T1-weighted images, and hyperintense on T2W and short tau inversion recovery images . The lesion was seen to cross the midline and displaced her tongue superiorly and to the right. The imaging findings suggested salivary gland tumor probably arising from minor salivary gland. Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) revealed paucicellular smears showing few epithelial cells in sheets and in a vague glandular pattern. There was no evidence of malignancy in the smears examined. With a presumptive diagnosis of benign salivary gland neoplasm, she was taken up for excision of the swelling with conventional incision for submandibular gland excision.
Intraoperatively, an encapsulated tumor during excision appeared to be attached to the upper border of her hyoid bone . It was excised and submitted for surgical pathology examination. Grossly, we received a single globular tissue measuring 4.0×4.0×4.0cm. Cut section revealed an encapsulated tumor measuring 4.0×4.0×3.7cm showing a homogeneous surface with areas of brownish discoloration. On the periphery of the nodule was seen a roughened area . Sections examined showed an encapsulated tumor composed of cells arranged in microfollicular, glandular and trabecular patterns. The cells were cuboidal to columnar and showed a moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm and central round to oval nuclei. The lumen contained inspissated colloid resembling hyaline globules. The intervening areas showed abundant eosinophilic extracellular hyaline material along with ectatic blood vessels. No capsular/vascular invasion was noted. The surrounding adjacent tissue showed non-neoplastic normal-looking thyroid follicles containing abundant colloid . There was no evidence of nuclear pseudo-inclusions, ground grass nuclei or nuclear grooves. With the above findings, a diagnosis of microfollicular adenoma within ectopic thyroid gland was offered. Immunohistochemistry corroborated the findings on microscopy. The cells showed cytoplasmic and membrane positivity for pan cytokeratin (CK) and CK7 and negativity for CK20 , epithelial membrane antigen , galactin-3 as well as CK 19. The cells also showed nuclear positivity for retinoblastoma . The hyaline stroma was highlighted with collagen type IV immunostaining . Subsequently, an imaging and thyroid scan for localization of normal thyroid was advised along with postoperative triiodothyronine (T3), thyroxine (T4) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) monitoring. A postoperative thyroid scan and ultrasound examination of her neck showed nonvisualization of orthotopic thyroid gland in her anterior neck region. Thyroid hormone levels done after 10 days of excision revealed T3 level of 1.17pg/mL; T4 level of < 0.40ng/dL and TSH level of >100μIU/mL. She was advised thyroxine replacement therapy and was euthyroid after 6 months of follow up.