A 38-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our hospital in 2006 for focal epileptic seizures. Seizures consisted of paroxysmal contractions of the right shoulder without loss of consciousness at a frequency of 3 times/week. MRI-scan showed a non-enhancing, left-sided temporo-parieto-occipital tumor [ and ]. Imaging findings were non-specific and could fit a low-grade glioma or other low-grade tumor. Tissue verification was advised by the multidisciplinary neuro-oncology board. As patient refused at that time a resection, a stereotactic biopsy of the tumor was performed, and histopathological examination of the limited tissue volume demonstrated a DNET. The epileptic seizures were treated with levetiracetam 500 mg twice daily and a wait-and-scan policy was advised.
For 8 years the seizures remained under control and the routine follow-up MRI-scan showed no signs of tumor progression. Shortly thereafter, the patient was admitted with agitation, dysphasia, and visual hallucinations in the right visual field. At admission, consciousness was intact and dysphasia, apraxia and a right-sided facial paresis was observed and levetiracetam was increased to 750 mg twice daily. An MRI-scan showed tumor growth, from 5.0 × 4.0 cm in 2006 to 7.6 × 5.8 cm in 2014. The tumor had solid and cystic components and did not enhance after gadolinium contrast. Mass effect was seen with slight displacement of the mesencephalon. The dysphasia and visual symptoms were interpreted as a combination of transient tumor (seizure) attacks and a mass effect on eloquent temporal neocortex and the optic radiation. The patient was scheduled for an awake craniotomy (Penfield procedure) but declined surgical treatment in the end. Ten years after the first admission, the MRI-scan showed further tumor progression with increased compression of the mesencephalon [ and ]. Besides progression, a nodular region of enhancement developed within the lesion, suspect of a dedifferentiated glioma rather than a DNET. Despite the increased tumor size, the patient had unchanged dysphasia and dysarthria. This time, a gross-total resection of the tumor was performed. In the postoperative phase, the patient had slightly worsened dysarthria, probably due to edema, which ameliorated substantially at hospital discharge. A postoperative MRI-scan, within 72 h after surgery, showed slight residual pathological contrast enhancement at the resection margins, suggesting minimal rest tumor [ and ]. Radiotherapy concurrent with temozolomide was started, according to the Stupp-protocol. Concurrently, multiple cysts were found in the liver and kidneys suggestive for autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) and a mutation in the PKD2 gene was detected.
Control MRI-scan, 6-months after surgery showed decreased gliotic changes but also progression of both enhancing and non-enhancing nodular components with regions of increased perfusion ratios, indicative of further progression of dedifferentiated tumor components. One month after this MRI-scan, the patient presented on the ER with an acute visual aura, numbness in the right half of the face, weakness of the right arm, dysarthria, and dysphasia, and interpreted as postictal symptoms. Physical examination showed a latent paresis of the right arm and no further deficits. Subsequent MRI-scan showed further tumor progression [ and ]. The following 2 years the patient was treated with chemotherapy using lomustine and radiotherapy but, unfortunately deceased in 2019. Due to the ADPKD and the subsequent liver-and kidney malfunction, the patient was excluded from clinical trials.
The biopsy showed brain tissue with increased cellularity, a variable distribution, and a remarkably perivascular pattern, suggestive for a low-grade primary brain tumor . In between, signs of fresh and older hemorrhages with hemosiderin-loaded macrophages and focal calcifications were seen. The tumor cells had round, slightly irregular nuclei with a changing chromatin pattern. There was some expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and S100, the MIB-1 expression showed normal proliferation. The diagnosis DNET was favored by several neuropathologists at this time. Ten years later, the contrast enhancing parts in the temporal lobe showed a cell-rich, pleomorphic glioma with extensive necrosis and pathological endothelial proliferation . The tumor cells showed marked nuclear atypia with irregular nuclei, irregular chromatin pattern and an increase in mitotic figures. GFAP-immunoreactivity was strongly increased, which together with the other findings, lead to the diagnosis of a GBM. Molecular testing showed the absence of IDH1–and IDH-2 mutation. The MGMT promoter was not methylated, and further methylation diagnostics showed it to be of the mesenchymal subtype. Microscopic examination of the resected hippocampus showed a diffuse infiltrating tumor with variable cellularity and in some parts a nodular pattern . These cells showed partly an astrocytic and oligodendroglial phenotype with also the presence of glioneuronal nodules and atypical ganglion cells with increased immunoreactivity for GFAP. NeuN staining showed pre-existent hippocampus and significant loss in neuronal cell elements where the tumor infiltrated. There was no increase in proliferation and there was strong immunoreactivity for CD34 within the tumor with a typical nodular staining pattern with the presence of tumor satellites that are characteristically seen in GG. In some slides, the evolution of the glial component of this GG into a GBM could be clearly seen. In conclusion, the initial diagnosis of DNET was changed to a dedifferentiated GG after gross total resection which is supported by the CD34 immunoreactivity that was performed for this case report on the biopsy material.