A 69-year-old woman (height, 148.7 cm; weight, 59.3 kg) was admitted to our hospital because of acute kidney injury. She had a history of right corona radiata infarct and had been taking cilostazol (50 mg) twice daily for to prevent recurrent cerebral infarction; cilostazol had been prescribed at another hospital 13 months before admission. She was not taking other medications and had no history of allergies. Her baseline serum creatinine (sCr) level was 0.85 mg/dL (normal, < 0.82 mg/dL) until 6 months before admission. On admission, her body temperature was 36.5 °C, blood pressure was 126/78 mmHg, and heart rate was 82/min. Blood tests revealed a creatinine level of 1.41 mg/dL. Urinalysis showed microscopic hematuria (urine red blood cells, > 100 per high-power field; urine white blood cells, 0–2 per high-power field), proteinuria (2.23 g/gCr; normal, < 0.15 g/gCr), and hyper-beta2-microglobulinuria (1002 μg/L; normal, < 289 μg/L). The serum IgE level was normal (80 U/mL). She had not had signs of headaches, palpitations, diarrhea, rash, flank pain, arthralgia, eosinophilia, or macroscopic hematuria. She did not present with glucosuria, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, polyuria, or nocturia. The patient’s clinical course is shown in Fig. . A renal ultrasound showed that the kidneys were of normal size (right, 93 mm × 44 mm; left, 92 mm × 43 mm) with no dilation of the urinary tract, renal pelvis, or calyces. The corticomedullary junction was obscure and there were no kidney stones. The resistive index at the renal interlobular artery was normal (right, 0.62; left, 0.66). Gallium-67 scintigraphy revealed uptake in the bilateral kidneys . A renal biopsy was performed after stopping oral cilostazol and revealed diffuse lymphocyte infiltration in the interstitium accompanied by mild interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy . Additionally, sparse acute tubular necrosis and hematic cylinder were recognized in a tubulointerstitial lesion . Focal segmental mesangial and intracapillary hypercellularity were observed . Crescents (one cellular and one fibrocellular) were observed in two of 13 glomeruli. There were no granulomas. Immunofluorescence staining showed a granular pattern for IgA , IgM, and C3 in the mesangium and was negative for IgG, IgG4, C1q, C4, and fibrinogen. A diagnosis of diffuse tubulointerstitial nephritis accompanied by IgA nephropathy was made. We suspected that the patient had delayed drug-induced hypersensitivity reactions, so a drug lymphocyte stimulation test (DLST) for cilostazol was performed. The 3H–thymidine uptake in peripheral blood mononuclear cells stimulated with the suspect drugs was evaluated . The stimulation index (SI) is defined as the value of 3H–thymidine uptake with antigen/without antigen . In our patient, the DLST result for cilostazol was positive (SI, 200%; a positive result is > 180%). Test results for p-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, c-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody, anti-nuclear antibody, anti-Sjögren’s syndrome A, and anti-Sjögren’s syndrome B antibody were negative. Test results for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, human immunodeficiency virus, cytomegalovirus, and Epstein–Barr virus were negative. No abnormalities were observed on ophthalmological examination. Her serum angiotensin-converting enzyme level was normal. Therefore, we excluded other causes of ATIN, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren’s syndrome, IgG4-related diseases, certain acute viral infections, tubulointerstitial nephritis, uveitis syndrome, and sarcoidosis . The patient was diagnosed with cilostazol-induced diffuse tubulointerstitial nephritis accompanied by IgA nephropathy; the IgA nephropathy might have existed before the administration of cilostazol.
We administered glucocorticoid pulse therapy with methylprednisolone (500 mg/day) for 3 days and then reduced the prednisolone dose to 40 mg/day for 2 weeks. After two courses of this regimen, we reduced the dose of prednisolone to 35 mg/day on day 44 and then to 25 mg/day. As shown in Fig. , urinary beta2-microglobulin on day 34, and sCr and urinalysis on day 49 improved (urine beta2-microglobulin, 291 μg/L; sCr, 1.43 mg/dL; urine red blood cells, 11–30 per high-power field). The patient was discharged on 20 mg/day prednisolone. However, sCr, urinalysis, and urinary beta2-microglobulin levels increased (sCr, 1.90 mg/dL; urine red blood cells, > 100 per high-power field; urine beta2-microglobulin, 989 μg/L) by day 64, indicating recurrence of interstitial nephritis . The dose of prednisolone was increased to 25 mg/day for 4 weeks and then reduced to 20 mg/day without recurrence.