A 33-year-old primigravid African American woman at 15 weeks gestation presented obtunded to the hospital for acute-onset altered mental status. Her medical history was significant for asthma, hypothyroidism, and β-thalassemia trait. She had no past psychiatric or substance use history. Her pregnancy had been complicated by ketonuria, nausea, vomiting, and poor oral intake noted at her initial prenatal visit with emergency department presentations for intractable vomiting and poor oral intake requiring intravenous fluid repletion .
On examination, the patient was disoriented, agitated, and persistently tachycardic to 150 beats per minute. Labs were notable for multiple electrolyte abnormalities, microcytic anemia, transaminitis, hypothyroidism, lactic acidosis, and rhabdomyolysis . Urine drug screen and blood alcohol level were negative. Urinalysis showed protein, ketones, and large amounts of bilirubin. Initial blood cultures showed one set positive for methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA). Computerized tomography (CT) of the head was unremarkable. Electrocardiogram (EKG) showed sinus tachycardia with a heart rate of 151 beats per minute. Obstetric ultrasound confirmed a single, live, intrauterine pregnancy at appropriate gestational age. Altered mental status was attributed to dehydration and sepsis, and she was started on intravenous nafcillin, hypotonic fluids, and high-dose parenteral thiamine. A plasma thiamine level did not demonstrate deficiency .
The patient developed paranoid delusions and auditory hallucinations prompting an encephalopathy workup. Rhabdomyolysis and transaminitis continued prompting concern for early hemolysis or rheumatological etiology . Sinus tachycardia persisted. Lumbar puncture showed elevated protein [glucose 58 mg/dL, protein 315 mg/dL, 2 white blood cells (WBC) per mm3, 32 red blood cells (RBC) per mm3]. Viral hepatitis titers, paraneoplastic panel, copper level, and ceruloplasmin were unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head showed findings consistent with a diagnosis of WKS . A new pituitary mass was noted . Prolactin level was normal (234 ng/mL, normal range 110–330 ng/mL). Repeat blood cultures were negative.
She was transferred to a larger academic center on hospital day (HD) 10 for further evaluation. On examination, she was disoriented, confabulatory, paranoid, and surprised to hear she was pregnant. Transfer workup showed ongoing transaminitis, rhabdomyolysis, and hypothyroidism . Labs demonstrated new elevated fibrinogen and d-dimer . Coagulopathy was ruled out by hematology consultants. Repeat blood cultures were negative. Transthoracic echocardiogram was unremarkable. She was seen by multiple consulting services, including infectious disease. MRI imaging of head, spine, and lower extremities failed to reveal a source as leukocytosis steadily worsened.
At HD18 and 18 weeks gestation, she developed septic shock with fetal demise and underwent dilatation and evacuation. She was intubated, started on pressors, and moved to the intensive care unit . Blood cultures grew Klebsiella and Candida, and she was switched to piperacillin–tazobactam and anidulafungin. Repeat cardiac imaging showed new high-output cardiomyopathy with reduced ejection fraction of 15%. Heparin was infused due to concern for pulmonary embolism, which was ruled out by vascular medicine, and she was transitioned to enoxaparin. Transesophageal echocardiography did not demonstrate vegetation. Blood cultures cleared, and she was extubated and transitioned back to the general floors by HD28. On HD40 she spiked an isolated fever of 102 °F after completing intravenous antibiotics and her husband asked to take the patient home. In accordance with hospital risk management, the patient and family were counseled on the risks of her current medical condition and the patient was discharged with return precautions.
Three weeks later, the patient returned to the emergency department with her husband . On physical examination, she demonstrated new horizontal nystagmus, ataxia, and encephalopathy. Urinalysis was notable for 3+ leukocyte esterase, positive nitrites, and > 182 WBCs per high-power field. Psychiatry consultants noted ongoing paranoia and cognitive impairment. Her husband as the surrogate decision maker agreed to continue treatment with ceftriaxone for a urinary tract infection and high-dose parenteral thiamine for presumed WKS. A central line was placed for long-term thiamine administration. The patient was transferred to acute physical rehabilitation and was incrementally able to participate in physical and occupational therapy. She received inpatient formal neuropsychological testing where she demonstrated profound anterograde amnesia, abulia, disorientation, impaired processing speed, and anosognosia highly consistent with a diagnosis of WKS. After 6 weeks of parenteral thiamine since her initial presentation until treatment plateau and 18 days of physical rehab, she was discharged back home with her husband.