We present the case of a 78-year-old man, a former smoker, with squamous cell lung carcinoma. Clinical staging was stage IV [cT3N2M1c (ADR)]. He was simultaneously diagnosed as having interstitial pneumonia. Chest high-resolution computed tomography (CT) showed a mass lesion of the right upper lobe as the primary lung carcinoma that was surrounded by ground-glass opacities as carcinomatous lymphangiomatosis. Interstitial pneumonia, as indicated by a subpleural reticular shadow with traction bronchiectasis and bronchiolectasis predominantly in the lower lobes and without apparent honeycombing, was comparable with probable usual interstitial pneumonia pattern based on recent criteria . He had no symptoms suspicious of connective tissue disease and serological domain as all auto-antibodies. In addition, he had no history of exposure-evoked aspects of chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis or familial or chronic drug-induced pneumonitis.
The patient underwent first-line treatment with carboplatin and nab-paclitaxel from May 201X. After 4 cycles, disease progression was recognized. Therefore, second-line chemotherapy of pembrolizumab was administered. However, CT revealed bilateral ground-glass opacities and his serum levels of Krebs von den Lungen-6 (KL-6) were increased, although the size of the lung cancer tumors was reduced after 2 cycles . We diagnosed pembrolizumab-induced pneumonitis and then started prednisolone (PSL) at 30 mg/day. This pulmonary toxic lesion began to improve immediately, and the dose of PSL was gradually tapered to 2.5 mg/day in April 201X + 1. Because of apparent regrowth of the cancerous lesion with brain metastasis, stereotaxic radiation of brain lesions and tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil (TS-1) as third-line chemotherapy were administered. However, disease progression was confirmed. At one year and 3 months after his initial presentation (August 201X + 1), honeycomb lesions appeared in the lower left lobe . Therefore, we diagnosed IPF because the radiological disease course became one of typical usual interstitial pneumonia and the patient had no evidence indicating other etiologies.
After careful examination of the drug-induced pneumonitis, atezolizumab was administered as fourth-line chemotherapy, but the patient developed subacute atezolizumab-induced pneumonitis after 1 cycle. A re-escalated dosage of PSL improved his pneumonitis, and his serum levels of KL-6 decreased, following which nintedanib was started as additional therapy for the IPF. Under careful observation with nintedanib (200 mg/day) and PSL (5 mg/day), atezolizumab was re-administered on day 1 of an every-21-day cycle. After three cycles, it remained stable without exacerbation of drug-induced pneumonitis. However, afterwards, he developed multiple brain metastases and carcinomatous meningitis. Because his therapy was converted to palliative care, he died one and a half months later due to carcinomatous meningitis.