A 74-year-old Caucasian male presented with malaise, dyspnoea, and cough at our hospital. Initially, the temperature was 37.6°C, blood pressure 124/70 mmHg, pulse rate 135 beats/min and irregular, and oxygen saturation 91% under 6 L/min oxygen. An electrocardiogram confirmed a known atrial fibrillation. No other comorbidities were known. He had bilateral crackles and basal interstitial pulmonary infiltrates. A nasopharyngeal swab confirmed a SARS-CoV-2 infection. The patient was hospitalized and treated with remdesivir and dexamethason. On the 5th day after admission, he developed acute chest pain with ST-elevation in leads II, III, aVF, and elevated cardiac biomarkers (troponin I: 116 ng/L). A coronary angiography was performed. Unexpectedly, the angiography did only reveal a chronic thrombotic occlusion of the marginal branches of the left coronary artery circumflex branch. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) due to cardiogenic shock. A cardiac index of 1.2 mL/(min*m2) with an elevated pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 27 mmHg and a mean pulmonary artery pressure of 33 mmHg was found . Echocardiography showed normal left ventricle cavity size with a severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF 15%) with akinesia of the apex and all apical segments, inferior and inferolateral to mid-ventricular, anterolateral and anterior to just mid-ventricular, hypokinesia of the remaining sections of the wall. Moreover, mild aortic, mitral, and tricuspid valve regurgitation was seen. The right ventricle showed a significantly reduced systolic function with akinesia of the free wall mid-ventricular to apical. Respiratory failure worsened and nasal high flow oxygen therapy was initiated (FiO2 100%, flow 60 L/min). Cardiogenic shock was initially treated with levosimendan and nitroglycerine in the later course. Clearly, the findings of the coronary angiogram with localized chronic changes did not deliver an explanation of this clinical condition.
Within the first week, a rapid decrease of the platelet count from 265 to 12 × 109/L was recorded. Furthermore, progressive Coombs-negative haemolytic anaemia (haemoglobin drop from 153 to 98 g/dL, lactate dehydrogenase 2844 U/L, and haptoglobin <0.10 g/L) with 12% schistocytes on peripheral-blood smear was noticed. The patient further developed acute kidney injury requiring renal replacement therapy and intermittent neurological symptoms such as delirium, drowsiness, and a slowdown in movements. The combination of thrombocytopenia, Coombs-negative haemolytic anaemia with schistocytes, renal failure, and neurological symptoms is highly suggestive of a TMA. Nevertheless, he was not suffering from diarrhoea and no shigatoxin-producing bacteria were detectable in the stool. ADAMTS13 activity came back normal (52%). With pending ADAMTS13 activity testing, the decision was made to start (i) therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) against fresh frozen plasma and (ii) high-dose methylprednisolone pulses (1 g/day) over 3 days followed by prednisone 1 mg/kg bodyweight daily. Despite mild neurological improvement, thrombocyte count did not rise above 24 × 109/L and haemolysis persisted. Complement levels were severely decreased [C3c <0.03 g/L (0.8–16 g/L), C4 < 0.01 (0.10–0.40 g/L)].
Cardiac biomarkers continuously increased after ICU admission up to a maximum troponin of 4814 ng/L the day before the first TPE. The daily plasma exchange then eliminated it to a level around 1000 ng/L where it reached a plateau (, ). Of note, creatine kinase and myoglobin were within normal range. After 7 TPE procedures, the patient continued to require inotropic support and the troponin levels remained elevated so that TPE was stopped [note that circulating markers such as troponin, creatinine, and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide rose the next day due to the simple lack of removal not due to a biological disease effect]. After an interdisciplinary discussion, a single dose of 900 mg Eculizumab was applied. In the following days, a continuous rise in thrombocyte counts and a decrease in lactate dehydrogenase, and troponin levels were detected . Renal replacement therapy could be discontinued and the estimated glomerular filtration rate reached a steady level around 40 mL/min/m2. Over the following days, schistocytes disappeared, haptoglobin increased to 1.21 g/L, and haemoglobin levels normalized. Importantly, cardiac function improved clinically, and the patient was successfully weaned from inotropic agents. Echocardiography showed an increase in LVEF to 41%. Steroids were tapered and the patient was finally discharged into rehabilitation after 36 days.