A 16-year-old boy presented to eye casualty having noticed a brief episode of flashing lights followed by acute inferior hemi-field visual loss in the left eye while walking to class. The visual loss persisted, and the event was completely painless. Past medical history consisted only of migraine which the patient was not experiencing at the time of visual field loss. He denied any history of smoking, illicit drug use, alcohol consumption or sexually transmitted infections.
Examination revealed a normal visual acuity of 6/6 in both eyes. A clear inferior altitudinal defect was evident when visual fields were tested to confrontation and a supra-temporal wedge of retinal pallor with associated arterial attenuation was visualized on slit lamp ophthalmoscopy. Colour retinal photography confirmed evidence of a superior branch retinal artery occlusion (BRAO) (ref. Fig. ) and visual field testing confirmed an inferior altitudinal field defect in the left eye (ref. Fig. ). Aspirin was commenced at this point and the patient was referred for urgent review with the local stroke team. Trans-thoracic echocardiography revealed a bicuspid aortic valve but reassuringly no vegetations that may have produced emboli. MRI and MR-angiogram of brain and neck were unremarkable. Haematological investigations revealed a moderate-severely raised homocysteine level (68.0 μmol/L, normal range 5.5–13.6 μmol/L), vitamin B12 deficiency (108 ng/L, normal range 191–663 ng/L) and a borderline folate deficiency (4.6 μg/L, normal range 4.6–18.7 μg/L). Following these findings, genetic testing was completed, revealing a C677T subtype homozygous mutation for the gene encoding methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), a vital enzyme in homocysteine metabolism. The patient was commenced on vitamin B12 and folate replacement (with resultant normalization of homocysteine levels) and continued on aspirin. Subsequent visual field testing at two months revealed slight improvement in the visual field defect (ref. Fig. ) and no further vaso-occlusive events were noted.