Patient is a 73-year-old female with a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, gastroesophageal reflux disease, diverticulitis, hyperlipidemia, and osteochondroma of the right scapula which was resected as an early teenager. She developed progressive dysphagia and odynophagia, as well as chest tightness in late 2019, prompting evaluation. Multiphase CT scan showed a 5.5 × 5.0 cm aneurysm of the azygous vein at the arch extending near its termination in the superior vena cava, resulting in displacement of the carina anteriorly as well as the esophagus toward the aorta and spine. Barium swallow revealed significant external compression of the esophagus in the region of the aneurysm with adjacent dysmotility and delayed passage of a 13.5 mm barium tablet.
Patient was referred to vascular surgery and underwent 20 × 30 mm helical hydrocoil embolization of the aneurysm as well as 12 mm Amplatzer plug occlusion of the AV inflow via a right femoral endovascular approach . Procedure was uncomplicated and patient recovered quickly. In the following weeks, she reported a drastic improvement of symptoms particularly with dysphagia. At one-month follow up, there was complete thrombosis of the AVA with size decreased to 4.6 × 4.2 cm on CT angiogram as well as significantly improved contrast passage on barium swallow.
Three months after the procedure, CT angiogram indicated that the AVA further reduced to 3.3 × 2.3 cm . On upper endoscopy, only mild external compression was observed at 28–30 cm from the incisors, and did not result in significant luminal narrowing. At six-month follow up, CT angiogram found that the AVA size continued to decrease to 1.0 × 2.4 cm. Barium swallow at that time revealed minimal esophageal compression with resolution of the previous delayed transit and adjacent dysmotility .
Despite her initial improvements, patient reported intermittent solid food dysphagia. She went on to complete further workup of dysphasgia and gastroesophageal reflux disease. . She was found to have a 2 cm hiatal hernia, however 48-h Bravo returned normal. High resolution impedance manometry (HRIM) did not show any manometric evidences of extra-luminal compression in the esophageal body at the level of AVA . Of note, HRIM revealed elevated median integrated relaxation pressure (IRP) of 19 mmHg with increased intrabolus pressure (iBP), suggestive of esophagogastric junction outflow obstruction (EGJOO) . She subsequently underwent robotic assisted Heller myotomy with anterior 180° Dor fundoplication. Procedure was uncomplicated, and the patient recovered well. Currently patient remains completely free of dysphagia and is tolerating a regular diet. The Eckardt score of the patient was 12 on her initial presentation and markedly improved to 0 following these interventions.