A 76-year-old, 166-cm, 71.3-kg Asian man with chest pain of 2 months’ duration due to coronary artery disease was admitted for coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) revascularization surgery. He had a history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus. He had a dilated left atrium, minimal tricuspid regurgitation, and normal left ventricular systolic function. He had no history of dysphagia or esophageal regurgitation. Preoperative magnetic resonance angiography revealed that his right internal carotid artery was severely occluded. The neurologist recommended a right carotid endarterectomy before CABG. The right carotid endarterectomy was performed uneventfully 2 days before CABG, and the total anesthesia time was 3 h 30 minutes.
A peripheral intravenous catheter was inserted into the left forearm, and an arterial catheter was inserted at the right radial artery. Anesthesia was induced with remifentanil 32 μg, propofol 120 mg, and rocuronium 70 mg. We inserted an OmniPlane TEE probe (Philips Medical Systems, Andover, MA, USA) into the esophagus without any difficulty or resistance. TEE examination was done with the CABG procedure. For patient safety, the comprehensive intraoperative TEE guidelines of the American Society of Echocardiography Council for Intraoperative Echocardiography and the Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists Task Force were followed.
The CABG was successful. The cardiopulmonary bypass time was 105 minutes. During cardiopulmonary bypass, the patient’s temperature was lowered to 33.0 °C at the rectum (33.0 °C at the nasal membrane). The TEE probe was in a neutral position in the upper esophagus and frozen to prevent injury. The average pump flow rate was 2.4 L/minute/m2. At the end of the procedure, the patient was rewarmed to 36.3 °C at the rectum (36.8 °C at the nasal membrane) for 60 minutes. During rewarming, TEE examination was performed, and the temperature of the TEE probe was increased to 39 °C. The TEE examination was discontinued intermittently and automatically to reduce the probe temperature. During the TEE examination, any movement or manipulation was gentle. Dopamine and nitroglycerin were given during weaning from bypass. The TEE probe was removed at the end of anesthesia. It was clean with no signs of blood. Extubation was done 11 h postoperatively.
The patient developed intermittent fever on the first postoperative day. Leukocytosis (19,440 white blood cells/μl) and a high level of C-reactive protein (30.0 mg/dl) were detected in the postoperative laboratory examination. The patient’s fever ranged from 37.0 °C to 38.3 °C and did not subside until postoperative day 3, despite empirical treatment with tazobactam and ciprofloxacin. Computed tomography done to evaluate the coronary arteries incidentally found signs of abscess formation or air-containing tissue in the retrosternal, pericardial, and paraesophageal areas . Esophagography revealed contrast leakage in the right wall of the middle esophagus . The patient’s hemodynamic variables, including blood pressure and heart rate, remained stable and were monitored closely. The patient was managed conservatively with fasting, parenteral nutrition, and intravenous antibiotics. We were prepared for surgical intervention, such as open esophageal repair or endoscopic primary repair, if there was any indication of unstable vital signs. The patient’s postoperative fever abated on postoperative day 4. Follow-up esophagography disclosed no change in the esophageal lesion. The patient was allowed to drink sips of water 35 days postoperatively. On postoperative day 39, he began a normal diet. He was discharged without complications on postoperative day 42.