A 43-year-old previously healthy male patient, weighing 70 kg, was admitted to hospital due to facial edema in the past two months and aggravation of lower extremity edema recently accompanied by decreased activity endurance. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a 90 × 65 × 52 mm large solid mass filled the right ventricular outflow tract and most of the right ventricular cavity, which fused and wrapped with the anterior and posterior leaflets of tricuspid valve, and only septal leaflet activity was seen . And a smaller one of about 20 × 17 × 25 mm occupied the apex. The left ventricular function is normal, with an ejection fraction of 60%. Preoperative routine laboratory examinations exhibited only mild thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 83 × 109 /L. There were no obvious abnormalities in liver and kidney function, coagulation function, and inflammatory markers.
On the day of surgery, transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) further confirmed the mass was approximately 90 mm in size and the tricuspid valve was seriously involved . CPB was performed using a roller pump, hollow-fiber oxygenator, and moderate hypothermia. Two filters were placed in the CPB circuit to prevent possible tumor debris and microemboli from entering the circulation. The circuit was primed with 200 mL of Lactate Ringer’s solution, 1000 mL of Succinylated Gelatin Injectiol and 3,750 U of heparin. 27,500 U (400 U/kg) of unfractionated heparin was injected intravenously after thoracotomy, with a resultant activated clotting time (ACT) value of 999 s observed. CPB was then commenced, with the flow rate of 2.4–2.6 L/(min·m2). After opening the right atrium, the tumor was noted to infiltrate into the endocardium and myocardium, and extend to the anterior, posterior, and septal leaflets of the tricuspid valve. An en-bloc resection was not possible, but an aggressive debulking procedure was performed. The resected tumor fragments are shown in Fig. C. Then, under small-dose vasoactive drugs and inotropic support with epinephrine (0.03 µg/kg/min) and norepinephrine (0.06 µg/kg/min), the patient was gradually weaned from CPB with normal heart rate (89 bpm), rhythm and blood pressure (101/56mmHg). TEE showed normal systolic function of both ventricles and normal left ventricular end-diastolic diameter. The total CPB time was 211 min with a cross-clamp time of 162 min. A total of 250 mg protamine was used to neutralize heparin (the ratio of protamine to heparin was 0.55:1), and the corresponding ACT value was 216 s, which was equivalent to the basic ACT value of 213 s.
However, the patient’s hemodynamics fluctuated greatly before leaving the operating room, and the drainage volume was up to 200 mL within 10 min. Hemodynamics could only be maintained under large-dose vasoactive drugs and inotropic support with milrinone (0.5 µg/kg/min), epinephrine (0.04 µg/kg/min), norepinephrine (0.75 µg/kg/min), m-hydroxylamine (0.75 µg/kg/min) and pituitrin (5U/h). The surgeons immediately performed a second thoracotomy for exploration, but no obvious surgical bleeding points were found except for extensive oozing in the surgical area. Severe coagulopathy and even acute disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) were highly suspected. The result of the thromboelastography (TEG) showed that R time and K time were prolonged, and alpha angle and maximum amplitude (MA) were decreased, suggesting coagulation factors, fibrinogen and platelet deficiency or insufficiency. The patient received intravenous infusion of 4 U of packed red cells, 950 mL of fresh frozen plasma, 1 g of fibrinogen, 600 U of prothrombin complex concentrate, 20 g of 20% albumin within two hours. Besides, 1g and 1.5 g of tranexamic acid were applied before and after rethoracotomy for hemostasis. Hemodynamics gradually stabilized with the support of smaller doses of norepinephrine (0.2 µg/kg/min) and pituitrin (3U/h) when the patient was transferred to intensive care unit (ICU).
The results of the blood samples taken by the patient upon entering the ICU showed thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 38 × 109/L and moderate anemia with a hemoglobin level of 78 g/L, and TEG test showed no significant improvement compared with that measured intraoperatively. Therefore, the patient received 10 U of cryoprecipitate, 2 U of platelets, and 3.5 U of packed red cells. Besides, the patient’s inflammatory markers increased significantly after surgery and peaked within three days, and did not return to normal until the patient was discharged from the hospital, with peak interleukin-6 of 474.00 pg/mL and procalcitonin of 38.7 ng/mL on postoperative day1 (POD1), and peak C-reactive protein of 239.6 mg/L on POD3. The evolution of postoperative inflammatory markers is shown in Fig. . From POD2 to POD6, the patient experienced recurrent moderate-to-high fevers up to 39.6℃ despite attempted at active cooling. As the blood culture was negative, antibiotic therapy was discontinued. At the same time, the patient suffered from frequent atrial fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia, and supraventricular tachycardia from POD3 to POD6, and was treated with antiarrhythmic drugs and electrocardioversion. The patient was transferred back to the general ward on POD9 and discharged on POD18 after his condition stabilized. Postoperative supplementary pathological reports supported intimal sarcoma.