An 89-year-old Caucasian woman, accidentally drank a sip of PCE while visiting her laundry, which had been carelessly poured into a bottle of water. Her medical record included a surgical aortic valve replacement, triple coronary artery bypass graft surgery, and arterial hypertension. The family described her as being completely autonomous at home, as proved by the fact that she worked in her own dry cleaning shop until the age of 88.
The exact amount of ingested PCE is still uncertain owing to the high variability of product concentration and the proprietary formulas used by the different brands. However, the patient later described having just a sip before realizing, based on the taste, that it was not water. Around 10 minutes after ingestion she became drowsy and the emergency medical service was activated by her relatives.
When she arrived at the emergency room, approximately 50 minutes after the ingestion, her vitals were as follows: Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 3, SpO2 96%, respiratory rate of 34 breaths/minute with a snoring breathing, heart rate of 51 beats/minute, and blood pressure of 115/55 mmHg. The first blood-gas analysis did not show relevant abnormalities: pH of 7.38 and lactate 2.4 mmol/L. The poison control center was immediately contacted and promptly provided the available information regarding PCE toxicity: it is not caustic; it is a fat-soluble product, which tends to accumulate in the central nervous system (CNS); its half-life is extremely variable and uncertain in humans, with an estimated biological half-life of 144 hours; and its immediate life-threatening aspects are CNS and respiratory drive depression, and risk of cardiac arrhythmias, possibly owing to myocardial sensitization to endogenous and exogenous catecholamines. No antidote is available for PCE. Characteristics of PCE intoxication are summarized in Fig. .
The sudden and deep CNS depression led the whole team to presume that a large quantity of PCE had been ingested and that its effects on the CNS could presumably last for several days. This scenario would have led to prolonged mechanical ventilation, a long intensive care unit (ICU) stay, and a high risk of ICU-related complications, especially considering the patient’s advanced age.
After a team evaluation, the patient was intubated and admitted to the ICU. Intubation was devoid of any complication; however, the patient developed severe hypoxemia, with the need to increase FiO2 up to 1. After 4 hours of mechanical ventilation, the arterial partial pressure of oxygen was 70 mmHg with an FiO2 of 0.6 [ratio between partial pressure of oxygen and FiO2 (PaO2:FiO2) of 117]. Oxygenation improved in the following 3–4 hours, reaching an arterial partial pressure of oxygen of 155 mmHg at FiO2 of 0.6 (PaO2:FiO2 of 258).
The patient showed some hemodynamic instability and required fluid resuscitation with 3000 ml of crystalloids infused over the first 4 hours. The concentration of lactate was rapidly normalized and the patient had a normal urinary output. Five hours after the accidental ingestion, two episodes of supraventricular tachycardia occurred, promptly terminated with adenosine.
Initially, the patient remained comatose, with a GCS of 3. During the observation in the ICU, her neurological condition started to improve and the patient suddenly woke up and self-extubated herself 12 hours after the PCE ingestion (3 a.m.). Her respiratory function had recovered, she could cough properly and was completely awake.
At 8 a.m., her vital signs were as follows: SpO2 98% with 2 L/minute nasal oxygen, respiratory rate of 17 breaths/minute, heart rate of 70 beats/minute despite a brief and self-limiting episode of atrial fibrillation, blood pressure of 145/50 mmHg, and urinary output 1400 ml from hospital arrival.
Less than 24 hours after ingestion she was discharged from the ICU, and 4 days later she was discharged from the hospital. No signs of liver or renal failure appeared, and the only complication during her hospital stay was a single episode of blood in the sputum. A blood and urine sample taken immediately after the discharge from the ICU was sent to the forensic toxicology department of the University of Milano for a quantitative measurement of PCE. The results were as follows: blood concentration 9.45 ng/ml and urine concentration 25.5 ng/mg.