A 22-year-old female patient, Gravida 3, Para 2 (G3P2), underwent fetal echocardiography at 23 weeks of gestation. Both the two-dimensional (2D) grayscale image and color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI) revealed cardiac structural abnormalities. The 2D grayscale imaging showed that the main pulmonary artery (MPA) originated from the left ventricle (LV) and could be seen overriding the interventricular septum, with left and right blood vessels separating at the distal end . Furthermore, the aorta (Ao) was shown to originate completely from the right ventricle (RV) . The above signs indicated that the fetus had d-TGA combined with a ventricular septal defect (VSD). 2D grayscale combined with CDFI showed that the Ao was located on the right side of the trachea and that the first blood vessel originating from the Ao was the left innominate artery (LINA) , which was toward the left shoulder of the fetus. Subsequently, the left common carotid artery (LCCA) and left subclavian artery (LSA) were separated , indicating RAA-MIB . The following scan revealed a rare vascular ring, which extended from the confluent of the left pulmonary artery (LPA) and right pulmonary artery (RPA) to the left and right ductus arteriosus (LDA and RDA), converging into the descending aorta (DAo). Therefore, the BDA completely encircled the trachea, forming an “O”-shaped vascular ring (, ). In addition, a PLSVC was observed; the 2D grayscale longitudinal plane showed that this vessel converged into the coronary sinus (CS) . We have provided a pattern diagram to help understand this case .
To better visualize the spatial effect, we used a four-dimensional (4D) color Doppler with spatiotemporal image correlation (STIC) HD live flow mode (Voluson E10, GE Healthcare, Zipf, Austria) to clearly display ventricular arterial connectivity and the direction of vessel travel. From this three-dimensional (3D) image, it can be inferred that in the d-TGA, the RAA with LDA formed a “U”-shaped vascular ring. At this point, the RDA was located immediately below the RAA and could only be observed with flickering of the RDA in certain cardiac cycles (, ).
Furthermore, we utilized the STIC HD live flow Silhouette mode (CFM Silhou.90, CFM thresh.30, Transp. CFM 20) to identify the RDA hidden beneath the RAA via a posterior view, which required adjustments in the image quality and angle when applying STIC. The LDA and RDA originated from the proximal end of the LPA and RPA, respectively, and converged into the DAo. Different blood flow directions could help distinguish between pulmonary arteries and veins. Due to angle factors, only the first branch of the Ao could be seen (, ). Following multidisciplinary counseling and discussions with her family, this female patient decided to terminate her pregnancy and refused to undergo genetic testing.