A 27-year-old, gravida 3 para 0020, was transferred to our institution at 18 weeks' gestational age with new onset severe hypertension (blood pressure > 180/100 mmHg) and >10 g of protein on spot urine. Upon arrival to the labor and delivery unit, she was started on intravenous magnesium sulfate for eclampsia prophylaxis. Intermittent intravenous antihypertensive treatment was required for severe hypertension (blood pressure > 160/105 mmHg) but she was overall controlled with oral labetalol and nifedipine. Her 24-hour urine protein was 8822 mg. Her serum labs were unremarkable with a hemoglobin of 10.6 gm/dL, platelet count of 183 K/UL, creatinine of 0.6 mg/dL, AST/ALT of 24/15 U/L, and uric acid of 4.4 mg/dL. Nephrology was consulted and an extensive work-up was done. A low complement C4 of <8.0 was found. The patient, otherwise, had a negative renal ultrasound, antiphospholipid antibody studies, antinuclear antibody, C-ANCA/P-ANCA, myeloperoxidase antibody, serine protease 3 antibody, glomerular basement membrane antibody, viral hepatitis panel, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), and urine drug screening. Due to concern for preexisting renal pathology, the decision was made to proceed with a renal biopsy.
Initial light microscopy findings were consistent with a thrombotic microangiopathic lesion, compatible with preeclampsia. On review with the pathologist, the main finding was glomerular endotheliosis and glomerular capillary double contours . There was no artery or arteriole involvement and there was no thrombi or red blood cell fragmentation. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed weak (1+) segmental glomerular staining for IgM and C1q and no staining for IgG, IgA, C3, or κ or λ light chains. The biopsy findings, the new onset severe hypertension, and new onset nephrotic range proteinuria in the absence of any other definable etiology led us to the eventual diagnosis of preeclampsia.
After a few days, the patient began to develop worsening hypertension despite being on increasing doses of oral labetalol and nifedipine, requiring additional intravenous antihypertensives for breakthrough severe range blood pressures. She also developed persistent neurologic symptoms consistent with posterior reversible encephalopathic syndrome. Her serum labs, including creatinine, remained stable. Due to the severe nature of her preeclampsia at a previable gestational age, pregnancy termination was recommended. Within 6 hours of the patient's delivery, she no longer required intravenous antihypertensive therapy. Her neurologic symptoms resolved within 72 hours of delivery. She had a follow-up visit with nephrology 17 days after delivery and her urinalysis demonstrated no protein. Her serum labs at that time included hemoglobin of 12.0 gm/dL, platelet count of 307 K/UL, creatinine of 0.74 mg/dL, and AST/ALT of 25/17 U/L.
Following her delivery, electron microscopic examination of the biopsy revealed numerous subendothelial and mesangial electron dense deposits within the glomerulus. Subsequent immunostain for C4d demonstrated intense staining of the glomerular capillaries. These findings were felt to be consistent with C4 glomerulopathy.