A 52-year-old male who had undergone CABG due to effort angina pectoris (left internal-thoracic artery to S7, free right internal-thoracic artery to S12, and free right radial artery to S4PD) 2 years prior visited our hospital for a recurrence of effort angina pectoris. A pre-PCI echocardiographic movie is shown in . Pertinent laboratory information upon admission was unremarkable. Coronary angiography demonstrated chronic total occlusion (CTO) of the first diagonal branch (S9, , dotted line) and severe stenosis of the second diagonal branch (S10, , arrow). Significant stenoses were not detected in other coronary arteries, including prior bypass grafts . Ischaemia of the left ventricular anterolateral wall was confirmed by myocardial scintigraphy. His chest pain at effort did not improve with the administration of bisoprolol 5 mg/day, nitroglycerine 25 mg/day, and aspirin 100 mg/day. Percutaneous coronary intervention was performed for Segments #9 and #10 after adding clopidogrel 75 mg/day to his medications. Segment #10 stenosis was anterogradely passed by a 0.014-inch coronary angioplasty guidewire (SION Black, Asahi Intec, Nagoya, Japan), and Segment #9 CTO was recanalized by side-branch intravascular ultrasonography-guided parallel wiring (Conquest Pro 12, Asahi Intec, Nagoya, Japan). After the stent deployment for each lesion, coronary artery perforation was detected by contrast injection; this was a complication from the wire manipulation at the distal end of Segment #10 (, arrows and Video 1). We immediately performed intravascular embolization using fat tissue, and contrast oozing disappeared at once (, arrows). Eventually, another wire perforation was found at the tip of Segment #9 (, arrow and Video 2). This was treated using the same method. However, rebleeding occurred at Segments #9 and #10, and in the left circumflex artery (Cx; , arrows and Video 3). Because the patient instantly experienced cardiac shock caused by the global pericardial tamponade, pericardial drainage was immediately performed. After drainage, bleeding was also observed around the Cx graft (pointed by the arrows in , and ). Haemostasis of the whole Cx and its graft was achieved by coil embolization using a microcatheter (C-STOPPER, Piolax Medical Devices, Yokohama, Japan, , pointed by a dotted line). In contrast, haemostasis of Segments #9 and #10 occurred spontaneously. This was confirmed by the final angiography ( and , and ). After PCI, rebleeding occurred. The amount of bleeding gradually increased to 400 mL/min. Unfortunately, the patient died due to cardiac and hypovolemic shock despite 7 h of intensive care and blood transfusions.