A 71-year-old man was referred by his general practitioner with undifferentiated right abdominal pain which eventually proved to be primary subhepatic appendicitis. The patient presented with sudden severe right upper quadrant pain radiating to the right iliac fossa. He had no nausea, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhoea or fever. The patient had multiple medical comorbidities including moderately severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and an uncomplicated open cholecystectomy 10 years previously.
The patient's vital observations were BP 96/57 mmHg, pulse 65/minute and regular, temperature 36.5°C, respiratory rate 18/minute and SaO2 98% on room air. Abdominal tenderness without rebound or guarding was present only in the right upper quadrant and epigastrium. The abdomen was not distended but obese, there was no palpable mass and normal bowel sounds were present. Occasional basal crepitations were heard on lung auscultation.
Liver function test, lipase and troponin I were normal. His white cell count was elevated at 19.1 (RR 4.5–11 × 109/litre) with predominant neutrophilia 16.66 (RR 1.8–7.7 × 109/litre). There was pre-existing right basal collapse on chest X-ray which was stable in size. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) with oral and intravenous contrast demonstrated a subhepatic appendiceal faecolith. The caecum was rotatedposteriorly andsuperiorlybehind the ascending colon, with the appendix passing superiorly from this to the inferior aspect of the liver wherethe faecolith was located. From there, the appendix passed anteriorlyalongthelowersurfaceof the liverand was associated with inflammation of the hepatic flexure .
The patient underwent laparoscopic appendectomy and adhesiolysis. Operative findings included suppurative subhepatic appendicitis with the ascending colon being adherent to the gallbladder fossa. The histopathology of the resected appendix is that of transmural acute inflammation and focal mucosal ulceration. The patient was ventilated for 72 hours for his COPD and had a 16-day in-patient stay due to surgical wound infection, which was treated with intravenous vancomycin and gentamicin.