A 60-year old male was referred for evaluation of an ascending aortic aneurysm following several months of intermittent chest pain. CT angiography revealed a 4.8 cm aortic root and moderate aortic insufficiency was seen on transthoracic echocardiography. Family history was notable for a mother and brother who died from acute aortic dissection and a second brother who underwent emergent repair of a type A dissection. Due to his symptoms and strong family history, elective aortic repair was recommended to mitigate the risk of rupture/dissection and progression of aortic valved disease. The patient underwent aortic root replacement using a bioprosthetic composite valved conduit in a modified Bentall fashion. The patient tolerated the procedure well and was discharged home on postoperative day 4 following uneventful inpatient convalescence.
Given his strong family history, genetics consultation was sought and genetic testing was performed on the proband. A commercially available Invitae panel was used to identify a potential mutation. This revealed that he was a heterozygous carrier of the ACTA2 missense mutation R118Q. All living family members were contacted and all agreed to be tested for this variant, allowing construction of a pedigree for the variant and penetrance of an aortic event . An aortic event was defined as lifetime occurrence of aortic surgery or dissection. 7 family members underwent genetic testing and 5/7 harbored the variant. Of those 5: both members over the age of 50 had an aortic event (II-4 experienced a dissection with emergent repair and the proband II-2 underwent elective repair for large aneurysm), one member (III-4) has known aortic dilation and is monitored with regular surveillance CT angiography, one has imaging with normal aortic diameter (III-2, 3.8 cm ascending aorta), and one has declined imaging surveillance (III-1). Notably, all descendants of I-1 over the age of 50 had an aortic event. Regardless of genetic presence of genetic mutation, all descendants of I-1 over the age of 50 (n = 4) had an aortic event (mean age at event 57.8 ± 3.9 years).