A 36-year-old white woman, 73 kg, 1.64 m, body mass index (BMI) 27.1 kg/m2, gravida 1 in 17 weeks of gestation presented to our hospital for the first time for evaluation of recurrent episodes of hypoglycemia associated with neuroglycopenic symptoms. She had no chronic illness or medical conditions and had not taken any medication prior to hospital admission. Her family and social history were not remarkable. She had post-high-school education and was not employed. Her environmental history revealed no abnormalities. Neither parent smoked tobacco during the pregnancy or took any drugs or medication. In 2008, she had a normal pregnancy with no complications and gave birth to a healthy 3500 g baby boy. On physical examination her vital signs were normal, her blood pressure was 125/75 mmHg, and pulse 85/minute. The examination was otherwise unremarkable. Her neurological examination was normal. An initial blood test of complete blood count (CBC), liver test, and renal function as well as urine analysis were in normal laboratory range.
To detect and evaluate her episodes of spontaneous hypoglycemia a CGMS was administered for 3 days. The system used was the MiniMed® (Medtronic, Northridge, CA, USA) subcutaneous CGMS® System™. This system continuously measures subcutaneous tissue interstitial glucose levels, recording values on average every 5 minutes within a range of 2.2 to 22.0 mmol/L. It allows 288 measurements of glucose in a 24-hour period.
The CGMS detected hypoglycemia 3 hours after her last ingestion of food. Her interstitial glucose value was 3.1 mmol/l, confirmed by plasma glucose value of 2.7 mmol/l, serum insulin 4.25 mE/l, C-peptide 0.54 nmol/l, and proinsulin value of 7.49 ulU/ml. After correction with a carbohydrate meal, hypoglycemia was again confirmed the next day at 1 a.m. with an interstitial glucose value of 3.3 mmol/l, a serum glucose value of 2.9 mmol/l, serum insulin 6.3 mE/l, C-peptide 0.44 nmol/l, and proinsulin 13.70 pmol/l, clearly indicating endogenous hyperinsulinism. Another instance of hypoglycemia was confirmed at 9 a.m. An adjusted meal plan with a proper amount of carbohydrate did not cause any further hypoglycemia as observed by the CGMS.
Preoperatively, a tumor mass of 18×22 mm was localized at the tail of her pancreas by endoscopic ultrasound. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was subsequently performed and no contrast medium was used because of the pregnancy. MRI demonstrated a hyperintense solid lesion 2 cm in diameter localized in the area of her pancreatic tail . Surgical exploration at 21 weeks of gestation confirmed one tumor in her pancreatic tail near to lienal artery and distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy was performed. A histopathological examination confirmed a 15 mm, partly encapsulated and partly expansive tumor with strong immunohistochemical staining for chromogranin and focally for insulin. There were also signs of vascular or perineural invasion. Tumor cells showed mild atypias with nucleolar enlargement, a slightly increased nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, and nuclear crowding. Ki-67 staining indicated a proliferative index of approximately 5%, which is diagnostic for a low-grade malignancy. On macroscopic examination, there were no signs of metastases and pT3N0Mx tumor staging was determined.
After surgical excision of the tumor, our patient had no more hypoglycemic attacks. Her postoperative blood glucose levels were within the normal range. Her serum insulin and C-peptide levels after oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) were in the normal range
The pregnancy continued without complications; at week 28 she was diagnosed with gestational diabetes. She was successfully treated with diet . During the pregnancy she gained 10 kg of weight. She delivered vaginally after 39 weeks of gestation: a baby girl with an Apgar score of 9/10 at 1 and 5 minutes. A birth weight of 3.57 kg, head circumference of 37 cm, and length at birth of 50 cm were recorded. No dyschromias or malformations were found. The examination of the newborn was normal. Her blood glucose level was normal. The postpartum period was without complication for the baby and for the mother. She was breastfed until the age of 9 weeks. She had regular visits to our diabetology out-patient clinic every 3 months. Her glucose levels and glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) were in normal range. She is without signs of recurrence or metastatic disease 36 months after tumor removal. Her glucose tolerance, checked by OGTT, is normal.