A 73-year-old man underwent right lower lobectomy with lymph node dissection (ND2a-2) for right primary lung cancer (cT1cN2M0 Stage IIIA). Because the patient was complicated with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis with emphysema (CPFE), we performed surgery without preoperative chemoradiotherapy in consideration of the risk of acute exacerbation of interstitial pneumonia. The lobar bronchus was closed by stapler, and suture closure was performed with a pericardial fat pad graft covering the bronchial stump to prevent the development of a BPF. Overall, his postoperative course was unremarkable; however, on postoperative day (POD) 13, computed tomography (CT) revealed pneumonia of the right middle lung lobe, and antibiotic therapy was initiated. However, he was refractory to the antibiotic therapy, and repeat CT (on POD 20) revealed air retention around the bronchial stump . Bronchoscopy showed the formation of a fistula involving the bronchial stump at the right lower lobe , and he was diagnosed with a BPF. We performed emergency fenestration to control bacterial infection and avoid a life-threatening situation. Since rehabilitation was not progressed due to postoperative pain and CPFE, we decided to perform fenestration using a Lap protector to avoid extensive surgery and continue postoperative rehabilitation. Intraoperatively, we made a skin incision (6 cm in length) in the eighth intercostal space in the posterior axillary line just above the thoracic cavity and incised the subcutaneous tissue and the muscles of the chest wall. We separated the intercostal muscles and inserted a Lap-protector (FF0707, Hakko Co., Ltd, Japan) . The thoracic cavity was thoroughly irrigated, and the fistula was confirmed cranial to the pericardial fat pad graft covering the bronchial stump. Postoperatively, the daily application of gauze dressings was continued without any complications such as pneumonia, and the fenestration wound showed good healing compared with the immediate postoperative wound , his routine activities were unaffected postoperatively. Although complete closure of the fistula did not occur by the time of his 1-year postoperative follow-up , the bacterial infection was well-controlled and chest CT showed a prominent reduction of the thoracic cavity , we planned to cover the bronchial stump and to fill the thoracic cavity by omentum. However, as the rapid deterioration of the general condition due to the recurrence of the tumor was observed, closing of the thoracic cavity was abandoned, and now, symptomatic treatment is performed under the daily application of gauze dressings.