We report a 23-year-old female patient diagnosed with DM 3 years before her current presentation. The diagnosis was based on the clinical presentation of Gottron’s papules, heliotrope rash, inability to comb her hair, walk up the stairs, or stand from a sitting position (proximal myopathy), elevated creatinine kinase, and muscle biopsy. She has been well-controlled on maintenance therapy of methotrexate and oral prednisolone 5 mg daily. On July 15th, 2021, she presented with rhinorrhea, fever, and dry cough and was diagnosed with a COVID-19 mild infection. Her prednisolone dose was increased to 20 mg daily and then tapered over 4 weeks. The COVID-19 infection ultimately resolved on July 30, 2021.
Six weeks later, she presented with an exacerbation of DM symptoms in the form of re-appearance of Gottron’s papules on both hands, heliotrope rash, and generalized muscle weakness, Medical Research Council’s scale (MRC scale) grade 4/5, that impaired her activity of daily living (ADL). Her lab profile revealed aspartate aminotransferase (AST): 91 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT): 255 U/L), elevated creatinine phosphokinase (CPK): 9052 U/L, leucocytosis: 12.04 cells/cc3, and elevated CRP: 4.45 mg/d. The patient received a dose of IVIG 1g/kg daily for 2 days, the prednisolone dose was increased to 10 mg daily, and methotrexate was continued. Nevertheless, the patient’s condition got worse in terms of the progression of her weakness and persistence of the heliotrope rash. She became bedbound with an overall MRC grade 2/5 of the muscles of the proximal upper and lower limbs. She reported no fever, weight loss, dyspnea, chest pain, or bulbar dysfunction. The CPK level increased to 24,135 U/L, and the AST and ALT increased to 883 and 201 U/L, respectively. The septic and malignancy workup was unremarkable.
Accordingly, she was admitted to our hospital and administered pulse methylprednisolone 1g/day for 3 days, followed by oral prednisolone 1mg/kg/day and IVIG 1g/kg daily for 2 days. Methotrexate was stopped and was replaced with rituximab. In about 10 days, the patient improved, ie, the power of the upper extremity muscles became MRC grade 5/5, the lower extremity muscles became 4/5, the CPK was reduced to 12,108 U/L, and the rash disappeared. The patient was discharged from the hospital on oral prednisolone 40 mg daily to be tapered gradually (5 mg every week) along with rituximab as maintenance therapy. Since then, her DM remained in remission.