A 27-year-old female presented acutely to an emergency department at a local hospital. Her symptoms began with malaise followed by productive cough, rhinorrhoea, and fever. She then had sudden onset of chest pain and dyspnoea. History from her caregiver indicated that she was known to have a cardiac murmur since she was 4 months old and had follow-up until 16, at which point she was discharged without surgical intervention. She did not have regular medication, history of tobacco nor illicit drug use. There was no recent travel history or close contact with persons with viral illness.
On arrival, she was tachypnoeic with a respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute and hypoxic requiring high flow mask oxygen of 15 L/min. She was also tachycardic at 130 b.p.m. and had a blood pressure (BP) of 125/53 mmHg. She was afebrile. Cardiovascular examination revealed a pansystolic murmur grade 2/6 heard best over the left upper sternal edge with chest auscultation revealing bilateral crepitations.
Her electrocardiogram showed ST-elevation in leads II, III, and aVF with ST depression in V4–V6 . Cardiac enzyme (Troponin I) was elevated at 6283 ng/mL. Her condition rapidly deteriorated requiring invasive ventilation. An urgent bedside transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed normal left ventricle function without regional wall motion abnormality that would otherwise suggest a myocardial infarct. In parasternal long axis (PLAX) view, there was a defect in the ventricular septum denoting a VSD .
Interestingly, the parasternal short axis (PSAX) view revealed ruptured right SoVA with left-to-right shunt from the aorta into the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) near the pulmonic valve . These findings refined our diagnosis to doubly committed subarterial VSD. This was further complicated by rupture of the SoVA prolapsing through the VSD into the RVOT giving rise to a ‘windsock’ appearance. There was also a suspicion of an intimal flap at the ascending aorta in the suprasternal view. Subsequently, a transoesophageal echocardiogram was performed and confirmed the TTE findings.
An immediate referral was made to the nearest cardiothoracic centres for urgent surgical repair. Stabilization of patient’s condition was emphasized before transferring over for surgery. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) and was treated empirically for infective endocarditis using local antibiotics guidelines.
During the first 2 days in ICU, the patient’s condition continued to decline. She required double inotropic support with higher ventilator settings. The patient developed an acute kidney injury and acute liver failure. Her white cell count was 31 × 109/L (neutrophilia), urea and creatinine were 15.3 mmol/L and 321 μmol/L, respectively. Her ALT (Alanine Transaminase) and AST (Aspartate Transaminase) were 3458 U/L and 5919 U/L, respectively.
Patient was finally referred to our centre for emergency surgery. Upon arrival in our cardiac care unit, she was critically ill needing multiple inotropes with overwhelming sepsis and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Haemodialysis was initiated in view of worsening kidney failure. Antibiotics were escalated to intravenous Piperacillin/Tazobactam. At one point, the patient went into cardiac arrest with pulseless electrical activity. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed for 7 min before return of spontaneous circulation. Despite her dire prognosis, the multidisciplinary team decided to proceed with high-risk emergency surgery especially since she was of young age. Surgery revealed a large SoVA at the right coronary cusp with windsock prolapsing through a large (20 mm) subarterial VSD. The rupture was at the tip of the windsock . The surgeon closed the defects with GORE-TEX® patches.
On Day 3 post-surgery (POD 3), she had unstable atrial fibrillation needing electrical cardioversion. On POD 8, she had incessant ventricular fibrillation which did not respond to external defibrillation, necessitating the surgical team to perform emergency exploratory sternotomy for resuscitation. No cardiac tamponade and bleeding were found, and the patient responded to internal defibrillation and cardiac massage. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed for 30 min followed with internal cardiac pacing. Resuscitation was successful and she gradually recovered. Antibiotics were also extended to a duration of 1 month for mediastinitis despite negative blood cultures.
After 6 weeks of hospitalization, she was discharged in good condition. She required intensive rehabilitation due to critical illness polyneuropathy.