A 58-year-old woman with NF1 was referred to our department for treatment. Her BMD and laboratory data are presented in and , respectively. She had not exhibited any clinical disease signs at birth, but dermatological examination of a café au lait spot during the upper grades of elementary school disclosed NF1. Genetic testing confirmed a deletion mutation in NF1 (c.6525delT) causing an amino acid substitution at position 2175 (p.2175fs). She later required resection of neurofibromas around her back and breast in her 40s. Foot pain appeared at age 55, at which time a fatigue fracture was discovered during a visit to an orthopedic clinic. She was referred to the Endocrinology and Metabolism Department of our institution under suspicion of osteoporosis and began conservative treatment for hyperparathyroidism. Osteoporotic treatment was commenced for the patient’s diminished lumbar and proximal femur BMD values due to past fragility fractures. She had been receiving ALN for the previous 3 years at a nearby clinic. Despite the ALN administration, the bone turnover marker values remained high values. As BMD values had remained substantially low, we opted for denosumab owing to its reported effectiveness following BP therapy.
Denosumab was injected subcutaneously every 6 months (ie, at 0, 6, 12, 18, and 24 months) and bone metabolism marker and BMD values were examined before, between 2 and 4 months, and at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months of treatment. Serum TRACP-5b and urinary type I collagen amino-terminal telopeptide (NTX) greatly decreased after the first administration. Despite the denosumab administration, bone turnover markers were remarkably increased to the 18 months after the therapy. At the study end point, the bone turnover markers were greatly inhibited.
At 1 year of denosumab treatment, her lumbar BMD had not increased and she had experienced a vertebral fracture. Around that time, her activity had started to decline and she required the use of a wheelchair. BMD began to fall. At 2 years of denosumab treatment, however, her lumbar BMD T-score was improved from −2.8 to −2.4 and her total hip BMD T-score was ameliorated from −3.9 to −3.5. The percent increases in BMD were 6.5% for the lumbar spine and 10.6% for total hips at the study end point.
This study was approved by the institutional ethical review board of Shinshu University School of Medicine (approval number: 2365) prior to its start and was conducted in accordance with the ethical standards set forth in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki for research involving human subjects. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication prior to this study.