A 28-year-old Iranian female, a primary school teacher, with a history of immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and asthma since childhood, presented with a 13-month history of progressive depression with insomnia and nightmare symptoms. After a specialized psychiatric consultation, haloperidol, clomipramine, and clonazepam were prescribed. After eight months, the patient's symptoms worsened, and abdominal pain and weight loss due to anorexia started. Because of GI symptoms, the psychologist requested a gastroenterologist consultation.
She was an active teacher in primary school, formerly without any problem. Due to tiredness and inability to teach, the patient had applied for retirement. The patient complained of amenorrhea and lost 10 kg weight in eight months.
During the first visit, she was cachectic and agitated. She had mild dehydration with an arterial blood pressure of 85/40 mmHg, a respiratory rate of 18/min, a blood glucose level of 90 mg/dL, and a pulse rate of 120/min . Her physical exam showed hyperpigmented elbow, knee, ankle, and buccal mucosa in the mouth . Physical examination and initial laboratory tests suggested adrenal insufficiency. A specialized laboratory test was performed to confirm the diagnosis . Laboratory test and abdominal CT confirmed AD (, ). Therefore, she was admitted to the ward due to her general condition and examination. A complete blood count test was performed . The percentages of neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, and eosinophils were 38%, 51%, 3%, and 8%, respectively. Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) was normal; therefore, we did not check ferritin since there was normocytic normochromic anemia.
Hormonal tests were conducted due to the patient's menstrual irregularity (amenorrhea). This was performed to check that amenorrhea is not because of a pituitary problem. According to the results , the serum level of cortisol was low (1 ng/mL), and plasma ACTH level was very high (355 pmol/mL), showing that the patient had primary adrenal insufficiency (primary adrenal disease), characterized by menstrual irregularities. The patient also was suffering from hypokalemia due to anorexia and vomiting. The exact information about her vomiting duration and frequency was not recorded, but she vomited several times a day.
To correct hypokalemia, we started intravenous hydrocortisone (100 mg every eight hours) and normal saline (3 L/day). The symptoms significantly improved on the third day. The patient remained calm and had a normal sleep without depressive symptoms or psychosis after 72 hours of treatment. The patient's depression medication was discontinued based on psychiatrist consultation. The patient was discharged with hydrocortisone (30 mg/day) and fludrocortisone tablets (0.1 mg/day).
During one year of follow-up, she was in good general condition without psychological symptoms and continued her work as a teacher. The patient's menstrual disorder disappeared during this period, and she gained 6 kg weight.