A 50-year-old man without any systemic disease or drug history was sent to a hospital after he incurred an electric shock injury while using a handicraft grinder by his two hands. This machine was adapted to a 60-Hz, 110-V alternating current supply. Upon receiving the shock, the man could not sever contact with the machine until 5 minutes later. He fell from a height of 1 meter on his buttocks. He remained conscious but experienced weakness and numbness in the left extremities, and his speech was slurred. He denied any head contusion happened during fall down. On arriving at the hospital, he was alert and his eyes were oriented to the right. Muscle strength on the left side was decreased, with a grade of 2 on the Medical Research Council Scale. The results of laboratory investigations, including complete blood count, coagulation function, and levels of electrolytes, serum glucose, liver enzymes and creatine kinase were all within the normal limits. The findings on chest X-ray scan, electrocardiogram and electrocardiogram were normal. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain showed no obvious abnormalities. With the impression of ischemic stroke with left hemiplegia, the patient was administered thrombolytic therapy with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (r-tPA) within 3 hours after stroke onset, but no clinical improvement was noted. A magnetic resonance imaging scan of the brain showed an acute infarction in the right frontotemporal area involving the right basal ganglia and corona radiata. Magnetic resonance angiography showed segmental narrowing of the siphon of the right internal carotid artery (ICA) and the M1 segment of right middle cerebral artery (MCA) . There were no stenosis or other abnormal finding founded in right common carotid artery or extracranial ICA by MRA study. Conventional angiography were arranged 4 hours after r-tPA, and showed a smaller-caliber lumen of the right ICA and irregular lumen of the distal M1 branch of the MCA. The M2 branch of the MCA proximal to the angular branch was patent. Focal narrowing of the M1 branch was manipulated by to-and-fro movement of the microcatheter, and vasospasm was treated by intravascular injection of nimodipine. After treatment, the flow in the right ICA region improved . A rehabilitation program, including physical, occupational and speech therapy, was arranged for the patient. This patient can walk with quadricane for daily activities and dysarthria improved in 2 months.