A five-month-old boy of Caucasian ethnicity presented at our pediatric emergency unit. He had suffered acute paroxysmal abdominal pain and bilious vomiting for nine hours. His general condition and vital signs were normal.
During physical examination, an abdominal mass was noted in the upper right quadrant - there was no blood in stools in the rectum. Biological examinations did not yield significant results, but an ultrasound scan revealed a target sign in the form of an opaque mass under the liver. An air enema reduction was performed and identified a loop in the transverse colon that was refluxing under air pressure. This procedure did not result in a complete reduction of the assumed intussusception even after two attempts under midazolam infusion. An ileocolic intussusception of 2 cm was diagnosed during the laparoscopic exploration and a reduction was carried out by applying gentle traction. The adjacent small intestine and the ascending colon had a normal color and the child had normal peristalsis. The procedure was finished on these reassuring signs. During the night, the boy suffered repeated episodes of vomiting and had blood in his stools. An ultrasound scan performed in the morning revealed an intussusception, a swelling of the distal small intestine and the presence of a mass in the pouch of Douglas. It was difficult to determine with confidence whether the intussusception was ileocolic or ileoileal.
A second laparoscopic procedure determined that the intussusception was not ileocolic. The cecum was in its usual location, and there was no inflammation of the appendix. The small intestine was examined more closely and an intussusception was found, located 40 cm above the ileocolic junction. A reduction attempt failed even with the help of a third forceps. A right hemitransverse abdominal incision was performed but the reduction attempt failed. Palpating the ascending colon revealed a diffuse induration with no signs of wall necrosis. The small intestine appeared normal. A transverse enterotomy was performed 5 cm before the ileocolic junction. An intussusception of a bowel segment was identified but it could not be reduced. After full exploration, a tumor of less than 15 mm was identified at the top of the first intussusception. 40 cm of ileum was resected and an end-to-end anastomosis (A-B) was performed. The postoperative course was uneventful.
Histologic examination indicated the presence of 12 mm of heterotopic pancreatic tissue . The first intussusception was 60 cm away from the ileocolic junction with ileal heterotopic pancreatic tissue as the lead point. The second intussusception, which formed an additional loop on the first one, was located 40 cm away from the ileocolic junction. The third intussusception completed the telescoping in the ascending colon .