A 20-year-old lady presented first with bilateral otalgia and hearing loss three years ago. Due to a flat tympanogram and conductive hearing loss, serous otitis media was considered for her, and a ventilation tube was inserted bilaterally. Post-operatively, otorrhea, followed by dyspnea and jaw locking, were added to her symptoms. A cystic lesion was detected in the lung computer tomography (CT). According to a positive C-ANCA and a high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), granulomatosis with polyangiitis was diagnosed. Azathioprine and prednisolone were prescribed to control the disease and a hearing aid for amplifying sounds. Hearing deterioration developed rapidly over two months, causing bilateral deafness. The tympanic membrane was atrophic and retracted with no perforation in physical examination. Tympanometry was B-type bilaterally. A temporal bone CT scan revealed underdeveloped mastoid air cells, the middle ear, and mastoid opacification and retraction of the tympanic membrane .
Because of the ineffectiveness of the hearing aid, the patient was decided to be a candidate for right ear cochlear implantation with the nucleus slim modiolar electrode (CI532, Cochlear Ltd., Sidney, Australia). With the postauricular approach, after mastoidectomy and clearing the attic tissue, the short process of the incus became visible. A posterior tympanotomy was performed with difficulty because of bleeding from the inflamed tissue. Thus, the opening of the facial recess was narrow, and the visibility of middle ear components and round window and retraction of the ear drum through the facial recess were insufficient.
After elevation of the tympanomeatal flap, posterior canaloplasty and atticotomy were done. The retracted tympanic membrane was lifted from the middle ear floor and cochlear promontory. Next, the round window was exposed completely. The round window niche was removed with a 0.8mm diamond drill, exposing its membrane. The electrode entered the middle ear through the facial recess and was guided to the round window with the ear canal microscopic view. Therefore, it was fully placed in the scala tympani with the Contour Electrode (Claw Z33021) through the canal.
We used a piece of concha cartilage to reinforce the tympanic membrane to prevent further retraction, perforation of the tympanic membrane, or chronic middle ear infection. Finally, the tympanomeatal flap was returned to its original position. Intraoperative impedance and neural response telemetry (NRT) and post-operative trans-orbital X-ray confirmed the perfect performance and location of the electrode. Post-operative free field audiometry revealed a 30 dB speech reception threshold and an 80% speech discrimination score. After one year, the status of the middle ear was good, and the tympanic membrane was intact.