A 56-year-old middle eastern male patient was referred to the thoracic surgery clinic with right-sided flank pain and an eight-kilogram weight loss in four months. He had been suffering from symptoms resembling renal colic for fifteen years. The patient had undergone multiple surgical interventions for nephrolithiasis and the current episode of pain was located on the same side as the previous renal colic. Furthermore, he was diagnosed with hypertension and was under medical treatment with amlodipine and valsartan. He was smoker and had no history of substance abuse. His initial vital signs were all within normal ranges: blood pressure 115/80 mmHg, pulse rate 87 bpm, respiratory rate 15 pm, temperature 37.2 °C, oxygen saturation 96 %. physical examination was unremarkable and no local tenderness was detected. The bone scan disclosed a hypermetabolic bone involvement in the sixth rib on the right side (e.g., inflammatory process, bone metastasis, etc.) . He was admitted to the thoracic surgery ward for further investigations. Chest computed tomography without contrast and magnetic resonance imaging studies revealed a cystic lesion with a daughter cyst measuring 46 mm in total located at the sixth rib's posterior arch . The lesion had significantly deformed the surrounding bone and had led to osteolysis. No pleural effusion or pulmonary lesion was detected. The radiological appearance was compatible with a hydatid cyst. Thoracoscopic surgery was planned for diagnosis and treatment Thus, Single port thoracoscopy was performed. The intraoperative finding was an intraosseous cystic lesion measuring about 6 cm in the extrapleural space located at the posterior arch of the sixth rib. For better exposure and more explorative capabilities, the procedure was converted from thoracoscopy to open surgery. A right posterolateral incision through the 5th intercostal space was made. The site was irrigated with hypertonic saline as scolicidal agent. Thereafter, the cyst was incised, and the membranes were removed. Finally, partial resection of the sixth rib was undertaken. The seventh rib at the posterior angle was also involved and resection of the involved part of the rib was also done. A chest tube and a feeding tube for leaving the pleural space were placed in the cyst cavity . Histopathologic evaluation of the mass revealed “Hydatid cyst with prominent foreign body type granulomatous inflammation at the periphery between skeletal muscles with extension to osteocartilaginous tissue.” (, ).
Postoperative treatment included albendazole tablets 400 mg twice daily. The patient had no respiratory complications, and the chest tube was removed on the fifth-day post-operation. The chest X-ray findings on the discharge were unremarkable. The patient was reevaluated four weeks after the surgery, and he had no major complications. He only complained of slight somatic pain at the incision site. Chest X-ray was normal, and the wound was healed. The patient is currently being monitored with radiological surveillance every 3 months.