A 26-year-old man presented to the emergency department with progressive lower limb oedema over the past two weeks, accompanied by shortness of breath during physical activity. He had chronic sinusitis and a family history of coeliac disease but had no known allergies or medication history. Two months prior, he had consumed raw fish without developing any fever or gastrointestinal symptoms, and he had not been in contact with animals recently.
Upon examination, he was stable and apyretic but showed signs of reduced heart sounds and pitting oedema in his lower limbs. Blood tests revealed eosinophilia (980/mm3—normal range 0–700/mm3), increased total IgE concentration and C-reactive protein levels (12 mg/dL, normal range < 5 mg/dL). His ECG was normal, but an echocardiogram showed a severe pericardial effusion with a ‘swinging heart’, ventricular interdependence, a dilated inferior vena cava, and a 25% breathing variability of mitral pulsed Doppler (; see ). His left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was reduced to 48%.
Chest and abdomen contrast-enhanced CT scans revealed pleural and pericardial effusion with mediastinal lymphadenopathies measuring up to 15 mm in diameter.
Colchicine 0.5 mg b.i.d. and ibuprofen 600 mg t.i.d. were administered—and continued throughout the hospitalization—to treat suspected pleuro-pericarditis.
After being transferred to the Division of Internal Medicine, he underwent echo-assisted pericardiocentesis and 1150 mL of pericardial serous liquid was drained. Microbiologic tests of pericardial liquid came back negative, and cytology showed normal lymphocytes, macrophages, and mesothelial cells without eosinophils. Over the next few days, the patient’s peripheral oedema subsided and his LVEF recovered, however, the eosinophilia persisted (940–1100/mm3) and echocardiography detected a stable residual pericardial effusion (maximum 16 mm posteriorly) throughout the hospital stay.
Cardiac magnetic resonance (MRI) reported signs of myopericarditis, including late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) of pericardium and of medium-distal left ventricular subepicardial inferolateral wall , with increased T2-mapping ; LVEF was mildly reduced to 54%. Additionally, the total body fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET-FDG) scan showed notable glucose uptake in the pericardium and mediastinal lymph nodes .
An allergic reaction was excluded due to unsuggestive serology for inhalants, negative skin prick tests, and lack of common allergic symptoms.
All serology tests for viral and bacterial aetiologies of pericarditis, as well as blood β-glucans, galactomannans, Cryptococcal and Histoplasma antigens yielded negative results, and stool tests were normal. Serology of Toxocara canis, Strongyloides stercoralis, Ascaris lumbricoides, and Trichinella spiralis were also negative. However, Echinococcus granulosus IgG and Anisakis simplex IgE were mildly elevated [1:64 (<1:32 range for positivity), and 0,33 kUA/L (threshold for positivity at our laboratory > 0,10), respectively), even at repeated tests. Consequently, an abdominal contrast-enhanced MRI was conducted to rule out echinococcosis. On the other hand, due to the low but specific titre presented by the Anisakis serology and the atypical clinical presentation, we deemed it necessary to exclude other diseases. Therefore, an onco-haematologic condition was excluded after negative results from peripheral-blood immunophenotyping and medullary-blood immunophenotyping and cytology—which showed an expansion of normal medullary eosinophils. Churg–Strauss syndrome was also investigated due to reported chronic sinusitis, but no auto-antibody titres were elevated, and both rhinoscopy and facial-sinuses CT scan were unsuggestive.
Upon confirmation of stable elevation of Anisakis-specific IgE titre and long-lasting eosinophilia, we suspected the patient had consumed contaminated fish, leading to potential pericardial anisakiasis. However, given the time that had passed since the presumed contamination (indeed, the titre of specific IgE was low), we opted not to perform a diagnostic endoscopy. Instead, we prescribed albendazole 400 mg b.i.d. along with colchicine 0.5 mg b.i.d. and ibuprofen 600 mg t.i.d. As the patient remained stable, he was discharged 20 days after admission.
The patient underwent outpatient echocardiography at days 3–7–14–30 from discharge, which demonstrated progressive improvement of pericardial effusion and complete resolution at 2 weeks. Blood tests showed normalization of eosinophilic count and, subsequently, C-reactive protein as well within 3 weeks. Albendazole was stopped after 21 days of treatment; colchicine and ibuprofen were continued and de-escalated within two months of discharge.