The patient was a 25-year-old gravida 2, presenting to the antenatal clinic at 13 weeks gestational age. Medical history indicated that the patient was diagnosed with bipolar disorder ten years prior to this pregnancy. She was effectively managed with lithium carbonate (500 mg b.i.d.), haloperidol (Haldol®5 mg b.i.d.) and benztropine (Cogentin®, 2 mg b.i.d.) prior to pregnancy and the regimen was continued through the pregnancy. Plasma concentrations of the prescribed medication were not assessed. At 12 weeks gestation, the patient described her appetite as good, with two full meals and three snacks per day. Her pregnancy booking BMI was 21.99 and plasma haemoglobin (Hb) was normal (11.4 mg/dL). Her haemoglobin phenotype status is AA and she was both HIV and VDRL negative. The patient also reported regular supplementation with multivitamins specific for pregnancy (Materna®). Her blood pressure was normal at the beginning of the pregnancy at 110/70 mmHg and remained normal until about 36 weeks of gestation. The weight gain from 15 to 36 weeks of gestation was 6.9 Kg and her Hb remained in the normal range throughout the pregnancy. She then started to lose weight moving from 73.1 Kg at 36 weeks (+ 5 days) to 71.4 Kg at 38 weeks (+ 5 days) and recorded an elevation in blood pressure from week 37 until week 38. Her blood studies at 37 weeks were all normal .
She was admitted to the antenatal ward at 38 weeks + 5 days and labour was induced, however due to failure to progress, a caesarean section was performed with the birth of a male infant at 39 weeks. The infant's birth Apgar scores were good: 9 at one minute and 10 at 5 minutes. The infant's birth weight was 2500 g, which is below the mean for a term baby in the Jamaican population . Both infant and mother were discharged after three days and no follow-up data of either was collected.
The patient in this study was taken from a pool of sixteen women who were followed through all three trimesters of pregnancy. In order to make further assessment of infant outcomes in this case, we selected other women from the larger study that were similarly matched in gestation age, weight gain, blood pressure, haemoglobin status and infant gestational age at birth . The most distinctive differences between these other women and this patient were the lower birth weight of the infant (30% less) and lower placental weight (42% less).
We measured both fasting plasma phosphatidylcholine and choline through the three trimesters of pregnancy . For this patient, comparison between the data from trimester 1 (week 10–13) to trimester 3 (week 34–37) showed that plasma phosphatidylcholine concentration decreased by 22% during this period, while the plasma choline decreased by 38%. Comparison of the controls showed the expected increase in plasma choline and phosphatidylcholine concentrations.