A 3-year-and-9-month-old female patient sought orthodontic treatment in her parents’ company, with a chief complaint of prominent lower anterior teeth and asymmetric face.
No history of present illness was reported.
No past illness was reported.
No familial tendency of class III malocclusion was reported by the parents.
The patient was clinically assessed and fully investigated regarding oral hygiene, general health and medical history, which were unremarkable. No familial tendency of class III malocclusion was reported by the parents.
During clinical examination, a lateral shift of the mandible was observed. Her profile was minor concave, with protrusion of the upper and lower lips . The mandible could not be retracted to an edge-to-edge bite. The functional mandibular shift was detected, whereas nose-chin midpoints coincided when the mouth was wide open. No clicking sound or tenderness was detected in her temporo-mandibular joint area. Moreover, the clinical examination revealed mandibular displacement and habitual mandibular protraction with a deleterious tongue-thrust habit at rest and in speech.
Intraoral examination revealed a primary dentition phase. Anterior spacing was observed, and the model analysis showed 6.5 mm spacing in the maxillary arch and 5.3 mm spacing in the mandibular arch. The cross-bite involved the maxillary and mandibular incisors and the upper right canine with a maximum negative overjet of 4.5 mm and a negative overbite of 1.5 mm. The lateral view revealed a slightly palatal inclination of the upper incisors and a labial inclination of the mandibular incisors. The upper dental midline aligned with the facial midline, while the lower dental midline deviated 3.5 mm toward the right. Centric occlusion examination revealed a flush terminal molar relation with cross-bites on the right side and mesial step on the left side. In addition, an obvious sharp cusp was observed on tooth 53, implying insufficient tooth wear .
The lateral head radiograph was not performed owing to parent’s wishes and for ethical reasons.