A 74-year-old man underwent right upper lobectomy for lung cancer. The intraoperative findings showed that his lung was fragile because of severe emphysema, and minor air leakage was found near the staple line of the middle and lower lobes during the air leakage test. We used a polyglycolic acid sheet to cover the air leakage points and interlobar staple lines. Sulbactam/ampicillin was administered prophylactically after surgery until the chest drain was removed on postoperative day (POD) 7, due to complicated conditions with significant medical history: current smoker, hypertension, severe emphysema, aortic dissection, and diabetes mellitus. Chest radiographs on postoperative day 9 showed an interstitial shadow in the right lower lung field of the patient, who presented with a fever of 38.5 °C, dyspnea needing oxygen supplementation, and increased purulent sputum production containing gram-negative rods with phagocytes. The patient was administered the broad-spectrum antibiotic, meropenem, with the diagnosis of postoperative bacterial pneumonia resistant to sulbactactum/ampicillin for these clinical presentations. Despite treatment with meropenem, subsequent radiographs showed gradual worsening of the abnormal shadows of the right lower lung field . Laboratory analysis of the hemogram revealed gradual decreases in the values of the inflammatory parameters (white blood cells, from 10,500 to 7300/mm3; neutrophils, from 8001 to 4497/mm3, from 76.2 to 61.6%) but a gradual increase in eosinophil count (from 286 to 1182/mm3, from 4.2 to 16.2%; Fig. ). After cessation of the meropenem therapy on POD 23, bronchoscopy was performed for further evaluation, and the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) showed that the proportion of eosinophils was 51% .
The drug lymphocyte stimulation test (DLST) was negative for sulbactam/ampicillin, but positive for meropenem. Based on the clinical course, the laboratory results of BALF, and positive tests in the DLST, we reached the correct diagnosis of drug-induced pneumonia caused by meropenem. The patient showed remarkable improvement with corticosteroid treatment, 30 mg of oral prednisolone as an initial dose. The dosage of prednisolone was gradually tapered down by 5 mg for 6 weeks after confirmation of steady conditions and was halted subsequently. After this treatment, the abnormal shadows on the radiographs remarkably disappeared along with improvements in clinical conditions. The patient was discharged on POD 43 without oxygen supplementation. He is doing well without tumor recurrence 16 months after surgery with tegafur/uracil adjuvant chemotherapy.