A 45-year-old man with acute myeloid leukemia (AML-M5b) was subject to human leukocyte antigen-haploidentical relative HSCT for persistent minimal residual disease (MRD) . Apart from AML, the patient did not have any potentially relevant pre-existing conditions or medical treatments that may have impacted on bacterial colonization, clearance, or drug tolerance. The conditioning regimen comprised busulfan (0.8 mg/kg/q6h), cyclophosphamide (60 mg/kg/d), and semustine (250 mg/m2/d). Cyclosporin A, methotrexate, and mycophenolate mofetil were used for GVHD prophylaxis, and levofloxacin and cefotaxime/sulbactam were given for antimicrobial prophylaxis. Prior to conditioning therapy, carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae (CRKp) colonization, which has a high level of resistance to most routine antibiotics except for tigecycline (Additional file : Figure S1), was identified during routine rectal screening, while no decolonization strategies were performed. Six days after allo-HSCT, the patient developed neutropenic fever and the organism that grew in the blood culture was identified as CRKp which with the same resistance pattern as the previous one. CRKp bacteremia was successfully controlled by tigecycline. Hematopoietic stem cells were engrafted on day +11 and the patient discharged on day +20. During regular follow-up, the patient was in remission, but suffered chronic oral GVHD as it had not responded well to prednisone and tacrolimus. Thus, the patient remained in a very poor nutritional state, weighing approximately 45 kg (height = 168 cm).
A second fever episode was accompanied by chills, cough, and expectoration on day +421. On this occasion, lung computerized tomography (CT) suggested pulmonary infection, and sputum and stool cultures were both positive for CRKp. This confirmed previous susceptibility tests, although blood cultures were negative. Infection was controlled by administering an antibiotic therapeutic regimen, including tigecycline. However, sputum and stool cultures remained positive for CRKp, indicating persistent CRKp colonization. Based on the same resistance patterns, we speculated that they were the same strain. Moreover, a previous study indicated that most bacteremia cases originated from the gut [, ]. Thus, FMT was planned to reduce the risk of infection and improve future quality of life.