A 72-year-old female patient, who has a prolonged history of diabetes mellitus type 2, hypertension, and was a heavy smoker of 50 pack-year, was accidentally found to have a 2 cm nodule in the right lung lower lobe. She was then referred to King Hussein Cancer Center (KHCC) for further investigation. A Positron Emission Tomography Computerized tomography (PET CT) scan was done and showed a peripherally located sub-solid cavitary lesion in the right lower lobe posteriorly measuring about 2.5 × 2 cm in maximum axial dimensions, with no evidence of other concerning hypermetabolic lesions. Computerized tomography (CT)-guided biopsy by interventional radiology was done and pathology examination showed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma with lepidic pattern. The staging was T1N0M0. The multidisciplinary committee (MDC) recommendation was to go with surgical intervention.
Normal preoperative routine labs with a pulmonary function test (PFT) resulted in FEV1 at 68% and DLCO at 95%. On the 19th of October 2022, the patient underwent right robotic-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (RATS), which showed difficulty in dissecting right fused pulmonary fissures. Accordingly, robotic surgery converted to anterolateral thoracotomy with right lower lobectomy and mediastinal lymphadenectomy. The pathology report showed completely resected 2.2 cm well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, and pathology staging was reported as pT2N0; due to visceral pleural invasion. Negative Lympho-Vascular Invasion (LVI).
The postoperative (post-op) course was smooth, she had one chest tube, the pain was controlled, and she used the incentive spirometer efficiently. Daily chest x-ray showed good right lung inflation. The chest tube was removed on postoperative day four and the patient was discharged home assuring compliance for incentive spirometer use. 49 days after the first surgery, she presented to the Thoracic surgery clinic with a 7-day history of shortness of breath, chest CT scan showed a new large right pneumothorax with a small dependent pleural fluid resulting in segmental pulmonary atelectasis. A suspicious focal connection between the right lower bronchus stump and pleural cavity was suspected suggesting a bronchopleural fistula (BPF).
The patient was admitted, and a pigtail chest drain was inserted right away and connected to the chest bottle on wall suction, around 200 ml of serosanguinous fluid was withdrawn at insertion with continuous air bubbling seen. On day 3 post-admission she was doing well, with no shortness of breath reported, vital signs were within normal limits, the pigtail drain was connected to the Heimlich valve, and the patient was discharged home. After one week of follow-up, a chest x-ray showed persistent right pneumothorax without improvement in the right lung inflation. Conservative treatment continued for another week but the chest x-ray didn’t show any changes. Accordingly, the thoracic surgery team decided to go for the right single-port VATS decortication and pleurodesis which was done utilizing a single-port VATS approach through the previous chest tube wound. After that, the patient was observed in the hospital for four weeks with not much improvement in lung expansion . Bronchoscopy was done by the interventional pulmonary team in the hope to locate the bronchial fistula by occlusion of different sub-segments from the upper and middle lobes but couldn’t localize the fistula exactly, a glue was installed over the lower lobe stump site.
103 days after the first operation, the patient was sent to surgery again. because she is thin (Body Mass Index (BMI) is 18) and there are not many options for a big flap to fill the chest cavity empty space, we decided to use multiple flaps; the general surgery team performed laparoscopic surgery in which the greater omentum was transferred as a pedicle flap passing through an opening in the right hemi diaphragm anterior to the liver to the right chest cavity, this procedure was assessed by redo right VATS, which was converted to mini- anterolateral thoracotomy to extract the omentum. Pleural decortication and closure of multiple bronchopleural fistulas with an omental flap were done. Intercostal muscle and serratus muscle pedicle flaps were used to aid with pleural space-filling and BPF coverage in addition to mechanical and chemical pleurodesis. Full expansion of the lung was obtained.
The patient spent the night in the intermediate surgical unit and was transferred to the floor on the second-day post-op. She had two chest tubes; one anteriorly and the other posteriorly on the right side. She had a daily chest x-ray with good expansion and no air leak . The post-op course was smooth, she was doing well without any signs of respiratory distress. On day 4 post-op the anterior chest tube was removed and there was no air leak, the posterior chest tube showed a slight air leak. On day 5 post-op there was no air leak, and the posterior chest tube was removed as well and the patient was discharged home. The patient was followed up in the thoracic surgery clinic, she was doing well, chest x-ray showed excellent right lung expansion without remnant pneumothorax. Also, there were no recurrent air leaks after a six-month and one-year follow-up.