Here, the authors present the case of a 59-year-old male patient who, over approximately 6 months, developed a severe depressive episode with depressed mood, loss of interest, reduced energy, reduced concentration and attention, pessimistic views of the future, disturbed sleep, and distressing inner restlessness. The psychopharmacological treatment with sertraline, trimipramine, trazodone, and cognitive behavioral therapy did not lead to an improvement, which is why the patient was admitted to our psychiatric day-care hospital. Focal neurological symptoms or other general medical symptoms or signs (e.g., skin changes) were not present. The patient had already experienced one mild depressive episode when he was 55 years old. The possibility of multiple sclerosis had already been discussed at the age of 39. At that time, he had suffered from sensory disturbances and muscle weakness of both legs (emphasized on the right side). Already at that time, CSF-specific oligoclonal bands (OCBs) and MRI white matter (WM) lesions had been noticed. However, with clinical symptoms fading away (without treatment) those MRI images had got lost over the years. When the patient was 44, autoimmune hepatopathy had been discussed due to slightly elevated transaminases, evidence of fatty liver in abdominal ultrasound, and elevated antinuclear antibodies (ANAs; titer: 1:3,200; reference, <1:50) without specification for extractable nuclear antigens (ENAs).
An MRI of the neurocranium showed several conspicuous FLAIR-hyperintense supratentorial WM lesions (among others, ovoid periventricular WM lesions on both sides, in the corpus callosum, and in the right side of the crus cerebri) without contrast enhancement which was assessed to be compatible with chronic inflammatory brain disease . Imaging of the spinal axis revealed no clear spinal lesions. Serum ANA titers of 1:12,800 (reference: <1:50) were found using indirect immunofluorescence technique on HEp-2000® cells without specification for ENAs or double-stranded DNA (ds-DNA). The CSF diagnostics revealed CSF-specific OCBs and local immunoglobulin M (IgM) synthesis. The MRZ reaction was negative. A large panel of established antineuronal antibodies against cell surface (NMDA-R, LGI1, CASPR2, AMPA1/2-R, GABA-B-R, and DPPX), and intracellular (Yo, Hu, CV2/CRMP5, Ri, Ma1/2, Tr, Zic4, SOX1, GAD65, and amphiphysin) antigens were negative. The tissue-based assay using CSF with indirect immunofluorescence on unfixed murine brain tissue revealed a (peri-)nuclear signal, likely reflecting the ANAs. However, CSF-testing also displayed an arborizing neuronal signal of many neurons, especially on granule cells in the cerebellum, hippocampus and olfactorius bulb (most likely axonal, not present in control CSF). The neuronal signal was also detectable in the corpus callosum . This signal was less detectable in the serum. The EEG and FDG PET of the brain and the whole body showed no relevant abnormalities. The peripheral electrophysiological examinations were essentially normal. Comprehensive blood analyses revealed persistent lymphopenia (minimum 0.59 109/L; reference 1.1–3.2 109/L). The lymphocyte panel showed a deficiency of CD8+ T cells, and the CD4/CD8 quotient was elevated (6.92), however the sarcoidosis markers were unremarkable. Further medical investigations including gastroscopy, coloscopy, ultrasound of the abdomen, and an x-ray of the thorax did not produce any evidence for rheumatic or oncological disease. Neuropsychologically, a clear psychomotor slowing and deficits in verbal memory were observed. All diagnostic findings are summarized in
The patient’s history was negative for in-utero/birth complications, febrile convulsions/epileptic seizures, severe infectious diseases, or craniocerebral traumata. There were no indications of developmental disorders. An obsessive-compulsive personality structure was perceivable without ever fulfilling the criteria of a personality disorder. The family history (including his parents, grandparents, and siblings) was clear of any diagnosed psychiatric, neurological, cancer, or autoimmune disorders except for his mother suffering from beginning late-onset dementia.
Following diagnostic clarification and in the absence of a response to antidepressants, immunosuppressive treatment with a steroid pulse (5 × 1000 mg methylprednisolone over 5 days) was performed. Directly after steroid pulse treatment, the inner restlessness receded, and the mood improved. Within the next two to three weeks, the depressive syndrome fully remitted. Neuropsychological follow-up testing showed an improvement in working memory and mental flexibility, and the ANA titers decreased to 3200. Maintenance therapy with azathioprine led to pancreatitis, therefore maintenance therapy with methotrexate (15 mg per week) was established. The individual decision for methotrexate treatment was made under the initial assumption of a possible “overlap syndrome” with multiple sclerosis and a systemic autoimmune disease. At the time of publication, the patient was recommended to start a long-term, specific treatment of multiple sclerosis. Vitamin B12/D and folic acid were substituted. After improvement of the depression, the antidepressant treatment was tapered off. Three months later, the MRI was unchanged. Eight months later, one small, newly detectable lesion in the right cerebellar peduncle was observed (in the previous MRI examination, however, the area was artifact overlaid). Over 8 months, all depressive symptoms had vanished, except a slight sensory overload in vibrant situations.