A 60-year-old Caucasian man initially presented with an anterior rib fracture which was evaluated with X-rays that revealed lytic lesions. Subsequent workup for MM revealed elevated immunoglobulin (Ig) G levels and masses in his anterior rib that appeared to be plasmacytomas. The results of initial laboratory tests revealed an IgG lambda paraprotein, serum protein electrophoresis 6.36g/dL, urine protein electrophoresis 1956mg/24 hours, IgG of 8000, lambda free light chain of 151, beta-2 microglobulin of 10.8, hemoglobin 9.3g/dL and serum calcium of 14.4mg/dL. A skeletal survey showed involvement of disease with multiple lytic lesions in his skull, thoracic spine, ribs, clavicle, pelvis, and bilateral upper and lower extremities. The diagnosis was confirmed by a bone marrow biopsy, which showed sheets of plasma cells. Cytogenetics showed hyperdiploidy, trisomy 5 and 9, deletion of 17p, IgH translocation t(4;14), but were negative for deletion 13q. He was staged as IIIB according to the Durie-Salmon staging system. He was started on induction treatment with a clinical trial using doxorubicin, thalidomide, and dexamethasone. He received three cycles with resultant near complete remission and resolution of karyotypic abnormalities. Five months after induction, he underwent treatment with high-dose melphalan, followed by ASCT. He did well initially after transplant but relapsed approximately 1 year later. Bone marrow at that time showed only few scattered polyclonal plasma cells. He was started on treatment with bortezomib and tanespimycin as part of the University of Kansas Medical Center Institutional Review Board (IRB)-approved clinical trial after having obtained the patient’s consent. He achieved a very good partial response after three cycles. Following the third cycle he was taken off the study for failure to tolerate tanespimycin. He did well for approximately 1 year, but relapsed again with multiple large peripheral lesions including his left supraclavicular lymph nodes , left antecubital fossa , and left inguinal area. Positron emission testing revealed numerous soft tissue masses as shown in Figures and . Biopsies of the peripheral lesions were consistent with eMM, but a repeat bone marrow biopsy continued to show no evidence of intramedullary disease. He received radiation to above peripheral eMM with improvement in size and symptoms. Following this he declined further treatment and was placed on palliative care and expired soon after. To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the few cases reported of a patient with rapid extramedullary relapse and progression of disease despite concomitant medullary response to multiple standard combination therapies including novel therapeutics and ASCT.