A 76-year-old white man presented to our emergency department (ED) with recent onset of unsteady gait, poor oral intake, dysarthria, and dizziness for 1 week prior to presentation. His wife called an ambulance and had him brought to our ED as she noticed he was short of breath for the prior 12 hours. He did not have any symptoms suggestive of a recent upper respiratory tract infection or gastroenteritis. He denied exposure to sick contacts, recent immunizations, or consumption of canned foods or beverages. He did have a past medical history significant for esophageal stricture (diagnosed 2 years before) for which he had been undergoing routine endoscopic balloon dilation (last attempt was 3 months before). He lived in a rural upstate New York county and had retired as a meat-cutter 15 years before. His only medications at the time were ferrous sulfate (324 mg daily), pantoprazole (40 mg twice daily), and a multivitamin. He did not have a history of tobacco smoking. He consumed approximately two standard drinks in a week. He had no known allergies. While in our ED, his vital signs were: temperature, 37 ºC (98.6 ºF); heart rate, 100–110 beats per minute; blood pressure, 141/82 mmHg; and oxygen saturation 82% on room air and requiring 100% fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) via facemask to maintain saturations above 96%. On physical examination, he was in marked respiratory distress but not toxic-appearing. He was awake but drowsy, oriented only to self. His pupils were equal and symmetrical with appropriate response to light. His extra-ocular movements were intact. There was no facial droop; there was no deviation of tongue or uvula. His gag reflex was impaired. He could move all four extremities spontaneously and on command. However, motor strength appeared to be symmetrically and mildly diminished in all extremities and accompanied by decreased tone. Diminished knee and ankle reflexes were noted bilaterally. He had a diminished flexor plantar response bilaterally. Sensation was grossly intact in his face, trunk, and extremities. Coordination was impaired in upper and lower extremities with dysmetria and dysdiadochokinesia. Gait was not assessed. He had no visible involuntary movements. His neck was supple without signs of meningismus. A cardiovascular examination was unremarkable, with normal heart sounds and equal symmetrical pulses in bilateral extremities. His abdominal, musculoskeletal, and skin examinations were unremarkable. Although he was hemodynamically stable, he became lethargic with stridor and progressive hypoxia. Given concern for airway protection, he was emergently intubated with a 7.5 mm endotracheal tube on first attempt and placed on mechanical ventilatory support. For intubation, he was administered 1.5 mg/kg of succinylcholine and 0.3 mg/kg of etomidate intravenously. Maintenance fluids (normal saline at 125 cc/hour) and empiric intravenous administration of ceftriaxone at a dose of 2 g every 24 hours (to cover for possible aspiration pneumonia) was initiated. He was transferred to our intensive care unit for further management. A nasopharyngolaryngoscopy revealed bilateral true vocal cord paralysis. After stabilization on a ventilator, he underwent a tracheostomy on day 3 of admission and was transitioned successfully to a tracheostomy collar. Following extubation, he had consistent and gradual recovery of mental status. This was not, however, accompanied by any progressive improvement in motor function. He continued to have vocal cord immobility and flaccid weakness of his extremities.
On presentation, laboratory testing revealed a white blood cell (WBC) count, 13,800 cells/μL; hemoglobin, 14.7 g/dl; platelet count, 235,000 cells/μL; sodium, of 143 mmol/L; potassium, 4.2 mmol/L; chloride, 105 mmol/L; glucose, 176 mg/dL; bicarbonate, 27 mmol/L; creatinine, 0.53 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 15 mg/dL; and calcium, 8.0 mg/dL. A hepatic function panel revealed a total protein level, 5.2 g/dL; serum albumin, 3.5 g/dL; total bilirubin, 0.5 mg/dl; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 18 U/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 21 U/L; international normalized ratio (INR), 1.08; creatine kinase, 127 U/L; and troponin I less than 0.015 ng/mL. Urine analysis demonstrated cloudy urine with specific gravity 1.018, pH 4.8, with 116 red blood cells (RBCs) and 4 white blood cells (WBCs), negative leukocyte esterase and nitrite. An electrocardiogram and chest X-ray were unremarkable. A urine drug screen and serum alcohol levels were negative. Serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and cortisol levels were within normal limits. Thiamine, vitamin B6, and B12 levels were normal. Serological tests were negative for Lyme disease, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), syphilis, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C. Blood and urine cultures obtained at presentation showed no growth. Non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of his head and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain were normal except for mild ventriculomegaly . CT angiography of his head and neck revealed patent intracranial vasculature. A repetitive nerve stimulation electromyographic (EMG) study demonstrated patchy, moderate to severe, peripheral motor nerve denervation consistent with AIDP. A lumbar puncture was performed and analysis of the obtained cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed albuminocytologic dissociation with less than 3 nucleated cells per mL of fluid, elevated CSF protein of 62 mg/dl, and normal glucose levels (88 mg/dl). CSF cultures did not demonstrate any growth. Anti-GQ1B antibody and anti-acetylcholine receptor (AChR) antibody levels were negative.
A subacute presentation with ataxia, stridor with respiratory distress, and areflexia with weakness of bilateral upper and lower extremity offers a challenging differential .
It is prudent to first rule out an acute vascular cause such as stroke, especially involving the cerebellum and brainstem; for example, for example, an absence of any lateralizing neurological signs and disturbed consciousness would rule out stroke, especially one with brainstem involvement. Next, metabolic abnormalities due to alcoholism, vitamin deficiencies, or electrolyte deficiencies would be evident on a metabolic panel and on serum vitamin and ethyl alcohol levels. An absence of a suggestive history of exposure to Clostridium botulinum, such as consumption of canned or tinned foods, cosmetic use of botulinum toxin injection, or intravenous drug use, significantly lowers the possibility of botulism. An absence of fever and meningeal signs, and analysis of CSF obtained on lumbar puncture, can rule out meningitis and encephalitis. Spinal cord trauma and spinal shock in the initial stages would result in flaccid paralysis of extremities aside from obvious signs of trauma. Also, concomitant bulbar paralysis is highly unlikely. Overlapping autoimmune demyelinating syndromes such as Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS) and Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis (BBE) must be considered. GBS is more likely to have a characteristic pattern of ascending paralysis. BBE is considered to lie on the same spectrum as MFS as it may present with ataxia and ophthalmoplegia and can have positive anti-GQ1b antibodies. However, BBE is characterized more by hyperreflexia and somnolence. New-onset MG can be suspected but, in our patient, motor involvement was patchy, the anti-AChR antibody test result was negative, and EMG was not suggestive of MG.
Based on the above, a diagnosis of MFS involving the bulbar muscles was made and our patient was started on a 5-day course of intravenous immunoglobulin at a daily dose of 0.4 mg/kg body weight per day. Following completion of this course, he showed clinical improvement in phonation, overall muscle strength, as well as tone. Although he initially did require overnight ventilatory support through his tracheostomy, the need for this gradually diminished and he was weaned off the ventilator altogether.
Subsequent follow-up laryngoscopies after 1, 2, and 4 weeks showed improvement in vocal cord abduction. His overall respiratory status also improved with decreasing oxygen requirement and decreased need for tracheostomy suctioning. He continued to have moderate pharyngeal dysphagia and required placement of a jejunostomy tube for feeding. His hospitalization was also complicated with development of aspiration pneumonia. He was eventually discharged to a skilled nursing facility on a tracheostomy collar and jejunostomy tube after a total of 6 weeks of hospitalization and subsequently discharged home after making suitable progress in physical rehabilitation. He continued to follow-up with the physical medicine and rehabilitation (PMR) out-patient clinic and remained tracheostomy-dependent at 6 months following hospitalization. He was able to ambulate with a walker at that time.