An 11-year-old boy was admitted to Head and Neck Surgery Department with a major complaint of painless swelling of the right facial region.
The patient’s symptoms started 6 mo ago, and he was referred to us for a painless swelling in the right maxillary region that gradually enlarged for 6 mo.
In 2011 in Hunan province, China, the patient was subjected to enucleation of the same region without factor replacement. The lesion was first diagnosed as a simple bone cyst, and the pathology consultation finally diagnosed it as a hemophilic pseudotumor of the right maxilla.
The face of the patient was symmetrical . The partially enlarged right maxilla was palpated in intraoral physical examination. The upper right side of the vestibular groove was shoaled .
Preoperative examination revealed a coagulation disorder diagnosed as hemophilia A (factor VIII, 23% of normal activity).
CT displayed a multicystic low-density mass measuring 3 cm × 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm in the right maxilla. The body of the right maxilla manifested irregular swelling . The lesion occupied the right maxillary sinus. A molar was squeezed into the right maxillary sinus and embedded in the superior part of the lesion close to the canalis opticus .
Odontogenic tumor of the maxilla
The specimens were retrieved from the Department of Pathology, The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University. In the lesion of the first surgery, no signs of epithelium were found, although a fibrous tissue lining was observed. In the wall of the lesion of the first surgery, remote hemorrhage and clot organization were obvious, which is different from simple bone cyst . Abundant intracellular and extracellular hemosiderin deposition was noted . Histological characteristics are necessary to rule out other entities that cause unilocular radiolucent jaw lesions. Combined with coagulation function results in this case, the multicystic radiolucent lesion in the maxilla was confirmed to be an HP.
The postoperative pathological results of the second surgery verified the diagnosis of intraosseous VM of the right maxilla. Histomorphology and immunohistochemistry results revealed that the lesions were abundant in vessels positive for CD31, a marker of endothelial components, and negative for GLUT-1, which is strongly expressed by endothelial cells of infantile hemangiomas at all stages of their evolution and is not expressed by other benign vascular anomalies and reactive proliferations . The lesions were diagnosed as intraosseous venous malformation according to the ISSVA classification. Venous malformations are most common in slow-flow vascular malformations that commonly form in the oral maxillofacial region. Angiogenesis characterized by normal pericyte coverage in patients with hemophilia has been reported in hemophilic arthropathy. Moreover, the increased vascular density likely caused the formation of vascular anomalies.