A 38-year-old premenopausal woman presented to us with the chief complaint of a progressive neck swelling which appeared 8 months ago and was initially located in the right side of the neck but gradually progressed to involve the anterior neck also . The swelling was associated with difficulty in breathing and voice change. On physical examination, there was a visible neck mass occupying the anterior and right lateral side of neck, measuring approximately 12 x 6 x 3.5 cm in size
. The swelling had a smooth surface, was firm in consistency, non-mobile, non-tender, extending superiorly from the level of hyoid bone to the suprasternal notch inferiorly. Laterally the swelling extended from right sternocleidomastoid muscle to the left sternocleidomastoid muscle. The swelling did not move with tongue protrusion or deglutition. On examination, Kocher’s sign and Pemberton sign were absent. On palpation using Lahey’s method, separate lobes of the swelling could not be appreciated. Mobility in both vertical and horizontal planes was restricted. No signs of thyrotoxicosis were seen.
All blood investigations including hemogram, peripheral blood film, renal function tests, liver function tests and serum electrolytes were within normal range. Thyroid function tests (TFT) showed Free triiodothyronine value of 2.17pg/ml (low) and Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH) value of 34.03 (high) suggestive of hypothyroidism. Serum alpha-feto protein (AFP) and beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG) were within normal limits. Anti-acetyl choline receptor antibodies, diagnostic of myasthenia gravis, were not detected. Ophthalmic examination revealed restriction of lateral extraocular movements in both eyes. Seventy-degree endoscopic examination of larynx revealed right side vocal cord palsy.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of the neck and chest showed a large heterogenous peripherally enhancing mass measuring 5.9 x 7.8 x 7.9 cm predominantly on the right side of neck likely arising from the right lobe of thyroid gland. The mass also involved the left lobe of thyroid and extended from the hyoid level superiorly to thoracic D1 vertebra inferiorly. No retrosternal extension was seen. Superiorly, the mass was abutting the submandibular gland with ill-defined fat planes. Medially, it was compressing the larynx, trachea and the oesophagus without involvement of the laryngeal cartilages. Laterally, it involved the sternocleidomastoid muscle on the right side. Posteriorly, it extended from C3 to C7 levels. A prominent lymph node 13 x 9 mm size was seen at level II on the right side (
, ). CECT Chest showed multiple, variable-sized, subpleural and parenchymal nodules, diffusely scattered in both lungs with the largest in the left lower lobe, 12 x 12 mm in size. CT orbit and MRI brain were normal.
The patient underwent an incisional biopsy from the neck swelling and an emergency tracheostomy for stridor. The histopathological report revealed thymoma Type A (atypical) with epithelial cells arranged in nests and islands .
The immunohistochemistry showed strong positivity for cytokeratin and leucocyte common antigen (
, ). The patient was treated with palliative intent in view of multiple pulmonary metastases. She was planned for palliative chemotherapy with CAP regimen consisting of Inj.Cisplatin 50mg/m2, Inj.Doxorubicin 50mg/m2 and Inj. Cyclophosphamide 500mg/m2. She received 2 cycles of chemotherapy till her last follow up.