We report the case of 42-year-old woman with no personal or familial history and no medical comorbidities, who was referred to our department for a stage IIIC2 adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix. She underwent four courses of chemotherapy based on cisplatine combined with pelvic radiotherapy at a dose of 45 Gy, complicated by post radiation rectitis and cystitis. She did not receive brachytherapy for being beyond the deadline. Evaluating pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a good therapeutic response associating tumor size regression (32 mm VS 40 mm), disappearance of parametrial involvement and lymph node invasion. The patient underwent colpohysterectomy. The immediate postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient returns home four days after surgery.
Final histological examination concluded to a 10 mm remnant of a cervical HPV positive adenocarcinoma. Surgical limits and parameters were free of tumor. The multidisciplinary committee of our institute did not indicate any adjuvant therapy. Two months after surgery, the patient presented to the emergency department because of fevers of 39 °C, pelvic pain, and painful mobilization of the left lower limb. The patient did not have any primary or acquired immunodeficiency. An abdominal CT scan revealed a recto-vaginal fistula fed by a 5 cm pelvic collection originating from the uterine cavity. She was admitted and treated with antibiotics and then underwent surgical evacuation of the collection and a bypass colostomy.
The initial progression was favorable, but within two weeks, the patient presented a rise of temperature with swelling and recurrence of pain on mobilization of the left lower limb. Clinical examination found a swollen, edema, hot skin and “crackling snow crepitus” among the left lower limb. No bullae or other skin signs predicting necrosis were appreciable. An urgent computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed a 10 cm pelvic collection lateralized to the left and fistulated into the bladder and rectum. It also showed intramuscular collections, pan-diaphyseal air bubbles of the left femur with a myositis-like appearance of the gluteal muscles, anterior and medial thigh compartments, and left leg muscles, suggestive of an infectious origin. Thrombosis of the left external iliac artery and left femoral vein were additionally noted .
The patient was then re-operated; the intraoperative exploration found an extensive necrosis to pelvic organs namely the bladder and the anterior wall of the rectum which extended to the anterior and medial thigh compartments muscles of the left leg. We also noted a thrombosis of the left external iliac vein and artery, with necrosis of their vascular walls Figs. and .
Given the septic conditions, a revascularization procedure was not feasible. A bilateral ureterostomy was required, as well as ligature of the left external iliac vessels. Necrotic tissue of the left lower limb was also effectively excised and revived. The evolution was marked by left lower limb loss of functionality, despite the development of collateral circulation. The patient underwent post-surgical palliative treatment, and she died one month after surgery of multivisceral failure due to sepsis.