A 72-year-old female presented with fever (Tmax 38.0°C) and maculopapular rash after receiving one dose of sintilimab as gallbladder carcinoma systemic therapy (T3N2M1, Stage IVB).
The patient received surgical procedures including cholecystectomy, en bloc hepatic resection, and portal lymphadenectomy 55 days prior to this visit. The lesion histologically contained low-differentiated adenocarcinoma together with signet-ring cell carcinoma. Test identified high microsatellite instability (MSI-H) in the tumor. After surgery, an elevated CEA level (65.4ng/mL) and a re-staging scan using PET-CT showed suspicious mesenteric metastasis. The patient started receiving sintilimab in combination with anlotinib on day-13 as tentative systemic therapy. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient.
The patient presented with a sporadic mild rash (grade 1, SCORTEN score 2) on body trunk and proximal lower extremities two weeks after receiving one dose of sintilimab. Intravenous infusion of 40 mg of methylprednisolone (0.8mg/kg/d) was applied on the first day. The patient still had a low-grade fever and developed a more extensive rash on day 2, and thus she was given a higher dose of methylprednisolone (1.2 mg/kg/d) in the next two days and admitted to hospital on day 3. Within one day during hospitalization, the rashes connected into large-area maculopapular skin rash with bullae (SCORTEN score 3), and epidermal detachment appeared, in which direct Nikolsky’s sign was present . Skin biopsy revealed karyopyknotic keratinocytes in the epidermis and interface dermatitis with lymphocyte infiltration in the dermo-epidermal junction . Immunoassay showed anti-Dsg1, anti-Dsg3, anti-BP180, anti-BP-230 antibodies were negative in patient’s serum. Dosage of methylprednisolone was increased to 80 mg (1.6 mg/kg/d). Meanwhile, intravenous immunoglobulin was added. The skin rash and bullae continued to progress, and around 70% body surface area of skin and mucosa was affected on day 13 . Intravenous immunoglobulin was increased to 800 mg/kg/d for three days, along with albumin infusion and encapsulation therapy (topical halometasone, erythromycin, and epidermal growth factor spray). The score of toxic epidermal necrolysis (SCORTEN) achieved five, and thus the patient was referred to a specialized care unit. We utilized an isolation room and bed with horizontal laminar airflow for infection control. Dressing of skin and mucosa lesions was changed once a day, and medical pain management was applied. It significantly improved her skin lesion within one week . Blood and exudate cultures reported negative throughout the course. Fungal infection in the oral cavity appeared and subsequently improved with tapering of glucocorticoid (started on day 20, as SCORTEN decreased to 2) and application of oral nystatin. She was dismissed after 43 days of hospitalization with satisfying re-epithelialization and no infection signs . The patient did not receive further anti-tumor medications. Imaging showed no signs of tumor recurrence at the primary site. A mildly elevated CEA was observed during hospitalization (75.57 ng/mL, 3 weeks after sintilimab administration).
The co-medication of the patient includes calcium antagonists for hypertension treatment (switching from amlodipine to nifedipine on day-4). We evaluated the drug causality using method of ALDEN, according to which sintilimab was very probable cause (ALDEN 6’), anlotinib was a possible cause (ALDEN 2’), while nifedipine was an unlikely cause (ALDEN 0’) of the disease. All three drugs were classified as possible causes according to Naranjo’s Scale (sintilimab 3’; anlotinib 1’; nifedipine 1’). The detailed algorithms were listed in and .