A 26-year-old male patient was referred to our clinic for pain in the right knee while walking, and being unable to run or jump for 6 weeks, after a jump landing on flat ground. Since the injury, he had received immobilization of the injured knee in extension position for 4 weeks with a hinged knee brace and crutches, then tried flexion and loading weight without the brace for 2 weeks, which however, did not relieve the pain effectively. Physical examinations on admission showed effusion of the injured knee, tenderness in the anteromedial aspect of the knee, and deep anterior knee pain when the flexion angle was greater than 40°. In addition, a positive McMurray test and grade I° posterior instability were found without unstable collateral ligaments.
Coronal view of MRI showed protrusion of medial meniscus at the front of the injured knee , and sagittal view showed antedisplacement of the anterior medial meniscus horn, combined with high T2 signal in the PCL , while the ACL was normal .
Based on the patient’s medical history and findings of the physical and radiographic examinations, traumatic avulsion of the AMMR combined with PCL injury was highly suspected. Hence, we recommended arthroscopic exploration and essential surgical interventions to the patient.
Arthroscopic examination found mild synovial hyperplasia and pannus formation, without obvious injury or degeneration of the articular cartilage. The ACL was intact and the tension was normal. Hyperemia and partial PCL injury but proper tension was observed. Furthermore, we discovered a detached anterior horn of the medial meniscus, and bruise and hyperemia on the downward slope from the medial articular plateau to the intercondylar region .
Arthroscopic suture anchor fixation of the injured anterior meniscus horn was performed. After clearing the hyperplastic synovium and pannus, a suture anchor (TwinFix Ti 3.5 mm, Smith & Nephew, Memphis, TN, US) was inserted into the bruise area of the downward slope from the medial articular plateau to the intercondylar region through the medial portal. Subsequently, four free ends of the sutures of the inserted anchor were hooked penetrating from the inferior to superior surface of the anterior horn of the medial meniscus with a curved suture hook. The penetrating points were placed at a distance 1.0 cm apart. Finally, two mattress-suture stitches were made with a knotter to make the torn anterior medial meniscus horn reattach the tibial plateau. An increased stability and decreased mobility of the anterior horn of the medial meniscus were then confirmed under arthroscopy, covering the marginal cartilage of the tibial plateau well . No surgical intervention was taken to the PCL considering its proper tension. The surgical wound was then closed by layers after a thorough flushing of the articular cavity with saline and careful hemostasis with plasm radiofrequency.
The patient received physical rehabilitation after the surgery. Swelling of the operated knee joint could be controlled with ice and compression in the first 2 weeks after the operation. The knee was immobilized in an extension position with a hinged knee brace for 4 weeks after surgery. Flexion was allowed up to 90° since week 4 to 6 postoperation, then up to 120° since week 6 to 8, and finally reached to the maximum flexion since week 8 to 12. The loading of operated knee was allowed partial incremental weight with crutches from week 4 to 9 postoperation, and a full-weight loading was permitted starting from week 10 to 12. Quadriceps activation was encouraged in the first 2 weeks after the surgery and muscle strengthening was necessary afterwards.
The patient had prominent pain relief and functional recovery in 12 weeks postoperatively. Physical examination found neither tenderness nor a positive McMurray test, and the posterior instability disappeared 12 weeks after the operation.