A 25-year-old married Japanese man (height 188 cm, weight 76.1 kg, body mass index 21.5) was referred to our hospital with a painless, right scrotal induration in his right testis discovered 1 month previously with no other subjective symptoms or notable histories.
On physical examination, the pubic hair and penis had a normal aspect (Tanner's stage was 5 each), but the atrophic testes had volumes of 8 ml on the left side and 12 mL on the right side (with an induration in the lower pole).
Testicular cancer tumor markers were normal (human chorionic gonadotropin <0.1 mIU/mL; alpha-fetoprotein 3.1 ng/mL; lactate dehydrogenase 132 U/L); endocrinological findings indicated hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (luteinizing hormone 21.3 mIU/mL, follicle-stimulating hormone 58.0 mIU/mL, total testosterone 333 ng/dL). Two separate semen analyses revealed azoospermia.
Ultrasonography report showed a 1.9-cm internal heterogeneous echoic mass with low echoic margin in the right testis. In the Doppler mode, blood flow presence inside the tumor was ambiguous, but a signal was seen at the periphery .
Malignancy was not ruled out; we planned to perform high orchiectomy. Because the patient hoped to have children, we decided to simultaneously perform a TESE from the normal testicular tissue.
In February 2018, the patient underwent a high orchiectomy with incision along the inguinal canal. Right spermatic cord was ligated and cut at the internal inguinal ring level. Immediately after orchiectomy, we sectioned the testis sagittally ex vivo. We observed a 1.5-cm white tumor in the lower pole of the right testis and normal testicular tissue with atrophic seminiferous tubules in the upper half . Approximately 200 motile and immotile spermatozoa were extracted and cryopreserved.
Preoperative chromosomal testing results showed a 47, XXY karyotype in 20 of 20 cells.
Pathological finding of the tumor showed a cyst wall covered with keratinizing squamous epithelia , without malignancy evidence, diagnosed as an epidermal cyst. The remaining testicular tissue of upper half showed atrophy of most seminiferous tubules hyalinized with Leydig cell hyperplasia. Only Sertoli cells (no germ cells) were apparent in the seminiferous tubules observed. Mean Johnsen's score count was 1.1. The patient's wife is planning to undergo oocyte retrieval and intracytoplasmic sperm injection in the future. TESE in the left testis can be scheduled if required.