A 27-year-old female with a history of cramp fasciculation syndrome, distant history of transient hemiplegic episodes, and no past history of migraine with aura reported persistent headaches, nausea, and occasional ipsilateral extremity weakness and paresthesias after a piercing of the inferior crus of her left antihelix . She obtained her piercing from a reputable practitioner; jewelry made of ASTM F-136 grade (implant grade) titanium was used (Invictus Body Jewelry). Within 24 h of the piercing, she began experiencing vague headaches and nausea, which persisted over the next few weeks. These symptoms were mild (3/10 pain, responding to 1/10 with acetaminophen), and the patient believes she may have acclimated to them within a month though they may still have been present. Then, 5 months after the piercing, her symptoms worsened. Her headaches and nausea were worse than before, with pain increasing from an average of 3/10 to 6/10. Headaches became localized between and behind her eyes. She developed visual disturbances and photophobia without phonophobia. Episodes increased in frequency, now occurring daily for nearly the whole day. The patient treated her symptoms with acetaminophen which was helpful although she cannot recall how much it decreased her pain. After additional 2 months, she also began suffering from occasional ipsilateral extremity weakness and numbness/tingling.
Of note, the patient does have a history of transient hemiplegia and hemiparesthesia without headaches 4 years prior; at that time, CT neck, MRI spine, MRI brain, and carotid ultrasound were unremarkable, and symptoms responded to physical therapy. In the context of this prior normal imaging and clinical course, further testing was not pursued for her current symptoms. Physical exam was unremarkable and showed a clean piercing with no signs of infection. The patient continued with migraine-supportive care. Ultimately, after 9 months, the patient removed the piercing for routine cleaning and upon removal noted the resolution of her symptoms within 1 min. She has not replaced the piercing since then. Of note, she informed her initial piercing practitioner, who then shared anecdotal reports of similar cases, in which there was an association between various head piercings and migraines, particularly for piercings in the auricular cartilage. She has heard similar anecdotal reports in the community, all involving rook piercings.
Since removal of the piercing, the patient has experienced intermittent, similar migraine symptoms starting about 72 h after removal. These have not been as frequent as they were while the piercing was in place. It should be noted that this patient did not develop any other complications of her piercing, such as allergy, chondritis, cellulitis, hematoma, or keloid. This patient has also had multiple piercings of other locations of the auricle , including the lobule, the stem of the antihelix, and the helix. She did not suffer similar symptoms immediately after any of these piercings and had no changes in symptoms when these were inserted or removed.