A 55-year-old American Caucasian man presented to the emergency department with acute respiratory failure secondary to acute pulmonary edema and diffuse petechial rash. The rash had been present for the previous 8 months, starting as a macular rash in both lower extremities and progressing to involve the trunk and upper extremities. In addition, for the last 2 months, he had complained of shortness of breath that limited his activity and which was progressively deteriorating. He was known to have hepatitis C, diagnosed when he was 1 year old, not treated and an anxiety disorder being treated with a benzodiazepine.
Upon admission to the emergency department, the patient was intubated and ventilated. Cardiac evaluation revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 30%. Initial laboratory tests showed acute renal failure (creatinine of 2.6 mg/dL), low serum albumin (2.9 g/dL) and protein (4.7 g/dL) and a normocytic anemia (hematocrit of 26.3%). Urinalysis showed microscopic hematuria (30-40 red blood cells/high power field (HPF)) with 3-6 coarse granular casts/low power field (LPF), and significant proteinuria (1600 mg of proteins/1 g of creatinine).
Investigation for the etiology of the acute renal failure was compatible with acute nephritic syndrome with low complement levels (C3 = 54 mg/dL (normal: 79-152); C4 = 2.7 mg/dL (normal: 16-38)). Rheumatoid factor was 150 IU/mL (normal: 0-20), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 1, and anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) and cryoglobulin collected at room temperature were negative. A kidney biopsy showed a membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis secondary to essential mixed cryoglobulinemia type II . Hepatitis C viral ribonucleic acid (RNA) was 1,350,000 IU/mL, and the genotype was 1a. The patient was started on exchange plasmapheresis and prednisone, and his kidney function improved. Treatment of hepatitis C was deferred until stabilization of the renal failure.
During his hospital stay, the patient had fluctuations of his white blood cell count (WBC). On admission and during his stay in the intensive care unit (ICU), his WBC count was in the range of 8000 to 12,000 cells/mL; after his transfer to the ward, his WBC counts varied between 24,000 and 96,000 cells/mL. On the peripheral smear, the blood cell count was in the normal range. The complete blood count values, performed by Beckman/Coulter GenS, were falsely high due to the precipitation of plasma cryoglobulins at room temperature. After treatment with plasmapheresis, the WBC counts tested on several occasions were in the normal range. The leukocytosis in our patient was secondary to the cryoglobulins.