A 72-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our department She complained of a purulent discharge from a left submandibular fistula and severe pain with hypoesthesia of the left submental region. The patient’s masticatory function was significantly impaired, and she had trouble sleeping because of pain. A panoramic radiograph taken at the first visit showed a fracture of the left inferior mandibular border with minimal deviation. Computed tomography (CT) showed extensive, morphologically irregular sequestrum formation (80 × 35 × 20 mm) in the left mandibular body.
Following initial diagnosis of diabetic nephropathy 13 years earlier, the patient’s disease had already advanced to the point where she needed insulin therapy. Eight years before the referral, diabetic nephropathy progressed further, acute congestive heart failure developed, and emergency dialysis was simultaneously introduced. For the last 8 years, the patient had been undergoing HD every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday morning at 9:00 am for 4 hours owing to kidney failure caused by advanced diabetic nephropathy. Thus, 5 µg of darbepoetin alfa was administered weekly immediately after dialysis to improve renal anemia and maintain hemoglobin level at 10–12 g/dL. To control mineral metabolism and elevated parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels associated with dialysis, the patient was medically managed with active vitamin D3 and sedimented calcium tablets. Then, 7 years before the referral, she underwent a two-branch percutaneous coronary intervention for exertional angina pectoris, and 5 years before the referral, the patient underwent extraction of all lower left molars for periodontitis at a dental clinic, after which the mucosa was completely covered and healed. Due to renal osteodystrophy-induced osteoporosis, she had been receiving monthly antiresorptive intravenous therapy with 1 mg ibandronate sodium hydrate for the last 3 years. Two years before the referral, the patient developed fractures of the second, third, and fourth metatarsals on the left side, which revealed that she had severe chronic kidney disease–mineral and bone disorder (CKD-MBD) with a young adult mean (YAM) value of 45%. Six months before the referral, the patient began experiencing pain in the left mandibular body and paralysis of the mental region, and she visited her primary care dentist for diagnosis and treatment. CT scan revealed normal findings in the left mandibular body, with no tooth or foreign substances as a source of infection, and no jawbone exposure or bone resorption. Although the cause could not be identified, continued observation revealed bone exposure, and the patient’s condition deteriorated. She was then referred to a public municipal hospital where stage III MRONJ was diagnosed, based on the AAOMS guidelines . She was treated in the hospital with regular flushing and antibiotic therapy; however, the local infection gradually worsened, and the patient was referred to our department.
Preoperative blood sampling showed elevated levels of C-reactive protein (CRP), suggesting a systemic as well as a local inflammatory response . The abscess was drained, and daily intravenous antibiotic treatment of 1 g ceftriaxone sodium hydrate commenced. Additionally, ibandronate sodium hydrate administration was discontinued after consulting with the doctor responsible for the patient’s dialysis given that the YAM value had recovered to 51%. A panoramic radiograph revealed a displaced pathologic fracture on the left side of the atrophic mandibular body, corresponding to stage III MRONJ . Although the acute inflammation disappeared with anti-inflammatory treatment, the cutaneous fistula worsened, and the deviation of the pathologic fracture of the mandible increased. Figure shows the clinical course from the onset of diabetic nephropathy leading up to the surgery for sequestrectomy. Consequently, the patient underwent decortication and fistula closure under general anesthesia 2 months after the referral. Immediately before the surgery, the anticoagulant used for dialysis was changed from heparin to nafamostat mesylate to reduce the risk of intraoperative bleeding. Because she also had cardiac disease, she was managed in the intensive care unit during the perioperative period. Intravenous injection of 1 g cefazolin sodium was administered at least 30 minutes prior to the surgery to prevent surgical-site infection. Oral hygiene practices were performed daily by an oral surgeon (KY) during the hospitalization, and cefcapene pivoxil hydrochloride hydrate was orally administered at a dose of 100 mg once daily for 6 weeks after the surgery. The antibiotic dose was reduced to one-third of the usual dose because the patient was under dialysis management. Antibiotics were administered for a relatively long period of 6 weeks until complete mucosal closure, and the route of wound infection was completely eliminated. After confirming that swallowing function was intact using the water swallowing test, the nasogastric tube was removed on the second postoperative day, and a soft dialysis diet was initiated. The sequestrectomy and fistula closure were successful, and no abnormal bleeding or postoperative infection was observed. Intraoperatively, the periosteum was left intact, and the sequestrum was dissected from the cortical surface (subperiosteal resection). The general perioperative condition of the patient was well maintained under HD management, and there were no cardiac events.
Histopathology revealed osteonecrosis and the presence of Staphylococcus species and Gram-negative bacilli that were identified as facultative anaerobes, and there was no evidence of tumor disease. During the first 3 months after surgery, the wound was regularly cleaned, and a soft diet was followed to avoid force loading.
Surprisingly, the 6-month follow-up CT scan and panoramic radiograph showed spontaneous bone regeneration. The fracture was replaced by new bone, bone healing in the periosteum was observed, and the patient was able to eat with a denture. Furthermore, the Semmes–Weinstein monofilament (SAKAI Medical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) examination performed 6 months after surgery revealed that the patient could identify the lowest target force (0.008 g) as a sensation and that thigmesthesia had recovered to normal, with no difference between the left and right sides of the submental region.
Blood sampling after the surgery showed CRP within normal limits and an improvement in hematologic and biochemical values. The patient’s oral condition remained good, with no findings of infection to date .
A literature search was conducted in PubMed according to the following method reported by Matsuda et al.: (spontaneous [Title]) AND (regeneration [MeSH Terms]) AND (mandible [MeSH Terms]) AND (“2003” to “Present” [Data-Publication]).
Eleven papers were identified by our literature search [–], including 26 patients (15 males and 11 females; mean age 23.2 ± 15.7 years). Ameloblastoma was the most commonly treated disease (12 cases), followed by ossifying fibroma (6 cases). The oldest patient, aged 70 years, was a case of MRONJ . Immediate reconstruction was reported as performed in seven cases, most of which were segmental mandibulectomy with preservation of the periosteum to achieve spontaneous bone recovery.