A 20-year-old man with a developmental disorder collided with a steel tower while downhill skiing. The patient sustained a whole-body contusion and was airlifted to our hospital. Upon arrival, his blood pressure was 99/65 mmHg and heart rate was 87 bpm. His consciousness was lucid, and he complained of pain in the left upper arm and right thigh. Physical examination revealed subcutaneous emphysema and tenderness in the left anterior chest, although he did not complain of dyspnea. A chest X-ray showed a wide mediastinum, enlarged aortic knob, rightward deviation of the nasogastric tube, and a smudgy aortopulmonary window, which led us to suspect thoracic aorta injury . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography confirmed dissection in zone 3 to 4 of the thoracic aorta, a hematoma in the left supraclavicular fossa and mediastinum, and the presence of hemothorax without active bleeding. X-ray examination of the limbs and pelvis revealed fractures of left humeral head and femoral neck. Blood examination showed a slightly elevated white blood cell count and slightly elevated aspartate aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, and creatine phosphokinase concentrations. The D-dimer concentration was 15.3 μg/mL. We chose conservative therapy for the acute aortic dissection because the patient was hemodynamically stable and the multiple fractures might have caused uncontrollable bleeding during heparinization for cardiopulmonary bypass. His blood pressure was strictly controlled at <120 mmHg by continuous intravenous administration of nicardipine and nitroglycerin. Eight days after admission, the fractures of the left humeral head and femoral neck were surgically repaired. We then surgically repaired the aortic dissection 42 days after admission. An upper-half sternotomy was performed until the fourth intercostal space was reached, and cardiopulmonary bypass was initiated with a 29-Fr right atrial cannula, a 10-Fr common carotid arterial cannula, and a 12-Fr axillary arterial cannula. After induction of moderate hypothermia at a rectal temperature of 28 °C, selective antegrade cerebral perfusion was begun. An open stent graft (J-Graft; Japan Lifeline, Tokyo, Japan) with a 21-mm diameter and 6-cm length was inserted via an aortotomy on the aortic arch just distal to the left subclavian artery during circulatory arrest. The proximal end of the stent was sutured to the aortic wall with 4–0 polypropylene by continuous suture . Then, the aortotomy was closed by continuous suture. The total operation time was 345 min, the cardiopulmonary bypass time was 192 min, and the arrest time was 53 min. The patient made steady progress postoperatively; he was weaned from the ventilator 3 h after the surgery. He began orthopedic rehabilitation on postoperative day 19. Computed tomography revealed no endovascular stenosis or endoleaks . He was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 43 .