An 18 year old male was stung on face, head, shoulders and upper limbs by multiple hornets while sitting under a tree. He developed severe pain at the site of the bites and was managed at local hospital. A day later he developed oliguria and by next day became anuric and developed nausea and vomiting, following which he was referred to our hospital. At admission, on examination, he was conscious and had mild pallor. The systemic examination was normal. Twenty-seven sting marks were found on face, shoulders and upper limbs.
Investigations revealed hemoglobin of 7.6 g/dl platelet count of 529,000/mm3; TLC of 16200/mm3 with peripheral blood film revealing microcytes, micro-ovalocytes, macrocytes with hypochromia. Blood biochemistry revealed urea 310 mg/dl, S. creatinine of 9.2 mg/dl. Serum CPK and transaminases (AST & ALT) were within normal limits. He had normal urinalysis. There was no evidence of intravascular hemolysis as urine was negative for hemoglobin and plasma hemoglobin was less than 20 mg/dl. Ultrasound of abdomen revealed normal sized kidneys.
His renal failure was managed by hemodialysis. However despite repeated hemodialysis, his urea and creatinine remained persistently high so kidney biopsy was undertaken after two weeks. It revealed 12 normal glomeruli, focal interstitial infiltration with eosinophils and lymphocytes with hyaline and pigmented granular casts in the tubules . These findings were consistent with tubulo-interstitial nephritis. In a focal area, the interstitial inflammationwas accompaniedbyinterstitial edema and few dilated tubules lined by flattened epithelium. This may besuggestive ofaccompanyingfocal/patchy acute tubular necrosis.
He was started on prednisolone 50 mg/day. Gradually his urine output increased to more than 1.5 liter/day and he was discharged when his serum creatinine decreased to 3 mg/dl. His nutritional anemia recovered on follow up with supplementation of Iron, Vitamin B12 and folic acid. His steroids were tapered over next four weeks and he recovered completely.