A 33-year-old man of Libyan origin was seen in cardiology clinic for investigation of pre-syncope. He had a strong family history of premature sudden death of unclear aetiology. As part of his assessment, he underwent an ajmaline provocation test, during which he had continuous ECG monitoring. After administration of 80 mg (equivalent to 1 mg/kg) of ajmaline, his monitoring demonstrated 2:1 atrioventicular block before reversion back to normal sinus rhythm. There had been no electrophysiological evidence of a type 1 Brugada syndrome prior to the assessment being stopped. The man was asymptomatic and had no evidence of arrhythmia during three hours of subsequent observation, and was discharged home.
Three weeks later, the man presented with painless jaundice, pruritus, nausea, dark urine and pale-coloured stools to his family physician. He had no personal or family history of liver disease and had not been jaundiced previously. He took no regular medications, and denied the use of alcohol, recreational drugs or herbal/ traditional therapies. Examination revealed jaundice and excoriation, but neither hepatomegaly nor features of chronic liver disease. An ultrasound of his abdomen demonstrated a normal appearance to the liver parenchyma, with no biliary dilatation. The common bile duct (CBD) measured 5 mm in maximal diameter, and no gallstones were seen. There was normal portal and hepatic venous flow. Sonographic appearances of the pancreas, spleen and kidneys were normal. He was kept under review.
Ten weeks after the test, his jaundice and pruritus had worsened, and he was admitted to hospital for investigation. His liver enzyme profile was abnormal on admission and continued to deteriorate, peaking at day 81 after the administration of ajmaline with ALT 90 U/L, AST 67 U/L, ALP 309 U/L, GGT 120 U/L, and bilirubin 244 μmol/L (see Figure ); no biochemistry results from prior to his illness were available. His platelet count, eosinophil count, prothrombin time and plasma albumin remained within normal limits throughout. His hepatitis A, B, C and E serology were negative. An auto-antibody profile (including anti-mitochondrial antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody, anti-liver-kidney-muscle antibody, anti-nuclear and anti-nuclear cytoplasmic antibodies) was negative, and his serum markers of iron and copper metabolism normal. Inflammatory markers and white cell count differentials were normal, excluding underlying sepsis. A repeat ultrasound of his liver and biliary tree showed similar findings to that performed previously. Magnetic resonance cholangio-pancreatography (MRCP) confirmed a CBD of normal calibre, with no filling defects detected at any point in the biliary system. The patient underwent liver biopsy for further assessment. This demonstrated normal bile ducts, but striking centrilobular cholestasis and focal rosetting of hepatocytes . The biopsy results were consistent with a cholestatic drug reaction. Of note, the history of ajmaline administration had not been volunteered by the patient prior to the liver biopsy, and only emerged subsequently after liaison between the patient’s hepatologists and his family physician.
By nine days into his admission, his symptoms had begun to improve and his biochemistry stabilised, and he was discharged back to community care. When reviewed three weeks later, his pruritus had completely resolved. By one year after the initial exposure to ajmaline, his serum bilirubin and liver enzymes had near normalised .