A 49-year-old Caucasian man sustained C-8/T-1 tetraplegia in a motorcycle accident in 1992, in which he lost the control of his motorcycle while overtaking on a bend and hit a patch of gravel; no other persons were involved. Neurological examination revealed motor power of Grade 5 in all groups of muscles of both right and left shoulders, elbows, and wrists. Handgrip showed Grade 3 plus motor power, whereas thumb muscles showed Grade 5. Following spinal fixation, he underwent rehabilitation and had since been leading an active life.
In 2009, this patient suffered frequent collapses in the lavatory during manual evacuation of the bowel. He experienced no palpitations, shortness of breath, chest pain, or dizziness correlating with or prior to these episodes of collapses. None of the episodes of collapses was witnessed. A 24-hour electrocardiogram (ECG) recording showed sinus rhythm with a maximum heart rate of 97 and a minimum of 39. There were no significant cardiac arrhythmias that might have contributed to his episodes of collapse. The collapses were therefore labeled as secondary to epilepsy, which itself attributed to a side effect of baclofen that was therefore stopped, after which he apparently suffered no further episodes of collapse. This patient did not have an ECG recording during any of the collapses; electroencephalogram recording was not performed at any time. In hindsight, the clinical reasoning that led to a provisional diagnosis of epilepsy in this case was not a necessarily sound clinical reasoning.
Subsequently, this patient developed mainly abdominal muscle spasms, which sometimes interfered with breathing. His case was reviewed, and the consensus was that collapse during manual evacuation of the bowel was related to autonomic dysreflexia and not due to epilepsy. As the patient requested, baclofen treatment was restarted initially at a dose of 5 mg at night and then increased gradually to 10 mg twice a day. This greatly alleviated his abdominal muscle spasms. He did not report any further seizures or episodes of collapse either in the lavatory or elsewhere.
However, in 2015, the patient again collapsed in the bathroom while performing manual evacuation of the bowel. He was found unresponsive in the bathroom by his daughter, who contacted the emergency services. On arrival at the Accident and Emergency Department of the local hospital, he seemed to exhibit expressive dysphasia and had developed a left-sided facial droop. In addition, initially he had a difficulty following commands. On admission, his Glasgow Coma Scale was 11/15, blood pressure was 164/84 mm Hg, and temperature was 36.4°C. ECG showed a ventricular rate of 56 per minute; PR interval =194 milliseconds; QRS duration =113 milliseconds; QT/QTc =457–440 milliseconds; and P-R-T axes =74–35–42. His chest was clear on auscultation. The patient was reassessed 40 minutes after presentation when his blood pressure had dropped to 97/59 mm Hg; he was much more alert and orientated, obeying commands and with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 15/15. His facial droop had resolved.
A noncontrast computed tomography scan of the head showed a grossly normal appearance of the cerebral parenchyma with normal gray/white matter differentiation, normal, symmetrical appearances of both middle cerebral arteries and unremarkable brainstem and cerebellum. There was no intracranial hemorrhage or surface collections, no space occupying lesions, or no mass effects. The ventricular system had a normal appearance, and the basal cisterns remained patent. The orbital contents were unremarkable as were the cranial vault and skull base. The overall conclusion was that there was no acute intracranial pathology.
Five days later, he developed painless swelling of the left knee and ankle. X-rays revealed a fracture of the tip of the left lateral malleolus and a supracondylar fracture of the left femur. A hinged knee brace was applied, which was locked in the most comfortable and appropriate position.
One morning in September 2016, his daughter found him collapsed and unresponsive in the bathroom at his home, sitting in his wheelchair next to the toilet with bloodied stool segments on the bathroom floor. He had a latex glove on his left hand and was holding a toilet tissue. Death was confirmed by a paramedic, and police officers attended the scene but found no suspicious circumstances. His district nurse had noted that the patient suffered a collapse three nights before his death after passing a very hard stool, but the nurse felt there was no need for his general practitioner to visit him. At the time of his death, his medication comprised baclofen, bisacodyl suppository, senna, and ranitidine.
A medicolegal postmortem examination was performed at the request of the coroner. This confirmed an old, relatively sharp curvature or angulation in the region of the lower cervical/upper thoracic vertebrae. The spinal cord appeared intact grossly but followed this angulation of the spinal column. There was no evidence of recent vertebral or spinal cord injury. The remainder of the examination was essentially unremarkable with no structural abnormality identified to account for death. In particular was no coronary artery stenosis, pneumonia, pulmonary embolism, or significant abnormality of the brain or of the urinary or gastrointestinal tracts. The rectum contained fairly hard feces. No histological, microbiological, or toxicological investigations were carried out. In the absence of any other obvious disease or cause for death found at autopsy and given the clinical history, the pathologist recorded the cause of death as autonomic dysreflexia secondary to spinal cord injury. The mechanism of death was postulated to be severe hypertension probably causing coronary artery spasm, acute myocardial ischemia, and fatal arrhythmia.