30 year old male was shot by an arrow which went through the 4th intercostal space just behind anterior axillary fold, penetrated the right chest wall to enter the chest cavity and lodged in the left thoracic wall. A second arrow entered the axilla from the posterior aspect of the upper part of the right arm. Pressure dressings had been applied around the entry points of the arrows. There was no obvious active bleeding externally. A chest radiograph done at the referring facility showed an arrow traversing both chest cavities superimposed on the cardiac silhouette . The second arrow had its tip superimposed on the humeral head.
Patient was referred to our facility, Moi teaching and referral hospital (MTRH) from a peripheral facility. He received a unit of packed red blood cells while on transit, intravenous fluids, and oxygen. A dose of analgesic, antibiotics and tetanus toxoid had been administered as per the referral note. Patient’s past medical history was not significant for chronic illness or prior surgeries, and had no reported drug or food allergies. He did not smoke or use alcohol. He lived a very active life working on his family farm mostly by hand.
At the MTRH emergency department, initial vitals were blood pressure 90/54 mmHg, pulse rate 90, SPO2 91% in room air, respiratory rate 22 and temperature 36.6 °C. Patient was fully conscious and complained of chest pain. Patient had equal bilateral chest expansion and air entry but with extensive emphysema of the left more than right chest wall. His blood pressures stabilized following resuscitation with crystalloids and dextran (Blood products were not immediately available). Analgesics and antibiotics were continued as per the treatment sheet. Renal function tests were normal and hemoglobin was 12 g/dL (12.0–17.4 g/dL) with platelet count of 187 × 103/μL (150–400 × 103/μL) and white blood cells (WBC) of 13.23 × 103/μL (5.00–10.00 × 103/μL). He was prepared and wheeled to theatre stable about 15 h post injury. The lead was a cardiothoracic surgeon.
Intra-operatively, the right axillary injury was dealt with first as there was active bleeding after removal of pressure dressing. A delto-pectoral groove incision was used to access the axilla and a distal approach through floor of axilla was employed. The severed right axillary vein was identified and ligated. The right axillary artery was not injured. The arrow head was identified, removed. Incision was then closed.
Patient was repositioned for a left thoracotomy, about 16 h post injury. Intra-op findings were 2 clean through and through cuts of the anterior and posterior wall of the thoracic esophagus, and a left hemothorax of about 500 mL. The arrow had gone through the left lung to lodge into the left thoracic wall. There were no injuries to the aorta and heart.
Arrow was gently pulled out. The esophagus was mobilized minimally at the level of injury. Minimal debridement was done; the esophageal tissue was healthy without edema. There was no visible soiling around the injury. A nasogastric tube (NGT) was passed into the stomach. Both posterior and anterior perforations were repaired from outside in two layers with Silk over the NGT. Volume of fluid suctioned from the left chest cavity was about 500 mL which seemed like a mixture of blood and saliva. Irrigation and lavage of the pleural cavity was done, left chest tube inserted and thoracotomy incision closed in layers. Patient was then repositioned to supine and a right chest tube inserted. It was deemed prudent to insert a prophylactic right chest tube as the arrow had traversed both chest cavities. Patient was transfused with 1 unit of packed red blood cells intra-operatively. Unfortunately the NGT dislodged at the time of reversal from anesthesia and the patient was nursed without it.
Post-operative plan included nil per oral, intravenous fluids, analgesics, antibiotics and proton pump inhibitors (PPIs). On the 6th post-op day the left chest tube was removed. A contrast swallow studies done on day 8 showed no leak at site of anastomosis with contrast in the stomach. Subsequently patient was started on oral sips. On day 10, patient developed respiratory distress necessitating an emergency chest radiograph which showed left lung collapse without effusion. Left lung expanded on chest physiotherapy and adequate analgesia.
A chest radiograph done on day 14 when patient went into distress again requiring oxygen showed a right pleural effusion with the chest tube insitu. The chest tube was removed and another fixed which drained serosanguinous fluid without food contents. Over next several days, patient continued to improve and the chest tube was removed. The patient was ambulant, doing self-care, off antibiotics and feeding normally. He was discharged on post-operative day 25 for follow up at the specialist clinic. Patient was well and feeding comfortably when he was seen at the outpatient clinic 3 weeks after discharge.