We report a case of an 84-year-old woman, who was admitted for a hip joint endoprosthesis. Increased bleeding was noted during the operation. Due to postoperative anemia and hemodynamic instability the patient received in total 3 units of packed red blood cells. On day 13, the patient developed fever and antibiosis with piperacillin-tazobactam was started. In the following days, the patient suffered from diarrhea and deteriorated clinically, but did not show fever anymore. Three days later, he was admitted to the intensive care unit with a clinical picture of severe septic shock with circulatory failure and lactic acidosis. A blood smear was ordered and the technician detected a high concentration of plasmodia and a rapid test was positive for Plasmodium falciparum. The patient received artesunate (2.4 mg/kg i.v.) as soon as the medication was available. Despite all efforts, the patient deteriorated and needed ventilation and hemodynamic support; however, the patient died on the next day.
The patient had no travel history, therefore the suspicion arose that plasmodia were transmitted by the packed red blood cells. A look back process was initiated by the responsible blood transfusion service, including all three donors. One of the donors − with a history of multiple donations − had recently traveled for 1 month to a country where malaria is endemic and obviously contracted malaria without experiencing any symptoms. The donor does not stem from an endemic area being not tolerant to malaria. The blood donation was performed 2 weeks after return from the endemic area. When filling out the questionnaire, the donor did not mention a recent return from an area where malaria is endemic. Furthermore, the donor did not give any information on the intake of drugs for preventing malaria. Therefore, the donor was released to donate whole blood. The donor had general symptoms of illness and fever 1 week after donation. Contrary to the advice in the donor questionnaire to report such symptoms, the donor did not do so. At the same time as the blood transfusion took place (11 days after the donation), the donor himself was diagnosed with malaria in the hospital; however, no information was passed on to the blood transfusion service. It was confirmed that the donor had taken malaria prophylaxis. Thus, after the death of the recipient, the events legally qualified as negligent manslaughter. The donor was indeed confronted with severe legal consequences after the source of the infection and its causality for the death of the recipient had been detected. After an indictment by the public prosecutor, the donor was sentenced to a criminal fine of 280 daily rates (adjusted to her income; in total, slightly over 1.600 EUR) for negligent causation of death (negligent manslaughter; § 81 of the Austrian Criminal Code). According to media reports , the judge stressed that while a confession, no prior entries in the criminal records, and the voluntary decision to donate blood could be counted as mitigating circumstances, the criminal conviction should also stress that any information given on one's health and traveling history must be as accurate as possible. The heirs of the deceased blood recipient also sued the donor (and the blood donation facility) for damages before a civil court.
The donor was also convicted under civil law in the first instance and must pay bereavement compensation and funeral expenses. The judgment is not legally binding . To our knowledge, this is the first case emphasizing the legal consequences of the involved donor.