A 23-year-old woman, gravida 1, para 0, had an uncomplicated cesarean section at 40 weeks gestation at a county hospital. Her prenatal and medical histories were unremarkable and the immediate postpartum course was uneventful. Eight days after delivery, the patient complained of severe nausea and vomiting. Her vital signs were normal, including a temperature of 36.5°C and blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg. Laboratory examinations revealed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 14.8 × 109/L, platelet (PLT) count of 60 × 109/L, and hemoglobin (Hgb) level of 75 g/L. The patient was given a tentative diagnosis of acute gastroenteritis and mild anemia. However, over the next ten hours, the patient showed an acute deterioration, accompanied by slight vaginal bleeding, gross hematuria, spontaneous bruising, marked pallor, icteric sclera, drowsiness, and even a loss of consciousness. Laboratory tests documented a Hgb level of 60 g/L, RBC of 1.86 × 1012/L, PLT of 31× 109/ L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 10.8 mmol/L (normal range: 1.7-8.3 U/L), and total bilirubin (TBIL) of 39.2 umol/L (normal range: 2–23 umol/L). Urinalysis revealed blood [3+] and protein [2+]. Coagulation studies, C-reactive protein (CRP), and serum electrolytes were within the normal range. Craniocerebral computed tomography (CT) examination was also normal. Direct and indirect Coombs tests were both negative.
Given the rapid progression and lack of a definitive diagnosis, the patient was transferred to a provincial hospital. The patient’s blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg. Subsequent investigations revealed hemolytic anemia, with Hgb of 55 g/L and serum lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) of 5286 U/L (normal range 135–214 U/L). There was a rapid deterioration in renal function: creatinine kinase (CK) 349 U/L, creatinine 108 umol/L, urea 13.57 mmol/L, and uric acid 466.7 umol/L. PLT were markedly reduced (5.2 × 109/L) with an increased WBC count of 32.41 × 109/L and an elevated glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (AST) of 149 U/L. Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), thrombin time (TT), prothrombin time (PT), fibrinogen (FIB), and antithrombin (AT) were within the normal range.
Despite aggressive resuscitation attempts over the course of two hours, the patient died. The presumptive diagnoses included disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP), hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets (HELLP syndrome), and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP). The antemortem peripheral blood smear showed fragmented red blood cells (RBC).
The body remained frozen (−20°C) until a forensic autopsy was performed two months postmortem because of a medical dispute and an issue of autopsy consent by the family. External examination revealed multiple petechial hemorrhages around the shoulder and extremities. Internal examination was significant for the presence of petechial hemorrhage involving the pericardium, the soft tissue around the left lung hilum, the right lobe of the liver and the uterine cavity . Other findings included 100 mL of serous fluid in the pericardial cavity and 400 mL of dark red fluid in both pleural cavities.
On microscopic examination, both kidneys showed autolysis and diffused glomerular changes with thickening of the capillary walls. There was an increase in the mesangial cell matrix, and segmental obstruction of glomerular capillaries and the renal afferent arteriole by the microthrombus. A number of glomeruli exhibited ischemic changes and atrophy . Protein casts were present in the renal tubules. The fibrin exudation on the renal arteriolar wall was observed . Other organs were unremarkable on gross or microscopic examination. The toxicology analysis revealed no positive findings.
Based on the clinical history, laboratory testing, and autopsy findings, we concluded that the cause of death was PHUS.