A 35-year-old African American man was initially sent to our emergency room to evaluate a possible head trauma after a witnessed fall. He complained of frequent falls and leg weakness for 3–4 months. The weakness appeared to be progressive and persistent without episodic worsening. He had to use a cane to compensate but was still able to ambulate. His family members also endorsed cognitive defects over the past few months before admission. These impairments consisted mainly of apathy and withdrawal from social interactions; he used to be fully independent but now stayed at home most of the time. His medical history was only significant for alcohol abuse (three to four cans of beer and red wine daily for 2 years), and his family history was unremarkable.
Physical examinations showed an age-appropriate, alert, and oriented man. He was able to engage in conversations with a paucity of speech and flat affect; he also made eye contact and followed all commands during our evaluations.
There was bilateral weakness with spasticity in all lower extremity muscle groups. The deep tendon reflex was hypoactive with an upward response of the plantar reflex on the left side. He also had a wide-based unsteady gait and poor limb coordination. The remainder of the neurological examination and a general examination were unremarkable.
Initial brain computed tomography (CT) in our emergency room demonstrated a mass lesion occupying the left caudate and extending into his frontal lobe . A brain MRI showed bilateral and symmetric hyperintense signals in the corpus callosum, periventricular white matter, and internal capsule with an axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence with gadolinium enhancement . A cervical spine MRI was negative for cord compression and abnormal signals.
Routine blood tests, as well as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), syphilis, and thyroid function tests, were unremarkable, and his serum vitamin B12 level was borderline (289 picogram per milliliter). A cerebral spinal fluid sample revealed a mildly elevated protein level (120 mg per deciliter) with a normal cell count (two cells per milliliter) and glucose level (79 mg per deciliter). The sample was negative for cytology, oligoclonal bands, culture, and Epstein–Barr virus DNA polymerase chain reaction (PCR). His urine toxicology panel was negative for common recreational drugs.
The initial impression was an acquired demyelinating white matter disease due to nutritional deficiency. A trial vitamin supplement (500 mg administered intravenously three times a day and 1000 μg of cyanocobalamin administered intramuscularly daily) was given based on his alcohol abuse history, but no symptom improvements were seen during the following week. An inherited condition was thus suspected given the negative workup, the non-response to treatment, and the symmetric involvement in the brain MRI. This suspicion was validated by his peroxisomal fatty acid profile , and a diagnosis of X-ALD was confirmed according to the identification of a pathogenic mutation in the ABCD1 gene: c.1489 2A>G (g.153005544). Adrenocortical insufficiency was not identified during the evaluation. No seizure activity was witnessed or shown on video-electroencephalography.
His neurological condition deteriorated rapidly. He progressed into a non-verbal, quadriplegic patient dependent on a ventilator within 5 months of the initial encounter, and after 1 year of follow up he had degenerated into a vegetative state. Genetic counseling was offered to his family, and all of his siblings were negative for the ABCD1 gene mutation.