A previously healthy 43-year-old male patient presented with acute chest discomfort and palpitations subsequent to alcohol ingestion, with these symptoms escalating to syncope. The electrocardiogram (ECG) delineated VT with a heart rate (HR) of 230 beats per minute (bpm). The patient’s consciousness recovered after receiving medication treatment and subsequently radiofrequency ablation (RFA) was performed. However, identical symptomatology reemerged after further alcohol consumption a month later, while the ECG did not suggested VT and the second RFA endeavor was not successfully induced VT. Since the patient received care at other medical institutions for his initial two episodes of arrhythmia, the prescribed medication regimen post-discharge was not accessible. No further incidents were reported in the next eight years until the patient again experienced chest constriction and palpitations post-alcohol consumption one week ago, with an ECG verifying VT at a HR of 193 bpm. Ongoing hemodynamic instability necessitated cardioversion to restore sinus rhythm. Subsequent coronary angiography indicated the presence of a coronary myocardial bridge and slow blood flow in the right coronary artery, without identifying significant plaques or stenoses in the coronary artery main branches.
The patient was referred to our hospital to investigate the cause of the recurrent episodes of VT. Physical examination revealed no abnormalities and laboratory tests were within normal range, barring mild elevations in of high-sensitive troponin T (TnT) and procalcitonin (PCT). Post-admission ECG unveiled sinus bradycardia, with biphasic P wave modifications in lead II suggestive of left atrial enlargement, T-wave inversions in multiple leads, and the presence of pathological Q waves in leads I and AVL. Intriguingly, epsilon waves were detected in leads V1-V3 . Two-dimensional echocardiography showed considerable RV dilation with ventricular wall thinning and diminished motion . Additionally, a flake isoechoic lesion was observed in the left ventricle (LV) apex and the movement of LV apex accordingly decreased as well . Contrast echocardiography was performed to ascertain the presence of a thrombus in the LV but no filling defect was observed on left ventricular opacification (LVO) . However, myocardial contrast echocardiography (MCE) revealed a notable reduction in apical epicardial perfusion . Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) elucidated the linear intensification on the delayed enhanced scan of the RV and the subendocardial diffuse stripy late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in the left ventricular apex-middle free wall .
Ultimately, the diagnosis of ARVC was confirmed, characterized by diffuse transmural fibrosis in the right ventricular free wall and subepicardial myocardial fibrosis in the left ventricular apex free wall. Due to the patient’s decision against the implantation of an intracardiac defibrillator (ICD), he underwent a RFA again and VT was successfully induced during the operation, which originated from the base of RV and the free wall of the tricuspid annulus. Following treatment, the patient was discharged with prescribed verapamil with plans for subsequent follow-up.