The patient was a 41-year-old man (height 174.2 cm, body weight 60 kg) with dextro-TGA who underwent balloon atrioseptostomy treatment at birth because of desaturation. He also had a Mustard procedure (interatrial baffle) at 10 months of age and required surgical repair for pulmonary vein stenosis at 2 years of age. At 41 years of age, he developed severe systemic RV failure and pulmonary edema . He was treated with inotropic agents, mechanical ventilation, intra-aortic balloon pumping, and continuous hemodiafiltration. His hemodynamic status was stabilized with these treatments, but he remained inotrope-dependent, and his condition gradually worsened despite optimal medical therapy. After a medical team preoperative meeting, he was scheduled for a VAD implantation of the RV as a bridge to orthotropic cardiac transplantation.
Preoperative cardiac catheterization indicated elevated pulmonary arterial wedge pressure and severely impaired systemic RV function with infusion of dobutamine (3 μg/kg/min) and carperitide (24 ng/kg/min), a recombinant atrial natriuretic peptide with vasodilating and diuretic activity . Echocardiography identified the dilated RV, preserved pulmonary ventricle (morphological left ventricle), and increased baffle flow velocity . Chest radiography and computed tomography scan showed a severely dilated RV .
In the operating room, a continuous monitoring of electrocardiography, SpO2, systemic arterial pressure via a right radial artery catheter, bispectral index (BIS; Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN), and regional cerebral oxygen saturation at the right and left forehead (INVOS™ 5100C, Somanetics, USA) was initiated before anesthesia induction. After administration of 100% oxygen, general anesthesia was induced slowly by intravenous administration of 3 mg of midazolam, 0.5 mg of fentanyl, and 50 mg of rocuronium. Additionally, dobutamine (3.3 μg/kg/min), nicorandil (1.1 μg/kg/min), which has the dual properties of a nitrate and a potassium channel opener, and carperitide (33 ng/kg/min) were continuously administered to minimize anesthetic-induced cardiac depression. During anesthesia induction and tracheal intubation, his circulatory and respiratory status remained stable. After tracheal intubation, a transesophageal echocardiography probe was inserted. Then, a central venous catheter and right heart catheter were inserted via the right internal jugular vein. The latter catheter (Swan Ganz catheter) was guided to the right pulmonary artery under fluoroscopic control because of his unique anatomy with interatrial baffle.
His anesthesia depth was controlled at a BIS of 40–60 by a continuous infusion of propofol (3–5 mg/kg/h), remifentanil (0.2–0.3 μg/kg/min), and rocuronium (7 μg/kg/min).
A standard median sternotomy was performed. Because his heart was heavily adherent, the cardiac surgeons had difficulty in adhesiolysis. The systemic aorta and systemic atrium were cannulated, and cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was instituted. At first, the patient’s aortic valve was replaced with a bioprosthetic valve for moderate aortic valve regurgitation. Subsequently, the trabeculae carneae of the RV, which could disturb the flow to the inflow cannula, were resected via the RV apex; the inflow cannula was positioned at the apex of the RV. The outflow cannula graft was anastomosed to the ascending aorta, and then a Jarvik 2000 VAD (Jarvik Heart, Inc., New York, NY, US) was implanted.
At the weaning of the CPB, infusion of dobutamine (3.3 μg/kg/min) and inhalation of nitric oxide (20 ppm), to decrease afterload of the pulmonary LV, was started. The CPB weaning was not difficult, and the VAD was successfully commenced at a pump speed of 10,000 rpm (3–5 L/min). The aortic cross-clamping, CPB, surgery, and anesthesia lasted 200, 296, 628, and 807 min, respectively. Estimated blood loss and urine output were 2051 and 2390 mL, respectively. Overall, 900 mL of crystalloid, 900 mL of colloid, 960 mL of packed red blood cells, 560 mL of fresh frozen plasma, and 200 mL of platelet concentrate were administered. After completion of operation, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit with ventilator support under propofol sedation.
On postoperative day (POD) 2, the patient was weaned from mechanical ventilation. On POD 5, after our surgeons decreased the VAD dial from 3 to 2, the patient developed pulmonary congestion with respiratory distress, decreased arterial oxygen saturation, and elevated pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) . Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (NPPV) was adopted, and intensified diuretic therapy was started. Additionally, the intensivists returned the VAD dial from 2 to 3. A few days later, he recovered from congestive heart failure, and then, NPPV was stopped. Following this, the patient did well hemodynamically and had good VAD performance. Another important point for postoperative management of VAD implantation is to prevent thrombosis. In this case, continuous infusion of heparin was administered for anticoagulation. The heparin infusion adjusted to an activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) ration of 1.5–2.0 (or 40–50 s). Actually, the infusion rate or heparin was 15,000–20,000 units per day.
The patient was discharged from the hospital on POD 60. He is now eagerly awaiting heart transplantation. Table shows his hemodynamic data, and Fig. shows his chest radiography on POD 90.