A 46-year-old female with a past medical history of SLE and associated Sjögren syndrome, usual interstitial pneumonia and migraine, medicated with prednisolone 5 mg and hydroxicloroquine 400 mg, with a recently worsened asymptomatic hypogammaglobulinemia (IgG of 297 mg/dL and IgA < 8 mg/dL) secondary to rituximab (taken 4 years earlier), was proposed for replacement therapy with IVIG. She had no previous history of therapy with IVIG. She was started on IVIG 10%, 2 g/Kg over 5 consecutive days. She was given two doses of IVIG in two consecutive days without any immediate reaction.
The patient presented to the emergency department, 36 h after the first infusion, with headache, photophobia, nausea, vomiting and fever. On examination, she was prostrated and had neck stiffness without focal neurological signs. Blood work showed low inflammatory parameters. The brain CT was normal. The CSF analysis showed neutrophilic pleocytosis with 1547 cells/mm3 (87.5% neutrophils), hyperproteinorrachia (15.3 mg/dL) and mildly reduced glucose (50 mg/dL in CSF and 113 mg/dL in plasma). The patient was admitted to the Infectious Diseases Department with the diagnosis of meningitis and given ceftriaxone 2 g every 12 h and ampicillin 2 g every 4 h.
Blood cultures were negative as well as Gram stain, India ink smear, CSF culture for bacteria and fungus and Nucleic Acid Amplification Test (NAAT) for Listeria monocytogenes in the CSF. The urinary pneumococcal antigen was also negative.
The patient was asymptomatic after 2 days of therapy. The lumbar puncture was repeated after 5 days of therapy. The CSF analysis showed 0 cells, normal glucose (67 mg/dL in CSF and 91 mg/dL in plasma) and normal proteins (3.5 mg/dL). Accordingly, the antibiotics were withdrawn and the patient was discharged.
Drug-induced aseptic meningitis usually manifests as meningismus within 48 h after drug exposure. Typically, CSF examination reveals neutrophilic pleocytosis (median 147, range 8–19,000 cells/mm3), protein elevation (median 1.20, range 0.04–3.90 g/L) and normal levels of glucose (median 61.64 mg/dL, range 43.45–157.45 mg/dL). Eosinophilic pleocytosis has been reported in some patients. CSF culture is necessarily negative.
In our case, the diagnosis was based on the presence of risk factors for IVIG associated meningitis (migraine, SLE, first infusion and high dose IVIG), the strong temporal relationship between administration of IVIG and onset of symptoms, the typical CSF characteristics, the exclusion of alternative causes and the quick improvement within a few days.