A previously healthy 32-year-old man, presented to the outpatient department of our institution with a 3-day history of high fever, sore throat, and mild diarrhea in early September 2016. His chief complaints were severe myalgia in both sides of his cervical and trunk muscles (around the pectoralis major, rectus abdominis, and trapezius areas), in addition to muscles of the upper and lower extremities (both proximal and distal), and orchiodynia. Additionally, he complained of inadequate sleep due to severe leg pain that led him to fear being unable to rise from bed after lying down. He therefore stood by his bed throughout the night.
On physical examination, the patient’s height was 171 cm and body weight was 67 kg (body mass index = 22.9). There was no paresis or muscle tenderness noted, and all deep-tendon reflexes were normal. His pain did not extend to the facial, hand, foot, or joint regions. No tenderness was observed in the testes, despite the complaint of orchiodynia. Rectal examination did not indicate prostatitis. He was fully conscious, and no paresis, speech disturbance, or skin eruptions were observed. The differential diagnoses initially included periodic paralysis, myasthenia gravis, adult-onset Still’s disease, fibromyalgia, and chronic fatigue syndrome.
An antigen-based rapid diagnostic test detecting both influenza virus A and B yielded a negative result. His white blood cell count was 3700/mm3, serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 1.41 mg/dL (normal range: < 0.2 mg/dL), serum creatine phosphokinase (CK) level was 48 U/L (normal range: 60–230 U/L), and serum myoglobin level was 63.1 ng/mL (normal range: 20.3–92.3 ng/mL). All liver and thyroid function tests, electrolytes, and serum ferritin level were within normal limits. Two sets of blood cultures both yielded negative findings. Circulating anti-nuclear, anti-acetylcholine receptor, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were not detected.
At the time of case presentation, the patient’s wife had just delivered a daughter and was temporarily staying at her parents’ house. The patient and his wife also had a 3-year-old son, with whom the patient stayed at their own home following his wife’s parturition. He worked in an office and sent his son to a nursery school during the daytime working hours. Five days before the patient’s initial visit to our hospital, his son developed a fever and mild throat pain, and several infants at the nursery school also developed mild flu-like symptoms and mild diarrhea that improved over 2–3 days. To rule out the possibility of enterovirus infection, serum antibodies were tested for coxsackievirus (type A2, A4, A5, A6, B2, B4, B5, B6) and echovirus (type 13, 30) at the initial visit and 2 weeks later with the neutralization test method. Significant antibody titer changes between acute and convalescent phases were not detected and a serological diagnosis was not established for these enteroviruses. Because adult HPeV-3 infection may occur shortly after an epidemic of pediatric infection, nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based detection tests for HPeV-3 were performed, and the HPeV-3 types were identified by sequencing the VP3/VP1 junction in PCR products amplified directly from the specimens . We collected blood samples from the patient at the first visit and 2 weeks later, and obtained stool samples from all family members several days later. We also collected specimens from the patient’s parents because the severity of his myalgia restricted his ability to move freely in his house, and he required assistance from his parents in caring for his son and himself.
HPeV-3 was detected in the patient’s initial blood and stool samples and his son’s stool sample ; viable HPeV-3 viruses were isolated from stool specimens using a cell culture method. We confirmed that the sequences of the PCR-amplified regions were identical in specimens from the patient and his son, indicating that the son had transmitted HPeV-3 to the patient. The results from the mother and newborn daughter, who had not stayed with the patient and his son during that time, were negative. The results from the patient’s parents were also negative.
He was finally diagnosed with severe epidemic myalgia caused by HPeV-3 infection. Without specific treatment, his severe myalgia, fever, and orchiodynia gradually improved. After a week, he had no difficulty in moving his whole body, and no sequelae remained. Additionally, we measured serum cytokine levels at the initial visit and 2 weeks later. Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-10, and IL-12 levels were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. A cut-off value for each assay was as follows: TNF-α and IL-10, below 2 pg/mL; IL-6 and IL-12, below 4 pg/mL. Although the values of his TNF-α, IL-10, and IL-12 levels were all below each cutoff value, his IL-6 level was elevated to 63.6 pg/mL at the initial visit. Two weeks later, his IL-6 level had decreased to almost half (34.9 pg/mL), but remained higher than normal.