A 35-year-old male presented to the emergency department, suffering from postprandial pain in the upper left abdominal quadrant, vomiting and belching for two days. Nine months prior to admission a laparoscopic total colectomy with terminal ileostomy was performed due to refractory ulcerative colitis. The patient had lost four kilograms of body weight over the past week, was dehydrated. He had the body mass index (BMI) of 21. There was no abdominal tenderness or symptoms of peritonitis and acute bowel obstruction was not suspected. The patient had an ileostomy which produced between 2000 and 3000 mL per day.
Laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell count of 20,000/mL, C-reactive protein of 17.0 mg/L, creatinine 181 μmol/L, lactic acid level of 1.2 mmol/L.
A normal upper GI endoscopy was performed, the patient was rehydrated with intravenous fluid and discharged from hospital on day four. Dehydration due to high stoma output was suspected.
The patient was readmitted two weeks later with recurrent symptoms.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed periduodenal edema but otherwise normal small intestine without signs of mechanical obstruction, intestinal ischemia or intraabdominal liquid accumulation. Common manifestations of internal hernia like swirl sign appearance of the mesenteric vessels or mushroom shape sign was not observed . Due to an elongated J-shaped stomach and the fact that the superior mesenteric vessels were seen in front of the antral part of the stomach on the CT, suspicion of an internal herniation through the hepatogastric ligament without intestinal obstruction was raised (, ). Laparoscopy was performed and a complete herniation of small intestine including the duodenojejunal flexure, ascending part of duodenum and a uncinate part of pancreas through the lesser omentum was revealed . There was no evidence of strangulation. The small intestine was repositioned and a large opening in the hepatogastric ligament was identified . Because of the size of the opening it was not possible to close the lesser omentum defect sufficiently and tension-free. Instead a neo-lesser sac was created by suturing remnants of the gastrocolic ligament and transverse mesocolon. Suturing was performed with continuous non-absorbable 4-0 polyfilament suture.
Postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on postoperative day three. He was free of symptoms at one-year follow-up.