A 53-year-old male Caucasian with diabetes type 2 was tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 with a rapid antigen test. Diagnosis was substantiated with PCR testing afterwards. Moderate symptoms started roughly 48 h after the first positive test, including increasing fever, shivering, listlessness, hyperhidrosis, lack of exercise tolerance, mild hypoxia, shallow respiration and severe coughing. The patient was first examined 5 days after the positive antigen test. He showed an overall poor physical condition. Oxygen saturation was measured continuously and fluctuated above 90%, however it momentarily reached 89%, which led to referral to a chest x-ray. As the oxygen saturation improved during the first day of treatment, possibly due to rehydration, no oxygen supplementation was performed. Symptoms and CRP plasma levels were monitored twice daily. 5 days after the initial positive test, CRP concentrations increased rapidly. Based on the rate of increase in CRP concentration, which is a prognostic marker for the potential onset of ventilation requirement , treatment with CRP apheresis was decided. First CRP apheresis was initiated 5 days after positive SARS-CoV-2 test (3 days after symptom onset) and four apheresis treatments were performed on consecutive days with the PentraSorb CRP adsorber .
Of note, a bacterial infection was excluded by measuring Procalcitonin (0.22 µg/L 3 days after symptom onset).
CRP concentration kinetics showed a rapid increase in plasma levels between 96 and 132 h after positive SARS-CoV-2 antigen test and 1st apheresis was then initiated. Apheresis treatments were performed as described elsewhere in detail and the blood was anticoagulated with ACD-A (1st apheresis) or ACD-A and additional heparin (2nd - 4th apheresis). Treated plasma volume was dependent on patient condition and CRP concentration. Apheresis parameters are listed in .
CRP plasma concentrations declined rapidly during apheresis with a maximal depletion of 79% during the last apheresis session . Maximum CRP concentration of 133 mg/l was reached 7 days after positive antigen test and before 3rd apheresis. Massive CRP synthesis was observed during the first two CRP aphereses. CRP levels stayed below 50 mg/l after the fourth apheresis treatment and normalized (< 10 mg/l) 12 days after the first positive antigen test.
Body temperature was measured daily and stayed consistently above 38.0°C until 8 days after positive antigen testing, when it decreased to a physiological 37.2°C during the last CRP apheresis, simultaneously reflecting the better condition of the patient .
During apheresis treatments, general cardiovascular parameters were measured at least hourly and did not show severe abnormalities. Blood pressure and pulse remained stable albeit the pulse was elevated over all four treatments. Sodium, Potassium, Calcium, Lactate and Glucose measurements showed normal concentrations without large changes during apheresis sessions. Venous O2 saturation improved during all four treatments. The patient’s hematocrit was influenced by fluid substitution during aphereses and decreased slightly during the treatments.
Chest X-ray was performed before 1st apheresis (day 5 after positive antigen test) and showed streaky compressions of the lung in the lower field/retrocardial left side. The abnormalities were consistent with the expected pattern of atypical pneumonia. The 2nd X-ray was performed 6 days after the last apheresis session and showed no more pathological findings .
Transthoracic Echocardiography was performed 27 days after last apheresis session with sinus rhythm. It exhibited no pathological findings. Left and right ventricle displayed normal size and healthy systolic and diastolic function. No hypertrophy or pericardial effusion was detected. Both atriums displayed normal size and cardiac valves exhibited regular function. Resting echocardiography showed no pathological findings as well.
Cardiac MRI was performed 41 days after last apheresis session and showed normal, healthy cardiac function. Specifically, there was no indication for exercise-induced myocardial ischemia, cardiomyopathy, acute/chronic peri/myocarditis or cardiac amyloidosis. There was also no evidence for myocardial fibrosis or acute/chronic inflammatory remodeling of the pericard.