A 32-year-old female with a history of chronic idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura (ITP) presented to emergency room with vertigo and imbalance for two hours prior to admission. Physical examination was remarkable for cerebellar ataxia, positive Romberg's sign, dysmetria, and dyskinesia on the left upper limb. Urgent CT scan of head was done and showed no signs of intracranial hemorrhage. Complete blood count (CBC) on admission was only remarkable for platelet count of 49 K/uL. The rest of blood work-up including coagulation profile and comprehensive metabolic panel was unremarkable. The decision was made to start the patient on intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) while investigating for cerebrovascular accident. MRI for head and neck was done and showed infarction areas in left cerebellar hemisphere ( (Radiology Department at Hamad General Hospital, Doha, Qatar)). MRA ( (Radiology Department at Hamad General Hospital, Doha, Qatar)) for head and neck was done as well, which showed an occlusion in the distal segment of left vertebral artery. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed no thrombus formation in left atrium. Further investigations including factor V Leiden mutation, proteins C and S activity, complement 3 and 4 levels, anti-phospholipid antibodies, anti-nuclear antibody, and antithrombin 3 level were all unremarkable. After consulting hematology and neurology team, the decision was to avoid both anticoagulant therapy for venous thromboembolism and antiplatelet therapy and to continue IVIG for five days total. One week later, the patient's symptoms improved with some residual difficulty walking. Average platelets count in the one-week period was 45 K/uL. The patient was transferred to a rehabilitation facility, where she continued to improve and was discharged afterwards. Three months later, in a follow-up visit, MRA for neck showed complete occlusion of left vertebral artery ( (Radiology Department at Hamad General Hospital, Doha, Qatar)). MRI for head showed complete resolution of the cerebellar infarction ( (Radiology Department at Hamad General Hospital, Doha, Qatar)). CBC was obtained during the visit and her platelet count was 46 K/uL. The patient was completely asymptomatic and was advised to avoid antiplatelet therapy.