A 65-year-old female, who was previously healthy, was admitted to the respiratory department of our hospital with a 3-month history of cough. She complained of repeatedly coughing without any inducement, accompanied by a small amount of white foamy phlegm. A dull pain in the left lower chest may have occurred when the cough was severe. Although the chest radiograph performed at the local hospital was normal, she received antibiotic treatment for 8 days. Unfortunately, her symptoms of cough and phlegm were aggravated after treatment.
The chest computed tomography (CT) scan of the patient revealed a left hilar mass ; she subsequently underwent bronchoscopy showing endobronchial neoplasm obstructing the left main bronchus , with a biopsy taken from the lesion. The biopsy pathology showed that the bronchial submucosa was uniformly diffuse with small- to medium-sized lymphoid cells at low magnification (× 100). At high magnification (× 400), the cytoplasm of the tumour cells was observed to be partially basophilic with large round, oval or lobulated nuclei in which 1–2 small nucleoli could be found . Based on these findings, haematological diseases were considered. The patient was transferred to the haematology department for further diagnosis and treatment.
During the physical examination in the haematology department, there was no evidence of fever, pale appearance, subcutaneous bleeding, hepatosplenomegaly or superficial lymph node enlargement. Sternal tenderness was negative. Respiratory sounds in the left lung were weakened, and no dry or wet rales were detected in either side of the lung. No abdominal mass was detected. Neurological examination showed no abnormalities.
The complete blood count was normal. Bone marrow biopsy and chromosome analysis did not show any additional abnormalities. Immunochemistry revealed the expression of MPO, CD68, CD15, CD117, CD34, lysozyme, CD99, CD43, CD56, and Ki-67 (70%) . In addition, expression was negative for CD3, CD5, CD20, and CD79a. Synthesizing the characteristics on chest CT and the results of the bronchoscopy and immunohistochemical analysis, we made the diagnosis of MS, which was further confirmed to be primary bronchial MS based on the normal bone marrow and lack of a history of haematological disorders.
After assessing the patient’s condition and obtaining her consent, chemotherapy with HAG (Homoharringtonine, Cytarabine, G-CSF) regimens was begun. Upon the completion of 3 cycles of treatment, the original mass had completely resolved, as confirmed by chest CT scan . No abnormalities were found on re-examination via bronchoscopy . However, we still obtained some local endobronchial mucosa from the original lesion, and the pathological results were normal. Routine blood and bone marrow examinations were performed again, which showed no abnormalities. No positive signs were found on the physical examination. The patient was discharged from our department without any symptoms.
One year later, the patient was re-examined in the local hospital and no abnormalities were found on routine blood tests, bone marrow biopsy, chest CT or bronchoscopy.
MPO(polyclone), CD68(KP1), CD15(Carb-3), CD117(2E4),
CD34(QBEnd/10), Lysozyme(polyclone), CD99(O13),
CD43(DF-T1), CD56(123C3.D5), Ki-67(70%)(MX006).
The immunohistochemical analysis was performed on Ventana BenchMark GX System.
All materials used for the test were purchased from Fuzhou Maixin Biotechnology Development Co.,LTD.