A 72-year-old man came to our Thoracic Surgery Department in March 2018 for a persistent cough that was resistant to therapy. He underwent chest X-ray and a CT scan with enhancement, which showed a mass of 34 × 32 mm located in the left upper lobe of the lung, infiltrating the left main pulmonary artery and the left bronchus . No signs of an atherosclerotic plaque or tumor infiltration involving the entire aortic wall were detected. Invasion of a calcified plaque was slight and appeared to involve only the adventitia. A PET/CT with 18F-FDG was positive (Standard Uptake Value, SUV max = 15) for hypermetabolic mass with negative lymph node stations bilaterally. The patient had a smoking history (one pack/50 pack-years), with no other previous malignancies, and 20 years of comorbidities, including diabetes mellitus type 2, hypertension and hypercholesterolemia treated with medical therapy. Pulmonary function tests before surgery showed a forced expiratory volume in the 1st second (FEV1) of 1.7, equal to 80% predicted, and a forced volume vital capacity (FVC) of 2.4, equal to 82% predicted. The endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) showed no N2 lymph node infiltration, although the percutaneous lung mass biopsy was highly suspect for adenocarcinoma of the lung. After signing the consent, the patient underwent a double-sleeve left upper lobectomy plus en bloc resection of the aortic wall adventitia for 4 × 2 cm2 through a left posterior thoracotomy. At the beginning of the operation, during the mobilization of the mass, a 5-mm aortic rupture occurred in the adventitia due to the presence of an atherosclerotic calcified plaque at this level (C). At first, manual pressure was applied on the bleeding site, then the surgeon tried to place a suture on the bleeding site, but the hardness of the plaque hindered the maneuvering. In the same time, the anesthesiologist maintained low mean arterial pressure (MAP). Patient conditions stayed persistently stable and after 15 min the bleeding was under controlled, however, for the high risk of an another unexpected bleeding, the thoracic wall was closed and the patient intubated was transferred urgently to the interventional operating room where an endovascular stent was placed from the left subclavian artery to the descending aorta using percutaneous retrograde common femoral artery access (D and E). After the vascular procedure, the patient was retransferred to the operative room, the chest was re-opened for inspection and for proceeding with the lung resection.
Intraoperative blood loss was totally 800 ml. Clinical parameters were stable during and after the procedure. The patient tolerated the endovascular stent placement and the subsequent double-sleeve left upper lobectomy within six total hours of operation. The patient was placed in the intensive care unit (ICU) for 48 h after surgery for optimal stabilization of his clinical condition. Chest tubes were removed on the third postoperative day, and the patient was discharged after six days from surgery with no morbidities (A). No stent-related complications were noted. Histology confirmed the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of the lung, stage pT2 pN1 pM0 (TNM 8th), and an oncologic evaluation was requested for the next treatment options. Chest X-rays at one-month and four-month follow-up from surgery (B–C) revealed no complications.