The patient was an 8-year-old, previously healthy, and fully immunized Iranian girl who was initially presented to the pediatric emergency department with 5 days of intermittent fever, followed by abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. She had not attended school within the last 6 months and was cared for by her parents. She was an active child, but staying home most of the time because of the COVID-19 pandemic. Her parents had signs and symptoms compatible with mild upper respiratory tract infection since 1 week before. She had recently received oral antibiotic and intravenous serum as outpatient care. She was admitted with fever and abdominal pain in the surgery service of Akbar Hospital with suspected appendicitis. Nausea and vomiting persisted. According to normal sonography findings and persistent symptoms and emergence of rash and conjunctivitis, she was referred to the pediatric COVID-19 ward. She did not have cough, congestion, or rhinorrhea. After the third day, she received co-trimoxazole and ondansetron. Physical examination revealed bilateral nonpurulent conjunctivitis, erythematous throat, palmar erythema, strawberry tongue, and erythema multiform rash without hypotension. There was no lymphadenopathy or retraction breathing, with normal respiratory sounds. There were no focal signs of infection. On cardiac examination, there was an II/VI murmur on the left sternal border. According to fever (38.6 °C) and pandemic state of COVID-19, she underwent lung high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT), which was not indicative for COVID-19 infection. Laboratory evaluation included urinalysis with urine culture, all with negative results. On laboratory examination, ESR was 67 mm/h, CRP 166 mg/L, platelets 192 × 109/L, hemoglobin 10.2 g/dL and WBC 10.3×109/L (PMN: 82%). Moreover, other routine biochemistry and liver function tests yielded normal findings.
She received IVIG (2 g/kg; 1 g/kg on two consecutive days) and high-dose acetylsalicylic acid (20 mg/kg four times daily) according to rheumatology consultation. Echocardiography showed no pathology related to coronary arteries. Besides, respiratory tract viral infections were evaluated by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test for COVID-19 and blood culture, all with negative results. There was no history of recent travel. Nonetheless, her parents had flu-like symptoms along with hypogeusia and anosmia. She was hospitalized for 5 days. The day before discharge, serologic tests for COVID-19 infection in her parents (serum IgM more than 1.1) and the child herself became positive (serum IgM COVID-19 of 2.1). Consequently, the public health department was notified, and the family was instructed to quarantine at home for 14 days from the positive test result date. She was discharged on low-dose acetylsalicylic acid (3 mg/kg daily), with plans to follow-up with pediatric cardiology for repeat echocardiographic evaluation 2 weeks later. On follow-up echocardiography, there was no aortic artery involvement.