A 12-year-old female patient reported to our institution with left maxillary anterior swelling for 6 months. The patient complained of an increase in the size of the swelling and moderate pain in the past 2 weeks. On palpation, the lesion presented as diffuse, extraoral hard, non-tender 3 × 5 cm swelling in the anterior left maxillary region. Intraoral examination revealed a large compressible well-circumscribed swelling with a smooth surface in the buccal and palatal aspect of the left anterior maxilla with obliteration of the buccal vestibule. The patient had an over-retained left maxillary deciduous canine with a maxillary left lateral incisor and canine missing. There was a marked expansion of both the buccal and palatal cortices.
Radiographic examination orthopantomogram (OPG) showed a large well-circumscribed unilocular radiolucency associated with the left anterior maxilla extending from the maxillary central incisor to the first molar region, with an embedded permanent lateral incisor within the lesion. There was a marked displacement of permanent canine towards the superior extent of the lesion. The cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) revealed a lesion extending from the distal aspect of the left maxillary central incisor to the mesial aspect of the left maxillary first molar. Thinning of the palatal cortex was noted. The mesiobuccal root of the left maxillary first molar was partly resorbed. The left maxillary canine was pushed apically to the floor of the left maxillary sinus, which displaced the floor of the antrum and encroached upon the internal space of the antrum .
Diagnostic aspiration fine needle aspiration cytology revealed straw-colored fluid. Based on clinical and radiographic findings, the differential diagnosis was of a dentigerous cyst or unicystic ameloblastoma.
After obtaining written consent, under general anesthesia, the cyst was completely enucleated along with the impacted left maxillary lateral incisor ( and ). The impacted left permanent maxillary canine, along with retained deciduous left maxillary canine, was extracted. The specimen was sent for histopathological examination, which revealed the characteristics of AOT that showed proliferation of epithelial cells in the form of ductal and rosette patterns, with evident cystic components. The ductal lumen was lined by an eosinophilic ring called a hyaline ring, and the ducts and rosette were surrounded by round and polygonal cells. Pale basophilic irregular to round calcified bodies was evident between ductal and rosette pattern ( and ). Connective tissue showed collagen fibers interspersed with fibroblasts. The histopathological findings were consistent with AOT. Postoperative orthopantomogram shows there were no signs of recurrence on the 1-year follow-up of the patient .