A 20-year-old man with good general health was referred to the oral and maxillofacial surgery department of the CES University, Medellin, Colombia in 2017, He had undergone a previous camouflage orthodontic therapy for a dental Class III, which finished in 2014, posteriorly the patient had a dentoalveolar trauma resulting in avulsion of the upper right lateral incisor (1.2) and required a dental implant in 2015 to replace it. Those therapies were done in another institution; therefore all of the information on the previous procedures and supplies used was not fully known. Nonetheless, it was possible to recover some information on the implant, it was a tapered implant with 3.5 mm diameter and 12 mm length and internal hexagonal conexion. On clinical examination, the patient presented with a skeletal and dental Class III due to maxillary hypoplasia and a prognathic mandible, anterior crossbite and open bite, lingualized lower incisors, the mentioned dental implant, and multiple attritions in the molars occlusal surface .
The treatment plan suggested for this patient was orthognathic surgery with surgery first protocol, orthodontic treatment, and a segmental osteotomy to move the dental implant to a caudal position once the orthodontic treatment was finished; the occlusal surfaces of molars and premolars were restored to get aesthetic-functional rehabilitation of the occlusal plane using posterior resin (P70-3M™ resin). Orthodontic treatment was performed with conventional 0.018 × 0.025 inches braces. Leveling and alignment began with 0.014 inches nickel-titanium arch-wire, followed by 0.016, 0.016 × 0.016. During the first arch-wires, anteroinferior teeth were not included in the arch. The occlusal plane was restored, and then 0.016 × 0.016 inches nickel-titanium arch-wires were placed, followed by 0.016 × 0.022, finally, stainless steel 0.016 × 0.022 inches rectangular arch-wires were used for the orthodontic finishing stage. The upper right lateral incisor (1.2 implant) was never included in the orthodontic treatment .
When the orthodontic treatment was finished, 3D planning for the alveolar osteotomy to reposition the implant was performed. Digital Imaging and Communication on Medicine (DICOM) and Standard Triangle Language (STL) were used to create the surgical guide, and those files were processed in a 3D software (NemoStudio 2018 version, Spain) to build a surgical guide, which had 3 cuts, on the top, mesial, and distal areas of the implant .