An 11-year-old female neutered Persian cat was presented to our institution 3 days
after the onset of inappropriate defecation and urination. The patient had a 4 year
history of polycystic kidney disease (PKD) but was asymptomatic so far.
PKD was diagnosed in this patient 4 years previously, during a routine geriatric
check out. Ultrasonography revealed multiple cysts at both kidneys, but no hepatic
cyst was detected at that time. Two years later, the kidney cysts were stable in
number and size, but two hepatic cysts were detected: one located near the
diaphragm, which measured 8.3 mm, and a smaller one (5.2 mm) located in the left
side of the liver.
Physical examination at the time of presentation to our institution revealed intense
pain on cranial abdominal palpation. Routine haematology, coagulation tests and
serum biochemistry were unremarkable, although urinalysis revealed lower-density
urine (1020 mg/ml), mild haematuria and microscopic pyuria with intracellular
bacilli. A urinary infection was confirmed and treated with amoxicillin–clavulanic
acid 20 mg/kg PO q12h for 4 weeks. No urine culture was performed.
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed that the hepatic cyst located in the left side of
the liver had increased in size, measured 4.5 cm × 3 cm, and was causing a partial
obstruction of the bile duct, which measuring around 3 mm in diameter . The second hepatic
cyst had not increased in size. No other causes of cranial abdominal pain were found
from the blood results or ultrasound study. Owing to the enlargement of the hepatic
cyst and developing clinical signs, surgical excision of the hepatic cyst was
recommended through a laparoscopic approach.
The patient was placed under general anaesthesia and positioned in dorsal recumbency.
A three-port technique was chosen introducing a Veress needle through the linea
alba, 1 cm caudal to the umbilicus. A pneumo peritoneum was established using carbon
dioxide via the Veress needle with a mechanical insufflator, until reaching an
intra-abdominal pressure of 8 mmHg, which was maintained throughout the surgical
procedure. Next, a 5 mm camera port was placed at the same position as the Veress
needle. A 5 mm 30° laparoscope was inserted into the abdomen. The other two 5 mm
portals for instrumentation were established under direct visualisation: one 5 cm
lateral and 3 cm cranial to the umbilicus on the left side; and the other one 3 cm
lateral and 3 cm cranial to the umbilicus on the right side, in a triangulating
pattern.
Initially, a limited exploration of the abdomen was performed, with particular
attention being paid to the liver. A large hepatic cyst was identified in the right
cranial abdomen, which originated from the left medial hepatic lobe ; a major part of the
surface area of the cyst was projected beyond the hepatic parenchyma, while a minor
part was causing a cavity in the liver. Two additional small cysts were seen during
liver examination, but no other gross abnormalities were observed.
An assistant was holding the camera and the surgeon used the other two ports for the
laparoscopic instruments. Once adequate visualisation was obtained, a free area of
the cystic wall was gently grasped using 5 mm laparoscopic grasping forceps. The
Veress needle was used to puncture the cyst and aspirate its contents using an
aspiration tube, to minimise intraperitoneal spillage. The cyst fluid was clear and
translucent.
The protruding cyst wall was dissected using a 5 mm laparoscopic vessel
sealer/divider device and the part of the cyst lining that was in contact with the hepatic
parenchyma was left in situ. The portion dissected of the cyst was removed from the
abdomen through one of the portals and was submitted for histological study. Because
the cyst capsule was not completely removed, an omentopexy within the residual
cavity of the cyst was performed using 4-0 USP braided absorbable material
(Polyglactin 910) in a simple interrupted pattern. The three portals were removed, and abdominal
incisions were closed in three layers using a 3/0 USP monofilament absorbable
material (glycolic acid).
The anaesthetic recovery was uneventful and the cat was hospitalised for 12 h.
Postoperative care in our hospital included close monitoring, Ringer’s lactate fluid
therapy, methadone 0.2 mg/kg SC q6h, which was changed to 20 µg/kg buprenorphine SL
q8h for 3 days after discharge, and continuation of amoxicillin–clavulanic acid 20
mg/kg PO q12h for 4 weeks for the urinary infection.
At follow-up examination 5 days later, the patient was bright and alert, physical
examination was normal and abdominal palpation was not painful.
Histopathological study showed a cyst wall covered internally by a flattened
epithelial layer, supported by a thin band of loose connective tissue, and small
clusters of vacuolised hepatocytes, with distended sinusoidal walls. These findings
confirmed the diagnosis of a liver epithelial cyst, excluding a neoplastic
lesion.
At the 6 month follow-up after surgery, there was no evidence of abdominal pain or
other clinical signs. The abdominal ultrasonography revealed no recurrence of the
liver cyst. The small liver cyst seen during the laparoscopy was stable and measured
4.9 mm × 10.6 mm, but the cyst near the diaphragm had increased to 2.8 cm × 1
cm.