A 42-year-old woman was admitted to our ward from the emergency room (ER), complaining of persistent gastrointestinal discomfort for nearly 3 weeks; she also had fever and severe lower abdominal pain.
The patient did not have any underlying diseases or specific past history, except for infertility and having recently received in vitro fertilization (IVF) treatment. The patient had undergone transvaginal sonography before receiving IVF treatment. Sonography revealed a teratoma-like ovarian mass on the left side, sized approximately 6 × 4 × 4 cm3 and several uterine myomas. The IVF-embryo transfer program included the use of a gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist, and ovulation was induced using one dose of recombinant human chorionic gonadotropin (250 µg). After 35 hours, she underwent ultrasonographically guided TVOR without any apparent complications and frozen embryo transfer was performed 3 days later. However, pregnancy test 2 weeks later was negative, and patient's failure to conceive in this cycle of treatment was confirmed.
After undergoing TVOR, the patient experienced dull lower abdominal pain, which persisted for 3 weeks before she decided to visit the ER. Moreover, other symptoms, including fever up to 38°C, severe lower abdominal pain, and watery diarrhea several times a day, had developed 3 days prior to her arrival. The following parameters were recorded upon her arrival at the ER:Vital signs: body temperature, 38.5°C; pulse rate, 84 bpm; respiratory rate, 16 bpm, blood pressure, 92/51 mmHg. Physical examination: abdominal distension and diffuse lower abdominal tenderness, particularly on the left side. Laboratory data: elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level (11.32 mg/dL), without other specific abnormalities. Sonography: cyst and abscess formation on both sides of pelvis with fluid accumulation. Computed tomography (to exclude other related diseases): a mixed-density mass, sized approximately 4 × 4 (cm), with calcifications but with a discontinuous border over the left adnexa, and diffused abdominal ascites with mesentery edema; the findings were compatible with clinical suspicion of a ruptured teratoma caused by puncture (of a teratoma) during TVOR . Chest X-ray: no specific findings (e.g., no pleural effusion)
Under the impression of peritonitis due to ruptured teratoma, the patient was admitted for further examination and surgical treatment.
Unfortunately, her condition deteriorated rapidly 1 day after admission, with unstable vital signs: pulse rate, 108 bpm; respiratory rate, 46 bpm; blood pressure, 80/57 mmHg. Her urine output also decreased. Physical examination demonstrated diffuse abdominal tenderness, and sonography revealed results similar to those of the previous day. The laboratory data showed some abnormalities, including leukocytosis with WBC count of 34440/µL, neutrophil fraction of 95.4%, CRP level of 34.37 mg/dL, and creatinine level of 1.2 µg/dL. Chest X-ray reports before and after presentation at the ER did not differ considerably. Severe sepsis and accompanied acute kidney injury was initially suspected. We changed the antibiotics from cefazolin + gentamycin + clindamycin to flomoxef + metronidazole, immediately followed by surgical treatment.
The patient received exploratory laparoscopy later that day. Upon entering her abdomen, severe adhesions as well as the presence of purulent fluid were found in her peritoneal cavity. Near the left adnexa, a ruptured teratoma and its spilled contents, including sebaceous substances, were noted . Because of severe adhesions caused by active inflammation, it was very difficult to even visualize or to remove the ruptured cyst. Left oophorectomy was also considered at the time but ultimately not performed because of the extent of peritonitis and adhesions. We did, however, remove as much tissue, adhesions, and purulent fluid adjacent to the left adnexa as possible. We also performed washing cytology, arranged intra-abdominal lavage with antibiotics, and inserted bilateral drains. Pathological studies showed that the fibrinopurulent exudate was composed of fibrin, neutrophils, mononuclear inflammatory cells, and cell debris, but without any ovarian tissues .
After the surgery, patient complained of occasional shortness of breath. Bilateral pleuritis was noted on chest X-ray. Drainage with pigtail insertion was subsequently arranged. Cytological findings included an increased number of neutrophils, histiocytes, inflammatory cells, and reactive mesothelial cells on the fibrinoid as well as a bloody background on both sides, which was suspected to be the exudate fluid caused by the chemical irritation of the spilled contents of the teratoma. For the next 2 weeks, patient continued to have intermittent fever, mild abdominal pain, and sporadic shortness of breath, which explained her long stay at the hospital. We continued to administer antibiotics and made the necessary adjustment according to the result of the pus/blood culture (Escherichia coli growth was observed in her pus culture, but not in her blood culture). Eventually, patient's condition improved steadily, and she was discharged 28 days after admission.