A 24-year-old, 151 cm, 50 kg, gravida 1, para 0, previously healthy Chinese woman presented to the obstetrics department at 38 weeks of gestation after experiencing 2 h of frequent uterine contractions. Two days later, she was in labor and requested labor analgesia. She had no drug allergies and had never received anesthesia before. Her pre-anesthesia blood pressure was 138/67 mmHg, her heart rate was 72 beats/minute, and her respiratory rate was 21 breaths/minute. The fetal heart rate was 136 beats per minute and reactive. The course of her pregnancy had been uneventful.
There were no contraindications to regional anesthesia, and the parturient consented to epidural labor analgesia using the LORA technique when she had reached about 3 cm of cervical dilatation. Using a TUORen epidural kit, a 16-gauge epidural needle was introduced with a piercing depth of 4 cm and the epidural space was identified with a loss of resistance to 2–3 ml of air technique. The epidural catheter was inserted via a median approach while in lateral decubitus in the L3-4 vertebral interspace and a placement depth of 5 cm. An epidural test dose consisting of 2.5 ml of 2% lidocaine (50 mg) was administered. Epidural analgesia consisted of 10 ml of 0.75% ropivacaine and 50 µg of sufentanil, diluted to 100 ml with saline, and the loading dose was 6 ml. Patient-controlled epidural analgesia (PCEA) was used to maintain analgesia, with 6 ml administered at 30-min intervals. When the analgesia was 15 min, the analgesia reached a satisfactory level of T10, and the whole analgesia procedure lasted for 2 h without any side effects. The epidural block was effective in reducing labor discomfort, and no refills or using emergency pain medications were administered during this period. Then she gave birth to a healthy newborn via lateral episiotomy in the left occipital anterior position due to fetal heart rate of 72–145 beats/min and frequent decelerations. The newborn had Apgar scores of 10 and 10 after 1 and 5 min, respectively. The amount of bleeding at delivery was 150 ml, the placenta-fetal membrane detachment was complete, labor was mostly uneventful, total delivery time was 12 h, routine perineal sutures were used, and 32.5 IU of oxytocin were administered both during and after delivery.
Two hours later, as she prepared to get out of bed, she suddenly felt stiff and sore in her neck and the pain radiated to the top of the head. She described the discomfort in her neck as stuffy and distending, giving the pressure a 7 out of 10. It was the ‘‘worst pain’’ of her life. Her sore neck and headache got worse when she was standing or sitting and went away completely when lying flat. She had trouble walking since her neck was so painfully stiff that she could only hold it in one position. There was no fever and no associated nausea, emesis, photophobia, phonophobia, visual changes, or other neurologic symptoms. Neurologic examination was normal and she had no history of headache.
Because the headache presented as an acute attack and was associated with a change in location, we initially considered a low ICP headache and started treatment with 3,000 ml of intravenous fluids daily and oral analgesics as required. The parturient's unremitting headache prompted a neurology consultation. An emergent non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the head showed scattered gas density shadows in the brain (CT values range from -982Hu to -464Hu) without other abnormalities and (b)), leading to the diagnosis of pneumocephalus.
However, we were still unsure whether pneumocephalus might explain the parturient's neck stiffness and position-related headache. Therefore, we did not think PDPH could be completely excluded out. Owing to the consideration of whether the parturient had a possible intracranial air embolism, evidence of a right-to-left shunt was sought. Echocardiography only showed tricuspid few regurgitations. Contrast echocardiography of right ventricle indicated that a small amount of microbubbles (5–6/frame) could be detected in the left heart in the sixth cardiac cycle after Valsalva maneuvers . In this regard, we believed that microbubbles detected in the left heart after Valsalva maneuvers might have come from the level of the pulmonary arteries, and we were concerned about the possibility of pulmonary embolism in the parturient. It was unfortunate she refused CT-pulmonary angiography (CTPA) because of the risks.
On top of that, we also gave the parturient a non-contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain. Magnetic resonance plain scan, diffusion weighted imaging (DWI), and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the head without contrast did not reveal any significant abnormalities.
We administered 3,000 ml of intravenous fluids daily, oxygen through mask, and oral analgesics as required while maintaining the parturient in a strict 10-degree head-down position. After 6 days of treatment, she continued to feel a distending pain in her head and a sore neck when she was out of bed, although they were not as bad as they had been. Her headache was fully gone after 2 weeks of lying bed after giving birth. A neurological evaluation performed 4 weeks after discharge was uneventful. She did not have a headache of any kind in the subsequent 6 months since her most recent one.