A 30-year-old woman affected by TS, suffering from headache, vomiting, and increase in body temperature was admitted. Her past medical history was characterized by myoclonic seizures, pharmacologically treated, since she was 8-year-old. Four months before the admission, she noticed a progressive growing nodular lesion in the left frontal side of the skull, which was painful on palpation. An ultrasound examination revealed an extracranial isoechoic mass diagnosed as a dermoid cyst.
At admission, the patient developed a generalized tonic-clonic epileptic seizure. She underwent a computed tomography (CT) examination which showed an osteolytic lesion, 33 mm in diameter, of the left frontal bone extending to the surrounding subgaleal soft tissues. The lytic lesion had the “punched-out” appearance, caused by the asymmetric destruction of the bone. There was no evidence of periosteal reaction or bone sclerosis. CT scan also demonstrated an irregular parenchymal left frontal mass, below the bone defect. The tumor had an inhomogeneous density, with some hyperdense components, expressing a recent intratumoral bleeding. Thoraco-abdominal CT scan did not demonstrate abnormal findings in other organs, including lungs, pancreas, and spleen.
Magnetic resonance (MR) examination was performed. The lesion showed strong and irregular increased signal intensity on T1-weighted images and mixed low-high intensity on T2-weighted images. The presence of low- and high-signal components suggested different phases of intratumoral hemorrhage. After gadolinium administration, a slight peripheral enhancement of the lesion was demonstrated.
The patient underwent surgical treatment. Following the left frontal skin incision, the bone defect was detected. A surrounding craniotomy was performed. The dura appeared regular without macroscopic signs of tumor infiltration. The lesion, which macroscopically appeared soft and reddish blue with bleeding signs, was completely removed. A cranioplasty, by using methyl methacrylate, was performed to reconstruct the bone defect. The postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperative MR imaging revealed no residual tumor.
shows the neuroradiological examinations performed before and following the surgery.
Histological examination showed a normal dura. The brain lesion showed numerous blood cells and deposits of hemosiderin. The tumor was made up of eosinophils, lymphocytes, macrophage with hemosiderin, and many histiocytes in addition to many Langerhans giant cells. The histiocytes and Langerhans cells were positive for S-100 and CD1a proteins. The histological diagnosis was LCH.