The patient was a 55-year-old African American male with a significant past medical history of known breast cancer, who presented to an academic teaching hospital in February of 2018 after a surveillance computed tomography (CT) scan of his chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed incidental acute appendicitis. The patient was asymptomatic on his original presentation but subsequently developed nausea and vomiting along with right lower quadrant abdominal pain in the following days resulting in admission to the general surgery service for treatment of appendicitis. The patient did not have any contributory family, drug, or psychosocial history.
On chart review, the patient had an extensive past oncological history dating back to 2014 after resection of an enlarging, exophytic, ulcerating chest mass on the right side just lateral to the midline. Pathology from the wide local excision of this mass demonstrated estrogen receptor (ER) positive, progesterone receptor (PR) positive, and HER2/neu negative metastatic adenocarcinoma with an unknown primary source at the time. He underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy to rule out a primary gastrointestinal malignancy, however, both were normal. He was followed closely by medical oncology and treated with tamoxifen for hormone therapy. Due to an enlarged anterior mediastinal wall lymph node discovered on routine CT surveillance in May of 2017, the patient underwent CT-guided biopsy and positron emission tomography (PET). The biopsy was negative for malignancy, however, the PET demonstrated abnormal, hypermetabolic activity within a retrosternal nodule, intense activity in a mixed focus in the manubrium, and several hypermetabolic nodes within the mediastinum. It also showed an abnormal hypermetabolic focus in the cecum suspicious for a colon primary (, ). An attempt was made to complete a colonoscopy at the time, but the gastroenterologist could not advance the colonoscope past the transverse colon due to technical reasons. Medical oncology elected to continue close surveillance.
In January 2018, the patient was noted to have right axillary lymphadenopathy and an ultrasound-guided biopsy of a 1.5 cm right axillary lymph node was performed. Pathology results showed an infiltrating, moderately-differentiated ductal carcinoma. This specimen was also ER and PR positive as well as HER2/neu negative.
A CT scan of the patient’s chest, abdomen, and pelvis was completed on February 15, 2018 for further monitoring. At this time, the patient was incidentally found to have a dilated appendix with no wall thickening or periappendiceal stranding. He did not have a leukocytosis and clinically he did not have any fever or any symptoms including pain, nausea, or vomiting at this original presentation. However, he returned two days later with nausea, vomiting, and right lower quadrant pain consistent with appendicitis. On a repeat CT of the abdomen and pelvis with IV and oral contrast, the appendix was dilated to 1.8 cm with appendiceal wall thickening and periappendiceal stranding. In addition, a 2.3 × 1.9 × 2.3 cm bowel mass was identified in the right lower quadrant either adjacent to or within the wall of the cecum that correlated with the previous PET-CT scan performed in May 2017 . He was therefore admitted and treated with IV antibiotics for acute appendicitis with plans for appendectomy during his hospitalization along with further workup of the cecal mass.
Because of his oncological history, a colonoscopy was performed on hospital day one to evaluate the cecum to rule out metachronous colon tumors given his CT imaging findings and previous PET-CT. The colonoscope was advanced to the cecum without issue. Cecal inflammation was noted and several biopsies were taken of this area, however, no discernable tumors were noted. Pathology returned with no significant pathologic changes to the biopsied tissue.
The following day after receiving intravenous antibiotics and fluid resuscitation, the patient underwent laparoscopic appendectomy. The procedure was converted to open due to the extensive inflammatory process in the right lower quadrant and retrocecal position of the appendix. The appendix was divided from the cecum using a GIA stapler and the appendiceal vessels were suture ligated and divided with electrocautery. The specimen was removed from the field and sent to pathology for evaluation. Prior to abdominal closure, the colon was run from the terminal ileum to the rectum and a large walnut-sized mass was discovered in the cecum proximal to the area of the appendiceal orifice. It was hard, mobile, and suspicious for a primary colon lesion. A right hemicolectomy was then performed including adequate mesenteric lymph node resection. The operation was performed by a general surgeon and a chief resident. The patient tolerated the procedure without complications and was returned to the surgical floor postoperatively. His post-operative course was unremarkable, and he was discharged five days after the procedure.
Pathology from the surgical specimen returned shortly after the surgery. The appendix showed findings suggestive of acute appendicitis with organizing periappendicitis. The right colon specimen returned as metastatic breast carcinoma involving cecal submucosa clear of margins with overlying benign colonic mucosa . Twenty lymph nodes were harvested and were all negative for disease. The specimen stained strongly and diffusely for GATA3 which was consistent with metastatic breast carcinoma and negative for CDX2 (A–D).
After discharge, the patient had close surveillance with medical oncology. He was transitioned to anastrazole secondary to the ER/PR + receptor status of his tumor and its refractory response to tamoxifen. Prior to his first outpatient appointment in April 2018, he complained of worsening skeletal pain at multiple sites. Bone scan showed left posterior rib and sternal involvement for which zoledronic acid was initiated. He also underwent CT scan of his chest, abdomen, and pelvis to monitor progression of his metastatic disease which showed no significant changes. During his appointment in June 2018, he was noted to have an enlarging left lateral neck mass. Ultrasound-guided biopsy of this mass returned positive for metastatic carcinoma consistent with breast origin. No significant changes to his treatment regimen have occurred since this time.