A 45-year-old Japanese female (height, 158 cm; weight, 60 kg) was diagnosed with uterine fibroids and scheduled for total hysterectomy. She had been treated for panic disorder with sertraline hydrochloride 50 mg (after breakfast and dinner), escitalopram oxalate 10 mg (after dinner), alprazolam 0.4 mg (after dinner), and bromazepam 3 mg (after dinner). No abnormality was noted in the preoperative examination.
On the day of surgery, no oral medication was administered. Oxygen inhalation was started, and remifentanil was administered at 0.5 μg/kg/min. Remimazolam 12 mg/kg/h was started 3 min later . Within 1 min, eyes did not open in response to a call, and eyelash reflex disappeared. However, over the next 3 min, the upper limbs were in a flexed position, the lower limbs showed spasm-like movements, and BIS remained in the 70s. Even though a total dose of remimazolam 50 mg (0.8 mg/kg) was administered in 4 min, the extremity reactions remained, and BIS did not decrease below 70. Therefore, we gave up anesthesia with remimazolam and switched to propofol. Propofol TCI was started at 3.0 μg/ml (propofol 42 mg was administered as an initial dose). One minute later, BIS decreased to the 30s, and limb movements disappeared. Rocuronium 50 mg was administered and tracheal intubation was performed. Intraoperative anesthesia was maintained with propofol 2.5 μg/ml and remifentanil 0.5 μg /kg/min. After surgery, propofol and remifentanil were terminated. She responded to calling after 8 min, and she was extubated. She had no memory of the anesthesia induction.
A 46-year-old Japanese female (height, 166 cm; weight, 63 kg) was diagnosed with uterine fibroids and scheduled for total hysterectomy. From 15 years ago, she has been treated for post-traumatic stress disorder with escitalopram oxalate 10 mg, ethyl loflazepate 1 mg, domperidone 5 mg, and suvorexant 20 mg before bedtime. No abnormality was noted in the preoperative examination.
After entering the operating room, oxygen inhalation was started, and remifentanil 0.5 μg/kg/min was administered. Remimazolam 12 mg/kg/h was started 3 min later, and her response to call and eyelash reflex disappeared in 90 s . BIS at this time was 56. Remimazolam was reduced to 1 mg/kg/h. Tracheal intubation was performed after administration of rocuronium 50 mg. Immediately after reducing the dose of remimazolam to 1mg/kg/h, BIS was in the 60s, and after 53 min, it reached the 70s. Therefore, remimazolam was increased to 1.1 mg/kg/h. BIS temporarily remained in the 60s, but increased to the 70s after 14 min. Therefore, the dose of remimazolam was increased to 1.4 mg/kg/h. BIS remained in the 40s to 60s for a while, but gradually increased to 76 in 71 min, and the remimazolam was increased to 1.6 mg/kg/h. Once BIS settled at the 50s, it gradually increased and rose to 66 after 19 min. Thus, the remimazolam was increased to 2 mg/kg/h. However, no BIS decrease was observed. After 25 min, continuous administration of remimazolam was abandoned and changed to anesthesia with propofol. Subsequent anesthesia was maintained with propofol 3–4 mg/kg/h and remifentanil 0.2–0.6 μg/kg/min. BIS remained stable in the 40s. After surgery, propofol and remifentanil were terminated, and sugammadex was administered at 2 mg/kg. She responded to calling 12 min later, and she was extubated. During the administration of remimazolam, there were no changes in pulse or blood pressure and no signs of arousal. She did not remember anything during the anesthesia.
A 44-year-old Chinese female (height, 162 cm; weight, 54 kg) suffered a fracture of the right tibial plateau in a traffic accident and was scheduled for hematopoietic surgery. There were no previous medical conditions or medications. There was no abnormality in the preoperative examination.
After entering the operating room, oxygen inhalation was started, and remifentanil 0.5 μg/kg/min was administered. Remimazolam 12 mg/kg/h was started 2 min later . The response to call and eyelash reflex disappeared in 2 min. BIS at this time was 56. Remimazolam was reduced to 1 mg/kg/h, and tracheal intubation was performed after administration of rocuronium 40 mg. Then, a sciatic nerve block was performed at distal thigh level. As BIS remained in the 60s immediately after the reduction of remimazolam, remimazolam was increased to 1.2 mg/kg/h after 16 min. BIS temporarily dropped to around 50, but rose to the 60s again, and thus, remimazolam was increased to 1.4 mg/kg/h. BIS did not decrease and rose to the 70s temporarily, so remimazolam was increased to 1.6 mg/kg/h 8 min later. However, no BIS decrease was observed after that. An administration of a bolus of remimazolam 0.2 mg/kg (10 mg) showed no change in BIS, so remimazolam was increased to 2 mg/kg/h after 11 min. After that, even after two additional boluses of remimazolam 0.2 mg/kg, BIS did not decrease. After 32 min, we abandoned the continuous administration of remimazolam and changed to propofol. After a bolus of propofol 30 mg was administered as an initial dose, BIS promptly decreased to the 20s. Propofol 6 mg/kg/h and remifentanil 0.25–0.5 μg/kg/min were used to maintain anesthesia, and BIS remained stable in the 30–50 range. After the surgery, propofol and remifentanil were terminated. The patient was extubated 15 min after the termination of propofol and remifentanil. During the administration of remimazolam, there were no changes in pulse or blood pressure and no signs of arousal. She did not remember anything during anesthesia.