A 79-year-old female patient was referred to surgery for evaluation of a suspicious periumbilical mass with vague abdominal discomfort. She had previously been seen by hepatology for liver cysts and was followed with surveillance CT, which incidentally identified a 4 cm abdominal wall mass. She had no other pertinent medical history.
Follow up ultrasound, colonoscopy, and MRI further characterized a 3.8 × 4.1 × 2.5 cm hypoechoic abdominal wall mass (see Figure ). CT-guided core needle biopsy was consistent with a well-differentiated NET. Immunohistochemistry staining was positive for AE1/AE3, synaptophysin, chromogranin and CD56, and negative for beta-catenin, HMB-45, desmin, SMA, and inhibin. Ki-67 proliferation index was estimated to be 3%–5%.
The patient subsequently underwent EGD, colonoscopy and a PillCam study, all of which were unremarkable. Positron emission tomography (PET) Dotatate imaging demonstrated uptake in the abdominal wall as well as uptake in the pelvis adjacent to the sigmoid colon (see Figure ).
Given her oligometastatic presentation and lack of an identifiable primary tumor we proceeded with exploratory surgery with planned resection of the abdominal wall tumor. Intraoperatively the abdomen and pelvis were fully explored. The abdominal wall mass was resected. The small bowel was entirely unremarkable on inspection and palpation. A tumor implant was identified on the sigmoid colon and a partial thickness colon resection was performed. The partial thickness colotomy was repaired primarily. A cholecystectomy as well as an appendectomy were additionally performed at this time. Final surgical pathology was consistent with NETs in both the abdominal wall and sigmoid colon specimens. The sigmoid colon specimen demonstrated serosal involvement without mucosal involvement. Surgical margins were all negative. The appendix was unremarkable on final pathology. Her sigmoid lesion was felt to be more consistent with a drop metastasis due to the lack of mucosal involvement on final pathology and her unremarkable preoperative colonoscopy.
Postoperatively, the patient was seen by medical oncology and started on lanreotide. Three and six-month follow-up imaging has been unremarkable for any evidence of recurrence.