A 14-month-old Congolese male child with oculocutaneous albinism visited the Mbujimayi pediatric clinic with fever and fatigue. He was originally from Kasai Oriental, a region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He was the youngest in a family of five children, three of whom had oculocutaneous albinism. He himself has sickle cell disease and the rest of the siblings have a sickle cell trait . He was born at term with a birth weight of 3000 g, and presented with spontaneously resolutive neonatal jaundice. The other significant history was episodes of fever with a monthly frequency of two episodes. No vaso-occlusive crisis was clearly diagnosed, in particular no dactylitis episode was reported. The vaccination schedule according to the expanded program of immunization in the DRC was respected with Bacille Calmette et Guérin (BCG) vaccine against tuberculosis; diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis (DTP) vaccine; oral polio vaccine (OPV) against polio; hepatitis B and haemophilus influenzae vaccine (HepB-HiB1); rotavirus vaccine (Rotasiil1); pneumococcal vaccine (Prevenar); measles vaccine (VAR); and yellow fever vaccine (AAV). The patient has never been hospitalized and has always been treated on an outpatient basis in health centers during febrile episodes such as malaria or typhoid fever. The siblings reported no particular clinical history.
His parents are not albinos and have no specific medical history; they never benefited from a prenuptial test. They reported their fear of the judgment of others because they have albino children when they are not affected.
The patient was wide awake with good contact and interaction. Generalized pallor was noted with subicteric conjunctivae, and the irises were bluish gray and translucent, thus appearing red with nystagmus . The patient’s skin was pinkish white, depigmented, without any particular lesions or bruises.
On physical examination, weight and height were at the third and tenth percentile for age, respectively. There was no fever (temperature 36.5 °C), the respiratory rate was high (53 cycles/minute), as well as the heart rate (176 beats/minute), but the latter was regular with the presence of a 1/6 systolic murmur at the mitral focus. The oxygen saturation was 94%. The oral examination was normal. The lymph nodes were free, without lymphadenopathy. The lung examination was normal. The abdomen was supple and painless. There was stage III splenomegaly according to the Hackett classification. Laboratory tests showed a hemoglobin level of 48 g/L and white blood cells at 13,200/μl (complete blood count performed with the Sysmex poch-100i; Sysmex, Norderstedt, Germany).
The diagnosis of SCD has been suggested on the basis of pallor, jaundice, and severe anemia. It was confirmed first by a positive rapid test (BioMedomics, Inc, Morrisville, USA) and then by hemoglobin electrophoresis.
The diagnosis of albinism was proven by molecular genetics on a blood sample and identification of the mutation involved, that is homozygosity for the 2.7 kb deletion of OCA2 (laboratory “Centro Nacional de Biotecnologia CNB-CSIC Campus de Cantoblanco, Darwin 3, 28049 Madrid, Spain). A family investigation was then performed (see Fig. ).
Given the very low hemoglobin level, the patient’s age, and SCD, a blood transfusion was indicated. Antibiotic treatment (ceftriaxone and amikacin) was started in the hospital. The evolution was favorable. On discharge from hospital, routine prophylaxis with folic acid and oral penicillin was initiated, and advice on crisis prevention and medical monitoring was given to the parents.
A dedicated patient monitoring program has been set up for sickle cell anemia and albinism with hygiene advice and sun protection measures. The patient received a hat, sunglasses, and sun protection cream. Ophthalmologic follow-up has also been set up. The evolution remains dermatologically stable, no skin lesion was observed. For SCD, the patient received treatment with hydroxyurea since early 2020. It is still too early to objectify the benefit of this therapy but he had only one infectious episode, one vaso-occlusive crisis, and did not require blood transfusion for over a year.