Female, 38 years-old, without comorbidities, non-smoker. In 2001, at 17 years of age, the patient experienced bloody liquid diarrhea (approximately 15 episodes per day), abdominal pain, and weight loss. Ileocolonoscopy revealed acute colitis of the colon with a proximal predominance, with lesions suggestive of UC. The patient was treated with sulfasalazine and a clinical response was observed. The patient presented one episodic of disease flare in 2002 treated with corticosteroid.
The patient remained in clinical and endoscopic remission for 3 years. In 2006, the patient developed sulfasalazine-induced hepatitis, and the medication was changed to mesalazine (3.2g/day). Colonoscopy performed on the same year showed endoscopic remission of the disease. In 2017, after 11 years of clinical and endoscopic remission, the patient presented with clinical and endoscopic relapse and treatment with azathioprine 100 mg/day was initiated. However, the medication was suspended after six months owing to gastric intolerance. The patient was lost to follow-up for three years and was sporadically treated with prednisone during UC activity.
In December 2020, the patient was admitted to the hospital’s maternity ward as a six-week pregnant woman with bloody liquid diarrhea (10 episodes/day), abdominal pain, fever, and a previous history of miscarriage (6 months before hospital admission). Examination results for Clostridioides difficile were negative. Colonoscopy revealed pancolitis with severe endoscopic activity according to the Mayo endoscopic classification 3 . After a shared decision with the patient and an evaluation of the risk-benefit of medications in the first trimester of pregnancy, IFX (5 mg/kg) was chosen. After the first dose of IFX, the patient showed significant clinical improvement and was discharged. She received a second dose of IFX in two weeks, without any complications. Unfortunately, between the second and third IFX doses, the patient experienced a spontaneous abortion at nine weeks of gestation. However, she continued infusions with IFX, with anti-drug antibody levels at 13.4 AU/mL and serum IFX levels <20 μg/mL at week six, without abnormalities. The patient presented with an acute infusion reaction with a skin rash and itching on the back and abdomen after six months of treatment, with recurrence, even with the use of prophylactic antihistamines. Colonoscopy after six months of treatment revealed UC with endoscopic activity representative of an endoscopic Mayo grade of 2 . Given the lack of endoscopic improvement associated with the infusion reaction, a decision was made together with the patient to exchange IFX for VDZ. Despite instructions to avoid pregnancy during the induction period with VDZ, the patient discovered a pregnancy with identical twins (gestational age, seven weeks, and six days). During pregnancy, the patient presented with clinical remission of UC on maintenance therapy with VDZ without clinical or gestational complications. The patient did not undergo an endoscopic examination during pregnancy. At the end of 2022, she underwent cesarean section at 34 weeks of gestation for the birth of twins without complications. Guidance was provided on starting breastfeeding and maintaining treatment with VDZ, in addition to advice on postponing attenuated vaccines for babies for six months. The patient continued treatment with VDZ in maintenance therapy and in clinical remission of UC, and the babies maintained adequate developmental growth for their age.