A 45-year-old man visited outpatient department presented with chronic cough, dyspnea and persistent hoarseness.
The patient started to have persistent cough with chest tightness since 10 mo ago. Unintentional weight loss for 17 kgs in 6 mo was also mentioned.
The patient denied any history of past illness.
The patient denied any family history or allergic history to food or medicines.
No specific finding on physical examinations was identified.
Routine blood test results were unremarkable, with normal levels of carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 and squamous cell carcinoma antigen.
The chest X-ray did not show any significant abnormalities. No significant abnormal findings on the abdominal sonography. Abdomen computed tomography (CT) discovered a 3.8 cm cystic lesion with mild irregular wall in the spleen was noted, which regular follow up was suggested. The patient was transferred to otorhinolaryngology department owing to persistent hoarseness and left shoulder pain. He underwent microlaryngeal surgery after left sided vocal cord palsy with a protruding lesion on the postcricoid region was revealed by stroboscopy. Neck magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and bone scan were arranged after surgery. A large, lobulated, soft-tissue mass measuring 5.4 cm x 6.6 cm x 3.8 cm which involved the left superior mediastinum and supraclavicular fossa was discovered accidentally on MRI. Chest CT revealed a confluent and lobulated soft tissue mass encased the right brachiocephalic artery, right and left carotid arteries, and left subclavian artery in the mediastinum. With enlarged nodes (maximal size: 1.6 cm) in the left supraclavicular region. In addition, the chest CT scan disclosed a cystic mass in the spleen that increased from 3.8 cm to 5.1 cm in diameter in one month . A fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET) was arranged two months later for malignancy survey. The image revealed intense FDG-avidity in a soft tissue lobulated mass occupying the superior mediastinum (standard uptake value (SUV) max = 16.0, size > 9.0 cm), over the cystic lesion in the spleen (SUV max = 9.2, size = 6.1 cm) and in few enlarged nodules over the left supraclavicular fossa (SUV max. up to 17.5, size = 2.1 cm) .
The pathology result of the postcricoid lesion was benign. The CT-guided biopsy of the thymic mass was positive for cluster of differentiation 5, negative for thyroid transcription factor-1. Microscopically, Hematoxylin-Eosin staining of the thymic mass showed polygonal and spindle shaped tumor cells accompanied by giant cells with bizarre and multilobulated nuclei, suggesting poorly differentiated carcinoma of the mediastinum . The ultrasound-guided biopsy of the splenic lesion was made, which was consistent with a metastasis from the thymic carcinoma .