We evaluated a 4 years old girl, previously healthy, with no relevant family medical history. She was conducted to our clinic because of a submandibular lymphadenitis. A month before, during a 3 days fever period, a painful submandibular swelling was noted. Neck ultrasound (US) showed a 2-cm diameter lymphadenopathy with a conserved structure. Therapy with ibuprofen was then suggested. Because of symptoms persistence, a control US was repeated after 5 days. The lymph node was enlarged and presented a subverted structure, with hypoechogenic areas and an absent roundness index . Therapy with co-amoxiclav was immediately started at a dosage of 80 mg/kg/day for 6 days. Blood tests showed a slight increase in C-reactive protein values (53 mg/L; normal value <50 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (31 mm/h); serology for Cytomegalovirus confirmed a previous infection, while IgM for Epstein Barr Virus (EBV) were positive. Blood smear was normal. Tuberculin skin test resulted positive (10 mm infiltration diameter). QuantiFERON-TB Gold In-tube test and chest X-ray resulted negative.
Neck US performed after 20 days was unchanged. Therefore the girl was referred to our infectious disease unit for further investigations. At physical examination, a fixed right submandibular lymphadenopathy, with an elastic consistency, painless and with no superficial skin alterations was detected. No other significant clinical features were described. Blood tests showed no alteration in blood count, inflammatory markers, liver function, lactic dehydrogenase, coagulation. Francisella tularensis and Toxoplasma gondii serology were negative. EBV serology showed evidence of a past infection.
In the suspicion of an NTM lymphadenitis, antimicrobial therapy with clarithromycin (15 mg/kg/die), and rifampicin (20 mg/kg per day) was started. A magnetic resonance imaging showed a confluent lymphonodal pack inside the inferior pole of the right parotid gland (4 × 4.2 × 2.9 cm) that was enhanced after contrast medium infusion. The enhancement involved also the whole parotid gland parenchyma and the ipsilateral sternocleidomastoid muscle.
Due to sudden enlargement of swelling, exeresis of the lymph node was performed. Bacterioscopic exam showed a positivity for acid-fast bacilli, and the histological examination evidenced a granulomatous inflammation. Culture from the biopsy grew a M. marseillense strain, identified using a commercial kit (Hain Genotype Mycobacteria CM, Hain Lifescience, Germany) and sequencing the spacer region interposed between 16S and 23S rRNA genes, as described previously . Because of a slow healing up of the surgical scar, ethambutol (25 mg/kg/die) was added to the previous therapy. Antimicrobial treatment was well tolerated by the patient and no adverse effect were reported. Blood exams and clinical assessment were periodically performed in order to evaluate potential drug-induced toxicity. Therapy was finally stopped 2 months after surgery.
Periodical blood tests and neck US were performed. At 10 months follow up visit, no relapse was found and the surgical scar was completely healed.