A 27-year-old man was admitted to the China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University with abdominal pain for 3 days. Basic physical examination was performed after admission: Height 174 cm, Weight 117 kg, Waist circumference 100 cm, Body mass index (BMI) 38.6 kg/m2. Tenderness under the xiphoid process in the upper abdomen, accompanied by mild rebound pain, without muscle tension. He had been hospitalized for acute pancreatitis 4 years ago, and the results of abdominal CT examination after admission showed: a cystic mass on the right side of the middle and upper abdomen, considering the possibility of pancreatic pseudocyst; fatty liver . Blood, urine amylase and white blood cells were significantly elevated, it is worth noting that his blood lipids also abnormally elevated. At the same time, a gallbladder ultrasound was performed to rule out biliary pancreatitis. Based on these basic conditions, he was diagnosed with acute pancreatitis, pancreatic pseudocyst, fatty liver, severe obesity, hypertriglyceridemia, type 2 diabetes, and hyperuricemia.
After symptomatic and supportive treatment, the patient's abdominal pain relieved, and blood and urine amylase returned to normal. In order to solve his pancreatic pseudocyst and related metabolic diseases, after multidisciplinary consultation and taking into account the degree of intra-abdominal adhesions of the patient, it was decided to perform robotic-assisted sleeve gastrectomy with simultaneous Roux-en-Y cystojejunostomy.
After the anesthesia took effect, the abdominal cavity was first explored. A small amount of saponification plaques could be seen in the omentum. The ultrasonic scalpel dissected the gastrocolic ligament and exposed the pancreas. It was found that the posterior wall of the stomach was strongly adhered to the pancreas . After careful separation of the adhesions, the greater curvature of the stomach and pancreatic pseudocyst were exposed, and a gastric sleeve resection was performed under the guidance of a 32 Fr bougie tube . The jejunum was lifted up 40 cm away from the Treitz ligament, and Broun anastomosis was performed with the pseudocyst , and the operation was completed. The operation time was 376 min and the amount of bleeding during surgery was 50 ml.
The patient engaged in activities on the 2nd day after the operation. An upper gastrointestinal radiography on the 4th day showed no abnormalities, allowing for the patient to begin consuming liquid foods. The patient was discharged smoothly on the 8th day after the operation.
The postoperative follow-up was 12 months. In this case, the Weight, BMI, Excess weight loss (%EWL) and Total weight loss (%TWL) decreased significantly at 3, 6 and 12 months after surgery, and high triglycerides Lipidemia, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes were all completely relieved, and the vitamin B 12 level returned to normal after operation, as shown in . No serious complications such as anastomotic leakage, bleeding, anastomotic obstruction and deep vein thrombosis occurred in this operation. The patient developed cholestasis 6 months after the operation. He was required to take ursodeoxycholic acid orally for choleretic treatment strictly according to the doctor's advice. After 12 months post-operation, ultrasound examination revealed no signs of cholestasis. Bone densitometry indicated normal bone densities in the lumbar spine and hip joints. However, an abdominal CT scan of the patient showed splenomegaly and multiple varicose veins in the fundus of the stomach, around the hilum of the spleen, and in the upper abdomen, as shown in .