A 31-year-old male with Marfan syndrome and a history of recurrent pneumothorax presented with back pain, nausea, and vomiting during exercise and was diagnosed on CT with an uncomplicated type B aortic dissection from the left subclavian artery to the right common iliac artery. The proximal intimal tear was located just distal to the left subclavian artery with a maximum diameter of 15 mm, and a large false lumen (max diameter 35 mm) ( and Video 1). Physical examination revealed no abnormalities and electrocardiogram (ECG) was normal. The patient was treated medically with a betablocker and calcium antagonist and follow-up imaging were planned. An MRI was performed 5.5 weeks after the type B dissection, which was already scheduled due to an increase in aortic diameter at the outpatient clinic earlier that year. In our tertiary centre aortic aneurysm in young patients are routinely monitored using MRI, including aortic 4D flow analysis. The MRI showed a dilated root of 40 mm and known type B dissection. Aortic lumen was split just distal to the left subclavian artery into true and false lumen, which directed blood volume (3.6 L/min) mainly towards the false lumen (true lumen 0.8 L/min, 22% and false lumen 2.8 L/min, 78%). On 4D flow streamlines did not indicate helicity or vorticity in the ascending aorta or aortic arch, however, vorticity was observed in the proximal false lumen ( and Video 2). Increased WSS was observed at the sinotubular junction (STJ), inner wall of the ascending aorta, and just proximal and distal to the subclavian artery at the location of the dissection .
Two weeks after MRI, the patient presented to the emergency department with jaw pain, visual complaints, and decreased sensibility of the right arm. On physical examination, the patient was briefly hypotensive [86/56 mmHg, after fluid challenge 117/70 mmHg (left equals right)], with good peripheral pulses and no other abnormalities. ECG was normal. CT showed a type A dissection with an entry tear at the STJ and involvement of the innominate and left common carotid artery for which an acute valve-sparing root, ascending and arch replacement (David procedure) was performed ( and Video 3). During surgery the entry tear at the STJ was also observed. shows the location of elevated WSS at the STJ and ascending aorta at the time of type B dissection, which seems to correspond to the future entry tear location and true/false lumen border of the type A dissection, respectively. Postoperatively, the patient suffered from transient ischaemic attacks with amaurosis fugax and transient sensibility disorders of the right arm. He was discharged after 10 days of hospitalization. At the outpatient clinic the patient showed stable cardiovascular parameters with no cardiac complaints. Follow-up CT imaging at 7 months showed some progression of dilatation in the descending aorta and a dissection in the left subclavian artery for which frequent imaging will be continued.