A 24-year-old male patient was presented to the outpatient department with a history of right lateral knee snapping and recurrent sensation of discomfort for the past 2 years. Snapping was elicited upon extending the knee and could be reproduced by applyng direct pressure on the posterolateral knee. There was no actual or previously sustained trauma noted on this patient.
The patient was initially and preliminarily diagnosed with knee joint plica syndrome and underwent arthroscopic surgery in a previous institution. This however did not relieve his symptoms. As the snapping continued, the patient became unable to tolerate physical activities or prolonged walking.
Upon thorough physical examination, full active range of motion was observed to be intact, but a reproducible audible and palpable snapping of the lateral knee when moving from flexion to extension. However, this was not consistently reproducible with passive range of motion. (see Additional file ) Other special tests were negative except for the Cabot sign, which clearly produced a snapping sensation.
X-rays presented a round osseous structure in the posterolateral part of the joint, similar to the normal sesamoid . CT scanning and MRI were additionally conducted. No pathological results were obtained apart from a clearly visible ovoid-shaped bone that was located posterior and superior to the proximal musculo-tendinous intersection of the popliteus muscle. The sesamoid bone articulates non-cartilagenously with the lateral dorsal femoral condyle . The popliteus muscle and tendon presented signs of inflammation. A steroid injection was administered into the snapping point but did not relieve his symptoms.
A posterior approach was used to incise the bone which lead us to discover that the biceps femoris tendon presented no pathological changes. Deeper in the popliteus tendon, a large cyamella was found. With the knee in a passive range of motion, we found there was snapping of the popliteus tendon over the cyamella. (see Additional file ) An incision was made directly over the located area and the sesamoid bone was excised (see Additional file ). The cyamella located near the musculo-tendinous intersection of the popliteus muscle . The specimen measured 15*7*9 mm . Radiographs following the procedure demonstrated removal of the cyamella .
Postoperatively, the patient recovered well and had immediate relief after treatment. He was able to return to physical fitness activities at 8-week follow-up.