A 65-year-old male positive for hepatitis C virus antibody had been treated for HCCs in the liver segments 5, 6, 7, 8 in our hospital since October 2014. The patient was initially treated for the ruptured HCC in the segment 5 with TACE, while subsequent examinations detected other HCCs in segments 6, 7 and 8 which were similarly treated by 2nd line TACE, following the Japanese HCC therapeutic guidelines. After the treatment, the tumors in segments 6 and 7 were well controlled, while the pre-ruptured tumor in segment 5 and the lesion in segment 8 still remained viable. Hence, a 3rd line TACE was performed after 6 months: while the segment 8 tumor were well embolized after the treatment, the segment 5 tumor could not be embolized completely. Subsequently, it continued to gradually develop, as the caudal side of this tumor was perfused by the gastroepiploic artery, due to the ruptured tumor progression into the greater omentum. The collateral vessels from the omental branch into the tumor disturbed further TACE, as we suspected it could induce ischemia in the GI tract. Hence, the chemotherapeutical sorafenib was selected and administered repeatedly .
Since this pre-ruptured tumor began and continued to involve the duodenum in the next six months, causing anemia and malnutrition, even further administration of sorafenib became difficult. At this point, the patient was referred to our surgical department for the first time. His critical situation compelled us to consider a surgical intervention.
A pre-operative examination by CT revealed a massive HCC in segment 5 of 6.5 cm in diameter, protruding from the liver and penetrating the duodenal wall (a), while other small HCC lesions appeared to be controlled. A gastroendoscopy revealed an ulcerative mass lesion in the posterior wall of the duodenal bulb (b), which was revealed to be HCC following histology analysis of a biopsy sample. Laboratory analysis revealed anemia (hemoglobin 9.2 mg/dl) and low albumin level (3.0 g/dl), while PIVKA-2 and α-fetoprotein levels were extremely high (2560 mAU/ml and 13,3000 ng/ml, respectively). The retention rate for indocyanine green until 15 min was 8.5%, revealing that his liver function was not compromised. During the preoperative evaluation, repeated blood transfusions became necessary, while communicating collateral vessels from the pancreatic and omental branch into the tumor disturbed hemostatic embolization. Since the disease condition aggravated by the tumor progression became a life-threatening oncological emergency, we were compelled to operate on the patient. However, considering his anemic and malnutritional preoperative conditions, we decided to exclude highly invasive surgical approaches such as hepatectomy with pancreaticoduodenectomy (HPD), and instead attempted to do HPPD to lessen surgical stress.
During surgery, we found that the ruptured HCC in segment 5 further developed to became about 10 cm in diameter, involving the duodenal wall, fortunately without any macroscopic peritoneal dissemination. This corresponded to a grade evaluation of S2 (invasion to other organs) and P0 (no peritoneal dissemination) according to the General Rules for the Clinical and Pathological Study of Primary Liver Cancer 2019 by Liver Cancer Study Group of Japan . We started the surgical treatment with the partial hepatectomy of segment 5 using the Pringle maneuver, and removed the tumor with the liver parenchyma as surgical margin (a). We did not perform anatomical resection of the segment 5 considering the past multiple HCCs status and also to avoid a major HPD in case we would be forced to add pancreaticoduodenectomy during the operation. The gall bladder was also removed as it was attached to the tumor. After the resection of the tumor from the liver, we inserted a thin Nelaton catheter from the cystic duct into the common bile duct to investigate the approximate location of the major papilla of Vater and its relation to the tumor. The inspection suggested the possibility of choosing HPPD and avoiding HPD, even after taking en bloc resection into consideration. On the basis of this observation, we subsequently dissected the first and second parts of the duodenum along the pancreas head and cut the minor pancreatic duct after its ligation. Then the duodenal inner lumen was opened to directly confirm the preservation of the major papilla of Vater. We removed the liver tumor and gallbladder en bloc with the first and second parts of the duodenum, finally transecting directly oral side to the papilla using a surgical stapling device. The reconstruction was performed using the Billroth II approach as in distal gastrectomy (b). Blood loss amounted to two liters due to the bleeding from the fragile collateral vessels surrounding the extended tumor and from those developed in the adhesional planes that formed due to the previous TACE treatments. We did not perform further peritoneal resection since no peritoneal disseminated lesion was found. Therefore, we evaluated the achieved resection equivalent to grade R0 (no viable tumor remaining).
Post-operative course was uneventful except for a wound infection. He was discharged on the 45th postoperative day. Tumor markers were found to be in the normal range within three months after the surgery. Pathological examination was compatible with the pre-operative findings and revealed poorly-to-moderately differentiated HCC cells directly invading the duodenal wall and extending inside the duodenal lumen . Approximately one quarter of the tumor was necrotic, demonstrating either the effects of repetitive TACE and the chemotherapy, although we cannot exclude spontaneous necrosis. Surgical margin was proved to be cancer negative.
After this surgery, the lesion in segment 8 remained stable. However, it was radio-frequency ablated twice as a preventive measure. Three years after the surgery the patient is still alive and leads a disease-controlled life.