A 26 years-old woman came to our attention because of the abrupt onset of aphasia during her work (she was a lower school teacher). This symptom lasted several days with a progressive improvement during hospital staying and a final complete recovery. The patient arrived in the Emergency Department four hours after the onset of symptoms and an unenhanced brain CT did not show abnormalities. Urgent blood tests was also normal. The neurological evaluation reported a mild aphasia with prevalent anomic and paraphasic alterations, without motor deficits; the National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 1.
At this point an urgent neurosonological study was performed both in the extracranial and intracranial vessels, showing a normal appearance of the extracranial carotid and vertebral axis and a suspected left distal M1 MCA stenosis, by using unenhanced Transcranial Colour-Coded Sonography (TCCS). Therefore, because of the suboptimal temporal bone window, contrast-enhanced TCCS was performed by intravenous injection of sulphur hexafluoride (Sonovue®). It confirmed the presence of a left distal M1 MCA stenosis; moreover this finding was congruent with signs and symptoms of the patient. The ultrasound grading of the MCA stenosis was performed according to the Baumgartner's velocity criteria , and the stenosis was evaluated as ≥ 50% . The left M2 MCA waveform did not show an abnormal pattern, also compared with the contralateral corresponding segment. The left A1 anterior cerebral artery (ACA) did not show signs of flow diversion and the posterior cerebral artery (PCA) waveform appeared normal.
Subsequent brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed a left caudate head and temporal cortical ischemic damage and the Magnetic Resonance Angiography (MRA) confirmed the left MCA stenosis .
The past medical history of the patient was significant only for a previous diagnosis of hyperinsulinemia, treated with metformine; overwheight is present (BMI 26). The diagnostic pathway included blood testing and instrumental evaluation to rule out a primary or secondary central nervous system vasculitis. An accurate anamnestic survey was performed about the previous occurrence of any event that could point to immunological and/or rheumatologic or infectious processes, with negative results. Blood samples were taken for screening of autoimmune diseases and common acquired or congenital thrombophylic factors or coagulation abnormalities, both with negative findings. The titration of autoantibodies did not show any abnormality, also including antiphospholipid and anti-beta2 glycoprotein 1 antibodies. Serological screening for borreliosis, herpesviruses (comprising Varicella-Zoster virus - VZV) and influenza viruses was not suggestive for a first or recurrent infection. Also the lymphocyte typing and the immunofixation electrophoresis of immunoglobulins were normal.
Antiplatelet and HMGCoA reductase inhibitor therapy was early started and a selective Digital Subtraction Angiography (DSA) was proposed, but the patient initially refused it.
After 20 days the patient was again evaluated because of the recurrence of a ten minutes-lasting episode of aphasia. Both neurosonological and neuroradiological examinations were repeated and their findings were unchanged; at this point the patient agreed to undergo selective DSA of the cerebral vessels. Therefore DSA was performed after 10 days. Meanwhile a dual antiplatelet therapy with acetyl salicylic acid and clopidogrel was suggested. The DSA findings was similar to TCCS and MRA results for the identification of the left distal M1 and M2 MCA branch stenosis, but the angiographic grading (50%) was lesser than the expected one.
In the following ten months no other event has been reported by the patient and she was phone called in order to undergo a contrast-enhanced TCCS as a follow-up test. TCCS was performed in second harmonic imaging with pulse inversion and sulphur hexafluoride (Sonovue®) 2.5 mL was injected by the right antecubital vein. A left M1-M2 MCA occlusion was diagnosed, with a large early branch, arising from the M1 MCA segment just before the stop . This findings were really unexpected and therefore a brain MRI and MRA were performed, showing respectively the lack of new brain parenchymal lesions with a normal perfusional status, and an absent flow signal in the left M1-M2 MCA. Moreover this last finding was confirmed by a subsequently performed DSA, also viewing the early M1 MCA branch that vascularizes the distal MCA territories (row C of the Figure lists the follow-up neurosonological and neuroradiological data).
In the following 16 months neurosonological control examinations overlapped the last findings and no neurological event was reported. Also neuropsychological testing was normal and the patient was treated with a Serotonine Selective Reuptake Inhibitor, because of an associated post-stroke depression.