The patient was a 19-year-old woman who was admitted for hemoptysis during her menstrual period for 3 consecutive months.
The patient reported experiencing hemoptysis during the first menstrual period following an abortion 1 year prior. In the 3 mo leading up to admission, the patient had experienced hemoptysis again, along with the expulsion of approximately 200 mL of blood.
The symptoms appeared on the third day of menstruation and disappeared after menstruation. There were no accompanying symptoms such as chest pain, respiratory distress, coughing, fever, night sweats, or weight loss.
The patient did not have a medical history of infectious diseases such as hepatitis, typhoid fever and tuberculosis; chronic diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, and coronary heart disease; and no history of major trauma or blood transfusion. Moreover, she did not have a history of an allergy to food or drugs.
Physical examination at admission showed the following: Body temperature 36.7 °C, pulse 73 beats/min, respirations 20/min, blood pressure 114/80 mmHg, clear cooperation, and normal development. The skin and mucosa of the whole body had no yellow pigmentation and hemorrhagic spots, and the superficial lymph nodes of the whole body were not enlarged. Cranial features indicated no deformity and bilateral pupils were large and round; additional findings included a symmetrical thoracic corridor without deformity, symmetrical tactile chatter of the two lungs, silent bilateral lung percussion, clear bilateral breath sounds, absence of dry and wet rales, and absence of pathological murmurs. The abdomen was soft without rebound tenderness; the liver and spleen were unaffected; there was no percussion pain in both kidney areas and the mobile dullness was negative. Physiological reflex was present but pathological reflex was not elicited.
Laboratory test findings were as follows: Routine red blood cell count 3.75 × 1012/L (normal value: 3.8-5.1 × 1012/L); liver function indicator, serum albumin 36.4 g/L (normal value: 40-55 g/L); kidney function indicator, serum potassium 3.42 mmol/L (normal value: 3.5-5.5 mmol/L); coagulation function indicator, serum fibrinogen 1.9 g/L (normal value: 2-4 g/L).
Computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed several patchy high-density shadows in the middle lobe of the right lung of approximately 0.5 cm3 in size . Cytopathological analysis following right middle lobe bronchial brushing revealed many ciliated columnar epithelial cells and a few lymphocytes; no malignant cells were observed. Assessment of the tissue specimen revealed that the lung tissue in the right middle lobe was 9.0 cm × 5.0 cm × 1.0 cm in size. The section was grey red and soft. A hemorrhagic area (1.5 cm × 0.8 cm × 0.5 cm) was observed locally . Microscopic assessment of the right middle lobe lung tissue revealed hemorrhagic foci in the alveolar cavity, with scattered glandular epithelial cells and inflammatory cells within the bleeding foci . Glandular epithelial cells were found in some vascular cavities , whereas hemosiderin deposits were observed in alveolar cavities . The immunohistochemical staining showed staining for cytokeratin (CK) but no staining for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and CD10. Special Prussian blue staining for hemosiderin was positive .