A 64-year-old female presented with intermittent abdominal pain, diarrhea, and blood in the stool that had been occurring for 1 year.
On April 9, 2020, the patient was diagnosed with cervical squamous cell carcinoma. Radiation therapy was commenced on April 27 with a 5000 cGy dose for external radiation therapy and four intermittent sessions of three-dimensional intracavitary radiotherapy between June 15 and June 29 with a 700 cGy dose. The patient experienced no discomfort during radiotherapy. In May 2021, the patient developed abdominal and colic pains. The patient had diluted watery bowel movements 7–8 times a day. The patient self-administered antidiarrheal drugs but did not experience significant relief. In June, the patient reported intermittent blood in her stool with a volume of 100 mL per occurrence. She visited a local hospital, where an electronic colonoscopy revealed rectal and sigmoid colonies. The medical history suggested chronic radiation enteritis, and mesalazine-soluble tablets and compound glutamine-soluble capsules were prescribed for symptomatic treatment. After receiving mesalazine enteric-coated tablets and compound glutamine enteric-coated capsules for symptomatic treatment, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and blood in the stool persisted, significantly affecting the patient's quality of life. The patient was admitted to our hospital for further treatment.
The patient has no previous medical history.
The patient and family histories were negative.
The abdomen exhibited tenderness in the mid and lower regions, with no other positive signs.
The patient's laboratory tests were within the normal range, including tests for blood routine, liver and kidney function, electrolytes, and tumor markers.
An electronic colonoscopy revealed diffuse congestion and edema of the mucosa 20 cm below the anus, multiple congestive spots, disappearance of the mucosal vascular texture, and multiple capillary dilatations. The patient was diagnosed with chronic radial enterocolitis .