We report an 80-year-old male patient suffering from aqATTR that occurred after DLT was performed for hepatocellular carcinoma. His previous medical history included hepatitis B, diagnosed in 1988 and treated with interferon in 1990, and coronary heart disease, diagnosed in 2000. In 2003, he was diagnosed with hepatocellular carcinoma (T2/N0/M0 stage in TNM classification), and in 2007, he underwent a liver transplant at Kings College Hospital from a compatible donor, who, in turn, underwent a transplant due to familial amyloidosis, with a TTR Met 30 mutation.
The patient was followed up in the University Hospital of Ioannina, Greece, with no recurrence in imaging studies and stable liver function in laboratory workup under treatment with tenofovir. After about 8 years, he developed bradyarrhythmia and, 2 years later, symptoms from the peripheral nervous system, mainly distal limb paresthesia, tingling, and mild weakness. From the gastrointestinal tract, he experienced periods of diarrhea followed by constipation and concomitant abdominal pain. From the cardiovascular system, there was pre-existing coronary heart disease, but during 2015, his bradyarrhythmia worsened, leading to the placement of a pacemaker, and he also developed an abdominal aortic aneurysm. The initial clinical and laboratory examination revealed polyneuropathy with absent tendon reflexes and severely affected sensory conduction in nerve conduction studies. The history of DLT from a donor with hATTR led the diagnostic approach to nerve biopsy, which confirmed the diagnosis of amyloid polyneuropathy . On the other hand, aqATTR cardiomyopathy was excluded, based on the history of coronary heart disease prior to DLT and the absence of typical echocardiographic findings., The arrhythmia was associated with the heart disease, along with possible autonomic nervous system involvement, while the aneurysm was attributed to the liver transplantation . Renal and ocular involvement was not observed.
At the time of diagnosis, clinical evaluation of the patient classified him at FAP stage 1 and polyneuropathy disability (PND) score 2. He immediately started treatment with tafamidis (20 mg orally once daily) in November 2018 but then underwent a slow and steady aggravation of his neurological deficits, which, in spring 2020, reached a critical point (FAP stage 2 and PND score 3B). At this point, the progression of the aqATTR was about to lead the patient to the final stage of amyloid polyneuropathy, confining him to a wheelchair. Accelerated disease progression was compatible with the age of the patient, as described in previous studies. Thus, it was decided that the patient should have a gene silencing treatment to stop the progression of aqATTR as a rescuing therapy. Patisiran treatment was started in summer 2020, at a dose of 300 μg per kg body weight administered intravenously once every 3 weeks, with intravenous premedication of corticosteroid and H1/H2 blockers as well as 2500 IU vitamin A supplementation per day. During the first 3 months of the treatment, the patient's condition stabilized in FAP stage 2 and PND score 3B. Over the next months, the patient experienced a slow and steady improvement, bringing him back to FAP stage 1 and PND score 2.
Two years after the initiation of the treatment with patisiran, the patient remained in a stable neurologic condition. It is also important to note that the patient was affected by multiple comorbidities, diagnosed before initiation of patisiran treatment, such as coronary heart disease, abdominal aortic aneurism, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (low risk, lymphocytosis without other symptoms), and was receiving complex medication with antiviral agents for hepatitis. These disorders, the laboratory tests, and the medication were not significantly affected by the addition of patisiran treatment.