An 82-year-old man (height, 167 cm; weight, 58 kg) was scheduled for mitral valve repair due to exacerbated heart failure symptoms. His past medical history included aortic valvular stenosis with post-aortic mechanical valve replacement and atrial fibrillation treated with oral warfarin. The patient had no upper gastrointestinal symptoms or related medical history. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient.
Four days before mitral repair surgery, warfarin was replaced with intravenous heparin (10,000 units/day), which was administered until 6 h preoperatively. Under general anesthesia, a TEE probe was inserted, without resistance, to evaluate perioperative cardiac function and residual regurgitation using mid-esophageal and trans-gastric views, as appropriate. The inferior vena cava (IVC) could not be visualized in trans-gastric view, despite several manipulations of the probe with the venous cannula placed into the IVC. After cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), an unexpectedly large echo-free space in the stomach was detected on TEE. The mitral valve repair was successfully undergone, the TEE probe was removed, and a nasogastric tube was inserted. Surprisingly, 700 mL of dark brown blood was aspirated from the nasogastric tube. We suspected upper gastrointestinal injury, but the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit, as the blood was dark brown and the bleeding appeared to have stopped.
Approximately 6 h postoperatively, another 100 mL of fresh blood was aspirated from the nasogastric tube. Thus, we immediately performed an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) examination and computed tomography (CT) scan. The EGD examination showed a mucosal laceration spanning from the esophagogastric junction to the gastric body, with a perforation in the center of the laceration . On this occasion, a clip was placed to stop the hemorrhage from the injured area, but the perforation was too large to close with the clip under EGD. The CT scan showed localized free air in the abdominal cavity, which helped establish a definite diagnosis of gastric perforation . Initially, surgical treatment was considered for the repair of the perforation. However, we selected conservative management to avoid increasing operative stress, to minimize the need for total gastrectomy (including the lower esophagus), and to reduce the risk of infection spread. Fortunately, spontaneous closure was expected, as there were no abdominal symptoms and the perforation site was covered with the lesser omentum and inferior surface of the liver.
Nasogastric tube aspiration was continued postoperatively, and the patient was administered total parenteral nutrition. On the day of surgery, the patient received hemostatic therapy with carbazochrome sodium sulfonate hydrate (100 mg) and tranexamic acid (0.5 g), as well as routine antibiotics including sulbactam sodium (0.5 g) and ampicillin sodium (1.0 g). Tazobactam sodium (0.5 g) and piperacillin sodium (4.0 g) were initiated after diagnosis of gastric perforation and continued until the perforation site had healed. Intravenous omeprazole sodium (20 mg) was used as a proton pump inhibitor until oral intake. On postoperative day 1, hemostatic therapy included carbazochrome sodium sulfonate hydrate (200 mg), tranexamic acid (1.5 g), and menatetrenone (20 mg). As there were no persistent abdominal symptoms and the nasogastric aspirate contained no blood, the tracheal tube was removed on postoperative day 3. A follow-up CT scan revealed a reduction in the echo-free space in the abdominal cavity, and upper gastrointestinal examination revealed no leaking of the contrast medium into the abdominal cavity. Thus, the patient began enteral nutrition on postoperative day 10 and oral intake on postoperative day 12. To prevent rebleeding, anticoagulation was restarted only after enteral nutrition was established (warfarin, 3 mg). To protect the gastric mucosa, oral esomeprazole (20 mg) and ecabet sodium (2000 mg) were started upon establishment of oral intake and continued until after discharge. A follow-up EGD examination on postoperative day 23 revealed that the perforation site had healed, with scarring . The patient recovered without any complications and was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 24.