A 69-year-old female with Type 2 diabetes mellitus presented to the emergency department following a fall, secondary to bilateral lower limb weakness, with urinary retention and constipation for 3 days. There was proximal weakness over the upper (power 4/5) and lower limbs (power 3/5), intact anal tone, and no saddle anesthesia. She was afebrile but hypoxic with raised jugular venous pressure, lung bibasal crepitations, and bilateral lower limb oedema. Initial investigations revealed high C-reactive protein (CRP), high anion gap metabolic acidosis, acute renal failure, hepatic dysfunction, and thrombocytopenia. She was admitted to internal medicine with a diagnosis of sepsis and received initial resuscitation with empiric intravenous (IV) ceftriaxone and metronidazole, intranasal oxygen (O2), IV furosemide, and judicious crystalloids, without requiring inotropic support. Methicillin-Sensitive Staphylococcus Aureus (MSSA) was detected in blood cultures, prompting a change of antibiotics to IV cloxacillin. Subsequently, her hepatic and renal dysfunction improved, with normalization of lactate, base excess, and platelet count within 1 week .
Her inflammatory markers remained elevated with worsening proximal weakness (power 3/5 over upper limbs and 2 to 3/5 over lower limbs) and a new onset of unrelenting back pain with cervicothoracic tenderness. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study of the full spine found SEAs at levels C3/4, C6-7, T5 to T7, L1 to S2 levels, with central canal narrowing and severe cord compression by a large degenerative osteochondral bar at C5/6 with focal cystic gliosis. There was associated severe thecal sac and cauda equina compression from L2-3 to L4-5 levels. The T5 to T7 collections displayed mild indentation with no significant compression of the spinal cord. There was C3/4 and C6/7 infective spondylodiscitis and osteomyelitis, septic arthritis of left C3/4 and C4/5 facet joints, T5 and T6 costovertebral joint septic arthritis and osteomyelitis, bilateral loculated iliopsoas abscesses at L5 level and a right thigh abscess. (-) A computer tomographic (CT) scan of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis demonstrated a left pectoralis major abscess and left strap muscle abscesses, left sternoclavicular, and first sternocostal joint septic arthritis. A transthoracic cardiac echogram did not demonstrate any vegetations suggestive of infective endocarditis while a detailed head-to-toe examination did not reveal any obvious skin or dental lesions. The urinary analysis and urinary culture were unremarkable although the patient was also found to have chronic left obstructive hydronephrosis. The patient had no history of IV drug abuse. A multidisciplinary team comprising of specialists from internal medicine, cardiology, infectious diseases, anesthesia, otolaryngology, cardiothoracic surgery, urology, orthopedic, and spine surgery was assembled for pre-operative medical optimization. They also developed joint goals of surgery as well as a detailed surgical plan on the day of surgery and post-operative care.
The patient underwent concurrent drainage of the left pectoralis major and left strap muscle abscesses, followed by C3/4, C5/6 anterior cervical discectomy and fusion in a supine position. The patient was subsequently turned prone for the drainage of lumbar SEAs with right L2/3, left L3/4, laminotomy, L5 and S1 laminectomy. The alternate-sided laminotomies were performed to preserve the contralateral structures to maintain spinal stability. Finally, the right psoas and right thigh abscesses were drained in a left lateral position. The thoracic SEAs and left psoas abscess were left undrained. The septic arthritis of left C3/4, C4/5 facet joints, T5/6, T6/7 costovertebral and left sternoclavicular, and first sternocostal joint was also conservatively managed.
Surgical drains were inserted into the cervical, lumbar, right psoas, left strap muscles, and left chest wall regions. These procedures were carried out by the spine, cardiothoracic, and otolaryngology service, with multiple surgeons operating simultaneously. The total operating time was 7 h and 40 min, with total time under general anesthesia of 11 h and 40 min. Intraoperative coagulopathy and excessive bleeding were addressed with 1g of IV Tranexamic acid, 4 units of packed cell transfusion (PCT), and 2 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) and multiple vasopressors. Postoperatively, the patient was admitted to the high dependency ward and reviewed 24 h later for a “second-look” surgical recommendation, which was not required.