A 77-year-old male with a past medical history significant for hypertension, stroke, and prostate cancer presented to the emergency department for accidental ingestion with nausea and vomiting. Approximately 90 minutes prior to arrival, the patient had gone to the refrigerator for water and had mistaken a bottle of 35% hydrogen peroxide for water, subsequently ingesting approximately 150 milliliters (mL). The patient immediately felt a burning sensation in his mouth and throat, followed by nausea and vomiting. He reportedly vomited several times, mostly dry heaving, but at one point had a small amount of blood in the vomitus. He otherwise denied any other complaints.
The patient was in no acute distress upon arrival. His blood pressure was elevated at 157/84 millimeters of mercury, respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute, pulse 65 beats per minute, and arterial oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. Complete physical examination was negative for posterior oropharyngeal erythema, abdominal tenderness, rebound, or guarding. Laboratory results were significant for an elevated leukocyte count of 18.9 × 103 thousand per millimeters cubed (K/mm3) (reference range: 4.5–11.0 K/mm3), hemoglobin of 16.4 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (12.0–16.0 g/dL), creatinine of 1.7 milligrams (mg)/dL (0.5–1.4 mg/dL), and lipase of 844 U/L (73–393 U/L). Initial imaging via computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast revealed gastric pneumatosis extending into the distal esophagus with extensive portal venous air, diverticulosis, multiple left renal cysts, and a 5.8-centimeter (cm) adrenal myolipoma .
Given the patient’s presenting symptoms combined with the CT findings of gastric pneumatosis, the poison center and gastroenterology were consulted. The patient was admitted for observation with plans for an endoscopy; however, upon surgical consultation, he was emergently transferred to a tertiary care hospital due to concerns for a potential perforation and necrosis of the gastric body and distal esophagus, which may have necessitated a total gastrectomy as well as distal esophagectomy. The patient had been placed on a nothing-by-mouth restriction on admission and was hemodynamically stable on intravenous (IV) fluids, pantoprazole IV drip, and piperacillin-tazobactam at time of transfer.
Upon arrival at the tertiary center, the patient reported overall improvement of his abdominal pain and sore mouth. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy performed there confirmed moderate to severe distal esophagitis and severe pangastritis but no evidence of necrosis, linear ulcerations along the lesser curvature, or mild bulbar duodenitis. Gastric biopsy later demonstrated fundic type gastric mucosa with acute inflammation and epithelial erosion. Following his endoscopy, the patient tolerated clear liquids and had his diet advanced to surgical soft. He remained pain-free and was deemed stable for discharge on the third day with recommendations for a repeat endoscopy in two to three months.