A 42-year-old female patient presented with recurrent episodes of right upper quadrant (RUQ) abdominal pain and dyspepsia for the past six months. Had previously been treated at multiple periphery hospitals with analgesia and antibiotics attaining temporary relief before another bout of RUQ pain. At presentation had persistent RUQ pain for 5 days, worsened with fat rich meals and associated with nausea and vomiting. On examination had localized tenderness in the RUQ and epigastric region with a positive Murphy's sign. Laboratory tests revealed elevated inflammatory markers and abdominal ultrasound showing features of calculous cholecystitis. Due to duration of symptoms was initiated on conservative approach and upon resolution was scheduled for an interval cholecystectomy. The laparoscopic cholecystectomy was uneventful and the gallbladder was removed intact. The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative recovery and was discharged on the second postoperative day.
Routine histopathological examination of the excised gallbladder revealed the presence of scattered calcified Schistosoma eggs noted within the lamina propria and muscularis propria of the gallbladder . The eggs were suspected to be of Schistosoma mansoni based on their morphology, size, and shape. Other findings included smooth serosa, presence of few black stones, benign mucosal glands and Rokitansky Aschoff sinuses.
Given the unexpected finding of Schistosoma eggs in the gallbladder, further investigations were initiated to determine the origin of the infection. The patient had no recent history of international travel or exposure to freshwater sources associated with schistosomiasis. However, reported during her teenage years of swimming infrequently in the Lake Victoria which is one of the recognized hotspots of schistosomiasis worldwide. She could not recall experiencing overt symptoms of schistosomiasis.
Serological tests for schistosomiasis were conducted, and the results confirmed the diagnosis. It was suspected that the patient might have acquired the infection during her teenage years by swimming in the Lake Victoria, or possibly via contaminated water bodies in the local region later on in life.
Following the diagnosis of schistosomiasis, the patient was referred to an infectious disease specialist for further evaluation and management. Treatment with praziquantel was initiated, and the patient showed response during therapy. Repeat serological tests confirmed a decline in schistosomiasis-related antibodies as well as negative urine and stool microbiology and is scheduled for 3 monthly follow up to ensure eradication.