In January 2018, a 77-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with spontaneous pain and swelling of the left thigh. The patient noticed swelling of the left distal thigh, without pain, in 2015. In November 2017, she developed severe pain and consulted doctors at a general hospital. Radiography revealed a remarkably osteogenic thickening and sclerotic lesion in the distal femur . The preliminary diagnosis of malignant bone tumor and aplastic anemia were made at the hospital before transfer to our hospital. Physical examination showed local tenderness and a hard bony swelling of the femur but no redness or local heat.
Laboratory test results were as follows: white blood cell: 2870/μL, hemoglobin: 8.5 g/dL, blood platelet: 22 × 104/μL, and neutrophil: 2.24 × 109/L. The hematologist suspected aplastic anemia, as the blood cell levels were three-times lower than the typical values and suggested symptomatic treatment.
On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the T1-weighted image showed extremely low signals in the sclerotic lesion. The T2 fat-suppressed image showed heterogeneously signals in the sclerotic lesion and medullary cavity. Gadolinium contrast MRI images showed multiple high signals in the soft tissue and bone. The bone scintigraphy revealed significant uptake in the left femur .
Based on the above findings, the diagnosis of osteosarcoma and hematological malignancy was made. Meanwhile, a needle biopsy was carried out, and histopathological examination showed no malignant tumor cells in the specimen and negative bone marrow biopsy results .
Thereafter, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed abnormally high accumulation in the lung, lung lymph nodes, cervical vertebra, thoracic vertebra, right third rib and left femur .
The clinical manifestations and radiological examination findings were inconsistent with the pathological results. However, a diagnosis of the low-grade malignant bone tumor was still suspected by the multidisciplinary team (MDT), and a treatment plan involving complete excision was done. Because of the older age, poor medical condition and suspicion of a low-grade tumor, neoadjuvant chemotherapy and open biopsy were not performed. En bloc resection was carried out, followed by the replacement of the distal femur with a mega-prosthesis . The final pathological analysis showed no malignant tumor cells and negative immunohistochemical staining results for CDK4 and MDM2; therefore, ruling out a diagnosis of the low-grade malignant bone tumor . Meanwhile, staining for CD3, CD20, CD34, and kappa and lambda light chains were negative and hematological malignancies were ruled out. Considering the PET-CT revealed high uptake in the lung and lung lymph nodes, a CT-guided percutaneous puncture biopsy was done which revealed pulmonary large cell carcinoma, and the patient was eventually transferred to the Respiratory Department.
Due to the lack of support, all malignant tumors were ruled out. Combined with imaging diagnosis such as significant uptake in bone scan and PET-CT and sclerotic lesion in radiography, meanwhile patient was also diagnosed as pulmonary large cell carcinoma, PHO was finally diagnosed.