A 46-year-old healthy woman presented at the outpatient clinic of Tropical Medicine Foundation Doctor Heitor Vieira Dourado (FMT-HVD) with a one-day history of itchy maculopapular rash, fever, conjunctival hyperemia and periarticular edema preceded by myalgia and diarrhea. She lived in Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil and had no history of travelling within the previous month. Initial examination revealed a body temperature of 39.2 °C, bilateral conjunctivitis and maculopapular skin rash in trunk and limbs. Blood pressure (114/80 mm Hg) was normal and heart rate was 122 bpm. Blood and urine samples tested positive for ZIKV by real time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR). Blood cell count was normal. After two days of the diagnosis, she returned with worsening of clinical presentation, fatigue, vomiting, diarrhea, dyspnea and lower limbs edema. Physical examination revealed hypotension (103/81 mm Hg) and persistence of the tachycardia (120 bpm). She was admitted to the ward and laboratory results showed an increase in the creatine kinase (CK) 4.027 U/L (normal < 170 U/L), creatine kinase-muscle/brain (CK-MB) 99U/L (normal < 25 U/L) and creatine kinase-muscle mass (CKMB) 29.4 U/L (normal < 4.3 U/L). The troponin T [0.27 ng/mL (normal < 0.04 ng/mL)], and myoglobin [> 500 ng/mL (normal < 107 ng/mL)] were elevated. The chest x-ray revealed hypotransparency on bases and enlarged cardiac silhouette. Her electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm. The 24-h ECG monitoring was normal. The echocardiogram (echo) revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 64% and a moderate pericardial effusion, without signs of cardiac tamponade. The cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) revealed a thickening of the pericardium, moderate pericardial effusion and an intramyocardial area with gadolinium enhancement involving the basal medial segment of the anterior septal wall compatible with inflammatory changes observed in viral myocarditis based on Lake-Louis consensus criteria. The biventricular systolic function was preserved, and the myocardial perfusion was within the normal range. Based on her symptoms, biomarkers and imaging findings, a clinical diagnosis of myopericarditis was made. Treatment with colchicine, bisoprolol, furosemide and spironolactone were introduced. We observed a fast normalization of CK and troponin T levels and clinical improvement. The RT-PCR tests performed yielded negative results for dengue, chikungunya, cytomegalovirus, Epstein Barr virus, herpesvirus, varicella zoster virus, parvovirus B19 and enteroviruses. Serologies were negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B (HBV) and C (HCV) virus. Five months later, the left ventricular ejection fraction was 74% and revealed a minimum pericardial effusion, without signs of cardiac tamponade. After one year, the cMRI showed absence of pericardial effusion and a small area of intramyocardial hyperintensity involving the basal medial segment of the anterior septal wall. This was compatible with a fibrosis with characteristic pattern non-ischemic cardiomyopathies . The patient presented significant clinical improvement.
ZIKV, dengue and chikungunya detection was performed by rRT-PCR employing the commercially available kit ZDC from Instituto de Tecnologia em Imunobiológicos Biomanguinhos.. Serum sample was screened for five herpesviruses: herpes simplex virus type 1and 2 (HSV-1 and HSV-2), Cytomegalovirus (CMV), varicella zoster virus (VZV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) by multiplex PCR . Seminested PCR was used for the identification of Parvovirus B19 and of all enteroviruses . Serology for HIV, HBV and HCV were assessed by immunochromatographic rapid tests.
The patient was enrolled in a prospective cohort study designed to assess the persistence of ZIKV in different body fluids. The study protocol was approved by institutional ethics committee as described by Calvet et al., 2018 . Written informed consent was obtained from the patient.