A 74-year-old man with abdominal pain was referred to our hospital after a pancreatic mass was revealed on abdominal ultrasonography. He was subsequently diagnosed with pancreatic cancer with celiac and splenic artery involvement.
He had no history of cardiovascular, arterial sclerotic diseases or diabetes. He was 168 cm tall, weighed 58 kg, and had a body mass index of 20.3 kg/m2. Blood test showed slight elevation in CA19-9 and DUPAN-2 levels. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a 3-cm pancreatic body tumor with main pancreatic duct dilation extending to the tail and significant parenchymal atrophy, particularly in the tail . The celiac artery was invaded 180°, with splenic vein occlusion. No lymph node metastasis was observed. Positron emission tomography CT did not reveal any distant metastases.
The patient was diagnosed with stage III pancreatic body cancer according to the Eighth edition of the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual . The diagnosis was confirmed by ultrasound-guided endoscopic puncture aspiration. Six cycles of tegafur + gemcitabine hydrochloride (1000 mg/m2) were administered as neoadjuvant chemotherapy for borderline resectable pancreatic cancer. Post-chemotherapy blood tests showed a decrease in CA19-9 (53.2 → 7.8 U/mL) and DUPAN-2 (162 → 63 U/mL). Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT revealed tumor shrinkage from 3 to 2 cm in size, with no changes in the findings of arterial and venous invasion . We performed DP–CAR for stage III pancreatic body cancer.
Surgery was successfully performed with an operation time of 371 min and intraoperative blood loss of 417 mL. We dissected the pancreas to the left of the portal vein using Endo GIA reinforced reload with Tri-Staple Technology®. Additionally, we dissected the celiac trunk after branching from the left gastric artery (LGA) and preserved the LGA. Contrast-enhanced CT on postoperative day 7 revealed minimal fluid collection . On the 16th postoperative day, the patient was discharged. Subsequently, he underwent regular check-ups, including blood tests and CT, with no significant findings up to 7 months postoperatively.
Postoperative follow-up CT at 10 months revealed a pseudoaneurysm that was incidentally detected in the anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery (ASPDA) , and an urgent angiogram was performed. First, hepatic artery angiography was performed through the left gastric artery and right gastric artery (RGA) . Subsequently, to confirm the presence of the pseudoaneurysm in the ASPDA, angiography from the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) was performed . Coil embolization was performed for the ASPDA, right gastroepiploic artery, infra-pyloric artery (IPA) and gastroduodenal artery (GDA) . We also made the schema which describes the arterial anatomy, the location of pseudoaneurysm and embolization which we performed . The patient had no tumor recurrence or relapse of pseudoaneurysm formation 2 years postoperatively.