A 77-year-old woman presented to the urology clinic with a two-week history of night sweats, right back pain and loin swelling. Her medical history included a laparoscopic cholecystectomy for gallstones five years before presentation. Other than a similar pain noticed six months previously, there had been no known complications from the surgery. On examination the patient had a tender, fluctuant swelling in the right lumbar region with overlying skin erythema. Her blood tests showed a neutrophilia of 7.7 × 109/litre and C-reactive protein of 134 mg/litre. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a complex subphrenic, subhepatic and subcutaneous collection. The patient's abscesses were drained under ultrasound guidance and the drains left in situ. The pus grew Escherichia coli on culture. The patient was then treated with antibiotics for ten days and discharged home.
Three weeks later the patient reattended hospital with similar symptoms and ultrasound and CT scans showed a perihepatic and subcutaneous reaccumulation of fluid, with a 1cm gallstone adjacent to the right lobe of her liver . The abscesses were again drained. A barium enema of the colon was arranged to exclude a neoplastic cause for the abscess, but the result simply showed mild sigmoid diverticular disease and no fistulous connection. In addition, a contrast study through the percutaneous drain did not reveal any connection with intra-abdominal viscera. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with intra-abdominal sepsis secondary to retained gallstones at the time of her laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Subsequently, the patient was treated as an out-patient, but her ultrasound scans (USS) continued to show collection of pus, which had to be drained three more times. The patient also developed chronic sinus discharge, and still went to the out-patient clinic 18 months after her initial presentation. A sinogram showed her sinus connecting with the right paracolic gutter and extending upwards and posteriorly . After identification of the offending gallstone on a second CT scan, the patient was offered surgery to remove the offending gallstones but declined this mode of treatment. At the time of writing she wished to continue with conservative management unless further problems arise.