A 42-year-old male shopkeeper was referred to the Neuro-ophthalmology Clinic at the Rassoul Akram Hospital, Tehran, Iran with blurred vision in both eyes. The patient complained of gradual progression of bilateral vision decline, ataxia, and paresthesia of the lower extremities over the past 40 days. Results of brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with and without contrast were normal, and the ICP was within normal limits. The patient's medical records indicated that the serum lead level was 164 µg/dL (normal upper limit: 20 µg/dL). One month before the referral, he had been treated with intravenous sodium calcium edetate (disodium calcium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid [EDTA]) for five days by a neurologist. Subsequently, succimer (2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid) was orally administered for two weeks. A week later, his neurological symptoms improved, and the lead level in his serum dropped to 36 µg/dL. Before treatment, the patient had not undergone eye evaluation. Shortly after the completion of chelation therapy, he came to our neuro-ophthalmology clinic for the evaluation of persistent blurred vision in both eyes, although he reported subjective improvement in visual acuity after chelation therapy. His medical and family histories were unremarkable. His blood pressure was 115/80 mm Hg. He had used oral opium for over 10 years but did not drink alcohol. With the Snellen chart, his best-corrected visual acuity was 5/10 at a distance of 6 m in the right eye and “count fingers” at a distance of 3 m in the left eye. There was no vision improvement in the pinhole test in either eye. His pupillary reactions were normal in both eyes, with a relative afferent defect in the left eye. Extraocular motility was intact in both eyes. The intraocular pressure was 14 mm Hg in both eyes on Goldmann applanation tonometry. The Ishihara test scores were 9/14 and 1/14 for the right and left eyes, respectively. Slit-lamp examination was unremarkable. His dilated fundus exam was significant for hyperemia, hemorrhage, and edema of the retinal nerve fiber layer surrounding both optic discs [Figure 1]. Optic nerve pallor was not present. The macula, peripheral vascular structures, and retinal periphery were unremarkable in both eyes. The Humphrey visual field test showed double arcuate scotoma with enlargement of the blind spot and severe generalized depression of the right eye [Figure 2]. The visual field of the left eye was severely depressed, and the patient could not undergo perimetry. Peripapillary optical coherence tomography (OCT) demonstrated increased thickness of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) in all four quadrants of both eyes [Figure 3]. Fluorescein angiography detected disc leakage in both eyes [Figure 4].
The patient underwent lead toxicity treatment with chelating agents (EDTA and succimer) and showed a good response with a decreased serum lead level. He was advised to attend follow-up visits to monitor the resolution of optic neuropathy with clinical and paraclinical tests. However, the patient did not return for follow-up visits to detect clinical and/or paraclinical progression or regression of the disease.