The patient was a woman in her 60s. She visited a nearby hospital because of bloody stool. She underwent a careful examination, and she was diagnosed as having sigmoid colon cancer with synchronous liver metastasis. She underwent laparoscopic sigmoid colectomy, and the pathological diagnosis based on the Japanese classification was as follows: S, Type2, 20 × 20 mm, moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma (tub2), pT3(SS), med, INFb, ly0, v1, pN0(0/16), EX/ND(-), PN1a, pPM0 (90 mm), pDM0 (50 mm), pRM0. She received postoperative systemic chemotherapy. Then, no new lesion occurred in the liver. She preferred to undergo laparoscopic hepatectomy and was referred to our hospital. She tested negative for serum marker of hepatitis B and C virus infection. Additionally, several types of imaging examinations were performed: multidetector computed tomography (MDCT), Gd-EOB-DTPA-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (EOB-MRI), and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET). MDCT showed a low-density nodule during the arterial phase and ring enhancement during the delayed phase in liver segment 8 . EOB-MRI showed restricted diffusion and a low-signal intensity mass during the hepatobiliary phase in liver segment 8 . However, FDG-PET showed no marked uptake in the liver. She was diagnosed as having a liver metastasis from sigmoid colon cancer as initially diagnosed, and laparoscopic partial hepatectomy was planned.
The trocar was placed, with no adhesions and no ascites in the abdominal cavity. The liver was examined intraoperatively by contrast-enhanced ultrasonography with perfluorobutane microbubbles , and then laparoscopic partial resection of liver segment 8 was performed with the Pringle maneuver. The cross-section of the resected specimen is shown in Fig. b. During the operation, there were no complications, and there was a small amount of blood loss.
The patient had a good postoperative course, and she was discharged on postoperative day 12.
The pathological findings were as follows. The nodule in the liver parenchyma was composed of dense lymphoplasmacytic proliferation, and scattered lymph follicles were surrounded by intermediate-sized B cells with clear cytoplasm, suggesting marginal zone/monocytoid B cell differentiation . Those cells were positive for CD20 and IRTA1(FCRL4) and negative for CD3 and CD10. Some areas showed aggregates of plasmacytic cells, which were predominantly positive for kappa chains . Based on the above, the tumor cells were positive for CD20, IRTA1, and kappa chains, and negative for CK20, CD3, CD10, and lambda chains. The Ki-67 labeling index was 20%. These findings are consistent with a diagnosis of extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue. Based on these pathological findings, the diagnosis was hepatic MALT lymphoma, and a hematologist was consulted. He performed a bone marrow biopsy. She was finally diagnosed as having limited-stage primary hepatic MALT lymphoma. She did not receive any treatment after the operation, and she has shown no recurrence for 4 years.