A 43-year-old Caucasian unemployed man presented with lifelong symptoms of depression, anxiety, and impulsive behavior. He reported struggling with intense depressed mood, substantial life stress including a divorce in progress, and the inability to hold a job due to the impairment and distress associated with his symptoms. He had received psychopharmacological and psychotherapeutic treatment for the previous six years, but reported that he had not experienced any clinically meaningful gains as a result of those treatments. His medication history included fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, escitalopram, desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, levetiracetam, valproic acid, oxcarbazepine, ezogabine, aripiprazole, quetiapine fumarate, chlorpromazine, mesoridazine, and lithium. At his initial assessment, his medications included sertraline, valproic acid, and lisdexamfetamine dimesylate (this medication was not approved by our team, but rather was prescribed by his previous physician who believed his diagnosis to be attention deficit hyperactivity disorder). On the Thase and Rush Staging Model, he was at Stage III of treatment resistance, indicating failure of more than two adequate trials of distinct classes of antidepressants, as well as failure of an adequate trial with a tricyclic antidepressant.
He was given a primary diagnosis of bipolar II disorder, currently in a mixed state, based on a psychometric assessment conducted by an independent licensed clinical psychologist prior to the beginning of treatment. His assessment included the administration of a valid Personality Assessment Inventory (PAI) and the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI)-II. These measures showed severe depressive (PAI Depression (DEP) T score=79, BDI-II=36) and manic (PAI Mania (MAN) T score=74, PAI Aggression (AGG) T score=72) symptoms. Elevations in his life stress were also apparent (PAI Stress (STR) T score=86).
He was also assessed at baseline using brain single-photon emission computer tomography (SPECT) with 99mTechnetium-hexamethylpropyleneamineoxime (HMPAO). SPECT is a neuroimaging technique that shows the functional status of gray mater areas via the measurement of relative perfusion [-]. Results from this assessment revealed significant relative underperfusion bilaterally in multiple hemispheric areas, more accentuated in his frontal lobes, anterior cingulate and extensive underperfusion in his orbitofrontal and apico-mesial temporal areas. Marked hyperperfusion was seen in his right caudate head, cerebellar vermis, and retro-splenial posterior cingulate. Moderate hyperperfusion was apparent in his left caudate head, dorsal aspect of his posterior cingulate, and in an asymmetric thalamus. This combination of underperfused areas is compatible with multiple dysfunctions related to attention, memory, executive function, impulse control, and social interaction, while the hyperperfused areas are often found in anxiety and depression [,].
After informing him of the possible risks and benefits of the combined ketamine and TMS treatment, the new technique was used to treat his bipolar II disorder. He was first given two days of TMS pretreatment, which consisted of four treatments of 30 minutes each day, with 45-minute resting intervals between each treatment. Based on 14 years of observational evidence from our clinic, the TMS consisted of 40 minutes of 1 hertz continuous TMS administered at 115% of the motor threshold. The combined protocol treatment added the intravenous ketamine infusion (Ketalar®, manufactured by Par Sterile Products LLC, Parsippany, NJ, USA), which was administered concurrent to, and bracketed within, the middle 30 minutes of TMS; there were five minutes of TMS pre- and post-infusion. The TMS head coil (manufactured by Neotonus, Inc., Marietta, GA, USA) was positioned at the midline of his scalp to maximally stimulate the medial prefrontal area that overlays the anterior cingulate region. This area was targeted based on evidence that it is implicated in depression .
The protocol described above was repeated a total of 24 times over five months, at approximately one-week intervals. All stimulation levels were within published safety guidelines, and a certified registered nurse anesthetist personally managed the anesthesia aspects of this treatment at all times. The dosage of infused ketamine was gradually increased from 50mg at the first treatment (approximately 0.5mg/kg) to 600mg by the last treatment. The dose increases were based on his tolerance to higher doses and to symptom reduction, as well as on the clinical evaluation that was performed a few days after each treatment. The ketamine dose adjustment was previously described . Institutional review board exemption was obtained for this report from an independent accredited agency (Sterling IRB) because the ketamine dose adjustment used in our current study has been previously described and approved.
Beginning after the second combined treatment, he reported substantial improvements in his symptoms and related functioning, eventually including the ability to maintain a full-time job. Five and a half months after his initial assessment, he again underwent a psychometric assessment. Results from a valid PAI and BDI-II showed substantial decreases in his symptoms related to both depression (PAI DEP T score=65, BDI-II=13) and mania (PAI MAN T score=61, PAI AGG T score=56). Remarkably, these improvements occurred even though he continued to experience elevated life stress over the duration of the treatment (PAI STR T score=82). Moreover, his follow-up brain SPECT scan showed increased relative perfusion in all previously underperfused areas (see Figure ), thus documenting a specific functional substrate for the treatment effect.