A thirteen year old boy presented to the cardiology outpatient department of a tertiary care hospital with complaints of chest pain and palpitations for six months. The patient also complained of breathlessness which aggravated upon physical exertion and was relieved by resting. The patient had no history of recurrent lower respiratory tract infections or history of prior hospitalisation. No significant comorbidities were present and no relevant family history was provided. Laboratory investigations were normal. On chest examination, bilateral air entry was normal while on cardiac examination, a low-pitched ejection systolic murmur was appreciated in the second and third left parasternal spaces. Plain frontal chest radiograph of the patient revealed mild cardiomegaly. The patient underwent transthoracic echocardiography which showed a suspicious echogenic membrane below the aortic valve with flow acceleration seen across the LVOT on continuous wave Doppler having a mean gradient of 35 mmHg, peak gradient of 55 mmHg and peak velocity of 3.7 m/s. Additionally, right atrium and right ventricle were found to be dilated and flow acceleration with mean gradient of 40 mm Hg was observed across RVOT as well which was limited by poor acoustic window. For further structural information and complete preoperative evaluation, the patient was advised to undergo cardiac computed tomography (CT) examination.
CT cardiac angiography was performed on Siemens 256 slice dual-source CT scanner with retrospective ECG gating using 50 ml of 350 mg/dl nonionic iodinated contrast agent. Cardiac CT confirmed the presence of a thin, circumferential subaortic membrane [*, Fig. ], coursing from the ventricular septum to the anterior mitral leaflet with an eccentric 3 mm fenestration [thin arrow, Fig. ]. The membrane was seen to cause subvalvular aortic stenosis with resultant left ventricular hypertrophy. CT also revealed dilated right atrium and right ventricle with concentric right ventricular hypertrophy. An anomalous muscular band was seen to arise from the RVOT septal wall and course till the subinfundibular region causing significant luminal stenosis at subinfundibular level [thin arrow in Figs. , and ]. The hypertrophied muscular band divided the right ventricle into a proximal high pressure chamber and a distal low pressure chamber [H, L in Figs. and ]. Infundibular hypertrophy was seen as well [chevron in Figs. and ]. Thin major aortopulmonary collateral (MAPCAS) were seen arising from the right internal mammary artery, arch of aorta and the anteromedial aspect of the descending thoracic aorta at D3 level [*, Fig. ]. Also worth noting was presence of mild aortic and pulmonary valve thickening [A,P in Fig. ]. Interatrial and interventricular septa were found to be intact. Atrioventricular and ventriculoarterial connections were concordant with thoracic and abdominal situs solitus. Pulmonary and systemic venous drainage was normal.
Based on combined echocardiography and CT findings, a final diagnosis of DCRV with SAM causing both right and left ventricular outflow tract obstruction was made. The patient underwent resection of subaortic membrane with myectomy and RVOT muscle bundle resection along with pericardial patch augmentation.