A 4-year-old Caucasian male born at term without complications, otherwise healthy, was sent to our emergency department (ED) by his gastroenterologist (GE) owing to MRI findings of mild optic nerve sheath distension. He was being seen by GE for intermittent episodes of early-morning vomiting starting 10 months prior, occurring once every 1–3 weeks only upon awakening in the morning and with return to his usual state of health within 1–2 hours following these events. His parents denied other associated symptoms, such as abdominal pain, visual impairment, loss of balance, or changes in bowel and bladder continence. They endorsed that he may have had a few headaches in the past 10 months, lasting brief seconds while playing, without temporal correlation to his events. Upon onset, he was initially worked up by his pediatrician, with hematologic, metabolic, hormonal, allergic, and immunologic work-up all unremarkable. Pediatric GE performed an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) without any notable masses or lesions, and multisite biopsy without inflammatory changes. Given his strong family history for CVS (five paternal cousins) and continued stereotypic episodes without change in frequency or character, he was ultimately diagnosed with CVS and initiated on antiemetic therapy. Unlike his cousins, however, his symptoms did not subside. His pediatrician obtained an MRI brain with contrast, which was only notable for mild bilateral optic nerve sheath distension without masses, globe flattening, or other signs suggestive of increased intracranial pressure , prompting his urgent referral to our ED.
At presentation, the patient was in his usual state of health: active, curious, socially engaging, and running back and forth through the examination room. His last episode of vomiting occurred about 2 weeks prior, and he had been at his baseline since. Initial metabolic, hematologic, and infectious work-up were all unremarkable. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) was negative. Neurological examination was without focal deficits, with his mental status at baseline, speaking in full coherent sentences, and asking inquisitive questions. Cranial nerves were without deficit and without evidence of nystagmus or visual field cuts. Visual acuity was equal bilaterally without impairment. Dilated fundus examination by ophthalmology demonstrated healthy pink optic nerves bilaterally without disc edema. LP demonstrated an elevated OP of 47 mmHg with normal glucose, protein, and cell count. Magnetic resonance venography (MRV) of the brain yielded no venous sinus thrombosis or stenosis. He was initiated on carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (CA-I) therapy with acetazolamide, and discharged home with close outpatient follow-up. At outpatient follow-up visits, most recently 12 weeks following discharge, his mother endorsed significant improvement in his mood and resolution of his early-morning episodic vomiting, stating this was the best she had seen him in a year.