An 8-year-old female patient, weighed 17 kg had been diagnosed with congenital heart disease during her infancy, with unknown follow-up and treatment. She was admitted to the hospital due to fatigue, shortness of breath while playing with friends one month ago. Physical examination on admission revealed a systolic murmur in the left para-sternum, trans-thoracic echocardiography showed a peri-membranous VSD extended into inlet septum with a diameter of 12 mm, left to right shunting, pressure gradient via the defect was 20 mmHg, a PDA of 4 mm in diameter. The patient had undergone trans-catheter PDA closure first, and 3 weeks later, TES was performed for VSD repair without robotic assistance.
Patient was placed in supine position; two arms were along the body, under general anesthesia with single-lumen endotracheal tube. We used a no.6 Knitted Dacron graft (Vascutek Terumo, Bangkok, Thailand) which was connected to the right common FA of the patient with an end-to-side anastomosis. The other side of the graft was connected to the arterial line of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) machine. Superior vena cava (SVC) and inferior vena cava (IVC) cannulae were inserted via internal jugular vein (IJV) and femoral vein, respectively, using Seldinger technique. When CPB was started, the arterial pressure gradually increased to 260 mmHg, we switched to bilateral FA cannulation with an additional 10Fr FA cannula (Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, Minn, USA) (the predicted size was 16Fr) was directly inserted to the left common FA. After having additional femoral cannula, the arterial pressure declined and stabilized at 180–200 mmHg.
Four soft trocars (Covidien, Hampshire, Mansfield, USA) were placed in the right chest of the patient, included: one 12 mm trocar in the 5th intercostal space (ICS) at the anterior axillary line as the main working port, one 5 mm trocar in the 4th ICS at the mid-axillary line as the second working port, one 5 mm trocar in the 5th ICS at mid-axillary line as the camera port and one 5 mm trocar in the 6th ICS at the mid-axillary line for left atrium sucker. After snaring SVC, we pushed a 16 G Surflo® I.V. Catheters (Terumo Corporation, Laguna, Philippines) into the ascending aorta through the anterior right chest wall and used it as an aortic root needle. Myocardial protection was achieved by antegrade Custodiol® HTK solution (Koehler Chemi, Alsbach-Haenlien, Germany) through aortic root after clamping aorta by Chitwood clamp (Scanlan International, Inc, St Paul, MN, USA).
Right atrium (RA) was opened in parallel to atrioventricular groove, atrial septal was intact, and we punctured atrial septum at the location of ovale foramen to place the drainage of left atrium. The defect was exposed by taking some stitches to hang RA wall to the pericardium. The lesion extended into the inlet septum, some chordae tendineae of septal and anterior leaflets of tricuspid valve crossed the defect. We split the commissure of anterior and septal leaflets to clearly expose the defect. The VSD was closed using artificial patch, continuous combined with interrupted suture . The RA was closed using two layer of continuous suture after the split in the leaflets and the ovale foramen had been closed. After declamping the aorta, the heart re-beat in sinus rhythm, de-airing via aortic root needle. Extracorporeal circulation was then stopped and the operation was finished with no difficulties. CPB time and aorta cross-clamp (ACC) time were 185 and 150 min, respectively. Echocardiography prior to discharge showed completely closed VSD, no tricuspid regurgitation. The patient was discharged at the postoperative day 8 without any symptoms; no neurological or vascular complications were noted at the follow-up visit 3 months after surgery. Her family was very satisfied with the results .