An 80-year-old male was admitted to our hospital for shortness of breath, cough, asthma, and hoarseness on November 19, 2020. Ultrasound showed a mass in the right lobe of the thyroid, about 38*51*78mm in size, partially involving the isthmus. Further MRI scans revealed a large right thyroid mass pressing on the airway . Because of severe stenosis of the main trachea leading to chest tightness, palpitation, cough, and asthma, the patient was placed with a tracheal stent. Preoperative bronchoscopy showed that the vocal cords were fixed and compressed, and no new organisms were found in the airway wall. Owning to the failure of histopathological diagnosis by core needle biopsy, the patient underwent right partial thyroid and right neck lymph node surgical biopsy on November 25, 2020. Postoperative pathological examination revealed poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Scattered squamous cell islands and nuclear heterogeneous cells were seen. The right lymph node revealed a small round epithelial malignancy with low differentiation, and pathological mitotic figures could be seen . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for CK5/6, CKH, P63, P40, CD5, CD117, and the Ki67 index was over 95%, while CK7, S100, CD56, SYN, NSE, and CHGA were negative. The results were consistent with squamous cell carcinoma .
Subsequently, the patient underwent esophagoscopy, gastroscopy, and duodenoscope to rule out upper gastrointestinal tract origin tumors. Combined with previous bronchoscopy and pathological findings, the diagnosis of PSCCT was confirmed. Based on previous case reports (, , ) and retrospective studies (, ), the diagnosis was adequate. We also ran a genetic test to assess tumor mutation burden. Unfortunately, BRAF, HRAS, NRAS, TERT mutations and RET, PPARG, NTRK3 fusion were all negative. Due to the unresectable locally advanced tumor, the patient was treated with Anlotinib (Focus V®, Jiangsu Chia-Tai Tianqing Pharmaceutical and Advenchen Laboratories) 12 mg once daily taken orally continuously for 2 weeks of each 3-week cycle combined with Sintilimab (Tyvyt®, Innovent Biologics and Eli Lilly and Company) 200 mg once every 21 days. The patients were evaluated before every 3 treatment cycles. Surprisingly, after 2 courses, the volume of the tumor reduced significantly (maximum diameter from 11.17cm to 8.52cm, ), and the symptoms of compression were relieved. Except for reversible leucopenia and skin pruritus, other laboratory tests were normal, and there were no other complications. MRI images showed almost no significant abnormalities in the original tumor site after 5 courses .
On April 25, 2021, the patient was sent to the local hospital for malignant vomiting, anorexia, and disturbance of consciousness. He had an unexplained elevation of AST, ALT, GGT, and bilirubin with progressive aggravation . He was diagnosed with fulminant liver failure and autoimmune liver disease in the local hospital. Three days later, the patient died there. The timeline of the major diagnosis and treatment is shown in .