A 31-year-old woman was admitted owing to severe headache and vomiting lasting 1 day in July 2021. The patient had received a blood transfusion 5 days before headache onset. On the morning of admission, she developed an explosive headache, which worsened when sitting or standing, accompanied by dizziness, vomiting, blurred vision, and waist and leg pain. On the day of headache onset, emergency brain computed tomography (CT) showed no obvious abnormalities . The patient was previously diagnosed with intermediate α-thalassemia by genetic testing at 2 years of age, after which she received irregular blood transfusions. Transfusion of 2 units of packed RBCs every half a year in 2016, transfusion of 2 units of packed RBCs every 3 months in 2017, and transfusion of 4 units of packed RBCs every 3 months in 2018 were administered owing to anemia. Changes in hemoglobin levels are shown in Fig. . A year before admission, liver and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated normal cardiac iron levels but revealed severe iron overload in the liver. The patient had been consistently taking deferasirox (1000 mg/day) since 2018, up to the current hospital admission. Changes in ferritin levels are shown in Fig. . The patient underwent a splenectomy for thalassemia. She had a history of cholecystectomy, hepatitis, and induced abortion.
Physical examination upon admission showed horizontal nystagmus while looking left, right, and up; negative meningeal signs; and no other abnormal neurological signs. Glycosylated hemoglobin levels were within normal limits, and the results of thyroid and kidney function tests, nucleic acid test for COVID-19, and Coombs test were normal. Abnormal hematological findings are shown in Table . Cerebrospinal fluid analysis on day 3 revealed normal pressure, white blood cell count, and glucose and protein levels. Echocardiography showed mild tricuspid regurgitation, chest CT showed atherosclerotic changes in the aorta, and brain MRI , gadolinium-enhanced MRI , MR venography , and MR arteriography on day 4 showed no obvious abnormalities. Susceptibility-weighted imaging showed abnormal signals in the bilateral and fourth ventricles. Heart and liver iron levels measured by T2-weighted MRI showed severe hepatic iron overload.
The initial diagnosis, headache, may be secondary to intracranial infection, cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, or reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome (RCVS); therefore, antibiotic (ceftriaxone 2 g/day for 6 days) and antiviral (acyclovir 0.75 g/day for 8 days) treatment, decompression of intracranial pressure (mannitol 375 mL/day), deferasirox 1 g/day, and symptomatic treatment were administered. However, these considerations were not supported by the results of the auxiliary examination. Therefore, transfusion-related headache was considered. The hemoglobin level was 67 g/L on day 3, and the desired transfusion target was a pre-transfusion hemoglobin level of 95–105 g/L (typically to achieve post-transfusion hemoglobin of 130–150 g/L) as per the guidelines [, ]. Small intermittent blood transfusions were administered with caution. A RBC suspension (2 units) was transfused on days 4, 5, and 6, and the hemoglobin level was 113 g/L following transfusion. The patient’s headache was gradually relieved, and she was discharged on day 9. Headache recurred after another blood transfusion at the 5-month follow-up; however, it was not as severe as that observed at admission. In the year after discharge, liver and cardiac MRI indicated normal cardiac iron levels but revealed severe iron overload in the liver. The timeline of the patient’s condition is shown in Fig. . The patient was satisfied with the treatment and recovered well.
This study was approved by the Ethics Review Board of the First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University (No. 2023-169-01PJ). Informed consent was obtained from the patient.