A 65-year-old right-handed black Ethiopian male referred to the outpatient neurology clinic in Tikur Anbessa Specialized Hospital with a complaint of diffuse, symmetrical body fat deposition which was started 15 years back as belly fat and slowly grows to involve his anterior chest with bilateral breast enlargement. The mass continued to gradually increase until it attains the current size which now involves his torso, both upper arms and thighs. The mass spares his face and distal limbs. Since the past six months, he experienced deep aching pain in his knees and ankles bilaterally and recently the joint pain got worse with new onset low back pain. For the above complaint he visited a nearby clinic and his symptoms were attributed to his excess body weight (114 kg) at that time and treated with oral analgesic and advised to control his weight through diet and regular exercise. However, all of his symptoms persisted with worsening of back pain and walking difficulty. Which made him homebound and need another person assistance to stand and walk around the house. Otherwise, he did not have breathing or swallowing difficulty, abdominal pain or distal limb sensory or motor abnormalities. He denied any history of alcohol abuse, tobacco or illicit drug use but occasionally he consumed 1 to 2 beer in social events and holidays. He usually found it difficult to find a cloth that fits him otherwise he was relatively healthy. He lost his truck driving job since the recent worsening of symptoms and become financially dependent on his wife. He was married and a father of three boys. All of his siblings were alive and healthy except his older sister, who was hypertensive. His family history was negative for similar condition.
On physical examination, his body mass index was 39.6 kg/m2 (weight − 113 kg, height − 1.69 m) otherwise vital signs were normal. There was diffuse bilateral symmetrical, non-tender, soft swelling of his trunk, shoulder, upper arms and thighs with bilateral breast enlargements. [Figure (A)]. Also, he had thick and redundant skin folds with huge lipomas in his back torso sparing the neck [Fig. (B)], and disproportional enlargement of both arms and thighs as compared to a normal appearing forearm and shine [Fig. (A) & (B)]. On neurologic exam, straight leg raise test was difficult to perform because of the central mass. He had mild lumbar vertebrae tenderness. The motor and sensory exams were normal. No joint swelling, tenderness, or crepitation detected. The rest of his examination was non-revealing. Table summarized the baseline laboratory findings where most of the results were in the normal range except hyperuricemia (10.6 mg/dl). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical [Fig. (A)] and lumbar [Fig. (B)] vertebrae showed diffuse subcutaneous fat deposits in the posterior neck and lower back with multilevel degenerative disc prolapse and osteophytic changes. Biopsy from the mass revealed non-capsulated sheets of mature adipocytes with modest fibrous infiltration which is consistent with the pathologic features of benign lipomatosis.
The patent was diagnosed with type II Madelung’s disease and lumbar degenerative disc disease with and hyperuricemia. We started with on parenteral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (Diclofenac) and physical therapy. A week after starting the supportive therapy his symptoms subsided and discharged home with oral analgesics. Advised on lifestyle and dietary modifications to control the hyperuricemia including abstinence from alcohol, avoiding high glycemic foods and sugary drinks that will limit his total daily calorie intake between 800 and 1000 calories, adherence to low purine diets such as nuts, whole grains, vegetables and fruits rich in vitamin C and engaging in regularly physical activity with at least 30 min of brisk walking for 3–5 days per week. The patient refused surgical treatment. One month in his follow up, he lost 2 kg with good functional recovery but lipomatosis remined unchanged. He was kept on regular follow-up in the endocrine, rheumatology and neurology outpatient clinics.