A 33-year-old male patient presented to orthopedicsand traumatology outpatient clinic with left hip pain. The pain started suddenly 3months ago while walking and the patient were conservatively treated. Due to pain did not subside despite conservative therapy, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed. It showed bone marrow edema of the left femoral head, and consequently, the patient was referred to our tertiary clinic to have surgery. Patient’s history was significant for palpitations, itching after the bath and episodic chest pain starting approximately 3months ago. The patient also complained of paresthesias at the hands, feet, and back of the neck 6–7 months ago and his medical history was unremarkable including steroids, and he did not have any concomitant diseases. Patient smedical and surgical history wereunremarkable; however, family history was positive for a hematological malignancy in his sibling. The patient was using crutches. Inspection of the hips and lower extremities was normal. Passive flexion and extension of the left hip elicited pain with normal range of motion. Internal rotation of the left hip was painful and restricted, while external rotation was normal with the full range of motion. The neurovascular examination was unremarkable. The anterior-posterior and lateral X-ray of the hips were taken. MRI shows increased intensity on T2-weighted images . Patient’s complete blood count (CBC) done at another hospital showed thrombocyte count of 609 103/μL whereas other parameters were in normal range. At the time of presentation, CBC was normal except the thrombocyte level (644 103/μL). Considering the presenting symptoms and diagnostic tests of the patient, the initial diagnosis was established as ET, hematology opinion obtained. A genetic analysis was positive for JAK2 V617F. Repeated hemograms during the follow-up showed increasing thrombocyte counts (665 103/μL and 769 103/μL, respectively) which support the diagnosis. To prevent possible thrombotic complications, the patient was started on acetylsalicylic acid and hydroxyurea and the patient has s c h ed u l ed a b o n e mar row b i o p s y. W h i l e p ro te i n electrophoresis was normal, bone scintigraphy showed significantly increased activity in the left femoral head and acetabular region. The patient was diagnosed with TO of the hip and core decompression was planned to eliminate compressive symptoms of the hip.