A 63-year-old male presented to the emergency department with a pool ball in his rectum. He reported that his girlfriend had inserted a #14 pool ball into his rectum two days prior. On presentation, he had excruciating lower abdominal pain and difficulty with urination and bowl movement. On examination, he was in no acute distress, the abdomen was soft and non-distended, and there were no signs of hemorrhage. Plain pelvic radiography revealed a round, opaque foreign body in the pelvic cavity . A Foley catheter retrieval of the pool ball was attempted without success, so the patient was moved to the operating room for foreign body extraction.
Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a high lithotomy position. The pool ball was palpable distally with a digital rectal examination; however, neither manual removal nor suction with an obstetrics vacuum extractor was successful in retrieving the pool ball transanally. The patient’s pelvic outlet was very narrow, and it became apparent that further attempts to remove the ball through a transanal approach would continue to be unsuccessful; therefore, a low midline laparotomy was made. Unfortunately, the pool ball was found to be lodged in the rectum below the level of the peritoneal reflection, and the ball could not be manipulated to an intraperitoneal position for extraction through sigmoidotomy. Further attempts were made to deliver the ball through the transanal route, but the patient’s narrow pelvic outlet restricted movement past the ischial tuberosity. As the pool ball could not be moved either proximally or distally in the rectum, an orthopedic surgeon was consulted to see if any manipulation or resection of the pelvis might aid in the removal of the pool ball. It was determined that a pubic symphysis resection would not be of assistance in ball retrieval, but a partial unilateral resection of the ischial tuberosity may help. Since the patient had not provided informed consent for resection of the ischial tuberosity and was not positioned nor draped for such a procedure, a final transanal extraction attempt was made with a Schanz pin.
A speculum was placed into the rectum so that the #14 pool ball was visible. The ball was held in place through the laparotomy opening, and then a pair of ring forceps was inserted through the speculum to grasp the pool ball. A Schanz pin was then drilled into the pool ball. This rigid anchor allowed for good handling of the pool ball, which was wiggled past the ischial tuberosity and removed from the patient’s rectum through the transanal route .
Post-removal sigmoidoscopy revealed mild mucosal irritation but no perforations. Post-operatively, the orthopedic service recommended weight-bearing as tolerated. The patient’s recovery was complicated by ileus and anal fissures, but he eventually regained bowel function.