A 64-year old man with known arterial hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, a 40 pack-year history of smoking and alcohol abuse, developed recurrent exercise-induced weakness associated with high-frequency irregular tremor in his right arm. In the beginning, the patient only experienced the symptoms during running/brisk walking. The patient later progressed to experience the symptoms during light walking. These shaking spells lasted for several minutes, but without other associated neurological deficits. MRI of the brain revealed no signs of acute ischemia in the left hemisphere, but bilateral subcortical white matter lesions, suggestive of small vessel disease, were present . The left internal carotid artery (ICA) was occluded at the bifurcation , but there were no additional stenoses or occlusions in the remainder of the cervico-cranial vasculature. The left middle cerebral artery (MCA) was reperfused from the circle of Willis due to anterior cross filling. On first admission, he was on no antihypertensive medication and had a blood pressure of 135/91 and a heart rate of 91.
Administration of a statin and antiplatelet therapy did not ameliorate his symptoms, and he continued to have stereotyped ’limb-shaking’ TIAs precipitated by mild exertion. He underwent successful high-flow bypass between his superficial temporal artery and middle cerebral artery - extracranial to intracranial (EC-IC) bypass, with prompt cessation of the spontaneous ’limb-shaking’ TIA episodes . Duplex Transcranial Doppler confirmed the patency of the bypass graft as demonstrated by reversal of flow direction in the left MCA .
The patient was asymptomatic for a little over two years, but returned as an outpatient reporting that he could manually recreate his original symptoms by compressing the superficial temporal artery anastomosis (STA) just above the burrhole over the zygomatic bone. On examination, ‘limb-shaking’ could be provoked 20 s after compression and lasting for 20 s after releasing the pressure (see Additional file ). The patient had electroencephalography (EEG) recording during an event, which was negative for epileptic discharges and focal slowing.