A 24-year-old female was referred to the urology clinic by gynecology after an incidental detection of a bladder tumor on ultrasound. At the time of the consultation, the patient was complaining of incomplete bladder emptying accompanied by urgency, frequency, hesitancy, and urinary incontinence. The patient stated that these symptoms have been present for the past 3 years, with gradual worsening over the past year. The patient's symptoms were not associated with abdominal pain, fever, hematuria, dysuria, or weight loss. On further questioning, it was revealed that the patient was otherwise healthy and not on any medications. There was no pertinent family history of malignancy or any inheritable diseases. Social history revealed that the patient is not sexually active and does not smoke or consume alcohol. Over the past four years, the patient suffered two urinary tract infections. In both incidents, the patient received oral antibiotics and did not develop any complications. However, the urinary symptoms persisted despite adequate clearance of the infection.
Past surgical history of the patient includes a laparoscopic ovarian cystectomy performed in March of 2020. Histology of the mass confirmed an endometrioma. The pelvic ultrasound performed at that time revealed a bladder tumor that necessitated further investigations.
Physical examination at the time of the urology consultation did not reveal any pertinent findings. The patient was alert, oriented, and vitally stable. There was no lymphadenopathy, suprapubic or costovertebral angle tenderness. The initial laboratory studies included a complete blood count, urinalysis, and kidney function tests - all of which reported normal findings.
The first pelvic ultrasound done by the gynecology team revealed a bladder tumor with mixed echogenicity. Following the ultrasound, an MRI was performed, and it confirmed the presence of an oval-shaped mass lesion arising from the base of the urinary bladder. The mass shows as low signal intensity on both T1 and T2 weighted images and enhances avidly following contrast medium administration . The findings were consistent with a bladder mass.
An ultrasound of the kidneys, ureters, and bladder was done by the urology team in 2020, and it revealed a prominent polypoidal lesion from the bladder mucosa with well-defined, encapsulated margins containing a small appendicular lobule on the surface. The polypoidal lesion measures 4 cm × 2.8 cm × 3.2 cm with a volume of 20 cc and shows minimal flow on Doppler assessment. Appearances were suggestive of a solid lesion with well-encapsulated margins .
The patient was concerned about the nature of this lesion and the possibility of malignancy. The results of the investigations were discussed with the patient, she was educated on the management options, and she gave an informed decision about undergoing cystoscopy and TURBT. Following that, the patient underwent cystoscopy where a large tumor was visualized at the bladder trigone. During the procedure, a tissue biopsy was taken and sent for microscopic examination. The pathological findings showed bladder tissue lined by normal urothelium with subepithelial tumor. The tumor was composed of epithelioid and bland spindle cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm. The cells displayed no nuclear pleomorphism, atypia, mitosis or necrosis . On immunohistochemistry, the tumor cells showed strong expression of SMA and Desmin (, ) but no expression of Cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), S100, SOX-10, CD68, ALK1, or CD117. CD117 highlights scattered mast cells between tumor cells. The appearance was suggestive of bladder leiomyoma.
Following confirmation of the diagnosis of bladder leiomyoma, the patient underwent an uneventful trans-urethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT). The procedure was done in July 2021 by a urology consultant. During the surgery, one large bladder tumor, measuring 5 cm, was resected. A three-way 20fr foley catheter was inserted. Surgical biopsy report confirmed bladder leiomyoma. The catheter was removed in postoperative day 1. The patient tolerated the procedure well, she remained hemodynamically stable, and was discharged without any complications.
The patient was seen for follow-up one month and two months after the surgery. An ultrasound revealed no recurrence of the tumor and the patient reported that she was relieved from her urinary symptoms. The patient remains asymptomatic to this date.