A 12-year-old young girl, 149 cm in height, weighing 55 kg known to have recurrent urinary tract infection (UTI) since childhood with no investigations done. The patient had a history of recurrent visits to the emergency department 3 months prior to admission. She complained of intermittent dysuria and lower abdominal pain.
She was treated as Urinary tract infection and was discharged home.
The patient had dysfunctional voiding. Her mother reported that she holds her urine for long periods of time, specifically in public areas. She usually double voids to empty her bladder. She presented to the emergency room with 90 days history of intermittent dysuria, lower abdomen and suprapubic cyclic pain for the past 2 months. She denied any trauma, constipation or back pain.
The patient had an unremarkable antenatal, postnatal history and past medical history. Initially the Patient was tachycardic (110 beats per minute). She was afebrile with a normal blood pressure, oxygen saturation, and respiratory rate. A full examination was showed distended abdomen up to the umbilicus with tenderness mainly in the suprapubic area. Patient's sexual characteristics were of Tanner stage 3.
Pelvic examination was then conducted by labial separation in a supine frog-leg position. A bluish bulging hymen obstructing the urethral meatus was seen that was tender to touch.
Laboratory investigations were done and were mostly unremarkable except white blood cell count (11.300/μL).
Renal function test and urine routine were also unremarkable. Urine culture showed no growth.
A decision was made to perform a bedside ultrasonography that showed bladder filled with anechoic fluid with a dilated vagina filled with low level echoes that could be blood products. A 14 French catheter was inserted and drained 750 ml clear urine which relieved her acute pelvic and abdominal pain.
She was then admitted to the urological ward, and an MRI was done and revealed a vagina markedly distended with fluid seen along the posterior vaginal wall.
The uterus was seen displaced superiorly showing its cavity mildly distended with minimal amount of fluid showing signs of hematocolpos . A multidisciplinary meeting was held with obstetrics and gynecology to discuss the patients' condition. Due to religious reasons no internal examination was conducted and a provisional diagnosis of imperforate hymen of hematocolpos was made.
After counseling the parents about the risks and benefits of hymenotomy, the parents signed a consent forum for surgical drainage.
An urgent hymenotomy was done on an urgent basis. Two consultants scrubbed in, a urologist as well as a gynecologist both with high level of training. A surgical incision to the hymen was made in the centre of the imperforate hymen which was in a cruciate manner. The hymen was thick and tough which made the incision difficult. Approximately 500 ml of thick tarry colored old menstrual blood with clots were drained with the help of suprapubic manual pressure application. Redundant flaps were later cut, and the edges of the margins were everted by suturing the inner vaginal mucosa to the exterior vestibular mucosa. Vicryl 2–0 braided absorbable sutures were used. The enlargement of the abdomen almost immediately subsided as the vagina emptied.
A medical-legal certificate was given to the family for the medical intervention done causing her loss of virginity.
No future surveillance will be needed for this diagnosis. Although she had a 1 week follow up post intervention to check on the wound and proper dressing.
A later follow up was also done with a uroflow and post residual volume to make sure proper voiding has been achieved. An ultrasound was also done to check for vaginal patency. She was also advised to come to the Emergency Room, if she was unable to void, faced intractable pain, hematuria, or fever. The patient had high satisfaction after the surgical intervention which relieved her from a long duration of pelvic pain.