The authors report a case of a 63-year-old woman, righthande non-smoker, homemaker leading a sedentary lifestyle The comorbidities present were dyslipidemia, blood hypertension, hypothyroidism, and obesity (body mass index=33). For 1 month, the patient presented severe, disabling pain of the left shoulder which occurred spontaneously, usually in the morning and after effort. The pain was localized regarding the calcification with irradiation in the lateral side of the arm. There was no history of trauma or symptoms suggestive of paraneoplasia syndrome. Active and passive shoulder range of motion was not restricted. However, the patient had painful passive terminal adduction and internal rotation. The palpation of the calcification zone was painful. There was no neurovascular deficiency
Radiological exploration revealed calcification of the humeral insertion of the pectoralis major. MRI and CT scans helped diagnose the calcific tendinopathy and revealed cortical erosion adjacent to the soft-tissue calcification ( and ).
The calcification measured 4.2 cm in its longest axis with two radiological aspects common to calcifications: Comet tail sign and flame appearance ( and ).
A complete blood analyses was performed to research an organic etiology of this calcific tendinopathy. There was no inflammatory syndrome, but it revealed hyperparathyroidism.
Non-surgical management was performed with a combination of physiotherapy and painkillers.
A follow-up CT scan was performed 2 months after the beginning of symptoms. Complete resorption of calcification was observed ( and ). Cortical erosion had disappeared, without sequelae ( and ).
On clinical examination, the patient was completely painless with complete active and passive shoulder range of motion. Forced adduction and internal rotation were painless. Palpation revealed no painful areas.
Hyperparathyroidism management was done in coordination with an endocrinologist.
At 1 year, there was no recurrence, shoulder mobility was complete and painless. Radiological control was without abnormality.