A 53-year-old female patient presented to the outpatient clinic of local hospital in June 2017 (day 0) for routine checkup of lumbar intervertebral disc herniation. She underwent a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan that revealed a round small mass in the retroperitoneal space. On day 3, she was referral to our department for further diagnosis and treatment of the retroperitoneal neoplasm. She did not have any complaint except for disc herniation-related low back pain. Her past history and family history were non-contributory. Physical examination was insignificant. Routine laboratory studies were normal. Specifically, serum tumor markers including carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were all within normal ranges. Afterward, she received abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans, which revealed a well circumscribed cystic lesion, measuring 3.3 × 2.7 × 3.5 cm3 and filling with non-enhancing fluid-density collections, in her retroperitoneal region . The lesion was located below the diaphragm and was adjacent to the left crura of diaphragm and abdominal aorta. After a multidisciplinary team discussion, a minimally invasive surgery was planned for her to determine the feature of such cystic lesion. On day 12, the patient underwent laparoscopic exploration and lesion excision. The cystic lesion, smoothly surfaced with mucinous content, was totally separated from the left crura of diaphragm, abdominal aorta, stomach, and left adrenal gland. The operation was successfully performed, which lasted for 90 min with estimated blood loss 10 mL. Oral feeding started 6 h after surgery, and the postoperative recovery was uneventful. On day 16, the patient was discharged uneventfully from the hospital. She did not develop any complications at 3-month follow-up. Her histopathological findings indicated that the cystic wall consisted of ciliated pseudostratified epithelium, smooth muscle, seromucous glands and fully developed cartilage . Thus, the patient had a confirmed diagnosis of retroperitoneal bronchogenic cyst. She continued her daily activities without any limitation and had no evidence of recurrence within two years of follow-up.