A 64-year-old female patient was diagnosis of chyluria for more than 10 years. Episodes of chyluria occurred intermittently; however, recently the symptoms lasted for several months, necessitating interventional treatment.
She underwent MRI lymphangiography which showed the abnormal lymphatic vessels in the left renal pelvis . Intranodal lymphangiography was done which showed the stagnation flow of lipiodol (Guerbet, France) in the TD and the presence of abnormal lymphatic vessels toward the left kidney .
The cysterna chyli was punctured by a 21-gauge needle (Chiba, Cook company, USA) under fluoroscopy. Subsequently, a microcatheter (Progreat 2.7F, Terumo, Japan) was inserted into the TD as described in the literature . When contrast was injected into the TD though microcatheter with very gentle pressure, there was no flow in the TD and the contrast material stopped at the lympho venous junction . Only when the contrast was injected with high pressure under subtraction, the flow at the lympho venous junction could be seen . The diagnose was made as there might be an elevation of pressure in the TD causing the reflux of chyle into the left renal pelvis. The patient was put an uncovered drug eluting ballooning stent (Resolute Onyx DES coronary stent, Medtronics, USA) at the terminal part of TD which was described in the literature previously . The interstitial lymphatic vessels embolization was attempted to embolize, but the technique was failed so, no embolization was done to occlude the renal- lymphatic fistula in that patient. However, the chyluria was disappeared after intervention.
Four months later, the patient represented because the symptoms of chyluria recurred. Intranodal lymphangiography was repeated to verify the flow in the thoracic duct stent and tried to embolise the renal-lymphatic fistula. On lymphangiography, slow lymphatic anterograde was seen as the previous intervention. The cisterna chyli was punctured and inserted the microcatheter successfully. When injecting the contrast material through the microcatheter, no flow in the stent at the gentle pressure . However, when we increased the injected pressure, the flow passing the stent was seen . Because the renal-lymphatic fistular could not be embolized at the previous intervention by direct puncture, we tried to embolize it retrograded access. Through the first microcatheter in the TD, we advanced the 0.014″-guide wire into the thoracic duct (trancend 300, Boston scientific, USA), then passed the stent into the subclavian vein and into the inferior vena cava. Through a snare which was placed at the inferior vena cava, the guide wire was caught out to the right femoral vein. From femoral vein, a second microcatheter (Tokai, Camelian, Japan) was advanced into thoracic duct through the 0.014″-guide wire. When the second microcatheter was at the thoracic duct retrogradely, contrast material was injected to see the abnormal lymphatic branch into the left renal pelvis. Then, the second microcatheter was selectively canulated the abnormal branch while the first microcatheter was placed at the lower part of TD. The mixture glue NBCA with lipiodol (ratio 1:4) was injected into the abnormal branch while the first microcatheter was injected the glucose 5% parallelly to prevent the reflux of glue into TD . After occlusion of renal-lymphatic fistula, the symptoms of chyluria disappeared, the patient was followed up for 12 months with no recurrent symptoms.