A 26-year-old woman, G1P0A0, was referred to the Medical Genetic Centre of Guangdong Women and Children Hospital for prenatal diagnosis at 24 weeks of gestation due to imbalanced development of twins. The patient’s medical history revealed no remarkable abnormalities. The patient got pregnant naturally and had no family history of twins or multiple births. Fetal ultrasound scans showed a monochorionic diamniotic pregnancy with imbalanced development of twins. Twin 1 presented with normal development of brain, abdomen, skeleton and cardiovascular system. Twin 2 had normal brain and abdomen, with underdeveloped/absent radius, ventricular septal defect, cleft lip and palate .
Ultrasound parameters for twin 1 : Biparietal diameter (BPD) 59 mm, Head circumference (HC) 223 mm, Abdominal circumference (AC) 198 mm, Femur length (FL) 45 mm, Heart rate (HR) 154/min.
Ultrasound parameters for Twin 2 : BPD 51 mm, HC192mm, AC1 41 mm, FL 35 mm, HR 141/min.
Data from ultrasound examination indicated the imbalanced development of the two fetuses might due to the Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS), but can’t exclude chromosomal abnormalities. After genetic counseling, the couple agreed to receive a diagnostic amniocentesis for the normal fetus (twin 1).
Amniotic cells were cultured in CHANG Medium (CHANG Amnio, Irvine Scientific) for 7–10 days for karyotyping and CMA analysis. Conventional G-banded karyotyping from peripheral blood lymphocytes and cord blood were performed according standard protocols. Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) analysis was performed using Agilent’s 8 × 60 K commercial arrays (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA) and the data was analyzed with AgilentGenomic Workbench Lite Edition 6.5.0.18 software (Agilent Technologies) as described in our previous report . QF-PCR for detecting common chromosome numerical anomalies was carried out using a modified version of previous report . FISH based on cultured amniotic cells was performed by using AneuVysion Multicolor DNA Probe Kit (Abbott Molecular Inc., USA).