A 62-year-old male, with a background of Type 2 diabetes, peripheral vascular disease, and previous recurrent venous thromboembolism presented with acute confusion of a few hours’ duration, following 5 days of worsening abdominal pain. His medication history included atorvastatin 40 mg, omeprazole 20 mg, and warfarin. Physical examination revealed jaundice, significant ascites, asterixis, and bilateral pitting oedema extending up to his thighs. Cardiovascular and respiratory examination were thought to be otherwise unremarkable, although the patient was not seen by a cardiologist at this point. The initial working diagnosis was acute liver failure complicated by hepatic encephalopathy.
Haematological and biochemical investigations were consistent with acute liver failure, with elevated liver enzymes ALT 1395 (7–55) IU/L and AST 596 (10–40) IU/L. A series of investigations excluded viral hepatitis and other causes of acute liver failure. His NT-proBNP was 231 ng/L (>400 ng/L likely heart failure) and his C-reactive protein 208.2 (0–5) mg/L. Computed tomography (CT) abdominal scanning was arranged to exclude portal vein thrombosis and this demonstrated a heterogenous appearance on portal venous phase images—a ‘nutmeg liver’—consistent with hepatic congestion . The initial echocardiogram [transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE)] was reported as ‘normal’ apart from a small pericardial effusion. During the initial work-up, the patient was commenced on pharmacological treatment for hepatic encephalopathy with intravenous antibiotics (piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5 g TDS), multi-vitamin replacement (vitamin B substances with ascorbic acid TDS), and lactulose (10 mL BD).
The patient was discharged early after showing some signs of clinical improvement. However, in view of ongoing peripheral oedema, he was referred to cardiology for outpatient review. The presence of an elevated pulsatile JVP alongside Kussmaul’s sign, and an unexplained sinus tachycardia led to re-admission for inpatient investigations. These were arranged to identify the cause of the heart failure syndrome, despite the apparently ‘normal’ TTE and NT-proBNP.
A focused TTE was repeated to specifically investigate this. This showed the normal biventricular size and ejection fraction, confirmed the presence of a pericardial effusion, and identified a dilated and non-compliant inferior vena cava. In addition, there was evidence of respirophasic ventricular septal shift (, ). Mitral inflow velocities demonstrated significant respiratory variation and mitral annular tissue Doppler patterns were consistent with annulus reversus, suggestive of constrictive physiology .
The patient was admitted to the cardiology ward and commenced on intravenous furosemide 40 mg BD, ibuprofen 400 mg TDS, and colchicine 500 µg BD. To further assess cardiac structure and function, a cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) was performed. This confirmed increased ventricular coupling during free breathing (ventricular interdependence), with left-sided septal motion at the onset of inspiration (, ). There was extensive late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) throughout the thickened pericardium, and no enhancement in the myocardium . T2 STIR imaging was performed but was of suboptimal quality.
Cardiac CT identified minimal pericardial calcification. To further assess pericardial disease activity which would determine the appropriate treatment strategy, an 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan was arranged. This demonstrated uptake in an irregularly thickened pericardium, which was consistent with an inflammatory pathology .
A full laboratory work-up including autoimmune and viral screen did not identify any underlying cause of the pericarditis. Underlying malignancy and cardiac tumours were also excluded by CT.
Following confirming the diagnosis of effusive-constrictive pericarditis with evidence of active pericardial inflammation on imaging, a discussion within the Heart multidisciplinary team concluded that a trial of medical therapy with steroids is justifiable to avoid high-risk pericardiectomy. A regime prednisolone 40 mg OD was introduced.
Anti-inflammatory therapies in conjunction with diuresis resulted in clinical and biochemical improvement. Continuation of colchicine 500 µg BD, furosemide 40 mg, and prednisolone 30 mg as an outpatient resulted in complete resolution of symptoms.
A repeat FDG-PET organized at 6 months post-admission demonstrated a significant reduction in pericardial thickness and metabolic activity . Follow-up CMR demonstrated near resolution of the ventricular interdependence during free breathing (, ) alongside a reduction in the late enhancement of the pericardium . His CRP was 8 mg/L. Based on the encouraging imaging findings, steroids were carefully weaned off over 6 weeks and eventually discontinued.
During the last follow-up visit, 9 months after his original presentation, the patient reported that he was asymptomatic and had returned to his normal daily activities. He will remain under long-term follow-up due to the risk of recurrence.