Our patient was a 74-year-old white middle eastern man, with known hypertension under treatment, who presented with complaints of back pain for the past 12 months which was progressive and localized at the lower back. The pain improved after receiving analgesia and was associated with episodes of urinary incontinence. The patient’s family history for cancers was unremarkable. He underwent investigations at a local hospital; the computed tomography (CT) scan showed a sacrococcygeal mass suggestive of chordoma. Therefore, the patient was referred to our center for further evaluation and management. He was seen in January 2020 in the outpatient orthopedic clinic at our hospital. The examination revealed localized tenderness at the coccygeal bone. Neurological tests (motor, sensory, and reflexes) were all normal. Blood test results were within normal limits. A lumbar CT indicated a large midline, destructive, osseous, sacrococcygeal mass with a large presacral mass with soft tissue components and linear calcification measuring 12.5 × 10.4 × 10.6 cm . MRI of the pelvis showed a large midline, well-defined, oval-shaped lesion replacing the sacrococcygeal portion of the spine, with extension to the presacral region . CT-guided Tru-Cut biopsy revealed features suggestive of dedifferentiated chordoma. The patient did not undergo colonoscopy, as he did not have rectal bleeding or changes in bowel habit, and the size of the mass was too large for colonoscopy to be performed or pass through. Moreover, neither MRI nor CT raised the suspicion of a rectal mass.
We decided to treat the tumor using a multidisciplinary approach that included a urology, colorectal, plastic, and orthopedic surgical team. First, the patient underwent cystoscopy and bilateral ureteral stenting. Afterwards, with the patient in a supine position, laparotomy was initiated, and the unilateral left pedicle rectus abdominis myocutaneous flap was harvested and saved to reconstruct the back defect after sacrectomy by the plastic surgery team. Subsequently, midline laparotomy incision was performed from the suprapubic site to 4 cm above the umbilicus. A 3M wound protector and Bookwalter wound retractors were applied. Dissection started laterally to medially until the sigmoid and superior rectal arteries from the inferior mesenteric artery were identified. Next, transection of the sigmoid parallel to the pedicle was performed using an NTLC stapler. Dissection of the rectum was then initiated from right to left until we reached below the sacral promontory to permit the sacrectomy procedure. Posterior rectal mobilization showed that we could not separate the rectum from the sacral mass, as it was very adherent and fixed. Therefore, to avoid any further disruption to the blood supply of the rectum, we proceeded with an end stoma. After that, the patient was moved to a prone position with the hips raised. A midline incision over the mass was made. An attempt made to dissect the tumor and free it from the surrounding structures and its attachment to the sacrum was successful. However, it was fixed to the sacrum and rectum. Therefore, sacrectomy was performed and the tumor with its attachment to the rectum was removed in one specimen. Next, L3, L4 and L5 pelvic fixation was done to provide further stabilization. The rectus abdominis flap was tunneled and delivered into the sacral defect. The flap had good color and blood supply. Therefore, it was fixed to the pelvic floor muscles using 2-0 Vicryl in a figure-of-eight fashion to approximate the defect. We then placed Surgimed mesh over the flap which was sutured and placed over the pelvic floor muscles using another 2-0 Vicryl in a horizontal mattress fashion. Lastly, minimal mobilization and release of the gluteus maximus muscle was performed with extra length for skin closure to avoid tension. Two Jackson-Pratt drains were emplaced. The patient tolerated the procedure and was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit.
Final histopathology of the resected specimen showed two different neoplasms: first, a sacral tumor consistent with dedifferentiated chordoma. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of cells with pale eosinophilic and clear vacuolated cytoplasm intermingled with high-grade sarcomatoid areas with spindle cell morphology . The immunohistochemistry revealed positive staining in the pale eosinophilic/clear cells with epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), cytokeratin AE1/AE3 and S100 protein (focal). The second tumor was in the rectum, and microscopic examination revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma invading the muscularis propria with no vascular or perineural invasion . The surgical resection margins were free of tumor, and 16 lymph nodes were negative for metastasis; final staging was T2N0M0.
During the postoperative period, the patient was kept on a Foley catheter and prophylactic enoxaparin 40 mg. However, abdominal drains were slightly turbid in color and the patient had mild leukocytosis of 11.0 × 109. Consequently, CT of the abdomen and pelvis were ordered to rule out intra-abdominal abscess, which showed a surgical site collection measuring 5.5 × 2.2 × 4.8 cm. The patient underwent ultrasound-guided drainage and the fluid was sent for culture. Microbiologically, the specimen revealed extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) Escherichia coli; hence, the patient was treated with the appropriate intravenous antibiotic for an entire course of 14 days. In addition, upper cuts of the abdominal CT showed incidental findings of a left posterior segmental artery filling defect representative of pulmonary embolism despite the patient’s stable and asymptomatic status. Therefore, the anticoagulation team advised switching to rivaroxaban 20 mg daily. The patient was subsequently discharged home in good clinical condition, with functional stoma, all drains removed, healthy surgical wound, and on permanent Foley catheter, as his urinary incontinence did not improve. On follow-up 4 months after surgery, he remained stable, and his lab tests and investigations were unremarkable.