A 39-year-old male construction worker was admitted to the emergency department of West China Hospital of Sichuan University 3 hours after falling from a second floor and landing ventrally on a clump of iron rods. Four metallic bars (1.5 cm in diameter) jabbed into his body at right anterior chest wall, left supraclavicular region, right temporoparietal region, and left temporal site, respectively. In addition to the impalement injuries, the patient also suffered from a left-hand dyskinesia, which was proved to be a distal radius comminuted fracture by X-rays. Bystanders cut the iron rods from the ground as gently as possible to prevent movement of the metallic bars within his body as instructed by a local health worker on scene.
On admission to the emergency department, the patient was fully conscious, oriented, and stable hemodynamically. His pulse rate was 157 bpm, regular, full volume with a blood pressure (BP) of 150/95 mm Hg. Routine blood test showed increased white blood cell count and no excessive loss of blood. Clinical examination found 2 metallic bars with entry sites at bilateral anterior upper chest wall and no exit site on backside. One iron rod penetrated the patient's right temporoparietal scalp through and through. Another iron rod was found traversing from the patient's left cheek to the region above the tragus with nearly 15 cm of the metallic bar under skin . No active bleeding was found at anyone of the entry or exit sites.
A chest computed tomography (CT) showed parenchymal lesions in both bilateral apical segments of lung and the presence of 2 foreign bodies with high density, 1.5 cm in diameter, extending in a ventridorsal direction from the bilateral anterior upper chest wall deepest to the left-side posterior paravertebral muscle. Fracture of several ribs and transverse process of vertebrae was also detected in chest CT. Thanks to the protection of the skull, no intracranial injury was found except for penetrating wounds of the scalp.
In order to inspect suspicious vascular lesions, CT angiography (computed tomography angiography [CTA]) was also performed, which found a blurring boundary between the left-side subclavian vessels and the foreign body.
The patient was immediately transferred to the emergency operating room for removal of the impaled objects and injury control. Bilateral closed chest tube drainage was promptly performed as soon as the patient was inside. In cases of severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was used as a temporary substitute for the injured lung to increase lung rest time, giving it time to recover from trauma.[
Head injury was first managed. Two iron rods were removed by a neurosurgeon and scalp lacerations were sutured after debridement. An orthopedist handled the left upper limb fracture by manipulative reduction maneuver and plaster external fixation.
During the surgical removal of the foreign body, plugging effect of the foreign body on the injured blood vessels wall might be relieved; anticipation of sudden gushing out of blood from an injured major vessel was essential.[ Therefore, as instructed by the CTA done before the operation, 2 vascular surgeons were summoned to explore the adjacent relationship between the foreign body and the left-side subclavian vessels.
Video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) was performed to take a thorough exploration of the thoracic cavities and to remove the foreign bodies under direct vision. Surprisingly, except for some avulsion injuries of the arteriovenous adventitia, our patient did not subject to any fatal injury to the major vessels, as the iron rod had just passed through the narrow rift between the left side subclavian artery and vein. Bilateral apical segments of lung were transfixed by the iron bars and the pleural cavity was found to be filled with 200 mL of blood and clots. No active bleeding point was found. Two iron bars were removed under direct vision by using VATS and a bilateral upper lobectomy was also performed by 3 thoracic surgeons . A conversion to thoracotomy was taken due to hemostasis of an intercostal artery. Inflated lung promotes effect of compression on the bleeding vessels and reduces dead space, which is a good protection against empyema.[ After extensive rinsing of the bilateral thoracic cavities, lung was fully insufflated to prevent atelectasis. Bilateral pleural drainage was a must, considering residual clotted blood as the major risk factor for the development of fibrothorax and empyema.
Total operative time was 12 hours. Surgeons involved in the operation include 3 senior thoracic surgeons, a neurosurgeon, 2 vascular surgeons, an orthopedist, and 5 surgery residents. Two thousand milliliter of blood was lost during the operation time associated with transfusion of 4 packed red blood cells and 600 mL fresh frozen plasma.
The patient was treated by broad-spectrum antibiotics and weaned from mechanical ventilation after 2 days stay in intensive care unit (ICU). He was then discharged from the ICU and admitted to an ordinary ward to receive a left upper limb fracture repair surgery, after which he had an uneventful recovery and was discharged from the hospital with a good general condition.