Our patient was a 74-year-old Chinese man who had undergone left radical nephrectomy 10 years earlier. Postoperative pathological examination revealed clear cell carcinoma. One year later, he returned for laparoscopic cystectomy due to cholelithiasis, and we found a mass in the subcutaneous tissue protruding by about the size of a thumb into the abdomen. We did not resect the protruding mass, and we decided to see our patient on an annual follow-up basis. Nine years later, he came back to see us because he noticed the protruding mass in the subcutaneous tissue had grown larger within the last year. His physical examination revealed two masses, and enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a 5 × 6-cm mass in the left side of the anterior abdominal wall and a 5 × 6-cm mass in the back of the right waist . Enhanced CT also revealed a hypervascular lesion in the pancreas . The patient’s tumor marker carcinoembryonic agent concentration was 6.0 ng/ml. Malignant tumors were suspected, and resection of the tumors was performed.
In surgery with the patient under general anesthesia, we first placed the patient in prone position to resect the tumor in the back of the right waist. Then, he was placed in supine position to resect the tumor in the left side of the anterior abdominal wall. Both tumors in the front and back were around 5 × 6 cm in size, and clear cell carcinoma was suspected. Later, we performed distal pancreatectomy with spleen preservation because enhanced CT showed a hypervascular lesion of approximately 3 × 3 cm in the pancreas. The size of the resected tumor in the left side of the anterior abdominal wall was 4 × 2.8 cm; the one in the right waist was 4 × 2.5 cm, and the ones from the pancreas were 1.8 × 1.3 cm and 1.9 × 1.5 cm. All resected tumors were of the clear cell type. Histopathological examination revealed they were paired box gene 8-positive (PAX8+), cluster of differentiation 10-positive (CD10+), RCC-positive, creatine kinase-positive (CK+), vimentin-positive, hepatocyte-negative, and thyroid transcription factor 1-negative (TTF-1−) .
After surgery, our patient was seen in regular follow-up. One year later, our patient came back for a routine checkup, and CT showed recurrence in the pancreatic head. On the basis of our patient’s condition, our group offered him a palliative treatment plan, which is tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy. He refused any further treatment. The timeline of our patient’s case is listed in Table .