A 24-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with a 1-year history of abdominal bulging in his left upper quadrant and a progressive enlargement over the previous several weeks. The patient reported the bulging as painless and denied other symptoms like nausea, vomiting, or changes in bowel habits, with the exception of occasional flank pain. He had no personal or family history of malignancy. The physical examination showed a pulse of 88 beats per minute, body temperature of 37.2°C, respiration of 20 breaths per minute, and a blood pressure of 110/90 mmHg.
Upon palpation, a substantial mass was detected below the patient’s left lower ribs. His laboratory tests were in the normal range except for a slight leukocytosis. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed an irregularly shaped echo, measuring 121×66 mm, located posterior to the left kidney. Color Doppler imaging displayed vascularity associated with the mass. A computed tomography (CT) scan identified a lytic expansile lesion in the vicinity of the left lower ribs, characterized by multiple internal high-density areas .
These findings raised suspicion of bone-derived malignancies such as chondrosarcoma or intra-abdominal mesenchymal sarcoma, considering the mass effect on the left kidney and its anteromedial displacement. The patient subsequently underwent an ultrasound-guided core needle biopsy, which was consistent with a histopathologic diagnosis of Schwannoma tumor.
Eventually, the decision to complete surgical resection was made. Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a lateral position. An ~20 cm long incision was carefully made to access and decompress retroperitoneal structures and address the tumor’s attachment to the 12th rib with a thorough separation of the intercostal muscles, layer by layer.
In our case, the operation’s main goal was to expose the tumor clearly and to resect it entirely without injuring the left kidney. However, there were challenges in separating the tumor from the bottom of the posterior thoracic wall and the 12th rib. Due to the adhesion, the distal part of the 12th rib was also resected along with the tumor. Moreover, the diaphragm was partially deflected and required repairing by suturing. Accordingly, the encapsulated mass, measuring 15×15×10 cm in diameter, was excised entirely. To pre-empt potential postoperative complications like pneumothorax and hemothorax, a chest tube was inserted, and subsequently, the chest was closed. After the surgery, the patient experienced an uneventful recovery.
On macroscopic examination, the mass was oval in shape and well‑circumscribed, with an attached bone (12th rib) . The tumor’s cut surface exhibited a multinodular/plexiform growth pattern with a firm consistency and creamy-heterogenous appearance.
The postoperative histopathological examination revealed a biphasic benign neural neoplasm with distinct patterns. It consisted of Antoni A regions, characterized by compact spindle cells exhibiting twisted nuclei and arranged in interlacing fascicles with nuclear palisading, known as Verocay bodies. Additionally, there were Antoni B areas, which were less cellular and featured inflammatory cells, delicate collagen bundles, patches of xanthomatous changes, and large irregularly spaced vessels, some exhibiting hyalinization and thrombosis. Although there were foci of nuclear atypia, no apparent mitosis or tumoral necrosis was observed. Immunohistochemistry confirmed the histologic diagnosis, revealing diffuse strong S-100 positivity (both nuclear and cytoplasmic staining) in the tumor cells .
This comprehensive assessment led to the diagnosis of a giant ancient plexiform schwannoma. Notably, after a 2-year follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic, and no signs of recurrence were observed.