A 13-year-old boy was referred to our plastic surgery clinic with complaints of a slow-growing enlarged pruritic mass on his penis for over a year. He had had traditional male circumcision one year prior to his presentation. We asked the patient’s father to describe the process of traditional circumcision so that we could better understand the likely cause of the presentation. The procedure was done at a traditional initiation ceremony for boys which takes place around the same time every year. The process involved use of a razor blade to cut off the foreskin, without use of an anaesthetic. Haemostasis was achieved using pressure by wrapping material such as leaves and bamboo twigs around the wound. Finally a herbal paste was applied to the wound. He further went on to tell us that the recovery process had been slightly delayed compared to other boys in the same cohort. The patient’s past medical history was unremarkable. There was no family history of keloids according to the father. Examination showed a large irregularly shaped keloid along the circumference of the coronal sulcus, it measured approximately 6 cm broad and 5 cm thick in its widest dimensions (see , ) The patient also had other areas of keloids over his chest, both shoulders and back sustained from ritual ‘tattooing’ around the same period of the circumcision.
Consent for surgery and photography was sought from the patient’s father as the patient was considered a minor. The patient was scheduled for elective surgery under general anaesthesia. Surgery was performed by a consultant Plastic surgeon. The surgical procedure involved complete, circumferential excision of the keloid tissue to the level of dartos fascia. The circumcision-like wound was minimally undermined to allow a tension-free closure. Haemostasis was achieved with electrocautery. Single layer closure was done with nylon 5.0 sutures. Corticosteroid (1 ml of triamcinolone acetonide 40 mg/ml) was injected into the wound edges after skin closure. Standard dressings were used which included sterile Vaseline gauze and dry gauze. Corticosteroid was also injected into the keloids in other sites while patient was under anaesthesia. The peri-operative period was uneventful. The patient was sent home for review on the third post-operative day. With the view of his propensity for keloid formation he was given comprehensive advice to avoid all forms of cutaneous trauma.
Sutures were removed on the 14th post-operative day and a second dose of corticosteroid was injected. Wound healing was uncomplicated. The patient then returned for repeat injection every 6 weeks for a period of 6 months (see ). There was no recurrence after 1 year although the ventral aspect had a very mild degree of hypertrophic scarring. The keloids on his shoulders, chest and back also showed remarkable flattening of the scars. All injected area had minor degrees of hypo-pigmentation within the scar extending to a small surrounding circumference of normal skin. This did not bother the patient and he was assured that it was likely to improve after cessation of injections.
The patient was reviewed 3 years later with complaints of pruritus along the ventral surface of the penis (see ). There was no significant change in the size of the scar and the patient was treated with another course of 6 weekly corticosteroid injections successfully. He was discharged from clinic and for further follow up on request. He was grateful for the assistance.