A 48-year-old woman was admitted to hospital with severe central chest pain with associated dyspnoea and diaphoresis. She reported an argument with her brother the previous day. She did not have any traditional cardiovascular risk factors; however, there was a strong family history of SCD that affected three female members in their 40s and 50s. She also had a prior history of anxiety and panic attacks. Her current medications included an intrauterine device releasing Levonorgestrel.
Her physical examination was unremarkable and her electrocardiogram (ECG) normal. Cardiac troponins were elevated [high-sensitivity troponin I 780 ng/L (normal range <16 ng/L)]. Her echocardiogram showed good ejection fraction and no wall motion abnormalities. A diagnosis of non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction was made, and a coronary angiogram (CAG) was performed. The CAG showed a moderate to severe stenosis of the proximal circumflex coronary artery (LCx), with good blood flow into the distal vessel . The remaining coronary segments, as well as other epicardial arteries, appeared normal but very tortuous; the appearance was suggestive of Type 2A SCAD. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) confirmed an intramural haematoma (IMH) without communication between true and false lumen . No intimal tear was identified. Despite significant stenosis in the proximal segment of a relatively large artery, a decision was made not to proceed with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). The patient was commenced on dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin and clopidogrel) for 3 months; this was followed by a long-term aspirin therapy, as well as metoprolol and cilazapril. She remained clinically stable and was subsequently discharged from hospital.
Eleven weeks following the index event a repeat CAG was performed, demonstrating completely normal coronaries . There was no evidence of remaining lumen reduction in proximal LCx.
Given the patient’s family history of SCD, further testing was arranged. A 12 lead ECG was normal with no evidence of QT prolongation, ventricular pre-excitation, or arrhythmia. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed and did not show any features of an inheritable cardiomyopathy or ischaemic scar. Genetic counselling and subsequent gene testing were performed for known variants associated with aortopathy and SCD and were unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging of the renal arteries showed a focal area of irregularity of the right renal artery suggestive of fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) affecting the right renal artery .