A 79-year-old male presented to a tertiary orthopaedic hospital in the United Kingdom with worsening pain and difficulty weight bearing localised to his previously asymptomatic total hip replacement. He had undergone an uncomplicated metal on polyethylene total hip replacement in 2008. Eighteen months prior to presentation to our unit he had developed a fluctuant swelling over the right hip. The swelling intermittently discharged serous fluid via a sinus which resolved spontaneously 2 months prior to presentation, after which he reported persistent pain in the joint and significant weight loss but no fevers or other systemic symptoms.
His past medical history included osteoarthritis of the spine, ischaemic heart disease, two myocardial infarctions, benign prostatic hyperplasia, pulmonary embolism following a trans-urethral resection of the prostate and transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. For the latter he received six intravesical BCG vaccine instillations (Tice strain, Alliance Pharmaceuticals) over a 2 month period. Within a month of receiving the final BCG instillation the swelling over his right hip developed.
In view of the intermittently discharging sinus, the clinical diagnosis at initial orthopaedic assessment was PJI. Computed tomography of the pelvis showed a large collection around the right hip extending into the adductor compartment. The urinary tract appeared normal and there was no evidence that the collection was associated with any part of it. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the hip demonstrated a large, lobulated soft tissue mass arising in relation to the hip joint and prosthesis, which was felt to be consistent with a diagnosis of metallosis and pseudotumour due to aseptic lymphocyte-dominated vasculitis-associated lesions .
The joint was aspirated and blood-stained fluid was obtained which was negative on Gram staining and standard microbiological testing (culture of fluid from a normally sterile site including blood, chocolate, fastidious anaerobic and Sabouraud agar; continuous monitoring blood culture system and fastidious anaerobic enrichment broth) . One month later the patient underwent explantation of the joint, with insertion of a vancomycin and meropenem impregnated articulating cement spacer. Intraoperatively, extensive damage to the ilium, ischium and pubis was noted, together with multiple turbid fluid collections in the adductor compartment and around the medial aspect of the hip. Synovial fluid alpha-defensin was negative (Synovasure™; an assay for neutrophil antimicrobial peptides (NAMP) used to support the diagnosis of PJI) . Multiple intraoperative bone and tissue samples underwent histological examination and microbiological culture, and post-operatively the patient was treated empirically with meropenem and vancomycin. Antimicrobial therapy was subsequently discontinued when standard microbiological cultures were negative. While histology was not consistent with active infection, samples did show a fibrinous exudate replacing the synovial lining with abundant macrophages laden with particulate debris . No granulomas were identified and no acid and alcohol fast bacilli were seen on Ziehl Neelsen staining. Following discussion at the regional bone infection multidisciplinary team meeting, residual intra-operative samples underwent broad-range bacterial 16S ribosomal deoxyribonucleic acid (rDNA) PCR, which was negative, and mycobacterial culture.
Five weeks post-operatively, tissue samples grew acid alcohol fast bacilli in liquid culture with a time to positivity of 28–31 days (BD BACTEC™ MGIT™ Automated Mycobacterial Detection System, Becton Dickson, NJ, USA). Within 5 days of the positive mycobacterial culture, the bacilli were identified by whole-genome sequencing (WGS) as Mycobacterium bovis (BCG lineage), and a genotypic drug susceptibility profile was determined.
Although we had identified BCG from intra-operative samples which was presumed to be a complication of previous intravesical therapy, we went on to further investigate the origin of the BCG by comparing our patient’s isolate with clinical BCG isolates from the Midlands and North of England (ca 15 M population) in the 2 years from January 2017 (a period during which sequencing of M. tuberculosis complex isolates was operational). A maximal likelihood phylogeny reconstructed using iqTree 1.6.1 with a GTR model, outgroup rooted using a lineage 1 isolate [, ]. We identified 28 isolates from 27 patients, which grouped into three, presumably corresponding to the BCG preparations marketed by different suppliers for vaccination or intravesical instillation . The isolate received by our patient, and eight other older men who presumably also received intravesical BCG therapy, differs from the BCG strains isolated from children in the same time period .
A six-month treatment regime with rifampicin, isoniazid, ethambutol and moxifloxacin was commenced (pyrazinamide was excluded due to the intrinsic resistance of M. bovis). The second stage revision was delayed until completion of 12 weeks of this therapy, approximately 6 months after the first stage revision (explantation), with an uncemented modular titanium femoral stem and modular titanium revision shell with metal on polyethylene articulation. The patient is presently walking without aid and without pain or clinical recurrence of PJI.