A 70-year-old male who presented with numbness in both toes for more than 7 months before admission. The numbness gradually progressed upward to the mid-calf after 1 month and was accompanied by difficulty passing urine. Three months later, the patient developed weakness in both lower limbs, which manifested as dragging while walking. After another month, he was unable to walk or squat, and the numbness progressed to his hands, along with urinary retention. Abnormal signals in the spinal cord at the cervical 2–thoracic 7 levels were observed on T1-weighted images. He was diagnosed with “subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord” by the local hospital and was administered intramuscular vitamins B1 and B12 for approximately 2 weeks. The patient lost 30 kg of body weight within 7 months. He had a previous history of chronic atrophic gastritis with erosion and hypertension, but no family history. Neurological examination revealed decreased near memory and calculation power, grade 2 muscle strength in both lower limbs, positive bilateral Babinski sign, decreased pinprick sensation below the T4 level, and normal deep sensation. Routine blood work suggested elevated neutrophil percentage (78.5%; normal range 42.9%–74.3%), elevated urine routine leukocytes (219/µL normal range 0–5/µL), elevated coagulation D dimer (4.3 mg/L; normal range 0–0.55 mg/L), elevated tumor marker CA72-4 (25.7 U/mL; normal range 0–10 U/mL), positive internal factor antibodies, normal liver and kidney function, syphilis, hepatitis B, HIV-related tests, thyroid function, antinuclear antibody profile, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies. Lumbar puncture pressure 80 mmH2O, elevated CSF total leukocyte count (26 mm3; normal range 0–10 mm3), 90% monocytes, elevated CSF protein (77 mg/dL; normal range 8–43 mg/dL), decreased chloride (114.4 mmol/L; normal range 115–130 mmol/L), normal glucose 3.27 mmol/L (concurrent venous glucose 5.4 mmol/L), elevated immunoglobulin A (0.96 mg/dL; normal range 0–0.2 mg/dL), elevated immunoglobulin M (0.36 mg/dL; normal range 0–0.2 mg/dL), elevated immunoglobulin G (IgG) (10.6 mg/dL, normal range mg/dL), positive cerebrospinal fluid GFAP-IgG at a titer of 1:100 , positive blood GFAP-IgG at a titer of 1:32, weakly positive serum and cerebrospinal fluid IgG oligoclonal bands, positive activated lymphocytes and plasma cells in cytology, no tumor cells were found, antibodies to aquaporin 4 (AQP4), myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) No abnormalities were found in AQP4 antibody, MOG antibody, paraneoplastic syndrome-related antibody, autoimmune encephalitis-related antibody, tuberculosis antibody, adenosine deaminase, lymphocyte culture + interferon (TB-spot). Enhanced T1-weighted images of the spinal cord suggested punctate and patchy enhancement within the spinal cord at the level of the spinal cord, cervical 2–thoracic 7 . Abdominopelvic ultrasonography suggested bilateral renal cysts and prostatic hypertrophy with echogenic heterogeneity. Ultrasonography of the deep veins in the lower limbs was suggestive. Electrocardiography revealed sinus tachycardia with T-wave changes. PET-CT suggested: diffuse increased metabolic activity in the cerebral bridge, medulla oblongata, cervical medulla, and upper thoracic medulla; possible inflammatory changes; and hypermetabolic lymph nodes in the mediastinum and bilateral hilar lungs; reactive hyperplasia; Multiple small cysts in the liver, possible left adrenal adenoma, enlarged prostate, slightly hypermetabolic foci in the lower lateral part, and possible inflammation. On admission, the patient was hypothermic, with a temperature of 37.3°C to 37.7°C. After the proposed diagnosis of GFAP-A, we administered intravenous methylprednisolone 250 mg/d for 3 days and 160 mg/d for 3 days. The patient developed hyperthermia at a temperature of 38.5°C, and the hormone was discontinued as the urinary tract infection worsened on laboratory tests and was combined with a bloodstream infection. Intravenous gamma globulin (IVIG) 0.4 g/kg was then applied for 5 days along with moxifloxacin for anti-infection. After treatment, the patient infection was controlled and limb weakness improved. After 20 days of treatment, the T1-weighted image was repeated to show a reduction in the extent of the lesion , the CSF GFAP-IgG 1:100 was repeated, and the serum GFAP-IgG was negative. One month later, the patient was fever-free and the muscle strength of both lower limbs was grade 4. One month after discharge, the patient limb weakness worsened, and was treated with Chinese herbal medicine at a local hospital. Two weeks later, the patient symptoms improved.
During the 1-year follow-up period, the patient was able to stand with external force, but still left with numbness and pain in their lower limbs. The pain affected sleep and daily life, and he took long-term oral painkillers to control it. Unfortunately, the patient has not been able to undergo a face-to-face consultation, only his family members have described his symptoms over the phone.