A 70-year-old man with end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) maintained on PD, presented in April 2021 for a scheduled myocardial scan, having ischemic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (35%). Upon arrival, he complained for anorexia, nausea, and vomit tendency and unremitting hiccups.
Gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms started 5 d ago and persistent hiccups 2 d ago, preventing him from eating and considerable sleeping. He denied any abdominal pain, stool change, cloudy PD fluids, fever, chest discomfort, symptoms suggestive of gastroesophageal reflux, or change of his custom PD regimen. His medications included metoprolol, monosorbide, ramipril, simvastatin/ezetimibe, furosemide, acetylsalicylic acid, pantoprazole, folic acid, and darbepoetin injections. He denied any new drug initiation or new dietary habits.
The patient’s past medical history was significant for cardiorenal syndrome following myocardial infarction in 2000, with coronary angioplasty and stent insertion, arterial hypertension, dyslipidemia, and a recent diagnosis (one month) of seronegative rheumatoid arthritis. Notably, 15 d prior to presentation, he had been admitted due to anemia (hemoglobin fall to 7.7 g/dL), nausea, and appetite loss, all attributed to recent initiation of leflunomide 10 mg daily for rheumatoid arthritis. At that time, C reactive protein was 141mg/L (reference < 6 mg/L), white blood cell count 6280/μL, serum urea 89 mg/dL, creatinine 6.5 mg/dL, and ferritin 642 ng/mL.
He was managed with red blood cells infusions and discontinuation of leflunomide. He was discharged in 2 d with Hb 9.4 g/dL, stable high sensitive troponin 209 pg/mL (reference < 14 pg/mL, while the patient’s high sensitive troponin routine assessment values were between 255-430 pg/mL), free of gastrointestinal symptoms, with good appetite and negative nasopharyngeal reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
ESKD due to cardiorenal syndrome; PD initiated 3 years ago; carpal tunnel syndrome diagnosed 1 year ago; former truck driver; and no special family history.
Physical examination revealed a weight loss of nearly 2 kg (74 kg), temperature of 36.5 °C, oxygen saturation 98% on room air, and low blood pressure (117/73 mmHg, heart rate 90 beats per minute in sitting position). No signs of peripheral edema nor pulmonary congestion were noted. Abdominal examination was negative, as was heart and lung auscultation. The patient appeared ill with persistent hiccups, weakness, anorexia, and vomit tendency, in contrast with his relatively good clinical condition on discharge 13 d ago.
Peritoneal dialysis fluid analysis revealed a normal cytology and biochemistry and negative Gram staining. Serum laboratory examination revealed C reactive protein of 36.8 mg/L, hemoglobulin of 9.8 g/dL, white blood cell count 4530/μL (neutrophils 58%, lymphocytes 28%), stable serum urea and creatinine, ferritin 855 ng/L, but troponin elevation to 1650 pg/mL.
Electrocardiography showed a sinus rhythm with left bundle branch block, not different compared to previous tracings while echocardiography revealed worsening of ejection fraction to 25%. Routine nasopharyngeal RT-PCR arranged upon admission revealed a positive result and he was transferred to the COVID clinic.
Due to severe co-morbidities and a positive RT-PCR test for SARS-CoV-2, chest computed tomography was performed, showing signs of mild COVID-19 pneumonia, i.e., less than 10% degree of lung infiltration in the right upper lobe, as small areas of ground glass opacities and small areas of atelectasis .