A 72-year-old multiparous female presented to the Emergency Department at Nepal Medical College and Teaching Hospital, with a history of on and off groin swelling since the past 2 months, which had become irreducible in the last 10 days prior to presentation. She had no history of nausea, vomiting, fever, colicky abdominal pain, or abdominal distention. However, 3 days prior to her visit, she noticed that the skin around the swelling had become red and had started to ooze purulent material. The next day, there was discharge of fecal matter from the lump.
At presentation, her vitals were stable and there was no evidence of peritonitis on physical examination. She did not have any features of obstruction, however, there was an enterocutaneous fistula in the right groin . There were no swellings in the left groin, or in the umbilicus. The fistula was of low output type and was noted to be discharging fecal material. The patient also did not have evidence of sepsis or require inotropic support during the duration of treatment.
The patient was admitted, resuscitated, and a contrast enhanced computed tomography scan was done, which showed findings consistent with enterocutaneous fistula coming out through the femoral ring . The patient then underwent exploration. This was done under epidural anesthesia as the patient had crepitations over bilateral lung fields. A lower midline incision was given to help reduce the contents of the hernia, and the enterocutaneous fistula was excised. Although most femoral hernias are Richter’s type, our patient had a bowel loop that had incarcerated, but only the apical portion of the loop had become gangrenous and ultimately perforated as an enterocutaneous fistula. The hernial orifice admitted approximately 2 fingers (~ 2.5 cm), but with difficulty. The herniated bowel loop was approximately 20 cm from the terminal ileum, so a resection and anastomosis of approximately 10 cm of the bowel was done, with 5 cm on each size of the perforation, and a drain placed. A primary repair of the femoral ring was performed with polypropylene sutures from both the groin incision and intraperitoneally (as mesh was contraindicated in this patient), and the skin was kept open . The post-operative period was uneventful, and the patient was then discharged on post-op day 5, with the skin incision closed with polyamide sutures, and the drain removed on the day of discharge. Currently the patient is doing well, and the wounds have healed without surgical site infection, or any complications requiring readmission.