A 33-years-old woman with Marfan syndrome had undergone a modified Bentall operation at the age of 20 years. The patient recently experienced progressive chest pain on exertion. Coronary angiography showed a critical stenosis in the left main trunk, which was anastomosed using a 10 mm diameter artificial vascular graft . The right coronary artery, which had been directly anastomosed with the aortic root, was intact. The patient was diagnosed with unstable angina. Considering her young age and unusual stenotic lesion, CABG was preferred over percutaneous coronary intervention.
The patient underwent emergency off-pump CABG with the left internal thoracic artery (ITA) to the left anterior descending artery (LAD) through a left anterior mini-thoracotomy because of the risk of repeat median sternotomy and the possibility of future aortic surgery in the setting of Marfan syndrome. On the second postoperative day, the patient was extubated. The international normalised ratio (INR) of prothrombin time was 1.42. Then, intravenous heparin and oral aspirin were started. Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was controlled more than 1.5 times the normal value, which was 45 s, until INR exceeded more than 2.0. However, the patient complained of chest discomfort and dyspnoea. Catheter angiography was performed and showed that the ITA graft was patent with a normal flow to the entire LAD (Additional file : Video 1).
On the 7th day, platelet count was 180,000; INR was 1.71; and APTT was 48 s with the administration of heparin, warfarin and aspirin. However, contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed that the interposing artificial graft to the left coronary artery was occluded by thrombosis . On the same day, the patient had severe dyspnoea and hypotension during rehabilitation. Emergency catheter angiography showed that the ITA was patent; however, blood flow from the in situ ITA was delayed, and reversal flow from the apex to the proximal LAD and left circumflex coronary artery was found (Additional file : Video 2). Intra-aortic balloon pumping and cardiopulmonary circulatory support were immediately started, and an additional saphenous vein bypass graft was created between the left subclavian artery to the left circumflex artery through a left anterior thoracotomy.
On the 11th postoperative day, the patient was transferred to our hospital, and a left ventricular assist device was implanted. The patient was considered a candidate for heart transplantation. However, she died of intracranial haemorrhage 4 months after initial ITA grafting.
Autopsy revealed a broad subendocardial myocardial infarction. The cause of the severe ostial stenosis of the left coronary artery was intimal hyperplasia, which was associated with an adventitia defect .