A 34-year-old Caucasian man presented to the emergency department with a 15-day history of left neck edema, local pain, and fever. He was in good general condition, awake, lucid, oriented but discretely dyspneic. He had trismus (70%); a painful, warm, red, hard left neck bulging of 10 cm in length without signs of fluctuation; fever (temperature 38.8 °C); ventilator-dependent pain in the right hemithorax; respiratory rate of 23 breaths/min; pulse rate of 100 beats/min, and abdominal discomfort in the right hypochondrium. His blood pressure was within normal range at 110/70 mmHg. He had no alterations in cardiac auscultation and a reduced vesicular murmur at the right hemithorax. His abdomen was discretely distended, and he had considerable pain in the right hypochondrium. His Murphy’s sign was negative, he had no sign of peritonitis. He did not present with any neurological symptoms.
The patient and his wife and children lived in a small house with a monthly income of approximately 410 dollars. There was no record of a permanent job, but he formerly worked in construction as a bricklayer. He had no significant past medical history, but he reported daily smoking (20 cigarettes/day) for 20 years and alcohol consumption of 500 ml of distillate drinks on a daily basis for 10 years. He denied illicit drug consumption.
Seventeen days prior to presentation, he had undergone odontogenic surgical treatment in a dental clinic. He received oral amoxicillin 500 mg/8 h two days prior to the dental procedure, and after that, he received it for five more days with dipyrone (1 g/6 h) and nimesulide (100 mg/12 h). After the dental procedure, seven days before his admission to our unit, he went to another emergency room (ER) with the same symptoms, and there he received empirical intravenous antibiotic therapy (ciprofloxacin 400 mg/12 h) for seven days. Realizing that he was not improving, he left the first ER and presented to our hospital.
Upon his admission to our hospital, we started to manage the sepsis with an intravenous isotonic saline solution and empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics (1000 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride solution + ceftriaxone 1 g/12 h + clindamycin 600 mg/6 h). We planned antibiotic administration for 21 days, and it was given as intravenous dipyrone (1 g/6 h) for fever and tramadol (100 mg/8 h) for pain. Laboratory examinations did not show meaningful changes . The patient underwent serological screening to rule out possible causes of immunodeficiency , and blood cultures were collected. He underwent cervicothoracoabdominal computed tomography (CT) . CT of the neck demonstrated soft-tissue infiltration and edema of the muscular tissue; left retromandibular, submandibular, parapharyngeal, and vascular space collections; and another left upper encapsulated fluid mediastinal collection. CT of the thorax and abdomen demonstrated bilateral pleural effusion, right subphrenic collection, and a small amount of liquid between intestinal loops.
Initially, based on these data, it was concluded that the patient had deep neck space infection (with involvement of the cervical fascia) from a dental focus, descending necrotizing mediastinitis, and subphrenic abscess; therefore, the patient underwent cervical, thoracic, and abdominal aggressive operative drainage. After bronchoscopic intubation without muscle blockers, the surgery was started by left cervicotomy, evidencing an abscess cavity in the submandibular and retromandibular spaces in addition to a small amount of thick liquid in left vascular and retropharyngeal spaces and upper mediastinum. The procedure consisted of extensive debridement and drainage of the cervical and mediastinal collection with tracheostomy to secure the airway . Drainage tubes were left in place, and samples were taken for culture and an antibiogram. Afterward, a right posterolateral thoracotomy was performed, evidencing serum pleural effusion and mediastinal and pericardial thickening. Mediastinal and pleural drainage was done via large-bore chest tubes. An abdominal approach through median supraumbilical laparotomy revealed a right subphrenic abscess. After drainage of 2000 ml of purulent secretion , drainage tubes were also left in place, and samples were taken.
The following day, the patient had septic shock and needed vasoactive drugs. The antibiotic treatment was changed to intravenous piperacillin and tazobactam 4 g/6 h and vancomycin 1 g/12 h.
The bacteriologic results from materials obtained from the abdomen revealed only Candida albicans. Aerobic and anaerobic liquid cultures were collected with sterile syringes in the surgical field and were stored in dry tubes for aerobic pathogens and in appropriate liquid contents for anaerobes. We don't have information about how was made the transportation of the tubes. There was no growth in the neck, pleura, and mediastinum material. The blood culture was also negative. Gram staining did not detect any bacteria. These were probably due to the patient’s previous use of antibiotics. Fluconazole (400 mg/12 h) was added to the treatment.
After three days in the intensive care unit, the patient was hemodynamically stable with apparent improvement, and he was transferred to the head and neck ward. He had 21 days of antibiotic treatment (2 days of ceftriaxone 1 g/12 h + clindamycin 600mg/6 h, 19 days of piperacillin and tazobactam 4 g/ 6 h) and 15 days of antifungal treatment (fluconazole 400 mg/12 h), and then he was discharged from the hospital on the 22nd postoperative day, without drains or tracheostomy. His outpatient discharge occurred six months later, without any sequelae. At his last appointment, the scars had a good aspect, with no keloids or hypertrophy, and he had no complaints about swallowing, breathing, or vocal hoarseness. He was able to get back to his work with no restrictions.