A 62-year old Asian male presented to the emergency department with a 3-day history of intermittent shortness of breath, dizziness, and amaurosis. On examination, the patient appeared distressed and anxious. His temperature was 37 °C, HR of 29 bpm, a blood pressure of 190/100 mmHg, and a respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute with an oxygen saturation of 98%. Medications were hydrochlorothiazide 12.5 mg per day for the last year and 0.5% topical timolol twice daily for 13 years. The 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed bradycardia with third-degree AV block (Additional file : Figure S1). However, electrolytes, troponin T, and n-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide were normal, as well as a normal complete blood count, liver and renal function tests, and echocardiography.
Isoprenaline was administered at a dose of 3μg/min and HR increased to 45–62 beats per minute with an ECG showing a third-degree AV block (Additional file : Figure S2) with symptom relief. During continuous ECG monitoring we noticed the patient’s HR decreased to 35 bpm 15 min after administering the timolol eye drops. Timolol was replaced by travoprost after consultation with an ophthalmologist. Isoprenaline infusion was continued, but the dose was decreased gradually when HR increased, and stopped when HR recovered to 45–60 bpm at 24-h after the discontinuation of Timolol. The administration of hydrochlorothiazide was continued. Approximately 48 h after discontinuation of timolol, HR of the patient increased to 65 bpm without isoprenaline (Additional file : Figure S3), and the ECG showed first-degree AV block with a PR interval of 210 ms. One week after admission, 24-h Holter device monitoring showed an average HR of 72 bpm with an intermittent first-degree AV block. However, the patient did not meet the criteria for pacemaker implantation and was discharged with the addition of 150 mg irbesartan for further blood pressure control. At the 12-month follow-up, Holter recorded first-degree AV block with intermittent second-degree type II AV block and 2:1 AV block at 2:12 AM during the patient’s sleep (Additional file : Figure S4). Although this met the criteria of pacemaker implantation, the patient refused it since the AV block was asymptomatic. This patient is currently under continued follow-up care. This case was reported to the State Food and Drug Administration Adverse Event Reporting System, which is the regulatory authority in China. It was not reported to the drug company, due to lack of existing reporting system in this company. The timeline of events is presented in Fig. .