A 79-year-old man with a 1-month history of progressive dyspnea and exercise intolerance was found to have severe pulmonic valve stenosis and was referred to our institution for balloon valvuloplasty. Prior medical history included coronary artery disease, hypertension and chronic kidney disease.
At the referring institution, the physical exam was notable for a III/VI systolic murmur best appreciated in the left upper sternal border. An electrocardiogram (EKG) demonstrated sinus rhythm with a right bundle branch block and a chest x-ray was normal. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was reported as demonstrating severe pulmonic stenosis with a peak gradient of 100 mmHg and peak velocity of 5 m/s associated with right ventricular hypertrophy, severe tricuspid regurgitation and severe right atrial dilatation (Fig. , Additional files , , ).
The patient was taken to the catheterization lab for planned balloon valvuloplasty but the procedure was canceled after angiography revealed an obstructive mass in the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) of unclear etiology extending into the main pulmonary artery (Fig. , Additional files , and ). Contrast-enhanced computed tomographic (CT) angiogram and gadolinium-enhanced cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were obtained to better characterize the obstructive mass.
CT angiogram showed a fixed intravascular defect within the proximal main pulmonary artery arising from the pulmonic valve with mixed enhancement properties suggesting a thrombus versus a vascular mass; no other filling defects were noted .
Cardiac MRI revealed a T1 and T2 hyperintense ovoid mass measuring 2.0 × 1.5 cm, and centered at the lateral aspect of the pulmonary valve in the region of the anterior sinus of Valsalva. The mass extended into the pulmonary artery resulting in severe pulmonic stenosis . Neither CT nor MRI demonstrated malignant lesions anywhere else in the body.
Given the CT and MRI findings, the mass was presumed to be a primary cardiac tumor and decision was made to proceed with surgical resection. A preoperative transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) corroborated CT and MRI findings (Fig. , Additional files , and ).
The patient underwent median sternotomy and longitudinal arteriotomy in the main pulmonary artery (MPA) that showed a fungating mass involving the pulmonary annulus and MPA with extension into the RVOT . The tumor was resected en bloc and the RVOT was reconstructed using a pulmonary homograft. Surgical histopathology revealed increased mitotic activity and nuclear atypia. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA) consistent with intimal spindle cell sarcoma .
Postoperatively, a TTE demonstrated normal pulmonary valve function and his dyspnea resolved. He was then referred for chemotherapy with pazopanib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, but was lost to follow up.