A 54-year-old Caucasian man (weight, 116kg; height, 185cm body mass index, 33.7kg/m2) underwent left total hip replacement surgery under general anesthesia. A bioimpedance-based RVM (ExSpiron, Respiratory Motion, Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) was used to collect digital respiratory traces via an electrode PadSet placed on the thorax , beginning pre-operatively and continuing until PACU discharge, for a total of 418 minutes (106 minutes pre-operatively, 192 intra-operatively and 120 minutes in the PACU). MV, TV and RR measurements were calculated every 5 seconds for the duration of this period from 30-second segments collected in a sliding window. The clinical staff were blinded to RVM data. Vital sign measurements and pulse oximetry readings were obtained as part of routine patient care and were available to caregivers for ongoing patient management.
The patient’s past medical history was positive for OSA, with no other respiratory conditions. The patient owned a home model of a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) device but had not been using it. In the pre-operative holding area, the patient was very sleepy, though not yet sedated. The RVM trace showed sustained, visible manifestations of apnea over this period . Clinical personnel had no way to observe these apneic episodes and were unaware of the patient’s disordered breathing. No snoring or physical indications of obstruction were observed. The patient was taken to the operating room, where sedation was induced with 300mg of propofol and 250μg of intravenous (IV) fentanyl and intubated after receiving 50mg of IV rocuronium. Two 0.5mg doses of hydromorphone were administered in the 15 minutes after incision, along with three additional doses of rocuronium (20mg, 10mg, 10mg) over the subsequent hour. Surgery lasted 134 minutes, after which the patient was extubated and transferred to the PACU.
Within 20 minutes of PACU arrival, prior to receiving any post-operative opioids, the patient began to exhibit apneic events lasting up to 45 seconds . As in pre-operative holding, no outward indications of disordered breathing were observed. Using a standard formula based on ideal body weight , the patient’s predicted minute ventilation (MVPRED), expected to be sufficient to maintain blood oxygen and carbon dioxide levels under baseline conditions, was calculated to be 7.9L/min. Previous research has described ventilation below 80% of MVPRED prior to opioid administration as putting a patient at risk for OIRD (MV <40% of MVPRED), a potential threat to patient safety . Our patient’s average MV, as measured by the RVM during the 5 minutes of stable breathing prior to an initial PACU opioid administration, was 3.70L/min, 44% of MVPRED.
At this point, the patient received an isolated, nurse-administered dose of hydromorphone (0.4mg). This was followed by an immediate reduction in ventilation, with average MV of only 2.37L/min (28% of MVPRED) in the subsequent 5 minutes . The patient’s RR gave no indication of compromise, remaining between 12 and 18 breaths per minute for the duration of this period and even showing a slight increase after hydromorphone administration . Blinded to the RVM data and with no way to objectively evaluate ventilation, clinical personnel continued to administer opioids to manage pain in accordance with standard practice. The patient received a second nurse-administered hydromorphone dose (0.4mg) 40 minutes after the first. He was then provided with a patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) device and received three PCA doses (0.2mg hydromorphone each) in under 1 hour, before being discharged to a general care unit 118 minutes after PACU arrival . MV remained low (<40% MVPRED) for the duration of the patient’s PACU stay and was still reduced upon discharge. RVM monitoring was discontinued at that time.