An 8-year-old girl was admitted primarily for skin rash and edema for one month. The patient was found to have proximal muscle weakness predominantly involving the lower extremities, low-grade fever, and foamy urine. There was no family history of the disease. The girl had a heliotrope rash, Gottron papules, and edema of the legs on physical examination. Manual muscle testing (MMT) scores (0–5) of her lower and upper limbs were 4 and 5 respectively.
Laboratory tests found that the girl had elevated creatine kinase (CK) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), massive proteinuria, decreased albumin and elevated cholesterol, as shown in . ANA, anti-DsDNA, anti-ENA, ANCA, anti-GBM, CMV-Ab, HCV-Ab, HBS-Ag, and HSV-DNA were negative. The urinary system and abdomen ultrasound and chest computed tomography scan did not show any abnormalities. Electromyogram showed narrowed motor unit potentials, polyphase potentials, increased irregular waves and recruitment potentials. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed high signals on T2-weighted and Stir images of the legs and no rhabdomyolysis or muscle necrosis, as shown in .
We made a diagnosis of JDM and NS. The MSA test showed that she had anti-NXP2 antibodies without other antibodies including Jo-1. The parents refused a renal biopsy.
Her urine protein decreased to 209.04 mg/24 h after 10 days of prednisone and methotrexate (MTX), but her muscle strength gradually decreased. The girl could not squat up, lie down, or get up, and she coughed after drinking. Her MMT scores (0–5) were 3 and 4 in her lower and upper limbs, respectively, and CK was 4,546 U/L. Methylprednisolone (MP) pulse therapy and intravenous immunoglobulin were given for 3 days, and her muscle strength did not significantly improve. MTX was replaced with mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) one month later, and her muscle strength gradually improved.
Twenty-one months later, the doses of MP and MMF were gradually reduced, and the skin rash and muscle weakness recurred. The 24 h urine protein was 227 mg (5.53 mg/m2/h, body weight 58 kg). MRI revealed extensive muscle damage and high signals in the muscles of the lower limbs, buttocks and pelvis in T2-weighted and Stir images . The MP dosage was adjusted to 32 mg/day, and 40 mg adalimumab was subcutaneously injected every two weeks. The muscle strength of her limbs improved. MRI T2W and Stir-weighted images of the legs revealed decreased muscle damage one year after relapse . Adalimumab was subcutaneously injected at 40 mg every two weeks for a total of 10 months and then every month for 5 months without side effects. The dosages of MMF and MP were decreased to 0.125 g and 2 mg per day, respectively.