A 63-year-old male with ischemic cardiomyopathy and severe left ventricular dysfunction was admitted with chest pain and dyspnea at rest. He was on maximal medical therapy and had received multiple prior percutaneous coronary interventions and two previous coronary artery bypass surgeries. Recent coronary angiography revealed no possibility of further revascularization. He was evaluated for Orthotropic Heart Transplant (OHT) and listed as Status 1A-e (urgent need). His worsening intractable angina and dyspnea necessitated IABP placement via left axillary artery, which significantly improved his condition. Axillary artery was the chosen site of insertion (as opposed to femoral artery) in order to enable ambulation and prevent deconditioning, as the patient was awaiting transplant . The IABP was placed under fluoroscopic guidance, with the tip of the IABP placed few centimeters below the aortic arch, as confirmed radiologically . Following the procedure, the patient complained of new-onset, persistent, throbbing, and burning left-sided frontoparietal pain above the left lateral eyebrow that radiated to the left orbit, with an intensity of 7/10 on the numerical pain scale. It was aggravated by movement and relieved by pressure, with frequent watery eyes without visual changes. He had a remote history of traumatic brain injury due to motor vehicle accident but he denied any subsequent headache.
Examination revealed tender and bulging left temporal artery suspicious of temporal arteritis (TA); however, his normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate minimized TA as a likely diagnosis. Nonetheless, he was offered prophylactic prednisone, which he refused. Pain management service was consulted and multimodal treatment including acetaminophen, oxycodone, citalopram, and tizanidine was initiated, while nitrates were withheld . The patient reported limited relief and continued to complain of a persistent pain in the same distribution. Subsequently, left supraorbital neuralgia was hypothesized, and gabapentin was initiated with limited benefit. A supraorbital block was offered, which was refused, and patient insisted on discontinuing the IABP.
In accordance with patient's wishes, the IABP was weaned and removed, and nitrates were initiated for angina prophylaxis. On postremoval assessment, the patient's headache had completely resolved with no future recurrence. He subsequently received OHT and was discharged with normal EF and no further headaches.