EF is a 72 year old man who presented to our emergency department in February 2009. He described a 4 month history of fatigue and weight loss, with a 4 kg weight loss in the preceding 8 weeks. He had noticed a change in bowel habit, becoming constipated, over the last 3 weeks. Along with this history; he also complained of a dry, non-productive cough in the preceding two months.
He had a long-standing history of Hypertension and Hypercholesterolaemia; for which he was prescribed atorvastatin, perindopril and bendrofluazide.
He gave a history of a vision loss in his left eye due to a "tumour", which required an enucleation of his left eye 24 years previously.
His routine laboratory investigations revealed a hypochromic, microcytic anaemia (Haemoglobin 9.0 g/dL (range 13-17 g/dL), Mean Cell Volume 74fl (range 80-100fl), Mean Cell Haemoglobin 23.8 pg (range 27-32 pg)). His Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate was elevated at 68 mm/hr (range 0-30 mm/hr). His renal and liver profile was normal, although his albumin was noted to be low at 30 g/L (range 35-50 g/L). His Chest X-ray on admission suggested hilar lymphadenopathy. His Faecal Occult Blood Test was positive.
He proceeded to investigation of his iron-deficiency anaemia by gastroscopy and colonoscopy. His colonoscopy was normal. His gastroscopy, however, revealed several abnormalities. He was found to have a large, irregular fungating ulcer in the fundus of his stomach (see Figure ). This measured 6-7 cms in maximal diameter. The appearances of which were concerning for malignancy. A second smaller ulcer was noted inferior to this. Three further irregular ulcers were noted in the second part of his duodenum (see Figure ). Their appearances were again worrisome for malignancy. These ulcers, in contrast to the gastric ulcers however, were noted to have a quite marked central pigmentation. He had multiple biopsies from stomach and duodenum taken.
Histopathological examination revealed extensive mucosal and sub-mucosal infiltration of gastric and duodenal tissue by a malignant tumour with a solid growth pattern and pigment. Immunohistochemistry stains were positive for S100 and negative for Keratin and CAM 5.2, consistent with a diagnosis of metastatic melanoma.
He subsequently underwent a staging CT of Abdomen, Thorax and Pelvis which confirmed the endoscopically diagnosed mass in his stomach. He was noted also to have abdominal and thoracic lymphadenopathy. Bilateral adrenal metastases were seen, along with several ill-defined lesions in his liver which were felt to represent further metastasis. Multiple lung metastases and a probable bone metastasis in a lumbar vertebra were also appreciated.
He was informed of his diagnosis of metastatic melanoma, and seen by the medical oncologists with a view to palliative chemotherapy. He was commenced on Temozolomide 150 mg/m2 (increasing to 200 mg/m2) for five days and to be repeated every 4 weeks.
He was subsequently discharged and continued his chemotherapy as an out-patient. He tolerated his treatment relatively well. However, despite this his disease progressed. He subsequently died in May 2009.