A 70-year-old male was hospitalized at the Unit of Infectious Diseases, Mother Teresa Hospital, Tirana, Albania in a comatose condition. He had a seven-day history of fever up to 39-40°C, headache, fatigue, anorexia, vomiting, cough, and myalgia. The patient came from Librazhd and was a farmer. His son referred that his father had been in contact with rodents (mice) and also had animals at home (cats and dogs). He did not drink alcohol and his medical history was otherwise not significant. On arrival, his temperature was 40.1°C, low blood pressure of 85/55mm Hg, pulse rate of 119/min, the respiration rate of 23/min, and oxygen saturation of 87% on room air. General examination of the patient showed scleral hemorrhages, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, jaundice, and maculopapular rash over the trunk, abdomen, and palms of his hands. He was urgently transferred to the intensive care unit of the Infectious Diseases Department. Initial laboratory investigations showed severe acidosis, depressed bicarbonate levels, high levels of creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, alkaline phosphatase, lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase, bilirubin, liver enzymes, low levels of albumin, red blood cells, platelet count and normal values of white blood cells .
Urinalysis data showed albuminuria (1.98 gr) and microscopic hematuria. All three blood cultures taken were negative. C-reactive protein was 21.1 (normal range <0.5 mg/dL). Serological tests of Leptospira,
Brucella spp., Leishmania spp, and viral infections such as HIV, hepatitis B and C, CMV, and EBV were negative. Protein electrophoresis and immunological examination such as ANA, C3, C4, and FR were normal. In the view of clinical history and laboratory parameters, it was suspected to be rickettsiosis from R. typhi, because Weil Felix test, Proteus OX19 Ag resulted- positive (1/640), ELISA Rickettsia typhi IgM resulted positive and ELISA Rickettsia typhi IgG resulted positive. Chest radiography showed cardiomegaly, occlusion of the left phrenicocostal sinus, and bilateral interstitial abnormalities . Abdominal ultrasound showed liver 180 mm, spleen 130 mm, and a gall bladder wall thickening. The patient was treated with antibiotic therapy (Ceftriaxone and Levofloxacin, methylprednisolone, albumin, plasma, platelets, dopamine, and supportive therapy with electrolyte, vitamin, and intravenous fluids. He could not undergo treatment with doxycycline, the first-line treatment for this disease due to poor clinical conditions and the availability of only oral formulation in our institution, therefore we initiated intravenous antibiotic treatment with Levofloxacine and Ceftriaxone as they are effective against Rickettsia spp.
The patient was put on mechanical ventilation immediately upon admission in addition to vasoactive agents. Despite the great professional work of Infectious disease and Intensive care specialists, his hemodynamic status worsened, the patient could not survive and died on day 4 of hospitalization and the 11th day of the disease.