A 40-year old female was transferred to our Department of Medicine for the assessment and treatment of pleuropericarditis following lower respiratory tract infection. Her body mass index was 25.7 kg/m2 and her personal history was positive for current smoking (~ 10 cigarettes/day, 40 pack years) and arterial hypertension (occasional use of amlodipine 5 mg). The present history of the patient begins 5 weeks ago with a hospitalization in a Respiratory Department for CAP (fever, dyspnea, chest X-ray positive for consolidation on the left upper lobe; Additional File ). The patient received ceftriaxone and moxifloxacin for 10 days without any medical report on causative pathogen. Four weeks after her discharge the patient presented with fever, shortness of breath especially in exertion and pleuritic chest pain and was admitted to a Respiratory Department where bilateral pleural (mainly left) and mild pericardial effusion were found. Pericardial friction rub was not identified. Her blood tests revealed increased neutrophils and indices of inflammation . Piperacillin/tazobactam and linezolid were initially administered. Thoracocentesis on the left side revealed neutrophilic exudate with pH 7.40. Despite antibiotic treatment, patient was not improved. Moreover C-reactive protein (CRP), pleural and pericardial effusions remained unchanged. Procalcitonin, high-sensitive troponin and brain natriuretic peptide levels were within normal limits during hospitalization. Blood and sputum cultures were negative. Extensive rheumatological workup was negative. In electrocardiography sinus tachycardia (112 bpm), frequent premature ventricular contractions, periods of ventricular trigeminy and inverted T-wave in V1–V6 were observed. Echocardiography was positive for mild mitral and triscupid valve regurgitation and mild pericardial effusion, without any sign of hemodynamic decompensation. Computed tomography (CT) imaging (including CT pulmonary angiogram) did not reveal pulmonary embolism or pathological findings from lung parenchyma and was positive only for the presence of pleural and pericardial effusions (Additional File ). Pulmonologists administered ibuprofen 600 mg three times daily with the indication of idiopathic pleuropericarditis. The patient presented allergic reaction to ibuprofen and was transferred to our Department of Medicine on day (D) 12. Upon her admission, the patient presented with diffuse maculo-papular rash that was attributed to the allergic reaction to ibuprofen. Ibuprofen was withdrawn and IV methylprednisolone 40 mg once daily was initiated. Antibiotic treatment was suspended due to the lack of evidence of bacterial infection. Due to sinus tachycardia and premature ventricular complexes metoprolol 25 mg twice daily was administered. Patient’s file was reviewed and pericarditis investigation and differential diagnosis was conducted according to current guidelines . The patient fulfilled two out of four major criteria (pericardial chest pain and new pericardial effusion), along with one of the additional supporting findings (elevated CRP, white blood cells and erythrocyte sedimentation rate), rendering the diagnosis of pericarditis evidence-based . Colchicine 0.5 mg once daily (patient’s weight 66 kg) was initiated, for the treatment of pericarditis under investigation. The patient presented clinical improvement and CRP dropped to nearly normal (Additional File ). Methylprednisolone was stopped after 3 days, as it was administered to treat the allergic reaction to ibuprophen. Low grade fever and pleuritic chest pain recurred rapidly, along with rising CRP levels. A new chest X-ray revealed bilateral pleural effusion but this time mainly on the right side. A repeat thoracocentesis revealed neutrophilic exudate with pH 7.40 and in a new chest CT the only new finding was the reduction of the left pleural effusion in combination with the increase of the right sided pleural effusion. Empirical initiation of meropenem was decided (Additional File ). Clinical and laboratory findings did not improve with the addition of antibiotics; thus, antibiotics were suspended due to lack of evidence in favor of a bacterial cause for the new fever and IV methylprednisolone 40 mg once daily was again initiated.
The patient presented impressive clinical and laboratory response to the combination of colchicine and methylprednisolone and was discharged (D 31) with the diagnosis of pleuropericarditis under investigation on colchicine 0.5 mg once daily and methylprednisolone 16 mg twice daily per os, while waiting for further laboratory test results. C. pneumoniae IgM and IgG antibodies [enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) VIRION/SERION ELISA kit] were both positive upon admission of the patient to our Department on D 12 (IgM 20 U/ml, IgG 14 U/ml with normal limits < 15 U/ml for IgM and < 12 U/ml for IgG) . Mycoplasma pneumoniae antibody titers were found to be negative, and a possible cross reaction, observed in 30% of patients with M. pneumoniae infection, was excluded . In addition, a positive aspergillus antigen test (galactomannan) was found. Clinical and imaging findings were against aspergillosis, the patient was not in an immunodeficient status, and this finding was considered as a false positive finding, probably due to prior treatment with piperacillin/tazobactam . In order to follow the antibody kinetics, new antibody titers were ordered upon patient’s discharge on D 31 (IgM 11 U/ml, IgG 17 U/ml) . Thus, the combination of the patient’s history and course, the negative extensive work up for other infections and autoimmune diseases, the negative imaging for pulmonary embolism and malignancies, along with the trend of the antibody kinetics rendered a diagnosis of C. pneumoniae related pleuropericarditis rather possible.
The patient visited the hospital on an outpatient basis two weeks after discharge (D 46). She was in good clinical condition, with normal laboratory values (white blood cells, CRP) and improved imaging evaluation (mild pleural effusions in CT imaging) (Additional File ). Tapering of methylprednisolone was decided by reducing 8 mg of methylprednisolone every 7 days. The patient presented to the next scheduled follow-up visit as outpatient one month later (D 68) on colchicine 0.5 mg once daily and methylprednisolone 8 mg once daily. She reported recurrence of mild pleuritic chest pain and low-grade fever. CRP was 2.8 mg/dl (normal limits < 0.7 mg/dl) and imaging (echocardiography) revealed small pericardial effusion. Aggressive tapering of methylprednisolone was considered as the most probable cause of the clinical relapse of the patient. Uptitration of methylprednisolone to 16 mg twice daily was decided. A third sample for C. pneumoniae antibodies was acquired (IgM 11 U/ml, IgG 22 U/ml) . The patient was reassessed on D 105 in good clinical condition and absence of pleural effusion in chest X-ray and closer follow-up was planned for a slower tapering of corticosteroids. Complete rheumatologic evaluation was repeated (clinical and laboratory) without evidence of rheumatological disease.
Concerning the patient’s perspective, she was informed of all the investigations performed and she was compliant with the interventions. She was relieved with the exclusion of severe causes (malignant) and fully aware of the need for regular follow-up. The patient engaged gradually to her daily activities without any concern.