A fifty-seven-year-old woman had only unilateral milky discharge of the right breast. Clinical and mammography findings were normal. Ultrasound examination was performed with 10 MHz linear probe, and it showed homogeneous predominantly fatty parenchyma echotexture with no masses, cystic formations or calcifications visualised. No biopsy nor FNA was recommended, and the sonography finding was reported as BI-RADS 1. Cytological diagnosis of intraductal papilloma was established which was galactographically confirmed and patient underwent to surgery. Ductulolobular segmentectomy was made. After the histopathology results were received, besides the intraductal papilloma, there was found „signet-ring“ cell lobular invasive carcinoma. It was followed by total mastectomy, axillary limphadectomy and contra lateral breast biopsy. Residual tumor was found only in breast tissue, while axillary lymph nodes and contra lateral breast biopsy were negative.
Post-operative oncology therapy was instituted.
Review 12 months post-operatively revealed no evidence of recurrence of the tumor.
Milky nipple secretion of middle canal was spread to the slide, air dried and stained according to May – Grunewald – Giemsa. Cytological examination showed foam cells and cell clusters with papillary architecture, moderately enlarged nuclei of variable sizes with mild hyperchromasia. Abundant, dense, well defined cytoplasm with large, prominent vacuoles was also found. Cytological diagnosis of intraductal papilloma was established and galactography was recommended. The excised specimen was not visibly abnormal and was only slightly firm to palpation although substantial involvement by tumor was evident microscopically.
Dilated mammary duct was containing solitary discrete benign papillary epithelial tumor which was consisted of an orderly proliferation of ductal epithelium on well defined fibro vascular stalks. The epithelium, distributed in a single layer, had little cellular polymorphism, and a myoepithelial layer was present between the fibro vascular stalk and the epithelial cells.
Carcinoma was not nodular, it consisted of solitary tumor cells spread throughout the whole breast parenchyma. Tumor cells existed beyond the segment of intraductal papilloma.
Around dilated duct the tumor cells were arranged in concentric rings but loosely dispersed throughout a fibrous stroma, too. Most tumor cells had intracytoplasmic lumina containing sialomucins demonstrable with the mucicarmine and Alcian blue stains, and the cells had a signet ring configuration Further analysis was performed using the streptavidin – biotin – imunoperoxidase technique. The tumor cells were diffusely positive for Cytokeratin 8 ER H-score 80, PR H-score 50, HER-2/neu negative, Ki 67 1, 5%.