A 9-year-old Persian girl complaining of burning pain in the epigastrium, palpitations, and no other symptoms presented to our department. The nonpositional pain started 6 months before our visit and was not related to feeding or transit. She was referred to us by a cardiologist after a palpable mass in the right upper quadrant (RUQ) was detected. She did not mention any drug usage, allergies, or past medical or family history except the fact that she was born as a result of in vitro fertilization (IVF). On the physical examination and routine laboratory tests, which are reported below in the box, the only noticeable finding was a mild bulging in the RUQ. We performed an ultrasonography (US), demonstrating a large echogenic mass with moderate vascularity adjacent to the segment VI of the liver. A few days later, on the computed tomography (CT), a large, well-circumscribed mass (92 mm × 70 mm) without hemorrhage, hypervascular in portal phase with a central nonenhanced scar was present and seemed to emanate from the right liver lobe . The lesion was hypodense in the precontrast phase and isoattenuated to the liver parenchyma in the equilibrium phase. The fibrotic scar demonstrated enhancement on the delayed scan. Based on the CT findings, pedunculated liver focal nodular hyperplasia and hepatocellular adenoma were considered. We checked for alpha fetoprotein and antihydatid antibody levels, which were both normal. For a decisive diagnosis and histopathological examination, the patient underwent surgery. Opening the abdomen, a large lesion was observed below the right lobe of the liver . The lesion was resected, and macroscopic evaluation of the liver mass revealed a well-demarcated, solitary brown‒orange lesion with a central scar . No evidence of recurrence was detected on examination and US at the 1 month follow-up. Microscopic sections revealed a well-differentiated hepatocellular lesion with fibrous septa containing artery branches, a ductular reaction, and mixed inflammation. Nuclear pleomorphism, prominent nucleoli, and mitotic figures were absent . The above-mentioned morphologic features suggested FNH.