A 30-year-old woman sought treatment at our joint surgery department for pain and instability of the right knee joint, after suffering from injury. She experienced a valgus semi-extension injury to her knee while driving an electric motorcycle that was hit by a car. MRI examination revealed complete ACL rupture.
The patient had a history of OP and was diagnosed with the disease at the time of her first fracture at the age of 13. Radiographs showed diffused sclerosis in the skull, vertebrae, pelvis, and appendicular bones. Knee X-ray revealed typical bone modelling defects (‘Erlenmeyer flask’ deformity). There was obvious ‘bone-in-bone’ morphology at the femur heads, vertebrae, and phalanges. In addition, focal sclerosis was detected in the skull base, pelvis, and vertebral end plates (‘sandwich vertebrae’) . Bone mineral densitometry (BMD) of the antero-posterior lumbar spine vertebrae, L1-L4, was 2·381 g/cm2 (Z-score = 12.1), as evidenced by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. The BMD of the left femoral neck was 1.863 g/cm2 (Z-score = 9.2). Blood chemistry exhibited elevated levels of N-terminal propeptide of type I collagen (142 ng/mL [reference range 16–55 ng/mL]).
To evaluate the genetics of OP, a targeted gene panel was sequenced to investigate the presence of pathogenic variants of multiple OP-related genes. With informed consent, 3-mL blood samples were collected from the patient, her parents, 6-year-old daughter, older sister, and two nephews. Based on our analysis, the same heterozygous missense mutation c.2227C > T (p.Arg743Trp) was observed in exon 23 of the CLCN7 gene in the proband, her father, and her daughter, in whom the mutated locus was first reported . The family was assumed to suffer from ADO-2. Nevertheless, the father and daughter had no OP-related complaints and their other relevant tests appeared normal.
At 8 weeks after the injury, the patient underwent ACL reconstruction surgery, using a ligament advanced reinforcement system (LARS) (Surgical Implant and Devices, Arc-sur-Tille, France) artificial ligament (AC 100 [8 mm diameter, 100 free fibers]), following earlier reported isometric surgical principles . Due to the significant increase in bone density, the guide pin, and hollow drill bits were not able to penetrate the tough bone. Hence, a bone tunnel was established with the direct use of a 7.5 mm diameter solid drill bit. The 9.0 mm diameter titanium interference screws were also extremely difficult to screw in. In all, the operation lasted 130 min and was successfully completed. Histopathological analysis of the ruptured ACL sample, obtained during the operation, revealed massive deposition of calcium salts in the ligament tissue . The patient was discharged from the hospital 3 days after the operation. She underwent a standardized rapid rehabilitation program, as described previously .
Postoperative 1 month’s T2-weighted MRI illustrated the LARS ligament was intact after ACL reconstruction . Until her final 16 month’s follow-up, she reported no knee instability symptoms and other complications. Clinical assessment involved both passive and active range of motion (ROM) and the KT-1000 arthrometer (MED metric, San Diego, CA, USA), which assessed the side-to-side difference between the affected and nonaffected knee. The patient also filled out validated patient-reported outcome measure surveys including the Lysholm knee scoring scale and Tegner activity score . The flexion angle of the affected knee was 115° and that of nonaffected knee was 125°. The extension angle of both side of the knee was 0°. The side-to-side difference in knee laxity, as evidenced by a KT-1000 arthrometer was 0.9 mm. The Lysholm score improved from 45 before operation to 83 after operation. The Tegner activity score improved from 1 before operation to 4 after operation.