A 54-year-old woman presented with complaints of transient right hand and arm numbness, along with facial twitching for 3 months. The patient had a 20-year history of epilepsy. Her neurological examinations were largely unremarkable.
On MRI , abnormal signal intensity was noted on the left medial frontal region, predominantly hyperintense on T2/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), and showed diffusion restriction on diffusion-weighted imaging sequence. Peripherally, the hemosiderin ring was appreciated on T2 sequences with signal dropout on susceptibility-weighted imaging. It showed patchy post-contrast enhancement on the contrast sequence. However, due to high signals on pre-contrast T1, it was difficult to comment on the extent of post-contrast enhancement. Surrounding edema and punctate foci of hyperintensities on the subcortical white matter with chronic ischemic changes were noted on T2/FLAIR sequences. Findings were therefore, suggestive of a cavernoma. It clearly lacks the typical features of glioblastoma, including irregular enhancement and significant surrounding edema.
Elective neuronavigation-guided craniotomy for maximus safe resection of the lesion was performed. Intraoperatively, it was noted to be an intra-axial soft to firm lesion with xanthrochromic discoloration throughout the lesion. Some abnormal vessels were difficult to coagulate; it was a clue that it could be a high-grade lesion rather than just a cavernoma.
The histopathological examination revealed neoplastic glial cells with hyperchromatic nuclei, inconspicuous nucleoli, and a moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm. Multiple gemistocytes and areas of palisading tumor necrosis alongside areas of mitoses were seen. However, no microvascular proliferation was appreciated. Genetic analysis revealed that glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) was positive, p53 and IDH-1 were both wild types, SOX10 and Cytokeratin AE1/ AE3 (CKAE1/AE3) were negative, and Ki67 index was 20%. The patient was thus diagnosed with glioblastoma, IDH-1 wild type .