A 76-year-old man visited our outpatient clinic complaining of abdominal discomfort with no history of drug allergy. Gastroscopy detected an ulcerated 2-cm diameter mass in the cardia, lying within 1.5 cm of the dentate line. The pathology revealed moderately to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, partly mucinous adenocarcinoma, with a mixed type in Laurén's classification. Chest and abdominal enhanced computed tomography suggested possible lymph node metastasis of the hepatogastric ligament without distant metastasis. According to the Union for International Cancer Control/American Joint Committee on Cancer tumor–node–metastasis staging system (8th Edition, 2017), the clinical stage was stage IIIB (T3N2M0).
Hospitalized in the surgical department, the patient suddenly developed precordial pain with heavy sweat. The electrocardiogram (ECG) suggested dynamic lead II, III, aVF ST-segment depression of 0.1 mv with T-wave inversion . The cardiac troponin I peaked at 0.8299 ng/ml (0–0.0175) the next day. Echocardiography detected moderate (grade II) left ventricular diastolic dysfunction and preserved left ventricular systolic function without regional wall motion abnormalities. The diagnosis of non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction was suspected. Physicians administered anticoagulants and dual antiplatelet and lipid-lowering therapies. Coronary angiography detected 25% stenosis in the mid-left anterior descending artery, 50% stenosis in the first diagonal artery, 75% stenosis in the second diagonal artery, 50% stenosis in the left circumflex artery, 25% stenosis in the middle right coronary artery, 25–50% stenosis in the distal right coronary artery, and 50% stenosis of the post lateral artery. No stent was placed. He had previously received medications for secondary prevention of coronary heart disease, including nitrates. Postoperative ECG and cardiac enzymes returned to normal. The surgeons did not consider the patient a candidate for surgery or radiotherapy due to the higher risks, and they referred him to our medical oncology department for further anti-tumor treatments.
Upon admission to the medical oncology department, the patient reported no chest discomfort with a negative troponin level. He had a temperature of 36.4°C, pulse rate of 72 bpm, breathing rate of 17 breaths per minute, and blood pressure of 125/71 mmHg. Physical examination was unremarkable. We implemented a chemotherapy course consisting of oxaliplatin and tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil and he received oxaliplatin (150 mg) infusion over 1 h. After 1 h of infusion, the patient suddenly complained of shortness of breath, palpitation, and diaphoresis. The patient was alert and oriented. Physical examination revealed a heart rate of 37 bpm, breathing rate of 26 breaths per minute, and blood pressure of 110/50 mmHg. The patient was afebrile. His face was pale and no rash was seen. Cardiovascular examination was notable for a bradycardic rhythm. The ECG identified a new third-degree atrioventricular block . At that time, the patient did not receive tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil. We immediately withdrew oxaliplatin, and the symptoms resolved spontaneously after 20 mins, with the ECG restoring to baseline. His cardiac troponin I cardiac enzymes peaked at 0.0643 ng/ml, 9 h after the onset. Repeated echocardiography revealed no significant changes from baseline. We suspected coronary spasm triggered by oxaliplatin as the etiology, and we administered diltiazem to prevent future onsets. A permanent pacemaker was implanted for safety. The patient complained of no discomfort during the subsequent courses of oxaliplatin and tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil. The pacemaker had not been activated by a low heart rate, and we did not find a third-degree atrioventricular block when we turned down the pacemaker rate during follow-up. A detailed timeline for the case and a graphical abstract image are provided (, ).