A 43-year-old female presented headache, palpitation, and intractable hypertension. Her physical examination including heart and lung examination were completely unremarkable. Abdominal examination was also normal.
Laboratory examination showed white blood cell count: 5500/µL, hemoglobin: 12.3 gr/L, platelet: 176000/µL. Glucose, lipids, liver function tests and kidney function tests were all normal. Hormonal studies including urine epinephrine (15.45 IU, normal < 20), norepinephrine (75.23 IU/L, normal < 90), metanephrine (155.3 IU/L, normal < 350) and dopamine (452.16 IU/L, normal < 600) were all normal. Also 17-OH progesterone and cortisol were all normal.
Her blood pressure was 130/90 mm Hg, pulse rate: 88/minute, respiratory rate: 18/minute and temperature = 37°C. Her past medical history showed surgery of total abdominal hysterectomy (TAH), and bilateral salpingoophorectomy (BSO).
During the work up for her hypertension, an abdominal sonography was performed, which showed an anechoic to hypoechoic mass lesion measuring 2.5 cm in diameter in left adrenal gland with cystic degeneration and without calcification. Abdominal Computed Tomography (CT) scan showed an adrenal tumor, measuring 2.5 cm in diameter, which was well-circumscribed, had low density, with very slight enhancement, and without calcification .
With the impression of an adrenal tumor with the possibility of adenoma or pheochromocytoma, adrenalectomy was performed on her. The specimen received in the pathology lab showed left adrenal gland with a well-defined mass measuring 2.5 × 2.5 × 1 cm, with solid and cystic appearance .
Histologic sections of the adrenal mass showed a solid cystic mass. The cysts were lined by flat and bland endothelial cells, which were all positive by CD 31 and CD 34, but negative with cytokeratin . The diagnosis of adrenal cystic lymphangioma was made.
The patient is now under follow up for about six months, during her visits, her blood pressure was always normal, and no sign of recurrence or any other abnormality was observed.