Almost two years ago, a 64-year-old Caucasian man was referred to our Cardiology Department for evaluation of back pain and shortness of breath on minimal physical activity. He had a long medical history, including surgical repair of aortic coarctation by Dacron patch plasty at the age of 26, with residual systemic hypertension. He also underwent bi-leaflet prosthetic valve (Sorin Biocarbon 27) implantation for severe degenerative stenosis of the bicuspid aortic valve at the age of 54. Twelve years previously he had been referred to hospital for ischemic stroke with left hemiparesis. On that occasion he was diagnosed as having a 5cm diameter asymptomatic aneurysmal dilatation of the thoracic aorta at the site of the first surgical procedure. Given the lack of symptoms at that time, the decision was made to follow him with regular reassessments.
Twelve years later, given the onset of symptoms, he was hospitalized in our department. At admission, physical examination revealed stable vital signs, blood pressure at 160/80mmHg, normal heart rate at 64 beats per minute, stony dullness to percussion of the left posterior thorax, and no evidence of left ventricular dysfunction at rest. An electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, first-degree atrioventricular block with a PQ interval of 280 milliseconds, left bundle branch block and rare ventricular premature beats. Conduction abnormalities had been already documented during previous evaluations.
Initial evaluation consisted of a plain chest radiograph, which showed a well-contoured opacity with a diameter of approximately 10cm, next to the left border of the aorta . The chest contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the presence of a large dilatation of the thoracic aorta . Transthoracic echocardiography found good left ventricular systolic function, normofunctional aortic prosthesis, no abnormalities of the native valves, absence of pulmonary hypertension, absence of pericardial effusion, and a dilated (49mm) ascending aorta and aneurysmal descending thoracic aorta. Coronary angiogram and aortography performed in the same session showed no significant lesions of the epicardial vessels and location of the aortic aneurysm immediately below the left subclavian artery.
A multidisciplinary team, including a cardiologist, cardiovascular surgeon, angiographist and radiologist, decided on a hybrid resolution of the aneurysm.
One year after the last evaluation successful exclusion of the aneurysm was carried out by percutaneous stent-graft implantation (Proximal Free Flow Straight Valiant Thoracic® TF3232C200X, Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) using a right femoral approach . The stent-graft partially covered the ostium of the left subclavian artery and a paraprosthetic leakage was observed . The percutaneous intervention was continued with the surgical transposition of the left subclavian artery to the left common carotid artery within the same session. The post-procedural debranching had to be done because of the occlusion of the left subclavian artery during the procedure. Pre-procedural evaluation had not suggested this, but at the end of the interventional procedure the final angiogram revealed a partially covered ostium of the left subclavian artery by the stent-graft. The surgical possibilities for debranching in this situation were carotid-subclavian bypass or transposition of the left subclavian artery to the left common carotid artery. We chose the second procedure because of the presence of a paraprosthetic leakage originating from the left subclavian artery. The closure of the subclavian artery with sutures resolved both problems: the leakage and the left upper arm and vertebral artery vascularization. Both procedures were successful. Post-procedural evolution was uneventful, except for a fever of a few days duration of up to 38°C, which was related to post-implantation syndrome, with no evidence of infection and mild residual dysphonia. Three months after the procedure, our patient was clinically well without any clinical signs of left lower limb ischemia or new onset neurological abnormalities. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed complete thrombosis of the excluded aneurysm .