In 2007, a 14-year-old male underwent excision of an abdominal cutaneous lesion and was diagnosed with abdominal dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (2 cm) with infiltrated surgical margins. The family history of the patient was unremarkable. The disease was limited to the abdomen. Radical resection was performed, with no evidence of residual disease. Further information about the surgery is lacking because the patient underwent diagnosis and treatment in another center. Eight years later, in January 2015, an ultrasound of the chest wall revealed a subcutaneous nodule of almost 5 cm. The lesion was radically excised, and histology revealed a metastasis compatible with dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Radiotherapy of the thorax was performed (60 Gy in 30 fractions) and follow-up was negative for one year. In 2016, a CT scan detected the presence of multiple bilateral nodules in the lung and two nodules in the liver, all suspicious for metastases. An 18FDG-PET/CT (18-fluorodeoxy-glucose positron emission tomography-computed tomography) scan showed areas of increased uptake in the 7th and 8th hepatic lobes and in 3 lung nodules. The patient began imatinib 400 mg/bid, decreased to 600 mg/die because of myelotoxicity. Disease progression was confirmed after 3 cycles and second-line treatment with anthracycline-based chemotherapy was proposed, which the patient refused. In 2017 the patient stopped all antitumor treatments and has since refused further clinical and imaging evaluations.
In August 2019, the patient at the age of 26, was referred to our cancer institute from the Emergency Room of a local hospital following a diagnosis of bone metastases in the left acetabulum, with pathological fracture. A 18FDG-PET/CT scan revealed multiple bone metastases in the hip bone, bilateral ribs and left femur, multiple bilateral lung lesions, multiple liver metastases, muscle metastases, and one lesion in the left kidney suspicious for metastasis . Radiotherapy was performed for the bone pathological fracture (20 Gy).
The recurrence in the thoracic wall was composed of spindle cells characterized by low-grade morphology showing a mitotic rate of <5/10 high-power fields (HPFs) and low-to-moderate cellularity with focal vascular invasion . Following a multidisciplinary evaluation of the case, a biopsy of the hepatic metastasis was performed, revealing the presence of spindle cells arranged in a clearly fascicular pattern . The sections of the tumor were incubated with antibodies (–) and analyzed, revealing the expression of CD34, S100 and p53 at immunohistochemistry (IHC), Ki-67 1% . These features were initially considered as confirmation of metastases form dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans.
Next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis was performed with the Oncomine Focus Assay on the histologic slides of the 2015 surgery to remove the subcutaneous nodule, highlighting the presence of the TPM4 (exon 7)-NTRK1 (exon 12) fusion gene . Microsatellite instability status (MSI) was also evaluated, but microsatellite stability was confirmed . Given the molecular findings, natural history of the disease and resistance to previous treatment, and after re-evaluation of the histological and immunohistochemical features of the case with an expert pathologist, it was concluded that the final diagnosis was compatible with the new entity of STS, NTRK-rearranged spindle cell neoplasm.
In November 2019, the patient started treatment with larotrectinib provided by Bayer as part of an early access program. Larotrectinib was administered orally in capsules on a continuous 28-day schedule, at a dose of 100 mg twice daily . An 18FDG-PET/CT scan performed 7 days after the start of larotrectinib, considered as a baseline evaluation, showed early tumor shrinkage in both visceral and bone disease. The patient did not experience drug-related toxicity. Subsequent evaluations confirmed tumor regression in disease sites . The last follow up of the patient was on October 2021 showing the confirmed metabolic response. The patient continues treatment, with no drug-related adverse events, and in good clinical conditions.