A 30-yr-old female, diagnosed case of AIDS, was admitted for evaluation of weight loss and intractable diarrhea of 4 months duration. The patient complained of chronic, painless, nonbloody, profuse watery diarrhea with a weight loss of 10 kg (decrease to 30 kg from 40 kg prior to illness). She had no complaints of fever, cough or expectoration.
Previously, during evaluation of her complaints in the outpatient department, she was discovered to be HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) infected with a CD4 count of 38 cells/μl. She also had anemia with hemoglobin value of 8 g/dl, normal kidney function, normal AST/ALT (aspartate aminotransferase/alanine aminotransferase) and elevated serum alkaline phosphatase. Stool examination showed no red blood cells or leukocytes, and no ova or cysts were observed. A contrast enhanced CT scan of the abdomen showed diffuse small bowel wall thickening, a fatty liver and no significant lymphadenopathy or ascites. Her chest radiograph was normal. Based on these details, a diagnosis of abdominal tuberculosis was made 2 months back, and she was started on standard 4-drug regimen for treatment of tuberculosis. Besides this, she was also given co-trimoxazole and once a week azithromycin prophylaxis for Pneumocystis jiroveci and mycobacterium avium-intracellulare infection respectively. Two weeks later she was started on non-zidovudine based HAART (highly active antiretroviral therapy), after she had tolerated antituberculosis drugs. However diarrhea failed to improve, and she continued to lose weight.
During this admission her stool sample was sent to a specialized microbiology laboratory, where acid fast oocysts of Cryptosporidium parvum were observed. Her antituberculosis drugs were stopped and she was started on treatment with tablet Nitazoxanide 500 mg twice a day. Her peripheral smear showed a megaloblatic anemia (mean corpuscular volume - 120 fl), for which folate and vitamin B12 were supplemented. Her kidney functions, AST/ALT were again normal, but she had raised serum alkaline phosphatase and a low serum albumin of 2.8 g/dl. In hospital she was also given supportive care with oral rehydration solution, antidiarrhoeals, and a nutritious diet low in lactose. After 2 weeks of nitazoxanide treatment the patient's stool remained positive for cryptosporidium. Her hemoglobin level had improved with folate and vitamin B12 supplementation. At this moment it was decided to discharge her on extended nitazoxanide treatment while continuing HAART, antibiotic prophylaxis and folate and vitamin B12, with monthly follow up.
Patient was again observed 2 months after discharge. Her diarrhea had settled for last 1 week. Her stool this time was negative for Cryptosporidium parvum, which was confirmed twice. Repeat CT scan of the abdomen showed resolution of the small bowel thickening, persistent fatty liver, no lymphadenopathy or ascites. A repeat CD4 count was done which was 36 cells/μl only.
Following parasitological clearance, the patient showed improvement in appetite and gained 5 kg weight over next one month. HAART and vitamin supplementation was continued. In view of lack of definite guidelines on secondary prophylaxis, the authors decided to continue nitazoxanide until the patient would achieve a CD4 count of 100 cells/μl.