A 69-year-old never-smoker woman in good clinical conditions was referred to a local hospital due to a solid lesion in the left lung on April 2020 . Subsequent bronchoscopy revealed a lung adenocarcinoma, confirmed by TTF-1 and napsin A immunohistochemistry positivity. A brain MRI revealed no abnormalities Positron emission tomography (PET) CT scan indicated elevated standardized uptake value (SUV) of bone lesion and lung nodule . The CT scan also revealed metastases in mediastinal lymph nodes and in the multiple vertebra; the final staging was cT4N2M1c (stage IVB). Next-generation sequencing (NGS) of tumor tissue revealed a variant (GUG > AUG) in the exon 20 of EGFR, resulting in amino acid substitution V786M (Val786Met) .
The local doctors considered the patient non-eligible for targeted therapy due to lack of evidence. A first-line therapy of pemetrexed and carboplatin combined with anti-programmed death-1 (PD-1) antibody tislelizumab was used for 6 cycles, with best response of stable of disease . No serious adverse events were observed. The patient went on a routine follow-up. In April 2021, progressive disease was defined due to the appearance of intracranial metastases . The primary lung cancer remained stable .
A second-line therapy of 4 cycles of nab-paclitaxel plus vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) TKI anlotinib was used, with best response of stable disease . Anlotinib was used for another 4 months for maintenance therapy . In November 2021, the patient complained of dizziness and fatigue. Brain MRI detected multiple intracranial metastases . A multidisciplinary team discussion was held for this patient of medical oncologist, radiologist, thoracic surgeon, and pathologist. Despite the limited literature data available on the variant, we considered the patient eligible for treatment with gefitinib (250 mg/day), which started on November 10, 2021. A repeated MRI scan showing multiple brain lesions on December 8, 2021, suggested that new metastases were observed after 1 month of gefitinib . A third-generation EGFR TKI almonertinib was used as fourth-line therapy. After 1 week of almonertinib treatment, the clinical conditions of fatigue and dizziness disappeared. A brain MRI and chest CT scan and an indicated shrinkage of intracranial metastases and primary lung cancer were assessed as a partial response. A follow-up radiological examination of chest CT and brain MRI on April 14, 2022, confirmed the response as partial response . The treatment timeline of this patient is illustrated in .
To investigate the oncogenic role of the V786M mutation, we predicted the 3D structure of EGFR V768M mutation using publicly available tools . V786 is located in the N-terminus of the receptor at the dimerization interface. While some frequently occurring point mutations such as G719S, T790M, and L858R have been well studied, the unexpected location of V786M led us to investigate its action in pathological state and the TKI efficacy. Structural analysis indicated that V786M protrudes into the kinase dimer interface and may increase the dimer interaction due to the larger size of methionine . Intriguingly, the active state of EGFR is achieved through a “head-to-tail” configuration in asymmetric dimers and V786M could stabilize the interaction to keep the kinase domain for autophosphorylation and downstream signaling . These results indicated that EGFR V786M mutation may facilitate the dimerization of EGFR, while it does not affect the binding of TKI.