A 74-year-old woman presented with signs of severe cough and acute abdomen. She had generalized abdominal pain with constipation, and abdominal distention. The physical examination showed peritoneal irritation, and rebound tenderness. She also had bruising and ecchymosis in the right and left flank extended to the back.
Two months prior to admission, she was diagnosed with COVID-19. She had fever, cough with sputum, and was treated with Azithromycin and Dexamethasone. Although she recovered, the cough was gradually increasing throughout the past two months. Two days before the admission, the patient's continuous cough suddenly increased accompanied by a sudden onset of pain in the left flank. The pain transferred to the umbilicus, right flank, epigastrium in order; until it was generalized and accompanied by abdominal distention.
During this period, she lost weight because she could not eat well due to abdominal pain.
The patient does not smoke or drink alcohol. She has 10 children, all normal birth. Her past medical history includes type II diabetes mellitus for two years and atrial fibrillation. She had mechanical mitral valve replacement 10 years ago. As a result, she has been taking warfarin 5 mg since then. The patient Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score was 3, she had a degree of muscular atrophy due to advanced age.
On admission, the Ultrasound (US) of the abdomen and pelvis showed distended oedematous cystic formation with turbid content in the left and right hypochondria . Everything else was normal.
Abdominal X-ray denied gastric or enteric perforation. No free air was found .
Computed tomography (CT) scan was performed, and showed asymmetrical increased thickness at both sides of the rectus abdominus and in the posterior wall of the stomach, possibly due to inflammatory infiltration. The maximal thickness was 29 mm and 2–19 mm respectively . This indicates the presence of retroperitoneal and rectus sheath hematoma (RSH), and rectus abdominis muscle rupture.
Due to the hematoma rapid and continuous expansion, she was hemodynamically unstable and had hemorrhagic shock. She had tachycardia with hypotension. Thus, she needed an emergency surgery. Complete blood count (CBC) showed decreased hemoglobin levels of 8.6 g/dl and hematocrit levels of 25 %; and elevated white blood cells levels of 14,200/cmm, INR of 4.5 and PTTK levels of 40.3 s. As a result, the warfarin was stopped the day before the emergency surgery, and she received 4 units of fresh frozen plasma and one unit of whole blood in order to adjust her INR and hemoglobin levels. In addition, she received paracetamol.
The operation was done by a surgical doctor. A small midline incision was made, and a large hematoma was seen inside the aponeurosis of the left and right rectus abdominis muscles with blood infiltration in the peritoneal cavity. The hematoma was excised, the rupture in the rectus abdominis muscle was sutured, and the abdomen was closed with a drainage tube.
The day after the surgery, she used nasal cannula because her respiratory rate decreased due to abdominal pain. After the surgery, PTTK and INR were prolonged, and she was started on heparin pump 25,000 IU/ml at rate of infusion of 2 ml/h. The heparin pump was gradually stopped the next day and she was back on warfarin. Her general state gradually improved, and she was finally discharged from the hospital.
A week after the surgery, WBC and hemoglobin levels were normal. INR was 2.3.