We report a case of a 52-year-old Caucasian woman who was diagnosed with stage IIIB/C melanoma from a regressed primary of the abdomen when she presented with a bulky left groin mass. Imaging demonstrated a 6.5 cm lobulated mass in the left groin involving soft tissue and probable lymph nodes. Excisional biopsy revealed two lymph nodes with metastatic melanoma; tumor cells were positive for Melan-A and SOX-10, and negative for CD45, Cytokeratin AE1/AE3. The patient reported a long standing black skin lesion at the lower abdomen that had previously grown and bled, but more recently had started to fade. This lesion was biopsied and demonstrated superficial dermal fibrosis with tumoral melanosis and pigment laden macrophages (melanophages), consistent with a regressed melanocytic lesion. She had no distant metastases on staging and underwent a wide local excision of the regressed primary site and radical resection of the inguinal mass with complete lymph node dissection, followed by reconstruction of the left groin with a sartorius flap. Pathology of the 8.9 cm subcutaneous mass revealed a spindle cell (sarcomatoid) melanoma involving lymph node tissue, possible aggregate of matted lymph nodes with extranodal extension, and multiple additional lymph nodes without melanoma. She had no known history of autoimmune conditions or prior Raynaud’s phenomenon.
The first high dose Ipilimumab of 10 mg/kg was administered at an outside hospital followed by limited loose bowel movements and mouth soreness. One week after the second Ipilimumab infusion (at 3-week intervals), she developed myalgias, arthralgias, rash, vision changes, jaw pain, and discoloration of several upper and lower limb digits. Initially, the digital symptoms included intermittent red and blue color changes, worse in the cold, and better with warmth. Two weeks after the second infusion, her oncologist initiated Amlodipine 10 mg daily, Aspirin 81 mg daily, and Prednisone 10 mg daily for suspected immune-mediated Raynaud’s phenomenon. Serologic workup at the initial presentation included a negative antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody, cytoplasmic and perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, cryoglobulins, and hepatitis C antibody and ribonucleic acid (RNA); serum and urine protein electrophoresis were within normal limits. She reported immediate improvement of the myalgias, rash, arthralgias and jaw pain, but she had progression of digital pain and discoloration, therefore her oncologist administered 500 mg of IV Methylprednisolone and increased her daily Prednisone to 60 mg for a presumed Ipilimumab immune related adverse event (IRAE). Her digits did not improve, and she received a second 500 mg dose of IV Methylprednisolone three days later. The lower extremity digital pain resolved, but the upper extremity digital pain became so severe that she required high doses of morphine.
She was admitted for inpatient management two days after her outpatient steroid infusions. Physical exam revealed acrocyanosis of all upper extremity digits . She was initiated on 2 mg/kg of IV Methylprednisolone and calcium channel blockade. Lower extremity digits were less affected and demonstrated the greatest improvement. The upper extremity digital pain and acrocyanosis persisted. She was treated with one dose of 1000 mg of IV Methylprednisolone with limited benefit, and thus continued daily 2 mg/kg dosing. Arterial duplex dopplers of upper and lower extremities were normal. Transthoracic echocardiogram was negative for thrombus or mass. Conventional angiogram was performed on the left upper extremity; it revealed severely diminished blood flow in the digital arteries beyond the proximal interphalangeal joints, and the Verapamil challenge did not increase blood flow . Findings on the conventional angiogram were consistent with small vessel occlusive disease. Extensive autoantibody panels (inclusive of myeloperoxidase, proteinase 3, antinuclear, anti-centromere, anti-topoisomerase I, Beta-2-glycoprotein 1, anti-cardiolipin, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic) and viral panels (human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis panels) were negative. A full coagulopathy work-up was unrevealing. Given concern for ongoing immune-mediated vasculitis, the patient also received a 5-day course, 6-h per day, of Epoprostenol at a rate of 3 ng/kg/min. Fifty units of botulinum toxin A in 10 mL of normal saline was injected into each hand via palmar approach focusing on the proximal aspect of each digital artery. After six days of IV steroids, she was transitioned to oral Prednisone 100 mg (1 mg/kg) daily. She received four cycles of Rituximab at 375 mg/m2, at approximately one-week intervals. Her Prednisone was tapered to 10 mg daily over the course of seven weeks. She then developed an IRAE of pneumonitis, which quickly improved when the Prednisone was increased to 50 mg daily. During steroid treatment, she was also on Alendronate and calcium for osteoporosis prophylaxis, Bactrim for pneumocystis pneumonia prophylaxis, and Omeprazole for gastrointestinal protection.
After the four cycles of Rituximab, we believe that the vasculitic process and additional damage were halted, as she did not develop further proximal digital ischemia or other systemic symptoms. The exam appeared worse with dry gangrene of the fingertips, consistent with the natural evolution of skin changes with distal digital ischemia, as shown in Fig. & (Taken 5 weeks after Fig. ), likely reflecting consequences of the initial injury. She did ultimately require distal digit amputations. See Table for the chronological outline of the case presentation.