We report the case of a 33-year-old Italian male born from consanguineous parents and diagnosed with ATS since adolescence carrying the homozygous c.1334delG (p.Gly445-Glufs*40) SLC2A10 pathogenic variant [, ].
He suffered a cardiac arrest at delivery. Reanimation was successfully performed, and no brain damages occurred. He had normal psycho-physical development. During childhood and adolescence his major alterations were tortuosity, dilatation, and elongation of the main arteries and an increase carotid bifurcation thickness of intima and media, associated with vomiting, failure to thrive, dyspnea, diaphoresis, arm and abdominal pain, and fainting. He also suffered recurrent fever, bronchitis, and pneumonia successfully treated with antibiotic therapy. At 19 years, aortic sinus dilation (48 mm) with a moderate aortic valve incompetence were detected by aortic angiography and computed tomography (CT). Doppler ultrasonography showed extreme narrowing and tortuosity of the arteries. Therefore, the patient underwent surgery by replacing the ascending aorta according to Tyrone-Davis procedure with Vascutek No.28 prosthesis and aortic valve sparing [, ]. He also suffered from autoimmune chronic thyroiditis, treated with Levotiroxine 150 mcg daily, and Gilbert’ syndrome. He received cornea transplantation in left eye for corneal ectasia.
At 33 years, while he was at home, he experienced an episode characterized by expressive aphasia and right hemiparesis. Symptoms were described by family members lasting about 15 min with spontaneous resolution. While the patient was being transported to the hospital, he suffered a new episode with similar characteristics, lasting about 10 min. A further episode was observed once the patients arrived at the emergency room. Neurological evaluation showed central deficit of the VII right cranial nerve, mild right hemiparesis, mild expressive aphasia with some naming deficit and mild dysarthria (National Institute of Health Stroke Scale, NIHSS = 6). Brain CT showed no hyperacute signs of ischemia. Glucose, coagulation and blood cell counts were normal. After 20 min, neurological picture began to improve spontaneously, but without a complete recovery. In accordance with the international stroke guidelines, the patient was admitted to the Stroke Unit and intravenous fibrinolytic therapy with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rTPA) at a dosage of 0.9 mg/kg was administered.
After 1 h, the neurological examination was unremarkable. No signs of ischemia or bleeding complications were evident at brain CT after 24 h. Electroencephalogram, urine analysis, electrolytes, coagulation and routine screening for juvenile stroke including thyroid ormones were normal.
3 Tesla brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) T1, T2 and FLAIR sequence showed the absence of acute ischemic lesions. Intracranial and supra-aortic trunks magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed a marked tortuosity of the vessels, in the absence of dissection, aneurysmal lesions or hemodynamically significant stenoses Transesophageal echocardiography showed a moderate hypertrophy of the left ventricle with signs of diastolic dysfunction. There were no signs of patent foramen ovalis or shunt. Blood pressure values were monitored but were within normal limits.
Angio-CT scan of the thoracic and abdominal aorta showed tortuosity of thoracic and abdominal vessel without any stenosis .
The patient was diagnosed with recurrent transient ischemic attacks (TIA) and discharged with Aspirin 100 mg daily, with periodic follow-up and blood pressure monitoring indications.
At 3 months follow-up the patient was still asymptomatic.