A 29-year-old male with no history of headache referred to the Emergency Department for two episodes of sudden-onset, maximal-intensity posterior bilateral headache associated with nausea and hemi-paraesthesia, ascending from the left lower limb up to the face, followed by ipsilateral hemiparesis. Both episodes completely recovered within 2 h. In the previous 2 weeks, he had complained of fatigue, insomnia, and migraine-like headaches progressively worsening in intensity and frequency. Neurological evaluation and non-contrast brain CT were unremarkable. He was discharged with a diagnosis of migraine with aura.
Three days later, he was admitted to our Emergency Neurology Unit for a third episode.
Within the first hours from admission, he experienced five thunderclap headache attacks, two of which were associated with a 4-h-duration left hemiparesis. Blood pressure was normal. A RCVS was hypothesized: the patient was administered oral nimodipine 60 mg, followed by 30 mg every 4 h, with prompt symptoms resolution. Brain MRI revealed a circular diffusion restriction in the splenium of corpus callosum and diffuse leptomeningeal (but not callosal) enhancement . MR angiography, MRI spectroscopy, and perfusion-weighted imaging were normal. CSF showed lymphocytic pleocytosis (200/mm3), 6.5% CSF/serum albumin ratio (normal values: < 0.7%), and a mirror serum/CSF band pattern. Blood and CSF angiotensin-converting enzyme was negative. Search for neurotropic pathogens was negative, except for positive EBV-DNA PCR in both serum (5310 copies/mL) and CSF (2620 copies/mL), with positive EBV VCA IgG, and negative VCA-IgM, EBNA-IgM, and EBNA-IgG. CSF/blood immunophenotyping did not reveal blasts/cancer cells. Contrast-enhanced body CT revealed mild spleen enlargement. EEG showed bilateral diffuse anterior theta-delta slowing, without epileptiform abnormalities. Transcranial Doppler (TCD), performed during the third day of nimodipine treatment, revealed increased mean flow velocity in Middle Cerebral Arteries (MCA-MFV), not reaching the vasospasm threshold (right MCA: MFV 91 cm/s, peak 137 cm/s; left MCA: MFV 86 cm/s, peak 127 cm/s normal values: MCA-MFV < 80 cm/s, MCA peak < 120 cm/s) . During hospitalization, no relapses occurred for both headache and focal symptoms. Nimodipine was tapered to a maintenance dose of 30 mg every 8 h for 6 weeks. Follow-up CSF analysis on the 7th day revealed a marked reduction in cells (60/mm3) and CSF/blood albumin ratio (2.9%). 10 days after admission, follow-up brain and spine MRI was normal . Follow-up TCD showed normal MCA-MFV. The patient was discharged with complete resolution. After 1 month, EBV serology revealed EBNA seroconversion with positive EBNA-IgG index (8.0, range 0.2–0.8, Multiplex Luminex Method), supporting that a primary EBV infection had occurred.
Studies were identified by Pubmed, by entering the keywords: pseudo-migraine, headache and neurological deficits with cerebrospinal fluid lymphocytosis, headache and pleocytosis, and HaNDL. The search yielded 134 case reports and two small series, including a literature review on the paediatric population. Studies in English and Spanish language were included. The electronic search was supplemented by a manual search of references and reviews. Two Authors (GF and GB) independently screened full texts, to verify whether the patients fulfilled clinical inclusion criteria for HaNDL. Among patients with HaNDL, we selected those with (a) positive screening for infections OR (b) positive brain imaging. Unfortunately, many reports do not specify which infections were screened for, or whether MRI was contrast enhanced or not; in a few reports MRI was not performed and exclusion of alternative aetiologies relied on CT angiography.
We defined as “positive brain imaging” those abnormalities detected by conventional MRI. We excluded abnormalities detected by advanced imaging techniques (perfusion SPECT/CT, perfusion MRI), due to uncertain interpretation of findings: for instance, documentation of altered perfusion may be cause or consequence, and usually does not explain the primary mechanism. The extracted data were as follows: first Author, year of publication, patient’s age, sex, CSF features, results of blood serology or CSF serology/genome search, and results of brain MRI. We recorded the chosen treatment, but did not extrapolate any judgement about treatment effectiveness.
We thus could retry a total amount of 18 reports, 10 including MRI abnormalities only (focal or widespread leptomeningeal enhancement: n = 8; callosal oedema: n = 2), 4 with positive screening for infections, and 2 with both infection and MRI abnormalities. We also annotated the reports in which the Authors, in view of the transient focal deficits, decided to perform transcranial Doppler (n = 3).
The results are in Table , where also the current case is reported for comparison.