A 71-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our institution for further evaluation of chest discomfort, heavy dizziness and nausea after the use of nitroglycerin prescribed by a general practitioner.
On physical examination, cardiac auscultation revealed a systolic ejection murmur at her left sternal border. Her blood pressure was 130/60 mmHg, heart rate 68 beats/min, and her peripheral oxygen saturation was 98% in the room air. The 12-lead electrocardiogram revealed small negative T waves in leads III and a VF. A chest X-ray showed no pulmonary congestion, and the cardiothoracic ratio was 51%. Mild hypercholesterolemia was shown on her blood chemistry. Her B-type natriuretic peptide level was 81 pg/ml.
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed right ventricular hypertrophy, and a calcified lesion around her tricuspid valve . A Doppler study showed a high velocity flow signal in her right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT), and a mild tricuspid regurgitation . Her tricuspid valve area was calculated to be 2.2 cm2.
Multislice cardiac enhanced computerized tomography (CT) scanning showed an anomalous muscular bundle, dividing her right ventricle into two different compartments, which led to the RVOT stenosis. The stenosis was not obvious in the diastole, but especially severe in the systole. A calcification around her tricuspid valve, which seemed to be involved in the stenosis, was also observed . No calcification was observed around the other three valves. On the cardiac enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the calcified lesion contained very little parenchymatous tissue and revealed no enhancement .
A cardiac catheterization was performed. Her coronary angiography showed no abnormalities. Right to left flow through her patent foramen ovale, but no left to right shunt flow, was observed . Her pulmonary artery pressure was 24/13 mmHg; the pullback pressure recordings demonstrated a pressure gradient of 74 mmHg across the RVOT stenosis, and her right ventricular pressure was 97/5 mmHg . The diagnosis of double chambered right ventricle was confirmed based on the stated findings. Our patient refused surgical correction, and so beta-blockade (calvedilol) was prescribed. This was effective in reducing her symptoms after discharge.