The patient was a 48-year-old Caucasian man, with a history of smoking, alcoholism, tracheostomy, diagnosed with laryngeal moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma, and had not previously received tumor treatment. In November 2016, the patient received high-dose cisplatin monochemotherapy (100 mg/m2 every 21 days) along with 70 Gy of radiotherapy into 35 sessions in the head and neck region, as a therapeutic schedule. The only comorbidity was gastroesophageal reflux, and home therapy consisted of omeprazole 20 mg and dexamethasone 4 mg daily, and acetaminophen 500 mg if necessary for pain. On the day of cisplatin administration (total dose of 178 mg), the patient received vigorous hydration (3 L of saline solution; 0.9%), diuretics (125 mL of mannitol; 20%), electrolytes (20 mL of potassium chloride, 19.1%; and 10 mL of magnesium sulphate), and prophylaxis for acute emesis (20 mg of dexamethasone plus 24 mg of ondansetron). From days 2–6 following the first infusion the patient received 10 mg metoclopramide and 100 mg dimenhydrinate every 6 h, and 8 mg ondansetron every 12 h orally to prevent nausea and vomiting. Nevertheless, the patient had nausea during the five days following chemotherapy, decreasing his food intake. He did not have diarrhea, vomiting, or fever. Furthermore, the patient did not report any previous episodes of allergy or anaphylaxis.
At 12 days following the first cisplatin infusion and after 8 sessions of radiotherapy (total of 16 Gy), the patient presented with acute onset of palpable purpura in the lower limbs . On the 13th day following chemotherapy, the patient was hospitalized with suspected meningococcemia and began an antibiotic therapy with intravenous 1000 mg vancomycin every 12 h and 2000 mg cefepime every 8 h. On the 14th day after chemotherapy, the patient underwent a cranial computed tomography scan and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis that refuted the meningococcemia hypothesis, thus the antibiotic therapy was discontinued. The CSF analysis included adenosine deaminase activity, bacterioscopy, biochemistry, cytology, culture, gram bacterioscopy, IgG dosage, and screening for antitoxoplasma antibodies, mycobacteria, antineoplastic cells, fungi, and anti-cardiolipin antibody. All of the tests had normal or negative results. At the 14th day following the first dose of chemotherapy, a skin biopsy was performed, which revealed neutrophilic exudates coating the walls of the vessels of the superficial dermis, with marked apoptosis of inflammatory cells (leukocytoclasia). There was spilling of red blood cells and degenerative changes in the dermal collagen. The diagnosis of leukocytoclastic vasculitis was therefore performed . The direct immunofluorescence test revealed mild and granular deposits of IgM and C3 on the wall of some upper dermis vessels. Moreover, blood tests were negative for cryoglobulin, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), antinuclear antibodies (ANA), hepatitis B and C, and for human immunodeficiency virus.
At the 15th day following chemotherapy, a blood test showed marked leukopenia ; therefore, the patient received 300 mg subcutaneous filgrastim, blood was taken for culture and he restarted prophylactic antibiotic therapy at reduced doses (500 mg vancomycin and 1000 mg cefepime). He also began a regimen of 40 mg daily subcutaneous enoxaparin. At the 16th day following chemotherapy initiation, the patient underwent a urine test, and therapy with 1 mg/g topical triamcinolone daily was initiated owing to radiodermatitis, and therapy with 4 mg oral dexamethasone daily was restarted. At the 18th day, a therapy with 20 mg oral omeprazole daily was also restarted. At the 19th day, the patient received 5 mg/mL (20 mL) fenoterol inhalation therapy every 6 h, and the antibiotic regimen was altered to 500 mg ciprofloxacin every 12 h and 500 mg amoxicillin + 125 mg clavulanate orally every 8 h. Another urine test was performed on the 20th day, and a 24-h urine collection was performed on the 21th day owing to worsening of renal function, as evidenced by increased serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) . Discharge from the hospital occurred at the 23th day, once the purpura lesion had recovered and the patient’s renal function started to improve. Figure shows the sequence of pharmacotherapy and laboratory tests.
All the results of blood tests done prior to (basal) and following cisplatin administration are described in Table (hematological tests) and Table (biochemical and other blood tests). We observed that the majority of hematological parameters (hemoglobin, leukocytes, neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, and platelets) decreased after cisplatin chemotherapy and during the hospitalization, and began to increase on day 16 and 17, due to filgrastim administration. Eosinophils and basophils increased after cisplatin infusion; this was observed even on the blood test performed prior to the appearance of purpura lesion (on day 7). Regarding the renal parameters, creatinine and BUN increased primarily on day 16 (3 days after hospitalization) probably due to vancomycin administration, since these parameters began to decrease after the change to the antibiotic regimen used. The hepatic parameters were slightly altered after hospitalization only in relation to albumin and total proteins. The international normalized ratio parameter, a global standard for prothrombin time, was within the reference values. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and c-reactive protein (CRP) levels were altered in the test performed 14 days after cisplatin administration (2 days after appearance of the first purpura lesion). The rheumatoid factor showed no marked changes. The levels of complement components C3 and C4 were below the reference value in the test performed on day 14.
During the hospitalization, the general condition of the patient was good, with a fever only present on days 15 and 16, ranging from 100.22 °F to 100.76 °F, and no presence of arthralgia on any day. The palpable purpura occurred only in the lower limbs, and did not spread to any other site.
Twenty-five days after cisplatin administration and 2 days after discharge from hospital, the chemotherapy regimen was changed to carboplatin AUC 5 (total dose of 375 mg) owing to impaired renal function and the possibility of pharmacodermia (leukocytoclastic vasculitis due to cisplatin administration). After carboplatin administration, the patient had no more episodes of purpura.