A 68 year-old woman with a history (12 years ago) of breast cancer presented with a 0.7 cm × 0.7 cm solitary nodule of the left upper eyelid. The mass appeared three years ago in the central lid, was slowly growing and the patient reported no pain. On physical examination, the mass was firm, freely moving and not tender. The overlying skin did not reveal any abnormality. The clinical diagnosis was epidermal inclusion cyst and the mass was removed for diagnostic as well as cosmetic reasons.
The specimen was received in 10 % buffered formalin. On gross inspection, a tan well-circumscribed dermal mass measuring 0.7 cm × 0.7 cm × 0.5 cm was seen. The overlying skin ellipse (0.8 cm × 0.4 cm) was grossly unremarkable with a rubbery and firm consistency. On the cut surface, it was apparently homogenous. There was no attachment to underlying structures. On sectioning, no gross keratinous or cheesy material was seen.
Hematoxillin and eosin staining of the sections revealed a dermal mass with fibrous encapsulation . The tumor consisted of dual epithelial and stromal components. The former consisted of interconnected cords, tubules, solid islands and cystic structures showing a two layer arrangement of cuboidal epithelial cells . The tubular structures showed decapitation secretion or apical snouting of the inner cell layer. Keratotic lamella-filled cysts lined with squamous epithelium were seen. The latter contained anucleated squamous cells. As a result of the eccentrically placed nuclei, hyaline epithelial cells were observed focally to have a plasmacytoid appearance . The stroma was myxoid with intersecting collagen fibers, focal lipomatous differentiation and calcification . Capsular breach, hypercellularity, atypia, high mitotic figures or satellite lesions were not appreciated. Microscopically, the tumor had no connection to the palpebral lobe of the lacrimal gland.
To better characterize the cell nature, differentiation, and protein expression of this tumor, we performed an extended immunohistochemistry panel for CK7 (cytokeratin-7-7), EMA (epithelial membrane antigen), GCDFP-15 (gross cystic disease fluid protein-15), α-SMA (alpha- smooth muscle actin), S-100, p63, and CD10 immunomarkers (Novocastra Laboratories; Leica Microsystems). Both internal and external positive and negative controls were assessed according to personal experience and manufacturer instructions. CK-7 immunostaining was positive at the inner cell layer of the ducts, tubules and cystic structures (luminal cells). The abluminal (basal/myoepithelial) cells and stromal component were not reactive . EMA which is present in a variety of glandular (secretory) epithelia such as breast, eccrine and apocrine glands was positive in the luminal cells of the epithelial component and displayed an apical staining pattern ; the sebaceous cells were bubbly positive . Some non-specific epidermal staining was observed. GCDFP-15 immunostaining showed strong luminal positivity . The abluminal and stromal cells were negative. Α-SMA reacts with tumors arising from smooth muscles and myoepithelial cells and was negative at epithelial component, but showed focal positive stromal staining . The vascular walls within the tumor showed strong cytoplasmic reactivity. S-100 immunostaining revealed strong stromal positivity, especially in the lipomatous areas . The epithelial component was not reactive. The p63 immunostaining showed positivity at the abluminal cells of tubules and cystic structures. The stromal cells were focally positive . CD10, or CALLA (common acute lymphoblastic leukemia antigen) is a cell surface antigen that has been confirmed as a myoepithelial cell marker. CD10 immunostaining showed reactivity in abluminal cells and stromal fibrocytes . The plasmacytoid cells were also positive for this marker .