We admitted a 41-year-old Albanian man with dyspnea to our emergency department. He was complaining of severe upper thoracic chest pain after being involved in a pedestrian-vehicle traffic accident 5 days earlier. The patient was hit by a car while walking on the pavement, resulting in multiple rib fractures. Initial conservative treatments at another medical institution had failed to alleviate his symptoms. He had had recurrent episodes of fever in the days preceding his admission to our clinic.
The patient, a self-employed business owner, was still in emotional trauma upon his admission to our hospital. His medical history showed no evidence of narcotic addiction, but the patient’s family reported that he is a regular smoker and that he consumes above average amounts of alcohol.
Our examinations revealed an elevated blood pressure of 150/90 mmHg, mild tachycardia (95–105 beats/min), a chest deformity, subcutaneous emphysema, hematoma, and a score of 5 on a visual analogue scale (VAS) for pain . From this point on, the patient’s pain intensity was assessed every 60 minutes; pain management was performed accordingly via intravenous analgesics because the patient was uncooperative with the epidural anesthesia.
Laboratory evaluations suggested possible liver trauma, indicated by elevated aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 89 U/L and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 122 U/L, which was excluded by computed tomography. The patient had a normal renal function, Urea and Creatinine levels of 6.9 mmol/L and 64.4 μmol/L, respectively. The patient had normal body temperature (36.6 °C) and white blood cell counts (8.8*103 cells/μl).
We observed no neurological abnormalities. Chest radiography revealed possible fractures of several right lateral ribs, hypoventilated lung fields, and minor pleural effusion. Transthoracic echocardiography showed no other abnormalities. The patient’s left ventricular ejection fraction of 60% and blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg pointed to steady hemodynamics. Computed tomographic scans indicated displaced fractures of right lateral ribs 5–11 , hyperdensity zones from bone fragments, and pulmonary contusion .
We opted for general endotracheal anesthesia followed by an anterolateral thoracotomy. The transection was performed below the chest, above the costal margins, through cauterization of the pectoralis, serratus, and intercostal muscles. Four displaced ribs, the seventh through tenth, were stabilized using titanium reconstruction plates and cortical locking screws (small notch titanium reconstruction plates, thickness 3.5 mm, width 8 mm, catalogue number 489245; DePuy Synthes, West Chester, PA, USA). After thoracic drainage, 32 Fr, the surgery was terminated via standard closure of the intercostal wound incision and suturing overlying tissue. We transferred the patient to the intensive care unit following the surgery, where he stayed for 48 hours with no significant postoperative complications. Within the first 12 hours, the patient reported a low VAS pain score (< 2); as a result, we started with a rehabilitative physical therapy program from this point on. However, the patient experienced significant pain (VAS score of “6 – 8”) upon mobilization. He was more cooperative at this stage and allowed the placement of an epidural catheter between the fourth and fifth lumbar vertebrae for continuous infusion of bupivacaine (0.25%; 3–5 ml/h). The epidural analgesia decreased the patient’s VAS pain score to 2. Evaluation of the patient’s respiratory function confirmed a gradual recovery and full independence from the respiratory support system 48 hours after surgery .
Control chest X-ray analysis on day 4 confirmed the correct placement of the plates . Postoperative pain analysis on day 5 indicated a substantial relief from pain discomfort (VAS pain score of 1).
The total hospitalization was 6 days. Follow-up at 3, 6, 12, and 23 weeks and 11 months, via outpatient clinic visits and phone contact, confirmed a complete physical and mental recovery with no residual symptoms . The patient reported that he was able to participate in work after 6 weeks and that he had quit smoking since the accident.