We present the case of a 7-year-old girl who was referred to our hospital with severe symptoms of heart failure. An abnormal Q wave was noted during a school checkup, but the patient did not receive medical attention. She had severe fatigue and dyspnoea at the time of admission. Gallop rhythm was heard and coolness of extremities was prominent. She also had hyperkeratosis and a bullous skin lesion of unknown cause which appeared soon after birth . Echocardiography revealed a dilated left ventricle and ejection fraction was <20% with Teichholz method . Chest X-ray showed massive cardiomegaly and congestion. We diagnosed her with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. We administered diuretics, dobutamine, milrinone, and human atrial natriuretic peptide, yet her heart function worsened soon after admission. She required extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support on Day 25 but did not recover thereafter. We decided to implant EXCOR® as a bridge-to-transplant therapy. We did not consider the skin lesions as a contraindication because they were located on the extremities. After implantation of EXCOR®, genetic testing detected a homozygous loss-of-function mutation of calpastatin (CAST). Both parents were found to be heterozygous for the mutation, and because other examinations, including skin biopsy and mitochondrial enzyme activity, did not reveal any abnormality, this was thought to be the cause of her skin lesions. Skin condition around the return flow cannula (RFC) worsened gradually, and granulomatous tissue formation occurred . She occasionally experienced fever, which we treated as sepsis although a positive blood culture was never observed. At nearly 2 years after admission, she started to experience intermittent fever which required antibiotics. There was no vegetation on transthoracic echocardiography, and contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) performed on Day 729 showed fluid retention along the RFC . We continued debridement and antibiotic administration when required. On Day 767, she had another episode of high fever, with a positive blood culture of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). We administered vancomycin and daptomycin, and the subsequent blood culture was negative for MRSA. However, massive bleeding from the cannulation site of the RFC occurred on Days 768 and 775. Because the bleeding stopped by compression, cardiovascular surgeons considered that exploration of the cannulation site could be diagnostic and practical; yet we could not determine the origin of bleeding by the exploration, the bleeding was considered to be caused by neoplastic vessel along the RFC, and did not perform further images or exams. On Day 781, she had another episode of massive bleeding. At this time, we decided to perform surgical exploration with the intention of exchanging the whole system if needed. We did not perform CECT before moving to the operation room because the bleeding did not stop. When the sternum was opened, a tremendous amount of bleeding occurred instantly due to a ruptured pseudoaneurysm at the cannulation site of the ascending aorta. Despite all medical efforts, she collapsed into asystole and then to ventricular fibrillation. She passed away during surgical exploration.