A 57-year old Afro-Caribbean female presented with a T4N2M0 triple negative mucinous right breast carcinoma. She was 1-year post radical hysterectomy and adjuvant radiation for abnormal uterine bleeding, with the corresponding histology of endometrial carcinoma as well as multiple uterine leiomyomas. She had a 12-year history of left exophthalmos secondary to a sphenoid wing meningioma, for which she received external beam radiotherapy. She also had a history of rectal bleeding secondary to an anal polyp, which was resected and proved to be a tubular adenoma.
Several dermatological lesions were noted on examination, which the patient reported to be present ‘since childhood’. These included flesh colored papules in the perinasal region, warty papules on the tongue, hands and feet as well as palmar pits. A visible right neck swelling was also noted and further questioning revealed symptoms of dysphagia as well as a history of prior left thyroidectomy for a multinodular goiter. She did not report any shortness of breath, palpitations or significant weight loss. A left cheek swelling was palpated, which was pulsatile in nature. Our patient also had a thoracolumbar scoliosis and complained of symptoms of sciatica. Unfortunately, as she was estranged from her family, her family medical history and genetic testing of family members could not be obtained.
Hematological and biochemical investigations as well as thyroid function tests were all within normal limits. Contrast enhanced CT of the brain, neck, chest, abdomen and pelvis was performed for staging purposes and to monitor known lesions. CT revealed a left sphenoid wing meningioma with extra-conal extension and resultant left optic nerve impingement and proptosis. Two other homogenously enhancing extra-axial lesions were noted, with one showing calcification, consistent with the presence of additional smaller meningiomas. These were stable on imaging for 5 years . The pulsatile left cheek swelling corresponded with a left parotid arteriovenous malformation, with the arterial feeder arising from the left external carotid artery . A left thyroidectomy was noted with multinodular enlargement of the right thyroid lobe and isthmus along with retrosternal extension and marked tracheal deviation to the left . The right breast lesion was partially imaged on CT preoperatively, along with level I and II axillary adenopathy . Of note was a thin walled lung cyst in the periphery of the left upper lobe .
Multiple hypo enhancing splenic lesions were seen, likely representing hamartomas, as well as several subcentimeter fat density lesions within the pancreas . The pelvis showed post surgical changes with no evidence of local recurrence or lymphadenopathy. No metastatic disease was evident. Mammogram of the left breast showed no evidence of spiculated masses, clustered micro calcifications or architectural distortion. Our patient declined biopsy of her skin lesions however these were assessed by dermatologists and clinically confirmed to be facial trichilemmomas, acral keratosis, palmar pits and oral papillomas. MRI of the spine revealed a thoracolumbar scoliosis with spondylosis and multilevel disc disease however there was no evidence of metastatic disease, dural ectasia or extra medullary lesions. Genetic testing identified a pathogenic mutation in the PTEN gene: c.697C > T (pArg233*).
Following neoadjuvant chemotherapy, our patient underwent a right modified radical mastectomy with axillary lymph node dissection. Although she declined debulking operative intervention for the sphenoid wing meningioma, she was treated with external beam radiotherapy; with stability of this lesion noted post radiation. Prophylactic mastectomy for the contralateral breast was discussed at the multidisciplinary team meeting, however our patient opted to instead have regular clinical and imaging examinations for screening of the left breast.
There has been no clinical or radiological evidence of local or nodal recurrence of her endometrial carcinoma. FNAC of the right thyroid showed no evidence of malignancy, however the patient is considering thyroidectomy due to worsening symptoms of dysphagia. She continues to be monitored in the outpatient clinic setting for her sphenoid wing meningioma and parotid AVM, however she is not keen on operative management. For follow up, she will be offered annual thorough clinical examination including dermatologic assessment as well as screening colonoscopies. She will also perform interval whole body contrast enhanced CT for continued surveillance for metastatic disease. On this examination, her kidneys will also be closely monitored for renal cell carcinoma.