A 14-year-old girl suffering from Burkitt leukemia presented to the emergency room with chest pain, dyspnea, and mild cough, without fever. She was diagnosed with Burkitt leukemia 4 months earlier and treated with chemotherapy (120 mg/m² of doxorubicin and 5,700 mg/m² of cyclophosphamide, both known as cardiotoxic drugs).
In the emergency room, her vital signs were listed as follows: Heart rate of 144 beats/minutes, blood pressure of 59/45 mm Hg, body temperature of 37.2°C, respiratory rate of 40/min, and oxygen saturation level of 100% on room air. The physical examination was remarkable for signs of hypoperfusion (prolonged capillary refill time, mottling) and mild respiratory distress. Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly and perihilar infiltration. Electrocardiogram showed ST–T waves abnormalities in leads V4, V5, and V6. Myocardial biomarkers, as listed in the following, were increased on admission: Brain natriuretic peptide 349 pmol/L (Normal <28.9 pmol/L); Troponin I 353 ng/L (Normal <15.6 ng/L), increasing to 9,953 ng/L 72 hours later. Echocardiography showed a severely depressed left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 10–15% with a moderate pericardial effusion, establishing the diagnosis of HF. The patient was transferred to the PICU to be placed under mechanical ventilation. An inotropic support by catecholamines was initiated. Rapidly, a refractory cardiogenic shock was diagnosed due to increasing lactic acidosis and the patient was placed under VA–ECMO. After an initial improvement of myocardial function, a decrease in LVEF associated with an elevation of myocardial biomarkers (7 days after admission) were observed. Therefore, a treatment by IVIg was started (2 gm/kg) for 2 days. After 10 days of VA–ECMO, the patient gradually recovered and LVEF was normalized on day 11. Pericardial effusion disappeared and myocardial biomarkers decreased to normal values. She was weaned from VA–ECMO support on day 16 and was discharged from the PICU on day 23.
Regarding the etiologic diagnosis, a RT-PCR in bronchoalveolar lavage identified hMPV. The other main causes of myocarditis (blood PCR testing for enteroviruses, adenoviruses, Epstein–Barr virus, human herpes virus 6, cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B19, hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency viruses, influenza, dengue, and chikungunya virus; multiplex respiratory PCR testing for respiratory syncytial virus, influenza A, influenza B, parainfluenza, adenovirus, coronavirus, chlamydia, and mycoplasma pneumoniae; toxins and autoimmune diseases) were ruled out, and the blood cultures remained negative. Endomyocardial biopsy was not performed because the patient's condition was unstable and because of predominant left HF. A cardiac MRI was performed 30 days after the admission: Left ventricular ejection fraction was normal with high signal intensity of the myocardium in T2-weighted STIR sequences, and a delayed myocardial enhancement in T1-mapping was suggestive of myocardial inflammation . The diagnosis of acute myocarditis secondary to hMPV was finally established, with a large body of evidence such as timing of recovery, frequency, imaging findings, and identification of hMPV, already known as a causative agent of myocarditis. For note, the cardiac function after completion of chemotherapy was normal with a LVEF >50%, without regional kinetic wall motion abnormalities.