A 66-year-old Caucasian patient has been followed since 2004 for a Gleason score 8 (4 + 4) prostate adenocarcinoma, initially classified T3N0M0, treated by radiotherapy in association with luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) analogs for a period of 3 years.
His family history was relevant for epilepsy in his two sisters.
Hormonal treatment was resumed in 2009 for biological recurrence, and he was then put under diethylstilbestrol in 2013.
In May 2017, he underwent prostate laser photovaporization for severe voiding disorders refractory to medical management. It should be noted that his prostate-specific antigen (PSA) back then was 1.53 ng/ml.
In September 2017, the patient presented generalized tonic–clonic seizures, followed by postictal confusion.
Initial neurological examination, standard laboratory tests, and brain imaging [brain scanner and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)] did not show any abnormalities.
Treatment by levetiracetam was then introduced but stopped rapidly.
A few days later, he was hospitalized following the recurrence of the generalized epileptic crises. His wife reported memory and concentration problems that appeared after the first epileptic episode, along with an escalating depressive syndrome.
During his hospitalization course, the patient suffered from confusion, phasic disorder with slurred speech, and disorders of simple and complex order comprehension in addition to partial seizures, manifested by loss of contact, chewing, sniffing, clonism, and right gaze deviation.
Epileptic activity with focal onset in left frontotemporal region, secondarily generalized, was documented by the electroencephalogram (EEG) shown in Fig. .
Intravenous administration of clonazepam and levetiracetam allowed clinical improvement, with, however, persistence of left temporal interictal slow peaks on control EEG.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis demonstrated normal cytology, glycorrhachia, and protein rate. Bacterial culture and herpes virus polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in the CSF were both negative.
Furthermore, supernumerary bands of immunoglobulin were found on the CSF analysis with the absence of Hu, Ri, and Yo neural antibodies. It is noteworthy to mention that GABAB anti-receptor antibodies were positive in the CSF, thus evoking the diagnosis of limbic encephalitis with GABAB receptor antibodies.
The patient was then hospitalized in the intensive care unit for 2 weeks secondary to the aggravation of the epileptic seizures, where he was intubated with thiopental sedation after failure of phenytoin and phenobarbital effect.
Methylprednisolone treatment was then started with three boluses of 1 g, followed by treatment with polyvalent immunoglobulin 2 g/kg over 5 days when autoimmune limbic encephalitis diagnosis was confirmed. Antiepileptic treatment had to be escalated gradually by levetiracetam, clobazam, lacosamide, and carbamazepine.
The course of his hospitalization was then marked with successful extubation after 7 days along with a few episodes of fluctuating agitation. The control EEG patterns improved gradually with striking evidence of resolved generalized status epilepticus and persistent foci of seizures from right and left temporal starting point. However, some left temporal slow puff of waves persisted without seizure before his discharge from the intensive care unit.
Brain MRI was performed 3 weeks after the first epileptic seizures showing left hippocampal and parahippocampal hypersignal in T2 and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences, with swelling appearance, without contrast enhancement, compatible with the initial diagnosis of limbic encephalitis .
Choline positron emission tomography (PET) scan showed, besides the prostate and iliac ganglionic areas uptake, left temporal brain hypermetabolism corresponding to the electric epileptic focus and the hypersignal observed on MRI. Considering that GABAB anti-receptor antibodies limbic encephalitis is frequently associated with small-cell lung tumors, bronchoscopy with bronchial aspiration were performed, showing no evidence of malignancy.
Back in the neurology department, the patient was calm and better oriented without any sensorimotor deficits or phasic disorders. However, mild ataxia and especially massive anterograde memory disorders persisted. Neuropsychological assessment revealed verbal and visual anterograde memory disorders as well as psychomotor fatigue and concentration difficulties.
Hospitalization was complicated with left lower limb deep vein thrombosis treated by curative anticoagulation.
Immunotherapy was changed to immunosuppressive treatment.
The patient received one course of cyclophosphamide of 1 g and two courses of rituximab of 375 mg/m2.
No prolongation of cyclophosphamide treatment was done owing to persistent neutropenia and lymphopenia. Rituximab was not renewed 6 months later as treatment with chemotherapy was established.
Control brain MRI showed stable left hippocampal and parahippocampal T2 and FLAIR hypersignal, without contrast enhancement.
The patient then remained neurologically stable for 2 years, with visual anterograde and immediate memory improvement. Nevertheless, verbal anterograde memory was deficient with autobiographical lacunar amnesia regarding the 2 years that preceded the disorder.
Epileptic seizures receded with normalization of the subsequent control EEG patterns and tapering of antiepileptic treatment.
Concerning the prostate cancer follow-up, diethylstilbestrol was stopped and was replaced by degarelix before tumor progression on imaging. It should be recalled that the PSA level at the beginning of the neurological events was 0.16 ng/ml, then increased to 1.1 ng/ml, and then dropped back to 0.68 ng/ml 6 months after degarelix was introduced.
Following voiding urinary symptoms complaints, several investigations were conducted, including abdominopelvic ultrasound showing a bilateral ureteral and pyelocalyceal dilatation with a postvoid residual of urine of 300 cc with laboratory data indicating the start of kidney injury with creatinine level of 140–150 µmol/l serum.
Flexible cystoscopy revealed an obstructive prostate. Consequently, prostate endoscopic bipolar resection was performed.
Histological examination found a poorly differentiated carcinomatous proliferation, with significant eosinophilic necrosis. Carcinomatous cells were observed in ranges and sheets of average size, presenting hyperchromatic nuclei with irregular outlines and quite abundant cytoplasm .
Immunohistochemical examination showed positivity for neuroendocrine markers (CD56, synaptophysin, and chromogranin A), and absence of expression of CK7 and PSA . Ki67 proliferation index was high, marking 100% of tumor cells .
A multidisciplinary discussion was held, and decision was made to start chemotherapy of which he initially received six courses of cisplatin with etoposide after discontinuation of immunosuppressive treatment. PSA level after the last course was 0.21 ng/ml.
Follow-up PET scan showed the presence of subdiaphragmatic ganglia; accordingly, docetaxel as a second-line treatment was started with an unfavorable response after six courses evidenced by bilateral palpable indurated inguinal adenopathies and hepatic metastatic nodules on choline PET scan.
Hence, a third-line chemotherapy by doxorubicin associated with cyclophosphamide was started with progression of hepatic nodules on follow-up PET scan after three cycles.
As such, cabazitaxel as a last chemotherapy was commenced with initial favorable response after three courses. Subsequently, PET scan findings deteriorated, showing isotopic, ganglionic, bone, hepatic, and cerebral progression.
Considering the aggressive disease profile, it was decided to stop any further treatment and to confine the patient to palliative care.