A 78-year-old woman diagnosed with mild aortic valve stenosis for 6 years had chest tightness on exertion over the past 1 month with cardiac failure New York Heart Association Class III. Comorbidities were hyperlipidaemia, hypertension, and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Echocardiography identified symptomatic severe aortic valve stenosis with mean gradient 59 mmHg, peak velocity 4.9 m/s and valve area 0.8 cm2, left ventricular ejection fraction 65% and left ventricular end-diastolic dimension 38 mm, moderate tricuspid regurgitation, and pulmonary artery pressure 41 mmHg. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed no coronary stenosis, and CTA evaluation by 3Mensio Structural Heart software version 10.0 (Pie Medical Imaging, Maastricht, the Netherlands) hinted the high anatomical risks of coronary obstruction (CO) caused by disequilibrium of the tricuspid valve (sinus of the Valsalva dimensions 26.6 mm × 33.5 mm × 32.0 mm), low left coronary ostia (left 6.3 mm, right 13.5 mm), low left sinus height (14.2 mm), and calcium and thickening of leaflets at left coronary ostia . 3D-printing model (MA KE MEDICAL, Xian, China) of the aortic root and simulation with a 22-mm balloon dilation showed the acceptable risks of CO if the patient accepted TAVR ( and F).
The patient was first recommended for a surgical aortic valve replacement with the Society of Thoracic Surgeons score of 6.1%, but she refused the surgery and then accepted TAVR. Next, angiography showed a small left coronary sinus (Video 1) and a normal left coronary artery (Video 2). Aortography demonstrating total occlusion of the left main coronary artery caused by the left coronary sinus completely compressed by a 22 mm × 40 mm balloon (Microport, Shanghai, China) under rapid pacing (Video 3). So, our team decided to place an undeployed 4.5 mm × 21 mm GuReater stent (Lepu Medical, Beijing, China) into the left anterior descendent coronary artery through the left radial artery by a 6-Fr guiding catheter and Guidezilla guide extension catheter (Boston Scientific, USA, ). After the 24-mm VitaFlow valve was anchored preliminary and maintained half-released, the undeployed coronary stent was pulled back into the left main coronary artery and protruded to the ascending aorta, then released with a high-pressure post-dilation. Finally, the VitaFlow valve was completely implanted (, ) without hypotension or ST-segment elevation. According to the CHA2DS2-VASc score (4 points) of patients with atrial fibrillation, oral anticoagulation was recommended. The patient was discharged 3 days after the operation, with dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg, once a day) and anticoagulant therapy (rivaroxaban 2.5 mg, twice a day) for the chimney stenting during TAVR. The anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel 75 mg and rivaroxaban 10 mg, once a day) were changed a month later for long-term maintenance. The CTA evaluation and 3D-printing simulation identified the chimney stenting of the left main coronary arterial patency after 3 months of follow-up .