In August 2022, a 65-year-old Chinese woman, a never-smoker, was admitted to our hospital. She had a three-month history of progressive dyspnea, cough, and bloody sputum. The patient’s overall health was poor due to a five-year history of hypertension and a 30-year history of rheumatoid arthritis. Her family history regarding cancer was unclear. She had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance scale score between 3 and 4. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed a space-occupying lesion in the right upper lobe of the lung, along with multiple masses in the pericardium, various skeletal sites (including bilateral ribs, thoracic and lumbar vertebrae, iliac bone, and bilateral femoral bones), right latissimus dorsi muscle, and left adrenal gland . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed positivity for pan cytokeratin (PCK), cytokeratin 7 (CK7), cytokeratin 5/6 (CK5/6) and Ki67 (60%), and negative for Napsin A, thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1), P63, chromogranin A (CgA), and synaptophysin (Syn). Morphologically, the appearance was consistent with poorly differentiated carcinoma, with adenocarcinoma features . A diagnosis of stage IVB (cT4N3M1c) poorly differentiated carcinoma was confirmed by PET-CT and pathological examination of a coarse needle biopsy from the right axillary lymph node. Further, a blood sample was collected for next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based molecular profiling of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) (conducted by OrigiMed, Shanghai, China), which identified a novel EML4-MET fusion, comprising exons 1 to 13 of EML4 and exons 15 to 21 of MET (including the complete MET kinase domain) . The allele frequency of EML4-MET was 0.4%. NGS also identified a TP53 gene mutation (exon 10, abundance: 6.8%) and an NTRK3 mutation (exon 10, abundance: 5.3%).
Following diagnosis, the patient opted out of chemotherapy and was prescribed anlotinib for a two-week course. However, due to hemoptysis, an adverse event, anlotinib was discontinued. Following a multi-disciplinary treatment (MDT) discussion in October 2022, oral savolitinib treatment (400 mg once daily) was started. After one month, CT showed that the patient had achieved stable disease (SD), with no significant size changes for some lesions (right upper lung lobe, pericardium, skeleton, right latissimus dorsi muscle, and left adrenal gland). There were also reductions in pericardial and right pleural effusions, revealing savolitinib as a viable therapeutic option for this patient. We therefore continued the treatment with savolitinib. However, the patient was diagnosed with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in December 2022. Next, the patient had progressive exertional dyspnea after a 3-month treatment of savolitinib, due to treatment delay and COVID-19 complications. A subsequent CT scan revealed significantly increased right pleural and pericardial effusions, as well as a small left pleural effusion, indicating progressive disease (PD) . Following progression on savolitinib, the patient underwent thoracic and pericardial catheter drainage. She was then administered chemotherapy with pemetrexed disodium (0.6 g) for two weeks. Unfortunately, in March 2023, the patient succumbed to respiratory failure due to disease progression. The patient provided informed consent for the publication of this case.