An 8-year-old Caucasian female patient with CF (delF508 homozygous), with an implanted port-catheter and under CFTR-modulator therapy (lumacaftor/ivacaftor) presented with recurrent pulmonary exacerbations, B-symptoms including fever, night sweat, fatigue and weight loss. Laboratory work-up revealed elevated aminotransferases, which persisted despite discontinuation of CFTR modulator therapy (max. AST 370 U/l, ALAT 440 U/l). In parallel, the patient presented a decline of her baseline lung function (undulating around ppFeV1 60%, ppFeV1 min. 35%, baseline 81%). Mycobacterium chimaera was intermittently recovered from sputum cultures (5 out of 17 sputum cultures in 7 months), while chest computed tomography showed no NTM-lung disease defining pattern. The conventional sputum cultures in parallel revealed repeatedly a polymicrobial infection with multiple CF-typical pathogens (Achromobacter sp., Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Pseudomonas putida, Haemophilu influenzae, Aspergillus fumigatus, Staphylococcus aureus), so bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage was not performed. Over this period of 7 months, the patient was hospitalized 4 times for intravenous antibiotic therapy (meropenem, piperacillin/ tazobactam and vancomycin) and received 4 courses of oral antibiotics (amoxicillin/ clavulanic acid, co-trimoxazole, doxycycline, ciprofloxacin), each course for 10–21 days. No antibiotic with marked activity against MAC was administered. All antibiotic therapies resulted in partial temporary improvement of the clinical condition and the lung function. All conventional blood culture bottles drawn for the detection of aerobic and anaerobic bacteria remained sterile, the inflammation parameters were mildly elevated or negative (CrP max. 5.8 mg/dl, procalcitonin max. 2.74 ng/ml). The liver enzymes remained elevated and the subsequent liver biopsy revealed granulomatous hepatitis that was attributed to lumacaftor/ivacaftor toxicity at that time.
By means of next-generation sequencing (NGS) of cell-free DNA (Noscendo DISQVER, Duisburg, Germany), M. chimaera was detected in blood samples obtained via the port-catheter. Subsequently, specific mycobacterial diagnostics were initiated. M. chimaera was recovered from mycobacterial cultures from heparin blood using Mycobacteria growth indicator tube (MGIT) (time to positivity 7 days and 11 h for the first culture and 7 days and 20 h for the second) obtained via the port-catheter but not from peripheral blood and identified by GenoType CM 2.0 and GenoType NTM-DR (Hain Lifescience, Nehren, Germany). M. chimaera was also recovered from solid culture media (Löwenstein-Jensen and Stonebrink, Oxoid, Wesel, Germany). After the port-catheter was removed, electron microscopy illustrated the presence of rod-shaped bacteria (consistent with mycobacteria) and a biofilm on the inner and outer surfaces of the port-catheter . Following diagnosis of NTM bloodstream infection, formalin-bedded hepatic tissue was re-investigated for NTM by PCR, which yielded negative results.
Further immunologic and genetic work-up including inter alia autoimmune markers, immune cell phenotyping and a genetic panel for inherited immunodeficiencies revealed no underlying predisposition to mycobacterial infections apart from CF. Serum levels of pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6 were normal, sIL-2 receptor levels were mildly elevated (1414 U/ml, cut-off: 700 U/ml), interferon gamma levels were also elevated (298.8 pg/ml, cut-off 30.2 pg/ml).
After removing the port catheter and initiating triple antimycobacterial therapy according to US and European consensus guidelines (rifampicin, ethambutol and azithromycin) , the patient’s condition and lung function quickly recovered completely. The liver enzymes were normalized a week after initiation of MAC therapy. The patient received antimycobacterial therapy for 8 weeks, which was then discontinued in favor of CFTR-modulator therapy incompatible with rifamycins due to CYP3A interactions. The sputum cultures remained negative for M. chimaera after catheter removal and start of targeted therapy. In the follow-up over months after the end of the therapy there were no signs of infection relapse but CFTR-modulator therapy was dose-adjusted due to relapse of elevated liver enzymes.