A 80-year-old female with hypertension, diabetes mellitus, was referred to our hospital for fever, metrorrhagia and rest pain in right leg. Medical history reported uterine cancer and gallbladder cancer treated many years before with hysterectomy and cholecystectomy, . Five years before, a right superficial femoral artery stenting was performed for rest pain. No coronary artery disease. At admission, her physical examination revealed atrial fibrillation, blood pressure of 150/70 mmHg, fever (37.5 °C), respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min and oxygen saturation of 95%, abdomen's soft and non-tender with inflammation in genital region caused by Candida albicans infection with Vescicovaginal Fistula complicated by urinary tract infection. Vascular examination showed lack of distal pulses with cyanosis of right foot. Duplex ultrasound (DUS) showed narrowing residual lumen and monophasic wave on both iliac-femoral axes with occlusion of stent in SFA.
The subsequent CT-angiography showed any significative alteration in the thoracic and abdominal aorta, but in iliac-femoral axes were confirmed an important atherosclerotic disease with significative stenosis on both common and occlusion of right external iliac artery; furthermore, right superficial femoral artery showed an occlusion of stent with its proximal tract involving the origin of right deep femoral artery (DFA), determining an obstacle to direct flow . After a gynaecological and urological consult that declared as not urgent the problems previously highlighted, the reduced blood flow in the right leg and foot was identified as the main cause of right leg clinical conditions. A simultaneous multilevel hybrid treatment was proposed to address simultaneously the MPAD. After spinal anaesthesia, the hybrid approach consisted of a first step with common femoral endoarterectomy and dacron patch angioplasty prior section of stent involving the origin of DFA. The iliac axis stenosis was also addressed by placing a 7 × 70 mm Silene (InSitu Technologies, USA - Minnesota) in the common iliac artery with extension in external iliac artery with 7 × 150 mm Viabahn Stent graft (WL Gore and Associates, Flagstaff, AZ, USA). After intervention, a direct blood flow was registered in the right DFA. On second post-operative day, the patient was asymptomatic for pain with normalization of cyanosis. The patient was discharged after a week with double antiplatelet therapy and advanced inguinal medication to avoid infectious complications.
After two months of the index procedure, the patient was readmitted due to inguinal wound dehiscence with a purulent secretion through a fistulous channel and signs of sepsis. The patient had missed every check and urological problems were progressed with urine output on the inguinal wound, despite the presence of bladder catheter.
The control CT showed an occlusion of iliac stent with gas bubbles inside the stent graft and peri-iliac soft tissue attenuation that suggested a graft infection (, ). Moreover, there was a suspect of disconnection between patch and arterial wall with dislocation outside of arterial wall in final tract of viabahn stent graft . Antibiotic treatment was initiated with intravenous meropenem and vancomycin.
Laboratory data were as follows: White blood cell (WBC) 37,000/μL (neutrophils: 95%), C-reactive protein (CPR) 131.5 mg/dl, pro calcitonin 11.6 μg/dl, Hemoglobin (Hb) 8.9 g/dl, Haematocrit (Hct) 27.3%.
The patient was transferred to the operating room, under general anaesthesia, long midline laparotomy was performed. After peeling off the intraperitoneal adhesion, right common iliac artery was controlled . In abdomen was present ascites. The stent-graft was completely removed with a traction after a surgical access on common iliac artery and common femoral artery where patch was partially disconnected from arterial wall (, ). A procedure of revascalarization was not taken into account for high risk of reinfection and the lack of arterial wall suitable for a vascular anastomosis. Intravenous meropenem and vancomycin were continued for 30 days after surgery, followed by a further 15 days of oral levofloxacin. The cultures from the expulsion site and the explanted stent-graft demonstrated Staphylococcus aureus sensitive to the meropenem; thus, the antibiotic regime was continued throughout hospitalization.
At 24 h from index operation, an ischemic deterioration of right leg was present and a major amputation was needed.
After amputation Clinical and laboratory findings were suggestive for sepsis regression: White blood cell (WBC) 20,000/μL (neutrophils: 81%), C-reactive protein (CPR) 108.5 mg/dl, procalcitonin 8 μg/dl, Hemoglobin (Hb) 8.5 g/dl, Haematocrit (Hct) 26%.
The patient was discharged home after 3 weeks with three per day amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 875/125 mg and daily wound dressing. After two weeks, the surgical wound was closed.