A 38-year-old female, known to have a history of generalized anxiety disorder and depression (on sertraline), presented to the emergency department (ED) with an intentional ingestion of an unknown black powder diluted in 450 milliliters (mL) of water, 30 minutes before arrival . The powder was labeled as “rodenticide” and purchased from a local Lebanese market. The patient waited seven minutes after mixing the solution in a bottle and then drank 400 mL; she reported a garlic-like smell. Her other co-ingestions included three tablets of 0.5 milligrams (mg) alprazolam and two tablets of 500 mg acetaminophen. On arrival, she was alert and oriented, with normal vital signs (heart rate 77 beats per minute, blood pressure 122/81 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, pulse oximetry 98% at room air, and temperature of 37.2°C). Pupils were 4 mm and reactive bilaterally. Neurologic examination was normal with no rigidity or clonus.
The rest of her examination was unremarkable. Electrocardiogram was normal and chest radiography was unremarkable. Urine drug screen was detectable for acetaminophen but undetectable for amphetamines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, cannabinoids, opiates, cocaine metabolites, tricyclic antidepressants, methadone, or phencyclidine. Her serum salicylate level was undetectable, and her acetaminophen level four hours post-ingestion was 18.6 mg per liter (L) (toxic level: >150 mg/L four hours post-ingestion). Initial laboratory results are displayed in the . Given that the ingestion of the unknown rodenticide was 30 minutes before presentation, activated charcoal with a dose of 1 gram (g)/kilogram (kg) was administered. The patient vomited once after the charcoal. The remaining 50 ml of the solution that the patient had ingested was sent for qualitative analysis. The sample was shaken and 10 ml was filtered on a 0.2μm filter, acidified, and run on inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (Agilent ICP-MS 7500ce, Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, CA) in a semi-quantitative mode for multiple metals. The method used was the EPA 200-7/8 M (US Environmental Protection Agency Method 200.7: Determination of Metals and Trace Elements in Water and Wastes by ICP-MS-atomic emission spectrometry). This test can detect many substances including anticoagulants, thallium, aluminum/zinc phosphide, and other heavy metals (aluminum, vanadium, chromium, manganese, iron, cobalt, nickel, copper, zinc, arsenic, selenium, strontium, silver, cadmium, barium, lead, mercury, and phosphorus).
The test detected zinc (14.7 mg/L, limit for quantification >0.005 mg/L) and phosphorus (14.7 mg/L, limit for quantification >0.005 mg/L). Other metals such as barium (0.026 mg/L), strontium (0.058 mg/L), manganese (0.036 mg/L), lead (0.024 mg/L), and thallium (0.007 mg/L) were detected minimally above the level of quantification (>0.005 mg/L) but not as high as phosphorus and zinc. Testing for whole blood lead and arsenic level were also performed and results were unremarkable. The patient was subsequently admitted to the intensive care unit for 24 hours where she remained hemodynamically stable and only complained of mild abdominal pain and vomited once. Serial coagulation profile was repeated and was within normal limits. The patient was later transferred to the psychiatric ward and discharged with no complications on day three of hospitalization.