A 34-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital, with the complaint of dizziness for more than 1 month. The patient had no obvious neurological deficits except for dizziness. The physical examination indicated that the patient was conscious, who could give right answers to the questions. Moreover, there was a bulge on the left frontal-temporal parietal bone, with a slightly hard texture and no obvious tenderness . The muscle strength and muscle tension of the patient’s limbs were normal. There were no obvious abnormalities in the cranial nerve examination. For the past history, before about 1 month, the patient was treated for gastric ulcer in a local hospital and had been given the clotting factor VIII. The patient has a family history of hemophilia. The head CT showed abnormal density lesions on the left frontal-temporal parietal bone, with multiple irregular calcifications within the border, as well as clear boundaries . The skull MRI showed a large clump-like mixed signal at the top of the left frontal ridge, with a slightly higher signal on T1WI and a mixed signal on T2WI, and enhance was observed on contrast-enhanced images . After admission, the patient was subjected to complete preoperative preparation and surgical treatment. Neurological navigation was used to determine the extent of skull defect before surgery to make a surgical incision . The lesion was observed with complete capsule, containing brown blood clot-like tissue . The lesion was completely removed . After resection, the pathologic examination displayed obvious blood clots and fibrosis hematoma, accompanied by inflammatory cell infiltration and calcification . On day 3 after surgery, the right upper limb muscle strength was decreased and CT exanimation showed that the patient had an epidural hematoma, which was conservatively treated . Clotting factor VIII substitution therapy was used for the intraoperative and postoperative treatments. Specifically, at 1 day before and during the operation, coagulation factor 2000U and plasma were supplemented to maintain the level of coagulation factor VIII above 80%. Thereafter, 600–800U coagulation factor was supplemented daily for 2 weeks. The patient was discharged on day 14 after surgery. At discharge, the patient was conscious, with the I/A healing of the surgical incision. The right upper limb muscle strength returned to level 3, and the residual limb muscle strength was level 5. After 6 months, the muscle strength of patient’s limbs was normal. Then, the patient received cranioplasty .