A 13-year-old girl with no significant past medical history presented with abdominal pain in the right upper quadrant (since three months ago), postprandial vomiting, and abdominal distention (since two months ago). A local physician had visited her, and abdominal sonography and CT scan had been requested. Abdominal sonography had shown heterogeneous predominantly solid mass (14 × 14 cm) with cystic changes located in the upper posterior part of the right lobe of the liver. Also, in the CT scan of the abdomen, a well-defined soft tissue density mass (12 × 11 × 9 cm) in the right lobe of the liver had been reported. She was referred to our hospital for further evaluation.
In physical examination, she was afebrile with normal vital signs and no signs of jaundice; however, abdominal distention and a palpable mass in the right upper quadrant with severe tenderness were distinct. Laboratory data showed leukocytosis and elevated liver enzymes and direct hyperbilirubinemia. Alpha-fetoprotein was within the normal range. The cystic lesion had been interpreted as a benign lesion of the liver.
An abdominal CT scan revealed a large hypodense lesion (200 × 156 × 172 mm) occupying the right lobe of the liver. Faint peripheral and internal septation was seen in the mass. Mild to moderate ascites was reported in the abdomen and pelvic cavity. Also, the gallbladder was normal in configuration with no stone or wall thickening . The possibility of a large mesenchymal hamartoma or an atypical hemangioma was considered. Therefore, the patient was scheduled for operation without receiving any episodes of radiotherapy or neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
The patient underwent exploratory laparotomy. Intraoperative findings showed a huge mass in the right liver lobe (5 kg) ; therefore, right hepatectomy was carried. Pathologic examination demonstrated a large multilobulated mass in the liver (28 × 20 × 12 cm), with extensive hemorrhage and necrosis. The mass was hemorrhagic, solid, and cystic with a gray to dark red color involving hilum. Microscopic examination of the tumor showed highly pleomorphic cells with many multinucleated forms in a highly necrotic background. Tumor cells showed hyperchromatic, highly anaplastic nuclei with many mitoses (Ki-67 proliferative index was also high, around 40%). PAS with diastase stain showed intra-cytoplasmic PAS positive and diastase resistant globules . Tumor cells were reactive with vimentin but non-reactive with smooth muscle antigen (SMA), desmin, CD34, cytokeratin, hepatocyte-specific antigen (HepPar-1), Myo-D1, and S100. Lymphovascular invasion and satellite nodules were absent, and no lymph node was identified. Negative epithelial marker (cytokeratin) excluded epithelial tumors such as hepatoblastoma and hepatocellular carcinoma. Another important differential diagnosis was embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, which was also excluded by negative desmin and Myo-D1.
She was tumor-free following the surgery and discharged 8 days postoperatively in good condition . She was also prescribed an adjuvant chemotherapy regimen, which during her follow-up, we discovered that she refused to receive. The patient has been symptom-free for 6 years after surgery, with no evidence of recurrence of the tumor.