A 13-year-old female was firstly hospitalized in September 2021 with a chief complaint of knee joint pain that aggravated after prolonged standing or walking and relieved after rest. The pain had persisted since a traumatic incident five months earlier. Her symptoms worsened with obvious activity limitation ten days ago before she came to our hospital. Physical examination showed a positive McMurray sign and limited range of motion (ROM) of the right knee (60 °-110 °) without other abnormal movements. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated a large amount of fluid signal shadow in the right knee joint cavity, suggesting synovitis or PVNS. Synovectomy via arthroscopic surgery was performed for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. The patient experienced pain alleviation after the lesion tissues were excised and medivinal drugs (sodium hyaluronate, ropivacaine) were injected into the right knee cavity. Pathological results revealed chronic inflammatory changes in the synovial tissue, characterized by synovial cell proliferation, interstitial collagenization, mucinous degeneration, and focal granulation tissue hyperplasia. PVNS was excluded due to the lack of hemosiderin-laden histiocytes. After the operation, the right knee pain was relieved, and the range of motion improved, so she was discharged.
Three weeks later, the patient was readmitted due to the recurrence of much more severe pain, accompanied by local swelling, increased skin temperature and limited right knee motion . Another MRI test revealed extensive thickening of synovial soft tissues around the right knee, with erosion into the lower femoral and upper tibial metaphysis area . Moreover, fluid signal shadows were observed in the right knee joint cavity.
Laboratory tests showed moderate anemia with a 70 g/L hemoglobin level. Bone marrow film showed hyperplasia of marrow cells and an inverted granulocyte/erythrocyte ratio. Some other routine tests, including erythrocyte sedimentation rate, blood coagulation, liver and kidney function, were normal. Immunologic indicators such as rheumatism indicators, antinuclear antibody, extractable nuclear antigen (ENA) antibody profile, Coombs’ test, and HLA-B27/B7 were all negative. Etiological detection ruled out tuberculosis, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and Brucella infections. As the initial pathological result indicated chronic inflammatory changes in the synovial tissue, the findings were regarded as compatible with oligoarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) were adopted, slightly relieving the right knee joint pain. However, the pain worsened two weeks later, accompanied by aggravated swelling and local fever. The corticosteroid treatment was attempted for one week but didn’t work too. Throughout the hospitalization, disease progression was closely monitored via twice joint ultrasounds conducted within a one-week interval. The ultrasounds revealed severely diffuse thickening synovium of the joint along the surgical scar and subcutaneous tissue, with local nodular protrusions. Therefore, a second biopsy guided by ultrasound was performed to confirm the diagnosis.
The synovial membrane biopsy specimen exhibited epithelial-like cells growing in a streak or patch pattern, as revealed in Fig. . Some cells were spindle-shaped with eccentrically-located nuclei, frequently showing atypical features and nuclear division. Hyperplasia of interstitial fibrous tissue with mucinous degeneration and focal necrosis was also observed. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining showed positive results for epithelial tumor markers (CKpan) and an unspecific marker (SATB2), while staining was negative for CD68, S100, SMA, Desmin, Myogenin, MyoD1, ERG, and TLE1 . The SMARCB1/INI1 protein, a molecular hallmark of ES, was completely absent, and the proliferating marker Ki67 exhibited a high nuclear staining rate of 30%. To validate the immunohistochemical findings, another fluorescence in situ hybridization detection (FISH) test was performed for SYT gene, resulting in a negative result (which meant no SS18 gene-related translocation) that excluded the possibility of synovial sarcoma. In consideration of all pathologic and IHC findings, a diagnosis of INI-1 negative epithelioid sarcoma was indicated.
Afterward, the patient’s parents consulted the pathological findings in the Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Fudan University, where the rechecked immunohistochemistry results (AE1 / AE3 +, INI-1 -, CD34 -) confirmed the diagnosis of INI-1 deficient epithelioid malignant tumor, suggestive of epithelioid sarcoma base on the tumor’s location. Surgery or chemotherapy was recommended; however, she lost the chance of palliative surgical treatment due to the distant metastasis of the lymph nodes, bones, and lungs. One month later, following her initial diagnosis, the girl was transferred to the orthopedic department of Shanghai Sixth People’s Hospital, where the medical team recommended a course of chemotherapy with a prescription of 160 mg albumin paclitaxel and 1.1 g gemcitabine. However, the girl experienced severe adverse effects after the first course of chemotherapy, which prevented her from receiving any further scheduled chemotherapy sessions. Her parents faced a difficult and heart-wrenching choice to go back home and decided to seek palliative treatment in traditional Chinese medicine. The girl’s condition continued to deteriorate steadily, and she passed away seven months after the diagnosis.