The patient was a 69-year-old woman, with diabetes mellitus, obesity, and asthma. In 2003, she had a non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) that was treated with a PCI at the proximal and mid-left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) stent at another facility. In 2016, she was readmitted for a new NSTEMI. Coronary angiography showed a 45% in-stent restenosis and an 85% lesion at a marginal branch, which was treated with 2.75 mm × 26 mm drug-eluting stent (DES). She did not attend post-hospitalization and was lost to follow-up. In January 2019, she was again readmitted for NSTEMI Killip Class III.
On physical examination, the patient was found to have hypertension (non-invasive arterial pressure was 147/75 mmHg), tachycardia (96 b.p.m.), a basal oxygen saturation of 94%, bilateral basal crackles, no cardiac murmurs, and absence of limb oedema. Echocardiography was not performed due to a poor acoustic window.
Coronary angiography showed a moderate restenosis of the LAD stent with no other significant lesion ( and , Video S1). During the diagnostic catheterization, invasive left ventricular (LV) end-diastolic pressure was measured revealing high LV filling pressure (20 mmHg). An invasive haemodynamic evaluation with resting full-cycle ratio (RFR) was performed, finding a significant LAD ischaemia (RFR 0.75) with a clear step-up into mid- and proximal LAD. Two wires were inserted: one into the LAD and a second wire to protect the first diagonal branch. In contrast to other plaque modification devices, intravascular lithotripsy may be used safely with several wires left in place. Attempts to expand the proximal part of the LAD stent and the proximal LAD were unsuccessful using a progressive 3.0 high-pressure cutting balloon and a 3.5 non-compliant high-pressure balloon. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) showed there was neoatherosclerosis with a 360° calcific arch at the proximal part of the LAD stent and at the proximal LAD; there was no fracture on the calcific arch or dissection at the proximal LAD (, Video S2). The proximal reference vessel size was 3.5 mm × 3.6 mm .
Intravascular lithotripsy was planned in order to treat the calcified neoatherosclerosis and prevent sudden closure of the first diagonal branch. Initially, lithotripsy with a 3.0 × 12 balloon at the mid-distal part of the stent was performed. As a good expansion was achieved with two cycles of pulses, the balloon was then retrieved to the central and proximal part of the stent. However, the balloon ruptured at the third cycle of pulses (, Video S3), although it had been applied at the recommended pressure (4 atm). The emission of pulses was immediately stopped with distal downstream embolization of balloon contents. Transient ST-elevation on electrocardiogram and a drop in the blood pressure were observed and resolved with retrieval of the balloon and application of intracoronary nitroprusside. A coronary angiography showed that there was no distal dissection or vessel rupture (, Video S4). Then, another 3.5 × 12 lithotripsy balloon at proximal LAD was used to treat the proximal in-stent and proximal LAD . Following lithotripsy, an IVUS showed multiple fractures of the 360° calcific neoatherosclerosis plaque (, white arrows and , Video S5). Then, a 3.5 mm × 22 mm DES was implanted covering the proximal previous stent to the LAD ostium, expansion was good, and the final result was excellent ( and , Video S6).
The patient is on double antiplatelet therapy (with a recommended duration of at least 12 months) and is still uneventful 12 months after the intervention.