We report the case of a 44-year-old man who presents himself with an acute onset ocular pain and photophobia in his right eye. He had reported an eye trauma with a tree branch 3 days before. Patient had a previous history of type 1 diabetes mellitus, diagnosed 24 years before and with established microvascular disease – diabetic retinopathy and chronic kidney disease – having undergone a reno-pancreatic transplant 5 years before. Right eye best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/80; left eye BCVA was hand motion. Left eye low vision was secondary to a diabetic neovascular glaucoma. A slit-lamp examination revealed an extensive temporal corneal epithelium erosion and a peripheral anterior stromal infiltration in the inferotemporal quadrant, with 2×1.5mm, which was stained with fluorescein dye. A slight anterior chamber reaction was detected (Tyndall 1+, flare 1+).
Corneal samples were collected in this context, and although the pathogen was not found, a treatment was started with clotrimazole clotrimazole 10 mg/mL (1 drop 5 times a day), moxifloxacin hydrochloride 5 mg/mL (1 drop of 5/5 minutes during the 1st hour, then 1 drop of 1/1h during the first 24 hours, then 1 drop of 2/2h), tobramycin 3 mg/mL (1 drop of 5/5 minutes during the 1st hour, then 1 drop of 1/1h during the first 24 hours, then 1 drop of 2/2h), bromfenac 0.9 mg/mL (1 drop 2 times a day) and cyclopentolate hydrochloride 10 mg/mL (1 drop 3 times a day).
After four days of treatment (D4), the stromal infiltration had almost completely disappeared but epithelial damage kept similar to the presentation, so a therapeutic contact lens was placed and the treatment with cyclopentolate hydrochloride 10 mg/mL (1 drop 3 times a day), moxifloxacin hydrochloride 5 mg/mL (1 drop 5 times a day) and tobramycin 3 mg/mL (1 drop 5 times a day) was kept.
On D15, the patient reported a progressive deterioration of symptoms and the slit lamp examination revealed a paracentral corneal ulcer with an associated stromal infiltration occupying mainly the inferior temporal quadrant and measuring 4.7mmx2.7mm (shown in ). Epithelial changes as well as stromal disorganization (shown in ) were visible on corneal – Optical Coherence Tomography (Corneal-OCT) (Spectralis® Anterior Segment Module, version 1.10.2.0, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany).
Given this clinical aggravation, corneal samples were collected again, and inoculated immediately in blood and chocolate agars, in liquid Thioglycolate and in Sabouraud selective fungal medium, and sent to the Microbiology Laboratory. Topical therapy was changed to fortified vancomycin 50 mg/mL (1 drop of 2/2h), fortified ceftazidime 50 mg/dL (1 drop of 2/2h) and fortified voriconazole 10 mg/mL (1 drop 5 times a day).
On D25, the biomicroscopy exam was similar to the D15 evaluation as well as the topical medication. The microbiological study revealed a considerable growth of pigmented filamentous fungus identified as Alternaria alternata (shown in ) both by microscopic morphology and mass spectrometry through the VITEK® MS system, which consists of an automated microbial identification system that uses Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time-of-Flight (MALDI-TOF).
According to this diagnosis, topical therapy was administered. Therefore, therapy with fortified vancomycin 50 mg/mL and fortified ceftazidime 50 mg/dL was suspended. 5 mg/mL moxifloxacin hydrochloride (1 drop 4 times a day) was started and 10 mg/mL fortified voriconazole was maintained (1 drop 5 times a day).
On D32, the patient presented an improvement in pain symptoms, with an improvement in BCVA 20/50 and, at biomicroscopy, a corneal ulcer (less than 4.0 mm x 2.0 mm) with stromal infiltration and moderate ciliary injection.
These clinical changes persisted overlapping in subsequent evaluations, with a gradual decrease in corneal ulcer. At the beginning of the 3rd month, there was an improvement in BCVA to 20/25, with only a small ulcer less than 2 mm that was slightly coloured. Consequently, therapy with fortified voriconazole 10 mg/mL was suspended and only moxifloxacin hydrochloride 5 mg/mL (1 drop 4 times a day) was maintained. In the 4th month, the BCVA was 20/25 and, at the slit lamp observation, no ulcer was detected, there was only a paracentral leukoma no longer stained with fluorescein (shown in ) and the Corneal-OCT demonstrated an improvement in corneal stromal and epithelial anatomy (shown in ). Moxifloxacin hydrochloride 5 mg/mL was suspended. No adverse effects associated with the therapy process were observed.