A 20-month-old healthy Asian girl weighing 10.3 kg without any medical history, in a coma, and with progressive generalized weakness was admitted to our emergency department. She had complained of constipation, and 200 mg of MgO in divided doses daily had been prescribed earlier for 4 days by her family physician. According to the family, there was no stool discharge for 5 days, and the patient had episodes of vomiting twice in the morning in addition to a reduced level of consciousness. No remarkable findings were observed regarding her birth history, growth rate, or family history. She was not taking any medication, except for MgO as a laxative.
The vital signs on admission were as follows: temperature of 97.1 °F (36.2 C°), heart rate of 104 beats per minute, systolic and diastolic pressures of 110 and 60 mmHg, respectively, respiratory rate of 28 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 98% in room air. The physical examination revealed that the state of consciousness was E2V1M1 on the Glasgow Coma Scale. Her extremities did not respond to pain stimulus; however, her facial expression was set and showed little display of feeling. The neurological examination showed a symmetric decrease in muscle tone. The deep tendon reflexes were also decreased, and the pupillary reflexes were sluggish. No abnormalities were observed in her respiratory status or heart sounds. The abdomen was distended with diminished bowel sounds, and a mass of stool was palpable.
The laboratory findings showed that the patient had fatal hypermagnesemia (11.0 mg/dL) and hyperglycemia (377 mg/dL). The hemogram showed leukocytosis (white blood cell count 26,760/μL) with bands accounting for 82.6% and no anemia (hemoglobin 13.9 mg/mL). Other results included the following: serum calcium, 9.3 mg/dL; serum sodium, 130 mEq/L; serum potassium, 4.0 mEq/L; serum chloride, 100 mEq/L; serum creatine, 0.17 mg/dL; blood urine nitrogen, 30.4 mg/dL; total bilirubin, 0.2 mg/dL; venous blood pH, 7.33; partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2), 36.5 mmHg; and partial pressure of oxygen (PO2), 60.6 mmHg. An electrocardiogram showed normal and no block patterns. The blood cultures were negative. The patient was diagnosed with fatal hypermagnesemia caused by intoxication from a laxative containing MgO. She was instantly administered calcium gluconate infusion at 3.9 mEq for over 10 min. She was then continuously infused with calcium gluconate at 0.23 mEq/hour as a Mg antagonist to reverse the neuromuscular and cardiac effects of hypermagnesemia. She was kept hydrated with 0.9% sodium chloride to maintain good urine output to excrete the Mg, and a total of 720 mL was administered over the next 12 hours. An enema was performed, which expelled a large mass of stool and a large amount of muddy stool. After 2 hours, her serum Mg level was decreased to 5.9 mg/dL, and she regained consciousness to a level of being verbally responsive. Over the next 12 hours, her neurologic status continued to improve. Her serum Mg and glucose levels decreased to 2.4 mg/dL and 116 mg/dL, respectively. The patient recovered, and was discharged without recurrence of hypermagnesemia. At the follow-up visit 3 days later, her serum Mg level was 1.9 mg/dL. Five years after discharge, during a follow-up evaluation, she was neurologically well and had returned to her baseline status without a recurrence of hypermagnesemia and hyperglycemia.