A 43-year-old Chinese male presented with progressive muscle weakness, difficulty chewing, and an inability to lift his head since he was 8 years old. He achieved remission of symptoms after treatment with pyridostigmine, but the remission was incomplete. Over a year ago, the abovementioned symptoms worsened. He increased the dosage of pyridostigmine to 60 mg 5 times a day. However, the symptoms were not evidently relieved. Twenty-six days prior, he accidently fell and broke his left leg. Then, he was hospitalized and had a pubis fracture operation performed. General anesthesia was used during the fracture operation. After the surgery, he had difficulty breathing (shortness of breath and flustered), which was accompanied by sinus tachycardia. Then, he was transferred to the respiratory intensive care unit. After the anti-infection and symptomatic treatment, the trachea cannula was removed, and the mechanical ventilator assistance was ended. However, this was accompanied by dyspnea and tachycardia with activities. His birth and past medical histories were otherwise unremarkable. There is no parental consanguinity or family history of muscle disorders.
Upon examination, he had a body mass index (BMI) of 20.3 kg/m2, was unable to drum the cheeks, and had fatigable muscle weakness [proximal upper extremity Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 4/5; distal upper extremity MRC grade 4+/5; proximal lower extremity MRC grade 4+/5; distal lower extremity MRC grade 4/5; and dorsal and plantar flexors MRC grade 5/5]. His facial muscles were atrophied, but the bilateral gastrocnemius muscles were slightly hypertrophied. This was accompanied by femoral hyperreflexia. Other than the spinal scoliosis, the remainder of the examination was normal.
The hematological and biochemical investigations, including a full blood count, inflammatory markers, glucose, and renal and liver function tests, were normal. The immunological tests, that is, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), coagulation profile, thyroid functions, serum lactate, and creatine kinase level, were normal. The anti-AChR and skeletal muscle receptor tyrosine kinase (MUSK) antibodies were negative in the serum. No obvious abnormality was observed in the heart, abdomen, and urinary tract ultrasound. Thoracolumbar scoliosis was observed on chest computed tomography (CT) scans. Repetitive nerve stimulation at low rates showed a marked decrement (>30%) in the accessory nerve (normal at a high rate). His electromyography showed a myogenic lesion in the right dorsal interosseous muscle. Exome sequencing showed 2 novel variant mutations [c.59G>A (exon2) and c.423G>C (exon5), Fig. A–C], which were compound heterozygous variants, on the CHRND gene according to a phenotype–genotype correlation. The 2 mutations have never been reported according to the OMIN, HGMD, and CLINVAR databases. No occurrence of mtDNA mutations or copy number variations (CNVs) were found. He remained functionally independent with the pyridostigmine treatment.
Venous blood samples were obtained from the CMS patient and his unaffected parents. All studies were performed with informed consent from the patient's parents and were approved by the institutional ethics review board. Genomic DNA was isolated using BloodGen Midi Kit (CWBIO, China) according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
The genomic DNA sample was sheared by sonication. The sheared genomic DNA was then hybridized using the NimbleGen 2.0 probe sequence capture array by Roche to enrich the exonic DNA (Joy Orient, China). The libraries were first tested for enrichment by qPCR (polymerase chain reaction) and for size distribution and concentration using the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100. The samples were then sequenced on an Illumina Hiseq2500 platform (Illumina, Hayward CA). Two parallel reactions were performed for each sample.
The exon-enriched DNA was sequenced using the Illumina Hiseq2500 platform according to the manufacturer's instructions (Illumina). The raw image files were processed using BclToFastq (Illumina) for base calling and generating raw data. The low-quality variations were filtered using a quality score ≥20 (Q20). The sequencing reads were aligned to the NCBI human reference genome (hg19) using BWA. SAMtools and Pindel were used to analyze the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and indels in the sequence.
The data analysis was performed as follows:Synonymous changes and SNPs with a minor allele frequency (MAF) greater than 5% were removed. Nonsynonymous changes were filtered using SIFT software. The function of the mutated genes and their relationship to the disease were analyzed.
Sanger sequencing was used to confirm the mutation in the proband. The PCR primers and lengths of the PCR products are summarized in Table .
The PCR products were sequenced on an ABI 3730XL system, analyzed using DNASTAR software, and compared using an mRNA template (ATP8B1: NM_005603, IGSF1: NM_001170961.1).
Finally, in addition to certain mutations with a low probability, 4 mutations were found that may have caused myasthenia in the patient . On the basis of a phenotype–genotype correlation, the 2 mutations [c.59G>A (exon2) and c.423G>C (exon5) mutations] in the CHRND gene, which may cause FCCMS, were most likely pathogenic mutations.
No occurrences of mtDNA mutations or CNVs were observed in the mitochondrial DNA sequencing and CNS analyses.