A 43-year-old Pakistani man was admitted to Rigshospitalet, University Hospital of Copenhagen, in January 2013, with complex mechanical mitral valve- and native aortic valve endocarditis, complicated by aortic root abscess. Medical history included heart failure after rheumatic fever with mitral stenosis and mild aortic insufficiency, treated with mitral valve replacement and a minor commissurotomy of his fused aortic valve cusps in 2009. The patient was otherwise healthy and had no risk factors for coronary artery disease. Preoperative coronary angiography was normal . The patient was emergently operated with implantation of a biological mitral valve (St. Jude Medical, Epic, size 27 mm) and a full root FB (size 23 mm) in the aortic position. A FB was chosen since the tissue quality and irregularity of the revised root including the presence of a rigid biological mitral valve prosthesis did not allow for implantation of the rigid suture-ring of a stented (mechanical or biological) aortic valve prosthesis. Furthermore, a homograft was not available. Reimplantation of the coronary ostia was performed in a standard fashion with the button technique. The angle of the porcine coronary ostia is 90° relative to the centre of the aortic root, whereas the human coronary ostia assume an angle of 120°. The FB was therefore oriented so that the left coronary artery was reimplanted in the left porcine ostium, while the right coronary artery was reimplanted higher and further to the right in the right sinus of the FB, to avoid kinking or stretching of the coronary (. The patient was discharged after 6 weeks of targeted intravenous antibiotic therapy, with atrial fibrillation, and newly diagnosed diabetes mellitus type 2. He was prescribed warfarin (target international normalized ratio 2–3), enalapril 2.5 mg, metformin 1000 mg, and metoprolol 50 mg. Follow-up transoesophageal echocardiography 41 days postoperatively showed a well-functioning FB valve in the aortic position.
In June 2017, the patient presented with chest oppression, pain in the left arm and hand, as well as shortness of breath. Physical examination revealed a discrete heart murmur along with an irregular rhythm. Lung auscultation presented normal vesicular breath sounds and extremities were without oedema. Except from the chest oppression, the general condition was good and further physical examination normal. Electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation and new ST depressions and T-wave inversions in I, II, V5, V6, and ST elevation in aVR . Troponin T samples showed increasing concentration reaching a maximum of 196 ng/L (normal range < 14 ng/L). A contrast-enhanced cardiac computed tomography (CT) showed significant left- and right coronary ostial stenosis but no sign of atherosclerosis . Preoperative coronary angiography confirmed this finding, showing 90% stenosis in both ostia and otherwise normal coronary arteries . Preoperative transthoracic echocardiogram showed left ventricular ejection fraction of 50%, and excellent prosthetic aortic- and mitral valve function. Due to the risk of non-dilatable ostial tissue and stents protruding into the aortic lumen, the case was not found suitable for percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). The patient underwent emergent reoperation with the aim to either replace the FB or to perform revascularization. Intraoperatively, after partial opening of the distal anastomosis between the FB and the ascending aorta, we found pseudointimal glass-like membranes, which covered the distal anastomosis between the FB and the ascending aorta as well as both coronary ostia, leaving the latter with high-grade stenoses . The membranal tissue was brittle, not invading the FB and could thus be peeled of the FB tissue in strips. Since the pseudointimal membranes extended from the anastomotic sites and into both coronary arteries, and since surgical detachment of the membrane tissue could only be done radically in the proximal parts of the vessels, we considered replacement of the FB and subsequent reimplantation to carry a considerable risk of dissection between the pseudointimal tissue and native tissue, and subsequent coronary occlusion by the remaining membrane tissue. Likewise, PCI could potentially also dislodge the membrane and cause occlusion. Therefore, after collecting a tissue sample of pseudointimal membrane, the patient had coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) performed with separate venous grafts to the left anterior descending artery and the right coronary artery (RCA). The patient recovered uneventfully, aside from a smaller procedure due to epigastric fascial rupture.
Acetylsalicylic acid 75 mg was added to previous medication and metoprolol was reduced to 25 mg. Histological examination of the explanted pseudointimal membranes showed fibro-intimal thickening with areas of inflamed granulation tissue. There was no sign of acute inflammation, calcifications, foreign bodies, or amyloidosis.
In September 2017, a follow-up cardiac CT and transthoracic echocardiography, performed due to complaints of chest pains, showed a small (2.3 mL) pseudoaneurysm arising from partial rupture of the last opened (distal) anastomosis between the FB and the aorta . Due to the patient’s numerous previous reoperations, and the small size of the pseudoaneurysm, we chose a conservative, non-surgical strategy. Repeat follow-up cardiac CT, performed 3 months later, showed reduction of the pseudoaneurysm to 1.4 mL. and video 3
During follow-up in November 2019, the patient still suffered from exercise-induced chest pains. Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy from 2018 showed exercise-induced myocardial ischaemia of 6–8%, probably due to previous myocardial infarction. Coronary angiography from 2018 confirmed complete revascularization. Transthoracic echo showed mild-moderate stenosis of the FB valve and well-functioning biological mitral valve.