A 58-year-old man developed bilateral lower extremity deformities when he was young. He developed pain in his right thigh with no obvious cause 8 years ago. He was still able to farm daily and did not receive special treatment. The pain in the right thigh worsened 3 months ago and he was unable to stand immediately. He went to a local hospital and was diagnosed with a fractured right femoral shaft. No surgical treatment was performed, but conservative treatment was given at home. 2 months ago, consciously improved and walked down the ground, fell again, and the pain in the right thigh worsened. Conservative treatment was given at home again. Recently, he was admitted to our hospital because of worsening pain.
On admission, the clinical presentation was consistent with varus hip deformity, possibly with bilateral femoral neck deformities . In line with Tscherne type I closed fracture soft tissue injury, the remaining manifestations did not have any endocrine disturbance, pigmentation changes, or precocious puberty changes. Both lower extremities were deformed, and both knee joints were huge . In view of the abnormal bone quality of the patient, the imaging examination showed: multiple fibrous dysplasia combined with proximal femoral shepherd deformity, pathological fracture of the femoral shaft complicated by bone Nonunion , multiple fracture lines can be seen on the right femur, old fracture lines and new fracture lines coexist, and the original fractures are malunion. The fractured end of the new fracture was obviously displaced. The patient’s hemoglobin, total number and classification of white blood cells, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, calcium, phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase and other blood and serum biochemical indicators and hormone levels were within the normal range. On the second day of hospitalization, the right femoral shaft fracture was treated with open reduction, intramedullary nailing, internal fixation and osteotomy under general anesthesia, and the deformity was corrected and the fracture was fixed in one stage.
According to the length of the unaffected limb , a special length of intramedullary nail is ordered. This operation is different from the conventional antegrade or retrograde intramedullary nailing. The feature of this case is that after the femoral deformity osteotomy is done, the bone drill is inserted retrogradely from the fracture end to ream the pulp, and the opening is retrograde from the greater trochanter. With the help of the golden finger, the guide pin was introduced retrogradely, and the ball end of the guide pin passed through the orthopedic bone fragment and the distal end of the fracture under direct vision. Postoperative fluoroscopy showed that the distal guide pin was not located in the middle of the medullary cavity, so a 4.0 Steiner wire was used as a block. The intramedullary nail is inserted anterogradely into the medullary cavity, and there is no special treatment for other operations. Because the patient refused to undergo pathological examination, the bone tissue was not taken for examination. This operation successfully completes the fracture fixation and deformity correction through the combination of intramedullary nailing technology and osteotomy. Because the two surgical techniques are mature and simple, the operation time can be greatly reduced and the fracture end can be stabilized. It can reduce the economic pressure of patients, and the central fixation with intramedullary nails has good mechanics, and the blood supply damage to the fracture end is less than that of the steel plate, which can restore the force line of the femur well; however, the femur of such patients is too short, and special reservation The length of intramedullary needles may take a long time and delay the operation date, resulting in complications such as thrombosis, fall off, and fracture pain of the lower extremities, increasing the risk of life and economic burden. The orthopedic bone block has a large resistance during the insertion of the intramedullary needle, so it is necessary to prevent stress fractures and implant fractures . On the third day after the operation, he reported that the right psoas muscle was tense, showing traction-like pain. After physical examination, it was found that the psoas muscle was tense and tenderness was positive. He was given hot compress treatment, and the symptoms were relieved. After the operation, the deformity of the right thigh of the patient was relieved, but the knee valgus was still present .
Three months after the operation, he came to the hospital for re-examination. An X-ray of the right femur was taken. It was seen that the fracture end had a tendency to heal, and the patient was instructed to gradually bear weight ; re-examination six months after the operation, the right femur was examined on the front and lateral sides, and the fracture was healed well. Now the patient can walk with the aid of a walker ; One year after the operation, the X-ray of the right femur was taken on the front and the lateral side : it was seen that the fractured end had healed. Now the patient can walk without the aid of a walker and can take care of himself at home . However, there was still stretch-like pain in the right lower back, but it was tolerable. This case report has been verbally agreed by the patient and his family ( attached at the end of the article).