A now 44-year-old male was diagnosed with an SDHD mutation in 2009. He was genetically screened because of first-degree relatives diagnosed with paragangliomas based on an SDHD mutation, according to the international consensus on initial screening and follow-up of asymptomatic SDHx mutation carriers. At that time, he did not experience any symptoms, he had no relevant medical history, and did not take any medication. A left-sided carotid body tumour was surgically removed at age 31; furthermore, a right-sided vagal body and carotid body tumour were followed up with a ‘wait and scan’ strategy. In 2021, plasma screening revealed normal normetanephrine and metanephrine; however, the plasma 3-MT was increased four times the upper reference limit, suggesting a biochemically active paraganglioma. Thoracic and abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) identified an extracardiac (high mediastinal) and an intracardiac tumour. Additional 68Ga-octreotide positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) was performed, which showed strongly increased gallium dotatate uptake between the carotid and the subclavian artery (high mediastinal PPGL) and caudal from the pulmonary truncus and confirmed the suspected intracardiac paraganglioma ( and ).
The patient was referred to the cardiac outpatient clinic for further analysis. He had no chest pain (at exercise), shortness of breath, or palpitations. A physical examination revealed normal cardiac and pulmonary sounds and the absence of peripheral oedema. The electrocardiogram showed a normal sinus rhythm, and transthoracic echocardiography showed normal biventricular function without valve abnormalities. However, the tumour was not visualized, therefore, and for tumour characterization, a subsequent cardiac MRI was scheduled. The lesion had an intermediate signal on T1-weighted images ( and ). The tumour showed high signal on T2-weighted acquisition with fat suppression and no signal on mDixon fat reconstruction images , indicating the absence of fatty content in the lesion. Perfusion images showed contrast late in the arterial phase , and the lesion showed synchronous motion with the coronary arteries and aorta in the cine images . Furthermore, there was no late gadolinium enhancement in the lesion, indicating a lack of fibrotic components . The lesion was highly vascularized and located just below the distal left main coronary artery (Summary figure). Cardiac MRI supported the most likely diagnosis of a cardiac paraganglioma.
A coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) was scheduled to visualize the exact anatomical location and the relation with surrounding structures. Coronary computed tomography angiography demonstrated the paraganglioma with a dimension of 18 × 14 × 14 mm caudal from the left main ostium, transitioning in the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) . The case was presented in a multidisciplinary heart team and discussed with a cardiologist, cardiothoracic surgeon, vascular surgeon, and the endocrinologist. Coronary computed tomography angiography showed no signs of compression of the left main or LAD. The multidisciplinary team decided to remain conservative, since paragangliomas are typically slow-growing and rarely malignant. The preferred and only available curative treatment is en bloc resection, which, in this case, includes cardiac surgery (with cardiopulmonary bypass and the risk of coronary artery bypass grafting). Therefore, the patient was followed up with a ‘wait and scan’ policy. A follow-up CCTA scan was scheduled 6 months later and revealed growth (20 × 17 × 14 mm) .
Surgical removal was now recommended to anticipate on risk of compression of the left main coronary artery. Prior to surgery, coronary angiogram showed no coronary calcifications, while the highly vascularized paraganglioma was visible near the left main artery and proximal LAD . Additional preoperative blood tests did not show (nor-)methanephrine excess, and therefore, the patient was not pretreated with alpha-blockers. Furthermore, the vascular surgeon was consulted for the high mediastinal PPGL, but it was decided to remain conservative (absence of growth).
The paraganglioma was removed through median sternotomy. After the initiation of cardiopulmonary bypass, aortic cross-clamping was applied, and the aorta was circularly transected at the level of the sino-tubular junction. The tumour was carefully dissected from its localization at the medial/pulmonary side of the left main coronary artery and could be removed below the main pulmonary artery without the need for transection of the main pulmonary artery ( and ). The source of the blood supply appeared to originate from the left main coronary artery, and after removal of the tumour, a small defect in the left main coronary artery was repaired using a 7-0 polypropylene suture . Post-operative echocardiogram showed no regional wall motion abnormalities, and electrocardiogram demonstrated no signs of cardiac ischaemia, with post-operative enzyme release being within the normal range. The post-operative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged at the fourth post-operative period.
Complete removal of the tumour was confirmed with histological examination. The dimension of the tumour was 20 × 18 × 11 mm . An examination showed tumour cells in a typical ‘zellballen’ pattern, and the diagnosis of a paraganglioma was confirmed .