A 72-year-old woman presented to our clinic with a complaint of constant leakage of urine. At 37 years of age, the patient underwent radical hysterectomy and radiation therapy for uterine cervical cancer. On cystoscopic finding, the hollow area was observed at the inter-ureteric ridge of the bladder near the right ureteral orifice, and there were bladder calculi attached . Also, the saline infused into the bladder during cystoscopy leaked into the vagina. Under the direct vision using speculum, the leakage was observed from the small hole at the vaginal cuff, with pale surrounding tissue . She was subsequently diagnosed with VVF as a late complication of radiation therapy.
Before the laparoscopic approach, a guidewire was placed through the fistula, and ureteral stents were inserted bilaterally. Bladder calculi were removed transurethrally. The patient was placed in the 25° Trendelenburg position and four trocars were used (on the umbilical top, halfway between the umbilicus and the pubic symphysis, and in the left and right iliac fossa). The bladder wall was opened transversely near the fistula. Next, the fistula tract was excised up to the healthy tissue margin, and was then finely dissected between the bladder and vaginal wall to obtain a tension-free approximation of the bladder mucosa. The vaginal wall was closed by the one-layer interrupted suturing technique using 3-0 Vicryl sutures. Subsequently, water-tight closure of the bladder wall was ensured by placing interrupted sutures using 4-0 Vicryl with tension-free approximation at the bladder wall closing point.
Next, the graft was prepared for interpositioning between the bladder and the suture point in the vagina. The graft was made using perirectal fatty tissue. The peritoneum on the right side of the rectum was cut, until about 5 cm in length and 2 cm in width of the perirectal fat was freely mobilized. . Figure is the illustration of the perirectal flap. After assessment of the mobility, the edge of the graft was fixed using 3-0 Vicryl sutures between the suture points of the bladder and vagina . Finally, water-tight closure was re-assessed by infusing saline transurethrally, and the peritoneum surrounding the closure area was sutured and covered over . The operation finding is attached as Supporting Information (Video ).
The surgical time was 5 h and 32 min (the pneumoperitoneum time was 4 h and 10 min), and blood loss was 10 mL. No perioperative complications were observed. On postoperative day 12, complete closure of the fistula was confirmed by cystography , and the urethral catheter was removed. No recurrence of incontinence was reported at 1-year postoperative follow-up.