A 50-year-old woman went to Shandong Provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong University because of chest distress after activity. The patient had experienced this distress for 6 months without obvious precipitating factors or accompanying symptoms, and the symptoms disappeared at rest. Before she came to our hospital, the symptoms of chest distress had increased significantly for 1 month; the farthest distance the patient could walk was up to 50 m, and walking was accompanied by a heavy feeling in the lower limbs and an uncomfortable feeling of abdominal distension. Cardiac ultrasound revealed a successional mass in the right atrium and right ventricle, which originated from the inferior vena cava and extended to the pulmonary artery. The mass in the right atrium was approximately 3*5 cm in size, and the mass in the right ventricle was approximately 7 cm in length. A pelvic ultrasound revealed a high echo mass at the posterior wall of the uterus and uterine leiomyomas. The patient had had hypertension for 1 year, denied the presence of other diseases, and had a normal menstrual history. She did not have more children because of the family planning policy but did have a son and a daughter.
Next, to make an accurate diagnosis, it was suggested that she undergo a CT examination. The CT acquisitions were performed on a SOMATOM Definition AS CT scanner (SIEMENS) with the following settings: 120-kVp tube voltage, 300-mA tube current, 1.5-mm slice thickness, and 512 × 512 imaging matrix. The enhanced scan was performed by the mass injection method, and the contrast agent Iopamidol Injection (universum 370 mg I/ml) was injected through the cubital vein with a double-cylinder high-pressure syringe at a dosage of 1.5 ml/kg and an injection rate of 3.0 ml/s. The patient underwent plain scanning plus double-phase enhanced scanning (28 s in the arterial stage and 65 s in the venous stage). An abdominal contrast-enhanced CT revealed a 3.7 * 4.3 cm lesion in the uterus and a right iliac vein - iliac vein - inferior vena cava - right atrium - right ventricular filling defect. The bilateral renal veins were not invaded , and the tumour may have grown into the blood vessels through the right iliac vein . Gynaecological-related tumour markers were within the normal range. After all of these examinations, the patient was considered to have a uterine myoma with right iliac vessel metastasis and right iliac vein to right atrial tumour thrombus formation. After a multidisciplinary discussion, the patient was eventually diagnosed with IVL and required multidisciplinary surgery. Before the procedure, to facilitate the surgical resection and improve the accuracy of the operation, CT multiplanar reformation (MPR) and CT VR reconstruction were used to evaluate the tumour. With the help of extracorporeal circulation technology, a one-stage surgery was finally recommended.
After successful anaesthesia, the patient was placed in a supine position. The sternum was opened longitudinally, followed by the pericardium, free ascending aorta, and superior and inferior vena cava, and a set of blocking belts was applied as a backup. The right uterine vein was dilated after the laparotomy and initial adhesiolysis and was observed to be the canal where the leiomyoma grew into the right iliac vein. A total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy were performed. The right internal iliac vein was retrogradely separated from the uterine artery, and the internal iliac vein was resected from the bifurcation. The common iliac vein and inferior vena cava were separated to the lower edge of the liver, and a set of blocking belts was applied. After extracorporeal circulation was established, a small 3-cm opening was made from the right atrium to block the inferior vena cava blood flow, and a 7-cm incision was made from the inferior vena cava. By pulling the tumour down, it was completely delivered from the inferior vena cava. The heart cavity and venous lumen were examined, and there were no tumour remnants. At this point, the tumour was completely removed .
The postoperative pathology indicated multiple uterine leiomyomas and inferior vena cava leiomyomas, and the immunostaining showed desmin +, smooth muscle actin (SMA) +, P53 -, and Ki-67 + (1%). Combined with the immunostaining results, more than two experienced pathologists diagnosed the patient as having IVL .