Our patient was a 4-day-old female with a birth weight of 3,100 grams and a gestational age of 39 weeks born from non-consanguineous parents. Her birth history was unremarkable. She was first admitted to a local hospital for hyperbilirubinemia started at the third day of life. There was no history of poor feeding and fever. She was not ill or toxic on primary examination. After one day of hospitalization, fever started and she was referred to our hospital for further evaluation. Clinical examination at admission revealed an axillary temperature of 39°C, jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly and a necrotic lesion in perineum with swelling of the left labium major. Sharp margins of the lesion medially distended to the fourchette and anus and laterally to the origin of left thigh . There was no history of trauma or other predisposing condition. Initial diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis and sepsis was made and she was treated by vancomycin and meropenem to cover both aerobic and anerobic organisms, in addition to other supportive measures.
Laboratory study showed; direct hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin 17.6 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 5.9 mg/dL), blood cell count abnormality (WBC 2,160, neutrophil 5% lymph 88%, mono 7%, Hb 12.8 gr/dL, Plt 21,000) and elevated CRP 41.9 mg/L. TORCH study was negative. Blood and wound culture grew Pseudomonas aeruginosa sensitive to meropenem and amikacin.
In the course of treatment, by repeating CBC we found leukocytosis with a high percentage of blast cells and persistent thrombocytopenia (WBC 18,490, neut 5.7%, lymph 15.1%, mono 26%, blast 52%, myelocyte 1%, RBC 2,800,000, Hb 8.8, Plt 29,000) despite proper antibiotic therapy. So a pediatrics hematologic consultation was requested to rule out malignancies. Bone marrow aspiration and flow cytometry was performed according to his suggestion. The result was; AML-M4 .
Skin lesion progressed from a superficial necrotic lesion to a deep soft tissue involvement in external genital area . Abnormal coagulation profile and poor patient’s condition banned the surgeon from performing any surgical procedure for skin lesion, so local treatment with N/S irrigation and sterile dressing continued. Parents refused chemotherapy and she was discharged against medical advice. Bleeding and DIC was the cause of her death in a local hospital few days later.