A 52-year-old woman admitted to our hospital who complained of dyspnea for 2 months and dry cough for 10 days without any obvious causes. She was healthy previous and without family history. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a large amount of pericardial fluid. Dyspnea was alleviated by pericardiocentesis and malignant cells can be seen in pericardial fluid, but not be diagnosed definitely. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed a large defined enhancing soft tissue in the right atrium, considering the malignant lesion. Also, increased 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) uptake was observed in midsternum, likely due to metastasis . A subsequent chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large size tumoral lesion (approximately 7 cm × 5 cm × 5 cm) that its origin was right atrium, invading near fiber pericardium . Transthoracic echocardiography showed solid occupation in the anterolateral of right atrium, tricuspid regurgitation in small quantities . Tumor markers were detected that the CA125 was 97.9 U/mL, neuron-specific enolase (NSE) was 24.47 ng/mL. In order to make a correct diagnosis, the CT-guided biopsy was conducted for the tumor and the necrotic tissues were found. Considering higher risk would be accompanied by puncture again, an exploratory thoracotomy was performed after consultation by multidisciplinary team. Opening the pericardium, we could see extensive adhesion between the pericardium and the heart. After cardiopulmonary bypass was established, we separated right atrium from the pericardium difficultly. The tumor was located at the anterior inferior wall of the right atrium, rich vascularized, hard and uneven . Because of extensive involvement, the tumor was unresectable. A 5 mm × 5 mm tissue was removed for pathology. Although we ligatured the base before we removed the tissue, bleeding continued, it was stopped after performing pressing hemostasis for 30 minutes. The pathology diagnosis was angiosarcoma. The immunohistochemistry results were as follows: CD34(+), CD31(+), F8(+), Ki67 10% to 30%(+), p53(−), CD68(−), SMA(−), HMB45(−), CK(−), MelanA(−), LCA(−) . Ten days later, the patient began to receive chemotherapy with docetaxel for 2 cycles and the disease was progressive. Radiotherapy was declined in view of its cardiotoxicity. Bevacizumab was combined with chemotherapy for 3 months. Unfortunately, the tumor was still in progress. She died of respiratory failure, survived for 10 months. This case report was performed with the signed informed consent from the family of the patient, and the personal information of the patient was made anonymous.