A 77-year old man presented with breathlessness and weight loss. Endoscopy and duodenal biopsy showed amyloid deposits, subtyped as transthyretin type (TTR). Investigations excluded a plasma cell dyscrasia, and showed atrial fibrillation on ECG , and moderately increased wall thickness with moderate to severe diastolic dysfunction on echocardiography . TTR gene sequencing showed no mutation so the diagnosis was that of wild-type ATTR amyloidosis (senile systemic amyloidosis). Cardiac involvement, though likely, was not unequivocal as age/hypertension can confound. Technetium-labelled bone scintigraphy and CMR were performed. Scintigraphy demonstrated grade 2 myocardial uptake, highly specific for cardiac amyloidosis. Cine CMR imaging supported the echocardiographic and scintigraphy findings. Tissue characterization showed clear amyloidosis with elevated native myocardial T1 (ShMOLLI, 1072 ms, normal 960 ms+/-30 ms) and, after contrast (Gadoterate meglumine, 0.1 mmol/kg, gadolinium-DOTA, Dotarem® Guerbet S.A. France), abnormal gadolinium kinetics on TI scout (nulling of the myocardium before the blood) and diffuse biventricular subendocardial LGE . The extracellular volume fraction (ECV) at 15 min was 0.53.
Two weeks later, the CMR was repeated (same scanner and team with no changes in the patient regarding treatment or disease status) within the screening tests of a clinical trial, this time with a different contrast agent, gadobenate dimeglumine (0.1 mmol/kg, gadolinium-BOPTA, MultiHance®, Bracco, Milan, Italy). The cines and native T1 findings were the same . The LGE however was markedly different – the subendocardial LGE so characteristic of amyloidosis was not visible, even with phase-sensitive inversion recovery (PSIR). There was just non-specific right ventricle insertion point LGE . The ECV at 15 min obtained using Gd-BOPTA (MultiHance®) was now lower – 0.45 compared to 0.53 with gadolinium-DOTA (Dotarem®) (same acquisition time after contrast administration). This difference is higher than the expected variability of the technique. Prior publications demonstrate the ECV to be stable to a standard deviation of 0.02 (0.03 for amyloid); here a 0.08 difference with contrast agent is recorded.