A 67-year-old male has a history of old myocardial infarction, cardiac stents, apical LVA for almost 8 years and newly was diagnosed rectal cancer needing surgery. The patient was posted for non-cardiac surgery (Hartmann’s procedure) and stopped aspirin (100 mg QD) for 10 days to reduce the risk of bleeding. The preoperative cardiac troponin-l level stabilized at 0.07–0.078 ng/mL. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed “persistent” Q-waves and elevated ST-segment with relevant inverted T waves in leads V2–V5, suggesting a remote healed anterior wall myocardial infarction . Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) examination showed akinesia of the apical, ventricular septum and anterior wall of left ventricular with formation of an apical LVA, bulging 26 × 51 mm . Also, left ventricular dysfunction with ejection fraction of 46.7% and mild mitral regurgitation were found. But 2 weeks later seeing the TEE image on the stage, we were surprised to find that the result of TEE examination after induction of anesthesia was different from that of TTE preoperatively. Apart from the known extensive LVA, a well-circumscribed mural thrombus (30 × 30 mm) was visualized clearly . TEE is not a routine monitoring in non-heart surgery. And there were no suspicious symptoms occurred. This is because his left ventricular myocardial contractility was severely damaged with poor ejection fraction and we don’t see such patients very often. In order to decrease the risk of anesthesia for patients with chronic aneurysm, TEE was done to make real monitoring cardiac function intraoperatively. Fortunately, no thromboembolic or bleeding accidents happened intraoperatively. When the surgery was over, the serum troponin-l was 0.07 ng/mL and was not worsened comparing to the preoperative conditions. After surgery, in addition to continue taking antiplatelet therapy with aspirin, the patient was also treated with subcutaneous calcium nadroparin with frequency of twice a day (0.4 ml-4100 UI) for 5 days. The patient did well postoperatively, and 5 days later, TTE re-examination did not find LVMT. The patient discharged with good recovery on postoperative day 10. He was followed up for 2 years after the surgery, and there were no cardiovascular accidents occurred.