In March 2021, a 58-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of a one-month history of right upper quadrant pain accompanied by fever. The tumor markers examination showed a significant increase in serum β-HCG level of 6080.2 IU/L (normal range<5.0 IU/L). Some inflammatory parameters were also significantly elevated: white blood cell, 11.2 × 109/L with neutrophils occupying 79.3%; C-reactive protein, 52.3 mg/L (normal range<3 mg/L). CT of the abdomen revealed gallbladder cancer with invasion of the adjacent liver and multiple metastases in the liver . No tumorous lesion, suggestive of a primary site, was identified in organs of the reproductive system by radiography . A clinical diagnosis of cholecystitis and possible gallbladder tumor with liver metastases was made. Percutaneous cholecystostomy and needle biopsy of the liver were performed under ultrasound (US) guidance. Histopathological analysis of liver metastases showed poorly differentiated carcinoma with large-scale necrosis . Immunohistochemical detection of various markers was further performed on the tumoral tissue and revealed strong positivity for HCG in most tumor cells . Choriocarcinoma is usually composed of intermediate trophoblast cells, cytotrophoblast cells, and syncytiotrophoblast cells, and the interstitium is often accompanied by significant bleeding. The cell morphology of this case was uniform and did not have the characteristics of choriocarcinoma. Clinical examination of the female reproductive system showed no abnormality. After the additional examinations, the definite diagnosis of GBC with ectopic HCG with liver metastases was made.
After abdominal pain and fever improved, the patient received chemotherapy (gemcitabine 1.5g on days 1 and 8 and capecitabine 1g/1.5g on days 1-14, every 3 weeks) plus ICIs (carrellizumab 200mg on day 1) based on the guideline for the treatment of gallbladder carcinoma. The patient received a total of eight cycles of chemotherapy plus ICIs from April 2021 to September 2021. Contrast-enhanced CT was performed regularly, and the results suggested that the size of metastases and the extent of invasion were smaller than before . The patient showed a good response to the treatment with mild side effects.
After eight courses of treatment, CT revealed a drastic reduction in the tumor size and the serum β-HCG level decreased to the normal range. Subsequently, radical resection of gallbladder carcinoma and radiofrequency ablation of liver lesions were performed. Histopathological analysis showed no tumor cells, indicating pathological complete response (PCR) was achieved. The infiltration of large amounts of lymphocytes and plasma cells was observed in the specimen . Immunofluorescence staining showed positivity for CD4, CD8, and CD68 .
The patient received two more courses of postoperative chemotherapy plus ICIs. To date, there was no evidence of tumor recurrence and the serum β-HCG level remained in the normal range .
In order to investigate the genetic features of GBC with HCG production, gene analysis was further performed. Immunostaining showed tumor cells were positive for PD-L1 (Tumor cell Proportion Score, TPS ≥ 50%) . WES of tumor tissue revealed a tumor mutation burden (TMB) of 1.51 mut/Mb, which was at a TMB-low level, and a copy number variation of 5.58%. Based on sequencing data, the tumor tissue was microsatellite stable (MSS). A total of eight mutations in the genes that drive tumors were also identified, namely, AXL 19q13.2, BARD1 p.P89fs, CCND3 6p21.1, NRAS p.Q61K, APC p.R805Q, JAK2 p.V392M, MCL1 1q21.3, and SMO p.R485Q.
To better explore the differences in TIME features between GBC producing HCG and those without HCG, RNA-seq was performed, which refers to the use of high-through sequencing for cDNA sequencing to comprehensively obtain almost all transcripts of tissues of a tumor. The scatter plot was shown to demonstrate the variation of gene expression between two types of tumors . A total of 734 differentially expressed genes were screened, which met the criteria of adjusted P ≤ 0.05 and fold changes of less than -2 or greater than 2. RPE65 and CLDN10 were, respectively, the most significantly upregulated protein and downregulated proteins.
The ssGSEA method was used to uncover the gene sets associated with the pathogenesis of GBC producing HCG. As shown in , MYC targets v1, mitotic spindle, DNA repair, PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling, and unfolded protein response of gene sets were expressed in relatively higher levels in the present case than gallbladder adenocarcinoma without HCG. The immune infiltration features in our case and other cases of gallbladder adenocarcinoma were also analyzed using the CIBERSORT method, an analytical method to accurately estimate the immune composition of tumor tissue by using gene expression data. GBC producing HCG showed higher levels of infiltrating T cell gamma delta (4.5%), eosinophil (4.2%), and M1 macrophage (14.3%) than common gallbladder adenocarcinoma without HCG . The dominant immune cell types in our case were macrophage and CD4+ T cells .