A 4-year-old girl was referred to the general pediatric ward because of intractable hypoxemia, cough since 2 weeks, and fever since 11 days. Her highest body temperature was 40.6 °C. Peripheral blood cell counts were within the normal range, and etiological examination was not performed due to technical limitations. Azithromycin, ceftriaxone, cefoperazone sodium, and sulbactam sodium were previously administrated in the given order at a local hospital for infection. In the emergency department, face-mask ventilation was administered to maintain the blood oxygen saturation level over 95%. The patient is the second child of non-consanguineous parents, and with an uneventful birth and medical history. On physical examination, coarse breath sounds and wet rales were observed in both lungs. The suprasternal and supraclavicular fossa showed obvious depression.
Laboratory examinations on admission showed increased white blood cell count 21.33 × 109 cells/L (normal range, 4.0–12.0 × 109/L) with 91.4% neutrophils, hemoglobin level of 121 g/L (normal range, 110–155 g/L), platelets 258 × 1012/L (normal range, 100–400 × 109/L), hypersensitive C-reactive protein level of 44.97 mg/L (normal range, < 8 mg/L), and procalcitonin level of 25.73 ng/mL (normal range, < 0.46 ng/mL). Biochemical examination revealed reduction in albumin (normal range, 32.0–52.0 g/L), and increase in alanine aminotransferase (103 U/L, normal range, < 50 U/L) and aspartate aminotransferase levels (216 U/L, normal range, 15–60 U/L). Immunofluorescence of exfoliated cells of sputum for adenoviral, respiratory syncytial virus, influenza virus, and parainfluenza virus were weakly positive for the adenoviral antigen. RNA of Mycoplasma pneumoniae in sputum, antibodies for Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Chlamydia pneumoniae in blood, and 16S rRNA screening for gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, and multiple blood cultures (e.g., L-form bacteria, anaerobic bacteria, fungus) were negative. The results of tests related to the tuberculosis antibody—enzyme-linked immunospot, tuberculin, (1, 3) B-D glucan, and Galactomannan were negative.
Chest radiography and computed tomography (CT) scans indicated features of consolidation and progressive worsening, especially in the right upper and both lower lung lobes. Signs of airway obstruction (e.g., finger-in-glove pattern or bronchiectasis disappearance) were not obvious. . Ultrasound examination showed bilateral pleural effusion of approximately 0.77 cm and 1.74 cm thickness in the left and right sides, respectively. Additionally, peritoneal (maximum depth 5.0 cm) and pelvic (maximum depth 2.1 cm) effusions were noted. Thoracentesis was performed 6 days after admission, and approximately 50 mL of slightly turbid, yellowish pleural effusion fluid was collected.
Although antibiotics such as sulperazone, meropenem, voriconazole, and linezolid; corticosteroids; inhaled oxygen; and additional supportive treatments such as parenteral nutrition and external cooling were administered, the patient experienced type II respiratory failure with face-mask oxygen inhalation . Her white blood cell count decreased to 1.45 × 109/L with a neutrophil count of 0.87 × 109/L. Anemia (hemoglobin, 86 g/L) and thrombocytopenia (platelets, 78 × 109/L) were noted 5 days after admission. Bone marrow examination showed significant granulocyte proliferation, consistent with infection. Mechanical ventilation was adopted. However, the patient’s respiratory failure did not alleviate, and airway obstruction was speculated. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was implemented on the 7th day after admission, and flexible bronchoscopy was performed on the 8th day after admission. Flexible bronchoscopy showed complete obstruction of the right bronchiole by a white and elastic substance . Tree-like plastic casts were removed from the bronchi . Pathological examination showed flaky and cellulose-like necrotic tissue with extensive eosinophil infiltration consistent with type I PB . Immunofluorescence of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) cells for respiratory viruses was positive for the adenoviral antigen and negative for respiratory syncytial virus, influenza virus and parainfluenza virus. Pathogen analysis of BALF was performed by next-generation sequencing (BGISEQ-50), and the data were compared with pathogen sequences deposited in the 4 Microbial Genome Databases, which included 3446 species of bacteria, 206 species of fungi, 4152 species of viruses, and 140 species of parasites. The amplified sequences showed a 99.80% match with that of the human adenovirus 7. BALF and pleural effusion cultures were negative.
Type II respiratory failure improved after the plastic casts were successfully removed. ECMO support lasted for 7 days, and a subsequent flexible bronchoscopy performed 15 days after admission showed no recurrence of bronchial tree-like plastic casts. Chest radiography and CT showed gradual resorption of the pulmonary consolidation , and eventually, ventilator support was removed. Nebulized inhaled corticosteroid was administered on all 39 days; methylprednisolone was administered for 11 days to inhibit systemic inflammation. Antibiotics (meropenem, voriconazole, linezolid, and cefoperazone), intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), red blood cells and plasma, albumin infusion, and parenteral nutrition were additionally administered . The patient was discharged 39 days after admission and continued to receive nebulized inhaled hormone therapy for 7 days. During the subsequent one-year follow-up, chest CT demonstrated improvement of obstructive features (emphysema or atelectasis) , with no complaints of recurrent cough or wheezing.