A 17-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital with left ventricular hypertrophy. Our patient was born from non-consanguineous parents, delivered vaginally at 38 weeks’ gestational age weighing 2384 g with no neonatal asphyxia. He had no family history of cardiomyopathy or sudden cardiac death. Manifestations of neurological illness appeared in 7 months with delayed motor development. He developed metabolic acidosis triggered by a viral infection on three occasions when he was 1 year old. At this point, lactate and pyruvate values in serum and cerebrospinal fluid were elevated. T2-weighted imaging revealed bilateral hyperintensity in midbrain and dorsal pons in brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . Leigh syndrome was suspected based on clinical course and brain images. Although skeletal muscle biopsy was performed, ragged red fibres were not identified pathologically, and respiratory chain enzyme activity of the biopsied skeletal muscle was normal. Point mutations associated with mitochondrial diseases at the mitochondrial DNA position 3243, 8344, 8993, and 9176 in the biopsied skeletal muscle were not identified. As the evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction was not shown, he was diagnosed as ‘Leigh-like syndrome’. We started to supply thiamine and dichloroacetic acid as a treatment for mitochondrial impairments which was suspected at this time. The episode of metabolic acidosis did not occur after he was 4 years old. Although he had a delay in psychomotor development, he attended a school for disabled children and grew up with no regression. His activities of daily living such as functional mobility and self-feeding were independent, whereas bathing, dressing, and toilet hygiene needed partial assistance during childhood.
Left ventricular hypertrophy was identified on the electrocardiogram when he was 6 years old . Echocardiography showed left ventricular hypertrophy when he was 12 years old (Video 1). Although there were no cardiovascular manifestations such as dyspnoea or palpitation, mitochondrial cardiomyopathy was suspected based on these cardiological findings and clinical course. When he was 15 years old, T2-weighted imaging showed hyperintensity in bilateral putamen and right cerebral peduncle, and cerebellar atrophy in brain MRI . Single voxel spectroscopy demonstrated a lactate peak in the right basal ganglia . Although these MRI findings were suggestive of Leigh syndrome, a definitive diagnosis could not be made since we could not demonstrate evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction. The patient suffered a convulsive seizure when he was 16 years old. Levocarnitine supplementation as an additional treatment for suspected mitochondrial impairments and anticonvulsants were started.
When he was 17 years old, he was admitted to our hospital to investigate the cause of left ventricular hypertrophy. His blood pressure was 108/60 mmHg. Pulse rate was 53/min and regular. Heart sounds were regular, and he had no murmur. Neurological examination showed mild muscle weakness with normal deep tendon reflexes. Blood analysis showed normal brain natriuretic peptide value of less than 5.8 pg/mL (reference range: 0–18.4 pg/mL). EMB was performed by cardiac catheterization and biopsy samples were obtained at the ventricular septum in the right ventricle. Light microscopy of the biopsied myocardium showed cytoplasmic vacuolization , and electron microscopy showed a marked proliferation of mitochondria within myofibrils . Using electron microscopy with quantitative analysis, the volume density of mitochondria within cardiac muscle cells was 39%, which indicated the possibility of mitochondrial cardiomyopathy. Respiratory chain enzyme activity of the biopsied myocardium and cultured fibroblasts obtained from the biopsied skin showed decreased activity of complex I ., Oxygen consumption rate of skin fibroblasts measured by Seahorse XF96 apparatus was 92% of control in glucose medium and 64% of normal in galactose medium, which indicated oxidative phosphorylation impairment., Immunohistopathological analysis with respiratory chain enzyme antibodies of biopsied myocardium showed decreased signal intensity of complex I compared with complex II (22% of normal) and normal signal intensity of complex IV compared with complex II (116% of normal) . Genetic testing revealed an m.14453 A>G mutation on the MT-ND6 gene, with a heteroplasmy rate of the blood sample 60% and the cardiac tissue 83%. This mutation was not shown in his parents, suggesting that it was a de novo mutation. Association of mutations in MT-ND6 gene with Leigh syndrome has been reported previously., This m.14453 A>G mutation has been reported in mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes (MELAS) syndrome, whereas it has not been reported in Leigh syndrome previously. Taken together with clinical course and laboratory findings, this mutation was considered the causative agent. He was finally diagnosed with Leigh syndrome and mitochondrial cardiomyopathy. As the frequency of seizures gradually increased and his motor function gradually regressed, we started oral 5-aminolevulinic acid as a treatment when he was 21 years old. After the initiation of oral 5-aminolevulinic acid, the frequency of seizures decreased, whereas his motor function gradually continued to regress. In the most recent follow-up at the age of 22, he had no life-threatening complications and was able to walk slowly, whereas his activities of daily living such as functional mobility and self-feeding required partial assistance.