A 69-year-old African American male with hypertension, hyperlipidemia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, type 2 diabetes (hemoglobin A1C 8.4 %) presented to our clinic with approximately six months of intermittent white urethral discharge which began shortly after penoscrotal IPP removal and replacement by an outside urologist for prior IPP malfunction. No operative note was available for review. The discharge did not change in quantity after ejaculation or intercourse and was not associated with any urinary symptoms. Testing for sexually transmitted diseases by local urologist was negative. Clinic cystoscopy revealed an eroded right sided IPP cylinder involving the bulbar urethra .
The patient was taken to the operating room for removal of all IPP components through a penoscrotal incision. Erosion of the right IPP cylinder was confirmed by visualizing a 0.5 cm defect into the right lateral aspect of the bulbar urethra . A transecting excision and primary anastomosis (EPA) urethroplasty was then performed in the area of urethral erosion through a perineal incision. The corporal defect was closed separately. A14 French foley catheter was left in place with plans to remain in place for two weeks postoperatively. A 21 cm malleable prosthesis was placed in the left corpora (purposely undersized by 1 cm to avoid distal erosion).
A peri-catheter retrograde urethrogram (RUG) was performed 2 weeks postoperatively, which showed no evidence of contrast extravasation, and his catheter was removed. Six months postoperatively, he returned to clinic with continued urethral discharge and pain at the tip of his penis. Physical exam was concerning for impending MPP distal erosion. Office cystoscopy at that time showed a well-healed urethral anastomosis without visualization of the unilateral MPP cylinder, recurrent urethral erosion, or fistula. It was recommended that he undergo MPP explant (given concerns for impending distal erosion) but his surgery was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the context of his medical comorbidities.
Two weeks following office cystoscopy, the patient returned to clinic with new scrotal drainage and pain. Exam revealed an area of fluctuance concerning for scrotal abscess for which he underwent incision and drainage in clinic with evacuation of purulent material and clear fluid. He was prescribed antibiotics and scheduled for scrotal incision and drainage, MPP explant, and possible urethroplasty for presumed urethrocavernous fistula.
Intraoperative urethroscopy showed a pinpoint opening in the left bulbar urethra concerning for fistulous tract which was able to be cannulated with a wire . Perineal exploration confirmed the wire exiting the bulbar urethra and entering the adjacent left corporal body . The fistulous tract was excised and a non-transecting bulbar urethroplasty was performed. Two-week post-operative peri-catheter RUG showed no evidence of contrast extravasation and the catheter was removed. There was no evidence of recurrent scrotal abscess on exam. Despite multiple complications, the patient remains interested in future IPP placement.