A 60-year-old female was referred to our hospital in June 2016 for increased stool frequency for more than six months. Her mother died of “rectal cancer”. Colonoscopy showed ulcerated neoplasia of the rectum 8-13 cm from the anal verge, invading nearly half of the circumference. Pathology on bite-examination was adenocarcinoma of the rectum. The abdominal MRI showed a rectal wall mass consistent with rectal cancer, with multiple enlarged lymph nodes around the rectal mesentery and superior rectal artery; the rest of the pelvis was not abnormal. The patient’s imaging stage was cT3N2M0.
Radical bowel cancer surgery: In June 2016, the patient underwent a radical Dixon operation for rectal cancer. The postoperative pathology showed grade II adenocarcinoma invading the mesentery, with no clear choroidal aneurysm embolus or nerve invasion. Lymph nodes: peri-intestinal 0/10, mesenteric 0/4, mesenteric root 0/4 metastases. The patient was diagnosed with stage IIB (pT4aN0M0) adenocarcinoma. Genetic testing suggested KRAS E2p.G13D mutation . In July 2016, the patient started postoperative treatment with the XELOX protocol for one cycle. Patients are not tolerated due to adverse reactions and are reviewed regularly .
In June 2018, CT scan suggests nodule in upper lobe of right lung, metastasis? Not excluding primary lung cancer. Disease-free survival after bowel cancer surgery was 2 years (DFS).
Upper lobe of right lung surgery: In June 2018, the patient underwent right upper lung lobectomy. Immunohistochemistry suggested TTF-1 (-), CDX2 (+), Napsin A (-), PDL1 (DAKO 22C3) (0% positive), PD-L1 (VENTANA SP263) (0% positive), ALK Negative (-), BRAF (-), MLHI1 (+), PMS2 (+), MSH2 (+), MSH6 (+). Pathology suggests adenocarcinoma, considered of intestinal origin. In July 2018, the patient was given capecitabine chemotherapy for one cycle. Patients are not tolerated due to adverse reactions and are reviewed regularly . Disease-free survival after excision of lung metastases was 13 months(DFS).
1st-line treatment: In July 2019, CT scan suggested multiple nodules in both lungs and metastases were considered. A whole-body bone scanning indicated bone metastases. The patient started 1st-line treatment with mFOLFOX6+bevacizumab, lasting for seven cycles, and the disease was stable which achieved stable disease (SD) of the lung lesion . Subsequently, the patient was not diagnosed and treated as planned due to the impact of the epidemic and remained on SD until March 2020 with a PFS of 8 months.
2nd-line treatment:In March 2020, CT scan showed enlarged multiple metastases in both lungs, the patient developed a progressive disease (PD). The patient started 2nd-line treatment with FOLFIRI+Bevacizumab, lasting for eight cycles, and the disease was stable which yielded a partial response partial response (PR) of the lung lesion . 2nd-line maintenance therapy was given with irinotecan and bevacizumab, lasting for two cycles and until November 2020 with a PFS of 7 months.
3rd-line treatment : Starting from November 2020, patients received a combinatorial treatment with furoquinitinib (5mg d1-14 q21d), camrelizumab (200mg d1 q21d),lasting 23 cycles so far. The patient received 3rd-line treatment achieved maintain partial response (PR).