A 30-year-old woman was admitted to the Department of Breast and Thyroid Surgery, Third Xiangya Hospital affiliated with Central South University (hereafter referred to as our hospital) on December 10th, 2020. The complaint was a right breast mass for 5 months and left neck lymph node enlargement for 5 days. The patient presented a right breast mass with the size of an egg without pain or other discomfort 5 months ago that was not treated and had not been significantly enlarged. The lymph node of the left neck was found 5 days ago, and there was no pain or discomfort. Ultrasonography revealed hypoechoic nodules in her left neck, which was considered to be a lymphadenoid tissue lesion. The patient was admitted to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment.
Physical examination: The vital signs were normal; the neck was soft; the jugular veins were not inflated; the trachea was in the middle; and the thyroid was not enlarged. There were two palpable hard and enlarged lymph nodes approximately 1.5 cm*1.0 cm in size in the left neck, which showed poor activity. The appearance of both breasts was normal, and no “orange peel” appearance or “dimple sign” was observed on the skin. A 3.0 cm*2.5 cm hard mass was palpable in the right breast, which was irregular in shape, unclear in border, poor in motion and without tenderness. There was no palpable mass in the left breast. Bilateral axillary lymph nodes were not enlarged.
Laboratory examinations: Routine blood tests, liver and kidney function, tumor markers and thyroid function were normal. Ultrasound of the breast showed a hypoechoic nodule approximately 29 mm*20 mm*29 mm in size in the right breast (BR-4a). Ultrasound of the neck showed no obvious abnormal sonography of the thyroid gland. Several hypoechoic nodules on the left side of the neck were found, among which two nodules without lymphatic hila were located in cervical area III, with sizes of 20 mm*6 mm and 17 mm*9 mm. Ultrasonography of the supraclavicular lymph nodes showed no obvious swelling. The mammography showed a 33 mm*14.3 mm slightly dense mass in the inner quadrant of the right breast with fine spotty calcification (BR-4c). MRI showed a mass of 28.8 mm*23.5 mm*28.9 mm in the upper inner quadrant of the right breast (BR-5) and multiple lymph nodes in the right axilla. PET-CT showed two nodules with increased glucose metabolism in the left chest wall of the manubrium, which were considered metastases; several small lymph nodes in the left neck (region IV) accompanied by an abnormal increase in glucose metabolism were considered multiple lymph node metastases. The diagnoses were as follows: 1. right breast carcinoma; and 2. lymph node metastatic carcinoma of the left neck.
The preoperative preparation was completed after admission, and biopsy of the excised right breast mass as well as the left cervical lymph nodes was carried out. Rapid intraoperative pathological examination diagnosed a right breast malignant tumor and poorly differentiated carcinoma of the left cervical lymph nodes. Then, right mastectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy of the right axilla were performed immediately. Rapid intraoperative pathological examination confirmed that there was no tumor metastasis in the right sentinel lymph node, so right axillary lymph node dissection was not performed. The postoperative pathology report showed grade III invasive ductal carcinoma of the right breast, and isolated tumor cells were found at the extracapsular vessel of one lymph node in group 1 of the sentinel lymph nodes (the number of tumor cells was less than 200). No cancer metastasis was found in the sentinel lymph nodes of groups 2, 3 and 4 (0/3). Left neck lymph node carcinoma presented metastases (2/2). No certain intravascular cancer embolus was found. Immunohistochemical examination showed ER (40%+), PR (5%+), HER-2 (3+), Ki67 (40%), AR (70%+), CK5/6 (−), CK7 (++), E-cadherin (++), p63 (−), SOX-10 (−), GATA-3 (+), Mammaglobin (+), and Napsin A (−) of the breast tumor cells, and the carcinoma cells of the left cervical lymph node were ER (70%+), PR (20%+), HER-2 (3+), Ki67 (40%), GATA-3 (+), and CK7 (++). The patient was scheduled to undergo chemotherapy, molecular targeted therapy, radiotherapy and endocrine therapy after the operation.