A 53-year-old Caucasian woman with a colorectal adenocarcinoma, histologically confirmed, underwent preoperative triphasic MDCT of her chest-abdomen-pelvis, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and follow-up split-bolus MDCT. Triphasic and split-bolus MDCT were performed by Philips Brilliance 64-detector row scanner (Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands).
The triphasic MDCT protocol consisted of unenhanced images and a HAP (started 40 seconds after the injection of the contrast medium or 20 seconds after threshold of 150 Hounsfield units, HU, in her thoracic-abdominal aorta by using a bolus-tracking technique) of her upper abdomen, a PVP (started 40 seconds after the end of HAP acquisition) of her chest-abdomen-pelvis and a DP (after 5 minutes to the start of injection) of her upper abdomen. A bolus administration of intravenous contrast material (iopamidole, Iopamiro®; Bracco, Milan, Italy; 1.5mL per kg body weight, containing 370mg iodine/mL) was injected at 4.0mL/second via an injector at a rate of 4.0mL/second from an antecubital vein using an 18 gauge needle.
Triphasic MDCT demonstrated a lesion (5.5cm in maximum diameter) in the right lobe of her liver with diffuse immediate homogeneous hyperdense enhancement on HAP, washout of contrast medium becoming isodense to her liver on PVP and DP at 5 minutes. Scar was hypodense to the liver on unenhanced phase, showing a progressive enhancement throughout the three phases with maximum peak on DP (Figure ). A diagnosis of FNH was suggested.
Her radiation dose – the effective dose (sievert, Sv) was calculated using the following equation: effective dose = k × dose-length-product; k = 0.015 (conversion coefficient) – obtained during triphasic MDCT was 38.87mSv. The total number of the images was 878.
MRI with liver-specific hepatobiliary contrast agent gadoxetic was done, showing a hypervascular soft tissue lesion consistent with a diagnosis of FNH. Laboratory data were all within the normal range. Liver and other specific tumor markers (alpha-fetoprotein, CA 19–9, carcinoembryonic antigen) turned out negative. At follow-up after 12 months from the initial triphasic MDCT, a split-bolus MDCT protocol was used.
The split-bolus MDCT protocol consisted of unenhanced low-dose of her upper abdomen; a single acquisition of the chest-abdomen-pelvis after intravenous injection of 150mL of contrast medium (370mgI/mL, iopamidole, Iopamiro®; Bracco, Milan, Italy), split by an automatic power injector (Stellant, CT; Medrad, Indianola, Pa, USA) into two boluses (Figure ).
Using the scout film, a scan range from her pulmonary apex to her pubic symphysis was determined. Then a circular region of interest of the bolus-tracking technique (raising the threshold value at 500 HU) was placed in the descending aorta. At the start of the second bolus contrast medium injection, the scan started cranio-caudally after a delay of 6 seconds from the arrival of the contrast medium into her aorta. The inherent 6-second delay in the bolus-tracking technique is necessary to move the scan table to the start of the scan, give breath-hold instructions to the patient, and tune the gantry parameters.
A single contrast-enhanced acquisition of the chest-abdomen-pelvis was acquired, resulting in a simultaneous contrast enhancement of her arterial and venous system.
Split-bolus MDCT showed the typical hyperdense enhancement of the lesion with hypodense central scar at the combined phase images (HAP/PVP during hepatic enhancement) and isodensity with hyperdensity of central scar at DP (5 minutes; Figure ).
The dose of radiation obtained during split-bolus CT was 22.78mSv. The total number of the images was 637.
Split-bolus MDCT demonstrated no differences in quantitative analysis in HU on liver parenchyma, portal vein and aorta with respect to triphasic MDCT technique (Figure ).
For triphasic and split-bolus MDCT protocol, the following acquisition parameters were used: slice thickness 2.5mm; gantry rotation speed 0.75 seconds; reconstruction index 1.25; pitch 0.935:1; 120 peak kilovoltage and automatic tube current (mA) was set on the basis of the patient’s weight using z-axis modulation. MDCT examinations were completed with sagittal, coronal and curved multiplanar reconstructions.
Images were transferred to an external workstation (Advantage Workstation 4.2, GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, USA and Magic View, Philips Medical Systems, Best, The Netherlands) and stored in a picture archiving and communication system (PACS, Agfa Healthcare, Impax).