An 18-year-old girl was diagnosed with monosomy 7 AML with central nervous system involvement in March 2022 at Sydney Children's Hospital, New South Wales, Australia, after presenting with a haemoglobin of 68 g/L, platelet count of 67 × 109/L and white cell count of 3.0 × 109/L. The diagnosis was confirmed by bone marrow aspirate which showed a markedly hypercellular bone marrow with 57% myeloid blasts, and with flow cytometry confirmation of the myeloid lineage.
There was no relevant personal or family history, nor previous hospital presentations. Her disease was refractory to first-line chemotherapy as per MyeChild protocol (Gemtuzumab 3 mg/m2 × 3 doses, cytarabine 100 mg/m2 × 20 doses, mitoxantrone 12 mg/m2 × 4 doses) and re-induction FLAG-Ida chemotherapy (fludarabine 30 mg/m2 × 5 doses, idarubicin 8 mg/m2 × 3 doses, cytarabine 2000 mg/m2 × 5 doses). Therapy was complicated by prolonged febrile neutropenia, refractory thrombocytopenia with recurrent hematemesis, Candida glabrata bacteraemia, Klebsiella pneumoniae sepsis, Paenibacillus urinalis central line-associated bloodstream infection and pancreatitis, with a lipase that peaked at 500 U/L, along with deranged liver function tests.
To identify personalised therapeutic options, she was enrolled on the ZERO Childhood Cancer precision medicine study, which incorporates comprehensive tumour profiling (paired tumour-germline whole-genome sequencing and tumour whole-transcriptomic sequencing) with preclinical drug testing. Molecular analysis identified NRAS G12S and KRAS G13D hotspot mutations and an ETV6-MECOM fusion , not detected by diagnostic testing, and confirmed monosomy 7 . Whole-transcriptomic sequencing detected high RNA expression of MECOM (consistent with ETV6-MECOM fusion), MCL1, JAK2, MAP2K1, PRKCD and SRC family kinases (FGR, HCK, LYN) .
HTS was conducted in mononuclear cells (MNC) isolated from the patient bone marrow. Short tandem repeat profiling of MNC confirmed validity of cells and SNP microarray demonstrated 92% leukaemia cells. Cells were exposed to a library of 126 compounds, approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and/or Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) or in late pre-clinical or experimental trial stages of development for childhood cancer. Drugs were tested in duplicate and added to achieve final concentrations of 0.5–5000 nM (10-fold serial dilutions) for 72 h. A drug was considered a hit if the Z-score of the AUC and IC50 was ≤ − 2. This represents high differential drug sensitivity compared to other samples in the drug database as AUC and IC50 are 2 standard deviations lower than the cohort mean. There were six drug hits: ruxolitinib (JAK1/2 inhibitor) and five anti-metabolites (cladribine, clofarabine, 6-thioguanine, 6-mercaptopurine, pemetrexed) . Ruxolitinib was the only molecularly targeted drug hit in single-agent HTS, consistent with high JAK2 expression. The HTS showed in vitro resistance to venetoclax (BCL2 inhibitor), likely due to RAS mutations, and high MCL1 expression., Three in vitro drug combinations were tested based on molecular and HTS profiles and clinical agents commonly used in AML. Cells were treated for 72 h using a matrix design with five concentrations of each agent. Venetoclax was combined with ruxolitinib, trametinib or azacitidine, however no combination showed synergy .
Due to her Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance score of 4, refractory disease and co-morbidities, our patient was not a suitable candidate for further intensive salvage chemotherapy or ASCT. Based on the precision medicine results and use of ruxolitinib in post-myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) AML, ruxolitinib (20 mg twice daily) was commenced with the intention to provide outpatient oral treatment, quality-of-life and slow disease progression. Hydroxyurea was prescribed at 2 g/day concurrently with the aim to reduce the white cell count (WCC) burden and limit complications of leucocytosis.
The patient's blast percentage and WCC remained elevated yet stable for two-months . On commencing ruxolitinib, her packed red blood cell and platelet transfusion requirements decreased from an average of 7–2 and 21–10 units/month, respectively . Her quality-of-life, not formally assessed due to patient preference, and ECOG performance score of 2 significantly improved and she was discharged to outpatient services for the first time in 6 months. Unfortunately, she passed away from progressive disease 4 months later.