A 71-year-old woman repeatedly suffered from fevers. She had previously undergone surgery and radiation for cervical cancer in 1970s, which left her with ureteral stenosis due to radiation and pelvic abscess because of a bladder fistula after radiation, so we implanted nephrostomy tubes to both her kidneys. High fevers were the only after-effect that generally appeared. Abnormal laboratory test values included white blood cell 9.79 × 103/μL, C-reactive protein 23.8 mg/dL, urea nitrogen 13.9 mg/dL, and creatinine 0.95 mg/dL. Both nephrostomy tubes’ urine volumes showed no problem. Moreover, both nephrostomy tubes’ urine cultivations were identified as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Enterococcus faecalis, but the blood's cultivation was identified as negative.
A contrast-enhanced CT scan showed liquid in the ventral of her sacrum bone and calcification around the liquid. This suggested calcification was due to radiation . A cystoscope indicated a fistula of about 2 mm at the left bladder wall . Antegrade pyelography showed we could not confirm the contrast under both sides of her mid-ureters and in her bladder . Cystography showed urine leakage from her left bladder wall to the abscess cavity . Moreover, gastrointestinal and gynecological examinations were performed, which confirmed that the fistula was in the bladder only. These findings led to a diagnosis of a pelvic abscess caused by a bladder fistula after radiation.
First, we started antibiotic medication and drained the pelvic abscess under the CT-scan guide . We used only meropenem, because she had a lot of resistant bacteria. Then, the pelvic abscess drainage was identified as Fusobacterium necrophorum, and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron.
Second, we observed that her fevers were reduced after 10 days of medical treatment and her inflammatory reaction was reduced after 20 days, so we closed her bladder fistula with transurethral cystoscopic injection of NBCA. This procedure was in accordance with the Evaluating Committee for New Unapproved Drugs of Hiroshima University (approval number: 30). Specifically, a 5-Fr ureteral catherter that we filled with saline solution was advanced over a hydrophilic guide wire in the left bladder wall. NBCA of 1 mL was mixed with iodized oil (Lipiodol®; Guerbet, Paris, France) of 1 mL. After that, we injected NBCA into the fistula and rapidly withdrew the ureteral catheter . After a few minutes, we performed cystography, which showed no leakage . We closed her bladder fistula with transurethral cystoscopic injection of NBCA while the drain was in the abscess. This was because, after the closure, the drain was left in place in order not to make the abscess cavity a closed space.
Finally, the drain was withdrawn after confirming that the abscess cavity had shrunk after 30 days of medical treatment. The patient had no fevers after the drain was withdrawn.