A 53-year-old Japanese woman presented with a right breast mass at the site of a previous wide local excision of AME.
A 53-year-old Japanese woman visited our hospital with a palpable mass approximately 2 cm in size in the upper-inner right breast. The mammogram showed an oval, smooth, and well-defined isodense mass in the upper right breast . Diagnostic ultrasonography showed a well-defined mass with cystic change, measuring up to 16 mm, at the 2 o’clock position in the right breast . A core needle biopsy (CNB) was performed, and the lump was diagnosed as AME. Lumpectomy with safety margins and without axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) was performed. Postoperative pathology confirmed AME. The tumor was a 20-mm cystic lesion, and the cystic wall had nodules or irregular thickening . The microscopic findings were as follows. Round or spindle-shaped myoepithelium that had proliferated in and around the gland ducts. High mitotic counts were prominent in the myoepithelial component (8/10 high-power fields.) The border of the tumor was relatively clear . The tumor resection margins were relatively clear with at least 5 mm clearance at the nearest margin. No adjuvant therapy was given. Two years later, the woman returned to our hospital with a palpable mass in the same location. Ultrasound showed a well-defined, oval, low-isoechoic mass on the slightly caudal side of the area of postoperative change . Vacuum-assisted biopsy was performed, and the diagnosis was recurrent AME. Lumpectomy with safety margins and without ALND was again performed. The tumor was diagnosed as recurrent AME with a proliferation pattern similar to that at the initial surgery. In addition, a diagnosis of malignant transformation of AME was made due to the observation of nuclear atypia, a high mitotic count (approximately 10/10 high-power fields), and invasive growth . Excisional margins were narrow on the side of the pectoralis major muscle, but the tumor was not exposed. No adjuvant therapy was given. Eight months later, the patient presented with a recurrent palpable mass in the same area.
No special past medical treatment history.
No family history of breast cancer or other cancers.
An approximately 2 cm palpable mass was observed in the upper-inner area of the right breast.
The patient’s hematology and biochemistry results were all unremarkable.
Ultrasound showed a series of masses up to 27 mm in size that had formed on the right side of the previous surgical wound . The largest of the masses showed no echogenicity, thick walls and internal septal/cystic degeneration. The findings were similar to those of the patient’s previously diagnosed AME. Enhanced breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple masses up to 25 mm in size in the right inner-upper area . The masses were cystic with thick walls, similar to the previous tumor, and the patient was diagnosed with recurrence. Two 7-mm nodules were also found within the pectoralis major muscle.