We present the case of a 62-year-old male patient with a personal history of gout, who was referred to our hospital because of pancytopenia during a routine blood test. The patient was asymptomatic, and there were no findings on physical examination. Full blood count revealed leukocytes of 2840/mm3 (neutrophils 700/mm3), hemoglobin of 11.3 g/dL and platelets of 73,000/mm3. Coagulation screening was normal, with a prothrombin time of 13.4 s, activated partial thromboplastin time of 27.2 s, and levels of derived fibrinogen of 210 mg/dL. Renal and hepatic function tests were normal.
PB smear confirmed thrombocytopenia and revealed the presence of anisopoikilocytosis with a count of two erythroblasts per 100 leukocytes. Hypergranular myelocytes were observed, accounting for 8% of total cell count, as well as pseudo-Pelger–Huët neutrophils. Multiparameter flow cytometry (MFC) of a PB sample was performed, detecting 26% of autofluorescent promyelocytes that expressed MPO+, CD33++, CD13+, CD117± and lacking CD56 and CD34.
On BM aspirate, the majority of cells were abnormal promyelocytes with round, non-lobulated nuclei without nucleoli and hypergranular cytoplasm. Most of these cells lacked Auer rods (a), and some promyelocytes showed intracytoplasmic inclusions similar to those previously described by Dowse et al. (b). Dyserythropoiesis and granulocytic dysplasia were also described (c).
MFC of the BM showed a predominance of premature granulocytic cells, detecting 59% of atypical promyelocytes with positivity for CD33++, CD13+, MPO+, CD64±, CD117±, and negativity for CD15, HLA-DR, CD11b, CD56, CD203c, and CD34.
An early fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) study with Vysis LSI PML/RARA dual-colour dual-fusion translocation probe kit (Abbott Molecular, Les Plaines, IL), showed three green FISH signals suggesting a variant RARA translocation. RARA rearrangement was confirmed using a RARA break-apart FISH probe (NIMFISH) (a).Cytogenetic analysis was performed on 24- and 48-h in vitro cultures of BM cells. GTG banding techniques were applied, obtaining 10 metaphases, which all showed a male karyotype 46,XY,t(11;17)(q23;q21)[10] (b). These findings suggested the presence of a ZBTB16/RARA fusion gene.
A standard RT-PCR approach did not detect the presence of bcr-1, bcr-2, and bcr-3 transcripts corresponding to PML/RARA rearrangement. Due to our cytogenetic findings, we developed a real-time quantitative PCR, using the reverse primer located in RARA exon 3 in conjunction with the primer located within ZBTB16 (exon 3 and 4), similar tothose described by Jovanovic et al. . RT-qPCR reaction was run on with the expression of normalized leukemic fusion transcripts of the ABL control gene using the ΔCt method. In our case, the chromosome 11 breakpoint fell within ZBTB16 intron 3, leading to the retention of two zinc fingers (2ZF) in the ZBTB16 moiety of the ZBTB16-RARA fusion protein. Furthermore, an NGS panel was set up, detecting additional mutations in FLT3, IDH2 and SRSF2.
With a diagnosis of atypical APL, the patient was started on intensive chemotherapy following a PETHEMA pre-established regimen for AML that included a seven-day continuous treatment with cytarabine (200 mg/m2), plus daily idarubicin (12 mg/m2) during the first three days (3 + 7 regimen). As per protocol, on day thirty of induction therapy, a BM aspirate was repeated, which reported morphological evidence of residual disease showing the presence of 7% of atypical promyelocytes. Cytogenetic testing found persistence of t(11;17) in 10% of all analyzed metaphases, and ZBTB16-RARA rearrangement was detected at 11% by RT-PCR.
Following these results, reinduction therapy with a new 3 + 7 course was scheduled. We decided to initiate maintenance treatment with ATRA on day twenty-eight of this reinduction treatment. BM aspirate was repeated on day fourty-eight, showing the first complete morphological remission, with negative minimal residual disease (MRD) by multiparameter flow cytometry. These results were consistent with cytogenetic tests showing a normal karyotype and with molecular studies that did not find the ZBTB16-RARA rearrangement.
First consolidation treatment was given with high-dose cytarabine (HiDAC), consisting of six doses (1 g/m2/12 h) on days 1, 3, and 5. During this time, the patient continued ATRA therapy daily. BM aspirate was repeated on day +46, persisting with MRD and not finding the ZBTB16-RARA rearrangement. The patient then received two more cycles of HiDAC with a new bone BM showing the absence of disease after each cycle. Maintenance therapy with ATRA was reduced to fifteen days per month after the second HiDAC consolidation.
At the date of publication, the patient continues in CR and continues receiving ATRA as maintenance therapy fifteen days per month until further evaluation.
This case has been recently included in the PETHEMA REGISTRY .