A 31-year-old woman reported with more episodes of conjunctival hemorrhages and chemosis with extended healing periods over the last months. Other symptoms were dryness, redness, burning sensation and itching. She was followed over the last 15 years by another department because of dilatation of conjunctival blood vessels in the right eye. Additional examinations were not performed. Medical history of the patient was unremarkable, there was no history of ocular surgery, trauma or any other ocular or general diseases. She had no family history of any significant disease.
Visual acuity was 20/20 with myopic correction in both eyes. Slit lamp biomicroscopy revealed diffuse chemosis, dilated, tortuous blood-filled conjunctival vessels, affecting the temporal, nasal and inferior quadrant of the right eye . The lesion was mobile and not fixed to the underlying sclera. Anterior segment of the left eye showed no pathologies, posterior segment of both eyes was normal.
Ophthalmic ultrasound and cranial computed tomography (CT) did not reveal any abnormalities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) disclosed dilated atypical Virchow-Robin space (VRS) on the right side (side of the dilated lymphatic vessels). The dilated VRS was round, 5–6 mm in diameter and located under the basal ganglia .
Based on the clinical appearance our differential diagnosis was conjunctival lymphangiectasia or possibly lymphangioma. Swept-source OCT (DRI OCT-1 Model Triton (plus), Topcon, Tokyo, Japan) scans were taken of both eyes using the anterior segment (AS) module of the device. On the right side subconjunctival hemorrhages appeared as hyperreflective areas, while the dilated lymphatic vessels were shown as hyporeflective spaces with widely varying calibers on the OCT images . OCT also revealed clear fluid-filled spaces demarcated by septae within the elevated conjunctiva. On OCT imaging the dilated calibers of the vessels and the border between the conjunctiva and the sclera was easily visualized in high resolution. It was also easy to determine which areas of the subconjunctiva were the most densely filled with dilated lymphatic vessels. Location for the conjunctival biopsy was selected based on the above OCT findings.
A sample was taken from the subconjunctiva all the way to the scleral surface in the inferonasal area on the right eye under local anaesthesia. Histology with Hematoxylin and Eosin staining and immunohistochemistry with D2–40 lymphatic endothelial marker monoclonal antibody were performed (not shown). The sample showed irregularity and thickening of the collagen fibers. Between the fibers we found sparsely dilated lymphatic channels in small groups. Histology confirmed the diagnosis of conjunctival lymphangiectasia.