The patient is a 52-year-old Asian woman who presented to the rheumatology department of our hospital in August 2003 with complaints of tightness of the skin over the face and hands. She also had positive Raynaud's phenomenon. She was diagnosed with scleroderma. She did not have any difficulty swallowing. Fundus examination did not reveal any evidence of accelerated hypertension.
Her investigations revealed ++ urine protein, ++ white blood cell (WBC), 10 to 20 RBC/hpf (red blood cells per high power field) and her 24-hour urine protein was 1.17 g. Her blood investigation revealed a WBC count of 7.5 × 103 hemoglobin of 9.9 gm/dl, a platelet count of 378 × 109 and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 78 mm in the first hour. Total bilirubin was 11 μmol/l, alanine transaminase was 10 units/l; she was HBSAg (hepatitis B surface antigen) negative and anti-HCV antibody negative.
She was also antinuclear antibody (ANA) positive (1 in 640). Her blood urea was 7.9 mmol/l, S-Creatinine 135 μmol/l, sodium 141, and potassium 4.8. Anti-RO, -LA, -Sm, and -RNP antibodies were negative. Anti-ds DNA antibodies were negative. Lupus erythematosus cells were negative. Anti-Scl70 antibodies were positive. Cytoplasmic-staining (C)-ANCA was negative. Perinuclear-staining (P)-ANCA was reported as 'unable to determine because of positive ANA' (P-ANCA testing by immunoassay would have clarified this inconclusive result but was unavailable to us). Rheumatoid factor was less than 8IU/ml. (reference range (RR) < 30IU/ml). Serum C3 was 0.76 g/l (RR 0.88 to 2.01 g/l). Serum C4 was 0.32 g/l (RR 0.16 to 0.58 g/l).
X-ray of the hands showed acro-osteolysis of the terminal phalange of thumb and index finger. High-resolution computed tomography of the lungs revealed prominent bilateral sub-pleural honeycombing suggestive of usual interstitial pneumonia. A Doppler study of the renal arteries did not reveal any evidence of renal artery stenosis.
The patient was diagnosed with diffuse scleroderma, treated symptomatically and given ACE inhibitors for hypertension. In June 2004 she was referred to a nephrologist. At that time her investigations were as follows: blood urea 22.7 mmol/l, serum sodium 137, serum potassium 6.8, and serum creatinine of 555 μmol/l. Ultrasonogram examination of the abdomen revealed echogenic kidneys of normal size. In view of the relatively rapid decline in renal function and normal size kidneys a renal biopsy was performed .
A kidney biopsy was performed which showed 26 glomeruli. Most of the glomeruli (95%) showed prominent fibrocellular and fibrous crescent formation and the lesions were global. Capillary wall basement membrane thickening and duplication with tram track appearance and moderate mesangial proliferation were evident. The glomerular hypercellularity was mainly mesangial with occasional polymorphs with no necrotizing lesion. Five glomeruli were completely sclerosed. The extraglomerular renal vessels exhibited moderate thickening of the vessel wall, particularly of its medial layer. Chronic inflammatory cellular infiltration and fibrosis of interstitial tissue were also seen. Immunoperoxide staining showed marked positivity with ++ IgG, + IgM, ++ Focal C3 and negative IgA. The staining pattern was granular in the mesangium and peripheral capillary loops. The overall impression was of crescentic GN with granular immune deposits.
Therapy with methylprednisolone was not effective and the patient went into end-stage renal failure and was initiated on hemodialysis on 14 July 2004. She is still on maintenance hemodialysis three times per week.