A 64-year-old female patient presented in May 2020 for “postmenopausal vaginal bleeding for one year”.
The vaginal bleeding was intermittent, less than the amount of previous menstruation. The patient had no feeling of dizziness and fatigue, but was accompanied by slight abdominal pain and occasional abdominal distension.
In June 2013, 4 years after menopause, the patient began to experience irregular vaginal bleeding without obvious cause. Transvaginal ultrasonography (TVUS) showed the endometrium was thickened (approximately 1.5 cm in total), and diagnostic curettage was performed. The pathological results suggested simple endometrial hyperplasia.
In May 2014, diagnostic curettage was performed again due to irregular vaginal bleeding, and the pathological results suggested endometrial hyperplasia disorder. The first two curettage procedures were performed at a different hospital.
In June 2016, irregular vaginal bleeding occurred again. Gynecological examination showed that the cervix was normally sized, the uterus was enlarged and the shape was irregular, and there were no abnormalities in the adnexa area of either side. TVUS showed the size of the uterus was about 9.0 cm × 6.1 cm × 6.0 cm, the endometrium was thickened (approximately 1.9 cm), and the echo was uneven. Several hypoechoic masses were observed in the uterine area; the largest one was in the lower part of the anterior wall, and approximately 2.2 cm × 2.1 cm × 1.9 cm in size with a clear boundary. The size of the left ovary was 2.1 cm × 1.4 cm, and the size of the right ovary was 2.0 cm × 1.2 cm. No obvious mass was present in both adnexa. Further hysteroscopy showed that the endometrium of the posterior wall of the uterus was focally thickened, and multiple polypoid lesions were observed in the uterine cavity; the larger one was approximately 1.5 cm × 1.0 cm in size and soft and pink with a smooth surface. The cervical mucosa was smooth. The sex hormone test revealed the following: estradiol (E2), 63 pg/mL (normal range: < 20-40 pg/mL); human follicle stimulating hormone (hFSH), 29.01 mIU/mL (normal range: 16.24-113.59 mIU/mL); human luteinizing hormone (hLH), 26.54 mIU/mL (normal range: 10.87-58.64 mIU/mL); progesterone (Prog), 0.33 ng/mL (normal range: 0.01-0.78 ng/mL); and testosterone (Testo), 0.46 ng/mL (normal range: < 0.1-0.75 ng/mL). Hysteroscopic endometrial polypectomy was performed on June 27, 2016, and the pathological results revealed endometrial polyps with secretory changes. The bleeding disappeared after the operation.
The patient had experienced menopause at the age of 53; her body mass index was 18.75 kg/m2, she reported no risk factors for endometrial cancer such as obesity, diabetes, hypertension, or genetic diseases; she had no history of hormonal drug use; and her adrenal glands were normal in size. She had one pregnancy and one previous delivery (G1P1). Her family history was unremarkable.
Gynecologic examination: the cervix was normal in size with a smooth surface and no cervical atrophy, the uterus was enlarged and irregular, and no abnormalities were found in bilateral adnexa.
Sex-hormone test: E2: 124 pg/mL, hFSH: 33.31 mIU/mL, hLH: 26.97 mIU/mL, Prog: 1.04 ng/mL, Testo: 1.10 ng/mL. The serum carbohydrate antigen (CA)-199, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA-125, and CA-724 levels were normal.
Before the fourth operation: TVUS showed the uterus to be approximately 8.2 cm × 6.3 cm × 5.7 cm in size, and the endometrium was approximately 2.0-cm thick. Several hypoechoic masses were observed in the uterine area. The largest one (3.6 cm × 3.4 cm × 2.7 cm) was located in the isthmus of the anterior wall and had a clear boundary. The size of the left ovary was 2.1 cm × 1.7 cm × 1.0 cm, and the size of the right ovary was 1.9 cm × 1.3 cm × 1.2 cm. There was no obvious mass in bilateral adnexa. Hysteroscopy revealed that the endometrium was extensively thickened, and the cervical mucosa was smooth. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging showed the uterus was enlarged, the endometrium was thickened (approximately 1.6 cm in total), and the signal in the right corner of the uterine cavity was not uniform.
Before the fifth operation: TVUS showed the endometrium was approximately 0.6 cm thick, and there were several hypoechoic masses in the uterine area. The right ovary was approximately 2.2 cm × 1.7 cm × 1.5 cm in size, with a 1.6 cm × 1.2 cm × 1.2 cm mass being observed inside. It had clear borders and was hypoechoic. Blood-flow signals were detected with color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI). The left ovary was poorly visualized. Additional abdominal computed tomography showed a low-density nodule of approximately 1.5 cm × 1.0 cm in the right ovary with clear borders. During the operation, we observed that the uterus was obviously large and irregular, with multiple fibroid nodules. A yellow protruding lesion of approximately 1 cm was observed on the surface of the right ovary.
Histopathological examination of the surgical specimens with immunohistochemistry confirmed the diagnosis of right ovarian cellular fibroma with hilar cell hyperplasia, focal complex endometrial hyperplasia, multiple leiomyomas of the uterus, and chronic cervicitis. The following observations were made:
The tumor cells of the right ovarian lesion were observed to be spindle-shaped and bundle-like with sheet-like arrangement under a microscope, and the cells were densely arranged without obvious atypia. Eosinophilic cell nests with rich cytoplasm were visible in the focal area . The densely arranged endometrial glands were hyperplastic, and some glandular lumens were irregular . Immunohistochemistry revealed the following: cytokeratin (focal+, Figure ); inhibin (part+, Figure ); Wilm’s tumor protein (WT1, part+, Figure ); calretinin (+, Figure ); Ki-67 (approximately 10% +, Figure ); and net staining showed mostly surrounding single cells .