A 9-year-old Italian girl developed headache, fatigue and weight loss of about 6 kg 1 month prior the admission to our hospital. One week before admission, because of the occurrence of dizziness and vomiting, she was hospitalized to the Neurology Department of another hospital in Rome, where the computed tomography (CT) scan of head and audiovestibular exams were normal. The patient was discharged with a diagnosis of “Symptomatic paroxysmal vertigo, migraine without aura and acute gastroenteritis”. Few days after the discharge, she reported history of sleepiness, persistence of migraine and fever. Thereafter, she was admitted to the Pediatric Emergency Department of our hospital where she had normal blood tests and a normal brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The MRI is shown in Fig. a. A normal ocular fundoscopy was performed due to onset of double vision and she was transferred to the Department of Neuropsychiatry where she underwent electroencephalogram (EEG) characterized by slow focal abnormalities. During the hospitalization, the patient experienced increased sleepiness and showed facial nerve palsy with a mouth deviation to the right side for which she was subjected to a lumbar puncture (LP) that showed a clear CSF with a white cell count (WBC) of 372/µL, a lymphocyte percentage of 90%, a protein level of 1.317 mg/dL, a glucose level of 13 mg/dL. Examination of Gram, Ziehl-Neelsen stain and soluble antigen test (Neisseria meningitis A-C-Y-W135 Ag, Streptococcus pneumoniae Ag) were negative; cultures for common pathogens and M. tuberculosis, quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to detect herpetic viruses (Herpes Simplex Virus-1, 2 and 6, Cytomegalovirus, Epstein Barr and Varicella Zoster Virus) were negative. The GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay (Cepheid) was also negative for CSF. In order to investigate other CNS diseases we performed the Link index and oligoclonal band screen that resulted respectively normal and absent in CSF. Under a suspected diagnosis of clear liquor meningitis, the patient was transferred to our ward. Patient’s past medical history revealed no referred contacts with TB infected subjects. The screening test for human immunodeficiency virus and chest X-ray (CXR) were negative. Tuberculosis Skin Test (TST) was negative and QuantiferonTB-gold in peripheral whole blood (QuantiFERON-TB© Gold In Tube [(QFT-IT); Cellestis Limited Chadstone, Vic., Australia] was indeterminate.
In order to improve the diagnosis of TB, we performed an alternative immunological method based on multifunctional T cells, which has been suggested in recent years as a new tool for the discrimination between active TB and latent TB infection (LTBI) . In a previous study we used an intracellular cytokine flow cytometry (ICCFC) protocol to asses mono-functional and multi-functional Mtb-specific CD4+ in peripheral blood and we proposed an immune-based approach, which could improve the identification at single time point of subjects with no TB infection or patients having active or latent TB. A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was performed to calculate optimal cut-off values for both activated CD4+ T cells and polyfunctional CD4+ T cells in order to discriminate infected (active TB and LTBI) from uninfected patients and active from latent stage. We performed a ROC analysis, and a cut-off >0.45% for activated CD4+ T cells was found as the value allowing the best combination of sensitivity (94.44%, 95% CI 72.2–99.8%) and specificity (100%, 95% CI 69.15–100%; AUC 0.9722; 95% CI 0.9141–1.030%, P < 0.0001) to differentiate Mtb-infected patients (active TB and LTBI) from healthy controls . A further cut-off <0.182% for polyfunctional CD4+ T cells allowed the best combination of sensitivity (77.78%) and specificity (70%) to differentiate between active TB and LTBI subjects.
Although this study involved pulmonary TB, we tried to apply our algorithm to TB meningitis. The same method to stain peripheral blood was used to stain CSF. CSF (0.5 mL) was added to the 3 tubes of QFT-IT containing respectively, saline solution (negative control), phytohaemagglutinin (positive control), and TB antigens (ESAT-6, CFP-10, and TB 7.7). A costimulation with 5 μL/mL anti-CD28 plus anti-CD49d (BD Bioscience, Pharmingen, Italy) and 10 μg/mL BrefeldinA (Sigma-Aldrich) was added in all tubes . After 18 h of incubation, the cell surface staining was performed with the markers anti-CD45-VioBlue and anti-CD4 PE-Vio770 (Miltenyi Biotec, Germany), then the cells were lysed (BD Bioscience Lyse solution) and permeabilized (BD Bioscience Perm solution) and the intracellularly stained with anti-IFN-γ FITC, anti-TNF-α APC and anti-IL-2 PE (Miltenyi Biotec). Eventually cells were acquired with a MACSQuant Analyzer flow cytometer (Miltenyi Biotec) and analysed with FlowJo Software version 10, that allowed us to perform a “combination gates” analysis. Seven different population cells were detected in CD4+ cell gate on the basis of IFN-γ, IL-2, and TNF-α produced by CD4+ (Additional file ), as previously described .
The percentage of CD4+ T cells activated, defined as cells producing at least a cytokine, was elevated in peripheral whole blood (WB) (0.94%) and in CSF (2.86%) and using the cut-off (>0.45%) we scored the patient as a positive subject TB infected. Worthy of note, at this time the TST was negative, Quantiferon TB-gold was undetermined and a second PCR for M. tuberculosis in CSF was negative. Considering the polyfunctionality of T CD4+ cells, those simultaneously producing IFN-γ+ , IL-2+ and TNF-α+ in WB were 0.01% and in CSF 0.40% of total CD4+ cells (Additional file ). According to our cut-off (<0.182) the patient resulted as active TB in WB assay. Conversely in CSF a higher proportion of polyfunctional CD4+ was found comparable to the proportion registered in WB in LTBI patients. To date, few data are available regarding the measure of ICCFC at the site of TB infection, but it could be related to a high immunological response in the CSF, typical of TBM.
Moreover we carried out on the CSF extracted from the LP in the first day of hospitalization, the l ADA level which amounted to 18.31 UI/L, higher than the cut-off 10 .
Two days later, due to persistent clinical symptoms and uncertainty in the tests of coordination, a second brain MRI was performed with a report of hypertensive hydrocephalus and a diffuse leptomeningeal enhancement of the basal cistern, in particular of the interpeduncular cistern, attributable to infectious-inflammatory alterations. The brain MRI is shown in Fig. b, c. An encephalic drainage was inserted urgently.
Based on the clinical, radiological findings and CSF results (CD4+ polyfunctional response, ADA level, pleocytosis, hyperproteinorrachia and hypoglicorrachia) TBM was considered on admission day 3 and therapy was started with antituberculous drugs with isoniazid (H) 300 mg/day plus ethambutol (E) 500 mg/day plus rifampicin (R) 400 mg/day and pyrazinamide (Z) 1000 mg/day, as well as intravenous steroids (dexamethasone 4 mg every 8 h).
Analysis of CSF obtained from LP and encephalic drainage in the following days revealed a different protein concentration, with higher level of protein in CSF extracted from LP compared to CSF extracted by ventricular drain .
Renal and liver function, bilirubin and uric acid levels were monitored regularly. Serial CSF values are shown in Table . On day 9 a “in house” nested PCR amplifying a 123 base pair fragment of the M. tuberculosis DNA was performed using CSF with a positive result, while the The GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay was negative.
The family screening was performed and only the father was found TST positive with normal chest radiography and chest CT scan.
Once the patient’s condition stabilized, the HERZ regimen was continued and dexamethasone was gradually decreased. However, on admission day 27, because of an acute onset of aphasia with right hemiplegia, an emergency brain MRI was performed . The findings were compatible with tuberculous cerebral vasculitis (TVC), resulting in a diagnosis of ischemia with two focal areas of signal restriction in correspondence of the left caudate nucleus and of the posterior arm of the left internal capsule. We increased the corticosteroid dosage and treatment with enoxaparin and aspirin was added.
On admission day 74, there were no further episodes of fever, the neurological examination was normal with total disappearance of hemiplegia, the facial asymmetry and the double vision, thanks to neurological rehabilitation. The patient was discharged in good condition without significant neurological sequelae besides the presence of a slight disorder of attention and concentration and with recommendation to continue the treatment with HERZ regimen and aspirin. She was followed up at the outpatient clinic and a follow-up MRI of brain is shown on the Fig. d. Child is on regular follow-up.