A 70-year-old female patient presented with a lump in the upper and inner quadrants (UIQ) of the right breast. It was a painless mass associated with an erythematous skin change of approximately 3 cm and progressive enlargement . She had undergone silicone gel-filled augmented mammoplasty at a private hospital in Taipei 40 years ago without any complications. After the augmentation, she did not undergo regular follow-ups for her breast implants. She had no medical or family history of breast cancer that would significantly affect her implants and no injury involving the chest area, and she had not received a breast massage. Physical examination revealed bilateral hardened breasts and palpable and visible implants. These signs and symptoms were consistent with capsular contractures corresponding to grade IV on the Baker scale. Breast sonography revealed scattered hypoechoic nodules with sizes of < 5 mm in both breasts. Owing to the breast implants, fine-needle aspiration cytology was not attempted. Breast MRI findings revealed silicone leakage around the right implant with focal fibrosis and a bulging configuration in the UIQ of the right breast. Concerned regarding the possible side effects of the silicone, the patient requested the implant to be removed without any replacement.
After obtaining informed consent, the breast tumour in her right breast was excised , both breast implants were removed, and capsulectomy was performed for both breasts (excision of the siliconoma of both breasts) in October 2022. The surgery was performed via her previous 3-cm inframammary incision. The implants and their surrounding capsules were removed from the subglandular layer. Next, the silicone gel was spread to the surrounding tissue . Both implants were clinically intact, and the capsules were sent for pathological analysis.
Upon removal, the implants were reported to be 145-cc bilateral breast implants manufactured by Dow Corning Corporation . The silicone gel was clear and yellowish. The shells were thick, without Dacron fixation patches on the posterior surface. Implants with this configuration were manufactured in the 1980s.
The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery and was discharged the day after surgery. After 1 week, she visited our outpatient department for a follow-up examination. She did not exhibit or report any concerns regarding wound recovery. Immunohistochemical staining revealed siliconoma with lymphoid hyperplasia and calcification in the bilateral breasts with no signs of malignancy. However, the patient was satisfied with the postoperative results .