A 28-year-old Brazilian pardo woman presented to our hospital with sudden bilateral vision loss of 1 day’s duration, which had been preceded by 6 months of recurrent aphthous oral ulcers and 2 months of daily diffuse headache. She had no other past medical history. On examination, her visual acuity (VA) was hand movement in both eyes. She had bilateral, mild, nongranulomatous iridocyclitis. A fundus examination showed bilateral widespread retinal vasculitis with venous and arterial white sheathing, optic disc swelling, macular edema, and retinal hemorrhages .
An initial diagnosis of FBA was made, and an extensive systemic workup for retinal vasculitis was performed. Complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, liver and kidney function tests, angiotensin-converting enzyme, immunoglobulins and chest x-ray results were normal. Antinuclear and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody screening results were negative. The test result for human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B51 was negative. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed increased cells (84% lymphocytes) and increased opening pressure. Serologies for infectious disease were uneventful, including human immunodeficiency virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, varicella zoster virus, Epstein-Barr virus, toxoplasmosis, syphilis, and hepatitis. The results of the patient’s tuberculin skin test was negative. Aqueous humor was analyzed for herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus and toxoplasmosis by polymerase chain reaction, which was unyielding. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed thrombosis of the superior sagittal sinus, sigmoid sinus, and internal jugular vein .
Within 48 hours, the patient’s VA deteriorated to light perception in both eyes. Pulse methylprednisolone therapy 1 g/day for 5 consecutive days was instituted, followed by oral prednisone (1 mg/kg/day). By day 7, her VA improved to finger counting, and her fundus widespread retinal vasculitis ameliorated. By fluorescein angiography (FA), a prolonged arteriovenous phase was observed with extensive areas of blocked (retinal hemorrhages) and perivascular/optic disc leakage. Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) revealed a diffuse retinal edema in both eyes, which significantly improved after 21 days of therapy.
With rheumatology division consultation, a diagnosis of NBD with initial onset as FBA and CVST was made. Oral prednisolone was tapered until given daily at 25 mg, and associated therapy with mycophenolate mofetil (1 g daily) and infliximab (5 mg/kg/day) infusion was administered. Oral anticoagulation with warfarin was combined during the first 6 months to prevent intracranial hypertension and was discontinued after disease activity control. Weight gain secondary to systemic corticosteroids and axillary folliculitis were the main adverse events of immunosuppression. A fundus examination done a few months after the onset showed, in both eyes, pale optic discs, diffuse vessels whitening and, in the left eye, an extensive sea fan disc neovascularization. By FA, an extensive nonperfusion area in both eyes was observed . Panretinal photocoagulation was indicated in both eyes . SD-OCT demonstrated a thin central retina (153 μm in right eye, 184 μm in left eye) .