A 75-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital complaining of itching around her anus. She had a history of sigmoidectomy for diverticulitis 6 years prior and a past history of Sjögren’s syndrome. She had noted a reddish skin lesion around her anus over the past several years. She reported no change in bowel habits, no gastrointestinal symptoms, no weight loss, and no family history of malignancy.
Physical examination revealed an erythematous, inflamed skin lesion in the perianal region , but a normal vagina and rectum. Neither colposcopy, cystoscopy, nor colonoscopy showed evidence of a visible lesion or any abnormality of the cervix, bladder, or rectum . Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging showed no evidence of malignancy in the genitourinary or gastrointestinal tracts. Histopathological examination of biopsy specimens showed many Paget’s cells within intraepithelial lesions of the perianal skin but no malignant cells in the rectal or vaginal mucosa. Therefore, primary extramammary Paget’s disease (EMPD) of the anogenital region was suspected. We performed anal-preserving wide local excision deep to the subcutaneous fat with 1-cm negative margin from the positive sites confirmed by frozen section examination and mucosal resection of the anal canal that was extended 1 cm proximal to the dentate line of the anal canal. Reconstruction was performed using a bilobed gluteal fold flap .
Histopathological examination of the resected specimen showed Paget’s cells, characterized by clear cytoplasm and large pleomorphic nuclei, within the epidermis. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the Paget’s cells were positive for cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK20, and caudal-related homeobox gene nuclear transcription factor (CDX) 2 and negative for gross cystic disease fluid protein (GCDFP) 15 . These data suggested that her perianal skin lesion was secondary EMPD arising from the rectum, although there was no lesion found in the rectum. Additional histopathological examination of the resected specimen revealed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma in an anal gland, continuous with the Paget’s cells in the anoderm, but limited in the basement membrane without a desmoplastic change . Immunohistochemical staining of the resected specimen revealed secondary EMPD due to adenocarcinoma arising from the anal gland.
Because of the possibility of residual adenocarcinoma in the anal gland, possibly extending to the sphincter, we performed a radical laparoscopy-assisted abdominoperineal resection. Any reconstructive plastic surgery was not needed. Histopathological examination revealed no residual cancer cells in the resected specimen and no lymph node metastasis. The final diagnosis was anal gland adenocarcinoma in situ with pagetoid spread in the perianal skin.