A seven-month-old, 13.2 kg intact female Spanish Water Dog was presented for further investigation of recurrent respiratory symptoms. Three weeks before referral, the dog had developed an acute onset of lethargy and coughing. Pneumonia was suspected, since chest radiographs showed consolidation of the lungs. Treatment with amoxicillin-clavulanic acida for ten days resulted in transient improvement in the clinical signs.
On presentation, lethargy, spontaneous cough, tachypnea (respiratory rate 60/min), and moderate crackles on lung auscultation were noted. Coughing was provoked especially after drinking and tracheal palpation. The partial oxygen pressure in the arterial blood (PaO2) was 80.5 mmHg. The C-reactive protein (CRP) level was markedly elevated (138 mg/l). Thoracic radiographs revealed alveolar consolidations in the left cranial and left caudal lung lobe, consistent with bronchopneumonia. In abdominal radiographs, the small intestine was gas filled. Supportive treatment and intravenous amoxicillin-clavulanic acidb administration were initiated.
The dog was anesthetized and bronchoscopy performed, using a 4.9-mm flexible bronchoscopec. At the bifurcation, a small hole-like defect was detected in the tracheal wall . This defect was not visible after examination of the main bronchi . A moderate amount of yellow, viscous, foamy secretion was detected in the bronchial lumen of the left cranial lung lobe. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed on the left cranial lung lobe with a 1-ml/kg bolus of sterile warm (37°C) salined. The cytological examination revealed an elevated total nucleated cell count (1750 cells/μl) and a significantly elevated neutrophil proportion (64.7%). Aerobic and anaerobic cultures were negative, but after enrichment, Pasteurella stomatis was isolated in pure culture. The mycoplasma culture isolated Mycoplasma spp.
To further investigate the defect in the tracheal wall, an upper gastrointestinal contrast material swallow (CS) study was performed with a 10-ml bolus of per orally administered barium contrast mediume. A laterolateral thoracic radiograph obtained immediately after the barium swallow showed no leakage of the contrast medium outside the esophagus. Investigations were further continued by a CS study under fluoroscopy with the dog in a standing position. There was no evidence that undiluted barium contrast medium leaked from the esophagus. However, when diluted 1:1 with water, a small amount of contrast medium was seen to escape ventrally from the esophagus, through a duct-like structure . During the procedure, the otherwise normal anatomic structure and function of the esophagus was demonstrated. The thoracic radiograph obtained after CS demonstrated only a small amount of contrast medium in the lower part of the trachea and in the main bronchus. The finding of the CS study under fluoroscopy was indicative of a TEF. To further evaluate the connection between the trachea and esophagus, a computed tomography (CT) scan was performed. In the non-contrast CT, a 6-mm-deep and 3-mm-wide air-filled pouch was seen in the midline in the bifurcation, at the level of the carina, extending caudally between the main bronchi . The finding was consistent with the hole-like structure seen on bronchoscopy. The esophageal part of the TEF was not visible.
Surgical correction of the TEF was scheduled and amoxicillin-clavulanic acida medication was continued. Prior to surgery, a catheterf was placed along a guide wireg through the TEF from the trachea into the esophagus under endoscopic control. Ventrodorsal and laterolateral thoracic radiographs subsequently obtained showed that the distal opening of the fistula was located at the level of the sixth intercostal space. The TEF was surgically approached by thoracotomy through the right lateral sixth intercostal space. The esophagus and dorsally lying Nervus vagus were identified. The depth at which the guide wire was running in the esophageal wall and the exact place where the fistula joined the esophagus could not be identified by palpation. The level of the fistular opening was localized by the light of a 9.8 mm flexible gastroduodenoscopeh, which was visible through the esophageal wall. The distal end of the fistula (0.5 mm diameter) was bluntly dissected free from the surrounding connective tissue as far cranially as possible . The catheter with guide wire was removed, and the fistula was double ligated with polypropylene 3-0 (Prolene) immediately adjacent to the esophagus. A further double ligature was placed approximately 3 cm cranially from the first ligatures and the fistula was divided. The fistular tissue was fixed in 10% non-buffered formalin and submitted for histopathological examination. The dog recovered well from surgery and was discharged the following day. Oral amoxicillin-clavulanic acida medication was continued for two weeks. Post-operative analgesia was maintained with fentanyli and oral carprofenj.
The histological examination of cross sections of the excised fistular tissue revealed a tube-like structure with a narrow lumen, lined by stratified squamous epithelium. This was underlain by the lamina propria mucosae, a submucosa containing inactive glandular structures, an inner circular and outer longitudinal skeletal muscle layer (muscularis externa) containing (intermyenteric) plexus structures comprised of several unaltered neurons, and the adventitia .
The dog was re-examined two weeks and ten months after surgery, with no evidence of recurring clinical signs. At the first control visit, the blood leucocyte count, arterial PaO2, and CRP were within normal limits, and thoracic radiographs revealed signs of resolving bronchopneumonia. At the second visit, the blood leucocyte count, arterial PaO2, CRP, and thoracic radiographs showed no features suggesting a disease process. In addition, a CS study using fluoroscopy was performed. This did not detect any evidence of leakage of contrast medium from the esophagus. Both the structure and function of the esophagus appeared unaltered.