A 38-year-old man, with a clinical history of refractory hypertension (grade 3) for 10 years, was diagnosed with coarctation of the aorta (CoA) by digital subtraction angiography measurement in 2018. In addition, he had underlying atherosclerosis (cerebral artery and carotid artery), aortic valve insufficiency (mild) and moyamoya disease. Surgery was performed to dilate the narrowing area, by implanting a 3.4-cm covered CP stent (NuMED, CVRDCP8Z34, NY, USA) (CP) stent and a 20-mm balloon into the aorta, which lead to a normal blood flow through the artery. The patient was referred to our cardiac rehabilitation (CR) clinic 6 weeks after surgery, reporting general malaise, low exercise tolerance and anxiety. Detailed information about the risks of exercise training was provided and written consent was obtained before commencing CR. In order to develop a personalized exercise prescription, the patient underwent clinical examination, including a 6-min walk test, cardiopulmonary test (CPET), echocardiography, 24-h ambulatory electrocardiograph, physical therapy and nursing evaluation, a series of intake evaluations, including medical and dietary intake and body fat assessment. Exercise intensity was planned based on the initial results of all evaluations. The rehabilitation goals were for the patient to increase his aerobic capacity and resume normal activities for a full return to living and work.
At the end of the CR programme, changes in the patient’s characteristics and medical treatment were observed . Improvement in CPET and physical assessment results are shown in . Psychology questionnaires, including world health organization quality of life-bref (WHOQOL-BREF) and patient health questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) were adopted. WHOQOL-BREF scores were 20 in physical domain, 22 in psychological domain, 10 in social domain, and 34 in environmental domain, which changed to 25, 23, 10, and 33 at the end of the CR programme, respectively. PHQ-9 depression test questionnaire scores decreased from 8 to 1, indicating a lower risk of depression.