A 73-year-old man with known diabetes mellitus type II presented with a four-month history of progressive dyspnoea as well as leg and facial oedema without symptoms of cough, sputum, fever, or night sweats. Due to the non-improvement of symptoms on diuretic medication, his family doctor referred him to a cardiologist. A physical examination revealed markedly congestive neck veins. The transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE)) revealed subtotal compression of the right side of the heart from outside the heart border (see , ). The cardiologist referred the patient urgently to our clinic for further assessment. The routine blood test demonstrated markedly elevated creatinine (3,5 mg/dL, glomerular filtration rate 18 mL/min, 48 mg/dL), NT-Pro BNP 2543 pg/mL, and D Dimer 1393 µg/L. For further clarification, we conducted a thoracic contrast computer tomography (CT). It showed a large intrapericardial thick-walled mass with fluid accumulation in the cystic cavity and homogeneous enhancement of the cyst wall without visible air trapping. It measured 89 × 58 mm, and the maximal pericardial thickness was 2 mm . Consecutively, there was compression of the right side of the heart . Mediastinally, there were multiple supracarinal pretracheal lymph nodes enlarged, measuring 19.7 × 12.3 mm.
The imaging diagnosis was a large pericardial cyst with signs of concomitant infection (presence of discrete fluid collections usually related to increased vasodilation and vascular permeability, resulting in tissue oedema and stranding of normally fatty signal. However, these signs are non-specific).
We referred the patient to a tertiary heart centre. One day later, the patient underwent pericardiolysis with resection of the pericardial cyst via an anterolateral right side mini thoracotomy incision and received symptomatic treatment, including inhalation, breathing exercises, and antibiotic therapies. The subsequent post-operative histopathological and microscopic findings revealed a cyst containing haemorrhagic fluid with low cellular collagenous connective tissue with chronic inflammation (lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, many plasma cells, minor mixed eosinophils and granulocytes) without evidence of malignant cells.
The patient recovered post-surgery with no deficits, the TTE showed no compression of right heart side, and the patient was discharged 7 days later. The discharge medications were painkillers as necessary. Three months after the procedure, the follow-up did not show quality-of-life limitations.