A 25-year-old male presented to the emergency room reporting having been bitten by a
Viper snake on his left leg 1 day ago. He was unable to identify the species of the
snake when prompted but noted severe left leg pain associated with swelling of the
leg shortly afterward. He received his initial management of wound cleaning in the
form of washing the wound with tape water and injection ketorolac for pain local
basic health unit and the patient was advised against the movement while shifting to
the tertiary care hospital for further management. On arrival, the patient was in
shock with the vital signs, blood pressure of 90/60 mm of Hg, pulse rate of 118
beats per minute, respiratory rate of 25 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation
of 93%. The patient also had 3 episodes of hematemesis and a complaint of diplopia.
Initial laboratory investigations were sent, and the patient was resuscitated in the
emergency department, and he received three 10-mL polyvalent anti-snake venom, an
injection of ceftriaxone 2 g, and tetanus toxoid. On examination, the left leg was
found to have superficial puncture wounds consistent with fang marks just above the
ankle, swelling (2 cm greater than the right leg), and bruises at the site of the
cannula. The rest of the neurological examination was normal. Initial lab results
displayed elevated international normalized ratios (INR), bilirubin, D-dimers,
leukocytes, and thrombocytopenia . The patient was admitted to the
medical unit and treated as a case of disseminated intravascular coagulation. On the
first day of his admission to the hospital, his left leg swelling increased and
extended to the mid-thigh. Shortly afterward, he developed a severe headache and had
2 episodes of a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. From a clinical standpoint, he
improved significantly, as shown by the improvement from initial labs . A doppler
ultrasound of the left lower limb excluded venous thrombosis. His magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) did not reveal any abnormalities while his magnetic resonance venogram
(MRV) showed transverse sinus thrombosis with sigmoid sinus stenosis and . Further workup for
thrombophilia and secondary causes of hypercoagulability revealed no abnormalities
. He was
started on tablet rivaroxaban (initially 15 mg twice daily for 3 weeks then 20 mg
once daily) and tablet levetiracetam (500 mg twice daily). The patient’s was advised
to follow up with MRV after 3 months. The patient has one seizure episode after
2 months of treatment due to noncompliance with the antiepileptics and was advised
to take the same treatment same treatment for the next 3 months. The patient failed
to follow up after 2 months, and a follow up MRV was not done which was planned at
12 weeks.