A 13-year-old, castrated, male Cocker Spaniel dog weighing 10.1 kg was referred for persistent hypertension despite the administration of anti-hypertensive drugs. Before referral, the dog was treated with oral amlodipine 0.2 mg/kg/q24h and hydralazine 0.7 mg/kg/q12h for 5 weeks. At presentation, severe hypertension of approximately 300 mmHg, measured by the Doppler method, was identified. Complete blood count showed lymphopenia (377/μL; reference range 1050–5100/μL). Biochemical and electrolyte findings included mildly increased alkaline phosphatase activity (275 IU/L; reference range 29–97 IU/L), mild hypernatremia (156 mmol/L; reference range 141–152 mmol/L), and mild hyperchloremia (118 mmol/L; reference range 105–115 mmol/L).
Thoracic and abdominal radiographs revealed no remarkable abnormality. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a heterogeneous hypoechoic adrenal mass, approximately 3.6 cm at its maximum diameter, cranioventral to the right kidney, without any evidence of vascular invasion or metastasis. The left adrenal gland was not considered atrophied because its maximal thickness was 0.61 cm, which is more than the normal observed thickness of 0.5 cm .
To determine whether the adrenal mass was functional or non-functional, urinary normetanephrine-to-creatinine ratio and serum concentrations of cortisol, 17-hydroxyprogesterone (OHP), estradiol, and progesterone before and after the intravenous administration of 250 μg synthetic adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) were measured. The urine normetanephrine-to-creatinine ratio was 247.56, which could not completely exclude the possibility of pheochromocytoma or confirm it . Concentrations of 17-OHP, estradiol, and progesterone were found to be markedly increased both prior to and after the ACTH stimulation test; basal 17-OHP = 1.32 ng/mL [reference interval (RI), < 0.1 ng/mL], post-stimulation 17-OHP = 6.87 ng/mL (RI 0.4–1.2 ng/mL), basal estradiol = 78.9 pg/mL (RI 28–63 pg/mL), post-stimulation estradiol = 93.2 pg/mL (RI 30–69 pg/mL), basal progesterone = 1.04 ng/mL (RI < 0.1 ng/mL), and post-stimulation progesterone = 8.47 ng/mL (RI 0.4–1.2 ng/mL). The basal cortisol concentration was within the reference range (2.09 μg/dL; RI, 1.0–6.0 μg/dL), but post-ACTH stimulation cortisol concentration was below the reference range (6.26 μg/dL; RI, 7–17 μg/dL) . The ACTH stimulation test has poor sensitivity and is considered diagnostically inferior to the low dose dexamethasone suppression test (LDDST) in dogs with adrenal tumor-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. The LDDST was suggested, but the owners declined. These results were not sufficient to differentiate between pheochromocytoma and adrenocortical tumors.
Thus, CT and 18F-FDG PET/CT scan of the whole body were performed under isoflurane inhalation anesthesia to identify characteristics of the right adrenal mass and state of metastasis. CT images were obtained with a four-row multi-detector CT scanner with 100 mAs and 120 kVp in 1.25 mm slice thickness. Post-contrast CT scans were performed 2 min after intravenous injection of 880 mgI/kg iohexol. A right adrenal mass was detected on the CT, with a size was 4.3 × 6.8 cm diameter . The peripheral region of the mass was hyperattenuated and central region was homogenously hypoattenuated. Post-contrast images showed contrast enhancement of the peripheral region of the mass . PET/CT using 18F-FDG was performed 1 h after the injection of 5.46 MBq/kg 18F-FDG intravenously . The peripheral region of the adrenal mass visually revealed an increased 18F-FDG uptake, which was higher than that of the liver and the central region of the mass exhibited an absent 18F-FDG uptake . The PET image was analyzed using the commercial program (OsiriX MD v10.0, Pixmeo, Bernex, Switzerland). The regions of interest (ROIs) were drawn manually on the PET/CT fusion images and were transferred to a standardized uptake value (SUV) as follows: SUV = average tissue concentration of 18F-FDG (MBq/mL)/injected dose (MBq) per body weight (g). The maximal SUV (SUVmax) of the tumor was 3.24 . To evaluate the metabolic activity more objectively, relative SUV (RUV) was calculated by dividing the SUVmax of the adrenal tumor by the mean SUV (SUVmean) of the normal liver , and an RUV ratio of 5.23 was estimated. There was no evidence of metastatic lesion in the whole body, including liver, spleen, lung, lymph nodes, and regional lymph nodes based on the whole-body PET/CT images.
After the additional administration of prazosin 0.5 mg/kg/q12h for 1 month to relieve hypertension, surgical adrenalectomy was performed, and the adrenal mass was removed. Histopathologic examination of the resected adrenal mass revealed the characteristics of an adrenocortical carcinoma . The architecture of the adrenal tissue was completely replaced by neoplastic cells, resulting in the loss of normal structures. Capsular invasion of tumor cells, multiple areas of necrosis and hemorrhage in the connective tissue with hematoidin crystals were detected. Pleomorphic tumor cells were subdivided by thin fibrous connective tissue, resulting in the formation of nests. They had abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm with some lipid vacuoles and round nuclei with prominent nucleoli. Mitotic index was 1–2 in all high-power fields. The histopathological slides were examined using Olympus SLIDEVIEW VS200 microscope and images were achieved using the Olympus OlyVIA software (Olympus). The dog was re-examined 2 weeks after the excision of the adrenal tumor, and the systolic blood pressure had reduced to below 150 mmHg without anti-hypertensive medication. The owners declined any further assessment, and the dog died after 31 months.