The patient is a 55-year-old male who presented after being found down with nail injuries including multiple shots to the head. The patient was reportedly localizing on the scene but subsequently deteriorated and was intubated. Representative images on arrival are shown in . He was taken to the operative room emergently. We describe the operative technique for removal of six broad categories of nails; under skin but not involving other structures, into bone but does not violate dura, into brain but uncomplicated, into brain with underlying hematoma, through air sinus (frontal sinus), and through blood sinus.
The patient was placed in the supine position in a Mayfield head holder with care to avoid placement of the pins into any of the fractures. Stereotactic image guidance was used to locate each nail and evaluate the trajectory and ultrasound was used to evaluate for intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH). A microscope was present for removal of the nails through the superior sagittal sinus. A bicoronal incision that was bisected posteriorly was used to access to all of the nails from a single operative approach.
Representative images of each nail type are shown in .
This group is the most simple for removal, but this type is also the most likely to be left behind at the conclusion of the surgery. In our case, the skin was opened in its entirety first and any nails were removed directly. The overlying skin defect was closed with suture, and at the case conclusion, we obtain fluoroscopic imaging to ensure that none of these nails were left behind. This type of nail removal may also be performed at the bedside under local anesthesia if open surgical intervention is not otherwise needed.
The next group of nails was those that went into the bone but did not violate the dura. This type of nail was confirmed with both preoperative imaging and image guidance before extraction. They were then removed and the holes were sealed using bone wax and the entrance wound sutured in case there were microperforations of the dura that could lead to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage. This type of nail could be removed at the bedside as well.
Multiple nails penetrated the dura and pia without underlying hematoma on preoperative imaging. A single burr hole followed by a 2–3 cm circular craniectomy was performed around the nail. Excessive nail movement was avoided and the bone flap was elevated in the nail trajectory as determined by image guidance. Any surface vascular hemorrhage was controlled followed by ultrasonography to ensure no ICH. The dura is opened followed by pial hemostasis. In this case, all of the nails were sequentially removed and a final ultrasound was performed at all sites to ensure no delayed hematoma before craniectomy reconstruction.
The same procedure was performed for the nail removal as was done when there was no underlying hematoma initially. One nail was associated with an underlying subdural hematoma which was able to be evacuated through the small craniectomy. Another nail was associated with a <3 cm ICH visualized with ultrasound. The craniectomy was expanded and the hemorrhage was evacuated with ultrasound guidance through the original cortical violation of the nail.
The next type of nail that was encountered was through both the inner and outer tables of the frontal sinus. The craniectomy was performed superior to the frontal sinus and the dura was dissected away from the posterior table. The nail was removed and hemostasis was obtained. The ultrasound confirmed no underlying hematoma. The anterior table was sealed using bone wax and the posterior table was isolated from the dural violation with vascularized pericranial graft. A complete cranialization of the frontal sinus was not needed given the small defect.
These lesions have the most risk for hemorrhage and complications. Although the anterior sinus injuries are less dangerous given the ability to ligate the sinus if needed, the treatment is the same. A craniectomy with exposure of the sinus anterior and posterior to the nail is performed. The dura ipsilateral to the nail exit site is opened and the exit of the nail from the sinus is visualized with the operative microscope. The nail and bone flap are removed and the internal and external sinus defects are packed with foam-based hemostatic products and Cottonoid patties. This technique was effective in our case, but ligation or reconstruction of the sinus may be necessary in unique cases.
Ultrasound and fluoroscopy were performed before cranial reconstruction with titanium mesh to ensure no retained nails or operative hematomas. The patient had a postoperative venogram which demonstrated patent superior sagittal sinus. The patient was discharged home with the right hemiparesis.