A 73-year-old male farmer presented to the emergency department with a 4-day history of fever (38.3°C), fatigue, chest tightness, and myalgia. On presentation, the patient was alert, with regular heart rate and normal blood pressure. Physical examination revealed a temperature of 39°C and gastrocnemius muscle pain impairing walking. Laboratory tests revealed thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 48 × 109/L. Renal function tests revealed an elevated creatinine level (237 umol/L). CPK was 791 U/L (normal range 50–310 U/L) and CK-MB was 26 U/L (normal range <25 U/L). The C-reactive protein level was 160.44 mg/dL, and his hemoglobin level, white blood cell count and live function test was normal. Initial computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed multiple infections in both lungs .
The patient was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia and started on intravenous piperacillin–tazobactam at 13:55. At 15:22, the patient developed unconsciousness, fever, rigor, increasing tachycardia with a heart rate of 190 beats/min, hypotension (82/42 mmHg), tachypnea with a respiratory rate of 36 breaths/min, and hypoxia with peripheral capillary oxygen saturation of 78%. Intubation for respiratory support was immediately performed, and bloody sputum was aspirated during suctioning. Despite fluid therapy, the patient's blood pressure remained low, and norepinephrine was administered to maintain blood pressure. A repeat chest CT showed diffuse bilateral exudation that had worsened after previous imaging . His C-reactive protein level was elevated to 200.22 mg/L. Arterial blood gas analysis showed a PaO2 of 49.4 mm Hg and an oxygenation index of 80.98 with an oxygen concentration of 61%. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy revealed dark red, bloody sputum in the airways, and metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) samples collected from the airways and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid revealed Leptospira interrogans. Further history revealed that the patient had been exposed to and consumed raw river water before the onset of symptoms. The diagnosis of leptospirosis was made based on the patient's history, fiberoptic bronchoscopy results, CT manifestations, laboratory tests, and clinical presentation.
Additionally, the patient's disease state worsened dramatically after the administration of piperacillin tazobactam, with respiratory failure and septic shock. Pulmonary CT showed diffuse exudative lesions (examined 2.5 h after treatment), deemed JHR caused by penicillin treatment. The penicillin dose was reduced, and 40 mg methylprednisolone was administered every 12 h. When the conditions improved, the penicillin dose was adjusted to 400,000 units every 8 h for 2 weeks and subsequently discontinued. On the 7th day after onset, pulmonary CT showed an absorption of the lesion. Methylprednisolone was reduced after 2 weeks to 30 mg every 12 h for 3 days, 20 mg every 12 h for 3 days, and 20 mg daily for 3 days until discontinued.
After 2 weeks of treatment, the patient's temperature gradually decreased to normal, myalgia resolved, blood gas analysis showed a gradual increase in oxygenation index from 80.98 to 342.42 and 369.7 to normal, and chest imaging improved significantly ; norepinephrine was discontinued, and the endotracheal tube was removed.