A 52-year-old Chinese female farmer was referred to our hospital in August 2014 because of bilateral leg swelling since approximately 2 weeks. She had a history of malar rash and intermittent generalized arthralgia since 3 months. She also had a history of right thyroid papillary carcinoma, for which subtotal thyroidectomy was performed in 2009. Postoperatively, she was administered L-Thyroxine therapy and was followed up annually. The dosage of L-Thyroxine at admission was 50 μg daily. She was a non-smoker and had developed menopause at the age of 50 years. The family history was unremarkable. Physical examination showed a blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg, malar rash, clear breath sounds, normal heart sounds, and grade 3 lower-extremity pitting edema. There was no redness or swelling over joints. Her serum creatinine level was 1.37 mg/dL (121 μmol/L); serum albumin level was 2.3 g/dL (23 g/L); white blood cell (WBC) count was 2700/μL; lymphocyte count was 600/μL. Urinary protein excretion was 5.3 g/d. Serological tests for antinuclear antibody (ANA; 1:320, speckled pattern), anti-Smith (Sm) antibody, and anti-SS-A antibody were positive. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), hepatitis B surface antigen, and hepatitis C antibody were negative. She had low serum complement levels (C3, C4). Anti-streptolysin O titer, and rheumatoid factor were within normal range. Urine microscopy showed 20–30 red blood cells and 3–8 WBCs per high-power field. Electrocardiogram, chest radiograph and kidney ultrasound were unremarkable.
Based on clinical and laboratory findings, a diagnosis of SLE, lupus nephritis (LN) and nephritic syndrome was established. One week later, a percutaneous renal biopsy was performed. Light microscopy showed that there were 38 glomeruli, with a mild increase in mesangial cellularity and mesangial matrix. There were no signs of endocapillary proliferation. Glomerular basement membranes were thickened and spikes were noticed on Jones silver staining . On immunoflurescence examination, the mesangium and glomerular capillary wall were found positive for IgG (3+), IgA (1+), IgM (2+), C3 (2+), C1q (2+), and FRA (1+). Electron microscopy showed irregular thickening of the glomerular basement membranes, mesangial hypercellularity, proliferation of the mesangial matrix, and electron-dense subepithelial, intramembranous, subendothelial and mesangial deposits. These findings were consistent with Class V + IV(G)-A lupus nephritis.
After the diagnosis, we instituted treatment with intravenous methylprednisolone 500 mg/d for 3 days, followed by 1 mg/kg oral prednisolone daily. In addition, she received omeprazole (20 mg, twice a day), rocaltrol (0.25 μg, once a day), and caltrate D (300 mg, twice a day) for symptomatic treatment. Ten days after treatment, the WBC counts were restored to normal levels. Subsequently, intermittent intravenous cyclophosphamide treatment was added. After four-week treatment, the edema was largely resolved; her serum albumin level was 2.4 g/dL (24 g/L) and her urinary protein excretion was 4.0 g/d. She was discharged from the hospital and followed up monthly. Eight months later, her urinary protein excretion was 1.2 g/d, serum creatinine level was 1.1 mg/dL (97 μmol/L), and serum albumin level was 3.0 g/dL (30 g/L). There was no recurrence of rashes or arthralgia. Her condition continued to improve for about 15 months (until November 2015), at which time, the dosage of prednisolone was 12.5 mg daily and that of total cyclophosphamide was 8 g. Then she experienced exacerbation of symptoms with exertional dyspnea and frequent cough and sputum. She was hospitalized again. Sputum culture showed streptococcus pneumoniae and thoracic computed tomography revealed numerous well-defined cysts . Meanwhile, she developed recurrence of lupus nephritis. We instituted prednisolone 1 mg/kg daily combined with mycophenolate mofetil 0.75 g twice a day after the control of infection. A diagnosis of pulmonary LAM was made based on lung biopsy performed at another hospital . Patient only agreed to receive symptomatic treatment, i.e., oxygen supplementation, ipratropium and acetylcysteine. The patient refused to receive sirolimus and estrogen. In the following years, lupus nephritis was stable (partial remission); her serum creatinine level was 1.45 mg/dL (128 μmol/L), serum albumin concentration was 2.9 g/dL (29 g/L), and urine protein to creatine ratio was 2.3. The dosage of oral prednisone was 20 mg daily and mycophenolate mofetil was 0.5 g twice a day. However, she experienced progressive dyspnea. CT re-examination confirmed progressive multiple thin-walled pulmonary cysts and bullae in both lungs, along with interstitial pulmonary fibrosis . She died in December 2016 due to severe respiratory failure and cor pulmonale.