A 50-year-old, previously healthy female was presented to our institute to further investigate sputum-coughing, fever, and pulmonary shadow on October 25, 2016. The patient used to be exposed to a work-related humid environment but had no smoking history. The female presented a 1-month history of coughing, fever (highest temperature 37.4 °C), and weight loss (4 kg). She was admitted to a local hospital, and computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed a mass in the left lung. Lung cancer and obstructive pneumonia were confirmed by clinical diagnosis. However, her condition did not improve after antibacterial treatment.
On examination, an enlarged supraclavicular lymph node was observed on the right. The lower left lung revealed low breath sounds. The serum carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125), CA153, and CA19–9 levels were 94.5 (reference 0–30.2 U/mL), 37.2 (reference 0–32.4 U/mL), and 49.9 U/mL (reference 0–37.0 U/mL), respectively. The blood was HIV negative. The CD4+ and CD8+ T-lymphocyte counts were 744 and 576 cells/μL, respectively. The plasma galactomannan test result was positive. The level of C-reactive protein was 7.68 mg/L. However, the serum cryptococcal antigen agglutination test, acid-fast bacillus test of sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid smear, and blood and sputum cultures for fungus and bacteria were negative. The serum level of immunoglobulin (Ig)G, IgA, and IgM was normal. Other routine laboratory tests were normal, including the complete blood count, blood sugar, aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, creatinine, antinuclear antibodies, extractable nuclear antigen antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-ds-DNA antibodies, and cardiolipin-antibodies. The mass identified by CT in the left lower lung , was accompanied by left pleural thickening, pleural effusion, and multiple swollen lymph nodes throughout the body, while no abnormal brain CT, liver B-ultrasonic, and emission CT images were observed. Bronchoscopic examinations showed evident nodular projections in the bronchus orifices of the left lower lobes . Lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma and chronic granulomatous inflammation were found by histological examination of the endobronchial nodule. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the cytokeratin (CK) CK5/6, P40, and Epstein–Barr virus-encoded RNA were positive, whereas TTF-1, p63, CK7, CK56, syn, and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) were negative. Pharyngorhinoscopy and pathology of the nasal mucosa showed no tumor. Several yeast-like organisms with red cell wall and clear PAS-negative cell content were identified in the biopsy tissue . We concluded a definite diagnosis of primary pulmonary lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma with T. marneffei infection.
Her condition improved after a week of treatment with voriconazole (200 mg IV) at every 12 h. Docetaxel (120 mg) and carboplatin (600 mg) were prescribed as the first cycle of chemotherapy. Pulmonary shadow was significantly improved and the size of mediastinal lymph nodes reduced. The patient was prescribed oral itraconazole therapy and discharged. However, myelosuppression occurred during the fifth cycle of chemotherapy and fungal disease subsequently relapsed. She was unwilling to undergo further chemotherapy because of the poor tolerance and attempted to take apatinib orally. The pulmonary lesions remained stable until nine and a half months . Percutaneous lung biopsy revealed lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma but no T. marneffei, which suggested tumor relapse and talaromycosis marneffei cure. Itraconazole treatment was withdrawn and a single dose of docetaxel (120 mg) was prescribed.
The patient is still being followed up .