A 46-year-old woman presented with symptoms of potato voice and globus sensation for 4 years with no history of trauma or previous operation. She underwent a direct laryngoscopy, which revealed a thickness of the aryepiglottic fold and vallecula on the right side with a submucosal mass at the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis. The patient underwent a conservative laser resection of the involved area. Pathology showed fibrosis only, without any presence of atypias. One and half year later, symptoms recurred. Another laser procedure was undergone but the report remained the same. In the last 2 years, tumor growth occurred so rapidly that a CO2 laser transoral resection was preformed twice.
Unfortunately, endoscopic photos of the preoperative intra laryngeal surgeries do not exist. Before the open surgery, pathology showed squamous and respiratory type mucosa with superficial edema and fibrosis of the deep stroma with no mucosal epithelium atypia. CT showed a large heterogeneous enhanced mass, 30×24 mm in size, located on the right side of the base of the tongue with involvement of the genioglossus, hyoglossus, and mylohyoid muscles. There was a posterior-inferior extension of the mass to the vallecula and pre-epiglottic space; in addition to a thickened aryepiglottic fold in the presence of intact fat planes .
Upon admission, the patient had a stridor at rest due to the involvement of the base of the tongue and supraglottic region. The patient underwent extended supraglottic laryngectomy due to repeated recurrence and surgeries. The surgical area was primarily reconstructed because of the unilateral mass. This mass presented as an irregular-shaped piece of rubbery, which was a firm and grayish brown tissue, measuring 3×2.5×2 cm and was sent for evaluation. Immunohistochemical staining showed spindle cell positive reaction for SMA and ALK. No reaction for CD34, AE1/3 or desmin was observed; but BcL2 showed a positive reaction in inflammatory cells (Dr Nassizade, Iranian Blood Transfusion organi zation,IHC Lab. Ref#90-590).
The diagnosis was spindle cell proliferation with dense lympho- plasma cell infiltration compatible with inflammatory myofibro- blastic tumor (Inflammatory pseudotumor or plasma cell granuloma).