A 30-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with a 2-mo history of cough, dyspnea, bloating, palpitations, and lower extremity edema .
He was diagnosed with atrial fibrillation, heart failure, and multiple serous effusions (pleural, pericardial, and abdominal effusions) at a local hospital.
The patient had no history of any previous disease.
The patient had no previous or family history of similar illnesses.
The patient’s vital signs on admission were stable. Cardiac auscultation revealed muffled heart sounds. Palpation revealed mild edema in both the lower extremities. Electrocardiography revealed atrial fibrillation and a decreased voltage.
Blood tests revealed slightly elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone levels, moderately elevated inflammatory markers, and significantly increased N-terminal-pro hormone brain natriuretic peptide levels. The liver and kidney functions were within the normal range. The T-SPOT test yielded a negative result.
Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography (2D-TTE), on admission, revealed a significantly enlarged diameter of the left atrium (LAD) and right atrium (RAD) and a moderate pericardial effusion that was predominantly along the apical wall, measuring up to 2 cm . The diagnosis of biatrial enlargement due to atrial fibrillation and localized pericardial effusion was established according to echocardiographic manifestations and history. Emergency surgical pericardial drainage was performed by removing 500 mL purulent fluid to relieve the clinical presentation. Despite the removal of most of the pericardial fluid, which indicates a significant decrease in intrapericardial pressure, the patient's clinical symptoms showed no significant improvement. Subsequent 2D-TTE failed to show normalization of LAD and RAD. In addition, echocardiography revealed other information with significant diagnostic value, such as abnormal movement of the interventricular septum (“interventricular septum bounce”) and increased pericardial thickness. Notably, pulsed-wave Doppler revealed significant respiratory variation (greater than 25%) in the peak mitral inflow velocity (E) and an increase in the peak velocity blood flow from left ventricular relaxation in early diastole to peak velocity flow in late diastole caused by atrial contraction (E/A) ratio (> 2). Tissue Doppler imaging of the mitral annulus revealed “annulus reversus,” as the lateral mitral e’ velocity was lower than the medial mitral e’ velocity. M-mode echocardiography revealed a dilated inferior vena cava (IVC) with almost no aspiratory variation, according to which the estimated right atrial pressure was elevated (20 mmHg). Thus, a diagnosis of ECP as the underlying cause of the clinical presentation was established according to the pre- and post-pericardiocentesis echocardiographic performance. Computed tomography (CT) scan also revealed a small amount of pericardial effusion with a thickened pericardium. Positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) ruled out connective tissue and neoplastic diseases. Clinical and imaging tests revealed the need for urgent surgical removal of the residual pericardial effusion and visceral pericardium. A repeat 2D-TTE 1-wk after pericardectomy revealed that the biatrial diameter and echocardiographic features of pericardial constriction improved, and the right atrial pressure assessed using echocardiography also decreased .
Cytological examination of the pericardial fluid revealed many inflammatory cells and few mesothelial cells. Cultures of the pericardial fluid and the pericardium grew P. aeruginosa. Histological examination of the pericardial tissue obtained during pericardectomy revealed increased thickening with the proliferation of collagen fibers, hyaline degeneration, and calcification .