A 32-year-old Bahraini male presented with a 2-week history of exertional dyspnoea (New York Heart Association functional Class III) associated with orthopnoea, abdominal distension, and lower limb swelling in the emergency department. His past medical history was significant for TB lymphadenitis, which was diagnosed a few months ago via mediastinal lymph node biopsy. During that time, he was on appropriate anti-TB therapy as per the guidelines with isoniazid 300 mg o.d., rifampicin 600 mg o.d., ethambutol 1 g o.d., and pyrazinamide 1.5 g o.d. In addition, he was started on furosemide 40 mg b.i.d. and aldactone 25 mg o.d., 1 week prior to the current presentation.
On examination, he was afebrile with a pulse rate of 98/min, respiratory rate of 18/min, and blood pressure of 98/60 mmHg. Physical examination revealed raised jugular venous pressure 4 cm above the sternal angle that increased with inspiration. The chest examination showed bibasal diminished air entry with minimal crackles. The cardiac examination revealed soft first and second heart sounds with no murmurs. The abdomen was distended with full flanks. There was bilateral lower extremity oedema to the knees.
Besides elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein, laboratory investigations were normal. Electrocardiogram demonstrated low-voltage QRS complexes and sinus tachycardia. Echocardiogram (poor acoustic window) showed preserved biventricular function, without any significant valvular disease. The pericardium was thick, and there was evidence of septal bounce. There was a normal E-to-A ratio and a normal E-to-E′ ratio. Tissue Doppler imaging velocity of medial E′ (0.19 m/s) was greater than that of lateral E′ (0.14 m/s) indicating annulus reversus . There was no significant change in mitral or tricuspid inflow during respiration. The inferior vena cava was dilated with no respiratory variation, and the systolic pulmonary artery pressure was 40 mmHg. Finally, an expiratory diastolic flow reversal was observed in the hepatic vein .
Computed tomography (CT) of the Chest showed markedly thickened pericardium and mild bilateral pleural effusion. No evidence of significant pericardial calcification or effusion was noted on CT .
Based on these findings, invasive haemodynamics was performed to confirm the diagnosis of CP and demonstrate the pathological impact of this disease. A right heart study was conducted via the right antecubital vein; simultaneous access of the right radial artery was gained for the left heart study and subsequent coronary angiography. Mean right atrial (RA) pressure was elevated (30 mmHg) with prominent X and Y descents . The combination of elevated mean pressure, inconspicuous positive waves, and prominent descents result in the classic ‘M’ or ‘W’ pattern (Friedrich’s sign). Additionally, there was no significant variation in RA pressures during respiration, which indicates dissociation between respiratory and intracardiac pressures. Both right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) and right ventricular end-diastolic pressure (RVEDP) were elevated at 46 and 31 mmHg, respectively, with an RVEDP-to-RVSP ratio of >1/3 (RVEDP/RVSP = 0.67).
Simultaneous LV–RV pressure tracings were recorded to document the equalization of LV and RV diastolic pressures , and the tracings showed a difference of <5 mmHg (left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) − RVEDP = 2 mmHg) with typical dip and plateau waveform (square root sign). This waveform is characteristic of CP and represents early rapid LV diastolic filling that stops abruptly owing to a stiff pericardium that limits the amount of ventricular filling. Accentuated filling of the ventricles during early diastole is represented by deep left ventricular rapid flow wave similar to mitral annular E′ wave on tissue Doppler imaging. Left ventricular rapid flow wave measuring of >7 mmHg (as in our case) has a sensitivity of 93% in diagnosing CP .
Furthermore, simultaneous right and left ventricular (RV and LV) pressure tracings showed ventricular discordance (i.e. during inspiration, peak systolic pressure in LV is reduced with a corresponding increase in RV pressure, and the opposite occurred during expiration), which confirmed that the filling of one ventricle is out of phase to the other, which is a distinctive feature of CP . Moreover, in CP, the pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP) is generally limited to <50 mmHg, and in our patient, the PASP was 30 mmHg. Finally, coronary angiography showed normal epicardial coronary arteries. The main echocardiographic and invasive haemodynamic differences between CP and restrictive cardiomyopathy are depicted in
Based on the history and significant haemodynamics findings and following a multidisciplinary discussion, he underwent a total pericardiectomy. Upon gross inspection, the pericardium appeared diffusely thickened and stiff with plenty of abscesses cavities . Total pericardiectomy and debridement were performed successfully, and tissue specimens were sent for histological examination that confirmed the presence of necrotizing granulomas , which coincided with the overall clinical picture of tuberculous CP.
The patient’s postoperative stay was uneventful with a dramatic improvement of his symptoms and complete resolution of anasarca. He had a significant 12 kg weight loss during his hospital stay and was discharged 10 days later off all diuretics. Medications at discharge included the continuation phase of anti-TB therapy (isoniazid 300 mg o.d. and rifampicin 600 mg o.d.) along with pyridoxine 20 mg o.d. and vitamin C 1 g b.i.d. Additionally, Paracetamol tablet 1 g every 8 h and Tramadol capsule 50 mg every 12 h (for 4 days) were prescribed to relieve post-surgical pain.
In the 4-week of follow-up (via phone consultation due to hospital COVID-19 related protocols), he reported doing very well, asymptomatic with no residual heart failure symptoms.
Three months after discharge, he remained asymptomatic with good functional status and normal exercise capacity. Transthoracic echocardiogram was performed to rule out post pericardiectomy ventricular dilatation and low cardiac output syndrome, which showed normal LV systolic function, indeterminate diastolic dysfunction with no evidence of a constrictive pattern in Doppler signals.