An 18-month-old Egyptian boy was referred to our pediatric endocrinology clinic for evaluation of generalized hyperpigmentation of the skin associated with weakness, vomiting and recurrent convulsions. He was born to consanguineous parents after an uneventful pregnancy with a birth weight of 3450 g. He was the fourth child of the family; one of his siblings, who had died of an unknown cause at the age of nine months, had generalized hyperpigmentation of the body, recurrent convulsions and mental retardation. His other siblings were reported to be healthy.
After the first few weeks of the baby's life, his mother noticed a generalized black coloration of his skin. His parents also reported that he was darker than his sister and brother. At the ages of 10 and 11 months he had two attacks of a febrile brief generalized tonic-clonic convulsion. The etiology of the convulsions had not been evaluated as the parents did not seek medical advice at that time. On examination, our patient was able to speak only a few words and walk with support. His weight was in the 5th percentile while his length and head circumference were in the 50th percentile. His blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg. Unlike his fair-skinned parents, he had generalized symmetric deep hyperpigmentation of the body, especially of his elbows, knees, hands, feet and buccal mucosa , as well as hypotonia. He had no dysmorphic features. Examination of his external genitalia revealed a penis of normal length and bilaterally palpable testes in his scrotum. There were no signs of alacrima or achalasia. Other examination findings were unremarkable.
His blood chemistry results were: glucose, 48 mg/dL; sodium, 140 mmol/L; potassium, 4 mmol/L; chloride, 109 mmol/L; alanine transaminase, 28 IU/mL; and aspartate transaminase, 30 IU/mL. His total blood count was normal. His cortisol level was 0.6 μg/dL (normal range: 2.8 to 23 μg/dL) and ACTH, 708 pg/mL (normal range: 6 to 48 pg/mL). An ACTH stimulation test did not cause a rise in his cortisol level. His 17-OH progesterone level was 0.01 ng/mL (normal range: 0.03 to 0.9 ng/mL); androstenedione, 0.01 ng/mL (normal range: 0.1 to 0.17 ng/mL), dehydroepiandrosterone, 3 ng/mL (normal range: 50 to 480 ng/mL); plasma rennin activity, 57 ng/mL/hour (normal range: 2.35 to 37 ng/mL/hour); aldosterone, 801 pg/mL (normal range: 50 to 900 pg/mL).
His bone age, evaluated by an X-ray of his left hand and wrist according to the Greulich-Pyle atlas, was equivalent to two years. Adrenal ultrasonography revealed that both his adrenal glands were small; his left was 6 × 8 mm and right 7 × 8 mm in diameter. Computerized tomography of his brain was normal. A molecular genetics study revealed normal ACTH receptor gene sequences, excluding FGD type 1, and a homozygous deletion (c. 111+1delG) in intron 3 of the MRAP gene was detected. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of FGD type 2 was made. Oral hydrocortisone treatment at a dose of 10 mg/m2/day was started.
Our patient was seen two months after starting treatment. His general condition was greatly improved and he was able to walk alone. The hyperpigmentation was less in comparison with his initial presentation , he had gained 1500 g, and his blood sugar and cortisol levels were normalized while the level of ACTH had dropped to 221 pg/mL.