A 34-year-old woman was referred to our institution with a 4-month history of shortness of breath during exertion. She did not have a significant past medical history and no previous pregnancy or childbirth. The blood pressure was 106/72 mmHg, the heart rate was regular at 107 b.p.m., and the respiratory rate was 18/min. Although the oxygen saturation (on room air) was 95%, it decreased to 80% with low-level activity. An electrocardiogram showed right axis deviation and an inverted T in leads V1–3 . A chest X-ray revealed dilation of the pulmonary artery . A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed severe PH with a tricuspid systolic pressure gradient of 87 mmHg, an estimated mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) of 49 mmHg, significant right atrial and right ventricular enlargement and left ventricular oppression by the right ventricle. Computed tomography presented a mosaic perfusion pattern and multiple chronic or organized thromboembolic obstructions in the distal part of the pulmonary arteries . Perfusion scintigraphy showed severe perfusion defects . Right heart catheterization (RHC) showed a mPAP of 54 mmHg (normal reference value: mPAP ≤ 20 mmHg), and pulmonary angiography revealed angiographical findings consistent with the distal type CTEPH. There was no finding suggesting an underlying coagulopathy in her blood tests. Although the patient had a strong wish to have a child, we prioritized treatment of CTEPH and started anticoagulant therapy (Rivaroxaban 15 mg/day).
Despite the continuation of anticoagulant therapy, there was no improvement in the right heart load as estimated by echocardiography and by her shortness of breath. On the 28th day, ventricular tachycardia caused by right heart overload was observed, and an emergency BPA was performed. After a total of six BPA sessions, the mPAP improved to 18 mmHg . Since the lesions were observed in the distal part of subsegmental pulmonary arteries, there was no indication for PEA.
After continuing anticoagulation therapy for 3 months, RHC confirmed that there was no deterioration in the PH. Even at this point, the patient’s strong wish to have a child had not changed, and she accepted the risk to her life that would result from pregnancy. Therefore, we changed the anticoagulation treatment from rivaroxaban to heparin calcium (subcutaneous injection). We maintained the activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) between 50 and 65 s for another 3 months. After 3 months of heparin treatment, RHC was performed again, and it was confirmed that her haemodynamic condition had not deteriorated (mPAP 21 mmHg). Two months after the last RHC, pregnancy was confirmed. Heparin calcium subcutaneous injection was continued during the pregnancy, and the APTT was maintained between 50 and 65 s. No exacerbation of right heart load was observed by echocardiography at the follow-up examinations that were conducted every 2 months . At 40 weeks of gestation, a normal baby (3450 g) was delivered vaginally following the cessation of heparin calcium the preceding day and during the day of delivery, without any complications. Echocardiography revealed no exacerbation of PH after delivery. Both mother and baby have made satisfactory progress. She was enjoying motherhood (at the most recent follow-up, which was 10 months following delivery).