A 44-year-old woman with progressive and painless visual blurring of the right eye for two days presented to the emergency department of the Khatam-al-Anbia Eye Hospital, affiliated to the Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. She had no history of ocular surgery or trauma. Her medical, ocular, and drug histories were unremarkable. The best-corrected visual acuities (BCVAs) of the right and left eyes were 20/50 (logMAR: 0.4) and 20/20 (logMAR: 0), respectively. Her slit-lamp examination result was normal. Intraocular pressure was 14 mm Hg in both eyes. Fundus examination revealed optic disc swelling and multiple serous retinal detachments in the right eye and normal left retina. Retinal imaging revealed characteristic features of VKH in the right eye. FA showed focal areas of delayed choroidal perfusion, multifocal areas of pinpoint leakage, pooling, and optic nerve staining . ICGA disclosed early hyper-cyanescence of the stromal choroidal vessels, which led to late hyper-cyanescence in both eyes and multiple hypofluorescent dark dots in the right eye [Figure 3 (A and B)]. The EDI-OCT findings included choroidal thickening, loculated spaces of the subretinal fluid with bands, high macular retinal detachment, subretinal membranous structure, and hyper-reflective dots in subretinal fluid [Figure 4 (A and B)]. Results of laboratory tests, including complete blood cell count (CBC), sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, syphilis serology, toxoplasma serology, PPD (purified protein derivative) skin test, hepatitis serology, and autoimmunity markers (ANA [Antinuclear Antibody], RF [rheumatoid factor], ACE [angiotensin converting enzyme]), and chest radiography were negative.
The initial diagnosis was VKH with unilateral clinical presentation and subclinical involvement of the left eye disclosed on ICGA. The patient was treated with intravenous high-dose corticosteroid (pulse methylprednisolone 1 g/day) followed by oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg). VA and OCT findings significantly improved. Two months later and during rapid tapering of the corticosteroid dose due to systemic complications, VA of the left eye decreased, associated with anterior chamber and vitreous cellular reaction. The notable finding was the presence of vitreous and anterior chamber cells in the left eye, which was very different from the condition of the right eye in the first presentation with an absence of cellular reaction in anterior chamber and vitreous. Fundoscopic examination revealed multiple serous retinal detachments. Slit-lamp examination and fundoscopy of the right eye had normal results [Figure 3 (C and D), Figure 4 (C and D)]. Therefore, the dose of prednisolone was increased, and methotrexate (MTX) 12.5 mg/week was added. VA, clinical and paraclinical examination results significantly improved afterwards. The disease was in complete remission 12 months after treatment with MTX and tapering of the prednisolone [Figure 4 (E and F)].