A 55-year-old postmenopausal woman presented in our outpatient department because of increasingly serious vaginal bleeding in the previous 2 years. She had experienced a caesarean delivery at 28 years old and underwent natural menopause at 53 years old. The bleeding, which followed a severe cough, was less than normal menses at first but later was heavy and left her clothes soaking wet. The patient reported that the bleeding was fresh blood, which could be stanched by compression in a sitting position. At the time of admission, a vaginal speculum examination showed that the vaginal wall had many varicosities and some bleeding spots. To exclude malignant diseases, the patient underwent colposcopy, and the varicosities and bleeding spots were further confirmed in the vaginal mucosa . However, iodine staining showed no lesions on the mucosae . In addition, the endometrial thickness was less than 4 mm according to transvaginal ultrasonography.
Simultaneously, we noticed that the patient had obvious venous varicosities in her left leg and that the diameter of the left leg was significantly larger than that of the right leg . She stated that the venous varicosities were found when she was 10 years old but not treated because of poor medical conditions. To exclude vascular malformation, we advised the patient to visit the vascular surgery department. On contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scanning of the legs, several varicosities and hyperplastic soft tissue and muscle were found in the left leg but not in the right leg . To determine whether multiple arteriovenous malformations were present, the patient underwent a CT scan of the pelvis, which showed some venous varicosities in the left internal pudendal vein but not in the right vein . However, pelvic arteriovenous shunts and pelvic congestion syndrome were not found on the 3-D reconstructed image .
Then, deep arteriovenous shunts in the left leg were found by arterial angiography. The arteriovenous shunts were partly closed by an interventional arteriovenous fistula occlusion operation at Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Aspirin and Plavix were given after surgery as anticoagulants for 1 month and were gradually stopped over the next 2 months. The vaginal bleeding was gradually alleviated and disappeared 5 months later. For long-term management, close observation and regular follow-up examinations were recommended.