A nine-year-old male presented at age five for marked growth deceleration. GH provocative testing with arginine-clonidine revealed low peak GH of 2.3 ng/mL consistent with deficiency. Subsequent pituitary magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated mildly hypoplastic adenohypophysis with thinning and hypoplasia of the infundibular stalk . Laboratory evaluation for other pituitary deficiencies was negative. He started GH therapy at a dose of 0.3 mg/kg weekly with an excellent growth response .
In the next two years, he developed frequent ear and sinus infections, along with recurrent cough and wheezing triggered by viral upper respiratory infections. Wheezing episodes improved with anti-asthma medication, but the cough did not. He underwent evaluation by a pulmonologist. On examination, he was short, well-nourished and afebrile. He was macrocephalic with a normal pulmonary and cardiac examination. Initial pulmonary function tests (PFTs) were notable for a reduced and scooped expiratory loop with improvement post-bronchodilator therapy . Step-up controller therapy resulted in normalization of PFTs within 6 weeks. Nevertheless, his wet cough persisted, and the patient was later diagnosed with pneumonia. Chest radiographs after an antibiotic course showed prominent peribronchial thickening and patchy opacities in the right middle lobe. Computed tomography scan demonstrated mild bronchiectasis in the right middle lobe and reticular opacities in the right middle and upper lobes reflecting chronic changes, likely sequelae of prior infections (Additional file : Fig. S1). Further work up included a normal sweat test, normal airway anatomy on bronchoscopy and normal ciliary biopsy. Bronchoalveolar lavage culture grew Hemophilus influenzae. The patient was referred to immunology and genetics.
His pediatrician then discovered microscopic hematuria and proteinuria on evaluation for primary nocturnal enuresis. He was referred to nephrology. Urine microscopy revealed 10 red blood cells per high power field with some being dysmorphic but no RBC casts. On initial evaluation, urine protein to creatinine ratio was mildly elevated at 0.25 mg/mg and urine albumin to creatinine ratio was also mildly elevated at 166 mg/g. Urine beta-2 microglobulin was normal. Urine cytology was benign. Electrolytes and estimated glomerular filtration rate were normal. Glomerulonephritis evaluation included: negative ANA and ANCA, normal C3, and mildly low C4 of 14. His IgA level was elevated at 464. Renal ultrasound with doppler revealed bilateral nephromegaly, with his left kidney measuring 10.6 cm (99th percentile) and his right kidney measuring 11.1 cm (100th percentile). His proteinuria appeared to worsen, particularly with exacerbations of respiratory symptoms. Proteinuria as measured on 24 h urine collection was abnormal, but not nephrotic range, at 15.5 mg/m2/h. A renal biopsy is planned.
At the time of his genetic evaluation at age nine, physical exam was notable for macrocephaly (Z = + 3.67) with a wide forehead and pointed chin, synophrys, protruding ears, mild gingival hypertrophy and a fused but narrow palatal vault, lymphadenopathy, and splenomegaly. There was no family history of immunodeficiency and no clear pattern of malformation on exam to account for his clinical features. In addition to exam findings and history detailed above, he had mild expressive speech delay and learning disability. There was concern for immune deficiency or primary ciliary dyskinesia given ear, sinus, and pulmonary infections requiring nine courses of antibiotics over the course of 2 years and sinus surgery with myringotomy. While some of his features including short stature, splenomegaly, facial features, and mild developmental delay, were suggestive of Noonan syndrome, the bilateral nephromegaly was considered an atypical finding. This prompted a broader evaluation for other diagnoses, including lysosomal storage disorders, common variable immune deficiency, and human immunodeficiency virus, which was negative.
Trio whole exome sequencing (WES) was pursued and revealed a heterozygous de novo missense variant in phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit δ (PIK3CD) (NM_005026.3, c.3061G > A, p.E1021K) the most common mutation previously reported in association with APDS . Functional studies have characterized the p. E1021K variant as a gain of function mutation, resulting in increased activity of p110δ and abnormal B cell development and differentiation [, ]. In addition, a heterozygous paternally inherited previously reported pathogenic variant in cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) was also identified (NM_000492.4, c.3454 G > C, p. D1152H), with no second variant reported. As previous sweat chloride testing was normal, this variant was interpreted to be consistent with carrier status for cystic fibrosis.
An extensive immune evaluation was completed . Specific antibody response testing revealed inadequate titers to 13-valent and 23-valent pneumococcal vaccine. Lymphocyte proliferation to antigens by flow cytometry demonstrated diminished proliferation to candida and tetanus toxoid in CD45 and CD3 cells. Tetanus booster did not improve his response to tetanus toxoid, which continued to show decreased T-lymphocyte proliferation on repeat testing, suggestive of impaired cellular immune memory. Flow cytometry, which can differentiate viable, apoptotic, and dead cells in a sample, revealed lower than expected viable lymphocytes. This may be due to sample collection or transport conditions; however, lymphocytes collected from patients with APDS have been shown to be more prone to cell death than lymphocytes from control groups . Due to these results and the patient’s history of multiple infections requiring antibiotic treatment as described above, he began subcutaneous immunoglobulin replacement therapy and has since required only two antibiotic courses for infection in the past 13 months compared to nine courses in two years prior to initiation.
Shortly after his molecular diagnosis at age nine, the patient was admitted for worsening acute on chronic left hip pain. On exam, skin was intact, without associated redness, swelling or tenderness of the left leg. Hip flexion and external rotation were normal but groin pain limited range of motion with internal rotation (15 deg), which manifested as an antalgic gait. Laboratory studies revealed mild leukocytosis with normal inflammatory markers. MRI was notable for moderate left hip effusion with synovial enhancement, moderately prominent inguinal and iliac lymph nodes, and no avascular necrosis. He underwent arthrocentesis and diagnoses of aseptic versus inflammatory arthritis was considered. Symptoms resolved spontaneously soon after the procedure. Rheumatology was consulted and diagnosed oligoarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis based on history and imaging findings; no abnormalities in the musculoskeletal exam were noted at the time, and he was started on naproxen for symptomatic management.