A 78-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital because of rapidly declining renal function. The patient had been treated for hypertension since the age of 63 years at our hospital and was initially free of proteinuria with normal renal function. Despite satisfactory control of hypertension, he began to exhibit proteinuria with microscopic hematuria at the age of 71 years. Proteinuria gradually increased to 2 grams per day over the ensuing six months. Laboratory and imaging studies for connective tissue disease, malignancy, dysproteinemia, and hepatitis viral infection were uninformative, but a test for antinuclear antibodies was weakly positive and a high-resolution computed tomography scan showed mild interstitial pneumonia. Although a renal biopsy was recommended at this time, the patient did not consent to the procedure, but received antihypertensive treatment under the close observation. Proteinuria and microscopic hematuria persisted, and his serum creatinine remained at the level of 1.2 to 1.4 mg/dL. Seven years after the onset of the proteinuria, however, the patient’s serum creatinine level rose rapidly from 1.4 mg/dL to 8.1 mg/dL over a period of 2 months, and he was admitted to our hospital.
The patient was 167.5 cm tall and weighed 64.7 kg. His blood pressure was 142/77 mmHg. His body temperature was 35.8°C. The palpebral conjunctivae showed pallor, and marked edema was present in the lower extremities. No respiratory or neurologic abnormalities were apparent.
Laboratory data are shown in Table . Serum creatinine was markedly increased (i.e., 8.3 mg/dL). A urinalysis showed massive proteinuria (i.e., 3+), and the sediment contained 50 to 100 red blood cells/high power field as well as granular and waxy casts. 24-hour urinary protein excretion was 3.17 g. Serologic evaluation revealed the presence of ANCA directed against myeloperoxidase (MPO-ANCA) at 536 EU (normal, < 20 EU). The computed tomography scan of the lung showed interstitial pneumonia with reticular and ground glass opacity, predominantly in the peripheral lower lung accompanied by a honeycomb appearance. Bilateral apical old inflammatory changes suggestive of healed tuberculosis were also present.
Because of the rapidly declining renal function, hemodialysis was started shortly after admission. A renal biopsy was performed on the 7th hospital day. Renal histological findings were as follows; six of the nine glomeruli visible by light microscopy showed cellular and/or fibrocellular crescents with focal endocapillary hypercellularity . The capillary walls were diffusely thickened. Diffuse epimembranous deposits that were occasionally continuous with large mesangial and subendothelial deposits were observed. Arteries and arterioles were free of vasculitic changes. Immunofluorescent studies revealed heavy, granular deposits of the capillary walls that stained positive with antisera directed against IgG, IgM, and C3 . Silver-impregnated samples observed using electron microscopy showed diffuse glomerular basement membrane (GBM) thickening and reticulation with large intra- and trans-membranous deposits. The deposits were not concentrated in the lamina densa, as was observed in dense-deposit disease .
The patient was treated with high-dose prednisolone for 6 weeks following 3 days of intravenous pulse methylprednisolone treatment. Cyclophosphamide was not administered when his age and the risk of infection were deliberately taken into consideration. Although the MPO-ANCA titer decreased with steroid therapy, the patient’s renal function failed to improve and prednisolone was tapered. The patient was subsequently discharged from the hospital and continued to receive maintenance hemodialysis therapy on an outpatient basis.