A 56-year-old woman who had traveled to Wuhan, China on January 2, 2020, presented with nasal congestion, cough, expectoration, anorexia, and fatigue on January 21, 2020. On January 22, she developed an intermittent fever lasting for 2 days, reaching a peak body temperature of 39.4 °C. She was treated with antibiotics (ceftriaxone) in a local clinic on January 23. She returned home to Huizhou on January 27, and reported to the fever clinic of Huizhou Third People’s Hospital on the following day with symptoms of nasal congestion, cough, expectoration, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, rhinorrhea, fatigue, fever, diarrhea, chest congestion, and dyspnea . Initial blood tests revealed a slightly elevated lymphocyte count and normal oxygen saturation (Additional file : Table 1). Computed tomography (CT) scans showed multiple bilateral scattered regions of patchy ground-glass opacity in the lungs . RT-PCR tests (Additional file : Methods) of throat swabs collected later on the same day from this patient were positive for SARS-CoV-2 (ORF1 and N genes; cycle threshold values of approximately 22–23), and as such the patient was diagnosed with COVID-19 and transferred to an isolation ward. Her husband (Feb 11) and daughter-in-law (Jan 30) were also diagnosed with COVID-19, while her daughter (Jan 30) and older grandson (Jan 30) were found to be asymptomatic carriers . Other family members were negative for SARS-CoV-2 infection at the time of testing .
After hospitalization, the patient received moxifloxacin and arbidol for anti-infection therapy, methoxamine and ketotifen for anti-cough therapy, as well as pantoprazole for inhibition of gastric acid. Her symptoms improved significantly after symptomatic treatment , but she was still positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA on February 7 and 10 . On February 11, routine blood tests, liver function tests, creatinine levels, and bilirubin levels were normal (Additional file : Tables 1 and 2), and chest CT scans indicated the resolution of the scattered bilateral lung lesions . On February 12 and 14, two consecutive oropharyngeal and anal swabs were found to be negative for SARS-CoV-2 RNA . As per the recommendations of the New Coronavirus Infection Pneumonia Protocol (version 7) proposed by the National Health Commission of China, this patient was now eligible for discharge and release from isolation.
Given that SARS-CoV-2 viral clearance patterns remain poorly understood, all discharged COVID-19 patients are transferred to a designated clinical observation center for an additional 14-day quarantine. On February 15, this patient was still experiencing a cough and some sputum production , although her other symptoms (anorexia, nausea, rhinorrhea, and fatigue) had improved. On February 28, she developed worsening anorexia and abdominal discomfort. On February 29, biochemical tests revealed slightly abnormal liver function (ALT40 U/L) (Additional file : Table 2), and a subsequent chest CT revealed the presence of a small number of bilateral fibrous lesions as well as the slight thickening of the left pleura . Anal swabs obtained on this same day were positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA (cycle threshold values of approximately 36–37) . The patient was thus transferred back to an isolation ward for further treatment. On March 5, chest CT follow-up demonstrated the resolution of the bilateral pulmonary lesions in this patient , and both throat and anal swab samples were found to be negative for SARS-CoV-2 RNA on March 3, March 4, and March 6 . The patient was then discharged to a designated clinical observation center for an additional 14-day quarantine period.
On March 7, the patient experienced a nonproductive cough and anorexia . A chest CT scan revealed the presence of a few fibrous bilateral pulmonary lesions on March 13 . On March 21, anal swab samples from this patient were found to be negative for SARS-CoV-2 RNA, whereas nasal swab samples were positive for viral RNA (cycle threshold values of approximately 36) . IgM and IgG antibody tests (Additional file 2: Methods) specific for SARS-CoV-2 were positive on this same date (Additional file : Table 3). To minimize the risk of further viral transmission, the patient was admitted to the isolation ward for the third time. She was treated with oseltamivir. Oropharyngeal swab and blood samples tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 RNA on March 25 and March 28 . The patient was discharged on Mach 28 and was transferred to the designated clinical observation center for an additional 14-day quarantine. IgM and IgG antibody tests specific for SARS-CoV-2 were positive on March 30 (Additional file : Table 3). Anal and nasal swabs from this patient were negative for SARS-CoV-2 RNA on April 2 .