A 53-year-old healthy woman was admitted to our emergency room with complete paraplegia in both legs and loss of all sensation below the xiphoid process (T5 level).
One day before admission, she had taken a walk with her husband along the dam in Kaohsiung. While walking at that time, she was only wearing a backpack and did not do any specific stretching exercises. After the walk, the patient felt a slight discomfort over her back. By noon on the next day, she complained of tightness over her bilateral chest wall, around the level of the xiphoid process. She denied straining, lifting, crying, sneezing, or coughing in the past three days. On arrival at the emergency room, 27 h after the walk, the muscle power in her lower extremities was 0/5 strength bilaterally, and she experienced no sensation below the xiphoid process. She also had difficulty in voiding her bladder. Vital signs at presentation were body temperature (BT): 36.6 ℃, respiratory rate (RR): 17/min, pulse rate (PR): 82/min and blood pressure (BP): 156/82 mmHg. A neurological examination revealed increased deep tendon reflexes over the right and left knees and ankles.
The patient was not receiving any anticoagulation therapy, and laboratory test results, including a complete blood count, chemistry panel, and coagulation profile, were all within normal limits.
The patient denied related past illness or any history of anticoagulation therapy.
The patient denied related personal and family history.
Vital signs at presentation were BT: 36.6 ℃, RR: 17/min, PR: 82/min and BP: 156/82 mmHg. A neurological examination revealed increased deep tendon reflexes over the right and left knees and ankles.
Laboratory test results, including a complete blood count, chemistry panel, and coagulation profile, were all within normal limits (platelets: 206000/μL, PT: 10.1 s, INR: 0.96, and APTT: 28.2 s). Microscopic examination of the intrathoracic abnormally dilated vascularities showed a proliferation of varying sized and focally dilated vascular channels filled with blood and lymphatic substance . The pathologic diagnosis was lymphangioma.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the thoracic spine, performed one hour after abrupt onset of complete paraplegia, revealed the presence of a posteriorly epidural space-occupying lesion (7.6 mm × 18 mm × 85 mm in size) at the T4-T8 level of the spinal canal. The lesion caused obliteration of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) signal at the T6-T7 level thecal sac, with mildly thin peripheral enhancement . The scanned field showed neither a definite signal intensity changes in the spinal cord nor a significant bone marrow signal change in the vertebral body.