A 14-year-old Caucasian boy was referred to our Pediatric Rheumatology Unit for finger joint contractures. Since the age of 4, he had been treated for T1D without complication and with fair glycemic control (hemoglobin A1c 7,5%). At the age of twelve, he presented with a first episode of puffy hands and Raynaud phenomenon (RP). Subsequently, he developed mild pain and reduced range of motion (ROM) at all the finger joints, along with tight skin on the dorsum of the fingers . Physical examination confirmed the presence of sclerodactyly, periungual erythema, pachydactyly and tapered fingertips at the 1st and 2nd digits bilaterally. Neither digital ulcers, pitting scars nor signs of muscle weakness had been detected. He also had contractures of the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints (ranging between 40° and 45°), elbows and wrists, and a trigger finger of 1st and 5th fingers bilaterally. The “prayer sign” and “tabletop test” were positive. Clinically, there was no respiratory or cardiovascular involvement. Laboratory tests included normal values of blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, muscle enzymes, serum pro-BNP, and urinalysis. Autoantibody profile showed high antinuclear antibodies (ANA) (1:640 with fine speckled pattern) with extractable nuclear antigen antibodies positive for anti-Mi-2b and anti-Ro52. Other scleroderma-specific autoantibodies were all negative including anti-Scl70 and anti-centromere, as well as anti-U1RNP. Ultrasound showed thickening of the flexor tendon sheaths, especially at the 3rd and 4th fingers bilaterally. Standard x-ray and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the hands were unremarkable. Nail fold capillaroscopy revealed disorganization of the microvasculature, megacapillaries, branching capillaries, microbleeding, and avascular areas compatible with an “active scleroderma pattern” . Cold challenged infrared thermography showed at 10 minutes, an abnormal temperature gradient (deltaT) > 1 °C in all fingers form metacarpophalangeal to distal interphalangeal joints . Pulmonary function tests revealed a restrictive pattern with mild reduction of the diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO) (DLCO 72%, TLCO 73%, KCO 74%). Chest high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) showed a bilateral interstitial lung thickening with perihilar distribution and a fibrotic area in the apex. Echocardiogram revealed a mild reduction (− 17.5%) of the global longitudinal strain of the left ventricle with no signs of pulmonary hypertension. Cardiac MRI ruled out myocardial fibrosis.
According to the current criteria for systemic sclerosis (SSc), our patient fulfilled 6 minor criteria of the pediatric EULAR/PRINTO/PReS classification (sclerodactyly, Raynaud phenomenon, nail fold capillary abnormalities, decreased DLCO, pulmonary fibrosis (HRCT/radiography), antinuclear antibodies positivity) and scored 11 on the recent SSc Classification [, ]. A diagnosis of jSSc was made and treatment with mofetil mycophenolate at 600 mg/m [2]/day was started with a significant improvement in DLCO (84%) and in the ROM of all fingers with only a residual 10° metacarpophalangeal flexion contracture at 6-month follow-up.