A 62-year-old woman had undergone vitrectomy 30 years previously for traumatic vitreous hemorrhage, scleral buckling surgery 15 years previously for rhegmatogenous retinal detachment, and phacoemulsification without intraocular lens implantation 1 year previously for cataract in her left eye. She suffered acute loss of vision in her left eye 4 months before admission to our hospital, with pain, left-sided headache, and nausea, and consulted another hospital. Records show that the visual acuity in her left eye was light perception and the intraocular pressure (IOP) was 50 mmHg, and a slit-lamp examination showed diffuse corneal edema associated with hyphema and vitreous hemorrhage. IOP was 25 mmHg after the administration of glaucoma medications (Azopt® Eye Drops containing brinzolamide; Timolol Eye Drops containing timolol maleate; Alphagan® containing brimonidine tartrate), accompanied by the relief of both headache and nausea. The patient had experienced a relapse, with pain, left-sided headache, and nausea, 4 days before attending our hospital. Upon examination, her left eye showed visual acuity of light perception, diffuse corneal edema, hyphema, and vitreous hemorrhage , and an IOP of 45 mmHg. B-ultrasound showed vitreous opacities, and a high-luminance indentation of the eye wall with an acoustic shadow could be seen in the vitreous cavity on the B-scan . The axial length was 33.70 mm (IOLMaster 500, Zeiss). The patient was diagnosed with secondary glaucoma and treated with lavaging of the anterior chamber and vitreous cavity.
After the vitreous haemorrhage was cleared, a blue suture knot was detected standing out on retinal surface and projecting into the vitreous cavity at 5 o’clock . Using forceps, we found that the knot was loosely connected to the underlying tissue, and we removed it with forceps like any other intraocular foreign body, causing no haemorrhage or other complications . The next day, the visual acuity in the patient’s left eye was hand motion, the IOP was 14.9 mmHg, and her pain was relieved. One week later, her best correct visual acuity was hand motion and her IOP was 13.6 mmHg in the left eye without anti-glaucoma medication. The vitreous was clear, the retina was still attached, and the ring-shaped protrusion was still visible around the equator. Around 5 o’clock, where the suture knot had been located, the choroid and retinal tissue were missing and the silicone buckle had penetrated into the vitreous cavity . We opted to treat the patient with steroid eye drops and conservative follow-up (observation), unless retinal redetachment or vitreous haemorrhage occurred.
Microscopy showed the suture as a multifilament of four fibers, each having 11 microfibers of diameter 16 μm . Mass spectrometry revealed that the material was polyethylene terephthalate (PET) , possibly Dacron.