A 49-year-old woman complained of severe left leg pain and could no t walk or stand up. She presented with left buttock and anterior thigh pain along the L4 dermatome.
There was no lumbago, muscle weakness, or loss of sensation in her leg. The femoral nerve-stretching test was positive on the left side. Plain radiography of the lumbar vertebrae revealed spondylolytic spondylolisthesis at L4-L5, which was classified as Grade IIaccording to Meyerding classification; however, there was no instability on dynamic assessment. Computed tomography (CT) showed a free ossification lesion in the foramen and ossification of the yellow ligament at L4-L5, without a ragged edge . Magnetic resonance imaging revealed no compression and stenotic lesion in the canal or fibrocartilaginous mass . Considering a diagnosis of left L4 radiculopathy because of the free ossification in the foramen at L4-L5, selective nerve root block was performed, and it was very effective temporally. However, because her leg pain occurred repeatedly, operative treatment was planned over 7 months after the initial visit to our hospital. Ossification resection and nerve decompression were ι performed with posterior spinal microendoscopic surgery using the METRx endoscopic system (Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Memphis, TN, USA). Thepatient was placed in the prone position on a 4-poster spinal frame under general anesthesia. A 16-mm skin incision was made 6cm lateral from the central line of the spinous process and at the L4 transverse process (TP) on the left side. A tubular retractor was introduced into the extraforaminal zone between the multifidus muscle and longissimus muscle. After removing the caudal side of the left L4-TP by drilling using a diamond bur and the inter-TP ligament, a part of the ossification lesion and the nerve root were exposed . After careful ablation between the ossification lesion and nerve root, the ossification lesion was excised, and an ultrasonic bone curette (Sonopet TM Ultrasonic Aspirator, Stryker Corp., Kalamazoo, MI, USA) was applied to remove the ossification mass . The deep lesion near the entrance zone was carefully treated. After decompression by resection of the ossification lesion, the nerve root was found to be relaxed .The surgical time was 83min, and blood loss was only 5g. She mentioned that there was no leg symptom immediately after the surgery and could walk without an aid on the next day of the surgery. According to the Japanese Orthopedic Association scoring system, her score improved from 21/29 preoperatively to 29/29 postoperatively, and the full score was maintained at the final observation 45 months after the surgery. Post-operative CT revealed the absence of an ossification lesion and no lumbar instability.