A 78-year-old lady, with angina, presented for elective angiography. She had hypertension but was not diabetic. On examination, heart sounds were normal. Her blood pressure was 132 systolic and 74 diastolic. Her electrocardiogram at rest showed normal sinus rhythm. Prior stress echocardiography showed widespread inducible ischaemia, and she had mild left ventricular systolic dysfunction. Renal function and haemoglobin were normal. Angiography showed mild LM atheroma, a critically severe calcified stenosis in the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery with further severe disease in the mid LAD, and a moderate stenosis in the proximal LCx . There was also a critically severe lesion in the proximal right coronary artery (RCA), with collaterals from the left system. She was discussed in the heart team meeting and both PCI and coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery were considered reasonable. She was turned down for surgery, due to the lack of graft conduits. Therefore, she returned to the catheterization laboratory for PCI. The plan was to treat the RCA lesion first and then stent from the LM to LAD.
A right radial artery 7 French sheath was used. Stenting the RCA was uneventful. For LM to LAD PCI, a Voda VL3.5 (Boston Scientific, USA) 7 French guide catheter was used. A Sion Blue wire (ASAHI INTECC USA) was advanced into the LAD, and a second Sion Blue wire was put in the diagonal branch. The proximal LAD was pre-dilated with a 2.5 × 15 mm semi-compliant balloon, to allow the intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) catheter to pass. IVUS confirmed severe disease from proximal to mid LAD, with concentric calcification in the proximal LAD . Notably, there was negative remodelling in the proximal LAD; however, the measurements to guide stent sizing were performed on the more distal reference area where the luminal diameter was 4.25 mm .
Further lesion preparation to the proximal LAD was with 2.5 and 3.0 mm Scoreflex balloons (OrbusNeich Medical Company Limited) and a 3.0 × 12 mm intravascular lithotripsy Shockwave balloon. The IVUS appearance pre- and post-vessel preparation with intravascular lithotripsy is shown in . A 2.75 × 38 mm Synergy stent (Boston Scientific, USA) was then deployed in the mid LAD. This was overlapped with a 4.0 × 24 mm Synergy stent, from proximal LAD back to LM. Immediately after this, she became haemodynamically unstable, with chest pain. An Ellis type 3 perforation (frank perforation into pericardium) was detected, which was initially presumed to originate from the ostial LAD . The stent balloon was inflated proximal to the site of perforation to occlude flow. Prolonged balloon inflations failed to seal the perforation but allowed time for an echocardiogram and pericardial drain insertion. Femoral venous and arterial access was obtained. A second Voda VL3.5 7 French guide catheter was advanced femorally, to enable rapid delivery of equipment, between balloon inflations, using the ping-pong technique. She had two units of blood transfused. The on-call cardiac surgeon arrived, but the bleeding site was thought to be inaccessible for surgical packing, and CABG surgery was not possible due to the lack of graft conduits.
We thought a covered stent would be required, but landing the covered stent across the distal LM into the LAD would occlude the LCx. A 4.0 × 15 mm Papyrus covered stent (BIOTRONIK, Germany) was deployed, aiming to nail the LAD ostium, followed by proximal optimization with a 4.5 mm non-compliant (NC) balloon. However, after this, the leak persisted . At this point, we felt the only remaining option was to deploy a further covered stent from LM to LAD to seal the bleed point. First, a Sion Blue wire was passed into the LCx, so that this could be used as a target for re-entering the LCx. Next, a 4.5 × 20 mm Papyrus covered stent was deployed from LM to LAD, overlapping with the first covered stent, with deliberate occlusion of the LCx to ensure sealing of the perforation. Proximal optimization technique (POT) was performed with a 5.0 mm NC balloon. A SuperCross 120 microcatheter (Teleflex, Pennsylvania, USA), which has an angled tip, was used to advance an Astato 20 stiff wire (ASAHI INTECC USA), to fenestrate the covered stent into the LCx. The angled tip microcatheter was advanced into the LCx, and the Astato stiff wire was exchanged for a Sion Blue wire. The fenestration in the covered stent was then dilated using 2.5 × 15 mm and 3.0 × 15 mm NC balloons, to restore LCx flow. At the end of the procedure, there was thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) 3 flow in the LAD and LCx and a fully sealed perforation . An alternative to an angled microcatheter, to support a stiff wire with fenestration of the covered stent, could be a dual lumen microcatheter.
Of note, she had two layers of covered stents at the LAD ostium, which might increase restenosis risk. Furthermore, we were concerned that despite ballooning into the LCx ostium, there could be protrusions from the polyurethane membrane of the covered stent into the LCx ostium, which might increase the likelihood of restenosis. Therefore, she was discharged on long-term dual antiplatelet therapy.
Four months later, she had no angina recurrence. However, a repeat angiogram was arranged to evaluate whether further optimization was required, given the concerns regarding restenosis risk. A left radial artery 6 French sheath and Voda VL3.0 6 French guide catheter were used. The LM and LAD stents were patent; however, there was severe stenosis at the LCx ostium . Therefore, we performed reverse Culotte LM bifurcation PCI, to stent the LCx ostium, using optical coherence tomography (OCT) guidance .
Sion Blue wires were advanced into the LAD and LCx arteries. Optical coherence tomography of the LCx confirmed a tight stenosis at the LCx ostium (minimum luminal area 1.9 mm2) and also showed possible polyurethane membrane from the covered stent protruding into the LCx ostium ( and , ). The LCx ostium was dilated with a 3.0 × 15 mm semi-compliant balloon, before deploying a Xience 3.5 × 23 mm stent (Abbott, USA) from the distal LM into the proximal LCx. POT was performed in the LM with a 4.5 × 8 mm NC balloon. Kissing balloon inflations were performed using a 4.0 × 15 mm NC balloon in the LAD and a 3.0 × 15 mm NC balloon in the LCx. Final OCT of the LCx confirmed excellent stent expansion ( and , ).