A 38 years old male patient with uncontrolled diabetes was admitted to our hospital complaining of severe abdominal pain after meals with nausea and vomiting. Laboratory analyses revealed high (+++) urinary ketone body levels, elevated (+) levels of urine glucose, and 24 h blood glucose fluctuations from 16.0–21.6 mmol/L. Abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed evidence of acute pancreatitis and peritoneal fluid accumulation. The patient was therefore diagnosed with acute pancreatitis, hyperlipidemia, and diabetic ketoacidosis. However, 5 days later, dark necrotic tissue was observed in the left nasal cavity of this patient. At this same time point, the tissue on the left side of his face was visibly swollen, with left orbital proptosis, eyelid drooping, complete ophthalmoplegia, and dilation of his right pupil with a marked reduction in visual acuity . CT analyses revealed an increase in soft tissue density in the patient’s bilateral maxillary sinus, ethmoid sinus, sphenoid sinus, and right frontal sinusitis. Dilatation of his left medial and inferior recti was observed, and the perforation of the patient’s nasal septum was observed, affecting his left nasal cavity. Hard palate perforation was also observed . Nasoendoscopy revealed large quantities of dark necrotic tissue within the bilateral nasal cavity. The majority of the soft tissue within the nasal cavity was damaged, with complete exposure of the bones of the nasal floor and the lower nasal passage, and with complete exposure of the lower nasal passage. The top of the nasal cavity was also affected. A sample of the observed dark necrotic soft tissue was excised for pathological examination.
Histopathological examination revealed that the coagulated necrotic tissue contained lymphocytes, plasma cells, and multinucleated giant cells . Many hyphae were visible surrounding and invading blood vessel walls, resulting in vasculitis and thrombus formation . Broad tubular hyphae that were 20–30 μm wide were observed, with two asymmetric sidewalls that were partially swollen and distorted without separation, aside from a few disorderly branches occurring at right angles . Sporangia were characterized by small round brown spores and basophilia chrysanthemum-cluster-like sporangium, with visible endospores in the sac. Individual spores were roughly 10 μm in diameter, and were densely arranged in sheets . Periodic-acid-Schiff (PAS) staining revealed pink fungal hyphae , and yellow-brown spores . Grocott staining highlighted hyphae , sporangia, and spores, which were a noticeable dark brown color . Such fungal morphology was suggestive of a Mucor fungus, and the patient was pathologically diagnosed with acute invasive mucormycosis. He was treated via surgical debridement combined with intravenous amphotericin B administration. However, due to his advanced disease progression, the patient died 4 weeks following admission.