A 15-year-old male of Han nationality presented with a sudden weakness of limbs. Five days before being admitted to our hospital, about five pm after school, the patient felt weakness of the lower limbs and walked unsteadily. However, he did not show weakness of both upper limbs, chest congestion, palpitations, dizziness, headache, numbness of the limbs, convulsion and incontinence. About five thirty pm, weakness of his both lower limbs disappeared. But he showed weakness of both upper limbs twice. Three days before admission, he did not write well with his right hand when he was at school. Two days before admission, he could not lift his left arm and had slurred speech, dysphagia, which lasted 2–3 hours before being recovered. On the day of admission, he presented right hemiplegia and numbness. History of past illness showed that he had a high fever two weeks before onset, the highest temperature was 39.9°C, and he was poor in spirit, but did not show cough, expectoration, sore throat or other symptoms. He was treated by Ceftriaxone sodium and dexamethasone, and he got well soon. Two months before onset, he had a history of lower extremity weakness lasting about 30 minutes. He was the product of a normal full-term pregnancy and delivery. He had no learning difficulties. His mother, his mother’s mother and his mother’s sister presented pes cavus.
His medical examination presented the atrophy of his interosseous muscles and his distal lower extremities, flat thenar muscles, poor flexibility of his hands, diminished deep tendon reflexes in all extremities, negative bilateral Babinski signs, positive bilateral Pussep signs and equinovarus. The internal medicine examination showed no abnormalities.
His investigations showed normal blood counts and inflammatory markers, renal, liver, electrolytes, sedimentation rate, blood glucose and thyroid function test. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed mildly elevated white blood cell (6 × 106/L) and mildly elevated protein (65 mg/dl) without oligoclonal bands. The first MRI after four days of onset of symptoms revealed diffuse signal abnormalities in the internal capsule, corpus callosum, periventricular areas. The second MRI after nine days of onset showed no change compared with the first one. The third MRI after two months showed almost complete resolution of the white matter changes.
Electromyogram presented peripheral neurogenic damages of upper and lower extremities . BAEP showed prolongation of latency in bilateral wave III and wave I-III interpeak, poor reproducibility in Wave V graphics. Somatosensory evoked potential of upper limbs presented prolongation of latency in bilateral cortical potential N20 and bilateral subcortical potential N9, N13. Somatosensory evoked potential of lower limbs revealed prolongation of latency on the right side of the cortical potential P40, and that graphic differentiation is not clear on the left cortical potential P40 and bilateral subcortical potential N21.
Genetic testing of this patient showed a T to G transition at nucleotide 278 in connexin 32, resulting in changing a methionine to a arginine. His mother had T278G heterozygous mutation . His father had normal sequence.
The patient had normal strength in all muscle groups, but the deep tendon reflexes were diminished bilaterally when he was in our department. After hospital discharge, there was no longer onset of his neurological symptoms.