The cases are described according to the CARE guidelines .
A 37-year-old non-smoking Taiwanese man visited the hospital in December 2019 after an abnormal chest radiograph during a health examination earlier that year. He had suffered from a dry cough and dyspnea on exertion for more than six months. Physical examination revealed bilateral coarse crackles. No clubbing of fingers or cyanosis of lips and fingertips was observed.
This patient had worked at a grinder station for hard metal materials in a precision machinery factory without proper ventilation system or any respiratory protective equipment for 64 hours per week since 2007. His colleague who had worked with him for 5 years suffered from bronchitis and a cough.
A chest radiograph showed nodular infiltration with partial fibrosis in the right upper lobe, multiple tiny nodules in both the upper and lower left lung fields and honeycombing in bilateral lung bases . HRCT revealed a tree-in-bud pattern in bilateral upper lungs with bronchiectasis in both upper and lower lungs and diffused honeycombing in bilateral lung bases . Pulmonary function test demonstrated a tendency to restrictive ventilatory impairment with a forced vital capacity (FVC) at 74% of the predicted value, the forced expiratory volume in 1 s/forced vital capacity ratio (FEV1/FVC) at 0.91, the diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO) at 46% of the predicted value. The walking distance in 6-min walking test was 491. His baseline oxygen saturation was 95%, and his oxygen saturation dropped to 93% during the 6-min walking test. Heart echogram showed normal pulmonary artery systolic pressure (Right Ventricular Systolic Pressure = 18 mmHg).
His sputum acid-fast stain and tuberculosis (TB) cultures came back negative. A screening for autoimmune diseases revealed positive anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) with mixed speckled pattern (1:40). The quantities of complement 3, complement 4, rheumatic factor, and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) in his blood were all within the normal range.
Bronchoalveolar lavage results were negative in both Gram stain and acid fast stain, no growth of any micro-organism; the red blood cell count was 63/μl, white blood cell count was 740/μl, comprised of eosinophil 10% (ref: ≤1%), lymphocyte 18% (ref: 10–15%), neutrophil 6% (ref: ≤3%), which was considered as eosinophilic cellular pattern. The cytologic evaluation of bronchial washing revealed only bronchial and inflammatory cells.
This patient had a spontaneous pneumothorax and underwent a video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) wedge resection of the right upper and lower lobes in March 2020. He was re-admitted to hospital in August 2020 due to recurrent right spontaneous pneumothorax and underwent VATS wedge resection of the right middle lung and pleurodesis.
Sections of his right upper and lower lobes from VATS wedge resections revealed patchy fibrosis composed of dense collagen, fibroblast foci, and architectural distortion with focal honeycombing in a subpleural distribution . These findings suggest UIP. Tiny foci of aggregates of intra-alveolar pigmented macrophages and a few giant cells were found and suggestive of hard metal exposure . Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (Agilent 7800 ICP-MS, Santa Clara, USA) analysis of his lung tissue revealed 0.231 ppb tungsten and 0.012 ppb cobalt.
This patient was diagnosed with HMLD with a UIP pattern and received nintedanib treatment (150 mg twice a day) since April 2020. He also stopped working at the factory after August 2020. His symptoms subsided, with an improvement in FVC and DLCO in the subsequent pulmonary function tests .
His mother, aged 68, accompanied him to the hospital in Dec 2019 and complained of a dry cough and intermittent exertional dyspnea for 2 years. Chest radiograph showed increased reticulonodular infiltrations in both lungs . Physical examination revealed fine crackles in bilateral lower lobes. No clubbing of fingers or cyanotic of lips or fingertips was observed. Her oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximeter was 96%. HRCT showed diffused subpleural reticulations and ground-glass opacities with an apicobasal gradient and minimal basal lung honeycombing, consistent with a UIP pattern . Pulmonary function test showed a tendency to restrictive ventilatory impairment: FVC at 59% of the predicted value, FEV1/FVC at 0.99, and the DLCO at 55% of the predicted value. An examination of her auto-immune profile returned results that were all within the normal range. She never smoked, and she quit her job after getting married. She had hand-washed his son’s working wear every day. She also received nintedanib treatment (150 mg twice a day) since April 2020 . She reported that her symptoms improved after the treatment, but she discontinued the treatment in May 2020 due to side effects including serious diarrhea. Her symptoms recurred, and as a result she resumed nintedanib treatment in December 2020. She did not undergo bronchoalveolar lavage or a lung biopsy.
The first patient’s father and one of his brothers live with him and his mother in a high-rise apartment in a residential area. His father and his two brothers, including the one living with him, had no cough or any other related symptoms. He and his mother had no known food or drug allergies, and they did not have a history of other respiratory diseases.