The patient was an 11-year-old boy with no notable medical or family history. For about 3 months, he had occasional general malaise, headaches, and vomiting. The patient then began to complain of difficulty in turning his neck and was referred to an orthopedic clinic. No abnormalities were detected in the head and neck in the computed tomographic (CT) images and the magnetic resonance images (MRIs). In addition, all hematological tests were within the normal limits.
After 1 month, the patient had a transient reduction in vision, and when his vision worsened in both eyes, the patient was brought to an ophthalmologist. At the initial examination, his visual acuity was 20/200 in the right eye and 20/100 in the left eye. The intraocular pressure of the right and left eyes was 19 and 20 mm Hg, respectively. No clear differences in the pupillary light reflexes of the right and left eyes were found. A relative afferent pupillary defect was not present. The anterior segment of the eye was normal, but ophthalmoscopy showed a marked swelling of the optic disc and severe retinal exudates in both eyes .
The patient was admitted for comprehensive examinations on the same day. Physical and hematological abnormalities were not found. Head X-rays showed dehiscence of the coronal suture, which suggested intracranial hypertension. MRI showed no space-occupying lesions in the brain, but did show tortuous optic nerves, enlarged spinal fluid cavity, and flattened posterior sclera . MR venography did not show clear signs of a sinus thrombosis. Cerebrospinal tap demonstrated a marked increase in the cerebrospinal pressure with an opening pressure of 350–500 mm H2O, but the cerebrospinal fluid contents were normal.
Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with IHH, and acetazolamide, concentrated glycerin, and steroid were injected intravenously. Initially, the intracranial pressure decreased after the treatment, but after 1 month, the intracranial hypertension and symptoms did not improved. Thus, a ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt was inserted in the Neurosurgery Department, and the intracranial pressure was lowered. The ophthalmological findings have been stable thereafter.
The changes in the fundus and visual field during the course of the disease process are shown in fig. . At present, about 1 year after the onset, the papilledema has improved but the vision is 20/320 in the right eye and 20/2,000 in the left eye. The limited improvement of vision was most likely due to the optic nerve atrophy.