A 59-year-old man sought medical attention in 2005 for vague abdominal discomfort, nausea and belching that had started 6 months earlier. The patient did not have any previous history of cancer in his family or any history of asbestos exposure. He denied any other gastrointestinal or constitutional symptoms. A physical examination was unremarkable except for a slightly distended abdomen. Initial investigations included routine laboratory investigations, an upper gastrointestinal tract endoscopy and a colonoscopy, all within normal limits. However, an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed omental caking, perihepatic ascites and neoplastic seeding in Morrison’s pouch and the perihepatic space . There was no evident lymphadenopathy present. A single hepatic lesion was further investigated by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which was compatible with a benign hemangioma. A staging investigation was negative for extra-abdominal metastases. The patient underwent diagnostic laparoscopy. Intraoperative findings revealed an omental thickening with nodules on the omentum and diffuse involvement of the peritoneal surface with relative sparing of the liver, spleen, stomach, and small and large intestine. Peritoneal biopsies results were compatible with DMPM of the epithelial subtype. He was then referred to our institution for definitive treatment. At 3 months after diagnostic laparoscopy, our team performed a complete CRS and HIPEC. Total right diaphragmatic, partial left diaphragmatic (2/3), total pelvic and parietal anterior peritonectomies were performed. The CRS procedure also included cholecystectomy, splenectomy, omentectomy, mesenteric implant fulguration and removal of laparoscopic surgery trocar sites that were invaded with tumor nodules. The peritoneal cancer index (PCI) was 21 (maximal possible score: 39). This index takes into account the number of invaded areas from a total of 13, and the maximal size of tumors nodules within 3 possible groups (<5 mm, 5 mm to 5 cm, >5 cm) . After CRS, there was no residual tumor (completeness of cytoreduction (CCR) score = 0). HIPEC was performed with oxaliplatin 460 mg/m2 for 30 minutes and systemic 5-FU was simultaneously infused. The findings on the final pathological report were as follows: multifocal and multinodular tumor with numerous psammomatous calcifications, tumor made with polygonal cells showing a tubulopapillary proliferation pattern, cells present on the peritoneal surface and invading the underlying tissue inducing desmoplasia, tumor cells of intermediate size with a moderately abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, round and slightly irregular nuclei with prominent nucleoli, weak mitotic activity, no intracytoplasmic mucin on periodic acid-Schiff diastase (PAS-D) staining. Immunohistochemical studies have been performed for vimentin, keratin 5/6, calretinin, Wilms' tumor 1 (WT1), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CD15, E cadherin, Ber-EP4 and CD141. Tumor cells were extremely positive for calretinin, keratin 5/6 and focally positive for CD141. In conclusion, the histological aspect and the immunohistochemistry confirmed the diagnosis of DMPM of epithelial subtype.
Our patient’s postoperative course was complicated by respiratory failure episodes (secondary to pleural effusions and pulmonary edema), a right subphrenic abscess and a lower limb deep venous thrombosis. Recovery was slow but complete and our patient was discharged after 6 weeks. He was then followed with a positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan every 4 months for 1 year and then every 6 months. At 36 months after treatment (June 2009), a PET-CT scan showed no evidence of recurrence.
In November 2009 (41 months after CRS and HIPEC), the patient complained of blurred vision in his left eye and was referred to an ophthalmologist. Fundoscopic examination of the left eye revealed a solid pigmented choroidal mass above the macula measuring 6.9 × 9.2 mm in base and 2.5 mm in height. The patient was then referred to a medical oncology service for systemic staging. MRI of the brain, and a CT scan of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis did not show any evidence of metastatic disease. The medical oncology team assumed that the left eye tumor was metastatic disease from DMPM and external beam radiotherapy of a total dose of 40 Gy (20 fractions of 2 Gy) was administered. Further ophthalmologic assessment showed no treatment response, the size of the tumor increased to 8.1 × 11.3 mm in base and 2.9 mm in height. Two fine needle biopsies were performed but the results were deemed inconclusive. A second ophthalmologic evaluation by a specialized group of ocular oncologists was obtained. On fundus examination, a choroidal melanocytic lesion superior to the macular area was found. The lesion showed different grades of pigmentation, orange pigment on its surface and the presence of subretinal fluid . B-scan ultrasound revealed an acoustically hollow dome-shaped lesion , which on A-scan demonstrated a medium to low reflectivity, and a maximum height of 3.15 mm. Based on the clinical appearance and ancillary testing, a diagnosis of ocular melanoma was supported.
In November 2010, brachytherapy with an iodine-125 plaque at a total dose of 80 Gy to the apex of the tumor was performed. In October 2011 the tumor reduced in size to 2.9 mm in height and there was no sign of recurrence of DMPM or OM on PET-CT.