A 55-year old Caucasian female with a past medical history significant for hypertension and a lumbar laminectomy for spinal stenosis 5 years prior to the current presentation underwent a uncemented metal-on-polyethylene total hip arthroplasty 2 years prior to the current presentation using a Converge acetabular cup and APR (proximally hydroxyapatite porous-coated) stem (Zimmer, Warsaw, IN) for right hip osteoarthritis. She had no pain and functioned well in terms of ambulation and activities of daily living for the first two years. After two years, she began to notice enlargement of a mass over her right hip which began to make it increasingly difficult for her to sit or lie on the right side. She ambulated at this time with a Trendelenberg gait to the right side. Her posterolateral incision was well-healed and there was no warmth or erythema. She had a large palpable mass overlying the surgical incision. She had a painless range of motion of the hip and was neurovascularly intact distally with good distal pulses. Plain radiographs did not demonstrate radiolucencies at the implant-bone interface or eccentric polyethylene wear . Stem position was unchanged from postoperative radiographs. Osteolysis was noted beneath the collar of the stem. A circular soft-tissue density was seen surrounding the hip joint . Three- phase technetium bone scanning demonstrated increased blood pooling involving the soft tissue lateral to the prosthesis suggesting soft tissue injury, but no evidence of prosthetic loosening. There were no other areas of activity noted. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a massive collection lateral to the hip joint with extension into the ilopsoas bursa. A thin capsule-type wall surrounded the mass . The mass demonstrated intermediate signal on T1-weighted images and increased signal on T2-weighted images.
Because of the patient’s persistent symptoms, the patient underwent surgical excision of the lesion through a posterior approach to the hip joint. After division of the tensor fascia lata and the gluteus maximus musculature, a large cystic structure protruded from the wound measuring 14 × 10 × 4 19 centimeters . The cyst was noted to be compressing the sciatic nerve, although the patient did not demonstrate evidence of sciatic neuropathy. An attempt to aspirate the mass was unsuccessful. Therefore, a small incision was made in the capsular lining of the cyst to send a small quantity of the content for frozen section. Intraoperative frozen section revealed synovial hyperplasia with lymphocytic and neutrophilic infiltrate. Aggregates of organized fibrin (rice bodies) were noted. There was no evidence of infection. There was no evidence of malignancy, which would have required capsule closure, extraarticular resection of the hip joint and femoral prosthesis, and hip reconstruction. The cyst was then fully opened to reveal numerous granules of identical size and shape . There was no gross necrotic tissue or hemorrhage. The contents of the cyst were emptied and the capsular lining was traced into the hip joint. The hip was dislocated and the capsular lining of the cyst was completely excised. There was no evidence of prosthetic loosening, polyethylene wear or metal debris. The wound was copiously irrigated and closed in layers over a drain. All cultures taken from the operating room, including aerobic, anaerobic, fungal, and acid fast bacilli, were negative for infection. Final histologic analysis confirmed the intraoperative frozen section report. Polyethylene or metallic wear debris were not identified. Following removal of the mass, the patient obtained immediate pain relief. An inpatient rheumatology workup failed to identify the presence of abnormal inflammatory markers such as rheumatoid factor or antinuclear antibody. On follow-up examination the patient was ambulating comfortably, and could sit and lie on her right side 2 months after excision of the cyst. These good results persisted to the latest follow-up 1 year after surgical excision.