A 70-year-old female with history of symptomatic palpitations was referred to our centre for catheter ablation of AT. The patient had undergone MV and aortic valve (AV) replacement (St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN) more than 20 years earlier due to rheumatic heart disease. Antiarrhythmic drugs such as amiodarone failed to control the heart rate and the patient was still symptomatic. Cardiac auscultation demonstrated metallic ticking sound at mitral and aortic area. Her lungs were clear and had no signs of heart failure. Pre-operative transthoracic echocardiography showed that the bileaflet prosthetic function remained normal and left ventricular function was preserved, with an estimated systolic left ventricular function of 68%.
After intracardiac thrombi were excluded by transoesophageal echocardiography, the procedure was performed under local anaesthesia. Three-dimensional electroanatomical mapping using multipolar catheter (PentaRay, Biosense Webster, Diamond Bar, CA) and radiofrequency ablation application using an ablation catheter (ThermoCool SmartTouch; Biosense Webster) were performed. Venous femoral puncture was performed and a decapolar catheter was advanced in the coronary sinus as a reference. Activation mapping in right atrium (RA) using PentaRay catheter demonstrated that RA was not involved in the tachycardia. Double transseptal access was achieved and two non-steerable sheaths were positioned in the left atrium (LA). Despite cautious manipulation of the PentaRay in the anterior wall of LA, the catheter was entrapped in the septal aspect of the mechanical MV, a fluoroscopic image demonstrated the fixed ipsilateral disc of the mechanical MV, suggesting that one of splines of the PentaRay was entrapped in the hinge portion between the disc and the orifice ring . The catheter was easily retracted into the sheath but one of the splines had sheared off. Therefore, the ablation procedure was abandoned. We attempted to release the entrapped the spline by advancing the ablation catheter towards the stuck disc and pushing on the hinge portion of the disc with the catheter tip. The stuck and closed disc was luckily opened, and the deeply entrapped spline was released. Immediately thereafter, the entrapped spline floated through the Valsalva sinus. After an initial check to rule out cerebral embolization, the missing element was located in the distal left anterior tibial artery. We attempted to extract the spline by direct syringe suction via a multipurpose (MP) diagnostic catheter instead of grasping the spline with a snare because it might be difficult to advance the snare system to the distal anterior tibial artery. The MP diagnostic catheter was advanced to the distal left anterior tibial artery on the guidewire smoothly via a 6 F arterial femoral sheath. Next, the spline was successfully retrieved into the MP catheter following direct syringe suction (see , ). No complications occurred during the procedure. Post-operative echocardiography was performed and demonstrated normal function of the mechanical valve. The patient had no symptoms of right lower extremity and continued to intake antiarrhythmic drugs at the follow-up period of three months.