A 10-year-old boy with no history of immunosuppression had comorbidities, including allergic rhinitis and sebum-deficient eczema, which was treated with topical dexamethasone propionate ointment 0.1%. A few days before the visit, he had been bitten by an insect on the anterior surface of his right lower leg and had scratched it due to itching. The day before the visit, redness and mild pain were observed in the same area, and the patient visited the pediatric department of this hospital.
The vital signs at the time of the patient’s visit to our hospital were as follows: body temperature, 36.1 °C; pulse, 79 beats/minute; and saturation of percutaneous arterial oxygen, 97% (room air). The patient was 140.0 cm tall, weighed 38.0 kg, and had erythema, heat sensation, and swelling with indistinct margins on the anterior aspect of the right lower leg measuring 7 × 7 cm in diameter, with mild pain and itching in the same area. In the center of the erythema, a crust of about 3 × 1 mm and a small amount of pus was observed. Gram staining of the pus showed Gram-negative short bacilli. The right inguinal lymph node was not palpable.
Based on the symptoms and findings, he was diagnosed with right lower leg cellulitis. The patient had a Gram-negative short bacillus, which was atypical for cellulitis, unlike Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes, usually associated with cellulitis . The patient was treated with oral sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim and topical betamethasone valerate/gentamicin hydrochloride ointment 0.12%. Because the pruritus was severe, topical betamethasone was used in addition to topical antibiotics. After 3 days, the area of erythema was reduced to approximately 3 × 1 cm, and the pain and itching disappeared. Since the symptoms had largely improved, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim was taken orally for 5 days, and the symptoms resolved completely. Cultures of pus detected two types of bacteria, but normal culture methods could not identify one type of bacteria. The sample was analyzed using a Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time of Flight Mass Spectrometer (MALDI-TOS MS) and identified as R. mucosa (score = 2.52). The other bacterium was Coagulase-Negative Staphylococcus. Gram staining showed that it was a Gram-negative bacillus. We considered R. mucosa to be the causative bacterium.
However, the symptoms disappeared when the bacterium was identified as R. mucosa. Susceptibility tests were performed by the broth microdilution method based on standards reported by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute . Susceptibility testing for sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim was not performed. No additional treatment was given because the patient was clinically symptom-free. The patient was followed up until one month after onset, and no relapse of symptoms was observed.