A seventeen year old girl presented as an emergency with a two-day history of lower abdominal and back pain. She experienced rigors and appetite loss but no nausea, vomiting, dysuria, cystitis or vaginal discharge. Three months previously, she had undergone immediate appendicectomy for a gangrenous retrocaecal appendix. Other intraoperative findings at the time were a macroscopically normal right ovary and fallopian tube.
There was no history of recent sexual activity or pelvic inflammatory disease. Menstrual cycles were regular and every 28 days and the patient was mid-cycle at the time of presentation.
On examination, she had a temperature of 38.5°C, pulse of 100 beats per minute and blood pressure of 114/59. Lower abdominal rebound tenderness, guarding and absent bowel sounds were present. The patient had a leucocytosis of 16.4 × 109.l-1 and C-reactive protein concentration of 322 mg.l-1. A pregnancy test was negative and an emergency computerized tomographic scan showed a complex pelvic mass associated with or near to the right ovary and overriding, but not connected to the uterus . She subsequently underwent an emergency laparotomy. The right fallopian tube was found in the midline above the uterus. It was grossly enlarged, measuring 10 × 5 cm, with multiple necrotic areas oozing pus. The fimbrial end was oedematous with a radius of 2 cm. The left fallopian tube was slightly enlarged and was found postrolateral to the uterus, adherent to the sigmoid colon by fibrinous adhesions. There was no visible enterosalpinx fistula and no appendicular stump leak. The left salpinx was released by blunt dissection and pus drained from both fallopian tubes by retrograde "milking". Both tubes were irrigated generously with a 0.9% saline and Betadine mixture. Microbiological analysis of the pus revealed Escherichia coli and anaerobes but not Chlamydia or Candida spp. A postoperative Gastrografin enema did not reveal an occult fistula .
The patient was treated postoperatively with intravenous Co-Amoxiclav and Metronidazole for a week and made an uneventful recovery. However, she now faces the long-term sequelae of potential infertility, ectopic pregnancy and chronic pelvic pain.