A 58-year-old Caucasian female presented to her local emergency department with fever and diarrhea. The patient developed nonbloody, large-volume diarrhea after eating take-out 11 days ago, with four to five bowel movements per day. During this time, she also experienced fevers, chills, nausea, vomiting, general malaise, and weakness. In addition, she observed leaking and drainage around her G-tube site with associated erythema and intense abdominal pain. The patient denied sick contacts or recent travel.
Her past medical history includes obesity, orthostatic hypotension, hyperlipidemia, chronic kidney disease, nephrolithiasis, gastrojejunal ulcer, Kawasaki’s disease, subdural hemorrhage, epilepsy, chronic pain syndrome, and anxiety. The patient’s past surgical history includes burr-hole craniotomy, lithotripsy, cholecystectomy, Roux-en-Y gastric bypass complicated by chronic refractory marginal ulceration and small bowel obstruction requiring two resections, ventral hernia repair, and gastrostomy tube insertion.
The patient was pregnant six times and had six miscarriages (G6P0060). She lives with her husband and adopted son with good social support. She is currently unemployed. The patient denies ever smoking and does not drink alcohol. Familial history consists of diabetes, heart disease, and nephrolithiasis in the patient’s mother. Her father had glaucoma, nephrolithiasis, and prostate cancer.
Medications before admission included pantoprazole 40 mg twice a day, sucralfate 1 g twice a day, ondansetron 4 mg twice a day as needed for nausea, midodrine 10 mg three times a day, fludrocortisone 0.1 mg twice a day, atorvastatin 40 mg daily, levetiracetam 1500 twice a day, methadone 10 mg every 8 hours, and lorazepam 0.5 mg daily as needed for anxiety. She was also on daily vitamin A, D3, and B-complex supplements and a monthly cyanocobalamin 1000 μg intramuscular injection, in addition to a nutritional supplement Isosource 1.5 Cal that is administered through the G-tube once every night.
Due to her complex past surgical history, the patient was sent from her local emergency department to our hospital. At presentation, the patient was febrile to 101 ℉. Blood pressure was 110/72 mmHg, and heart rate was 84 beats per minute. Further examination revealed diffuse abdominal tenderness with erythema and purulent drainage around the G-tube site on the left upper quadrant. The general examination showed a thin patient who is alert and oriented. Mucous membranes were moist. Lungs were clear to auscultation as she was breathing comfortably on room air. Heart sounds were regular without murmurs. Extremities were warm with intact pulses bilaterally and no edema. However, she had moderate muscle loss for her age. Skin was intact except for the previously mentioned erythema around the G-tube. Neurological examination revealed normal speech with comprehension, intact cranial nerves II–VII, XI, and XII, and 5/5 motor strength in all four extremities. Sensation was intact to light touch and pinprick throughout. Romberg test was negative. Gait was slowed owing to weakness but showed normal balance.
Serum chemistry showed sodium of 136 mmol/L, potassium of 2.9 mmol/L, chloride of 111 mmol/L, bicarbonate of 20 mmol/L, magnesium 1.2 mg/dL, calcium 6.1 mg/dL, and serum creatinine 1.0 mg/dL. Liver function tests showed low albumin of 2.5 g/dL, total bilirubin of 0.3 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase of 86 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 13 U/L and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 21 U/L. Complete blood count showed a white blood cell count of 3.97 × 109 /L, hemoglobin of 12.6 g/dL, hematocrit of 39.6%, and platelet count of 239 × 109 /L. Urinalysis showed normal appearance and color, specific gravity of 1.020, without detecting red blood cells (RBC), white blood cells (WBC), ketones, glucose, leukocytes esterase, or nitrites. A stool sample was sent for Clostridium difficile and a molecular enteric panel but was pending at that time. Two out of two blood cultures that were collected at her local emergency department were positive for Gram-negative rods. An abdominal radiograph confirmed G-tube location overlying the stomach and a computed tomography (CT) abdomen/pelvis with contrast showed nonspecific skin thickening and subcutaneous fat stranding along the G-tube insertion site . Due to a prior history of penicillin and sulfa anaphylactic reactions, the patient was empirically treated with intravenous ciprofloxacin 400 mg every 8 hours for bacteremia, and oral clindamycin 450 mg every 8 hours for the cellulitis surrounding her G-tube site, in addition to intravenous fluid resuscitation with normal saline at 75 mL/hour and electrolyte repletion with oral potassium chloride 20 mEq for four total doses, and intravenous magnesium sulfate 4 g once.
A fluoroscopy G-tube study revealed no contrast leak or evidence of obstruction. On day 1 of hospitalization, the molecular enteric stool panel was positive for the Salmonella species. On day 4, two out of two blood cultures grew Salmonella enteritidis with susceptibilities to ampicillin, ceftriaxone, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. The patient was then transitioned from intravenous ciprofloxacin to a 14-day course of intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g every 24 hours. We resumed tube feeds through the G-tube on day 5 after a successful clamping trial. On day 6, the patient was somnolent and difficult to arouse, with poor skin turgor and dry mucous membranes. Vital signs remained within normal limits; T max of 98.6 ℉, blood pressure of 98/65 mmHg, and heart rate of 95 beats per minute. Laboratory results were significant for a serum creatinine level of 5.25 mg/dL and non-anion gap metabolic acidosis with sodium of 131 mmol/L, chloride of 105 mmol/L, and serum bicarbonate of 18 mmol/L. These clinical and laboratory findings of dehydration suggested the development of prerenal acute kidney injury (AKI) in the setting of prolonged GI volume loss. The patient was resuscitated with half normal saline containing 75 mEq sodium bicarbonate additive at 125 mL/hour. On day 8, the patient’s mental status improved but her G-tube began to leak, prompting clamping of the G-tube. The patient was encouraged to increase oral intake. Intravenous fluids were discontinued on day 9, as she was able to tolerate oral foods and liquids well. No further leakage was seen around her G-tube site. On day 13, the patient was discharged home with a peripherally inserted central line to finish a 14-day course of intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g every 24 hours).
Following completion of a 14-day course of intravenous ceftriaxone, the patient made a full recovery with resolution of her diarrhea and abdominal pain. Tube feeds were resumed without further issues. At a 4-month follow-up visit with her bariatric surgeon, the patient reports that she is doing well and happy with her progress. Electrolytes and serum creatinine were all within normal limits. The patient was readmitted 6 months following her initial hospitalization for abdominal pain and hematemesis due to a large marginal ulcer. She improved with conservative measures including bowel rest (nothing per os) and maintenance intravenous fluids, and was discharged 2 days later. At the time of discharge, her hemoglobin remained stable at 11.2 g/dL, and she was able to tolerate an oral diet. She continues to follow up with her bariatric surgeon in clinic with no recurrence of fever or diarrhea.