A 40-year-old female presented with an 18-month history of intermittent pelvic/lower extremity numbness, and 4 months of loss of balance and urinary/fecal incontinence. She was known to have Systemic Lupus Erythematosus and had been maintained on hydroxychloroquine. On neurological examination, she exhibited a sensory level at T10 with clonus and hyperreflexia in both lower extremities.
The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings demonstrate an intradural lesion at T6-7 that circumferentially encased the spinal cord . A CT Thorax-Abdo-Pelvis additionally showed a ring enhancing lesion on the liver later confirmed to be a hemangioma (on MRI).
The patient underwent a T6-T8 laminectomy for resection of the intradural lesion. Intraoperative neurophysiology monitoring was used. The tumor was found to be very adherent to the spinal cord. Although the lateral/dorsal segments of tumor were removed, the ventral portion was left behind to protect the anterior spinal artery. The histology confirmed a psammomatous meningioma (WHO Grade I). Postoperative recovery was unremarkable and the patient regained her mobility. Postoperative scans were satisfactory, and the patient was later discharged uneventfully .
Five years later, the patient again presented with 4 weeks of decreased mobility, worsening balance, and lower limb weakness. She demonstrated a T7 sensory level. The repeat MR scans showed tumor recurrence and cord compression at the T5 to T7 levels, and the tumor was now larger than noted at the initial presentation .
The patient underwent a second surgery for intradural debulking of the tumor, and fusion from T3 to T10 under intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring. The tumor was calcified and adherent to the cord, with only a small soft component being found. The posterior and lateral portions of the tumor were resected, while a small amount of tumor was left ventrally, again to protect the anterior spinal artery. Postoperatively, the patient had paraparesis with proprioceptive loss. After 6 months of neurorehabilitation, she was able to walk with a cane. The postoperative scans showed some residual tumor ventrally, and a small pseudo-meningocele .