A 45-year-old Caucasian male presented to the emergency department with the chief complaint of "blurred vision and facial numbness." The patient recalled that a month ago he had been drinking with friends when he was either punched or struck in the back of the head by an unknown object. He lost consciousness but did not seek medical attention at the time, stating that he "felt fine." He remained symptom-free for the next 2 weeks, until he developed left scalp and left facial numbness, and noted that he could not clench his jaw tightly on that side.
Over the next week his symptoms had increased to include: right-sided scalp and forehead numbness, right-sided droopy eyelid, light sensitivity, double vision, difficulty walking in a straight line, bilateral pulsating tinnitus, and a throbbing occipital to retro-orbital headache. With increasing difficulty performing his job as an electrician, he presented to the ED seeking medical attention for the first time.
His past medical history was significant for alcoholism and an old frontal bone fracture suffered as a child. He was not on any medications and had no significant family history. Comprehensive review of systems was otherwise noncontributory.
On physical examination, the patient was wearing sunglasses, in no acute distress. Vital signs were unremarkable. He appeared clinically sober. His visual acuity was 20/30 in each eye, and there were bilateral orbital bruits. The patient declined fundoscopic examination because of significant photophobia. The right eye exhibited: ptosis, inability to adduct, limited elevation and depression. He also could not abduct his left eye. He had decreased sensation to soft touch over the entire forehead, nose, and left cheek, but his corneal reflexes were intact. There was no facial asymmetry. The rest of the cranial nerve examination was intact. Motor strength bilaterally did not reveal any focal neurological deficits, and deep tendon reflexes (DTRs) were 2/4 symmetrical in both the upper and lower extremities. The cerebellar examination was unremarkable except for abnormal tandem gait. Other systemic examinations were unremarkable except for bilateral carotid bruits.
The initial workup in the ED included a complete blood count (CBC), basic metabolic panel (BMP), coagulation studies [prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), international normalization ratio (INR)], and a urine toxicology screen. Each of these studies was without abnormality. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head without contrast was performed, showing a significantly dilated left ophthalmic vein, seen in Figure .
Subsequent brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the suspicion of a carotid artery-cavernous sinus fistula . Neurosurgery was consulted. The following day, cerebral angiography with coil embolization of the carotid fistula was performed without complication . The patient was discharged the next day. An 8-month follow-up in the neurosurgery clinic revealed complete resolution of his symptoms.