A 36-year-old, postpartum, white female became increasingly symptomatic with sharp, low abdominal pain with the completion of each urination and gross hematuria. She denied night sweats or fever and any history of urinary tract infection, trauma, instrumentation or other urological problems. An ultrasound study of the kidneys and the urinary bladder revealed a broad-based polypoid mass (2.4 × 2.3 × 2.2 cm), located in the right posterolateral wall of the bladder. The patient subsequently underwent a transurethral resection of the aforementioned lesion.
Histologic examination of the excised mass displayed infiltration of the bladder wall by an atypical spindle cell proliferation with histologic features of myofibroblasts arranged in sheets with focal myxoid areas , whereas the overlying transitional epithelium was normal . In particular, the tumor cells demonstrated prominent nucleoli and nuclear pleomorphism; numerous normal mitotic figures (5/10hpf) and a few abnormal ones were seen. By immunohistochemical evaluation, the cells were: (a) positive for vimentin and ALK-1 ; (b) focally positive for cytokeratins 8/18/19, muscle specific and smooth muscle actins, and desmin; (c) negative for S-100, CD34, c-Kit (CD117), h-caldesmon and MyoD1.
These histologic findings posed a particular diagnostic problem and yielded a differential diagnosis of pseudosarcomatous myofibroblastic lesion versus low-grade leiomyosarcoma of focally myxoid type. Although the possibility of the former was taken into account, the diagnosis of malignancy could not be avoided, given the nuclear pleomorphism, abnormal mitoses and the infiltrative nature of the lesion. Based on the absence of an in situ urothelial neoplasm and the immunophenotype, this was considered to be more likely a smooth muscle tumor than a spindle cell carcinoma. Consequently, further adequate local excision was recommended. At that point, a staging work-up, including a bone scan, abdominal/pelvic MRIs and an intravaginal ultrasound, disclosed no definite evidence of radiographically residual intravesicular tumor and no evidence of extension or metastasis. Due to negative staging work-up and considering the rarity and complexity of the case, the patient was referred for close clinical follow-up and cystoscopic re-evaluation of the bladder excision site for potential residual lesion.
After five months' interval since the initial transurethral resection, a repeat cystoscopy was performed and disclosed scar tissue without any obvious tumor growth; additional biopsies were obtained from the surgical site. Microscopy revealed no sarcoma, but residual foci that simulated a reactive process.
Given that a sarcoma of the bladder would have already shown significant proliferative activity and comparing the initial slides with the re-biopsy slides, we issued a new diagnosis; in particular, we inclined more towards a diagnosis of pseudosarcomatous myofibroblastic lesion instead of a sarcoma. Due to the atypical features encountered and the fact that the biological potential of this entity cannot be accurately assessed, a close follow-up was warranted. The patient did not receive any adjuvant treatment. She is currently free of disease without evidence of tumor recurrence or metastasis by 3-year follow-up.