DP, a 47-year-old male, presented to his primary care provider with 3 years of bilateral hip and knee pain. He had a significant history of spina bifida status-post serial neonatal casting, chronic neurogenic bladder, and severe lower extremity weakness and contractures. Initial knee radiographs revealed chronic deformities with significant joint space loss and functional knee effusions . Plain films of the pelvis suggested bilateral dysplasia with complete hip dislocation . Laboratory tests were within normal limits including a complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, and urinalysis. He was prescribed extended-release naltrexone for pain management and referred to our tertiary medical center.
His physical examination revealed significant lower extremity atrophy. Sensation was intact to the mid-anterior tibial crest bilaterally but diminished distally. Distal pulses were intact and brisk bilaterally. Bilateral knee evaluation demonstrated full extension to 10° of flexion with active and passive range of motion. Active range of motion of the hips was limited to 10° of internal rotation, 15° of external rotation, and 20° of abduction and adduction. The patient was unable to plantarflex, dorsiflex, invert, or evert the ankles. Despite these challenges, he managed ambulation with a severely antalgic gait. The patient also received neurosurgical workup. Non-contrast magnetic resonance imaging of the spine revealed an osseous defect of the dorsal sacrum with tethered and low-lying conus medullaris at S2. Following a multidisciplinary discussion, it was decided that right-knee surgery was appropriate, with no emergent spinal intervention necessary.
The patient was informed a total knee arthroplasty (TKA) would be challenging given his severe limitation in motion. In addition, given his minimal quadricep function, arthroplasty would have required a permanent drop-lock knee brace. Therefore, the decision was made to proceed with arthrodesis to give the patient a stable limb for ambulation.
Intraoperatively, the right knee had significant scarring and atrophied muscle. Vastus medialis fibers were dissected proximally down to the knee joint and onto the subcutaneous tibia. Soft tissue attachments from the capsule and collateral ligaments were removed to visualize the distal femur for plating. A 5° valgus distal femur cut was made. The proximal tibia was exposed, and the posterior capsule was dissected. A tibial osteotomy perpendicular to the tibial axis was made, creating two opposable metaphyseal osteotomized surfaces with cuts orthogonal to the mechanical axis.
A template was employed to contour an anterior proud 4.5 × 206 mm 11-hole locking plate (DePuy Synthes, Johnson and Johnson, Raynham, MA). The plate was inserted with two screws in the proximal segment and the articulated tensioning device was used to compress the osteotomy site. The construct was bolstered with four proximal and four distal screws. An additional 4.5 × 206 mm medial locking plate was contoured . The patient was made non-weight bearing for 8 weeks and discharged 4 days post-operatively after an uncomplicated hospital stay. At 3-month post-operatively, the patient had minimal pain and a considerably improved gait. Twelve months after the index procedure, he underwent uncomplicated instrumented arthrodesis of the left knee, with the same indication, operative technique, and methods of fixation .
Five months later, the patient underwent left total hip arthroplasty (THA) after failing conservative treatment. A posterolateral approach was used, revealing minimal abductor attachment to the proximal femur. The patient received a 50 mm G7 OsseoTi Acetabular Shell (Zimmer Biomet, Warsaw, IN), with four screws in multiple cup quadrants, placed at approximately 40° of inclination and 20° of anteversion. A G7 Dual Mobility CoCr liner (Zimmer Biomet) was impacted, and subsequent femoral components, including a size 15 Standard Offset Wagner Cone Prosthesis Stem (Zimmer Biomet) and a 28 mm, 3.5 mm offset Biolox Delta Femoral Head (Zimmer Biomet), were successfully implanted. A minor crack was observed at the proximal femoral neck during femoral component seeding, leading to the placement of a single Dall-Miles cable (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI) distal to the crack . The femoral stem remained stable, and the crack did not propagate. Six weeks of partial weight-bearing was advised due to limited acetabular bone stock. After 8 months, the patient underwent an uncomplicated right THA using a similar approach and implants except for a 28 mm, 0 mm offset Biolox Delta Femoral Head (Zimmer Biomet).
At the most recent follow-up, 3.3 years after the index knee arthrodesis and 2.1 years after the index THA, the patient uses a manual wheelchair at baseline. While walking independently remains a challenge, he demonstrates the ability to wheel himself without difficulty. The patient’s bed transfers are independent, and he can stand with bilateral assistance. Complex activities of daily living require caregiver assistance. The patient is happy with his bilateral procedures, noting significantly reduced pain.