A 30 years old gravida III para II (both by cesarean section and alive), whose gestational age from her last menstrual period was 6 weeks plus five days presented with the chief complaint of lower abdominal and back pain of one-week duration. Other than the pain, she had no vaginal bleeding, blurring of vision, tinnitus, vertigo, headache, nausea, or vomiting. She never had a history of sexually transmitted diseases or infertility treatment. Except for the two cesarean sections, she never had other types of abdominopelvic surgeries.
On physical examination, her vital sign was stable with Blood Pressure =125/82mmhg, Pulse Rate = 84bpm, Respiratory Rate = 18, and Temperature = 36.9°C.
On Abdominal examination; the abdomen was flat, moving with respiration, soft and non-tender. There was no sign of fluid collection (no fluid thrill or shifting dullness). Bimanual pelvic examination indicates that the uterine size was 8 weeks sized with left side adnexal mass. She also had left adnexal and cervical motion tenderness. For this, both abdominal and transvaginal ultrasound were performed showing an empty uterus, with normal endometrial echo and thickness . On the left side of the adnexa, there were two gestational sacs with their yolk sac and fetal embryo separated by a thick intertwin membrane . In both of the embryos, cardiac activity was seen on color Doppler flow . In addition, the following laboratory requests were performed with results of; Complete Blood Count; Hemoglobin = 13.5g/dl, White Blood Cell = 8.69 × 103 /ul, the platelet count was 236 × 103, and serum HCG value was 86,456.00. Urine analysis and sexually transmitted tests were unremarkable.
Using the above evidence, a diagnosis of unilateral live twin ectopic pregnancy was made and laparotomy was decided. After taking informed consent and preparing for laparotomy, she was taken to the operation theater. Under general anesthesia, the abdomen was entered through a Pfannenstiel incision (through the previous 2 cesarean section scars). Upon entry into the abdomen, there was dense adhesion between the abdominal wall and uterus, 3cm by 4cm intact left intact ampulla (tubal) ectopic pregnancy . After adhesion was released, left side salpingectomy was performed and the abdomen was closed in layers. Dissecting the resected tube shows two separate gestational sacs . The woman was discharged home after two smooth post-operative days in the hospital.