An 82-year-old woman presented with progressive pain in the upper back, costal area, and lateral region of the lower abdomen.
The pain developed approximately 2 mo ago. No traumatic causes were identified. Initially, the patient was able to walk with an aid. However, a few days later, the patient was unable to stand upright. As the symptoms worsened, she experienced constant pain, with no relief despite posture switching. Administration of tramadol did not ease the pain.
The patient was in good physical condition. She had been diagnosed with hypertension for many years; however, hypotensive drugs had not been prescribed for a long time. She had no history of diabetes, heart disease, tumors, or surgery.
The patient had no relevant family history, particularly of osteoporotic vertebral compressed fractures.
Physical examination revealed extensive pain in the chest and back region, with limited spinal movement. Sharp tenderness and pain on percussion were detected in the spinous processes at T8 and T9. Hyperalgesia was noted in the bilateral costal and lateral lower abdominal regions. The Visual Analog Scale (VAS) score was 9 for each region. No radiating pain was observed in the lower limbs. Moreover, the sensation and muscle force were normal. The Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) was 82.5% on admission.
Preoperative laboratory examinations such as routine blood tests, liver function, kidney function, and coagulation function did not indicate significant contraindications.
Radiographs revealed that the T8, T9, and T11 vertebrae were dramatically flattened . The vertebral compression rate was > 90% at T11. Computed tomography revealed the “vacuum cleft sign” on horizontal sections of the vertebrae [,]. Sagittal T1-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) images revealed bone marrow replacement with asymmetrical low signal intensities . Sagittal T2-weighted MR images showed mixed signal intensity within the vertebral body and a linear area of hyperintensity surrounded by hypointensities (double-line sign) [,]. Bone mineral density assessment revealed a T-value of -3.0 in L3.