An 88-year-old woman was diagnosed with IgG lambda MM in April 2019. Her past medical history included type 2 diabetes, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and osteopenia, and she had a history of smoking (16 years). She presented with pathological tibial and humeral fractures. Imaging showed a permeative lytic lesion in the left tibia coupled with cortical disruption (a). It also showed a displaced left humeral fracture (b) along with multiple lytic lesions and compression fractures in the spine. Work-up showed mild macrocytic anemia (Hb 109 g/L, mean corpuscular volume 106 femtoliters), renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance 39 mL/min), and markedly elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 105 mm/h. MP level was 63.5 g/L, IgG lambda was present, FLC lambda was 2,396 mg/L (normal range 3.30–19.40 mg/L), undetectable FLC kappa (normal range 3.30–19.40 mg/L), non-elevated calcium levels. Bone marrow examination showed 40% neoplastic plasma cells in the bone marrow (a), positive for CD138 (b), CD 45/38/81/56, with lambda light chain restriction (c) and negative for CD 20/19/79b/PAX-5. She had R-ISS stage II. FISH was negative for translocation t(4;14), and no mutations in p53 or 17p deletion were found. Her previous therapy is shown in . In May 2023, she was getting third-line therapy with pomalidomide, cyclophosphamide, dexamethasone (PCd). She was overall in good health, tolerating anti-myeloma therapy well.
During her routine clinical visit prior to cycle 20 of PCd, she presented with an asymptomatic mass in her left neck that was round, flexible, 7 cm in diameter, with a rubbery consistence, and was more consistent with lymphadenopathy. At that time, myeloma work-up showed no measurable MP, and normal FLC and repeated skeletal surveys were unremarkable. Secondary malignancy (SM), lymphoma based on clinical presentation, was suspected, and the patient had a diagnostic core biopsy. It showed, however, features compatible with plasma cell neoplasm. Microscopic examination showed atypical plasmacytoid cells, involving soft tissue (a). Immunohistochemical stains showed positivity for CD138 (b), CD 45/38/81/56, and FLC lambda restriction (c). Cells were negative for CD 20/19/79 and EBV. KI-67 stained approximately 90% of the cells. Serum electrophoresis was normal with no MP detectable, and FLC kappa and lambda were 18.8 and 26.0 mg/L, respectively. Repeated skeletal surveys were unremarkable. Thus, the localized relapse was non-secretory, consistent with extramedullary plasmacytoma. She declined PET. She was treated with localized palliative radiotherapy to the left neck for a total dose of 2,000 cGy in 5 fractions over 1 week and continued on PCd. Upon examination in August 2023, the mass had completely resolved with no evidence of residual tumor. Four months post-radiation, she remains in complete biochemical and clinical remission, continued on the same line of therapy. Unfortunately, the patient progressed 6 months after, with re-appearance of MP.
Recently, we had another patient with relapsed refractory myeloma who presented with localized non-secretory relapse as a pelvic plasmacytoma that was confirmed to be plasma cell neoplasm on biopsy. PET scans showed no other sites of disease. This patient was also on third-line therapy with isatuximab/carfilzomib/dexamethasone. Since the relapse was isolated plasmacytoma, it was treated with localized radiotherapy, similar to the patient described above. After a total dose of 2,000 cGy in 5 fractions over 1 week, the tumor resolved completely. There was no detectable MP or increase in FLCs during the time of relapse. The patient continued the same line of anti-myeloma therapy and remained in clinical and biochemical remission for 3 months.