The patient was a 35-year-old woman with a confirmed diagnosis of high-grade B-cell lymphoma under rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP) and cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, high-dose methotrexate/ifosfamide, etoposide, and high-dose cytarabine (CODOX-M/IVAC) regimens. In the final phase of chemotherapy, an infectious disease consultation was requested because of fever (axillary temperature, 38.9°C) and neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count, 200 cell/mL).
On the physical examination, the patient’s left eyelid was swollen and erythematous. She also had headaches and blurred vision .
Since opportunistic infections were highly probable, chemotherapy was immediately stopped, and broad-spectrum antibiotics, including meropenem (2 g q8h), vancomycin (1 g q12h), and LAMB (300 mg/daily), were prescribed. In addition, paranasal sinus (PNS) CT scan and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were requested. The PNS CT scan showed mucosal thickening in both maxillary sinuses . The brain MRI images revealed an intracranial lesion (about 20×20 mm) in the left frontal cortex (MRI-T2 flair view) . Her laboratory tests revealed C-reactive protein (CRP): +++, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): 83 mm/h, galactomannan: 0.3 and blood cultures: negative.
The findings were compatible with ROCM; accordingly, sinus endoscopic biopsy and debridement was carried out, and the specimens were sent to the laboratory. Ribbon-like hyphae, compatible with mucormycosis, were reported in the histopathological examination . Considering the extent of ROCM, the patient was a candidate for enucleation of the left eye, orbital decompression, and sinocerebral debridement. Nevertheless, the patient refused eye enucleation and craniotomy. Therefore, multiple endoscopic sinus debridement procedures were carried out, and posaconazole (200 mg /Q 6 hours) was added to LAMB as a combination antifungal treatment.
During the third week of combination therapy, there was a remarkable improvement in the patient’s clinical signs and symptoms. Also, in the follow-up brain MRI images, the frontal lobe lesion was completely resolved . The combination antifungal therapy continued for four weeks, and the patient was discharged in the twelfth week. In the weekly follow-ups, no relapse in ROCM was found during the first three months of discharge. However, after three months, the patient died because of relapse in hematologic disease and bleeding due to severe thrombocytopenia.