An otherwise healthy, 92-year-old woman was seen for the evaluation and treatment of a “long-standing” nodular lesion on the tip of her nose. The lesion was characterized as a solitary, 5 mm, smooth, nodular, pearly tumor with telangiectasia . Dermoscopy confirmed the diagnosis of nodular BCC because of the presence of telangiectasia and arborizing vessels . The patient was completely asymptomatic. Surgical excision with 5 mm safety margins was performed. The wound healed by secondary intention with daily topical application of a pirfenidone gel (Kitoscell-Q, Cell Therapy and Technology, S.A. de C.V., Mexico). Histopathologic examination revealed a neoformation arising from the epidermis proliferating into the papillary and reticular dermis. It was constituted by an epithelial tumor with basaloid-appearing cells disposed in palisade at the periphery of the tumor nests. The neoplastic cells had large hyperchromatic nuclei with mitosis and individual cellular necrosis. The tumoral nests were surrounded by a lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate and a fibromyxoid stroma with stromal retraction artifact in certain areas. The tumor extended into the deep margins where tumoral nests were smaller, with angular shapes and interspersed by a more fibrous stroma. Histology confirmed the diagnosis of infiltrating nodular BCC and remains of tumoral cells within the wound bed and deep margins . Six weeks after the incomplete surgical excision, the esthetic result was acceptable . However, dermoscopy confirmed the persistence of the tumor characterized by a large arborizing vessel . The patient and her family members denied a second surgical intervention and/or radiotherapy. For this reason and due to the ease of at-home application, daily topical treatment with 5% imiquimod cream for 8 weeks was started . Follow-up was performed every 3 weeks. Clinically and dermoscopically the patient revealed an appropriate response to the topical treatment characterized mainly by erythema and mild ulceration . Four weeks after the end of treatment, the clinical esthetic result was acceptable . At 12 months after the end of treatment dermoscopy confirmed the absence of any signs of recurrence . The patient was last seen 23 months after the end of treatment without any signs of recurrence and dermoscopy confirmed the eradication residual disease . All procedures followed were in accordance with the ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation (institutional and national) and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1964, as revised in 2013. Informed consent was obtained from all patients for being included in the study.