The patient as a novel case is a 2.6-year-old Chinese girl and is the only child of the family. She was born to healthy parents who are non-consanguineous. Her father has single palmer creases in both hands. During pregnancy, the mother had a history of upper respiratory tract infection in the first month. Though feeling less fetal movement, she had no prenatal examination. She was born at 41+2 weeks (weight, 2.7 kg), with oligohydramnios, by caesarean section due to social factors. The Apgar scores were normal. The patient was referred to our hospital at the age of 2.6 years because of development delay. At 1 year of age she was able to recognize people. She could sit at 1.5 years of age. She still could not climb and stand now. Expressive language was markedly delayed with first word at 2.5 years. Thought she is able to make involuntary sound of only 2 words (mama, papa) now, her language’s comprehension skills are poor. She has chronic constipation after birth, about once every 10 days, without feeding difficulty and vomiting.
Clinical examination at admission revealed a weight of 7 kg (< 3th centile), a length of 78 cm (< 3th centile) and a head circumference of 45.5 cm (< 3th centile), indicating obvious physical retardation. Her most distinctive craniofacial features included slight raising eyebrow’s eyes (slight ptosis with compensatory elevated eyebrows), small eyes, slightly swollen upper eyelids, hypertelorism, sparseness of the whole eyebrows and hair, low nasal bridge, small nose, shallow philtrum, small and open mouth, thin upper lip, high arched palate, intermittent sparse teeth, micrognathia, low-set ears, protruding ears, circular arc helix, dysplasia of auricle, crus of helix and earlobe, no antihelix and crus of antihelix, flat forehead and face, and scaphocephaly . Besides, she never presented with prominent chin, uplifted earlobes, rounded nasal tip, prominent columella, medial flaring of the eyebrows, large eyebrows, sparse eyebrows in the middle, nystagmus, strabismus, and epicanthal folds of craniofacial features of classical MWS. Also, no significant abnormalities on vision, hearing, muscular tension, navel and four extremities including fingernails and toenails were noticed. The patient was easily to be irritated and prone to crying. However, she had no behavior of stereotype, frequent smiling and seizure. The patient has bilateral indirect inguinal hernia. Electroencephalogram (EEG) and B-ultrasound of liver, gallbladder, spleen, pancreas and kidney were normal. Doppler echocardiogram revealed an atrial septal defect (oval fossa type). Abdominal radiology of barium enema showed dolichosigmoid (Supplemental Fig. a). Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) not only showed that the volume of frontal lobe was small but also showed that encephalomalacia was around the left ventricle and delayed myelination was in the posterior horn of both lateral ventricles (Supplemental Fig. b).
We analyzed clinical data and collected DNA samples from the child and her clinically unaffected parents. The present study was approved by the Ethics Committees of Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou Medical University (approval no. 20,101,124). Written informed consent and permission have been obtained from the parents of the patient for publication of the study and accompanying images.
We used xGen Exome Research Panel v1.0 kit (Integrated DNA Technologies, Skokie, Illinois, USA) for next‑generation sequencing (NGS) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Chromosomal copy-number variations (CNVs) were tested based on NGS by Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA v.0.6.2). Human reference genome used was from GRCH37/hg19. The results of CNVs were further verified by using fluorescence quantitative PCR (fq-PCR). Four pairs of primers available on request were designed to amplify specific gene sequences including the NCKAP5, LRP1B, KCNJ3, ZEB2 genes, respectively. The first three genes lie in the proximal, central and distal ends of the region of the variant chromosome, respectively. In the region, important ZEB2 gene was also amplified. A normal copy number DNA sample as a control and test samples for fq-PCR (7300Plus Real-Time PCR System) were detected by the UltraSYBR Mixture (High ROX). Data analysis of PCR products was performed by Real-Time PCR Software V2.4. Gene copy numbers were assessed by the ΔΔCt method according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. We present a literature review of all cases with detailed clinical data of the contiguous gene gain syndrome including the entire ZEB2.
A novel de novo 22.16 Mb duplication at 2q21.2-q24.1 including the striking ZEB2 and other 41 genes in OMIM-listed database, (133,460,001- 155,620,000) x3, was identified by NGS-based detection of CNVs (Supplemental Tables , Supplemental Fig. ). The results of CNV have been further validated using fq-PCR (Supplemental Fig. ). This CNV was not found in her parents. Study of the family constellation indicated that the CNV arose de novo.
The distinctive craniofacial features of our patient and previously reported cases [, ] with the contiguous gene gain syndrome including entire ZEB2 are raising eyebrow’s eyes, small eyes, slightly swollen upper eyelids, hypertelorism, sparseness of the whole eyebrows, low nasal bridge, small nose, shallow philtrum, small mouth, thin upper lip, micrognathia, low-set ears, flat forehead and face, and scaphocephaly. However, the characteristic craniofacial features of MWS are not found in the contiguous gene gain syndrome including entire ZEB2. We first proposed these similar craniofacial features, through which the disease can be better diagnosed. In addition, these patients with the contiguous gene gain syndrome including entire ZEB2 may have neurodevelopment retardation (3/3), congenital heart diseases (3/3), constipation (2/3), dental anomalies (2/3), behavioral problems (2/3), inguinal hernia (1/3), and urogenital anomalies (1/3), which are also common features in MWS patients. Additional remarkable physical retardation and ear deformity (protruding ears) in our case were reported in the syndrome. Major clinical features in two previously reported individuals and our case with the contiguous gene gain syndrome including entire ZEB2 by a cytogenetic diagnosis are listed in Table .
Contiguous gene gain syndrome including entire ZEB2 characterized with similar multiple congenital anomalies of MWS and the distinctive craniofacial features is mainly caused by large 2q22 repeats including ZEB2 leading to dominant singe ZEB2 gene gain mutation, which is recommended to be named “Liu-Liang-Chung” syndrome. We diagnose this novel syndrome to distinguish it from MWS.