A 94-year-old Asian woman presented to our hospital for dyspnoea and wet cough. She also had abdominal pain and bloody stools. She was admitted to our hospital with a diagnosis of heart failure and sigmoid colon ulceration (day 1).
Her respiratory distress started during the night 1 d before presentation. It improved after 1 h and was still mild over the next morning and evening hours. However, 22 h later, her symptom got worse again during the night.
The patient had no chronic illnesses such as hypertension, diabetes, or asthma, and no history of cancer. She was a non-smoker and did not habitually drink alcohol. She had a well-balanced diet and lived a healthy lifestyle.
There was no specific history.
The patient was 148 cm tall, weighed 42 kg, and her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 111/43 mmHg; pulse 90/min; respiratory rate 14/min; and SpO2 98% (room air). On chest auscultation, her heart rhythm was regular and no heart murmur was found. However, auscultation of respiratory sounds found wheezing. Her abdomen was flat and soft and abdominal auscultation found neither increased nor decreased intestinal peristalsis. There was no rebound tenderness or abdominal guarding. However, there was intermittent and spontaneous abdominal pain and bloody stools. Her eyelid conjunctiva did not show jaundice or pallor. Her oral and nasal cavities and skin surfaces showed no abnormal findings. Her upper limbs showed no abnormalities. However, her lower extremities showed indurated oedema.
On day 1, her rapid antigen tests using a throat swab were negative for influenza A and B and COVID-19. Her electrocardiogram (ECG) showed no abnormalities on admission and on loss of consciousness on day 108. In her blood analyses, there were no abnormalities in the electrolyte, glucose, lipid, liver function, and renal function parameters. The antinuclear antibody (ANA) titre at 1:40 serum dilution was positive but staining patterns at 1:40 serum dilution was negative for homogeneous, discrete speckled, speckled, nucleolar, and peripheral staining. Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) and HIV tests were negative. On day 32, the patient’s IgE level was slightly high at 237 IU/mL (normal: 27.54–138.34), but her IgG, IgA, and IgM levels were normal. Blood analyses also showed that eosinophils and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels were high. The highest values for each were 1760/mm3 on day 26 for eosinophils and 738.1 pg/mL on day 1 for BNP . The blood and sputum taken on day 26 were negative on culture for bacteria or fungi and no parasites were found. However, on day 109, blood culture was positive for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis, and the β-D-glucan level was high (316.0 pg/mL). On day 128, blood tests showed normal levels of ammonia. The patient’s post-consciousness EEG showed spikes and waves in Fp1, F1, C3, P3, and O1 . Her echocardiogram showed no thrombi in the atria or ventricles.
Non-contrast computed tomography imaging of the patient’s chest showed bilateral pleural effusions and infiltrative shadows . Her gastrointestinal endoscopy showed multiple ulcers in the sigmoid colon . Histopathological examination showed colonic gland prolapse, vitrification of the stroma, and an infiltration of inflammatory cells, but no evidence of malignant transformation. Non-contrast magnetic resonance imaging of the patient’s head showed extensive periventricular hyperintensity .