Our 55-year-old Caucasian male patient presented with a two-month history of gastrointestinal symptoms, including severe dyspepsia, vomiting, and ‘black stool.’ At that time, it was not clear whether our patient’s weight loss (14kg), high fever (>38.5°C), and drenching night sweats were general symptoms or whether they were the result of an undiagnosed gastrointestinal tract disorder. The first histopathological confirmation of lymphoma came from a gastric biopsy sample that confirmed CD20-positive DLBCL with a high proliferation fraction (expressed by Ki67 immunohistochemical stain, which was positive in 90% of the cells). Furthermore, the cells were positive for MUM1 and negative for CD5 by immunohistochemistry. Our patient was referred from primary care to a hematologist following analysis of the gastric biopsy sample. By the time imaging studies were arranged (one week), generalized lymphadenopathy was evident, including a cervical lymph node that was nearly 8cm in diameter. Positron emission and computed tomography (PET-CT) imaging demonstrated Ann Arbor stage IVB with enlarged submandibular, cervical, and mediastinal lymph nodes; lung and spleen nodules (172mm); and gastric infiltration. At the beginning of therapy, our patient had a high IPI score of 4.
In the first year of therapy (year 1), our patient was treated with standard R-CHOP chemotherapy from December of year 1 through May of year 2. A good clinical response was confirmed on CT imaging performed after cycles four and eight (treatment schema, Figure ). Three months after completing first-line therapy, in August of year 2, a complete response (CR) status was further confirmed by a PET-CT scan that revealed cervical lymph nodes (<20mm in the long axis), with a standard uptake value (SUV) of 2.1, which was below mediastinal blood pool structure (MBPS) and liver maximum SUVs (SUVmax) and one 5mm nodule in the fifth segment of his left lung.
Our patient’s quality of life during first-line treatment was rather good; symptoms disappeared quickly. For the most part, he participated in normal daily activities. Treatment was conducted primarily in an outpatient setting.
In December of year 2, CT assessment suggested possible progression in cervical lymphadenopathy; early relapse was eventually confirmed by histopathology seven months after completion of the first-line therapy. As a second line of therapy, our patient received a regimen of rituximab, etoposide, methylprednisolone, cisplatin, and cytarabine (R-ESHAP) from March of year 3 to May of year 3.
A second CR was further consolidated by Z-BEAM-conditioned (Y90-labeled ibritumomab tiuxetan (Zevalin®, Spectrum Pharmaceuticals, Henderson, Nevada, USA) combined with the carmustine, etoposide, cytarabine, and melphalan regimen (BEAM)) ASCT. An initial dose of rituximab in June of year 3 was followed a week later by a second rituximab dose plus Y90-labeled ibritumomab tiuxetan and BEAM-conditioned ASCT 11 days after initiating therapy. Our patient was released from the hospital in July of year 3, with good hematopoietic reconstitution and no complications.At a three-month follow-up visit in October of year 3, our patient presented with no symptoms or abnormalities on physical examination. However, a small lesion was detected by PET-CT in his sternum (12mm in diameter, SUVmax 22.2, MBPS 3.2, liver SUVmax 3.8). A relapse of his DLBCL with high proliferation fraction was confirmed in material from an urgent partial sternectomy . Despite this prompt procedure performed by thoracic surgeons, the disease progressed in the following months, as multiple bone lesions were found on subsequent PET imaging.
Our patient’s quality of life during second-line treatment and ASCT was poor. There were extensive inpatient periods and side effects from the intensive chemotherapy. Furthermore, his survival concerns caused great stress and discomfort.
In December of year 3, our patient started third-line, gemcitabine-based chemotherapy for debulking . He received gemcitabine with cisplatin, rituximab, and prednisone. This was followed by gemcitabine every two weeks and rituximab every four weeks.
Beginning in January of year 4, our patient began to present unspecified, transient symptoms suggestive of central nervous system (CNS) involvement: headaches and signs of VII cranial nerve paralysis. Although this conclusion could not be definitively diagnosed by lumbar puncture with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cytology and repeated imaging studies (CT and magnetic resonance imaging), intrathecal liposomal cytarabine was given as CNS prophylaxis. In April of year 4, our patient presented with diplopia and right-side ptosis. CT scans demonstrated a left orbit tumor that infiltrated his frontal sinus. A neurological examination and CSF cytology were otherwise normal. Our patient received intravenous steroids and liposomal cytarabine, followed by involved-field radiotherapy (IFRT) of the orbit in April of year 4 and prophylactic radiotherapy of the CNS in May of year 4 . The diplopia and ptosis resolved completely, but he developed bone pain in different locations. This was addressed by palliative IFRT in April of year 4.
During this period of treatment, our patient’s quality of life remained poor. He was always either home-bound or hospitalized and was constantly undergoing medical procedures, including lumbar puncture. He experienced pain and the loss of some neurological function, and continued to be in great stress with survival fears.
Our patient remained on the rituximab therapy (375mg/m2 every four weeks) initiated during third-line treatment. In May of year 4, he started fourth-line treatment with lenalidomide in addition to rituximab . In June of year 4, he underwent a second round of palliative radiotherapy for bone lesions in locations corresponding with bone pain .In September of year 4, PET-CT indicated a partial response; only two bone lesions were found (humeral end of his right clavicle: 17×23mm, SUVmax 7.1; distal and proximal ends of his right tibia: SUV 4.9; MBPS 3.5, liver SUVmax 4.2). Our patient remained free of symptoms until March of year 5, when PET-CT revealed lesions of increased SUV in his pelvis, bilateral femur and tibia, left ankle, and the humeral end of his right clavicle; SUVmax of these lesions was up to 4.5, MBPS 2.8. An osteolytic lesion in his T12 vertebra was also described. Palliative radiotherapy given in April and June of year 5 was again successful. His pain resolved, and in a PET-CT assessment in August of year 5, no new skeletal lesions were described. The existing lesions were not metabolically active (lesions in his right femur, SUVmax 2.1; left femur, 1.8; bilateral tibias, 1.7 (MBPS 1.9, liver SUVmax 3.2)). The lenalidomide-plus-rituximab combination was continued until February of year 6, when treatment was halted for administrative reasons.
Six weeks after stopping lenalidomide-plus-rituximab therapy, our patient developed palpable lymphadenopathy of 5 to 10mm on his neck, prompting initiation of lenalidomide monotherapy in March of year 6, which has continued to date. Due to grade 3 neutropenia as classified by the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (version 4.0) , the lenalidomide dose was reduced from 25 to 10mg. Since the start of lenalidomide monotherapy, our patient has not experienced any progression, with a negative PET-CT in March of year 7, and has not experienced any bone pain or lesions.
Hematologic adverse events during lenalidomide-based treatment were manageable and comprised transient thrombocytopenia (platelets 39,000 to 80,000/μL, no treatment required), and leuko- and neutropenia (white blood cells <1000/μL, polymorphonuclear cells <500; managed with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor support). The cytopenia was exacerbated during the concomitant palliative radiotherapy. Our patient developed two infections: sinusitis in March of year 5, which was treated with amoxicillin, and herpes (varicella zoster virus infection limited to the skin of his left cheek, with severe neuralgia) from July to October of year 5, which was treated with acyclovir and analgesics.
During treatment with lenalidomide plus rituximab and then later on lenalidomide monotherapy, our patient’s quality of life and performance status remained surprisingly high (World Health Organization grade 0, Karnofsky score 100%) and much improved compared with his quality of life and performance status during previous therapies. Inpatient hospitalization was not required, all procedures were performed in a day clinic, and he returned to full-time work and engaged in physical activities.