A 33-year-old Chinese female patient (G1P1) was admitted to our hospital for abdominal discomfort, pelvic pain, and palpable abdominal masses in January 2018.
The patient felt intermittent abdominal discomfort 8 mo ago. At that time, there were no other discomforts including abdominal pain or bloating, so she did not pay much attention. However, in the past 4 mo, she felt pelvic pain and touched a lower abdominal mass. The size of the mass slowly increased, and the symptoms of abdominal discomfort and pelvic pain became more and more serious.
The past medical history was notable for four surgeries because of UL without morcellation from 2007 to 2015. The details are summarized in Table .
The patient denied any family history of UL or LPD and previous oral contraceptive (OC) use.
On abdominal examination, an 8 cm × 8 cm fist-sized palpable right lower-quadrant near midline anterior abdomen mass was observed. There was no tenderness or rebound tenderness.
Laboratory testing including tumor markers, sex hormones, and other tests yielded normal results. The pathology of the core-needle biopsy showed a spindle-shaped smooth-muscle cell tumor with features of leiomyoma without necrosis and atypia. Immunohistochemistry staining was positive for Caldesmon, smooth-muscle actin (SMA), Desmin, estrogen receptors (ERs), and progesterone receptors (PRs) but negative for SOX-10, and CD117 , and the Ki-67 index was 5%.
Whole exon sequencing of 120 cancer-related genes by next-generation sequencing for determining the possibility of malignant transformation was also performed. However, no germline variants were found.
Computed tomography confirmed multiple nodules involving the abdominal wall and pelvic cavity ranging from 3-7 cm in diameter, in which the largest nodule was approximately 78 mm × 66 mm × 40 mm. No distant metastasis or intravenous proliferation was found .
Caldesmon, SMA, and Desmin are three markers characteristically found in smooth muscle cells, which can distinguish UL or leiomyosarcoma. SOX-10 expression can be found in myoepithelial neoplasms. CD117 is typically positive in gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST). These markers helped eliminate potential differential diagnoses and determine the diagnosis of leiomyomatosis. No distant metastasis or intravenous proliferation excluded the diagnosis of BML and IVL.