Awareness of skin nodules for 4 years; thoracalgia and shortness of breath for 2 years.
A 43-year-old male presented with a left sided 2 cm × 2 cm, hard arm swelling without itching or pain . There were no other skin lesions or lymphadenopathy or significant organomegaly. The local lesion was excised. On histopathology, a diagnosis of ALK-negative PC-ALCL was made . This patient then underwent observation for recurrence.
Three months later, two subcutaneous hard nodules recurred at the same spot on the left arm. They were 1 cm × 2 cm and 0.5 cm × 1 cm in dimensions. The skin lesions were confirmed as relapsed lymphoma with muscle layer infiltration on histopathology . We diagnosed this new disease entity as systemic ALK-negative ALCL since the muscle was involved, although bone marrow biopsy and aspirate and whole-body CT scan were normal. The patient underwent treatment with six cycles of multiagent chemotherapy, CHOP (cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m2, theprubicin 30 mg/m2, vindesine 3 mg/m2, prednisone 100 mg). He refused treatment with brentuximab and auto-ASCT, and instead chose follow-up.
Two years later, this patient suffered from chest pain, shortness of breath, cough, and night sweats.
The patient reported no other medical history, such as hypertension and diabetes.
The patient denied any personal and family history of illness.
The patient’s height was 189 cm and his weight was 103 kg. He was clear-headed and energetic, and had no swelling of superficial lymph nodes. He had a 1 cm × 1 cm subcutaneous nodule on his back with clear border. He had tenderness in the mid-sternum and bilateral anterior chest wall, clear breath sounds in both lungs, uniform cardiac rhythm, and no obvious murmurs in the apical area. The abdomen was flat and soft, without tenderness and rebound pain, and the liver and spleen were not palpable below the costal margin. Murphy’s sign was negative. There was no percussion pain in bilateral kidney area and no tenderness in bilateral ureter running area. There was no edema in both lower limbs. Neurological tests were negative.
The patient had an increased lactic dehydrogenase of 255 U/L (upper limit: 250 U/L). Blood tests, hepatic function tests, and other biochemical tests were within normal limits.
Positron emission tomography/computed tomography scan revealed the subcutaneous nodule on the back as tumor invasion since there was higher 18F-flurodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) uptake activity, and also involvement of liver, bone, right lung, and widespread lymph nodes .