An 8-month-old male infant, Portuguese of gypsy ethnic origin, who presented with marked failure to thrive from birth, mild jaundice of the skin and splenomegaly (greatest longitudinal diameter was 87 mm at 7 months). An initial differential diagnosis was made to distinguish between hemoglobinopathies and other types of anemia (deficiency anemia, hemolytic anemia, erythroblastopenia). The clinical signs were compatible with severe microcytic anemia, requiring bi-monthly blood transfusions from the time of diagnosis. Admission to hospital was needed on several occasions due to infectious episodes (gastroenteritis due to Salmonella, Parvovirus B19 seroconversion) and for the implantation of an intravenous (IV) reservoir because of the transfusion requirements.
Blood parameters were analyzed with the COULTER LH 780 Series (Beckman), a hematology analyzer used to count and determine the size of blood cells. Hemoglobin analysis and the quantification of hemoglobin (Hb) A2 and Hb F were performed using Minicap Flex Piercing (Sebia) capillary electrophoresis.
The analysis of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), taken from peripheral blood with ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), was performed using proteolytic digestion followed by purification and ethanol precipitation. Next, spectrophotometry was applied to quantify the obtained DNA. All coding exons and adjacent intronic regions of the HBB gene (hemoglobin beta globin gene) as well as the CACC-box (cytosine-adenine-cytosine-cytosine-box) in the proximal promoter region and 5′UTR and 3′UTR regions were amplified using PCR (polymerase chain reaction).
In the testing for α-thalassemia, hybridization of the DNA that was obtained was performed using specific probes that are complementary to chromosomal region 16 p13.3, which contains the HBA (hemoglobin alpha globin) gene cluster. Subsequently PCR amplification of the genes located in the HBA gene cluster was performed using the MLPA (multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification) technique.
Lastly, sequencing of both strands of the amplified fragments was performed and the sequences were visualized by capillary electrophoresis using the Applied Biosystems© 3500 Dx Genetic Analyzer.
Labgenetics (Laboratorio de Genética Clínica S.L.) performed the genetic testing to diagnose α- and β-thalassemia.
The patient’s laboratory findings when he was 8 months old were as follows: microcytic anemia without other laboratory abnormalities, with Hb 6.2 g/dL, hematocrit (Hct) 20 %, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 74.40 fL, mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) 22.90 pg, without iron deficiency. HbA2 1.7 %, HbF 90.0 % (see Fig. ). Biochemical values revealed: lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 49 mg/dL, total bilirubin (TBIL) 1.40 mg/dL, direct bilirubin (DBIL) 0.31 mg/dL and reticulocytosis (4.14 %) (see Table ).
The β-thalassemia gene analysis found homozygous mutation IVS-I-110 (G>A), (c.93-21G>A), in intron 1 of the HBB gene and a non-pathogenic sequence variant [SNP (Single nucleotide polimorfism) Rs1609812], with heterozygous mutation IVS-II-666 (T>C) in intron 2 of the HBB gene.
Mutation IVS-I-110 (G>A), (c.93-21G>A), in intron 1 of the HBB gene can cause protein splicing defects, leading to aberrant mRNA (ribonucleic acid) and thus result in the synthesis of a non-functional protein. The presence of this homozygous mutation implies a diagnosis of β-thalassemia major. The presence of α gene triplication in heterozygosis has no effect on the synthesis of α globin chains in hemoglobin and subjects are usually clinically asymptomatic. However, the combination of a triplicated α-globin gene together with heterozygous β-thalassemia may produce a thalassemia intermedia phenotype, as it increases the imbalance between the α- and β-globin chains [, ].
At the age of 2 years the child required monthly transfusions and had marked failure to thrive (weight and height below P3, head circumference P10), splenomegaly and required chelation therapy with Deferasirox EXJADE® (deferasirox) (10 mg/kg/day) as maintained iron overload was found. The study of the whole family is normally done routinely.
The subject had two twin brothers (fraternal twins) aged 5 years, who were clinically asymptomatic at the time the analysis of the index case was performed (see Fig. , the family gave its consent to carrying out the family tree as part of routine study). Laboratory tests revealed they had mild microcytic anemia (Hb 9.3–10.8 g/dL, Hct 29.8–34.9 %, MCV 58.80 fL, MCH 18.20–22.90 pg) (see Table ; Fig. b). Gene testing in both revealed that they had heterozygous mutation IVS-I-110 (G>A), (c.93-21G>A), in intron 1 of the HBB gene and were homozygous for α-gene triplication (αααanti 3.7/αααanti 3.7).
The heterozygous mutation IVS-I-110 (G>A), (c.93-21G>A), in intron 1 of the HBB gene can result in the synthesis of a non-functional aberrant protein. This nucleotide change has been described as a mutation associated with the development of β-thalassemia. The homozygous α-gene triplication (αααanti 3.7/αααanti 3.7) causes an increase in the synthesis of the α-globin chain of hemoglobin, leading to a slight increase in the level of hemoglobin in the blood and resulting in an imbalance in α- and β-chain hemoglobin synthesis. The combination of a homozygous or heterozygous triplicated α-globin gene together with heterozygous β-thalassemia would produce a thalassemia intermedia phenotype, as the imbalance between the α- and β-globin chains would increase [, ].
The subject also had a 9-year-old sister (see Fig. ) with thalassemia minor who was clinically asymptomatic, she had a microcytic anemia without other laboratory abnormalities (Hb 10.0 g/dL, Hct 31.9 %, MCV 58.0 fL, MCH 18.30 pg, HbA2 5.5 %, HbF 2.6 %, HbA 91.9) (see Table ; Fig. a), and she had at least a triplicated alpha globin gene in heterozygosis. The mother was diagnosed with thalassemia minor and she also presented with severe iron deficiency because of menorrhagia that often needed to be treated with intravenous iron (Hb 8.5 g/dL, Hct 27.5, MCV 68.8 fL, MCH 21.30 pg, HbA2 4.9 % and HbF 1.4 %) (see Table ; Fig. a, b). The genetic study revealed heterozygosity for the IVS-I-110 (G>A) (c.93-21G>A) mutation in intron 1 of the HBB gene and heterozygosity for alpha-gene triplication (ααα3.7/αα).
The father was clinically asymptomatic and laboratory tests showed he had mild microcytic anemia (Hb 11.2 g/dL, Hct 35.9 %, MCV 60.90 fL, MCH 19 pg) (see Table ; Fig. a). He had heterozygosity for the IVS-I-110 (G>A) (c.93-21G>A) mutation in intron 1 of the HBB gene and was homozygous for alpha-gene triplication (ααα3.7/ααα3.7). Blood samples were taken from parents and sibilings as a part of routine care of patient. Parents signed informed consent for molecular genetic studies for themselves and their children.