A 43-year-old Japanese woman with a tumor-bearing but functional single left kidney presented at our hospital in July 2012. Her past history and family history were unremarkable in the present context. CT and MRI revealed a cT1aN0M0 RCC with maximum scores in preoperative aspects, anatomical Preoperative Aspects and Dimensions Used for an Anatomical (PADUA) criteria, and the radius exophytic/endophytic nearness anterior/posterior location (RENAL) criteria used to grade renal neoplasms . The tumor was embedded in the upper central region of the kidney. Because she had only a single functioning kidney, only partial nephrectomy was appropriate. However, the tumor location suggested the possibility of severe complications even after partial nephrectomy. We therefore commenced treatment with sunitinib as neoadjuvant therapy, and used MRI to monitor her condition.
The MRI modalities employed ECG-gated, respiration-compensated, time-resolved respiratory-gated three-dimensional (3D) phase-contrast (PC) MRI featuring PC-VIPR (phase-contrast vastly undersampled isotropic projection reconstruction) . 3D PC VIPR was performed using a 3.0 Tesla (T) MR scanner (750 Discovery, GEHC, WI) fitted with a 16-channel torso phased-array coil (GEHC), covering the entire left renal artery and parent artery (i.e. abdominal aorta) at the same level. Fast GRE-based sequence was used with the following parameters: field of view (FOV) 32 cm, slice thickness 10 mm, locs/slab 8, repetition time (TR) 7.0–7.1 ms, echo time (TE) 3.3–3.4 ms, flip angle (FA; degrees) 8°, matrix 256 × 256, receiver bandwidth 62.5 kHz, partition thickness 1.25 mm, NEX 1, number of phases/location 20, imaging time 9:29–9:36 min, respiratory window 50%, number of projections 10,000, and encoding velocity (VENC) 100–200 cm/s depending on the maximum velocities measured in preceding 2D cine PC studies. The 4D datasets were post-processed using flow analysis software (flova; R’s Tech Co., Hamamatsu, Japan). A valuable feature of 3D PC VIPR is its capacity to delineate renal branches and obtain flow velocity data without administration of contrast medium .
Figure illustrates the clinical course of the patient. Sunitinib was administered at the recommended dose (50 mg daily; 4 weeks on followed by 2 weeks off) in the first course and at 75% relative dose intensity in the second. Tumor size and density measured on CT decreased slightly, and disease status was stable according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.0 (RECIST v1.0). Tumor angiogenicity was disrupted by sunitinib, and renal blood flow was redistributed with a decrease in blood flow to the tumor and increase to other areas. Platelet concentration gradually decreased and she was classified as grade 3 under the Common Terminology Criteria Adverse Events version 3.0 system. She also developed grade 2 hypertension, grade 2 hand-foot skin reactions, grade 1 dysphonia, grade 1 proteinuria, and grade 2 hypothyroidism. Sunitinib treatment was thus modified to four cycles of 2 weeks on sunitinib (37.5 mg daily) followed by a 2-week drug holiday in an effort to restore platelet levels and achieve resolution of other adverse events. However, blood flow to the tumor and tumor size reverted to and remained at levels before sunitinib treatment . We judged that sunitinib was unlikely to yield further useful effects, and treatment was discontinued. The patient then underwent partial nephrectomy 1 month later. We could not find any tumor necrosis or hemorrhage reflecting the effect of sunitinib treatment pathologically. Both the operative and postoperative courses were uneventful, and she remains in good condition, with no tumor recurrence, an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 47 ml/min/1.73 m2, and grade 2 hypothyroidism.