A 65-year-old woman was admitted for an acute edematous syndrome associated with asthenia. The patient had a past medical history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, bilateral gonarthrosis and left coxarthrosis. On admission, physical examination revealed arterial hypertension (163/89 mmHg) without fever and a violaceous cutaneous rash of the right leg that had appeared 2 years before. It had started as a small painful round macule of the foot that progressively extended to the whole calf and the gluteal region . Neurological examination revealed painful peripheral neuropathy on the right leg. Electrocardiogram was normal.
Laboratory data showed hypoalbuminemia (1,2 g/dl) associated with severe proteinuria (7,03 g/24 h) and a recent decrease of renal function (serum creatinin level increase from 0,84 to 1,3 mg/dl). Urinalysis showed cytolipiduria without hematuria or pyuria (11/mm3 and 22/mm3, respectively). Serological tests for viral infections (HBV, HCV, EBV, HIV), antinuclear and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. Complement was normal. Cryoglobulin (monoclonal IgM-kappa and polyclonal IgG) was found. Serum protein electrophoresis revealed an oligoclonal increase of two IgG-lambda and one IgM-lambda condensations.
Histological examination of the skin biopsy showed a diffuse, rather dense dermal infiltration reaching the subcutaneous adipose tissue. It consisted predominantly of CD3+/CD5+ T-lymphocytes, admixed with numerous CD79a+/CD138+ polyclonal plasma cells (expressing in comparable amounts kappa and lambda light chains) and fewer CD20+ B-cells suggestive with chronic atrophic acrodermatitis .
Serological tests for Lyme disease confirmed the diagnosis of chronic borreliosis: the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was positive for IgG (titer > 200 U/mL, normal value < 6) and IgM (Enzygnost® Lyme link VLsE/IgG and Borreliosis/IgM used on the BEPIII® system, Siemens Healthcare Diagnostic Products GmbH, Marburg, Germany), and was confirmed by immunoblotting. After further questioning, the patient recalled a tick-bite 9 years before on this leg, but neither migratory erythema nor arthritis.
A renal biopsy disclosed chronic vascular lesions and normal glomeruli devoid of immune deposits . Transmission electron microscopy showed a diffuse podocyte effacement without any evidence of deposits . Specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) by LightMix Kit for the detection of Borrelia spp. (TIB MOLBIOL, ROCHE, Berlin, Germany) performed on DNA extracted from both skin and kidney biopsies was negative.
A whole-body scan showed no evidence of lymphoma. Renal ultrasound and doppler examinations were normal. The patient was not taking any medication that could induce the MCD.
Proteinuria slightly decreased after administration of an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEi) at d8. After serological confirmation of Lyme borreliosis, ceftriaxone was initiated (2 g/day by subcutaneous injections starting on day 21 after diagnosis, d21). One week later (i.e. on d28), corticosteroids (CS) were added (70 mg prednisolone, i.e. 1 mg/kg). To prevent an infection flare, CS administration was delayed.
At d24, i.e. 72 h after initiation of ceftriaxone therapy, proteinuria decreased again (3.96 vs 7.03 before treatment and vs 5.96 g/24 h after ACEi introduction) and hypertension and the edematous syndrome improved. At d48, the first antibiotherapy course was discontinued. At d52, proteinuria was insignificant (0.11 g/day) and CS were rapidly tapered (by 2.5 mg/week). At d115, while CS dosage was 47.5 mg, proteinuria was still insignificant (0.03 g/day) but the neuropathic pain of the right foot persisted. Electroneuromyographic and lumbosacral remnography remained normal. Ceftriaxone therapy was again started in association with pregabalin until d147 and resulted in complete regression of the leg lesions and pain. At d178, with 17.5 mg of CS, proteinuria remained insignificant (0,29 g/day) and CS were further tapered (2.5 mg every 15 days until 10 mg and then 1 mg every month). At d245, with 9 mg CS, there was a complete remission of the nephrotic syndrome . CS were totally stopped at d350 and after a 3-years follow-up, proteinuria remained insignificant.
Serological tests after 6 months and a 3-years follow-up were still positive for IgG and became negative for IgM.