A 73-year-old man presented with progressively worsening exertional dyspnoea and mild chest pain for the past six months. The patient denied syncope, orthopnea or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea. His past medical history was notable for the presence of hypertension, dyslipidemia, type 2 diabetes, cerebrovascular disease, stage 3b chronic kidney disease, and Parkinson’s disease. He was on regular valsartan 160 mg daily, amlodipine 5 mg daily, atorvastatin 40 mg daily, metformin 1000 mg daily, aspirin 100 mg daily, and levodopa/carbidopa 250 mg/25 mg three times a day.
On physical examination, he was afebrile, with normal breathing rate. The pulse rate was 77 bpm, and blood pressure 125/60 mmHg. A rough grade III/VI ejection systolic murmur in the aortic area, and clear chest sounds were present on cardiopulmonary auscultation. The abdomen was non-tender to palpation and there was no peripheral oedema.
To study his symptoms and murmur, the patient underwent a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) that revealed a severe aortic stenosis (peak velocity = 4.21 m/s, mean transvalvular gradient = 45 mmHg, estimated aortic valve area = 0.8 cm2) with an LVEF of 59%, and no other valvular abnormality. A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated sinus rhythm without conduction abnormalities, and coronary angiography showed no obstructive coronary artery disease. Pre-procedural computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a mean aortic annulus diameter of 26.4 mm, an annulus area of 548 mm2 and perimeter of 85.2 mm, with a moderately calcified tricuspid aortic valve—. Careful analysis of CTA reconstructions indicated adequate coronary ostia height and acceptable sinuses of Valsalva (SOV) and sinotubular junction (STJ) dimensions . Both iliofemoral axes had acceptable diameters and no severe calcification, enabling transfemoral approach.
The patient was deemed at low risk for surgical aortic valve replacement, with a Society of Thoracic Surgeons score of 3.27% and an EuroSCORE II of 3.67%. On Heart Team meeting, percutaneous approach was favoured, considering frailty (Katz Index 4), the presence of comorbidities not adequately reflected by the scores, suitability for transfemoral access, low risk for permanent pacemaker, and patient’s preference.
The procedure was performed under conscious sedation, and a 34-mm self-expandable CoreValve™ Evolut R™ (Medtronic) aortic bioprosthesis was selected for implantation. The right femoral artery was obtained using a 16F sheath for valve delivery (primary access), and the left radial artery was used for placement of a pigtail catheter, using a 6F sheath (secondary access). A Safari 2™ (Boston Scientific) extra small guidewire was advanced to the left ventricle, and the valve was slowly released under fluoroscopic guidance.
The implantation procedure was made difficult by haemodynamic instability every time the valve was flared on the aortic annulus. On third attempt, position check immediately before release, showed what seemed to be a good position, however careful prosthesis-cuspid alignment was not guaranteed . Immediately following valve implantation, the patient described chest pain and rapidly progressed with haemodynamic deterioration, culminating in cardiac arrest within less than a minute. Aortography revealed a very high valve implantation, without opacification of the left coronary sinus and occlusion of the main stem—coronary sequestration (, S). Advanced life support was promptly initiated, invasive ventilation was established, and a 20-mm Amplatz Goose Neck™ (Medtronic) snare was introduced through the secondary access to retrieve the valve (, S). It was rapidly and successfully removed toward the ascending aorta, resulting in immediate restoration of flow to the left main and a successful cardiopulmonary resuscitation (, S).
After achieving haemodynamic stability, detailed reanalysis of the aortic root was performed on CTA scan. The narrow STJ, SOV dimensions and the result obtained with the previous valve let the operators to decide to use a 29-mm balloon-expandable Sapien™ 3 (Edwards) aortic bioprosthesis, as a second valve. On this attempt, the valve was advanced through the CoreValve™ (Medtronic) placed in the ascending aorta, and uneventfully implanted with preserved flow to both coronary arteries (, S).
The patient was admitted to the Cardiac Intensive Care Unit with stable vital signs and without haemodynamic support. He was extubated less than 6 h later, and his clinical evolution was remarkable. There were no neurologic disturbances, and despite a high-sensitive troponin-T peak of 1100 ng/L, post-procedural TTE showed no deterioration in LVEF nor segmental abnormalities, and a normofunctional aortic bioprosthesis (, S). Post-procedural ECG revealed no rhythm disturbances. He was discharged home at hospitalization day 5, on single antiplatelet therapy.
At the last clinical follow-up, six-month after discharge, the patient is in NYHA class I, and repeat TTE revealed a normofunctional aortic bioprosthesis with preserved LVEF. There were no heart failure hospitalizations nor major cardiovascular events.