A 61-year-old man undergoing treatment for bronchial asthma was referred to our hospital because of an abnormal mass shadow on chest radiography. At the time of his first visit, he had a fever of approximately 37 °C, accompanied by persistent fatigue and mild dyspnea on exertion. He had a history of bronchial asthma, hypertension, and dyslipidemia, and was under medical treatment. He had no history of allergies and had smoked 20 cigarettes a day for 7 years between the ages of 18 and 25 years. He had worked as a pilot, but after retiring, he worked as a tree trimmer. Blood tests showed a mild increase in C-reactive protein levels to 3.5 mg/dL, but no other abnormalities in blood count or biochemical findings were observed. No elevation of tumor markers related to lung cancer was observed, but interleukin (IL)-2R was elevated to 536 U/mL (normal value 124–466 U/mL). Electrocardiography and echocardiography revealed no abnormalities. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a middle lobe hilar mass with irregular margins and swelling of the right hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET)/CT revealed a mass lesion with a maximum diameter of 5.5 cm and maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 11.0, and high SUV areas in the hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes . Therefore, we included middle lobe lung cancer with mediastinal lymph node metastasis (T3N2M0 Stage IIIB) and malignant lymphoma in the differential diagnosis. Transbronchial lung biopsy of the mass showed no malignant findings. Based on the above, we decided to perform a thoracoscopic lung biopsy; if intraoperative histology revealed malignant findings, a radical middle lobectomy plus lymph node dissection was planned.
The surgery was performed under general anesthesia, including differential lung ventilation and left lower lateral recumbency. A 1.5-cm camera port was made on the mid-axillary line of the seventh intercostal space, and the thoracic cavity was observed; however, it was difficult to evaluate the pleural effusion due to extensive pleural adhesions. The finding of firm adhesions with loss of normal laminar structure, which is atypical for cancer invasion, mainly in the oblique fissure near the tumor was striking. In addition, the normal layered structure of the vascular sheath of the pulmonary artery was also not preserved, making dissection difficult. After thoracoscopic dissection of the pleural adhesions, a total of five tumor sites and an enlarged lymph node (LN#10) were biopsied; however, intraoperative rapid pathological examination revealed no malignant findings. Dissection of the interlobar pulmonary artery was impossible due to severe interlobar adhesions, and a right total pneumonectomy was necessary to completely resect the primary lesion. Since it would be over-invasive to perform a total right pneumonectomy in a patient with an undetermined diagnosis, we decided to terminate the surgery and determine the treatment plan based on the results of the histopathological examination. The duration of the surgery was 256 min, and total blood loss was 80 mL. No postoperative complications were observed.
Hematoxylin–eosin (HE) staining showed an inflammatory cell infiltrate consisting of plasma cells, lymphocytes, and neutrophils. Storiform fibrosis was observed using silver impregnation. Immunohistochemical staining showed that there were approximately 40 IgG4-positive cells per high-power field (HPF), and the IgG4/IgG ratio was approximately 20% .
Based on the above findings, the patient was diagnosed with IgG4-RD occurring only in the lungs, and treatment with intravenous prednisolone (PSL) 60 mg/day was initiated. After 1 month of treatment with PSL, the mass had shrunk, and improvement in fever and cough symptoms was observed. The steroid dose was gradually reduced and changed to 30 mg/day orally in the third month after the start of therapy. During this period, there were no PSL administration errors, and oral administration was accurate. However, a CT scan during the third month of PSL treatment (30 mg/day) showed multiple nodular shadows in both lungs . No physical symptoms were observed. Considering the possibility of malignant complications and multiple lung metastases, we performed thoracoscopic partial lung resection of the newly appearing left lung nodules to determine the treatment strategy.
The surgery was performed under general anesthesia, including differential lung ventilation and right lower lateral recumbency. We performed 3-port video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS). Extensive pleural adhesions were observed in the thoracic cavity, but the adhesions were sufficiently detachable compared to right-sided surgery. After detachment of the adhesions, the surgery was completed with partial lung resection of the lower lobe. The surgery duration was 126 min, and the total blood loss was 10 mL. No postoperative complications were observed.
HE staining revealed a dense inflammatory cell infiltrate consisting of plasma cells, lymphocytes, and neutrophils. Immunohistochemical staining showed that there were approximately 40 IgG4-positive cells per HPF, and the IgG4/IgG ratio was approximately 70% . There was no evidence of malignancy.
Thus, we diagnosed IgG4-RLD refractory to PSL monotherapy.