A 44-year-old woman with an unremarkable medical history presented at the emergency department of our hospital due to acute onset gait imbalance accompanied by vertigo. Symptoms had already been present for several hours before her admission. On neurological examination, she was found to be confused, with a wide-based ataxic gait as well as right-sided dysmetria and dysdiadochokinesia. Dysarthria and right-beating nystagmus were also noted (National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale-5). A brain magnetic resonance imaging scan with IV contrast revealed ischemia of the right cerebellar hemisphere. Further, workup, including an ultrasound of the carotid and vertebral arteries, a heart ultrasound, a brain, and cervical area computed tomography (CT) angiogram as well as a cerebral digital subtraction angiography, revealed no other underlying pathology. Her vital signs on presentation were recorded as respiratory rate 15, blood pressure (BP) 155/95 mmHg, pulse rate 88 bpm, oxygen saturation 99%, and T 37.0°C.
Deemed outside the time frame for thrombolysis and with no thrombectomy service available on site, the patient was started on aspirin and rosuvastatin (secondary stroke prevention) and she was transferred to the neurological ward where she remained for the next 48 h, essentially unchanged. Of note, her BP throughout this initial period remained within normal limits ruling out hypertension as the underlying cause of the bleeding. However, on day 3 of her admission, the patient gradually became unresponsive. An emergency brain CT scan revealed acute obstructive hydrocephalus with dislocation of the fourth ventricle due to edema around the ischemic lesion. No significant brainstem compression was noted. As a result, the patient was intubated and an EVD was put in place at the OR. Aspirin was discontinued due to the intervention and she was moved to the intensive care unit for further hospitalization. Three days later, she was extubated and on day 7, after successful weaning, the EVD was scheduled to be removed. Her vital signs and blood tests were all within normal range. Due to a busy schedule on that particular day, the EVD was left for the on-call resident to take out; after all elective procedures would be complete. Removal was performed as per standard protocol, on the bedside. On completion of the procedure, the patient immediately complained of a headache and within the following hour, she fell into a stupor. She was again intubated with a new brain CT scan showing obstructive hydrocephalus due to hemorrhage extending along the EVD track and down to the lateral and third ventricles . In response to that, bilateral frontal EVDs were once again put in place alongside an ICP monitor. These remained for a total of 10 days and were removed only after serial CT scans had confirmed complete lysis of the clot. ICP values were normal throughout. The patient was successfully extubated 24 h later with no new neurological deficits being noted. The patient remained in the neurological ward for another 10 days and was finally discharged to a rehabilitation center with mild ataxia symptoms along with generalized weakness. All possible underlying stroke causes were ruled out.