An 11-year-old girl was reported to ambulatory care with fever and headache for 2 weeks. Prior to these symptoms, the patient was in normal health. She had febrile episodes (100–102 °F) without chills or rigors. The fever was associated with severe headache on the right side and was not associated with any vomiting, nausea or aura. The patient did not have any other significant complaints, clinical signs or symptoms pertaining to the ear, nose, throat or chest, or bleeding diathesis except for a history of falling 2 years previously when she was 9 years of age.
We admitted the patient for further evaluation. On clinical examination, the patient had tenderness over the right mastoid bone with an intact tympanic membrane. With the above history, a provisional diagnosis of acute mastoiditis of the right side was made. Pediatric neurology, endocrinology, and ophthalmology consultations were obtained. On fundoscopy, the patient had bilateral papilledema with normal vision on both sides and was referred for further imaging with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain which revealed no space-occupying lesions in the brain.
Routine investigations were all within normal limits except for erythrocyte sedimentation rate which showed a three-fold increase in the first hour. Subsequently the Mantoux test was performed which was positive (22-mm induration) and there was increased serum homocysteine.
Subsequently the patient was worked up for tuberculous OM, and a bone scan was performed for OM of the temporal bone. The patient had a positive Mantoux test (22-mm) and 99Tc- MDP triple phase bone scan with single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT-CT) of the temporal bone which suggested asymmetric uptake with increased radiotracer accumulation in the right temporal bone posteriorly. The patient was kept on AKT but did not respond.
High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan of the temporal bone showed mild sclerosis and cortical destruction involving the right temporal bone . With these findings, the patient was taken up for debridement to obtain tissue for histopathological diagnosis.
The patient underwent right cortical mastoidectomy under general anesthesia. There was a mass with soft cheese-like material on the sigmoid sinus bony plate. The sigmoid sinus plate was eroded, and the mass was tracked medially and found to be compressing the lumen of the sigmoid sinus. The mass occupied the space between the sigmoid sinus bony plate and the membranous lumen, misleading the diagnosis as lateral sinus thrombosis . The disease was cleared overall and the sigmoid sinus was found to be normal with good flow as confirmed by needle aspiration.
Tissue was sent for histopathological examination which revealed Mucor mycosis-induced OM of the right temporal bone . Postoperatively, the patient received 2g cumulative dose of Amphotericin-B (liposomal) along with voriconazole 50mg per day for 3 weeks.
The patient was strictly monitored for liver and renal function tests. The patient was free from symptoms after 3 weeks, with regular follow-ups to date. Post-operative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) after 6 months revealed post-canalised sigmoid sinus of the right side with good flow contour.