A 1.5-year-old Asian-Syrian girl presented to the pediatric clinic with the chief complaints of gradual onset excessive head nodding (side-to-side movement) for 3 months. Movements increased with walking, emotions, and stress; decreased during periods of concentration; and were absent during sleep. There were no other complaints or headaches. There was no other significant history. Pregnancy and delivery were normal.
On physical examination, the child was alert, with normal cognitive function. Neurological examination was normal. She had normal growth (weight 8 kg, length 72 cm, head circumference 44.5 cm).
Initial laboratory assessment including complete blood count (CBC), hepatic and renal function, and endocrine function tests were normal.
An ophthalmological examination revealed normal eye movements with no papilledema. Cranial MRI imaging demonstrated a large left-hemispheric cystic process with a midline shift, well-defined thin-walled suprasellar arachnoid cyst measuring 3 × 5 × 7 cm that obstructed the foramina of Monro, with resulting hydrocephalus ventriculomegaly . Based on the cranial MRI and symptoms, a diagnosis of a suprasellar arachnoid cyst with BHDS was made.
The patient underwent endoscopic cystoventriculostomy and cystocisternostomy for the suprasellar arachnoid cyst . The surgery was performed through a small para coronal burr hole on the right side of the skull. Insertion of the endoscopic trocar identified clear CSF that appeared to be under pressure. Very quickly, the cyst jumped towards our lens due to the high intracystic pressure. This high pressure seemed to have been compensated by the back pressure of the CSF. The fenestration was done very quickly. The cyst fluid seemed very clear and under pressure. With the bipolar probe, we removed a large part of the wall. Many other small fenestration holes were made in the anterior direction and at the bottom. At the end of the procedure, we achieved normal pulsation of the ventricle, with a good flow of fluid around the remaining membrane.
At follow-up 6 weeks after the procedure, she had a reduction in both the frequency and intensity of head movements. During the 6 months of follow-up, the head bobbing disappeared completely, and her growth was normal.