A 21-year-old male, who was in a motorcycle accident, presented with a confused level of consciousness and had a Glasgow Coma Scale score of E3V4M5. His blood pressure was 58/34 mmHg, his heart rate was 154 beats per minute, and his respiratory rate was 19 breaths per minute on admission. The initial diagnosis was diffused axonal injury, thoracic aortic injury, bilateral lung contusion with hemopneumothorax, liver injury, vertebral injury of T5, along with fractures of the right humerus, left patella, and bilateral scapula, and a stable pelvic fracture, with an injury severity score of 50. Brain magnetic resonance imaging on the 6th day showed diffused microbleeds in the bilateral subcortices, corpus callosum, and bilateral cerebellar hemisphere, consistent with diffuse axonal injury . A stent-graft repair was performed for the aortic injury, on the same day. On the 10th, 12th, and 17th days, open reduction and internal fixations were performed to repair bone fractures.
After 2 weeks of admission, prolonged drowsiness persisted, and hyperthermia, tachypnea, tachycardia, hypertension, and hyperhidrosis without any specific stimuli were observed paroxysmally several times a day. PSH was diagnosed using the PSH-assessment measure .
One month after the injury, decreased joint mobility and progressive pain were evident. Computed tomography (CT) showed HO in his humerus, ulna, radius, scapula, ilium, pubis, ischium, knee joint, patella, and tibia, as well as showing renal calculus . To evaluate metabolic bone abnormalities, 25-OH vitamin D, parathyroid hormone, calcitonin, N-terminal propeptide of type 1 collagen, and tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 5b were measured, revealing vitamin D deficiency .
A bisphosphonate agent and vitamin D were administered for 1 month to prevent progressive HO and the significant discomfort associated with it. Thereafter, his symptoms, radiographic findings, and laboratory abnormalities improved. On the 55th day, he was transferred to another facility for rehabilitation.