A 27-year-old, asymptomatic primigravida without any relevant personal or family medical history. She was receiving follow-up care during a year for bilateral adnexal masses of 3–4 cm size which were found during a routine gynaecological check-up and that may be indicative of bilateral teratoma. During the follow-up care period, we requested a tumour marker test and it was reported as normal. No changes were observed either.
The first 12-week ultrasound showed 66 mm × 48 mm cysts between the bladder and the cervix with peripheral vascularization, and another left paracervical cystic and heterogeneous lesion of 39 mm × 26 mm size . A follow-up visit was indicated requiring close monitoring.
No relevant morphologic findings were detected in the 20-week fetal ultrasound but the same described pelvic formations. Tumour markers were slightly elevated except CA (cancer antigen) 19.1, which was normal; CA 125: 38.3, CA 19.9: 18.6, HE-4 (Human Epididymal Protein): 79.7 and 20.56 for ROMA index (risk of ovarian malignicy algorithm index).
The MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) scan showed 53 mm × 46 mm thin-walled cysts with a septum in the right paracervical area, another 27 mm × 20 mm cystic formation in the left hemipelvis ( and ) and presacral 2 cm cysts containing a solid pole.
At week 20, specialty consultation was indicated after self-appreciation of enlarged left supraclavicular lymph nodes measuring 3 cm. Therefore, a biopsy was performed showing metastases from low-grade papillary serous ovarian carcinoma.
Patient was referred for medical oncology evaluation and a multidisciplinary committee with neonatologists, oncologists, gynaecologists-oncologists and obstetricians was held to decide the best treatment option. We took into account patient’s preferences and it was agreed to initiate neoadjuvant chemotherapy with paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 every 3 weeks at week 28 and elective caesarean section at week 34 after two cycles.
She required hospitalisation at week 32 due to threatened preterm delivery, as well as tocolysis and fetal lung maturation.
Finally, at week 34, she was hospitalised for elective C-section and staging surgery. She gave birth a female infant weighing 2040 g with APGAR scores 5/8/10, who is currently in good health, and underwent classic cesarean section via laparotomy under general anaesthesia.
During surgery, both ovaries and fallopian tubes appeared macroscopically healthy . An implant of 2 cm size was found in the anterior uterine wall and another implant of smaller size was found in the pouch of Douglas. It was also observed a 2 cm size cyst located between the anterior uterine wall and vesical fold. Rest of the abdominal cavity was normal. Concordant results were obtained at intraoperative biopsy, so complete surgical excision was carried out to remove the abovementioned cyst. Total extrafascial hysterectomy, double adnexectomy and omentectomy were also performed as per the standard protocol without any incidents. Postoperative course was favourable and patient was discharged from hospital 5 days later.
Pathology test results revealed a low-grade papillary serous ovarian carcinoma that was located in the ovaries and infiltrated fallopian tubes and uterus (serous membrane, in the whole myometrial thickness and cervix) with extensive vascular invasion and omental infiltration, and the presence of 70% of estrogen receptors and 90% of progesterone receptors with a ki 67 antigen percentage score of 3–5%.
The patient is currently receiving follow-up care and has received 7 cycles of paclitaxel (175 mg/m2 every 3 weeks) and carboplatin (AUC 6-under the concentration-time). She also received negative genetic test results. Last evaluation with PET-CT (positron emission tomography-computed tomography).: enlarged left supraclavicular lymph nodes suggestive of infiltrations, and enlarged retrocrural, para-aortic, bilateral and right iliac fossa lymph nodes where malignancy can’t be ruled out.
The patient still had disease persistence at supraclavicular level after 15 radiotherapy fractions of 45 grays so she is receiving maintenance hormonal therapy with letrozole 2.5 mg daily. Currently, after 1 year of follow-up, patient has stable disease and no disease has been identified at the abdominal level or in other locations different from supraclavicular lymph nodes. The baby is now feeling well and hasn’t referred any relevant complication.