A 37-year-old female with a past medical history significant for type I diabetes mellitus for > 20 years, Addison disease, and systemic lupus erythematosus presented to the emergency department with increasing abdominal pain over a six-day period. She also described poor oral intake and several episodes of nausea with blood-tinged emesis. She was treated 6 weeks earlier for Clostridium difficile colitis and completed a full course of antibiotics with resolution of symptoms; however over a week prior to the current admission her diarrhea had recurred. She denied any history of tobacco or alcohol use but did describe daily marijuana use. She was taking hydrocortisone 20 milligrams (mg) twice daily (bid) for Addison disease, insulin lispro 5 units (u) with meals, and insulin glargine 10 u at night. On admission her vital signs were temperature 97.1° F, blood pressure 130/102 mmHg, heart rate 140 beats/minute, and respiratory rate 26 breaths/minute. Her physical exam was only significant for abdominal guarding. The remainder of the physical exam was unremarkable. Metabolic panel demonstrated a blood glucose of 763 mg/dL, CO2 of 8 mmol/L, and β-hydroxybutyrate of 15.3 mmol/L with an anion gap of 36 mmol/L. Arterial blood gas (ABG) was significant for a metabolic acidosis with a pH of 7.11 and HCO3 of 4.1 mmol/L. Additional laboratory values were significant for urinary ketones of 80 mg/dL, urine glucose of ≥ 500 mg/dL, and a hemoglobin A1C of 15.3%. The findings were consistent with diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and she was started on an insulin drip with aggressive intravenous fluid resuscitation. Due to her significant abdominal pain, a computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis was done which revealed extensive low-attenuation surrounding the distal esophagus with esophageal wall thickening . Gastroenterology was consulted in regard to the abnormal CT findings and the decision was made to perform an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) which revealed severe, diffuse esophageal ulcerations and necrosis . A diagnosis of necrotizing esophagitis was made. The patient was started on a pantoprazole drip, oral sucralfate, and a clear liquid diet. Her stool workup was negative and the diarrhea responded to antimotility agents. The anion gap closed, and blood sugars normalized. She improved clinically but left the hospital against medical advice on hospital day 3 before complete resolution of her symptoms.