A 50-year-old male patient was admitted to hospital on 16 November 2021 having suffered an intermittent loss of vision for a month. A dynamic electrocardiogram (ECG) taken at another hospital showed a high degree of AV block, with the most prolonged RR interval being 6.765 s, and an echocardiogram showed ccTGA.
After admission, the ECG showed an intermittent third-degree AV block, Rs configuration in lead I, RS configuration in lead III and a gradually decreasing R wave amplitude in leads V1 to V5. The ECG after limb–lead reversal showed a QS pattern in lead I, an R pattern in lead III and a gradually decreasing R wave amplitude in leads V1 to V6 .
Echocardiography showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 0.55 and confirmed cardiac axis deviation and ccTGA, showing moderate tricuspid insufficiency, global enlargement of all four chambers, mild aortic regurgitation and mild pulmonary regurgitation. Cardiac computed tomography (CT) examination showed congenital heart disease, axis deviation, and function-corrected transposition of the great arteries . A cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed that the aorta emerged from the right ventricle and the pulmonary artery was connected to the left ventricle .
There were several points to take into consideration before the implantation. First, the reason that a leadless pacemaker was suitable for this patient was that leadless pacing has a low anticipated pacing burden, especially in young patients, which keeps the number of necessary replacements low. Second, this patient had a low anticipated pacing burden because his symptoms occurred at rest at an intrinsic rate of 50 beats/min. In addition, the patient was young and had a normal body mass index and wished to have minimal body scarring.
The procedure took 45 min, and the fluoroscopy time used in the procedure was 20 min. Twenty-four hours after the operation, the threshold value of the leadless pacemaker was 0.88 V/0.24 ms, the sensed value was 8.6 mV and the impedance was 850 Ω. There were technical difficulties during implantation, which differed from traditional left ventricular implantation, due to the presence of ccTGA and dextrocardia. First, the catheter handle had to be pushed down instead of up, to ensure that the sheath could cross the AV flap to the left and enter the anatomical left ventricle when the handle’s big bend button was pressed, thus enabling the anatomical left ventricle of the patient to be evaluated using preoperative imaging. It was found that the pectinate muscle was not as developed as the anatomical right ventricle, and the delivery system was prone to slipping during implantation. This meant that it could not hold up the ventricular septum, and this affected the release and electrical parameters of the pacemaker. Postoperative pacing showed that the primary waves in leads II, III, and avF were upward, and some of the QRS intervals were more than 120 ms . Postoperatively, the pacing threshold, R-wave amplitude and impedance were all excellent and stable. The chest X-ray before discharge showed that the Micra pacemaker position was fixed, and the cardiac shadow and costophrenic angle did not change significantly before and after the procedure . The patient was observed for 24 h postoperatively under the pacing state of VVI 60 times/min and showed no symptoms of pacemaker syndrome, such as chest tightness and suffocation. The lower limit frequency of the pacemaker was lowered to 50 times/min, and when the patient did not complain of any obvious discomfort he was discharged on 24 November 2021, eight days after being admitted to hospital. After discharge, the patient’s activities returned to normal, and he could do physical exercise without any apparent distress. The 3-month follow-up after the procedure showed a pacemaker threshold of 0.88 V/0.24 ms, an R-amplitude of 10.4 mV and an impedance of 890 Ω. The electrical parameters at his 6-month follow-up were as follows: threshold, 0.75 V/0.24 ms; R-amplitude, 11.8 mV; and impedance, 860 Ω. Three months after the operation, the ventricular pacing (VP) was 34%, and the ECG showed sinus rhythm, and six months after the procedure, the VP was 32%, suggesting that most of the heart rhythms were generated by the patient and not the pacemaker.