A 34-year-old woman was referred to our outpatient clinic during her 31st week of pregnancy suffering from shoulder pain of the right side after lifting her 11-month-old first born. During the first pregnancy, one and a half year ago she started noticing dyspnea which was still present at the time of her presentation in our clinic. At that time, this symptom was considered as pregnancy-related therefore no special examination was arranged. Several months later the patient became pregnant again. She was still reporting of dyspnea especially at physical activity and new symptoms, cough and hemoptysis, had appeared. Due to persistent symptoms, the general practitioner arranged a chest X-ray that showed a tumor mass in the right lung in close relation to the scapula .
Clinical examination showed a patient in good general health. There was a local swelling at the medial border of the right scapula with dull pressure pain. The movement of the shoulder was painless at full range of motion and strength. The auscultation of the lung presented a vesicular respiratory sound which was slightly attenuated at the right side. The patient did not suffer from pain. Family anamnesis revealed a breast cancer of the patient’s mother and a bronchial carcinoma of the father. B symptoms were not reported.
The case was primarily presented to the department of obstetrics in 31 4/7 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound showed a large for gestational fetus (2205 g, 93rd percentile) with normal amniotic fluid and normal feto-placental perfusion of a 34-year-old gravida 2 para 1 (one spontaneous delivery 1 year ago) with no pregnancy-related complications. A diaplacental cancer cell transmission seemed unlikely for the type of expected tumor.
MRI scans (magnetic resonance imaging, Fig. ) of the cranium and the thorax were performed and revealed several highly suspicious lesions in the right lung, the mediastinum, the inferior angle of the right scapula with soft tissue component, and an osteolytic lesion of the 3rd thoracic vertebral body with affection of dura and spinal nerve.
An interdisciplinary perinatal case discussion with obstetricians, neonatologists, oncologists, and our orthopedic department was initiated near-term discussing the conflict of delaying maternal tumor therapy and causing an iatrogenic preterm birth and its possible neonatal complications. In 32 0/7 weeks of gestation, the pros and cons due to a delivery before 34 0/7 weeks of gestation were discussed and presented to the patient and her husband by the treating specialist, so that informed consent could be obtained. In summary, a one-stage procedure, combining the primary cesarean section and the open biopsy of the right side scapula tumor lesion was planned for 33 4/7 weeks of gestation. Before the planned delivery, antenatal corticosteroid treatment for accelerating fetal lung maturation was implemented to minimize the risk for respiratory neonatal complications. Thrombosis and pneumonia prophylaxis were recommended due to the high-risk situation.
A fine-needle biopsy of the pulmonary tumor mass was done by bronchoscopy. Subsequently, the cesarean section was directly followed by an open biopsy of the right side scapula tumor lesion. A NUT midline carcinoma was diagnosed by immunohistochemistry while FISH analysis did not show the typical NUT gene rearrangements due to cryptic translocation.
The examination of the placenta did not show any signs of malignancy. After the cesarean section, a PET-CT (positron emission tomography-computed tomography, Fig. ) was performed showing further multiple metastases in both mammae in addition to the known tumor lesions. The case was presented in a multidisciplinary tumor board. Due to disseminated tumor disease in multiple non-resectable locations, a palliative systemical chemotherapy with nab-paclitaxel (100 mg/m2)/carboplatin (AUC 6) was started by the oncological outpatient clinic . Priorly, Trenantone® 130 mg subcutaneously for ovary protection was administered. Furthermore, an osteoprotective bisphosphonate therapy with Zometa® 4 mg was begun. Regarding the bone metastases in the right scapula and in the 3rd thoracic vertebral body, no surgical intervention but radiotherapy was planned in the further course as part of the palliative therapy regimen. After five courses of systemical chemotherapy with nab-paclitaxel/carboplatin, the patient showed a decline of dyspnea. A PET-CT 3 months after the start of therapy demonstrated a partial remission of known metastases in the right lung and in both mammae. Systemical chemotherapy was continued by the oncological outpatient clinic. However, the scheduled PET-CT after 5 months showed a tumor progress with growth of known metastases and new lesions in the spine and pelvis. Again, the case was discussed in multidisciplinary tumor board and systemic treatment was changed to pembrolizumab while an indication for BET inhibitors was proved in cooperation with an external oncological clinic. Unfortunately, further progress of known metastases was demonstrated radiologically as well as new spinal and pelvic lesions. After that, the patient was lost for further follow-up and missed further appointments.