A 24-year-old Chinese woman presented with acute psychiatric symptoms characterized by fear and agitation. Two days after symptom onset, she was admitted to a psychiatric hospital, and her symptoms were temporarily controlled. Seven days after symptom onset, she developed a low-grade fever and decreased consciousness, at which point she was transferred to our hospital. Her past medical history was unremarkable. On examination, she was non-responsive to verbal or painful stimulation. Her vital signs indicated slightly elevated heart rate and body temperature and normal blood pressure and respiratory rate. The pupils were normal in size and reactive to light. Spontaneous eye movements were absent. The oculocephalic responses were present. Babinski’s sign was negative bilaterally, and both Kernig’s and Brudzinski’s signs were negative.
Routine blood test and chemistry analysis including liver, renal, and thyroid function were unremarkable. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was normal. Autoimmune markers including antinuclear antibodies, anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibodies, rheumatoid factor, and antineutrophilcytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were negative. Serum anti-thyroglobulin (anti-TG) antibodies (38.4U/ml, normal range 0–60 U/ml, radioimmunoassay) and anti-thyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO) antibodies (28 U/ml, normal range 0–60 U/ml, radioimmunoassay) were unremarkable. Brain computed tomography (CT) was normal. MRI revealed FLAIR and DWI hyperintense lesions in bilateral subcortical white matter . Electroencephalography (EEG) showed diffuse slow-waves. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed a mild pleocytosis (24 × 106/L) with lymphocytic predominance. Protein and glucose levels were normal. Aquaporin-4 antibodies in serum and CSF were negative. Serological and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) investigation in serum and CSF were negative for infectious etiologies including varicella zoster virus, enterovirus, herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, and Epstein-Barr virus. Bacterial cultures of the CSF were negative. Anti-NMDA receptor antibodies were identified both in serum (titers 1:100) and CSF (titers 1:16).
The diagnosis of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis was established. Thorough evaluation, including ovarian ultrasound and high resolution computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, did not reveal an ovarian teratoma or other tumors. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg, 0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days) combined with high dose methylprednisolone (1g/day for 5 days) was initiated on day 18 after symptom onset. Despite IVIg and steroid therapy, the patient’s level of consciousness did not improve. She developed dyskinesias with mouth chewing, tongue thrusting, and twisting of the upper limbs. Episodes of generalized tonic-clonic convulsions were also seen. Repeat EEG again revealed diffuse slow-waves. At this point, the patient was intubated and mechanically ventilated. Valproic acid and intermittent intravenous diazepam was administered to control the seizures. On day 35, plasma exchange therapy was initiated; the patient regained consciousness after two cycles of plasma exchange, and seizures and dyskinesias were controlled after three cycles of this treatment. An additional four cycles of plasma exchange were given to reinforce the efficacy. Repeat MRI performed 1 month after plasma exchange showed partial resolution of the hyperintense lesions in bilateral subcortical white matter on FLAIR and DWI . MRI performed 2 months after plasma exchange showed complete resolution . Repeat CSF analysis revealed normal leucocytes (2 × 106/L), as well as normal protein and glucose levels. Anti-NMDA receptor antibodies were undetectable in serum and CSF. At 12-months follow-up, the patient remained well and has had no relapse of seizures and dyskinesias.