A 23-year-old Caucasian man with history of idiopathic hepatic abscess complicated by portal vein thrombosis developed headache, blurry vision, fatigue, and hypersomnia up to 14 hours of sleep daily. Initial neurologic examination was notable for Parinaud’s syndrome characterized by sluggish pupils, bilateral end-gaze nystagmus, and impaired upgaze. Gadolinium-enhanced head MRI revealed a pineal region mass causing 10 mm of midline shift and compressing the cerebral aqueduct, the left thalamus, and the midbrain , requiring an immediate ventriculoperitoneal shunt for treatment of obstructive hydrocephalus. The patient also had thrombocytopenia caused by platelet sequestration from an enlarged spleen secondary to portal vein hypertension. He was supported with romiplostim and platelet transfusion. Tissue was eventually obtained from a stereotaxic biopsy and the diagnosis was NGGCT with yolk sac component, but without embryonal tissue, choriocarcinoma, or teratoma. The tumor grew quickly and nearly doubled in size in 3 weeks . He was treated with induction ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide for 6 cycles resulting in partial reduction of the tumor. His serum and cerebrospinal fluid AFP dropped from a high of 1011.0 to 3.6 ng/ml and 677.9 to 0.6 ng/ml, respectively. Before initiation of cytotoxic chemotherapy, the tumor had an increase in size from 34 × 28 × 23 mm to 48 × 32 × 37 mm, but decreased after induction to 24 × 18 × 23 mm.
The patient’s bilateral Parkinsonism developed after the first dose of induction carboplatin and etoposide, consisting of bradykinesia, bradyphrenia, facial hypomimia, drooling, and dysphagia requiring a gastric tube for feeding. The right side of his body was more severely affected than the left . His Parinaud’s syndrome and diffuse hyperreflexia also persisted during this time. Levodopa, amantadine, and methylphenidate were administered and titrated to maximal symptom improvement . When the tumor size was reduced by induction chemotherapies, the patient became less Parkinsonian and required fewer medications. Intensive physical and occupational therapies also helped improve his mobility.
His Parkinsonism improved further after second-look neurosurgery, which achieved near total cytoreduction and revealed residual yolk sac tumor. During recovery, his AFP began to rise again to a high of 134.6 ng/ml. He received a second induction regimen of gemcitabine, paclitaxel, and oxaliplatin followed by apheresis collection of CD34+ stem cells. An autologous transplant was performed using conditioning high-dose carboplatin, thiotepa, and etoposide with concomitant colony-stimulating factor and romiplostim to support his granulocytes and platelets, respectively. His stem cells engrafted promptly in the marrow on posttransplant day 13, enabling him to discontinue growth factor support. His posttransplant head MRI showed no evidence of tumor growth and his serum AFP was within normal limits. He later received consolidative proton beam radiotherapy on posttransplant day 48 for 6 weeks to the craniospinal space. He was completely weaned off all dopaminergic drugs 5 months after his second-look surgery.
The patient remains in remission 2 years after transplant. At the time of this case report, the patient is able to perform all activities of daily living. He is able to participate in sporting activities such as jogging , waterskiing , and snowboarding. Consent was obtained from the patient to share videos of his Parkinsonism and subsequent recovery.