A 40-year-old female without known cardiovascular risk factors or migraine episodes visited the Moriyama Memorial Hospital (M.M.H.) outpatient clinic in February 2011 after suddenly developing global aphasia and right hemiparesis. Emergent diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DW-MRI) revealed fresh cerebral infarctions [, arrows]. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) revealed a suspicious stenotic lesion in the cervical segment of the left ICA [, arrow]. We performed digital subtraction angiography (DSA) 2 days after admission. No evidence of stenosis was found [, arrow]. MRA was performed again, and the result was the same as the DSA [, arrow]. Her laboratory data were negative for various coagulation disorders, collagen disease, and anticardiolipin syndrome. A Holter electrocardiogram (ECG) detected no arrhythmia; however, her ECG and cardiac echogram suggested an old myocardial infarction of the inferolateral wall, which was confirmed by myocardial scintigraphy . Normal coronary angiography suggested that vasospasm was also the cause of the myocardial infarction in this case . With identical clinical features to our first case, we diagnosed this case as ICCV. In June and August 2011, she developed transient visual disturbance and right hemiparesis, and visited our hospital. ICA stenosis similar to the first presentation was detected by MRA, but disappeared in 2 days. Diltiazem hydrochloride and warfarin, which were continued from the first presentation, failed to prevent TIA.
The patient gave informed consent and CAS procedures were performed in accordance with our institutional guidelines in September 2011. Because the safety of stent deployment near to the first cervical vertebra, where the torsional stress might be larger than lower cervical levels, had not been established, CAS covering only the bifurcation in the same fashion as for atherosclerotic stenosis was performed, using a Carotid Wallstent® . However, symptoms suggesting vasospasm continued, and it presented twice radiologically during the 7 months following CAS [Figure -]. As seen in the figures, the vasospasm always occurs at just proximal portion of the petrous segment of ICA. Thus, in May 2012, we performed another CAS to cover the stenotic/spasm region of the ICA . Considering the possible torsional stress and the spasm strength of the carotid artery, we again used a Carotid Wallstent®, which is proven to have the highest external pressure among the stents available in Japan. Since then, obvious cerebral ischemic attacks or ICA vasospasm have not been detected despite repeated MRA for a 24-month period following the additional CAS.