A 76-year-old Japanese male with a history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, and peripheral vascular disease had previously undergone successful endovascular treatment for occlusive right common iliac artery at 71 years of age. At the time, transthoracic echocardiography performed for screening revealed a dilated aortic root with a width of 49 mm. Subsequent electrocardiogram-gated cardiac computed tomography (EG-CT) revealed SVAs in both the LCS and RCS with no obstruction to surrounding cardiac structures. The sizes of the SVAs from the center of the aorta were 27.2 and 33.1 mm for LCS and RCS, respectively. Due to the relatively small size, they were observed carefully for 5 years, at which time the follow-up EG-CT revealed that the LCS and RCS sizes had grown to 34.5 and 35.7 mm, respectively, and transthoracic echocardiography showed moderate aortic regurgitation. The SVA in the LCS was grown between the pulmonary artery and the left atrium and bulged out on the anterior surface of the heart . The SVA in the RCS has also grown pressing the right ventricular outflow tract . Since both SVAs had been expanding on the surface of the heart , we concluded that they were extracardiac SVAs. Given that the SVAs, which were extracardiac type with a relatively high risk of rupture, were expanding gradually, the patient provided inform consent to undergo surgery for SVA removal.
The operation was performed via median sternotomy with cardiopulmonary bypass. After cardioplegic arrest, the ascending aorta was transected just above the sinotubular junction. Inspection of the interior of the aortic root revealed SVAs in the left lateral half of the LCS and the RCS on both sides of the commissure between the left and right coronary cusps. Left and right coronary arteries were intact. Aortic walls were missing in the floor of the SVAs adjacent to the aortic annulus, and cardiac muscles could be observed even outside of the annulus through a translucent membrane . The SVAs appeared to originate from the orifices with partial aortic wall defects.
The modified Bentall’s approach was performed using a handmade composite graft with a 26-mm polyester graft (Vascutek Gelweave Valsalva graft, Terumo Cardiovascular Systems, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) and a 23-mm bovine pericardial aortic valve (Carpentier-Edwards Perimount Magna Ease, Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA). Pathological examination revealed mild atherosclerotic changes in the aortic wall near the SVAs and inflammatory changes in all aortic valve cusps. The patient recovered well after the surgery and has been well for one and a half years without any events.