A 6-year-old female Japanese Shiba Inu was hospitalized in November 2014 for polyuria, polydipsia, severe hematuria, loss of appetite, weight loss, and lethargy. She had a recent history of hospital visits for cholestasis and hemorrhagic diarrhea due to severe whipworm infection. The owners granted permission for the publishing of this case report.
At admission, blood tests revealed leukocytosis (3.79 × 109/l with 90 % neutrophils), slight anemia (RBC 4.81 × 1012/l and PCV of 30.0 %), decreased albumin (1.5 g/dl), elevated hepatobiliary enzymes, possibly owing to cholestasis, and minimal changes in renal function (blood urea nitrogen 34.6 mg/dl and creatinine 0.5 mg/dl). No bacteria were detected in the peripheral blood via blood smear examination. Adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation testing was negative. Thyroid hormone levels remained within the normal range. IgM antibody titers for coronavirus, adenovirus type 2, parvovirus, and canine distemper virus were below detectable limits (<3, 3, 256, and 512, respectively). Computerized tomography showed gas accumulation on the mucosal side of the bladder wall .
Urinalysis showed proteinuria and bilirubinuria without glycosuria. The urine sediment contained large numbers of erythrocytes and leucocytes including neutrophils and monocytes. Rod-shaped bacteria were also detected via Diff-Quik but not by Gram staining. No urinary calculi, yeasts or fungal hyphae were detected. Enrofloxacin (5 mg/kg of body weight once a day) and metronidazole (35 mg/kg twice a day) were administered empirically for the treatment of UTI.
On day 2, this case developed urinary retention and formed a blood clot in the bladder, which was found by echography. In addition, the patient’s renal function declined sharply (blood urea nitrogen 113.8 mg/dl and creatinine 3.0 mg/dl). After being informed of the dog’s condition, the owners decided to take the dog home; the patient died the next day. While a post-mortem examination would have been helpful in this case, this could not be performed as the owners declined post mortem examination.
Urine was obtained via catheterization on day 1 and plated on sheep blood agar (Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) under aerobic and anaerobic conditions at 37 °C for 48 h. Small white colonies were observed only on plates incubated under anaerobic conditions; however, Mycoplasma canis, which can grow on blood agar plates , was not detected. The growing bacteria were non-spore-forming Gram-positive rods. The isolate was catalase-positive and identified as P. acnes using an API 20A (SYSMEX bioMérieux Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) with a 99.9 % probability. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and DNA sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene confirmed the biochemical identification results. Multilocus sequence typing (MLST) using nine housekeeping genes (cel, coa, fba, gms, lac, oxc, pak, recA, and zno) was performed according to previously published protocols . On the basis of these results, the isolate was determined to be of sequence type 53.
Susceptibility testing was performed by E-test (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France) per the manufacturer’s directions against the following antimicrobials: ampicillin, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, cefoxitin, imipenem, clindamycin, tetracycline, chloramphenicol, enrofloxacin, and metronidazole. Briefly, an inoculum was prepared by suspending a 48-h culture in reduced Brucella broth (Becton Dickinson Microbiology Systems, Cockeysville, MD, USA) to achieve a density of 1.0 on the McFarland nephelometer standard. The inoculum was plated on Brucella blood agar (bioMérieux Co., Ltd.). Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were determined following a 48-h incubation at 35 °C in an anaerobic chamber in accordance with Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines . Bacteroides fragilis ATCC 25285 was used as a reference strain. The bacterium showed high susceptibility to ampicillin, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, cefoxitin, imipenem, clindamycin, tetracycline, chloramphenicol, and enrofloxacin, but was resistant to metronidazole .