We report the case of a 5-year-old boy, brought to the emergency department after an isolated trauma of his right index during a fall of his height. The parent described a mechanism of hyperextension of his right index finger, causing a MCP joint dislocation. Conventional plain-film X-ray imaging performed in the emergency department shows a dorsal dislocation of the right index finger at that level of the MCP joint, without any fracture or osteochondral lesion ( and ).
During physical examination, the patient exhibited deformity of the MCP joint in the index finger, along with tenderness and swelling. There was no skin lesion, neurological and vascular examinations were normal.
After several unsuccessful attempts at closed reduction under digital block anesthesia, decision was made to continue management in the operating room. The patient underwent open surgical reduction through a volar approach. Intraoperative images depicted a typical presentation of a MCP joint dislocation, consistent with the illustrations of Kaplan , with the metacarpal head dislocated volarly and trapped between the flexor and lumbrical tendons through the volar plate.
After general anesthesia and the application of a tourniquet at the base of the arm, the dislocation was reduced through the volar approach using an elevator and subsequently, the volar plate lesion was repaired. C-arm fluoroscopy images show a reduction of the MCP joint ( and ).
After the surgery, the patient’s hand was immobilized in a palmar splint set at 30° of flexion for a period of 14 days. Following this initial immobilization, the patient was permitted unrestricted movement of the right hand and index finger .
During the 4-week follow-up, the patient reported being pain-free with active and passive movement. Pulp to palm distance was 0 centimeter, and range of motion in the right index finger was almost fully restored compared to the uninjured side ( and ). At 1-year post-operative follow-up, no sign of growth disturbance was detected, and the patient had no clinical sign of MCP instability.