A 0-day-old female baby was referred to our department due to abdominal distention. During the prenatal stage, the baby was diagnosed with intestinal atresia based on the intestinal loop dilatation findings found via maternal ultrasonography. She was delivered vaginally at full term weighing 3.5 kg. X-ray examination revealed dextrocardia, left-sided liver, and shifting of the nasogastric tube to the right side . Abdominal ultrasonography test revealed multiple dilated intestinal loop and situs inversus . The baby was diagnosed as having intestinal atresia with situs inversus and underwent emergency exploratory laparotomy after adequate resuscitation on the day of birth. A transverse incision on the upper abdomen was performed, revealing completely reversed left and right abdominal organs. The origin of the jejunum was on the left side accompanied with tubular intestinal duplication. The origin of the duplicated intestine was at the dorsal area of the pancreatic head. The tubular intestinal duplication was on the mesenteric side with a length of 40 cm. There were two points of type Шa ileal atresia at the intervals of 5 cm each. The distal side of the ileum and the entire colon was collapsed . Initially, we tried to resect the duplicated intestine with the accompanying jejunum. However, the proximal end point of the duplicated intestine was on the dorsal area of the pancreatic head and was not dissected completely even after Kocher’s maneuver. In addition, it was unclear whether the ampulla of Vater was on the true lumen of the jejunum or duplicated intestine. Therefore, the duplicated intestine with the length of 3 cm was spared and anastomosed with the true lumen of the jejunum, and the residual duplicated intestine with the accompanying jejunum was resected. The duplicated intestine was transected at 3 cm from the lower border of the pancreatic head, and the true jejunum was transected at 5 cm from the origin. The absence of the ampulla of Vater in the observation range of both lumens was confirmed. Small holes were made on the each wall of the duplicated intestine and true jejunum, and functional-side-to-side anastomosis was achieved with a 45-mm Endo-GIA™ camel load (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA). The insertion point was closed with a 5–0 absorbable suture. The ileum was transected at the distal side of the atresia point, and the mesenteric vessels were clamped and resected. The end-to-end anastomosis was performed with a 5–0 absorbable suture. A 5-Fr tube was passed through before suture completion as a transanastomotic tube . The abdominal cavity was irrigated, and a drain was inserted into the Douglas’s pouch via the right lateral region; then, the wound was closed. The patient was extubated on day 6 postoperation. Gastrointestinal series on day 11 postoperation revealed no contrast agent leakage; however, a contrast agent pathway from the oral side of the side-to-side anastomosis to the stomach’s dorsal area was observed . In addition, an abdominal computed tomogram revealed a luminal structure on the stomach’s dorsal area, which was compatible with the duplicated alimentary tract . It was speculated that the oral end of duplication is the stomach and the contrast agent flew into this remaining area. Enteral nutrition was initiated and established safely, and the patient was discharged at 2 months postoperatively. She has been received H2 blocker, because there has been a concern about gastrointestinal hemorrhage caused by ectopic stomach mucosa in the residual duplicated tract. She has been under periodical medical surveillance without gastrointestinal complications such as inflammation or hemorrhage and will undergo resection of residual duplication.