A 50-year-old woman (gravida 1, para 1) visited the hospital due to abdominal distension, anorexia, and exertional dyspnoea. She had been in good health and postmenopausal for 1 year. Physical examination showed a markedly distended abdomen. Abdominal US showed a pelvic mass and gross ascites. She was referred to our hospital for further examination and subsequent surgery.
Transvaginal US showed the presence of marked ascites and a large solid and cystic mass with a diameter of 8 cm in the left ovary . Chest X-ray confirmed a right-sided pleural effusion without lung metastases . CT of the abdomen and pelvis showed gross ascites that extended under the diaphragm and a heterogeneous mass in the left adnexa. On precontrast scans, a part of the solid component had higher attenuation than the other part and was strongly enhanced. It also had a small part with calcifications along the cystic wall. There was no lymphadenopathy or peritoneal dissemination. On pelvic MRI, the uterus and right adnexa were unremarkable. The left pelvic mass showed homogeneous low intensity on T1-weighted MRI and heterogeneous low and high intensities on T2-weighted MRI, suggesting the presence of cystic and solid lesions. The cystic lesions had various intensities on T2-weighted MRI and were separated by thickened septa . Solid parts including the thick septa were uniformly low intensity on T2-weighted MRI and well enhanced on contrast-enhanced MRI. There were no fatty components. The patient’s serum CA 125 level was 1237 U/ml (normal value < 35 U/ml). Serum CEA, CA 19–9, and SCC levels were within normal ranges. The pelvic cyst with solid components, the high CA 125 level, massive ascites, and pleural effusion strongly indicated the presence of an advanced ovarian cancer.
The patient underwent whole-body FDG PET/CT to confirm malignancy and the presence of lymph node or distant metastases. However, there were no lesions with strong FDG uptake . Moreover, she underwent abdominal paracentesis several times to confirm malignant cells in the ascitic fluid and reduce the abdominal discomfort due to the massive ascites. However, cytological examinations showed benign mesothelial cells without any malignant cells.
In this case, compared with the typical imaging appearance of epithelial ovarian cancer, the solid component of the pelvic mass had a higher attenuation lesion and calcifications on CT and a relatively smoother margin on MRI. Moreover, the cystic component had various intensities on T2-weighted images, suggesting the possibility of struma ovarii. Therefore, she underwent 131I scintigraphy, which showed strong uptake in the normal thyroid and the pelvic mass . There were no symptoms or clinical signs of thyroid hormone imbalance. Her free-T3, free-T4, and thyroid stimulating hormone levels were within normal ranges. The preoperative diagnosis was struma ovarii with pseudo-Meigs’ syndrome despite the clinical findings mimicking advanced ovarian cancer.
An exploratory laparotomy was performed for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes, and 3300 ml of yellow serous ascites were evacuated and obtained for cytology. The pelvic mass with dimensions of 10 × 8 × 7 cm3 that originated from the left ovary had no capsule rupture and no adhesions. The uterus and right adnexa were unremarkable. There were no enlarged lymph nodes or metastatic and disseminated lesions in the intraperitoneal organs. Left salpingo-oophorectomy was performed for intraoperative diagnosis. On frozen section examination of the left ovarian tumor, struma ovarii was reported. The patient underwent total abdominal hysterectomy and right salpingo-oophorectomy, because the patient and her family members had insisted on it before surgery.
Gross examination revealed a whitish and partly yellowish encapsulated mass with a slightly irregular surface. The cut surface showed multiple cysts separated by thickened septa, including a serous and gelatinous yellowish fluid and solid components . The pathological examination showed that the tumor consisted of thyroid follicles filled with various sized colloid lined by cuboidal epithelial cells . There was no evidence of malignancy or other germ cell elements in the specimens. The uterus and right adnexa were histologically unremarkable. Cytological examination of the obtained ascitic fluid showed no malignant cells. The final pathological diagnosis was struma ovarii confined to the left ovary, supporting the preoperative diagnosis.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. The pleural effusion disappeared 8 days after surgery. Serum CA 125 levels decreased to 288 U/ml 4 days after surgery and then returned to normal levels within 2 months. At 6 months, the patient remained disease-free without ascites and pleural effusion.