A 33-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of generalized weakness, emaciation and anorexia 12 years after massive small bowel resection. Our patient underwent massive small bowel and ileocecal resection because of small bowel volvulus 12 years ago. An end-to-side anastomosis was performed between his proximal jejunum and his ascending colon, with only 40 cm of his small bowel remaining. Subsequent bowel rehabilitation therapy, which included enteral nutrition with dietary fiber, recombinant human growth hormone and glutamine, was instituted for four weeks . Our patient was weaned from total parenteral nutrition (TPN) and had a normal diet up to the present.
One month ago, our patient developed diarrhea and weight loss of 7 kg with no obvious predisposing cause; he felt weak, anorexic and dizzy, and became progressively cachexic. Urinary volume was reduced, while stool volume was increased. On admission, our patient's body weight was 36 kg, body mass index (BMI) 12.2 kg/m2, heart rate 80 beats per minute (bpm), blood pressure 70/50 mmHg, and respiratory rate 18 bpm. He was oriented and cognitively intact. Pitting edema appeared in his lower extremities. An abdominal examination revealed previous surgery scarring, thin skin, a scaphoid abdomen, and negative shifting dullness. A chest X-ray showed a high density shadow of a nodule outside his right upper lung, considered to be rib calcification. A lower limb X-ray and ultrasound of both kidneys and ureters were normal. An ultrasound of his gallbladder showed gallbladder atrophy. An electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with T wave changes (II/III/avF/v4-6 flat, inversion), with incomplete right bundle branch block. All laboratory values are presented in Table .
Our patient was diagnosed with severe malnutrition and was supported by blood transfusion, parenteral nutrition (500 kcal/day), fluid, electrolyte, trace element and multi-vitamin supplementation (one ampoule each of Soluvit® and Addamel® daily), along with thiamine 100 mg intravenously prophylactically. Our patient's physical strength improved after these treatments, and pitting edema of the lower extremities decreased. Within 24 hours, our patient presented with profound fatigue and flaccid weakness of all four limbs. His heart rate was 98 bpm, respiration was normal, but biochemical investigation showed severe hypophosphatemia 0.05 mmol/L , hence a clinical diagnosis of RFS was made, and immediately the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for closer monitoring. Parenteral and enteral nutrition were interrupted and intravenous supplementation with phosphate polyfusor (120 mmol on the first day, then 60 mmol per day intravenously or enterally for five days) was initiated, along with enteral and parenteral multi-vitamins and trace elements (two ampoules each of Soluvit®, Vitalipid® and Addamel® daily for two days, thereafter one ampoule of each daily). He also received a once daily intramuscular dose of Vitamin B12 0.1 mg and thiamine 100 mg. In addition, a hydrocortisone injection 100 mg was given to prevent adrenal insufficiency on the fifth day. A plasma transfusion was given to expand blood volume because blood pressure fell to 97/60 mmHg temporarily.
On the seventh day, our patient had numbness of his limbs, diarrhea and dyspnea. At the same time, a chest X-ray indicated right middle lobe pneumonia. Respiratory muscle weakness was considered to be the reason, and an emergency tracheotomy with mechanical ventilation was done, and sputum aspiration was regularly performed. Anti-diarrhea (diphenoxylate 1 pill three times a day by mouth), anti-infection (moxifloxacin 0.4 g/day intravenously), and antacid (omeprazole 40 mg intravenously twice daily) therapy were given immediately.
On the ninth day, when his blood chemistry became normal, enteral nutrition was resumed at 500 kcal/day and increased gradually. On the twelfth day, total enteral nutrition was well tolerated with improved pulmonary symptoms, and our patient was successfully weaned from mechanical ventilator support. Subsequently, he received recombinant human growth hormone therapy (10 u/d) and total enteral nutritional support for one month and recovered uneventfully with a weight of 45 kg (gain of 9 kg) and a BMI of 15.2 kg/m2.