A 36-year-old man who was a professional soldier consulted his general practitioner several times for intermittent left testicular pain. The clinical diagnosis was epididymitis, but treatment with antibiotics and NSAID therapy was not effective. Clinical and radiological examination performed by a urologist revealed a suspect mass in the left testis. Left radical orchidectomy was performed in September 2009, and histological evaluation revealed a diagnosis of a 2.2-cm teratoma that was associated with malignant intratubular germinal cells and syncytiotrophoblastic cells. The pathological staging was pT1 pNx pMx. Serum tumor marker analysis at diagnosis showed normal lactate dehydrogenase (579 IU/L; normal, 313–618 IU/L), elevated β-HCG (126.6 mIU/mL; normal, <5.0 mIU/mL), and normal α-fetoprotein (5.5 ng/mL) levels. Liver and renal function tests, electrolytes, and complete blood count were all normal.
Thoracic and abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed left paratracheal nodes (11 mm) and left lomboaortic nodes (19 mm). Adjuvant chemotherapy was administrated after the total radical left orchidectomy due to postoperative β-HCG positivity of 12.9 mIU/mL plus the presence of left lomboaortic lymph nodes. The patient received 2 cycles of BEP (bleomycin, etoposide, cisplatin) chemotherapy followed by a retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy since the lymph nodes were still present after chemotherapy. The serum tumor marker β-HCG normalized after chemotherapy. Histological examination of the surgical retroperitoneal resection specimen revealed teratomatous tissue in a 4.5-cm polycystic mass without any residual nodal invasion .
Three months later, a CT scan revealed new mediastinal enlarged lymph nodes. The patient was asymptomatic and his serum marker levels were normal. A 2-cm teratoma was removed by thoracotomy. Three months after that, the CT scan showed a new cervical mass which was surgically removed and again showed teratomatous tissue . Two months later, a new 5-cm cervical mass appeared, and surgery was performed once more. Histological examination again revealed a mature teratoma. The patient suffered from postoperative left Bernard-Horner syndrome. He now undergoes regular follow-up every 6 months by clinical examination and CT and remains disease free more than 4 years after his last surgery. He has recovered completely from Bernard-Horner syndrome.