A 43-year-old Sudanese male was admitted to Acibadem University Hospital in Istanbul, Turkey with hyperpigmented painful skin rashes on his whole body. He was experiencing these symptoms intermittently for a year and self-medicated himself with non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs with no fever or other health problems. He had recently experienced joint pains. A complete blood count during admission showed normal erythrocyte counts (5.1 × 106/µL) and Hb levels (13.9 g/dL) with a high white blood cell levels (23.710/µL, of which 85% were lymphocytes) and low neutrophil (10.500/µL) and platelet (128.000/µL) levels. Investigation of a peripheral blood smear revealed 29% large granular lymphocytes (LGLs). Flow cytometric analysis of peripheral blood confirmed that 95% of lymphocytes (CD3+/TCRαβ+ population) were positive for pan-T antigens (CD2, CD5, and CD7) and CD8, but negative for CD4 and CD56. Ultrasonography and FDG-PET-CT evaluation of the abdominal area found hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and hypermetabolic supra-infradiaphragmatic lymph nodes as well as a hypermetabolic spleen. He had a history of malaria, but HCV and HIV tests were negative. These results were compatible with CD8+ T cell lymphoproliferative disorder with skin involvement. Therefore, a 0.5-cm-deep skin punch biopsy was performed in an inner part of the leg showing lesions.
LGL leukaemia is a rare lymphoproliferative disease and presents with anaemia, neutropenia, and an increase in the number of LGLs . About 85% of LGL leukaemias are derived from a T cell lineage (T-LGL leukaemic cells express CD3, CD8, CD16, and CD57), while the rest are derived from the natural killer (NK) cell lineage (NK-LGL leukaemic cells express CD2, CD16, CD56, and CD57) [, ]. Furthermore, CD8+ T cell lymphoproliferative disorder is a very rare form of T-LGL with poorly defined clinical, aetiological, immunophenotypic, molecular and pathological features . Although T-LGL is an indolent disease, it may chronically affect the immune system and cause recurrent infections, symptomatic anaemia, and autoimmune conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis. Prednisone, methotrexate, and cyclosporine have been used for T-LGL treatment. Therefore, the patient with this pre-diagnosis was prescribed methotrexate (20 mg/week) and Prednol® (80 mg) for 6 weeks, and further immunopathological parameters were evaluated in skin lesions.
Microscopic evaluation of skin sections by haematoxylin–eosin (HE) staining showed that the epidermis was minimally spongy and the upper dermis was oedematous with mild perivascular lymphocyte infiltration. However, the deep dermis was infiltrated by intra- and peri-vascular small lymphocytes . Standard analysis of paraffin-embedded sections by Benchmark-XT (Ventana Medical Systems) with its inner controls showed that 99% of the total lymphoid population was CD3+, CD2+, and CD5+, among which 90–95% were positive for CD8 , while only 5–10% were positive for CD4. Notably, Granzyme B showed a similar staining pattern as CD8 (data not shown). In contrast, CD20 (B cells) and CD56 (NK cells) were negative. At the bottom of the tissue, a few giant multinuclear histiocytic cells were noticed . Notably, these cells contained small intra-cytoplasmic microorganism-like structures that were not discernibly stained with any dye specific for fungi or bacteria (PAS, Alcian Blue, Grocott’s methenamine silver stain, and Ziehl–Neelsen stain) . Overall, the patient was finally diagnosed with CD8+ T cell lymphoproliferative disorder involving both the periphery and skin.
After this final diagnosis, methotrexate and Prednol were administered for 6 weeks. Six weeks later, blood values had normalized, skin and arthritis symptoms subsided, and the patient was discharged. No other follow-up could be performed because the patient returned to his country. However, because the patient was from Sudan, a malaria endemic region, and the unusual presence of small intra-cytoplasmic microorganism-like structures in histiocytic cells, the pathologist, who had no experience with malaria cases, consulted a malaria specialist at Osaka University, Japan.
Careful evaluation of skin biopsy samples by polarized microscopy revealed birefringent crystalloid structures resembling malarial haemozoin . Haemozoin is a by-product of haemoglobin metabolism in Plasmodium parasites and readily captured by macrophages and the reticuloendothelial system of the host, which can be easily recognized as birefringent crystals under polarized light [, ]. Haemozoin-like structures were mainly loaded in macrophages and giant histiocytes. To further investigate the possibility of asymptomatic submicroscopic chronic malaria infection, we performed nested PCR to detect Plasmodium parasites . After purification of DNA from the skin biopsy samples by a tissue DNA extraction kit (NucleoSpin, Macherey–Nagel), P. falciparum DNA was amplified .
The co-presence of EBV infection with malaria is a well-known aetiology of lymphoma. Hence, EBV-early RNA (EBER) transcripts were investigated in paraffin-embedded tissue samples and found to be positive in macrophage-like histiocytes .