A 9-year-old male with a past medical history of obesity, asthma, and coronavirus (COVID-19) infection one-month prior requiring hospitalization presented with fever, chills, myalgias, right eye conjunctivitis, cracked edematous lips, abdominal pain, macular rash on back and knees, and lower extremity edema. Laboratory evaluation revealed anemia (Hemoglobin 8.0 gm/dl, normal:11.5-15.5 g/dl, Hematocrit 25%, normal: 35–45%), thrombocytopenia (103 Thousand/µL, normal:140–400 Thousand/µL), and elevated c-reactive protein (185.4 mg/L, Normal < 8 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (20 mm/hr, normal: <15 mm/hr), fibrin d-dimer (1.44, normal:<0.25), functional fibrinogen (412 mg/dl, normal: 199–409 mg/dL), activated partial thromboplastin time (56.7 s, normal: 27.0-37.2 s), and prothrombin time (17.2 s, normal: 11.7–15.1 s). Imaging studies obtained at admission included a normal chest x-ray, a normal echocardiogram, and an abnormal CT of the abdomen that displayed right lower quadrant lymphadenopathy . Antibody testing to the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 was detected with no prior history of vaccination. He was diagnosed with MIS-C secondary to SARS-CoV-2. He was initially treated with intravenous immune globulin and low dose aspirin. Throughout his hospital stay he required a multidisciplinary team of specialists: rheumatology, hematology, cardiology, infectious disease, and nephrology. His condition worsened, and he developed anasarca, pulmonary edema, bilateral pleural effusion , respiratory distress, acute kidney injury, and mild ectasia of 2 coronary arteries on repeat echocardiogram. Eventually, he required admission to the pediatric intensive care unit for high flow nasal canula oxygen, intravenous high dose methylprednisolone, and fluid diuresis with furosemide. He was admitted for a total of 11 days and recovered well with resolution of his anasarca, pulmonary edema, acute kidney injury, and ectasia of his coronary arteries. The patient was discharged on 30 mg prednisone daily and low dose aspirin with planned follow up with rheumatology and cardiology.
One month after discharge, he noted left eye redness and photophobia after he self-discontinued prednisone, which prompted a referral to pediatric ophthalmology. On initial exam his vision was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/50 in the left eye with normal intraocular pressures in both eyes. Anterior segment exam was normal in the right eye and showed 2 + conjunctival injection with 2 + anterior chamber cell and posterior synechiae in the left eye. Exam of the posterior segment was limited, and the patient was diagnosed with unilateral non-granulomatous anterior uveitis and started on prednisolone acetate 1% every hour and cyclopentolate two times per day. A few days later he complained of photophobia in the right eye and had an exam consistent with anterior uveitis with 1 + conjunctival injection, 2 + anterior chamber cell and flare, and posterior synechiae. Treatment was initiated with prednisolone acetate 1% every hour and cyclopentolate two times per day in the right eye and continued in the left eye. A limited laboratory work up was initiated and referral was placed for further evaluation to the Proctor Foundation at the University of California San Francisco. Three weeks later he was examined at the Proctor Foundation and exam revealed a visual acuity of 20/20 and 20/25 in the right and left eye respectively and normal intraocular pressure in both eyes. Anterior segment exam showed white conjunctiva and 3 + anterior chamber cell, and 1 + cell in the anterior vitreous in both eyes. Fluorescein angiography (FA) was performed which revealed disc leakage and peripheral vascular leakage in both eyes . A diagnosis of bilateral non-granulomatous anterior and intermediate uveitis was made. Prednisolone acetate 1% was discontinued and difluprednate 0.05% 4 times a day was initiated in both eyes with continuation of cycloplegic medication. Laboratory investigations were notable for positive antinuclear antibody (1:40, negative < 1:40); interferon gamma release assay (QuantiFERON Gold), Bartonella antibodies, Treponemal antibodies, urine Beta-2-microglobulin, and HLA-B27 were negative. Throughout our patient’s treatment course, he developed mild ocular hypertension in both eyes (intraocular pressure elevation to 24, normal < 21) and was started on dorzolamide 2% 2 times/day in both eyes with a good response. He was able to taper off the dufluprednate 0.05% and transition to prednisolone acetate 1% daily in both eyes with discontinuation of cycloplegic drops. At last follow up, 9 months after initial presentation, his vision was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye with normal intraocular pressure. Right eye exam showed 2 + anterior chamber cell, with broken posterior synechiae, a small posterior subcapsular cataract, and rare anterior vitreous cell. The left eye exam revealed 1 + anterior chamber cell exam broken posterior synechiae, a small posterior subcapsular cataract and rare anterior vitreous cell. Posterior segment exam was normal and repeat FA showed resolution of disc and vascular leakage. His topical prednisolone acetate 1% was increased to 4 times/day and dorzolamide 2% 2 times/day was continued in both eyes. We initiated methotrexate 20 mg weekly with folic acid 1 mg daily given the multiple recurrences (3 total) of inflammation in both eyes with the development of complications of inflammation and topical treatment including ocular hypertension and posterior subcapsular cataracts.