A 17-year-old male patient was admitted to a different institution than ours complaining of blurred vision, headache, and three episodes of generalized tonic-clonic seizures, which had occurred 3 months before his admission. Upon neurological examination, the single alteration found was a visual deficit, observed with a direct confrontation visual field examination. A campimetry examination showed right homonymous hemianopsia. A cranial computed tomography (CT) scan showed a hyperdense expansive lesion adjacent to the left PCA with partial and homogeneous opacification following contrast injection . The main diagnostic hypothesis was a partially thrombosed giant aneurysm of the PCA. Subsequently, a cerebral angiography (CAG) was conducted, which demonstrated a giant saccular aneurysm of the P2 segment of the left PCA [Figure and ].
One month later, the patient was sent for endovascular treatment in our service. A cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed and showed a lesion with the heterogeneous signal, suggesting a totally thrombosed giant aneurysm of the P2 segment of the left PCA, with occlusion of the artery at its P2 segment [Figure and ]. Given this result, we performed another CAG, which confirmed the total occlusion of the aneurysm and the left PCA [Figure and ]. The patient was discharged with the prescription of an anticonvulsant, which was gradually discontinued after 6 months.
About 3 years after, the patient experienced visual worsening, having come back to our service. A cranial MRI scan was then performed, which showed flow through both the left PCA and its aneurysm, with no signs of bleeding. A CAG was also conducted, which confirmed the spontaneous recanalization of the aneurysm and the PCA [Figure and ].
We chose a noninterventional treatment aimed at managing the condition, with strict clinical follow-up. A CAG performed 1 year later revealed the patency of both the aneurysm and the left PCA, with no major differences in comparison with the previous examination . The patient continues to present with the previous neurological deficit due to the aneurysmal mass effect, yet with no additional headache episodes. He is still being given a noninterventional treatment combined with clinical follow-up.