A 60-year-old male patient was admitted to hospital for treatment of right-sided lumbar radicular pain.
Clinically, there was irradiating right leg pain in the L4 dermatome. The patient had a 1-year history of this symptom.
He did not have a past history of low back pain or LDH.
The patient had no clinically relevant comorbidities, except for being overweight (body mass index of 27). The patient had no prior relevant medical history. He was a non-smoker, had no allergies and was not diabetic. The patient didn’t have any family history related to low back pain or LDH.
Physical examination demonstrated a motor deficit of his right quadriceps, with 4/5 strength.
Preoperative laboratory tests showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 11 000/µl, normal creatinine and normal haemostatic parameters. C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were not measured preoperatively as this is not done routinely in our department for non-instrumented spinal surgery.
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan performed 2 d before the last infiltration, 1.5 mo prior to surgery, showed right-sided L4-L5 foraminal LDH, with compression of the right L4 nerve root. Intra-articular fluid collection was seen in the facet joints of L4-L5, without the presence of other inflammatory findings in the L4-L5 area .
He underwent extensive but unsuccessful conservative treatment with oral analgesics (paracetamol 1 g (1-1-1-1) and ibuprofen 600 mg (1-1-1)), rest and two right-sided L4-L5 transforaminal injections over a period of 1 year, with no clinical improvement. Over the last 3 mo, his level of pain had increased significantly, with a combination of irradiating right-sided leg pain and lower back pain.
Six weeks prior to surgery, our patient received a second right-sided transforaminal injection with cortisone. In the period following this injection, his pain level increased further, with a combination of irradiating right-sided leg pain and lower back pain. His treating physician subsequently increased his oral pain medication to level 3 analgesia with oxycodon 10 mg (1-1-1), but this failed to provide pain relief. In addition, cortisone-therapy with intramuscular solumedrol was instituted without success. This led to the consultation for surgery.
Bilateral microdecompression and right-sided L4-L5 combined microdiscectomy and foraminotomy by the posterior approach were carried out successfully. Preoperative antibiotic prophylaxis consisted of 2 g intravenous (IV) cefazolin. There were no clear intra-operative findings suggestive of infection. In the immediate postoperative period, the patient had complete relief from right-sided irradiating leg pain and was very satisfied. On the first day after the operation, he developed an excruciating irradiating pain in his left leg, which was contralateral to the side of the original herniation. The pain persisted and an MRI scan was carried out on day 4 postoperatively. This was almost normal, with bilateral decompression of L4-L5 and a small fluid collection in the left-sided facet joint of L4-L5 . No recurrent LDH, haematoma, or middle- to high-grade compressive pathology that could explain the new pattern of irradiating pain in the left leg was noted.
The patient remained in hospital for further observation. On day 5 post-surgery he developed a fever of 39 °C and chills. The clinical appearance of his wound was normal. As a standard measure in our hospital, with fever > 38.5 °C, blood cultures were taken and these grew S. aureus. With the high-level of suspicion of an infection, a second MRI scan was carried out on day 6 postoperatively, showing an increase in fluid collection in the posterior spine and the presence of air collections and inflammatory changes around the left-sided facet joint of L4-L5 .