A 46-year-old Asian woman, with a medical record of psoriatic arthritis (PA), received a cadaveric kidney transplant in May 2009. She developed combined C4d negative chronic-active antibody-mediated rejection (caAMR) in 2015, which was treated with a protocol involving repeated 5 cycles of double filtration plasmapheresis (DFPP) in 2015, 2017, and 2019, along with immunosuppressants (Rituximab 500mg in 2015, three doses of anti-thymocyte globulin 75mg in 2017 and 2019, three doses of Methylprednisolone (MTP) pulse therapy 500mg in 2019). Maintenance immunosuppressants are shown in Table . In May 2020, she presented with blurred vision and photophobia in the left eye for 2 weeks upon admission for her fifth DFPP for caAMR, associated with proteinuria, general malaise, and impaired renal function. Her visual acuity was 6/4 in the right eye, 6/5 in the left eye, without specific eye disease in Nov 2019. She had a pet kitten and denied contact or cluster history of pigeon feces, except for her husband's work environment. Apart from the above, a review of systems, especially the CNS and the respiratory systems, was unremarkable. Initial eye examination showed visual acuity of 6/5 in the right eye, 6/60 in the left eye, with intraocular pressures of 19 mmHg in the right eye, 16 mmHg in the left eye. The left eye slit-lamp examination revealed trace anterior chamber cells while fundus examination demonstrated peripapillary nasal lower localized choroiditis with exudative retinal detachment (RD) and small multifocal lesions . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed macular edema in the left eye . Examinations of the right eye were unremarkable . The preliminary diagnosis was posterior uveitis in the left eye. We suspended Methotrexate and the remaining 2 cycles of DFPP (first 3 cycles were already done), continuously tapered Tacrolimus and Mycophenolate sodium, while keeping prednisolone and salazine at the previous dose. Empirical antimicrobials with intravenous (IV) fluconazole (200 mg/day) and IV ganciclovir (100 mg/day) were prescribed.
Serology test of toxoplasma-immunoglobulin (Ig) G/IgM, quantiferon-tuberculosis assay, rapid plasma reagin, blood cultures for fungus and bacteria, Epstein-Barr viral capsid antigen-IgM, cytomegalovirus (CMV)-IgG/IgM/quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR), herpes simplex virus (HSV)-IgG/IgM, anti-human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody (Ab), and aspergillus galactomannan antigen (Ag) turned out to be negative. Chest X-ray showed no alveolar infiltrates, lymphadenopathy, mass lesions, or pleural effusions, and brain magnetic resonance angiography disclosed no obviously abnormal signal intensity or swelling of bilateral optic nerves. Nevertheless, the blood latex test for cryptococcal antigen (CrAg) was 1:4 initially and elevated to 1:16 two weeks later. Cryptococcal skin lesions were not seen. We shifted fluconazole (applied for the first 4 days) to IV liposomal Amphotericin B (L-AmB) (4 mg/kg/day dissolved in 5% Dextrose). Progressively impaired liver and renal function without specific discomfort developed following three weeks of treatments, with an increase of liver enzymes (AST and ALT) to almost two times the upper limit of normal (ULN) and an elevation of creatinine of about 50% (from 1.96mg/dL to 2.8mg/dL). Moreover, rescue intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) (0.4g/kg) was infused once due to hypogammaglobulinemia combined with vital organ involvement.
Lumbar puncture was done to rule out CNS involvement. Cerebrospinal fluid examination revealed a clear fluid without elevated protein level or lymphocytic predominance. India ink stain, latex test for CrAg, gram stain, acid fast stain, cultures for bacteria, virus, fungus and mycobacteria, venereal disease research laboratory tests, antinuclear antibody, adenosine deaminase, anti-double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) Ab, IgG index, oligoclonal bands, CMV DNA PCR were all negative. Aqueous humor of the left eye was also collected for PCR of HSV-1, HSV-II, varicella-zoster virus, and CMV, which were all negative.
Follow-up examinations (at least 1 time per week) showed deep and silent anterior chamber in bilateral eyes with mild vitritis and choroiditis in the left eye. Fundus demonstrated reduced exudative RD with small multifocal lesion and macular star . OCT revealed markedly decreased subretinal fluid . The left eye visual acuity was improved to 6/15 within three weeks. Due to clinical improvement, L-AmB (totally applied for 3 weeks) was shifted to oral form Fluconazole 200 mg/day with adjusted immunosuppressive agents . Her visual acuity recovered to 6/5 in the right eye, 6/6 in the left eye within half a year, and OCT showed no macular edema . Then we finished the treatment (Fluconazole totally applied for about 6 months). Furthermore, her visual acuity improved to 6/5 in the left eye in about 16 months of follow-up . However, under a relatively low dose of immunosuppressants, her renal function gradually deteriorated. She restarted dialysis in 2023.