A previously well 27-year-old Afro-Caribbean male nonsmoker presented to the emergency room following an episode of chest pain. The pain was central, burning, nonradiating, and lasted 40 minutes. It was rated 9/10 and was not associated with nausea or diaphoresis. He had been seen by a general practitioner 1 week prior with a similar complaint and diagnosed with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). His past medical, family, and psychosocial history were noncontributory. He had undergone no prior medical or laboratory testing.
On examination the patient was comfortable and pain free. Blood pressure was 148/56 mmHg, pulse 72 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation 99% on room air. The remainder of his physical examination was normal. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed T-wave inversions in leads II, III, aVF, V5, and V6 . At this point, the patient wanted to go home as he was convinced it was another GERD episode and he felt better. Laboratory results had not yet been obtained, and the treating physician agreed to discharge the patient with a plan to return if symptoms recurred. Several hours later, the results were followed up and troponin I was found to be markedly positive with a value of 51 ng/mL (normal range 0–0.08 ng/mL). The patient was called and asked to return to hospital for admission.
Echocardiogram showed an ejection fraction of 65% without regional wall motion abnormality. Coronary angiography revealed an anomalous origin of the right coronary artery (RCA) from the left coronary cusp with an acute take-off angle creating an 80–90% ostial culprit lesion. Computerized tomography (CT) coronary angiogram confirmed that the RCA arose anomalously from the left coronary cusp and coursed between the pulmonary trunk and the aorta with a “malignant” angulation at its origin . The patient was referred to cardiac surgery, and he underwent coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) with a right internal mammary artery graft to the RCA. He had an uneventful postoperative course and recovery. At subsequent follow-up office visits, he was well and defaulted from the clinic 1 year after surgery. Two years postoperatively, he presented to the emergency room with atypical chest pain after doing heavy lifting at home. He underwent treadmill stress echocardiography, which was normal. His chest pain resolved with antiinflammatory medications, and he remains asymptomatic to date.