A 43-year-old man was diagnosed with metastatic prostate cancer (Gleason score 4 + 4) in November 2013. Laboratory data showed that the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level was 18.6 ng/mL, and digital rectal examination indicated a stony hard mass in the prostate that was suspected to be local advanced prostate cancer. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a prostate tumor invading the seminal vesicle and a metastasis of the pubic bone . Based on these results, the patient underwent neoadjuvant androgen deprivation and docetaxel therapy, followed by laparoscopic prostatectomy, extended lymphadenenolectomy, and metastatectomy of the pubic bone in March 2014. Pathological examination revealed residual adenocarcinoma in the prostate and pubic bone (pathological T stage 3b, positive surgical margin). After the operation, he received adjuvant radiation therapy (66 Gy) to the pelvic floor. His serum PSA level decreased to < 0.01 ng/mL but gradually increased to 0.14 ng/mL. He was then re-initiated on docetaxel in December 2015, although computed tomography (CT) and bone scan did not show obvious metastatic lesions. His PSA level decreased to < 0.01 ng/mL in April 2016 after 7 cycles of docetaxel chemotherapy but slightly increased to 0.17 ng/mL in July 2016. Positron emission tomography-CT indicated five tiny nodules in the bilateral lungs . Biopsy specimens are difficult to obtain and might not reflect the precise extent of the disease owing to heterogeneity in patients with CRPC. Therefore, we performed liquid biopsy to isolate circulating tumor cells (CTCs) using the ClearCell FX System, which is an automated CTC enrichment system that is powered by a microfluidics biochip . To count the CTCs isolated using this system, we performed immunostaining using the following antibodies: mouse anti-pan human keratin (C11) monoclonal antibody (mAb) (keratin 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 13, and 18; Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA), mouse anti-human cytokeratin mAb (CK3-6H5, Miltenyi Biotec GmbH, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany), mouse anti-human EpCAM (VU1D9) mAb (Cell Signaling), goat N-terminal androgen receptor (AR; N-10) polyclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), and rabbit CD45 (D9M81) mAb (Cell Signaling). Additionally, we performed nuclear staining using 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole . Overall, 156 CTCs were detected per 7.5 mL, and almost all CTCs were AR negative in the nucleus . Therefore, we diagnosed the five tiny nodules as lung metastases from docetaxel-resistant CRPC with few AR-signaling-dependent cancer cells.
The patient was initiated on CBZ (25 mg/m2) according to the standard protocol in August 2016, instead of a second-generation AR-targeting agent (enzalutamide or abiraterone) . Following 2 cycles of CBZ chemotherapy, the PSA level decreased to < 0.01 ng/mL and the lung metastases completely disappeared, with a reduced CTC count of < 5. To date, the patient has been receiving intermittent CBZ chemotherapy.