A 31-year-old gravida 1, para 0 Thai woman at 33 weeks and 6 days of gestation presented at the labor and delivery unit due to the leakage of amniotic fluid at 26 h prior to the admission. Her antenatal care was unremarkable except for morbid obesity (body mass index 44.5 kg/m2) and pre-gestational diabetes. She was administered 81 mg of aspirin and 16 units of insulin daily. Her fasting and two-hour postprandial blood sugar ranged between 106–123 and 99–131 mg/dL, respectively. Her blood test, serology and ultrasound abnormality examination were normal. She had no underlying disease and denied a history of smoking, alcoholic drinking, or illicit drug use.
At 33+6 weeks’ gestation, she complained of vaginal leaking fluid and irregular uterine contraction 26 h prior to the admission. She had no fever or vaginal bleeding. Her fetal movement was good. Her vital signs showed no abnormalities. A dry sterile speculum examination revealed clear pooling fluid in the vagina with positive cough and nitrazine tests. Vaginal examination showed the cervix was 2 cm dilated with the effacement of 25%. Her white blood cell count (WBC) was 13,450 cells/mm3 with 80% neutrophil. Urinalysis was normal. External fetal monitoring demonstrated normal fetal heart rate and variability. Transabdominal ultrasonography examination demonstrated that the fetal growth was normal; however, the amniotic fluid index was only 2 cm. Therefore, we did not perform any amniocentesis for the determination of intra-amniotic infection/inflammation status. Expectant management was performed; steroid as well as antibiotic therapy (intravenous ampicillin, azithromycin) were given to promote lung maturity and prolong latency period, respectively.
The patient developed fever (38.2 °C) around 4 h after admission. Her pulse and blood pressure were 90 bpm and 121/71 mmHg, respectively. Continuous cardiotocography demonstrated a fetal heart rate of 165 bpm with moderate variability. Uterine contractions were 3-min intervals with moderate intensity. No uterine tenderness or foul-smelling discharge was found. Her WBC and C-reactive protein (CRP) were elevated (WBC 17,940 cells/mm3 with 85.4% neutrophil, CRP 24.36 mg/dL). Clinical chorioamnionitis was diagnosed and oxytocin was given to augment labor progression. The antibiotics were changed to intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g/every 24 h), intravenous metronidazole (500 mg/every 8 h), and oral clarithromycin (500 mg/every 8 h) to treat intra-amniotic infection as recommended in previous studies [–]. Her cervical progression was arrested at 4 cm for 4 h; hence, Cesarean delivery was performed. She delivered a male fetus with Apgar score of 8, 10 at 1 min and 5 min after delivery, respectively. Birth weight of the baby was 2680 g.
After delivery, she received similar antibiotics. Cultivation of blood culture (taken at the time of fever), amniotic fluid obtained during Cesarean delivery, vaginal swab (obtained at the time of hospital admission) and placental swab (chorioamniotic membranes) revealed bacterial colonies identified as S. mitis . Gram stain from enriched hemoculture showed Gram positive cocci in chains . Interestingly, antibiotic sensitivity profiles from all specimens were similar . Since her male neonate had respiratory distress, and severe hypoglycemia (blood sugar 16 mg/dL), which could be the sign of early onset neonatal sepsis, he was diagnosed with presumed sepsis requiring treatment. The diagnosis of presumed sepsis was based on intrapartum risk factor which involves the presence of intra-amniotic infection and the presence of respiratory distress as well as severe hypoglycemia requiring treatment in neonate . Although, his WBC count, hemoculture and chest x-ray were within normal limits, infection could be present in the newborn. CRP value could be in normal limit due to low CRP value in preterm newborns. Therefore, he was given intravenous ampicillin and gentamicin for 7 days which is based on the recommendation by the American Academy of Pediatrics and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) [, ].
Since the patient was diagnosed with septicemia and S. mitis is usually found in the oral cavity, we consulted a dentist and an infectious consultant to determine the source of infection. Dental examination showed multiple dental caries with nearly exposed pulp, pulp necrosis and acute apical periodontitis . Tooth extraction and curettage were performed. Vancomycin was intravenously administered for 1 week according to antibiotic sensitivity profile. At 6th week postpartum, her vaginal and dental caries bacterial culture demonstrated no S. mitis, and her clinical course was unremarkable. Placental histopathological examination confirmed acute histological chorioamnionitis stage 1 grade 2 . Gram positive cocci in chains was identified at chorioamniotic membranes. Retrospectively, the patient denied oral sexual intercourse during pregnancy. She reported that she subjectively had dental caries 1 year ago but did not get the treatment. The last time that she saw the dentist was more than 10 years. She did not receive dental treatment during this pregnancy. “Her partner denied having periodontal disease; however, he did not have a clinical assessment performed to determine periodontal disease status.”