A 72-year-old woman was followed up at our institute after radiofrequency ablation (RFA) for HCC. She had a history of hepatitis C infection, which was treated by direct antiviral agent therapy that had provided her with a serological viral response 3 years earlier. Two years earlier, she had developed a solitary HCC with a diameter of 1.8 cm, for which RFA was performed. Follow-up plain computed tomography (CT) revealed a newly developed low-density area around the RFA scar.
In the dynamic CT study, the area around the RFA scar in segment 8 did not exhibit early staining in the arterial phase. In the image of the portal phase, a mass was visualized with enhancement in the area, and the area continued into the bile duct of the right anterior section as a well-defined mass. The tip of the mass extended to the confluence of the anterior branch and posterior branch. The tributary of the bile duct in the anterior segment was dilated . On gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylene-triaminepentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB) magnetic resonance imaging, the area adjacent to the RFA scar exhibited low intensity on the T1-weighted image and a slightly high intensity on T2- and diffusion-weighted images. The hepatobiliary phase of the sagittal scan revealed a low-intensity mass that continued from the tumor into the right hepatic duct . Laboratory data disclosed slightly elevated liver enzyme levels, whereas the levels of alpha-fetoprotein and des-gamma-carboxy prothrombin were within normal range. The ICG retention rate at 15 min was 9.6% . The Child–Pugh score was 5 points .
We made a diagnosis of local recurrences of HCC after RFA, with BDTT reaching at the confluence of the anterior branch and posterior branch, which is defined as B3 by the liver cancer study of Japan . Right hepatectomy was planned for radical resection . One day before surgery, 2.5 mg of ICG was injected for intraoperative fluorescence navigation.
A J-shaped incision was made. Abdominal exploration did not reveal any unresectable factors. The liver edge was dull, and the parenchyma was slightly hard. The tumor and its RFA scar were recognized from the liver surface as serosal deformity on the right anterior segment. Intraoperative ultrasonography (IOUS) showed that the BDTT tip was located at the hepatic side of the right hepatic duct . On observation by the ICG fluorescence imaging system (PINPOINT, Striker, USA), the right anterior section demonstrated evident fluorescence, which reflected impaired excretion of bile due to BDTT . After dividing the right hepatic artery and the right branch of the portal vein, transection of liver parenchyma was performed along with a demarcation line on Cantlie’s line. To maintain the surgical margin, the resection line was extended to the left liver near the tumor. Finally, the right liver was connected with the right hepatic duct alone . ICG fluorescence imaging demonstrated the light of emission from the bile duct and BDTT with clear contrast; the proximal side (hepatic side) of the right hepatic duct exhibited stronger fluorescence than the distal side (duodenal side), which was compatible with the findings of IOUS before liver transection . The border was located approximately 8 mm from the confluence of the right and left hepatic duct, which was compatible with the findings of IOUS. Examination by palpation of the BDTT tip on the right hepatic duct was avoided due to its fragility. The bile duct division was made at the distal side of the BDTT border, and the surgical specimen was removed. The tip of BDTT was recognized into the resected right hepatic duct without laceration. The stump of the right hepatic duct was closed by interrupted suture using 4-0 absorbable monofilament threads . ICG fluorescence cholangiography performed after resection confirmed the bile duct route from the left hepatic duct to the common hepatic duct . The resected specimen demonstrated evident light of emission from BDTT when observed using the ICG fluorescence imaging system . Gross findings of the resected specimen revealed a confluent multinodular mass with BDTT with a secured surgical margin at the right hepatic duct . Pathological findings were as follows: St-A, 4 × 3.7 × 2.5 cm, confluent multinodular type, poorly differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma, e.g., fc (−), sf (−), s1, vp1, vv0, va0, b3, and surgical margin was negative for cancer .
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on the 13th postoperative day. Currently, she lives without recurrences for 9 months after surgery.