An 8-months-old male child was referred by a general dental practitioner to the oral medicine and diagnosis outpatient clinic of the Oral Medicine, Periodontology, Diagnosis and Radiology department, Faculty of Dentistry in March 2019. He was suffering from oral ulcers and difficulty with breastfeeding. The condition was concerning to his parents for which they sought medical consultation.
Intraoral examination revealed two ulcers in the tip of the tongue and lower labial mucosa respectively. The labial mucosal lesion was extensive and the lower lip was deformed. Extraoral examination showed erythema of the perioral skin surrounding the lower lip. Upper and lower primary central and lateral incisors were fully erupted. The patients' mother reported the appearance of lesions two months earlier without improvement. He didn’t receive any previous medications for his condition.
The infant was born with incomplete cleft palate, VSD and cryptorchydism. Surgical correction of cleft palate was performed after birth. VSD was monitored for spontaneous closure and cryptorchydism was scheduled for surgical management. Routine laboratory investigations (CBC, coagulation profile, kidney and liver function tests) were normal. Continuous lip sucking and tongue thrusting movements ever since birth were reported. The patient had no family history.
Based on the history and clinical examination, a diagnosis of Riga–Fede disease was made for the oral lesions. Perioral dermatitis from oral habits was also reported.
A three times daily regimen of a topical analgesic (Lidocaine Hydrochloride) was prescribed along with a prophylactic topical antifungal (2% Miconazole oral gel). Also, fluid intake and vitamin supplements were recommended as supportive measures. The patient was afterwards referred to a children’s hospital. After examination by a pedodontist and consultation about the medical history by a pediatrician, grinding of primary teeth was performed to eliminate tissue trauma from oral habits. Follow up appointments were scheduled at the oral medicine clinic of the Faculty of Dentistry every week for the following month to monitor the improvement of oral lesions. Parents were incompliant with the set visits. However, follow up by phone calls was performed and the parents reported complete resolution of oral ulcers and improvement of breastfeeding after one month with persistent lip deformity. Several attempts to contact the family for further follow up were tried but they weren't reachable.
In January 2021, the child's parents were successfully re-contacted by the oral medicine and diagnosis clinic. Follow up revealed that the child (2.5 years) suffered from prematurely lost upper and lower primary anterior teeth for about three months. Intraoral examination revealed no oral lesions. Apart from the deformed lower lip, extraoral examination showed the presence of a nasal ulcer with total loss of the midline portion between the nostrils (columella). Furthermore, drooling was significant .
The child's medical reports from the Hereditary Diseases Unit revealed the development of neurological manifestations like writhing movements of the arms and legs (dystonia), purposeless repetitive movements (chorea) and poorly articulated speech (dysarthria), as well as behavioral disturbances like aggressiveness and self mutilation. Self inflicting behaviors included head banging against hard objects, lip biting, vigorous scratching and manipulation of the eyes, nose and mouth. An eye ulcer that showed up for a few weeks before healing was also reported. Manifestations appeared earlier at the age of 1.5 years. However, pediatricians failed to reach a definitive diagnosis ever since that time. The records also reported VSD closure and normal values for kidney function tests (Urea:25.4 mg/dl, uric acid:2.5 mg/dl and creatinine:0.7 mg/dl). Abdominal and pelvic ultrasonography showed ectopic left iliac kidney. Genetic sequencing showed a hemizygous variant of uncertain significance (HPRT1, c.486-11G>A) in the Hypoxanthine Phosphoribosyltransferase 1 (HPRT1) gene. Final comments from the Hereditary Disease Unit confirmed the diagnosis of Lesch–Nyhan syndrome.
Psychiatric treatment with carbamazepine and an antipsychotic (risperidone) was scheduled to control the neurological symptoms and self mutilation. Moreover, the parents were taught some behavioral modification techniques like continuous and differential reinforcement. Such interventions were conducted under psychiatrist's supervision. As regards oral and dental management, topical antifungals were prescribed to prevent superimposed infection from drooling. Pedodontic consultation suggested that space maintenance for the prematurely lost primary teeth could be postponed to after adequate symptoms control. Dental follow up appointments were scheduled every month to monitor case improvement and rule out oral complications from self mutilation. About 27 weeks after psychiatric treatment, the patient’s parents reported significant improvement of self mutilation and neurological manifestations. No new lesions were reported. However, self inflicting behaviors are fluctuant and the patient needs regular monitoring.
A summary of the patients' full information of care are shown as a timeline in Table .