A 75-year-old man with HSK was referred to our department due to a 3-cm lower-pole tumor, which was incidentally discovered by CECT in the posterior part of the right side of the kidney . The patient was diagnosed with cT1aN0M0 RCC (RENAL Nephrometry Score: 1 + 2 + 2 + 1 = 6p, Fig. ). CECT also revealed that the right moiety of the HSK was supplied by the right renal artery and the branch of the left renal artery, which also perfused the isthmus .
We performed retroperitoneal LPN in the modified supine position (30° semi-lateral position) with five ports (5–12 mm) . During the procedure, the camera port was placed at a more caudoventral position than the usual placement preferred during the conventional retroperitoneal procedure . This position for the port renders the approach to the distal isthmus easy when the patient is in the modified supine position. Additionally, in our patient, CECT showed the arteries supplying the right kidney and the isthmus would originate from the left renal artery , thus it was necessary to identify the vessel feeding the tumor before tumor resection could be performed. To approach the branch of the left renal artery, both the anterior and posterior surfaces of the kidneys have to be exposed, especially the front and back of the isthmus. In light of this, the modified supine position and camera port placement helped expose the retroperitoneal cavity and distal isthmus .
A NIRF system with was employed to identify the tumor's feeding artery. One minute after intravenous administration of 1 mL of 2.5 mg/mL ICG, strong fluorescence was observed in the right part of the kidney except in the tumor . When the right renal artery was selectively clamped, fluorescence disappeared from the right kidney . These findings indicated that only the right renal artery supplied blood to the tumor and the surrounding renal parenchyma, which allowed us to clamp the right renal artery selectively.
The tumor was resected following a standard protocol, and the resected site was closed by a running suture using 2–0 V-Loc™ (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA). The operation time was 225 min, and the WIT was 18 min. The patient was discharged without any intraoperative or postoperative complications. The pathological diagnosis of the resected specimen was pT1a clear cell RCC (World Health Organization/International Society of Urological Pathology [WHO/ISUP] grade 1) with negative surgical margins. No local recurrence or metastasis was observed with follow-up CT, and there was no change in renal function at 3 months.