A 50-year-old female presented with sudden abdominal pain. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) was performed and revealed a pancreatic cystic lesion. So, she was referred to our hospital for detail examination of pancreatic cystic lesion. On physical examination, there were tenderness and spontaneous pain on her entire abdomen. She had been treated for acute pancreatitis twice and didn't have any medical and family history. Blood examination showed increasing inflammatory response, WBC 10180/μl and CRP 23.6 mg/dl, and tumor markers, CEA, CA19-9 and CA125, were not elevated.
The contrast-enhanced CT revealed a unilocular cystic lesion in pancreatic tail sized in 80 mm which had partial thicken wall. There were disproportionate fat stranding around cystic lesion , and ascites in the Douglas fossa. Based on the image findings, we suggested that she had diffuse peritonitis due to rupture of a pancreatic cyst with pancreatitis. We decided to treat pancreatitis and proceed with the detail examination of pancreatic cystic lesion because her symptoms were improving over time. MRI showed that the lesion was low to moderate intensity in T1-weighted image and high intensity in T2-weighted image. The lesion had a nodule-like low intensity area inside. The nodule enhanced in the early phase, and had high intensity area in diffusion-weighted images . In MRCP, the communication to the main pancreatic duct was not revealed. EUS showed that the nodule was protruding into the lumen and nourished by the splenic artery . One month after the first visit, the cystic lesion had gradually grown to 96 mm . 30 days after the follow up CT, she presented with sudden abdominal pain and admitted to our hospital again. We diagnosed with re-rupture because of the shrinkage of the cystic lesion and presence of ascites around the lesion. Pseudopancreatic cyst was also considered because of the complication and past history of pancreatitis, but we could not deny neoplastic disease because MRI and EUS showed a solid component with blood flow in the cystic lesion. Since there was a history of rupture, it was unlikely that a tumor with a thick capsule like MCN would develop. We suspected SPN (Solid Pseudopapillary Neoplasm) first because of pancreatic tail development at a relatively young age, so we performed distal pancreatectomy.
The operation was performed by specialists of pancreatic resection who had been in practice for over 10 years. In operative findings, there were adhesions due to repeated ruptures around the cyst lesion. The cystic lesion surface was smooth, and cysts contained fluid. We punctured the intra-cystic fluid and collected a brownish fluid. The biochemical examination of the intracystic fluid was Amylase 27,000 U/l, carcinoembryonic antigen 280 ng/dl, and carbohydrate antigen 7900 U/ml by biochemical examination. The operation time was 4 h 19 min, and the blood loss was 1400 ml.
The pathological findings revealed that there were no nodules, and mucinous cells covered inside the cyst. Immunostaining was performed, but no ovarian type stroma characteristic of MCN was found. The cells were poorly atypical and no neoplastic growth was observed, and granulation tissue was growing in the stroma . Finally, we diagnosed Simple Mucinous Cyst (SMC).
The course after the operation was uneventful. She discharged after 32 days after surgery. She had lived for a year after surgery without any evidence of metastasis and recurrence.