A 32-year-old female, resident of Pokhara city, district of Kaski, presented to our out-patient department in June 2017 with a history of joint pains, fatigue, neck stiffness, tingling sensation and headache. Earlier, in December 2016, she presented to a local hospital with high-grade fever associated with chills and rigors, joint pains, headache and bodyache. The laboratory tests revealed a total leuckocyte count of 9 800 mm−3, with neutrophils 77 % and lymphocytes 20 %. Her platelet count was 250 000 mm−3. Test results for liver and renal functions were found to be within normal limits. Urinary testing showed no evidence of bacterial infection. The Widal test was found to be positive. Based on a positive Widal test report, treatment was started with injectable ceftriaxone. The patient, however, did not benefit from antibiotic therapy. She tested negative for malaria. Brucellosis was suspected based on a positive brucella antibody test result, although a PCR test was negative. Doxycycline-rifampicin combination therapy was administered. Despite treatment, although fever subsided, she continued to have severe fatigue, joint pains, neck pain, tingling sensation and headache. She, therefore, decided to visit higher centres in India for further evaluation. She was then suspected of having tick-borne illness and, hence, was tested for Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease), Bartonella (Bartonellosis) ehrlichiosis and Babesia (Babesiosis) using ELISA, Western blot (WB) and PCR . She was treated empirically with a 3-week course of doxycycline. Besides Borrelia burgdorferi, all other tests were found to be negative. ELISA, WB and PCR confirmed Borrelia burgdorferi. ELISA for Borrelia burgdorferi showed a high level of IgM (22.9 U ml−1; ref. range: negative <12, positive >20) and an equivocal level of IgG (14.9 U ml−1; ref. range: negative <12, positive >20), respectively. On the IgM WB, the patient was positive for bands 23–25(+), 30(+), 31(+), 34(+), 41(++) and 83–93(+). On the IgG WB, she was positive for bands 18(+), 31(indeterminate), 34(+) and 41(+). The patient met both IGeneX and CDC/NYS WB criteria for IgM. The IGeneX criterion for IgG was positive but not enough to meet the CDC/NYS IgG criterion. A positive PCR result confirmed Borrelia burgdorferi. Electrocardiography (ECG), echocardiogram (EHO), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head, computed tomography (CT) of the chest, and abdomen and pelvis scan were unremarkable. The patient recalled a ring-like rash on her left thigh but did not remember a tick bite. Based on the clinical history (including the ring-like rash) and laboratory results, she was diagnosed with post-treatment Lyme disease syndrome.