A 47-year-old previously healthy male patient presented with a paroxysmal and progressively scrotal ache and a bilateral inguinal region with a burning sensation. He was admitted to the local hospital 4 h after onset. During admission, a suspected diagnosis of scrotitis was made, and the patient then underwent emergent and extensive surgical debridement. Past-operative histology showed chronic suppurative inflammation. However, despite the treatment, the skin of the scrotum continued to necrotize, and he was transferred to our hospital immediately. Physical examination showed a total scrotal skin defect, extensive left and right inguinal region skin defects (4 × 10 cm and 5 × 15 cm, respectively) and a purulent necrotizing tissue covering, which was accompanied by swelling and erythema of the surrounding skin. Bilateral testes were exposed. Five drainage tubes were visible. The patient remained afebrile with stable vital signs. Blood chemistry showed a white blood cell count of 10.35 × 10ˆ9 /L (neutrophil percentage 86.5%), a red blood cell count of 1.18 × 10ˆ9 /L, an albumin count of 26.8 g/L, and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate count of 84 mm/h. An ultrasound scan showed that the necrotic scrotal wall was thickened with edema, internal echo heterogeneity, a hydrocele of the right tunica vaginalis, and normal blood supply to the testes and epididymis. Cultures of the exudates from the scrotal wound grew Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The admission diagnosis was perineum necrotizing fasciitis. There was no history of trauma or symptoms of dysuria or haematuria. The patient had no history of diabetes, high blood pressure, or other chronic diseases; his past surgical history was unremarkable, and he was not on any regular medications.
After hospitalization, comprehensive therapy was managed by the patient. The patient then presented with fugacious pyrexia (37.8 °C), further erythema and swelling that spread to the right lower abdominal wall, which was hardened on palpation 5 days after admission. Because the patient’s condition had worsened, immediate surgical debridement was necessary. Histology confirmed the preoperative diagnosis. Cultures of exudates from the scrotal wound grew Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella pneumoniae, and the antibiotic treatment was adjusted according to the drug sensitivity results. On the 14th day of admission, the erythema and swelling continued to extend to the right outside the groin region and 2 cm down to the perianal region. There was no other discomfort. Although the lesion might have extended, we continued to strengthen the conservative treatment rather than use surgical debridement. After extensive drug-resistance developed, the antibiotic was withdrawn and conventional moist gauze therapy was applied after a shower once or twice daily. When the wound bed had been prepared, STSGs from the patient’s scalp were grafted to the scrotum, perineum, inguinal region, and perianal region. We gave the patient intravenous Cefuroxime for 3 days after his STSG, to which he was sensitive. To secure the STSGs and improve graft survival, a vacuum sealing drainage dressing (WEGO) was placed to cover the wound and the anus, and a negative sucker was placed upon the anus for 5 days. While using the NPWT, the patient did not defecate but passed gas normally . For economy, NPWT was used only after STSGs to help with wound healing. During this time, the patient did not complain of any pain or bleeding, which are common complications of NPWT. The dressing was changed every 3 days, after which the patient was able to defecate normally. After the grafted skin had survived, semi-exposure therapy was continued to facilitate wound healing. The patient had a urinary catheter placed throughout the treatment process.
After the treatment, graft take was 95%; local flaps were then grafted to cover the residual wound and the testis. The wound had decreased to two pea-sized areas . The patient was discharged and received conventional moist gauze therapy to close the residual wound at his local hospital. A follow-up by telephone 1 month later showed that both wounds had healed and that the patient was satisfied with the outcome.