A 71-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with dyspnoea due to severe aortic stenosis complicating a calcified type 0 bicuspid aortic valve. His medical history included diabetes mellitus, atrial fibrillation, chronic respiratory failure, and coronary artery bypass grafting surgery for left main artery stenosis, which uncovered a situs inversus totalis . On physical examination the patient had a systolic murmur predominantly located in the second left intercostal space on cardiac auscultation and bilateral crackles regarding the inferior parts of the lungs on pulmonary auscultation. Because of his medical history and a high Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) score of 11.9%, the Heart Team recommended TAVI rather than open surgery. The pre-operative multi-slice computed tomography (MSCT) evaluation of the aorta, and its branches confirmed patency of femoral arteries that allowed transfemoral approach and absence of significant thoracic aortic aneurysm.
Pre-operative sizing was performed with the new ValveAssist 2 (Discovery IGS 730, GE Healthcare, Chalfont St Giles, UK) image processing software. Comparatively to the standard fluoroscopy, the new software allows the projection of the MSCT-extracted, manually drawn virtual aortic annulus on the live fluoroscopy screen, and the enhancement of the aortic valve calcifications and aorta calcifications that are used as anatomical landmarks for operator guiding for the positioning of the THV during the procedure . A Sapien 3 (Edwards lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) 26 mm was directly implanted in a high position (regarding the leaflet extremities rather than the annulus, to reduce the risk of paravalvular regurgitation and need for permanent pacemaker), without post-dilatation, prosthesis constriction and no angiographic leak. The patient did not require permanent pacemaker implantation. A transthoracic echocardiography one week later confirmed an excellent result with no intra or paravalvular regurgitation, and the patient reported improved symptoms. In follow-up consultation 3 months after the procedure the patient reported improved symptoms and had no periprosthetic leak on transthoracic echocardiography.