A 63-year-old woman with a history of idiopathic hemochromatosis and treatment with phlebotomies was admitted to our emergency department with a 2-day history of right abdominal pain, which she described as colicky, and clinical characteristics of intestinal obstruction. She complained of acute retention of gas and flatus and she had no bowel movements in the previous 3 days. She also complained of nausea, vomiting and no food intake. The patient reported anorexia, severe weakness and weight loss of 12 kg over a period of 6 months. On physical examination, her abdomen was markedly tender at the right iliac fossa and a vague mass was palpated. Her bowel sounds were of obstructive type. The biochemical evaluation tests were within normal limits. The most important laboratory findings were elevated α-fetoprotein (> 800 ng/ml) and cancer antigen 125 (51.2 U/ml). HBV and HCV serum blood tests investigated in the past were negative. Abdominal X-ray showed opacity in the right upper abdomen, displacing the small bowel loops, and a few radiological signs of intestinal obstruction. The patient had clinically abdominal distention and features of intestinal obstruction on physical examination therefore, ultrasound was not performed. She also reported a history of liver hemangioma that was diagnosed 10 years previously. Following computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), without administration of intravenous contrast agent, a large (14 × 12.5 cm) well-defined, heterogeneous mass of unclear origin and nature was detected between the right hepatic lobe and the colon. The mass appeared hyper-dense on T1- and T2- weighted images compared with the surrounding lower-signal-intensity liver tissue. No invasion into the liver or adjacent organs was demonstrated .
With a possible diagnosis of giant liver hemangioma causing acute abdominal discomfort and intestinal obstruction, surgery followed. During the operation, an enormous pedunculated tumor with exophytic growth and a thin pedicle attached only to the inferior surface of the right lobe of the liver was found, hanging freely in the right abdominal cavity .
The remainder of the liver was of normal color and consistency. Grossly, the tumor was fairly well-circumscribed and encapsulated, invading veins in the periphery. This gave the impression of hemangioma . No enlarged porto-hepatic lymph nodes were seen or palpated. The patient underwent resection of the tumor from its pedicle close to the liver edge, at a safe distance from the tumor mass. The postoperative course of the patient was uneventful. Histopathological examination revealed a white-grayish tumor weighing 920 g and measuring 14 × 12.5 × 9.2 cm with nodular configuration and central necrosis . Microscopically, the tumor exhibited the morphological features of grade II and III HCC, according to Edmondson-Steiner's classification. There was invasion of a few small veins and of the hepatic capsule, without it being disrupted. Scarring, broad fibrous septa and extensive central necrosis were also observed. Adjacent to the tumor and underneath the capsule, residual tissue of a cavernous hemangioma with a small thrombus was recognized. The resection margins were free of neoplastic tissue. Liver parenchyma from the resection margin of tumor pedicle exhibited features of mild reactive non-specific hepatitis, signs of portal venous stasis and mild microvesicular steatosis. No cirrhosis or iron deposition signs were detected.
Follow-up of the patient has been short, but 5 months after surgery there was no evidence of recurrent disease.