A 69-year-old female was incidentally diagnosed with aneurysms of the right ICA and left anterior cerebral artery. She visited our hospital as the ICA aneurysm increased in size during follow-up. The ICA aneurysm measured 20 mm × 14 mm with a neck of 13 mm in the right C1 segment on digital subtraction angiography (DSA) . The patient underwent FD implantation. Antiplatelet therapy (prasugrel 3.75 mg and aspirin 100 mg) was initiated 13 days before surgery. A platelet aggregation test (VerifyNow System) performed three days before surgery revealed aspirin reaction units of 373 and P2Y12 reaction units of 69 (inhibition 72%, base 244).
For the FD placement, a Phenom 27 catheter (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) and 5Fr SOFIASELECT (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) were guided into the M1 segment of the right middle cerebral artery (MCA) and ICA using ASAHI CHIKAI 14 microguidewire (Asahi Intec) with the support of a 6Fr shuttle sheath (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) inserted from the right femoral artery. Next, an Excelsior SL-10 pre-shaped J microcatheter (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA). A 3.2Fr Guidepost (Tokai Medical Products, Aichi, Japan) was placed into the aneurysm with ASAHI CHIKAI14 microguidewire with the support of a 4Fr ASAHI FUBUKI Dilator Kit (Asahi Intec, Aichi, Japan) inserted from the left femoral artery. The PIPELINE FLEX SHIELD (Medtronic) 5.0 mm/30 mm was selected and expanded from the proximal portion of the MCA through the Phenom 27 catheter. Next, coil embolization was performed from the jailed SL-10 using i-EDCOIL Infini (Kaneka Medix, Osaka) 20 mm/50 cm for the first and second coils and target detachable coil XL 360 soft (Stryker) 12 mm/45 cm for the third coil. Coil embolization was completed after confirming that the inflow of the contrast medium into the aneurysm was sluggish. Since the proximal portion of the stent was poorly adhered to the parent vessel, the SHOURYU HR 7.0 mm-7.0 mm (Kaneka Medix, Osaka) balloon catheter was advanced and expanded at the proximal end of the stent. There was shortening of the proximal side of FD after percutaneous transcatheter angioplasty, although the aneurysm was well covered. After the procedure, we confirmed the absence of intracranial hemorrhage using cone-beam computed tomography (CT) .
No abnormal findings were observed on physical examination, and no new infarcts were detected by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on the 1st postoperative day. Moreover, the signal inside the aneurysm decreased on MRI. Antiplatelet medication was continued postoperatively. However, on the 3rd postoperative day, the patient was found in the hospital ward with an E1V1M1 consciousness level on the Glasgow Coma Scale. Resuscitation was initiated for cardiopulmonary arrest, and after her heartbeat resumed, CT revealed a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Based on the thick hematoma detected around the brainstem, the bleeding could have been caused by the aneurysm treated in this case. Therefore, delayed aneurysm rupture after FD placement was considered the cause of the hemorrhage . No shape changes, including FD shortening, were detected using CT at that time. The patient’s bilateral pupils were already dilated, and her circulatory system was unstable; therefore, surgical intervention was not considered feasible, and we decided to treat her conservatively. The patient died on postoperative day 11.