A 78-year-old Chinese woman was diagnosed with SCLC 1 year ago with no history of DM who presented with hyperglycemia up to 23.4 mmol/L (random blood glucose level) after 14 courses of sintilimab. The plasma glucose line shown in Figure .
The patient initially developed polyuria and polydipsia and her blood glucose level showed a mild increase after 12 cycles of sintilimab, but the treatment was continued. Two months later, the patient presented with hyperglycemia up to 23.4 mmol/L (random blood glucose level) with strong positive uric sugar (++++) and hemoglobin A1c of 8.2%.
The patient was diagnosed with SCLC on October 29, 2019 in the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University. She underwent endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration, and the results were suggestive of poorly differentiated cell carcinoma, considered to be SCLC. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated CKpan(+), P40, P63(+), Ki67 (50%+), TTF-1(+), CgA(+), Syn(+), CD56(+) and CD45. The patient immediately underwent concurrent chemotherapy and immunotherapy for SCLC (extensive). She received her first treatment, etoposide 82 mg, days 1–3; cisplatin 20 mg, days 1–3; and sintilimab 200 mg, day 1; EP plan) on October 30, 2019. The patient came to our hospital to continue treatment. After we assessed her condition, she continued the EP treatment plan, but we reformulated the doses as follows: etoposide 240 mg, days 1–3; cisplatin 250 mg, days 1–3; and sintilimab 200 mg, day 1. This therapy did control her disease well, with decreased tumor markers and no metastases found on imaging. In the following days, she came to our hospital monthly for evaluation. Her blood glucose level was normal after treatment. After five cycles with the EP plan, we changed to sintilimab 200 mg and anlotinib 8 mg q.d. because of severe gastrointestinal adverse reactions. After three cycles of the new treatment, the patient developed lower urinary tract infection, such as urinary frequency, difficulty urinating, pain with urination, and hematuria. Therefore, we had to stop anlotinib and used levofloxacin to treat the infection. Hence, we used sintilimab monotherapy, and imaging showed good antitumor effects . During the treatment, the patient only had mild gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea and poor appetite.
The patient denied any other specific personal history. But she has family history of cancer, her grandmother died of lung cancer, whereas her father died of colorectal cancer.
Height: 151 cm; weight: 40.4 kg; body mass index: 17.71 kg/m2. Physical examination was no positive signs.
Other laboratory evaluation showed that urinary ketones were negative and blood pH was normal and the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis and hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenocortical axis were negative; but antithyroid autoantibodies were 17.80 IU/mL (normal< 4.0 IU/mL) and antithyroid peroxidase autoantibodies were 10.0 IU/mL (normal < 9.0 IU/mL). The islets antibodies tests were all negative, including anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 (GADA) antibody, anti-islet cell antibody, and anti-insulin antibody tests were all negative. Moreover, zinc transporter 8 antibody levels were unavailable in our hospital. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I and II, which was shown in Table , including HLA-A, B, C, DRB1, DQB1 and DPB1, were tested by polymerase chain reaction-sequence based typing (PCR-SBT).
According to the computed tomography scanning of the patient’s chest , the tumor was shrinking, which indicated that anti-PD-1 therapy was effective.