A 38-year-old woman with no medical history presented 10 days of dizziness and headache without loss of consciousness, dysarthria, weakness, nausea, or vomiting. Neurological examination was normal. The brain CTA manifested two unruptured fusiform aneurysms, which located in left anterior cerebral artery and left posterior cerebral artery, with the size of 9.7 mm × 6.3 mm and 10.2 mm × 7 mm, respectively . Furthermore, transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a 4.8 × 2.9 × 2.5 cm3 mass attached to the interatrial septum in the left atrium, which obstructed the mitral orifice without mitral valve regurgitation .
According to the recommendation of multidisciplinary team (MDT), myxoma was first considered to be excised, a conservative approach was chosen for cerebral aneurysms, and the fast track cardiac surgery pathway should be performed to evaluate neurological function as soon as possible. The baseline vital signs of this patient were measured before induction of general anesthesia, in order to maintain the fluctuation range of heart rate (HR) and mean arterial pressure (MAP) within 10% throughout the perioperative period. The mass was successfully removed and histological examination confirmed a typical myxoma . No mitral regurgitation or shunt flow across the atrial septum was revealed by transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) . Parenchymal brain oxygen (PbtO2) monitoring did not change significantly throughout the procedure. The patient was transported to intensive care unit (ICU) receiving infusion of propofol. After that, continuous infusion of fentanyl (0.3μg/kg × h− 1) was performed to ensure analgesia and attenuate cardiovascular response to tracheal intubation. She was extubated 3 h after surgery without neurological disorder and discharged from ICU on the first day. Intravenous patient-controlled analgesia pump was employed to insure postoperative numeric rating scale (NRS) score lower than 3 (0 = No pain, 10 = worst pain imaginable) . She was fully recovered and discharged home on the sixth day after surgery.
The keywords “cerebral aneurysm”, “intracranial aneurysm”, “myxoma”, and “anesthesia” were used for searching in the PubMed and Google Scholar databases. The literature written in English published from January 1966 to April 2019 was reviewed, and articles or abstracts providing the following information were included, for instance, age, gender, intervention for myxoma and aneurysm, complication, and outcome. Eventually, there were 47 reports of 49 cases and a total of 50 cases analyzed [, –]. The median age was 38 years (95%CI, 34–42), and female/male ratio was 3.17:1. Resection of atrial myxoma was performed first in 90% (45) cases. Among these, conservative therapy for cerebral aneurysm was performed in 70% (35) cases, including repeated operations of recurrence myxoma in 2 cases [, ]. Whereas, craniotomy for aneurysm in 3 cases [, , ], coiling for 2 cases [, ], radiation for 1 case , and cytostatic treatment for 1 case was carried out later . Only one case reported craniotomy was performed first and early resection of myxoma was advised . Three patients were dead in the early 1970s due to lack of knowledge and treatment [, , ]. After resection of myxoma, 13.3% (6/45) patients suffered neurological dysfunction, while acute left hemiparesis appeared during induction of anesthesia and the operation was delayed in one case . Severe neurological complication appeared in one patient with chronic renal failure, who finally died of sepsis . No perioperative subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) was reported. Except in one patient, a conservative therapy was attempted, and a myxoma was verified by autopsy with cerebral aneurysms in 1973 . During follow-up period, the rates of stable and regression of aneurysm were 50% (25 cases) and 10% (5 cases) respectively, while enlargement was 10% (5 cases), and new formation was 12% (6 cases). The subgroup of 11 progressive cases was further analyzed, continuous conservative therapy was performed in 4 cases, operation was carried out in 3 cases, and radiotherapy was administered in one case. Further follow-up revealed stable or regression after the treatment. Only one patient suffered SAH . Although anesthesia management was introduced in only one case, it was in craniotomy procedure .