A 22-year-old female patient underwent the cosmetic injection of HA for her eyebrows in an illegally operated clinic. HA (1.1 ml) was injected under each eyebrow. A few seconds after the injection needle was withdrawn, the young woman suffered orbital pain on the right side of the eye. Hyaluronidase (100 U) was injected under the right eyebrow immediately to degrade the HA. After 3 days, rotation pain occurred in both eyeballs, and the patient was sent to the ophthalmology department. A physical examination demonstrated that the pupillary light reflex was normal; additionally, fundus imaging and an orbital computer tomography scan were normal. However, no electrophysiological examinations were performed, and the pain spontaneously relieved but later recurred.
Two weeks later, she had blurry vision in her right eye; thus, she came to the department of ophthalmology. No oedema or lesion was found around the injection point. The best-corrected visual acuity at initial presentation was 20/32 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. Fundus imaging of both eyes showed papilloedema and venous tortuosity and dilation, especially in the right eye . Computer automated visual field examination of the right eye showed tunnel vision, while the left eye exhibited peripheral depression . A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the head and orbits showed bilateral optic nerve sheath thickening. No obvious oedema of the extraocular muscles was observed. The lateral subcutaneous fat layer on both sides of the forehead had a band-like abnormal signal that was more pronounced on the left side. T1 WI had an equal signal, T2 WI had a high signal, the boundary was clear, and the medium intensity uneven enhancement was enhanced . Extraocular movements and anterior segment examination including intraocular pressure were normal in both eyes. The relative afferent pupillary defect test was performed. Laboratory testing included the determination of the complete blood cell count, the thyroid function test, rheumatoid factor, anti-streptococcus haemolysin O antibody, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, levels of antinuclear antibodies and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, syphilis serologic test and chest radiography. The results of all tests were normal or negative. She had no history of prior ocular or systemic disease and no allergies to medications or known substances.
The patient was diagnosed with OPN secondary to HA. Hyaluronidase (150 U) was immediately injected into the retrobulbar region of each eye. Oral prednisone treatment was started at 80 mg/d and decreased by 20 mg/wk. After 2 days of treatment, visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes. At the 3-day follow-up, the visual field had improved, and the fundus examination revealed decreased oedema of the optic disc. During the treatment, the patient did not complain of insomnia, stomachache or any other discomfort.