This study was conducted on a three-year-old boy from Shahrekord, Iran, as a tourist in Mashhad, Iran, who spent 2 days in a hotel. According to his mother, the boy first got thirsty at night; therefore, they asked the hotel personnel for some water. Abdominal pain began shortly after drinking a little water, followed by one episode of vomiting.
The next morning, the boy was referred to the Pediatric Emergency ward of Mashhad Imam Reza Hospital due to loss of consciousness. His weight was 15kg and his height was 93cm, both in 50 percentiles. He was previously a healthy child with normal development without any history of a specific disease or hospital admission. He was the only child with no history of metabolic disorders in their family and his parents were not consanguine. There was no history of diarrhea, fever, cough, headache, trauma, or any other symptoms.
In the initial examination, the child was lethargic with midsized and reactive pupils. His respiration was deep and rapid. His vital signs demonstrated hypotension (BP: 40/30 mmHg), tachypnea (RR: 42/min), and tachycardia (HR: 156/min). The pulses were weak and rapid, the extremities were cold with capillary refill time more than 3sec. Moreover, heart and lung auscultation were normal and neurological examinations revealed no neurological deficit. Other physical examinations were also normal.
On admission to the hospital, one dose of 20cc/kg normal saline was administered rapidly and the shock was resolved successfully. In the initial tests, the arterial-blood gas test demonstrated severe acidosis (first PH: 7.07, HCO3:4 meq/L, PCO2:14 mmHg).
Regarding the severe resistant acidosis, the patient received several doses of sodium bicarbonate; however, the acidosis persisted. The anion gap (AG) was calculated at 26 meq/L, lactate was measured at 58 mg/dl and there was mild hypocalcemia (Ca: 8.8mg/dl) without any other electrolyte disturbance. Blood glucose was normal and no ketone was detected in the urine test. Chest x-ray and ECG (electrocardiogram) findings were normal. Neurologic and cardiologic consultation with pediatric subspecialists recommended correction of hypotension and acidosis. Toxicology tests revealed negative serum concentration of salicylate, acetaminophen, phenobarbital, ethanol, and methanol; however, the serum level of EG was positive (28.8 mg/dl). The results of laboratory examinations are summarized in and toxicology test result are presented in .
Finally, based on the clinical evidence, physical examinations, and paraclinical test results, the diagnosis was confirmed as EG poisoning. Treatment response was favorable using appropriate fluid therapy, administration of sodium bicarbonate (1meq/kg stat, then 5meq/kg continues infusion in 24h), ethanol (1gr/kg of 20% solution stat, then 0.1 gr/kg/hr to 24h), thiamin and pyridoxine (1mg/kg/day) . Acidosis recovered after about 12h, the EG level reached zero after 24h and the child was discharged from the hospital in good general condition after 2 days.