A 49-year-old male patient was referred to the local hospital for complaining of gradual aggravated dysphagia with no obvious inducement one month ago, without hematemesis, hematochezia, and no significant weight loss. The patient underwent two upper digestive endoscopy, one showed smooth esophageal mucosa and good cardia expansion, the other showed fluid retention at the gastroesophageal junction, unclear mucosa, and narrowing of the cardia, but the endoscope could reluctantly pass into the gastric cavity. Two upper gastrointestinal imaging showed the smooth tapering distal esophagus (“Bird’s beak” appearance) and dilated esophagus with barium. CT showed dilated esophagus and insignificant thickening of the lateral wall of the cardia, beyond that there isn’t any other abnormality. A diagnosis of achalasia was obtained combining the above clinical evidence. Then the doctor communicated with the patient and his family to obtain their consent and scheduled for POEM. After general anesthesia, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was used to explore the whole process of esophagus: stenosis appeared at 40 cm from the incisor, and the surface mucosa was smooth. After the mixed solution of adrenaline, normal saline and methylene blue was injected into the submucosa 30 cm from the incisor, a longitudinal 1.2 cm mucosal incision was made to establish a tunnel for submucosal stripping under endoscopic-assisted. When the endoscope reached 39 cm from the incisor in the tunnel under the mucosa, it was found that the mucosa and muscularis had serious adhesion, and the two layers could not be separated. After the incision was closed with a titanium clip the operation was terminated. Postoperatively, the patient occurred esophageal fistula and mediastinal abscess, which was treated by mediastinotomy and drainage. At this time, the doctor checked the blood tumor markers: CEA, CA-125, CA-242, and AFP were all normal. Cardioplasty was performed after two months of infection completely control. At the same time, the scars near the cardia were removed for pathological examination, showing that it was highly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Two months later, he was referred to our hospital and planned to undergo radical surgery for gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinoma. Preoperative, we performed a complete oncology-related examination and there was no evidence of metastases other than the primary tumor and performed the operation with the consent of the patient. During the operation, we found that the cardia and the surrounding tissues including lung tissue, diaphragm, omentum, and left lobe of the liver were very tightly adhered due to multiple operations. The operation was difficult, but eventually we completed the operation. Postoperative pathology: (cardia) moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. (p-T4aN1M0G2). The patient recovered smoothly and was transferred to the oncology department to continue treatment, but he died ultimately after 4 months due to tumor recurrence.