A 5-year-old female child was admitted for intracranial tumor on 29th March 2018. Her chief complaint was polydipsia and polyuria for 3 years. The MRI image of December 2015 in local hospital showed tumor on sellar region, with characteristics of T1 hypointensity, T2 hyperintensity and homogenous enhancement. Recent 2 months, she presented with symptoms of intermittent body seizure and unconsciousness. The reexamination MRI in March 2018 revealed the tumor was bigger . Her height was 95 cm and weight 32 kg, the body mass index was 35.5. Her previous history was negative. Physical examination indicated no obvious signs except obesity and short neck. Although without results of polysomnography test, apnea did take place during sleep, so we inferred there was possibility of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). We evaluated her with ASA II and Mallampati III. Results of blood routine, coagulation function and D-dimer tests were normal. But the blood electrolytic, such as serum Na+ (154.8 mmol/L) and Cl− (119 mmol/L) were significantly higher than the reference. Meanwhile some blood hormone results were also abnormal. For example, free T4 (0.56 ng/ml) and total T4 (3.27μg/ml) were slightly lower than the reference, but cortisol (1.41μg/dl) and adrenocorticotropin (< 5.0 pg/ml) were significantly reduced. These changes of hormone demonstrated pituitary dysfunction and might cause the electrolytic and distribution of body fluids abnormal. Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram tests were normal, but serious fatty liver was detected by abdominal ultrasound. Thus, for exact diagnosis and treatment in progress, the operation with general anesthesia would be done to draw the tumor tissue for pathological examination.
After admission, sodium valproate 0.5 g/bid and levothyroxine 25μg/qn were administered. Blood electrolytic was monitored and regulated daily. The result of chest computer tomography (CT) on 30th March was negative, and her preoperative chest examination was normal . Na+ 146.6 mmol/L and Cl− 111.6 mmol/L, which re-examined on 3rd April, closed to normal range. Routine cortisol supplement was delayed due to results of cortisol and adrenocorticotropin reported not in time.
On 4th April, this girl was sent to the operating-room by stretcher. It was difficult to establish venous access because she was obese and incompatible, so the sevoflurane inhalation induction was given with 3%~ 8% sevoflurane and O2 6L/min. At the beginning of induction, she struggled for few seconds. The monitor showed SpO2 was 92%~ 96%. Although she was keeping spontaneous breathe, the tidal volume was very low, just 70~100 ml. Meanwhile, her breathe movement was not as same as normal, because there was very mild collapse of suprasternal fossa on inhalation stage, albeit it was not apparent. At the same time, another anesthesiologist was called for more assistance because of difficult jaw-thrust. By squeezing breather bag, support ventilation following her spontaneous breathe was tried, but the situation could not be improved and jaw-thrust was still difficult.
Twenty minutes later, venous access was established. Thus propofol 50 mg, sulfentanil 15μg and rocuronium 40 mg were administered. Endotracheal intubation with 4.5-intensive-tube was successful with routine laryngoscope, because exposing and visualizing her larynx and glottis was easily. No secretion was found in her mouth. And her tonsilla and vocal cords were normal. During the induction phase, although her heart rate and blood pressure waved normally, low tidal volume, low SpO2 and mild airway blocking sustained, the SpO2 was only 91%~ 95% with FiO2 100%.
After endotracheal intubation, mechanical ventilation setting was as follows: tidal volume 200 ml, I:E = 1:2, f 20, FiO2 100%. The monitor showed seriously high peak pressure sustaining at 36~39cmH2O. In the meanwhile the SpO2 was only 90%~ 92% and EtCO2 more than 55 mmHg. Although no wheezing rale and stridor, obvious blistering sound and coarse crackles presented in both lung fields by chest auscultation. Thus airway was aspirated immediately, only little secretion in the tracheal. But the ventilation was not ameliorated. After changing volume controlling model into pressure controlling model, ventilation situation was still bad. Then general anesthesia was enhanced by increasing concentration of sevoflurane and administering sulfentanil 10μg and rocuronim 20 mg. At the same time, methylprednisolone 40 mg and furosemide 10 mg were administered. Unfortunately, ventilation situation was not improved, such as seriously high airway peak pressure and low SpO2. Then the operation had to be cancelled, and she was sent to ICU after taking chest CT scan . Surprisingly, chest CT showed bilateral pulmonary consolidation accompanied by air bronchogram and the ground-glass opacity lesions, but echocardiography demonstrated a preserved left ventricular ejection fraction 65%.
In ICU, positive pressure mechanical ventilation was initiated. Methylprednisolone 40 mg and levothyroxine 25μg for one dose were administered. Although there was no bacterial organisms in sputum culture, meropenem was administered for anti-infection. Several hours later, breathe sound was obviously better except the bottoms of bilateral lung with tiny rale. After 48 h of supportive care in ICU, the pulmonary edema resolved rapidly, reexamined chest CT demonstrated the most of lung field was clean except bilateral lower lobe alveolar infiltrates and consolidation .