A 12-year-old male child patient visited the Department of Pediatric Dentistry with the presenting complaint of swelling and pain on the right side of the mandible for 6 months. The patient presented with a history of extraction of a carious tooth from the region 4 months back. On extraoral examination, it was found that a diffuse non-tender swelling was present on the right side of the mandible. The swelling was hard on palpation and was associated with right submandibular lymphadenopathy. The overlying skin color was normal. On intraoral examination, a hard bony swelling was found on the buccal aspect of the edentulous space of the first premolar region obliterating the vestibular depth (A) and was extending till the first permanent molar region.
Based upon these preliminary findings, it was provisionally diagnosed to be a case of chronic alveolar abscess with respect to deciduous molar, with a suspicion of some underlying bony pathology. To differentially diagnose the case, the patient had been advised a series of blood investigations and radiographic investigations (orthopantomogram, cone-beam CT). Complete blood count, bone biochemistry blood tests including levels of calcium, phosphate, electrolytes, etc., all were well within the normal range. Increased values of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (32 mm/hour) and alkaline phosphatase (280 U/L) were present.
Orthopantomogram showed developing tooth buds of mandibular right canine, premolars, and molars (B). A radiolucency was seen in the periapical area of the developing right second premolar area and there was also seen the localized thinning of the lower border of the mandible.
Cone-beam computed tomography examinations showed bony laminations parallel to each other and the underlying cortical bone in the axial and sagittal images and these were present both buccally and lingually (A and B). The lamellae were more prominent in the posterior sections of the mandible. However, the buccal cortex was destroyed in the anterior sections especially in the second premolar and molar region. Areas of small sequestrum and osteolytic radiolucencies were seen within the newly formed bone (C), which were alternating with each other. Enlargement of the affected mandibular canal was also evident. A three-dimensional reconstruction image showed an increase in the cortical bone and volume of the mandible on the right side. Based upon these findings in the CBCT, a provisional diagnosis of Garre's osteomyelitis was formed in this case.
The lesion was planned to be surgically curetted under 2% lignocaine with 1:200,000 adrenaline concentration. Informed verbal consent was taken from the child's parents to carry out the treatment. The surgical curettage of the area was followed by antibiotics along with anti-inflammatory drugs which were started 1 day before the surgery and continued for 8 weeks. Clinically, the patient's face was symmetrical and no swelling was present either extraorally or intraorally. An OPG was repeated which revealed the eruption of underlying mandibular first premolar but thinning around the lower border was still present . The patient was recalled after 3 months but unfortunately, he did not report back. The tissue samples sent for histopathology showed irregular trabeculae of bone with empty appearing osteocytic lacunae in a background of collagenous tissue, areas of hemorrhage, and inflammatory cells . These findings further supported the clinical diagnosis reached out through CBCT.