A 76-year-old woman with a history of HIT-T was admitted to our department for unstable angina pectoris (UAP); coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) was indicated. Her first admission by the cardiologist was 7 years prior for UAP with congestive heart failure, and diagnosed with three-vessel coronary artery disease. She was mechanically ventilated; intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP) and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with a bare-metal stent to the right coronary artery (RCA) were performed. Post-intervention, continuous hemodiafiltration (CHDF) with heparin was continued. Repeated heparin use caused gangrene and amputation of four fingers; she was subsequently diagnosed with HIT-T, and a temporary tracheostomy was required. Moreover, due to her poor general condition, PCI for residual coronary disease was not performed.
Other comorbidities included insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (hemoglobin A1c = 6.4%), chronic kidney disease (eGFR = 15 ml/min/1.73 m2), pulmonary hypertension, and peripheral artery disease (left carotid artery and left radial artery stenosis). There was no family history of coronary disease, allergy, or history of smoking.
Her left ventricular function was moderately impaired (left ventricular ejection fraction, 44%). The preoperative platelet count was 18.0 × 104/μl, and platelet factor PF4/H Ab was negative; thus, she was diagnosed with ‘‘remote’’ HIT [, ]. The estimated postoperative mortality by Japan SCORE II (which does not include entry for the thromboembolism) was 4.9%, and the estimated risk of mortality and morbidity was 28%.
On admission, aspirin and clopidogrel were substituted for argatroban, and argatroban was used during coronary angiography. Target activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) was twice the baseline; thus, argatroban was administered until 9 h prior to the operation. Surgery was performed under general anesthesia, and a median sternotomy approach was used. Simultaneously, the right femoral artery and vein were secured by introducing peripheral mechanical circulatory support, avoiding central cannulation for cardiopulmonary bypass establishment.
A bolus of 5000-unit unfractionated heparin was administered when anastomosis was started, and activated clotting time (ACT) was maintained between 189 s (control score) and 429 s . After all coronary anastomoses (RITA-LAD, LITA-LPL, SVG-4PD) were completed, 100 mg protamine was administered; however, the ACT did not normalize fully . The surgery was uneventful, and the patient was extubated in the operating theater. The intra and postoperative blood losses were 495 cc and 358 cc/16 h, respectively.
Furthermore, the postoperative anticoagulation regimen was based on the ACCP guideline . Argatroban was initiated at 0.2µg/kg/min (this value is in accordance with the Japanese standard ) 3 h postoperatively and continued until postoperative day (POD) 6. Warfarin was also started when platelet count exceeded 10 × 104/μl on POD 4 and continued for 3 months. The postoperative course was uneventful, and there were no signs of thromboembolism. PF4/H Ab was positive on POD 8 (examined by latex flocculation turbidimetry; 2.8 U/ml: the threshold is < 1.0) and negative by POD 91.
Informed consent was obtained from the patient for the reporting of this case.