A 46-year-old man with a history of diabetes, fatty liver, hypertension, and dyslipidemia had been aware of periumbilical pain since the previous day. In addition to this pain, he had also developed other abdominal symptoms including abdominal discomfort and vomiting. He was admitted to our hospital complaining of painful mass in the umbilical region for examination.
His examination on presentation was height, 165 cm; weight, 146.6 kg; BMI, 53.8 kg/m2; temperature, 36.8C; blood pressure, 142/88 mmHg; heart rate, 86 beats/min; periumbilical pain; and umbilical mass .
His blood test results on presentation included signs of mild inflammation, with a white blood cell count of 6500/mm3 and a C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration of 3.09 mg/dL, and signs of mild dehydration with blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 25.1 mg/dL and creatinine of 1.08 mg/dL.
Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed high-density subcutaneous fat and hernia in the umbilical region, with the hernia containing greater omentum and small intestine. Incarcerated umbilical hernia was therefore diagnosed . No dilation of the gastrointestinal tract was apparent.
On the basis of these findings, the hernia contents were considered to mainly comprise greater omentum and that this was therefore a case of incarcerated Richter umbilical hernia. The decision was made to perform emergency surgery. The patient was severely obese (BMI, 53.8 kg/m2), and as difficulties with first trocar insertion and securing sufficient working space for laparoscopic operations were anticipated, we decided to first release the incarcerated umbilical hernia by open surgery. If bowel resection is required, the hernia orifice is closed by simple suturing alone, whereas when bowel resection is unnecessary, the IPOM plus method using a mesh is chosen to reduce the risk of recurrence. In this case, we therefore adopted a strategy of using a hybrid IPOM plus method combining open and laparoscopic surgery.
Surgery was performed under general anesthesia by tracheal intubation without concurrent use of epidural anesthesia . A 10-cm longitudinal skin incision with the umbilicus at the center was created to expose the hernia sac, which was mobilized. The hernia contents comprised greater omentum and small intestine. The incarcerated greater omentum could not be reduced to the peritoneal cavity and was resected . No perforations or necrotic changes to the incarcerated small intestine were identified, and bowel resection was judged unnecessary. Reduction to the peritoneal cavity was therefore performed . After hernia sac resection, the long diameter of the hernia orifice was measured (6 cm). The mesh used was a 12-cm Symbotex™ round mesh (Covidien, Mansfield, MA, USA) coated with collagen to prevent adhesions and was sufficiently large to overlap the hernia orifice by at least 3 cm. Using a Alexis® laparoscopic system S size (Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA, USA), a 5-mm ENDOEYE FLEX™ deflectable-tip videoscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted via this site under insufflation pressure of 10 mmHg, and 5-mm trocars were inserted at two sites, under the right costal arch and on the cranial side of the left umbilical region . The insufflation was released, and the mesh was inserted into the peritoneal cavity. The hernia orifice was closed by simple interrupted sutures with 0 VICRYL™ (Ethicon, Cincinnati, OH, USA) , insufflation was again performed, and supporting sutures were placed on the cranial and caudal sides of the mesh using an EndoClose™ (Covidien) to temporarily secure the orifice by pulling it up against the abdominal wall . This mesh was further secured by the double-crown method using an AbsorbaTack™ (Covidien) . The umbilical wound was closed by dermal suturing with 4-0 Biosyn™ (Covidien) . Lidocaine hydrochloride (1%) was infiltrated into trocar sites and small open wound at the end of surgery in addition to diclofenac sodium suppository (50 mg) administration. The operating time was 100 min, and intraoperative hemorrhage was 160 ml. The patient took celecoxib 400 mg/day orally for 4 days from the day of surgery.
Postoperative course was uneventful, and no additional analgesics were needed. The patient was discharged on day 5. He underwent dietary therapy as an outpatient, and at 6 months postoperatively, his BMI had decreased to 43.2 kg/m2, with no recurrences identified as of the time of writing.