An 8-year-old female slipped on the stairs and had a bruise on her right knee. However, since the pain persisted, the patient visited a nearby orthopedic clinic. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed the possibility of a bone malignancy (Figure ). The patient was then admitted to the hospital for further examination. Biochemical testing revealed significantly elevated levels of both serum AFP (AFP: 79016 ng/ml, L3: 3555 ng/ml (4.5%), PIVKA-II: 128 IU/l), which suggested possible malignancy of the liver. A serum AFP level as high as 79,000 ng/ml was also indicative of a liver tumor. Antibodies against hepatitis virus B and C were not detected. The development of hepatoblastoma was atypical in terms of the age of onset, given that hepatoblastomas typically arise in patients under 3 years of age. Pathological diagnosis was transitional liver cell tumor (TLCT). A subset of liver cell tumors in older children and adolescents may develop as an intermediate between blastomatous tumors and adult-type tumors. This type of tumor, referred to as TLCT, is highly dependent on Wnt signaling than other categories of liver tumors . MRI imaging showed the simultaneous development of osteosarcoma and liver cancer (Figure ), both of which were confirmed by biopsy. After two courses of standard neoadjuvant chemotherapy for hepatoblastoma (a combination of cisplatin (CDDP) and tetrahydropyranyl-adriamycin (THP-ADR)), the residual liver tumor was removed completely by surgical extended lobectomy. After treatment with the standard neoadjuvant chemotherapy protocol for osteosarcoma (a combination of CDDP, ifosfamide (IFO), and methotrexate (MTX)), the diminished osteosarcoma was totally resected and an artificial joint was placed. The levels of transitional serum biomarkers for the liver tumor and osteosarcoma are shown (Figure ), in which the blue arrows indicate repeated neoadjuvant chemotherapy. To date, there has been no sign of relapse or latent metastasis for about two years after last surgery. Combined therapy with surgical resection after chemotherapy was, therefore, successful in this patient. Given that we found the simultaneous development of a liver tumor and osteosarcoma, we performed genetic testing to evaluate the patient’s susceptibility to malignancy. Despite the absence of a familial history of hereditary cancer, a germline mutation in p53 (c.722 C>T, p.Ser241Phe) was identified. Notably, the frequency of de novo mutations in LFS is between 7% and 20% ; it is, therefore, conceivable that the p53 mutation occurred de novo during embryonic development.
Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of the patient’s tumors prior to and following chemotherapy was performed using an antibody against the human CD44 variant isoform. CD44v8-10 was not expressed in both the liver tumor and the osteosarcoma before chemotherapy, but was ectopically expressed after chemotherapy (Figure ).