A 27-year-old female sustained a fall in the bathroom following which she presented with severe TL pain, and the inability to stand or walk. Although her neurological examination was normal, the X-rays and MRI studies confirmed an L1 burst fracture without accompanying neural compression [Figures and ]. Under general anesthesia in the prone position, she underwent a short segment T12-L2 percutaneous pedicle screw fixation; the blood loss was just 50 ml, and the operating time was only 37 min.
Postoperatively, she did well until the third postoperative day at which time she developed severe back pain and serous discharge from the right L2 pedicle wound . This progressed, and the fifth postoperative day, it started coming out of the left-sided wounds as well. She developed hypoesthesia from T11-L1, and an intermittent low-grade fever. Laboratory studies (e.g., CBC, differential count, ESR, and CRP) remained within normal limits, and wound cultures were sterile. Although she was started on empirical intravenous antibiotics, the discharge continued. On the tenth postoperative day, she returned to the operating room for a washout; the wound was left open . Although repeat wound cultures were negative, the serum CK was significantly elevated.
As the patient continued to have discharge without symptomatic improvement, she was taken back to the operating room. At this time, all incisions were opened, and the entire bilateral subfascial tracts were explored; the paraspinal muscles were pale, avascular, and non contractile . Dead muscle was excised bilaterally until vascularized/bleeding muscle tissue was seen. The irrigation fluid includes saline, 1% betadine, and gentamicin solution. The wound was closed in layers over a negative suction drain. Postoperatively, there was no further discharge; the drain was kept in place for 4 days. The wounds healed completely after 14 days when sutures were removed. Biopsy of the muscle tissue confirmed avascular muscle necrosis . The patient resumed to her activities after 1 postoperative month, and at 1 year, she returned to normal activities .