A six-year-old male with history of minimal vaccinations presented with his parents for evaluation of fatigue, headache, and vomiting that started after two weeks of a rash. Symptoms initially started three weeks prior with malaise, nausea, and tactile fevers. Upon resolution, a painful, non-pruritic, circular rash started on his right ankle and spread up his legs and back. He went to urgent care (UC), where he was diagnosed with viral hives and discharged home with five days of prednisone. The rash improved initially but returned, although no longer painful, after completion of the steroid burst.
Four days prior to arrival to the emergency department (ED), tactile fevers returned, his fatigue and rash worsened, and he developed a new-onset headache, vomiting (non-bloody, non-bilious), photophobia, diplopia, and myalgias. He went to another UC, was diagnosed with erythema multiforme and discharged on alternating acetaminophen and ibuprofen as well as loratadine. He slept constantly in the three days prior to presentation. The patient’s mother was also concerned because his gait was slow, and he appeared unsteady on his feet due to persistent leg pain. Several siblings lived at home with him, but none of them were sick. Mother denied known tick or other animal bites. He denied chest pain, shortness of breath, sore throat, cough, abdominal pain, and diarrhea.
On examination, he was a very tired but nontoxic appearing male with normal vital signs for his age. His rash consisted of several large, annular, asymmetric, papular, blanchable lesions on his torso, legs, and back (, ). There was no neck rigidity. Neurological examination was significant for decreased abduction of both eyes without complete paralysis. No other focal cranial deficits were noted. Neuromuscular exam demonstrated normal strength and sensation of all extremities. Deep tendon reflexes were 2+ throughout. Gait was slow and somewhat unsteady.
A head computed tomography (CT) was obtained and showed no intracranial lesions. Laboratory studies were drawn due to concern for possible infection and did not show significant abnormalities, apart from a slightly elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate . A lumbar puncture was then performed, which demonstrated a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis . With the overall benign lab evaluation and head CT combined with the CSF pleocytosis and rash resembling large erythema migrans (EM), there was concern for early disseminated Lyme disease complicated by meningitis. He was thus started on intravenous (IV) ceftriaxone and admitted to the hospital for further infectious disease and neurologic workup. Diagnosis was later confirmed by positive Lyme immunoglobulin M and immunoglobulin G antibodies of the blood and CSF. His hospitalization was complicated by sacral radiculopathy causing urinary retention, cranial nerve six palsy, and increased intracranial pressure with optic nerve swelling requiring administration of acetazolamide. He was discharged home on hospital day five with 16 days of oral doxycycline and had complete recovery on follow-up office visits.