A 70-year-old woman was previously admitted in another hospital due to injury after falling onto her bicycle handlebars. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed injury in the pancreatic body; thus, she was transferred to our hospital for further treatment 3 h after injury. We could not identify the presence of major pancreatic duct (MPD) disruption based on a previous CT scan. MPD disruption was not also identified on magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) . She was hemodynamically stable since admission.
On the following day, CT scan was again performed and showed an increase in fluid around the pancreatic injury site, retroperitoneum, and pelvic cavity . Laboratory data showed elevated serum amylase and lipase levels . Thus, we performed ERP and identified leakage of contrast medium from the injured MPD. Moreover, the pancreatic tail could not be visualized . A guidewire was passed across the break to the distal pancreatic duct ; however, the ENPD catheter was not advanced across the rupture because the guidewire and catheter were warped at the site of injury . We decided to perform laparotomy following after ERP. A 5-French ENPD catheter was placed at the site of injury preoperatively .
Surgery was started 22 h after injury and 2 h after ERP. During laparotomy, we found moderate amount of bloody ascitic fluid and saponification. We identified a partial thickness laceration in the pancreatic body. At the site of injury, the tip of the ENPD catheter was found , and we immediately identified the proximal MPD segment. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with grade III pancreatic body injury with MPD disruption. The extent of crush was not severe, and we experienced no difficulty in identifying the distal MPD segment. We pulled the ENPD catheter out of the proximal MPD segment and inserted it to the distal MPD segment . After obtaining a deflection of the ENPD catheter, the ruptured MPD was repaired with multiple interrupted sutures. The laceration was sutured with multiple horizontal mattress sutures . In total, the patient lost 525 mL of blood. Blood transfusion was not required, and the operative time was 139 min.
The postoperative course was uneventful. On postoperative day (POD) 31, we performed ERP, and it showed no leakage of contrast medium from the MPD, and this result indicates that the patient’s injury was treated. The ENPD catheter was changed to the endoscopic pancreatic stenting (EPS) catheter using a guidewire. She was ambulatory and was then discharged on POD 56. The EPS catheter will be placed for 6 months.