A 23 year old primigravida was referred to the antenatal outpatient department (OPD) for the first time at 10 weeks of gestation (May, 2016). She was a known case of tuberous sclerosis complex. She was on antiepileptic medication. The last episode of seizure was 5 years ago. There was no family history of tuberous sclerosis. On examination, adenoma sebaceum was present. General physical examination and systemic examination findings were normal except for the presence of systolic murmur on auscultation. The computed tomography scan (CT scan) of brain performed before pregnancy showed multiple parenchymal/perinuclear subependymal calcification, focal encephalomalacia. Echocardiography (ECHO) revealed a small patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) of 2 mm with left to right shunt. Fundoscopic examination revealed no abnormality. All the other routine antenatal investigations were normal. She was on regular follow up with regular consultation with neurologist. The anomaly scans which were performed at 13 and 20 weeks of gestation revealed no gross congenital anomaly. At 27 weeks of gestation while performing ultrasound for assessment of fetal growth, fetal cardiac rhabdomyoma (4×3.5 cm) with other features of fetal hydrops (ascites, pericardial effusion, scalp edema, abdominal wall edema) was detected. Fetal cardiac rhabdomyoma was confirmed by fetal ECHO and MRI. Detailed antenatal anatomic survey using ultrasound ruled out angiolipoma of kidney and cerebral hamartoma. Cardiologist and cardiothoracic surgeon opinion was taken. Genetic counseling was done and patient was informed that the fetus was probably affected with tuberous sclerosis. The patient was recognized with intrauterine fetal demise by the antenatal OPD at 31 weeks of gestation . Induction of labour was done and the patient delivered a male, macerated baby weighing 1.2 kg. Intrapartum and peripartum period was uneventful. She was discharged after 48 hr of delivery with the advice to refer to postnatal clinic, and neurology OPD later.