A 74-year-old Asian woman complained of right knee pain without any cause. Because the pain persisted for several months, she went to a nearby hospital where she was referred to our institute for a second opinion and treatment. She had thyroid cancer and received tumor resection 5 years prior to the knee symptom without local recurrence. Radiographs demonstrated a 4×4.5 cm osteolytic lesion in her medial femoral condyle . On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the lesion was depicted as low intensity on T1-weighted image (T1WI), low-intermediate intensity on T2-weighted image (T2WI), and highly enhanced after gadolinium contrast administration. There was no penetration of the tumor through the cortex and no soft tissue mass was present . An open biopsy was performed and, histologically, the tumor showed clusters of epithelial cells. These epithelial cells were oval or spindle-shaped with squamous differentiation, and surrounded with fibrous stroma. Tumor cell nuclei were relatively uniform, did not show pronounced atypia, and had a low rate of mitosis. Reactive bone formation, similar to fibro-osseous lesion, was seen around the epithelial cells . On histological examination, adamantinoma was initially considered for the diagnosis. However, it was inconclusive due to its unusual localization. Considering the patient’s age, metastatic squamous cell carcinoma was possible although the primary lesion was not evident. Moreover, it was difficult to exclude metastasis of the thyroid cancer she had 5 years ago because papillary carcinoma of the thyroid gland sometimes undergoes squamous metaplasia thereby resembling squamous cell carcinoma. Because there was no other known lesion after further screening, we performed a wide resection of the tumor and implanted a tumor endoprosthesis to reconstruct the defect . The resected specimen showed the same histological feature as the biopsy sample; therefore, the final diagnosis remained inconclusive. She was discharged without any complication. Five years later during a routine follow-up examination, an abnormal shadow occupying the upper lobe of her right lung was detected . She subsequently underwent lobectomy for the lesion. A histopathological section showed proliferation of spindle-shaped and squamoid epithelial cells with mild nuclear atypia, surrounded by fibrous stroma, which was strikingly similar to the findings of the femoral lesion resected 5 years ago . Of interest, the epithelial cells spread through the alveolar wall without destruction of the alveolar structure. This feature is quite different from that of squamous cell carcinoma, either primary or metastatic, which usually shows destructive growth . The bone and lung specimen were both negative for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and thyroglobulin immunostain, which precluded the diagnosis of thyroid papillary carcinoma. These findings led to a conclusion that the lung mass is a metastasis from the distal femoral lesion, and the tumor which occurred in the medial femoral condyle was finally diagnosed as adamantinoma.
At the latest follow-up, positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed a recurrent tumor in the upper lobe of her right lung and further metastasis in her lumbar spine .