A 74 year-old asymptomatic man with no history of smoking was referred to our department with a definitive diagnosis of multiple pleural nodules. The patient had a career working as a welder in the iron works. He had a history of hypertension, hyperuricemia, and chronic kidney disease. Chest X-ray revealed an abnormal shadow in the lower left lung field, and the patient was under follow-up with the respiratory medicine department for 1 year. Laboratory test results for tumor markers, including the carcinoembryonic antigen, squamous cell carcinoma antigen, cytokeratin-19 fragment, sialyl-Lewis X antigen, and pro-gastrin-releasing peptide, were within the normal ranges. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed multiple pleural nodules, including a 2.7 × 1.8 × 1.1 cm nodule inside the mid-axillary line of the 8th rib and a 1.3 × 1.2 × 2.9 cm nodule at the height of the 9th thoracic vertebral body on the dorsal side of the descending aorta. These nodules exhibited a heterogeneous pale contrast. During the course of 1 year, the nodules showed a slight tendency towards increased prominence, and a small amount of pleural effusion developed over time. Neither lung lesion nor hilar/mediastinal lymphadenopathy was observed. A whole-body positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scan using 2-deoxy-2-( 18F)-fluorodeoxyglucose demonstrated maximum standardized uptake values of 4.93 and 3.18 in the lateral nodule and the nodule at the dorsal side of the descending aorta, respectively . No clear tracer accumulation outside the pleural lesions was observed. A malignant tumor could not be ruled out, and a surgical biopsy was planned. Thoracoscopy revealed multiple gray-white pleural nodules . A part of the 8th intercostal nodule was resected. The submitted tissue specimen showed a variably thickened and hyalinized fibrous plaque with focal inflammatory granulation and no apparent neoplastic components. The intraoperative frozen section presented with no evidence of malignancy. We judged that the other nodules had the same characteristics, and the operation was terminated. Histopathologically, the resected nodule was found to consist of hyalinized fibrous tissue with a high degree of plasma cell-based inflammatory cell infiltration . A storiform pattern was observed in a region of the fibrotic parts. Obstructive phlebitis was not apparent. Immunohistochemically, IgG4-positive plasma cells were conspicuous . The IgG4/CD38 positive plasma cell ratio was evaluated in the same five fields at a high magnification, with IgG4-positive plasma cells accounting for 70.5% of the cells (1,555/2,206 in total). A scattered distribution of spindle-shaped cells weakly positive for calretinin, WT1, D2-40, CAM5.2, AE1/AE3, and CK5/6 was observed. However, there were no positive findings suggestive of neoplastic changes, and no indication of mesothelioma. Evaluation for the BER-EP4, MOC-31, and p40 biomarkers yielded negative results, while that for beta-catenin yielded positive results in the cytoplasm; desmoids were not observed. The postoperative serum IgG4 level was 289 mg/dL, the rheumatoid factor level was not elevated, and the samples were negative for antinuclear antibodies. Based on these observations, we diagnosed him with IgG4-RD with multiple pleural nodules. The postoperative course was good and the patient is currently being followed up.