We describe a case of disseminated extrapulmonary legionellosis in an immunocompromised 38-year-old Thai woman. The patient was diagnosed in 2002 with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with fever, polyarthritis, oral ulcer, alopecia, and proteinuria. Since then, she has been treated with prednisolone with azathioprine. She achieved clinical remission but remained on prednisolone (5 mg daily) and azathioprine (50 mg daily) for 13 years. In August 2015, 3 months prior to admission, she suffered from cramping abdominal pain, watery diarrhea two or three times daily, and low-grade fever. She was diagnosed with enteritis and treated with ceftriaxone without clinical improvement. The dose of immunosuppressive medication was increased to prednisolone 45 mg daily and hydroxychloroquine 400 mg daily. In September 2015, 2 months prior to admission, she developed proximal muscle weakness with low-grade fever. She was diagnosed with myasthenia gravis and received treatment with pyridostigmine (Mestinon™) 240 mg daily. She remained weak and lost significant weight because of poor appetite and diarrhea. She was admitted to her local hospital in October 2015 for intravenous fluid hydration and pyridostigmine was discontinued because of diarrhea. As her condition was becoming increasingly compromised with high-grade fever, generalized vesicular rash, and proximal muscle weakness, she was referred to our hospital in November, 2015. She did not recall any exposure to potentially contaminated water or animals. She worked as a school teacher. Upon admission, her temperature was 39 °C, heart rate 100 beats/min, and respiratory rate 20 breaths/min. Blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg. Physical examination revealed a cachectic woman with mild pale conjunctivae and anicteric sclerae. Skin examination showed generalized discrete erythematous papules and macules with dry necrotic crust on the scalp, facial area, trunk and extremities. She also had plaques measuring 15 × 15 cm on both inner thighs . Abdominal examination showed mild tenderness and distension. The examination did not reveal any cardiac or pulmonary findings. Neurological examination revealed ptosis in both eyes, proximal muscle weakness (grade IV) of all extremities, but normal sensation and tendon reflexes. Laboratory data shown in Table . Skin biopsy of the crusted lesion revealed varicella zoster virus from polymerase chain reaction (PCR). She was diagnosed with varicella zoster virus infection. At admission, plasma cytomegalovirus (CMV) viral load (Cobas® Taqman amplicon) was 363,000 copies/mm3. She received intravenous ganciclovir injection with adjuvant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor for leukopenia. The timeline of the patient’s illness is illustrated in Additional file . She was also treated empirically for skin and soft tissue infection with piperacillin/tazobactam (12 days), and then meropenem (5 days) and then cefepime (5 days), without any clinical response. Further investigations, computed tomography of the abdomen showed a long segment of jejunal wall thickening and mild rectal wall thickening. Colonoscopy revealed generalized edematous mucosa of the colon without ulceration, and random biopsy was negative. She was diagnosed with CMV syndrome with suspected CMV jejunitis, which later improved with ganciclovir therapy. She was also diagnosed with myasthenia gravis by electromyography, nerve conduction velocity, and presence of acetylcholine receptor antibody. Later on, she developed chest pain and shortness of breath. Computed tomography of the chest revealed bilateral pleural effusion and small pericardial effusion. Echocardiography revealed impaired left ventricular systolic function with 40% ejection fraction along with global hypokinesia. She was diagnosed with lupus myocarditis, and treated with a 5-day course of intravenous immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg/day) and 5 mg/day intravenous dexamethasone. During her hospitalization for 21 days, she remained febrile with a maximum temperature of 38.5–39 °C, despite the previously mentioned therapy. At that time, she had worsening pain in both thighs at the site of the plaques. Magnetic resonance imaging of both lower extremities revealed diffuse enhancing, hyperintense T2 signals in the muscles at the pelvis at both thighs and legs, with diffuse muscle atrophy and swelling of the skin and subcutaneous tissue . Multiple subcutaneous biopsy specimens were taken from both thighs (site of skin lesions) showed suppurative panniculitis and presence of Gram-negative bacilli. Acid-fast and Gomori methenamine stains were negative. Tissue biopsies for aerobic microorganisms showed no growth. Bacterial broad-range 16S ribosomal RNA sequencings revealed L. pneumophila (99% similarity to L. pneumophila consensus sequence). Culture for fungi and mycobacteria was negative. Her antimicrobial regimen was changed to intravenous azithromycin, and fever subsided within 5 days. Her thigh lesions gradually improved over the first week of therapy . She was diagnosed with disseminated L. pneumophila infection resulting in panniculitis, myositis and myocarditis. She received intravenous azithromycin for 21 days. Oral azithromycin and ciprofloxacin were continued for 3 months to ensure eradication of the organism from our immunosuppressed patient. She received intravenous ganciclovir until the clearance of CMV viremia (total of 48 days), and then switched to oral valganciclovir maintenance therapy. She underwent physical rehabilitation and was discharged after 64 days hospitalization. Clinically, she is doing well at 1-year follow-up. She did not have any further tests done as follow-up proved successful clinical resolution and eradication of Legionella infection.