A 6-year-old, Norwegian born, intact male Russian Tsvetnaya Bolonka, 6 kg, was referred to the Norwegian University of Life Sciences (NMBU) at the Small Animal Teaching Hospital with a 4.5-months history of progressive weakness. Starting with weakness of the tail and reduced general condition, the clinical signs progressed to include dysphonia, muscle pain, and lameness of the pelvic limbs, more prominent on the right. Two months prior to referral, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) of the lumbar region had been performed, demonstrating asymmetrical pelvic limb muscle atrophy involving particularly the right iliopsoas and quadriceps musculature. Several years before the first clinical signs of the progressive weakness appeared the dog was diagnosed with hypothyroidism and had been treated with substitution therapy since then. He had never left Norway.
General physical examination revealed reduced muscle mass of the proximal muscles of the right pelvic limb and the dog was afebrile (38.8 °C). On neurologic examination, the dog was ambulatory but paraparetic, more pronounced on the right, with an obvious hypoflexion of the hip joint, bunny-hopping gait, and a paretic tail. Cranial nerves were normal except for the observed dysphonia, whereas postural reactions were decreased in both pelvic limbs with reduced spinal reflexes in the right pelvic limb. The neuroanatomic localisation was considered to be the neuromuscular system. Differential diagnoses included inflammatory, as well as non-inflammatory, myopathies/neuropathies.
A complete blood count (CBC) and serum biochemistry profile revealed mildly increased creatinine phosphokinase, but was otherwise unremarkable. Toxoplasma gondii-specific IgM titre was border line (1:32) while IgG was negative, as was a follow-up IgM titre. Neospora caninum antibody titres were negative, and serum total thyroxine concentration was within the reference range.
By the time of a planned revisit to NMBU for laryngeal inspection, diagnostic imaging, electrodiagnostics, and biopsies 2 weeks after referral, the clinical signs had progressed further and the dog was now showing general paresis in all four limbs. During a light plane of anaesthesia, laryngeal inspection was performed showing immobile arytenoids and vocal cords bilaterally, indicative of a laryngeal paresis causing the dysphonia. Pre- and post-contrast CT examinations of the whole body were performed under general anaesthesia in dorsal recumbency. Iohexol (Omnipaque 300 mgI/mL, GE Healthcare AS, Oslo, Norway) dosed at 600 mg iodine/kg was administrated intravenously and CT images were acquired using a 4-detector row CT scanner (BrightSpeed, GE Healthcare), 1.25 mm slice thickness, 0.625 mm overlap, using helical acquisition in bone and soft tissue algorithms. The CT-examination revealed bilateral muscle atrophy with various degrees of fat infiltration evident in the muscles of the thigh, thoracic limbs, and head. The muscle atrophy was most prominent on the right side of the back , right pelvic limb, and right aspect of the head (temporal and masseter muscles). Changes in the triceps musculature were most prominent on the left side. Electromyography performed under general anaesthesia showed spontaneous activity in multiple muscle groups. Motor nerve conduction velocity was measured to be 40.5 m per second (m/s) (mean ± SEM in healthy dogs: 60 ± 1.1 m/s ) in the ulnar nerve, and no other nerves were tested. Muscle biopsies were taken from the right biceps femoris muscle, the left triceps muscle, and the longissimus dorsi muscles bilaterally, and submitted for a routine muscle biopsy panel established at the Neuropathology Laboratory, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, München, Germany. On histological examination, all muscle samples revealed multifocal interstitial and occasionally fibre-directed lymphohistiocytic infiltrates which, in some fields, were accompanied by granulomatous changes with giant cells and/or epithelioid macrophages . Intramuscular nerve branches were diffusely affected by endoneurial granulomatous changes. Perimysium and endomysium showed moderately increased amounts of fibrocollagenous tissue accompanied by patchy areas of mild perimysial lipomatosis. Grocott’s methenamine silver stain for fungi, Fite Faraco stain for acid-fast bacteria and Gram stain were all negative. Likewise, 16s rRNA polymerase chain reaction was negative for bacterial sequences. Based on these findings, aseptic granulomatous polymyositis and neuritis were diagnosed.
Following the negative microbial investigations, treatment was initiated with glucocorticoids (prednisolone) 1.7 mg/kg per os (p.o) twice daily for 2 weeks, followed by gradual tapering to a lower maintenance dose. At a revisit 1 month later, clinical signs had improved but were still present. Gradual improvement of the clinical signs continued over the next few months and then stabilised. At this point, neurologic examination revealed mild reductions of the right pelvic limb flexor reflex and the patellar reflex. Gait evaluation showed circumduction of the right pelvic limb but was otherwise normal. There were no signs of dysphonia or laryngeal paralysis and the tail had regained its normal position. Approximately 1 year after initiating treatment the dog had a mild relapse of clinical signs while receiving prednisolone at a dose of 0.75 mg/kg every third day. Following a dose increase, the owner reported an immediate positive response. The dog was re-examined again 16 months after initiating treatment. Gait evaluation was normal except for a mild gait disturbance of the right pelvic limb. Electromyography was repeated and spontaneous activity was still observed in several muscle groups, but to a lesser extent than before. Motor nerve conduction velocity of the right ulnar nerve was measured to be 48.0 m/s. A CT was performed and revealed similar findings as previously, except for an increased amount of subcutaneous fat, predominantly of the dorsum, considered most likely to represent an adverse effect of prednisolone treatment.
Two years after the first visit, the dog presented to the Emergency Service at NMBU with clinical signs of lethargy, pyrexia (40.2 °C), weakness, and coughing. Blood analysis, ultrasound, and CT were in agreement with a septic condition and the dog was treated accordingly. However, three days later the dog went into cardiac arrest and died. Autopsy was performed at the pathology department of NMBU and further muscle/nerve samples were sent to the Neuropathology Laboratory, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, München, for follow-up. The autopsy revealed purulent myocarditis, fibrinous pericarditis, interstitial nephritis, and centrilobular necrosis and thrombosis of the liver. Several muscle samples showed changes corresponding to a multifocal, subacute suppurative myositis with fibre necrosis. Muscle atrophy and intermediate neuropathy featuring axonal atrophy and partial demyelination were also present. No granulomatous changes were seen at that stage. Adipose tissue in between the muscle fibres had increased, which is expected when inflammatory changes is restricted to the interstitial compartments . Microbiology samples taken from the liver and spleen showed moderate growth of Escherichia coli, confirming the final septic condition.