A 73-year-old man had received definitive concurrent chemoradiotherapy (carboplatin/paclitaxel: 2 courses, 70 Gy) for left upper lobe squamous cell carcinoma suspected to have invaded the aorta (cT4N1M0 stage IIIA; Fig. a, b). Although the tumor shrunk significantly (partial response, ycT4N0M0 stage IIIA; Fig. c), radiation pneumonitis occurred. Steroid therapy (prednisone, 1.0 mg/kg) was administered, and radiation pneumonitis was relieved. However, re-enlargement of the primary tumor was observed during steroid tapering , and the patient was introduced to our department for salvage surgery. The imaging analysis indicated that the lymphatic and distant metastases were controlled, and radiation pneumonitis confined to the left upper lobe was sufficiently controlled by steroid therapy. Although aortic invasion was suspected, it was localized to the periphery of the third branch . The patient opted for salvage surgery, which may be curative despite the associated invasiveness and risk, and we planned salvage surgery with continuous steroid administration (prednisone, 0.5 mg/kg, 6 months after definitive chemoradiotherapy). The patient was positioned to keep the upper and lower body in the right lateral and supine positions, respectively. This arrangement allowed cannulation from the inguinal vessels while an anterolateral thoracotomy incision was made through the fifth intercostal space. Macroscopic inspection strongly indicated aortic invasion in the periphery of the third branch . The lingular pulmonary artery, superior pulmonary vein, and upper lobe bronchus were dissected from the caudal to the cranial side. Because invasion of the major branches of the main pulmonary artery (A3 and A1 + 2) was suspected, it was resected along with its reconstruction. After performing all procedures (except for dissection at the site of aortic invasion), a cardiovascular surgeon clamped the aorta at the distal site of the left subclavian artery under partial extracorporeal circulation (F-F bypass) and resected an invasive part of the descending aortic wall. Finally, complete resection of the lung cancer that had invaded the aorta was successfully performed. Further, we performed patch closure on the aortic defect and covered the site of the aortic patch with an intercostal muscle flap. The duration of the operation and partial extracorporeal circulation were 452 min and 37 min, respectively. The distance between the aortic wall and viable malignant cells was 3 mm, and aortic wall invasion was not recognized as a pathology (EF.2, ypT2aN0M0 stage IB). Although postoperative chylothorax was noted, we could completely control and additional complications were not observed. The patient visited another hospital for rehabilitation 3 months after surgery and has been enjoying daily life without any recurrence for 21 months post-operation.