A 17-year-old man, suffering from a cough, fever and weight loss for the previous 5 days, was admitted to the emergency department following hemoptysis a day before admission. He was conscious and pale. Blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg, pulse 110 beats per minute, respiratory rate 26 breaths per minute and body temperature 37.8°C. At physical examination, breathing sounds were roughened and inspiratory crackles were present in the right hemithorax. The other results of the physical examination were normal. (No other pathology was obtained.) In laboratory findings, values for C-reactive protein of 1.99 mg/dl, alanine transaminase of 26 U/litre, aspartate transferase of 14 U/litre, hemoglobin (Hb) of 9.7 mg/dl, Htc of 29.2%, mean corpuscular volume of 86 fl, prothrombin time of 29.7 seconds, activated partial thromboplastin time of 13.8 seconds and international normalized ratio of 1.09 seconds were obtained. A 5 × 6 cm circular lesion was located in the apex of the right lung at X-ray . A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a cystic lesion 4 cm in diameter in the posterior segment of the upper lobe of the right lung and multiple lesions neighboring the former, some of which were cystic and the others solid (the largest was 2 cm in diameter). In addition, a 2 cm lesion was revealed in the superior segment of the lower lobe of the right lung .
On the first day of hospitalization, massive hemoptysis persisted. Increased respiratory failure and decreased Hb values (from 9.7 to 7.4 mg/dl) forced us to administer blood transfusion, after which surgery was indicated. The upper lobe bronchus of the right lung was completely obliterated while the anterior and posterior segments of the upper lobe were destroyed. In addition, one of the cysts in the lower lobe was ruptured. During surgery, lobectomy of the upper lobe of the right lung and cystectomy with capitonnage of the lower lobe cysts was performed. Capitonnage is obliteration of the pericystic cavity. The material obtained revealed hydatid cyst disease. Following medication with albendazole, the patient was discharged in a healthy condition on the eighth day postoperatively.