An 84-year-old female was admitted to the Department of General Surgery complaining of severe, generalized abdominal pain with epigastric intensification. The pain started 24 h before admission and gradually increased. It was accompanied by nausea, but no reported vomiting. A medical history of epigastric pain that worsened one hour postprandial, which after investigations were attributed to gallstones, was observed. Thus, a cholecystectomy after which the pain was not completely relieved. Later on, the patient was diagnosed with a peptic ulcer and put on a proton pump inhibitor. However, the abdominal discomfort persisted. She was also previously diagnosed with atrial fibrillation, mitral valve regurgitation, constipation attributed to her old age, and external hemorrhoids treated conservatively. Medication history consisted of (Aspirin 100 mg, Omeprazole 30 mg, Digoxin 0.25 mg, and Lasix). On admission, the patient was alert with vital signs as follows: (Blood Pressure 120/80 mmHg, Temperature 38.5 °C, Respiratory Rate 20/min, and Heart Rate 98 beats/min). Physical examination revealed a hernia in the epigastric region, marked tenderness in the right hypochondriac area with abdominal guarding. An abdominal Ultrasound was performed reporting a resected gallbladder, a heterogeneous mass in the epigastric area, and a 7 mm epigastric midline hernia (i.e., linea alba hernia) that contained intestinal loops . A Chest X-ray showed free gas under the right diaphragm . Laboratory test results showed high levels of red blood cells (7 million cells/mcL), white blood cells (15,800 mcL), C-reactive protein (CRP) (90.2 mg/dL), and low levels of hemoglobin (11.1 g/dL) and albumin (3.1 g/dL). Whereas Creatinine, Bilirubin, Amylase, and Lipase values were within the normal limits . An echocardiogram (ECG) reported mitral leaflets vegetations, posterior leaflet prolapse with severe regurgitation, a pulmonary pressure of 65 mmHg, and calcification of the aortic valve. An exploratory laparotomy was performed, via a median incision. Afterward, a cloudy fibrinous exudate was noticed in the abdominal cavity. Exploration of the bowels revealed many small diverticula that spread over the entire small intestines . One jejunal diverticulum (JD) was perforated . The omentum was spotted gathered around the perforated JD in the epigastric area, which explained the heterogeneous mass marked on abdominal ultrasound. Diverticulectomy and suturing were applied to the perforated diverticulum. The other intestines’ investigation showed Meckel’s diverticulum 70 cm away from the ileocecal valve . The large intestines were found spared of any diverticula. IV fluids, Ceftriaxone 1 g q12h, Gentamicin 80 mg q12h, Ranitidine 50 mg q12h, and Acetaminophen 500 mg were administered. Postoperative monitoring confirmed the stability of the patient’s vital signs and general condition improved, and consequently, the patient was discharged 5 days after surgery. The histopathological findings of the 2 × 1.5 × 0.5 cm resected perforated jejunal diverticulum revealed nonspecific acute inflammatory changes with acute inflammatory infiltrate in the surrounding fat tissue. Six days after surgery, a symptom of mild, non-productive cough was reported. On physical exam, chest auscultation findings demonstrated decreased breath sounds at the lung bases, with no rales or wheezing, whereas the vital signs were normal. Oxygen saturation was 96%. A Chest X-ray showed bilateral pleural effusion that was eventually considered a normal post-surgical reaction .