A 30-year-old female presented to the emergency department with complaints of about ten episodes of severe watery diarrhea during the past 1 day. She also had complaints of four episodes of vomiting. There was no history of abdominal pain. She had consumed fried sea food a day before the onset of diarrhea and vomiting. On examination, the patient’s vitals were normal with pulse rate 76/bpm, blood pressure 110/70 mmHg and respiratory rate 18/bpm. Signs of dehydration were observed. No significant abnormalities were detected in cardiovascular, respiratory and central nervous systems. On palpation abdomen was soft and non tender with no organomegaly and no evidence of fluid.
Routine blood and urine investigations along with blood culture, urine culture, stool culture and hanging drop were done. Total white blood cell (WBC) count was increased with the value of 15 400 cells/cumm with 80% of neutrophils. Serum electrolytes were within normal limits. Renal function test shows Urea 64 (reference value 15–40 mg dl−1) and Creatinine 4.2 (reference value 0.5–1.4 mg dl−1) was elevated. The blood and urine cultures were found to be negative. On macroscopic examination the stool sample was found to be watery and non purulent. On microscopic examination by hanging drop actively motile (darting motility) bacteria were observed. The clinicians were immediately notified with the report and the patient was started with intravenous fluids, Injection Metronidazole 500 mg QID for 7 days and Ciprofloxacin 500 mg bd for 7 days. The patient condition improved symptomatically with renal parameters also returning within the normal range within 3 days after treatment.
In microbiological laboratory, the sample was inoculated in alkaline peptone water and was plated on to blood agar, MacConkey agar and thioglycollate bile salt sucrose (TCBS) agar, and was incubated for 24 h. The colonies on blood agar were flat with hemodigestion. On MacConkey agar, pale non lactose fermenting (NLF) colonies were observed. On TCBS agar, they were yellow in colour confirming sucrose fermentation. With the growth positive on TCBS agar and pale NLF colonies, the presence of species is confirmed, which was further substantiated by the following biochemical tests. It was oxidase positive, catalase negative, produced gas in glucose fermentation and triple sugar iron agar with acid/acid with no H2S, citrate positive, urease negative, indole positive, nitrate reduction positive, lysine and ornithine positive, sucrose and mannitol utilization positive, Voges–Proskauer test positive and resistant to 50 U polymyxin B.
The antibiogramwas done by Kirby–Bauer disc diffusion method with standard antibiotic discs from HIMEDIA, India following Clinical & Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) guidelines (M100-S15, 2012) showed sensitivity to gentamicin, ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, doxycycline and resistance to amikacin, ampicillin and nalidixic acid.
Based on growth on selective medium TCBS and strong gas production evidence in carbohydrate fermentation and triple sugar iron agar, the clinical isolate (VF4E2) was suspected as . PCR and Sanger dideoxy sequencing were carried out. Amplification and sequencing the 16S rRNA gene (1.52 kb) was performed, with PrimeSTAR GXL DNA polymerase and primers based on the method described by Takajo et al. . Sequence of the PCR product of 16S rRNA gene of the strain (accession no. MH885569) was compared with the sequences in the DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank and EzBioCloud databases on 25 August 2018. The result indicated that showed the highest homology (99%) with our isolate. The specific PCR for and was performed according to the method of Schirmeister et al. and Neogi et al., respectively , and was found to be negative for and positive for [, ]. Serology of was determined by slide agglutination test with polyvalent O1, and monovalent Ogawa, and Inaba antisera. Considering these findings, the clinical isolate (VF4E2) was identified as gas-producing serogroup O1, biovar El Tor, serotype Ogawa strain.