A 24 year-old woman with Takayasu’s arteritis (TA) and a recent history of progressive diffuse headaches presented to an outside hospital with altered mental status following loss of consciousness. Five years previously the patient was diagnosed with anti-myeloperoxidase (MPO) and p-ANCA vasculitis with an ESR of 57 mm/hr and a CRP of 75 mg/L . The patient was prescribed cellcept and a prednisone taper, but was lost to follow up until two years later when she developed hand numbness, headaches, and postprandial abdominal pain. CTA revealed 90% stenosis of the superior mesenteric artery, and ESR and CRP were elevated at 33 mm/hr and 32 mg/L, respectively . The patient was treated with cellcept and high-dose prednisone but was again lost to follow up.
At the age of 23 the patient presented to the emergency department with postprandial abdominal pain, and CTA indicated progression of her disease with luminal narrowing due to intimal thickening of the aortic arch, descending aorta, and left subclavian artery that was characteristic of large vessel disease consistent with Takayasu’s arteritis. Her ESR and CRP were 28 mm/hr and 7.1 mg/L, respectively, and the following day, her ESR was 15 mm/hr . Imuran 50 mg/d was started with plans to titrate the dose; however she discontinued her treatment after 3 weeks due to persistent nausea and vomiting.
Four months later the patient complained of progressive, persistent, diffuse pounding headaches that were associated with dizziness and blurry vision, and she was admitted to the hospital for further evaluation. At that time she was not on any immunosuppressant therapy. ESR was within normal limits at 19 mm/hr and CRP was only mildly elevated at 8.9 mg/L . But CTA of the head, neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis demonstrated further progression of her disease with circumferential thickening of the aortic arch and significant narrowing of the proximal descending thoracic aorta, along with a severe stenosis of the left common carotid artery at its origin, 1 centimeter in length . There was complete occlusion of the left proximal subclavian artery at its origin from the aortic arch, with flow in the distal left subclavian artery provided by the left vertebral artery, suggestive of subclavian steal , and with reconstitution of flow at the bifurcation of the vertebral artery suggesting collateral flow was arising from the posterior circulation. Carotid ultrasound indicated the left vertebral artery was patent with retrograde flow. Imuran was stopped and cellcept was restarted with a 60 mg prednisone taper; however, she refused pulse steroids due to concerns weight gain and also refused cytoxan again. Over the next several weeks the patient continued to experience worsening headaches unrelieved by over the counter pain medications. She also became noncompliant with cellcept.
One month later, the patient presented to an outside hospital with right sided weakness and speech difficultly. After CT ruled out hemorrhage, recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) was administered within the therapeutic window and the patient was transferred to our hospital for further work up. On admission, the patient was limited to following one step commands. Neurologic exam demonstrated anomia, dysarthria, a right lower facial droop, and severe weakness on the right upper and lower extremity. The strength in left upper and lower extremities was intact, and the rest of the physical exam was unremarkable.
CTA of the head and neck demonstrated mural thickening of the aortic arch that was consistent with previous images. There was also complete occlusion of the left common carotid artery at its origin and left internal carotid artery, with collateral flow arising from the right anterior circulation via the circle of Willis and leptomeningeal collaterals. In addition, there is complete occlusion of a short segment of the MCA, just past its bifurcation and evidence of flow through the anterior and posterior communicating arteries is absent upon imaging . These findings would explain the CT perfusion abnormalities of delay in transit time with decreased cerebral blood flow and cerebral blood volume, consistent with the left MCA infarct, including the left basal ganglia .
Initially, the patient’s ESR was elevated at 54 mm/hr . The patient was started on pulse steroids the day following her stroke. On the fifth day of admission repeat ESR was 6 mm/hr and CRP was within normal limits at 3.4 mg/L . Strength in the right upper and lower extremity improved while facial droop and speech deficit persisted. After 8 days the patient was discharged to an inpatient rehabilitation facility, where she continued to improve and can now walk unassisted and perform all of her activities of daily living.
Six months following the patient’s cerebrovascular attack (CVA), the patient’s ESR returned to the normal range at 10 mm/hr and her CRP value remained elevated at 19.5 mg/L . CTA of the head and neck showed encephalomalacia related to the previous infarct, complete occlusion of the left common carotid artery, and a striking complete lack of flow in the left internal carotid artery .