A 58-year-old man was admitted to the emergency department with right upper quadrant pain and jaundice. Though gallbladder could not be demonstrated optimally, the ultrasonographic examination revealed an increase in gallbladder wall thickness but it was contracted. Dilatation of intra and extrahepatic bile duct was detected. As a result, 64-detector multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) was performed since we could not evaluate gallbladder and choledochus optimally with ultrasound. In MDCT, gallbladder was contracted and could not be demonstrated clearly. The enlargement of choledochus and multiple choledochus stones were determined. For a better evaluation of the biliary stones, T2 weighted (T2W) MRCP (NCE-MRCP) was performed. T2W images showed multiple stones in ductus choledochus and intrahepatic bile ducts. A 15×20 mm cystic lesion including thin septa was demonstrated at the head of pancreas at periampullary region . There was no relationship between cystic lesion and pancreatic duct. Gadoxetic-acid enhanced MRCP (CE-MRCP) was performed at the same session to examine the bile duct obstruction and to evaluate the pancreatic cystic lesion . A slight enhancement was detected at the wall and septi of the cystic lesion in CE-MRCP. There was no relationship between cyst and choledochus or pancreatic duct. There was no obstruction in the biliary tract as well. The transition of contrast material to the lumen of gallbladder was not seen at either early or late phase images. The patient was planned to undergo the surgical treatment according to these findings.
At surgical exploration, the size of gallbladder was significantly reduced. There were fibrotic adhesions between gallbladder, liver and transverse colon. Cholecystectomy was done; the pancreatic cystic lesion was aspirated and excised, as well. The histopathologic examination revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of gallbladder with positive surgical margins and the pancreatic lesion was reported as PanIN-3. The patient was referred to the medical oncology department. The patient was in good condition the 6th month after the operation.