A 25-year-old male patient presented to the Emergency Department complaining of sudden onset of diffuse abdominal pain which radiated to his back, associated with nausea and numerous episodes of vomiting and diarrhea. On physical examination he appeared diaphoretic and quite uncomfortable, while his vital signs were suggestive of early stages of hypovolemic shock. He had tachycardia (regular rhythm, 120 bpm) with however, normal blood pressure. Abdominal distention, diffuse abdominal tenderness and a palpable mass in the periumbilical region were also evident. Initial laboratory tests revealed high white blood cell count (28.4 × 109/L), relatively low hemoglobin levels (10.4 g/dL), moderate hyperglycemia (225 mg/dL), slightly elevated urea and creatinine levels (60 mg/dL and 2.26 mg/dL, respectively) and normal lactate dehydrogenase levels (140 U/L). An urgent contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis depicted a large 13 × 11.4 × 15 cm retroperitoneal mass extending to the preaortic region below the renal veins in addition to a significant amount of free intraperitoneal fluid suggestive of hematic content . In addition, the mass caused partial obstruction of the right ureter and mild ipsilateral hydronephrosis.
The patient had a history of a radical right orchiectomy 4 months ago, for a malignant non-seminoma mixed GCT. The resected tumor had a diameter of 11 cm, consisting of teratoma (45%), embryonal cancer (40%), seminoma (10%) and yolk sac tumor (5%), and was classified as pT2 according to the 8th edition of AJCC cancer staging manual . His pre-orchiectomy CT staging, showed 2 focal liver lesions, compatible with hemangiomas and an enlarged (11 mm in diameter) preaortic lymph node at the level of aortic bifurcation. Preoperative levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) were normal (β-HCG < 1 mIU/L and α-FP = 6 ng/mL). A preoperative brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no signs of metastatic disease. Pathologic evaluation of the resected specimen classified the tumor as stage II, under the 8th edition of AJCC cancer staging manual , and the prognostic criteria of the International Germ Cell Cancer Collaborative Group (IGCCCG) predicted a favorable disease prognosis. However, COVID-19 pandemic-related deviation from oncologic surveillance and care standards combined with COVID-19-related patient’s emotional distress and self-neglect, had led to loss of opportunity for timely and appropriate adjuvant chemotherapy, obviously leading to the development of this devastating complication .
The patient was urgently admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for hemodynamic resuscitation. Vital signs at arrival in the ICU were pulse of 130 beats per minute, blood pressure 95/60 mm Hg, and hemoglobin level of 8.6 g/dL, suggesting a deteriorating hypovolemic shock. The patient was resuscitated with 2 L of intravenous fluids, 2 units of packed red blood cells, 2 units of fresh frozen plasma and vasopressors. He did not respond satisfactory to fluid load, while vasopressor needs were increased, with post-transfusion hemoglobin of 8.1 g/dL, and ABGs lactate levels 3.1 mmol/L. However, apart from detailed description of resuscitation requirements, the most decisive clinical sign was the progressively worsening abdominal distension of the patient, indicating an ongoing, uncontrolled intraperitoneal hemorrhage. This, combined with ICU monitoring data, laboratory values and computed tomography findings (massive active hemoretroperitoneum with a significant amount hemoperitoneum) led to the decision of an emergency exploratory laparotomy.
The peritoneal cavity was immediately accessed through a midline laparotomy. Massive hemoperitoneum was evident, necessitating evacuation of 2.5 L of blood, in order to identify the source of bleeding. A massive retroperitoneal hematoma surrounding a bleeding retroperitoneal lymph node metastatic necrotic mass was evident. Shearing and infiltrating forces exerted from the bleeding retroperitoneal metastatic mass, teared in several sites the posterior peritoneum, through which the blood entered the peritoneal cavity causing massive hemoperitoneum.
Following a right-sided medial visceral rotation maneuver (the Cattell–Braasch maneuver) consisting of extensive lateromedial-craniomedial detachment and complete mobilization of the right hemi-colon and small bowel mesentery from the retroperitoneum along the fusion fascia of Toldt the retroperitoneal mass was immediately accessed . Given that the Cattell–Braasch maneuver enabled adequate exposure of the mass, performing additionally a Mattox maneuver was deemed unnecessary.
A huge lymph node metastatic mass was evident located in the centromedial retroperitoneum extending from the renal veins to the aortic bifurcation. The mass was very soft and fragile with necrotic surface areas, which were actively bleeding . Additionally, the mass was displacing small and large bowel towards the left side and was densely adherent to the right ureter and the horizontal part of the duodenum. The main part of the metastatic tumor volume was located in the right part of the infracolic centromedial retroperitoneum on the right side of the aorta along the aortocaval lymph nodes. Blood extravasation infiltrating surrounding tissues, profound bleeding and dislocated viscera, made safe surgical dissection along avascular embryological planes fraught with pitfalls. Notwithstanding, careful dissection enabled complete exposure of the bleeding mass. Following safely identification and safeguarding of great vessels, critical tributaries and branches, control of the hemorrhage was finally achieved by a challenging resection of approximately 80% of the metastatic lymph node mass volume. Part of the mass invading the right ureter and the horizontal part of the duodenum remained in situ. Total intraoperative blood loss was evaluated to be around 4 L, while the patient received 4 units of fresh frozen plasma and 4 units of red blood cells.
Pathological evaluation of the surgical specimen revealed morphological features of immature teratoma composed of undifferentiated cells with foci of primitive neuroectodermic differentiation forming immature neuroepithelial tissue and extensive necrosis, findings compatible with the patient’s history of mixed tGCT (metastases derived from the teratoma component of the primary mixed GCT) . Postoperative recovery was uneventful, and was followed by early start of adjuvant chemotherapy without adverse events with the patient still hospitalized, with three cycles of cisplatin/etoposide followed by a cycle of bleomycin/cisplatin/etoposide. The patient consented to a regular follow up according to recent standards of oncologic surveillance and care. Two years after the operation the patient is doing well with no evidence of recurrent disease .