A 56-year-old female with a family history of multiple malignancies was diagnosed with Paget disease of the nipple. She underwent modified left radical mastectomy, followed by prophylactic contralateral adenomastectomy and bilateral reconstruction with silicone implant. Microscopic evaluation of the surgical specimen revealed a left-sided microinvasive carcinoma in the background of high grade ductal carcinoma in situ. No further treatment was prescribed at that time. Few months later, after clinical evaluation and genetic testing, the patient was diagnosed with Li-FRAUMENI syndrome (LFS).
Seven years later, in the follow-up of the breast reconstruction, the patient came to consultation reporting right-sided recurrent breast swelling for the past 18 months. In the meantime, she had already been submitted to imaging studies, which revealed fluid collections adjacent to the implant, suggestive of inflammatory process, followed by fine needle aspiration which showed no signs of malignancy.
The patient was then submitted to breast magnetic resonance imaging scan (MRI) , which showed a 6 cm heterogeneous mass with a contrast peripheral enhancement, adjacent to the implant fibrous capsule in the right breast. This was associated with enlarged lymph nodes of the ipsilateral axillary and internal mammary chains. The lesion was biopsied.
Biopsy fragments were 10% buffered neutral formalin fixed and paraffin embedded. Routine staining with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) was performed, and additional sections were submitted to immunohistochemical phenotyping. The antibody panel included markers for cytokeratins (AE1/AE3), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA, E-29), CD45/CLA (RP2/18), CD20 (L26), PAX5 (SP34) CD2 (MRQ-11), CD3(2GV6), CD4(SP35), CD5 (SP19), CD7 (CBC37), CD8 (SP57), CD30 (Ber-H2), CD68 (KP-1), ALK (ALK01), TIA1 (C-20) and Ki-67 (30–9). CD2 was provided by Cell Marque; CD7 by Dako; TIA1 by Santa Cruz. All other markers and the automated system were provided by Ventana-Benchmark.
Histological examination (H&E) showed infiltration of the capsule’s fibrous tissue by a dense population of granulocytes, especially eosinophils, interspersed with large atypical lymphoid cells. The latter showed moderate pleomorphism, high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio and easily found mitotic figures. In addition, some of them exhibited eccentric, kidney-shaped nuclei, with homogeneous eosinophilic cytoplasm (“hallmark cells”) .
The atypical cells showed strong and diffuse expression of CD30 on immunohistochemistry (IHC) . CD2, CD3, CD4 and CD5 were at least focally positive in the malignant cells. CD5 was expressed by the highest number of tumor cells, whereas CD7 was more extensively deleted . CD8 was negative. P53 protein was extensively expressed by the atypical cells and Ki-67 proliferation index was high (80%). There was no expression of AE1/AE3, CD20, PAX5, CD68, ALK and TIA-1 on the atypical cells. The diagnosis of BIA-ALCL was rendered. One month later, the patient underwent right modified radical mastectomy with breast implant excision and axillary region dissection. Microscopic evaluation of the resection specimen showed the implant capsule infiltrated by the neoplasm. All dissected lymph nodes were uninvolved by atypical cells. At the time of this manuscript’s submission the patient was about to start systemic therapy.