A 54-year-old male with a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and hypertension presented with difficulty breathing during exercise (shortness of breath after walking for 1 mile and 3 flights of stairs) without dysphagia. Physical examination showed full symmetric palpable femoral and pedal pulses, with the rest of the findings reported as unremarkable.
During follow-up for the patient’s lung disease, a computed tomography angiogram (CTA) revealed the presence of an RAA and aLSCA arising from the descending thoracic aorta with an adjacent 58 × 41-mm KD and tracheal and esophageal displacement (-). Considering the size of the KD, the risk of rupture, the anatomy, and the high perioperative risk for traditional open surgery given his severe COPD, we recommended a hybrid surgical repair. Due to a lack of appropriate proximal landing zone, a complete arch debranching was necessary.
The left common carotid (LCCA) and left subclavian (LSCA) arteries were exposed initially with a horizontal supraclavicular incision, followed by median sternotomy and supra-aortic dissection. After heparinization, an 8-mm ring polytetrafluoroethylene graft was anastomosed to the LCCA to first be used as part of a cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) circuit for anterograde cerebral perfusion. Then, an ascending aorta to innominate and LCCA bypass was performed, followed by cannulation of both the distal ascending aorta and LCCA bypass for CPB circuit formation. Given the abnormal quality of the aortic tissue and inability to oversew the origin of the great vessels with systolic flow through it, debranching of the arch vessels was performed under circulatory arrest for 7 minutes with adequate antegrade cerebral perfusion preservation. An 8-mm × 12-mm × 30 cm Hemashield trifurcation graft was selected and beveled to the appropriate length to perform end-to-end anastomosis with the arch vessels. The right subclavian artery was anastomosed to the 12-mm limb, followed by anastomosis of the LCCA to one of the 8-mm limbs and the right common carotid artery to the remaining 8-mm limb. Once the anastomoses were completed, a side-biting clamp was applied to the proximal segment of the ascending aorta. Then, an opening was created to anastomose the 12-mm stem of the trifurcation graft to the ascending aorta and rewarming was completed at this point Once no longer needed, the LCCA bypass that was used for the CPB was disconnected from the circuit and anastomosed to the LSCA to complete revascularization of the LSCA as a carotid-subclavian bypass. Following this, embolization of the proximal LSCA origin was performed using an 18-mm Amplatzer plug for the total exclusion of the KD. Finally, a 34 × 209-mm Cook Zenith Alpha endograft was deployed at the origin of the stem of the trifurcation graft covering the distal ascending aorta in Zone 0 . The completion thoracic aortogram confirmed the successful position of the device and the exclusion of the diverticulum and aneurysmal aorta. Wide patency of bypasses to all vessels (patent bilateral carotid arteries and left vertebral, right vertebral covered purposely by the thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR)) was observed. The patient tolerated the procedure well and was extubated with a normal neurologic exam and palpable distal pedal and radial pulses bilaterally.
Postoperatively, the patient developed an E. coli urinary tract infection and bacteremia which were treated with intravenous antibiotic therapy. Otherwise, the hospital course was uncomplicated, and he was discharged on postoperative day 11. At 30-day follow-up visit, his symptoms of dyspnea had significantly improved. Computed tomographic angiography demonstrated a patent ascending aorta to innominate and LCCA bypass as well as a patent LCCA to LSCA bypass graft with evidence of a small type II endoleak arising from the right first posterior intercostal artery. 3-, 6-, 12-, and 18-months follow-up CTAs have demonstrated a stable excluded aneurysm sac at the aortic arch as well as the persistence of the small type II endoleak (-) that is being followed conservatively due to continued sac shrinkage.