A 54 year old male, smoker, with no prior illnesses or surgeries, presented to the emergency room with sudden epigastric abdominal pain. He denied nausea or vomiting but on further inquiry he revealed that he had anorexia and vomited occasionally in the last 7 months, having lost 7 kg in that time span. He looked malnourished and his abdomen was distended and generally tender. A computed tomography (CT) was performed revealing massive gastric dilation due to pyloric stenosis. The patient was initially managed with nasogastric drainage, intravenous (iv) fluids, iv PPI and placement of a right subclavian central line for parenteral feeding. During placement of this central line an iatrogenic pneumothorax occurred and right chest tube was placed.
On day 3 the patient’s abdominal pain increased significantly and he showed signs of peritonitis. Another CT was ordered and a pneumoperitoneum was evident. The patient was rushed to the Operating Room and an exploratory laparotomy was performed, revealing chemical peritonitis, a 1 cm perforation on a pre- pyloric ulcer with pyloric scarring and stenosis. A subtotal gastrectomy was performed with a Billroth II reconstruction.
Post-operatively the patient stayed in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) for 23 days. He had septic shock due to an infected jugular central line that was placed later, and needed antibiotics and aminergic support.
He also needed the chest drainage (which was changed several times) for 26 days until complete resolution of the pneumothorax, However, once extubated, he had no trouble in resuming oral feeding. At day 34 the patient exhibited signs of shock again, and the ordered CT showed a sub-phrenic collection that resolved with an 8 day course of Meropenem and Vancomycin. He was finally discharged 40 days after surgery. The pathology of the surgical specimen confirmed benign gastric ulcer with no dysplasia associated.
A month after discharge he was seen in the outpatient clinic and was well, tolerating diet and had gained weight. The patient was not tested for HP status and has been called for new consultation to determine if he is indeed positive for infection so that eradication can be performed if needed (, ).