A 70 year old woman was admitted to the ophthalmology department with decreased visual acuity and ocular pain.
She had a history of chronic end-stage renal failure for 3 years, with polycystic kidney disease and liver disease discovered 15 years ago, haemodialysis with 2 sessions per week on a tunnelled jugular catheter that has not been changed for 2 years.
The history of her illness dated back to 1 month before her admission with the onset of generalized asthenia associated with a weight loss of 2 kg over 1 month evolving in a context of feverish sensation. Probabilistic antibiotics were prescribed without clinical improvement. The evolution was marked by the installation 1 week before his admission of an intense pain in the left eye associated with a fall of the visual acuity and a palpebral tumefaction without notion of surgery or ocular traumatism.
On admission, the patient was pale, conscious, hemodynamically and respiratorily stable, and apyretic at 37.1. Examination of the left eye revealed a 360-degree palpebral edema, corneal edema, central corneal opacity, high occular tension with a stony globe, and ophthalmoplegia.
Ocular ultrasound showed a vitreous with an echogenic organization, attached to the detached temporal retinal layer .
The biological analysis showed microcytic hypochromic inflammatory anaemia at 5.6 g/dL with a ferritinemia level of 137 ng/ml, neutrophils at 10860/μL and thrombocytosis at 420,000/μL, CRP elevated to 141 mg/dL, PCT elevated to 1.22 mg/l, and rheumatoid factor elevated to 303.4 IU/ml.
As part of the etiological assessment of the endogenous endophthalmitis, a transthoracic and then transoesophageal echocardiogram were performed, on the fifth day of hospitalisation, visualizing a large vegetation measuring 15.9 × 3 mm in the right atrium on the path of the haemodialysis catheter, vibratile , associated with 2 small vegetations in the right and posterior aortic cusps responsible for moderate leakage, and a small vegetation on the small mitral valve responsible for minimal leakage . Intravitreal sampling and two blood cultures were positive for coagulase-negative staphylococcus. The cerebro thoracic abdominal and pelvic computed tomography did not show any other secondary location of the endocarditis.
The patient received 3 intravitreal injections of vancomycin 1 mg and ceftazidime 2 mg, and intravenous antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone 2 g/day and gentamycin 2 mg/kg per dialysis, over a period of 4 weeks. a removal of the tunnelled catheter with a bacteriological study showing the culture of the coagulase-negative staphylococcus.
The short-term evolution was marked by clinical improvement with restoration of the general condition, biological improvement with normalisation of the infectious work-up and negativation of blood cultures and echocardiograpic improvement with regression of the size of the vegetations. Nevertheless, the ocular prognosis was poor with loss of the eyeball and a decision was made to eviscerate the eye. The patient was reviewed at 3 months after hospitalisation and evisceration was performed.