We report the case of a 45 year-old man admitted to the Emergency Department of Donostia-San Sebastian University Hospital, Spain, with a 5-week history of severe mechanical pain at the level of the elbow, without further concomitant symptoms. His medical history included arterial hypertension and degenerative changes in the spine and right shoulder, detected the year before. Additionally, the patient reported a 2-cm decrease in height.
Physical examination was normal; however, upon suspicion of right-side epicondylitis, an X-ray study was performed, demonstrating a lytic diaphyseal lesion. In the light of these findings, the patient was hospitalized for further examination .
Serum laboratory results demonstrated elevated β2-microglobulin levels and mild anemia, along with the presence of Rouleaux in the red cell series .
Capillary electrophoresis of serum proteins showed a monoclonal peak in the gamma fraction (γ), which was quantified as 1.33 g/dL . This peak was typified as FLC-Kappa monoclonal component by immunosustraction using anti-IgG, IgA, IgM, and Kappa and Lambda antisera. The result was confirmed and complemented by immunofixation including anti-IgD and anti-IgE antisera. Immunofixation showed a band in the IgE region and also in the Kappa light chain assay, which confirmed the presence of a IgE-Kappa monoclonal proteins .
With regard to serum immunoglobulin quantification, we observed an elevation in IgE concentrations (ImmunoCAP, Phadia®, Barcelona, Spain) and in the Kappa/Lambda light chain ratio in serum, which was 117.69 . 24-h urine analysis did not reveal proteinuria and capillary electrophoresis and immunofixation excluded Bence-Jones MC.
In the light of the results obtained, a bone marrow study was carried out, demonstrating a plasma cell infiltration of 30%, with the totality showing an aberrant immunophenotype by flow cytometry (CD138+/CD38+low/CD19−/CD45+het/CD56++/CD117−/CD27+het/CD81+het). Cytogenetic analysis by in situ florescence hybridization (FISH) of purified plasma cells was normal, being IGH-CCND1, t(11;14) (q13;q32) rearrangement the only anomaly detected.
In the light of these findings, and according to the International Myeloma Working Group (IMWG) [, ], the patient was diagnosed with IgE-Kappa multiple myeloma, Durie-Salmon stage IIIA, ISS-R:1 .