A 14-month-old boy was referred to our hospital for atypical genitalia. He is the only child, born to non-consanguineous parents by cesarean section after an uneventful pregnancy. Examination of external genitalia revealed absence of scrotal rugae on the right side, ipsilateral cryptorchidism and abnormal external tissue on the right side of the perineum . The right testis was palpable in the inguinal region, the left testis was in the scrotum with intact midline raphe, and his penile length was 4.8 cm (normal for age). Ultrasonography showed that both testes were normal in size and echotexture. Extra-genital examination showed right monodactylous lower limb, normal tone and deep tendon reflexes. He had no dysmorphic facial features or any other skeletal anomalies. .
The karyotype of the boy was 46, XY, while his hormonal profile showed normal prepubertal LH and FSH (0.1, 0.4 mIU/ml respectively). After ß-hCG stimulation, serum total testosterone increased from 0.03 ng/ml to 3.51 ng/ml (normal basal serum total testosterone: up to 0.3, normal serum total testosterone after ß-hCG stimulation: more than 2-fold rise) and testosterone/dihydrotestosterone ratio was 8.54 ng/ml (normal: up to 30). Moreover, he had normal sertoli cell function which was assessed by measuring inhibin-B and anti-Müllerian hormone which were 158 pg/ml (normal: 91–163) and 23 ng/ml (normal: above 15), respectively.
In addition, work-up for associated extra-genital anomalies was done. Skeletal survey showed right monodactylous lower limb (with only a big toe which had 2 phalanges) and normal spine alignment. This limb malformation resulted in motor developmental delay for which he started to stand supported with the help of orthopedic shoes, physical and occupational therapy. There was neither a family history of similar condition nor seizures, abnormal movements or ataxia. Associated intra-abdominal anomalies including renal system abnormalities were excluded by abdominal and pelvic ultrasonography. A previous echocardiography showed a small muscular ventricular septal defect (VSD) that closed on follow-up.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed posterior fossa malformation in the form of dysplastic left cerebellar hemisphere with hypoplasia of its antero-superior compartment, total aplasia of its postero-inferior compartment and a small cleft traversing the inferior aspect of the right cerebellar hemisphere . Despite that no seizures were reported, right focal epileptiform activity was detected by electroencephalogram. Audiological examination revealed bilateral normal function, and his ophthalmological examination was normal.
Intra-operatively, the patient had his right testis fixed in the right scrotum. Two biopsies were taken; one of them from the scrotal skin and the other from the perineal lesion. The pathological examination of the perineal lesion showed fibro-epithelial polyp (skin tag), with no testicular tissue or atypia .