A 29-year-old male presented to the Emergency Department with a penetrating stab wound to the anterior left second intercostal space, 2 cm medial to the mid-clavicular line. Previous medical history consisted of a right tibia-fibula fracture with intra-medullary nailing 7 years prior.
The patient presented haemodynamically unstable, in grade 3 haemorrhagic shock and after resuscitation, improved as a transient fluid responder. A left-sided intercostal drain was inserted for a large haemothorax. Vital signs after resuscitation: heart rate 100; respiratory rate 14; saturating at 95% on room air; blood pressure 101/64. Post-resuscitation, no angina was reported. On examination: no features of cardiac failure, central cyanosis, bruits, or murmurs were elicited. No ST or other rhythm abnormalities were noted on electrocardiogram . Pertinent findings were that of chronic septic hardware of the right lower limb which on further enquiry, had not been formally assessed by an orthopaedic service. Microbiological workup of the local septic limb was deferred until after haemodynamic stabilization.
A preliminary diagnosis of local septic hardware led to screening for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, and antibiotic prophylaxis with broad-spectrum coverage.
Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma scan demonstrated a 1 cm pericardial effusion. A contrasted computed tomographical scan of the chest and cardiac TTE was ordered.
Computed tomographical findings demonstrated a right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) injury at the level of the pulmonary valve and an associated suspected thrombus. A small aortic root injury with a small pseudo-aneurysm and intimal flap was also observed. The injury tract extended to the medial superior vena cava (SVC) and a high index of suspicion for an SVC injury was entertained.
Transthoracic cardiac ECHO findings did not demonstrate valvulopathies, clear flow reversal or shunting, regional wall motion abnormalities, tamponade, or features of infective endocarditis. The patient had a preserved left ventricular ejection fraction. A large dense lesion was noted immediately beneath the pulmonary valve which demonstrated beat to beat movement and was noted to be highly suggestive of a clot.
Pertinent laboratory findings showed that the patient had normal renal and liver function with a normocytic normochromic anaemia (haemoglobin = 10.9) and no coagulation abnormalities (normal prothrombin and partial thromboplastin time).
The patient was intubated under general anaesthesia with a single lumen endotracheal tube . Femoral cardiopulmonary bypass was initiated via the left groin. A median sternotomy was performed and no active bleeding was seen.
The aorta was then clamped and the heart arrested with cold blood cardioplegia administered into the aortic root. Cardioplegia was given every 20 min throughout the procedure.
A large clot was found within a defect in the medial wall of the RVOT, abutting the ascending aorta, and was subsequently removed. The RVOT was repaired with continuous 3/0 prolene sutures.
The aorta was opened via a transverse ‘J’ incision . There was a 0.5 cm laceration in the aortic wall, ∼1 mm left of the right coronary ostium which was repaired primarily. The plane between the main pulmonary artery (PA) and ascending aorta was dissected and opened. The right coronary artery was not injured. The contralateral side of the ascending aorta (right side) also had a defect through it and there was a small point injury to the base of the SVC which were both primarily repaired.
Pre-operative radiological findings had a good correlation with the intra-operative findings and no other intra-operative injuries were noted.
The patient was weaned off of cardiopulmonary bypass and closure of the femoral cannulation site, and sternum was performed successfully. The patient remained intubated and was transported to intensive care unit.
A complete recovery was made with no residual thrombus or intracardiac shunt at early follow-up. There was no cardiac, respiratory, or neurological sequelae at 30-day follow-up.