A young man aged 18 years first developed muscle weakness of the bilateral lower limbs, followed by fever, dizziness and muscle weakness of the neck and bilateral upper limbs. He had no gastrointestinal or respiratory symptoms. On the 5th day after illness onset (on October 3, 2018), he felt dyspnea without convulsions or impaired consciousness and was referred to the emergency room of our hospital. He was intubated and invasive mechanical ventilation was employed due to dyspnea progression. The brain's magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was normal . Blood tests revealed elevated white blood cell counts (11.79 × 109/L) and neutrophil count (9.56 × 109/L). Anti-JEV immunoglobulin (Ig) M antibody (EEB-IgM, Enzyme immunoassay test kit, Shanghai B&C Biological Technology Company) was positive in his serum. Unexpectedly, a high level anti-JEV IgG antibody (JE detect TMIgG, ELISA, InBios) was also detected in his serum. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of serum was negative for JEV RNA. PCR was also negative for other viruses such as Zika, Dengue, West Nile, Forest encephalitis, Coxsackie, poliovirus, Echovirus, Enterovirus, and herpesviruses. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed elevated leukocyte counts (49 × 106/L, lymphocytic pleocytosis) and protein level (814 mg/L, normal range: 100–600 mg/L). Indian ink staining, acid-fast staining and bacterial and fungal culture of the CSF sample were all negative. Unfortunately, no CSF sample was available for anti-JEV IgM and JEVRNA testing. The patient was from a rural area in the Liaoning province of China, where a JEV outbreak occurred in the summer of 2018. He was vaccinated against JE in childhood at eight months and two years of age. He was medicated with methylprednisolone (500 mg per day) followed by tapering.
Ten days later, his condition partly improved. He refused to continue invasive ventilation though he still had respiratory disturbance with an elevated PaCO2of 58.0 mmHg and decreased PaO2of 72.0 mmHg (on intranasal oxygen therapy of 10 L/min). Despite lucidity, proper cognition, and functional bladder and bowel, he had marked disturbances in coughing, articulation, and swallowing with absence of pharyngeal reflex and disabled soft palate movement, indicating injured cranial nerves (bulbar paralysis). He performed pectoral type breathing without any thoracic breathing, suggesting respiratory myoparalysis. Examination revealed weakened muscle power in the left upper limb (grade 4/5), right upper limb (grade 2/5), and bilateral lower limbs (grade 2/5), which were improved compared to day after illness onset. The muscle tone of his four extremities was decreased. Deep tendon reflexes were decreased without pathological reflex and sensation disturbance.
Auscultation revealed a purring sound in bilateral lungs. Lung computed tomography (CT) indicated consolidation in the lower lobe of the right lung . The blood test was negative for the antibodies of Epstein–Barr virus, herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, cytomegalovirus and human immunodeficiency virus. On the 24th day after illness onset, repeated MRI of the brain and spine appeared normal .The patient refused a second lumbar puncture. The assay for anti-gangliosides antibodies was unavailable at our hospital. On the 27th day after illness onset, electrophysiology examination revealed abnormal findings including prolonged latency of H reflex in bilateral tibial nerves, reduced amplitude of evoked velocity in the right median nerve, and slowed motor conduction in the right tibial nerve, while the conduction of the sensory nerves was normal. JEV infection-associated GBS was considered, which agreed with Brighton criteria level 1. The patient declined intravenous Ig and mechanical ventilation. Despite applying of broad-spectrum antibiotics and sputum clearance with bronchoscopy, he developed progressive dyspnea, increased carbon dioxide retention, and respiratory acidosis (PaCO2, 120 mmHg; PH, 7.185). Lung CT indicated aggravated consolidation in the lower lobe of bilateral lung, mainly in the right lung . He still refused mechanical ventilation and tracheotomy. He voluntarily withdrew from the hospital and died on the 36th day after illness onset.
We prepared a literature review of a total of 85 cases of JEV-associated AFP reported previously , 73 cases were considered as GBS. There were 4 cases with a reported history of previous JE vaccination.