A 55-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) with acute onset right lower abdominal pain a few hours prior. The pain was non-radiating, constant, and gradually increasing in intensity. She reported one episode of gross hematuria at home with the onset of the pain but the hematuria resolved subsequently. The patient had vomiting with the pain but did not have any other gastrointestinal symptoms. She did not have any fever or chills.
The patient had no past medical problems but a previous surgical history of a total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oopherectomy performed four years prior and a laparoscopic procedure converted to open deroofing of a hepatic cyst three years prior. During a computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis ordered by her hepatobiliary surgeon three years prior, a small, right kidney mid-pole stone was noted. However, as it was not causing any symptoms and was relatively small in size, it was conservatively managed.
On physical examination in the ED, she was afebrile and hemodynamically stable. Examination of the abdomen revealed tenderness over the right flank and iliac fossa with rebound tenderness but no guarding.
Initial blood investigations showed a total white cell count of 11×103 per microliter (μL) (reference range 4.5 – 11.0×103/μL) with mild neutrophilia. Serum electrolyte and creatinine levels were within normal range. Urinalysis showed microscopic hematuria with no casts. Point-of-care ultrasound did not reveal any intraperitoneal free fluid or the presence of an abdominal aortic aneurysm, and no findings suggestive of cholecystitis.
The differential diagnosis in this patient was broad and included appendicitis, renal colic, diverticulitis, etc. However, the presence of rebound tenderness and persistent pain prompted the decision for the patient to undergo a CT of the abdomen and pelvis in the ED. Meanwhile, intravenous ceftriaxone was administered in view of the presence of peritonitis. The contrast-enhanced CT showed no evidence of acute appendicitis but found a 0.3-centimeter right upper ureteric calculus, with upstream hydronephrosis and ureteric rupture (–).
Given the imaging findings, the patient was admitted to the urology service. She underwent urgent right percutaneous nephrostomy on the day of admission. Three days later, anterograde ureteric stenting was performed with a confirmatory nephrostogram the following day. She was subsequently discharged with a follow-up CT of the kidneys, ureters, and bladder in three weeks and urology clinic follow-up after the scan.