A-58-year-old Japanese woman who was diagnosed with a giant gastric GIST and administered neoadjuvant imatinib presented to the emergency department with complaints of abdominal pain and retching. Physical examination revealed abdominal distension, upper abdominal tenderness, and a moveable mass, but no rebound tenderness or guarding. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed tumor shrinkage from 25 cm at the initiation of imatinib treatment to approximately 18 cm, position shift, and an organoaxially twisted stomach . Upper endoscopy revealed the counterclockwise twisted stomach, and the scope could not access the duodenum. Upper gastrointestinal tract contrast study revealed rotation of the gastric body around the organoaxis . Based on these findings, we diagnosed the patient with gastric volvulus caused by a giant gastric GIST.
She had been admitted to our hospital with abdominal distention and a palpable mass 18 months earlier. The mass did not show any mobility on palpation. Enhanced CT revealed a lobulated mass measuring 25 × 22 cm, extending from the stomach, abutting the abdominal wall, liver, ascending colon, and abdominal aorta . Histopathological examination using endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy revealed the presence of spindle cells and immunohistochemical positivity for c-kit and CD34. We diagnosed the patient with a gastric GIST; however, the tumor was bulky and had infiltrated the adjacent organs, especially the abdominal aorta; therefore, we initiated neoadjuvant imatinib treatment (400 mg/day). After 12 months of imatinib treatment, fluorodeoxyglucose-positron tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) for response evaluation revealed metabolically inactive hypodense lesions. However, the tumor shrank slightly and showed no mobility on palpation. Eighteen months after the initiation of imatinib treatment, gastric volvulus occurred.
For treatment, initial decompression of a nasogastric tube improved retching and abdominal distension, but did not improve the gastric volvulus. As the tumor was thought to be resectable, we decided to perform surgery using a median incision. The tumor developed from the lesser curvature of the mid-portion of the stomach and caused its rotation . Other intraabdominal organs were not involved. However, the stomach did not show blood flow obstruction or necrosis, and was considered partially twisted. The main feeders of the tumor were the left and right gastric arteries. After ligation of the feeding artery, the tumor was resected along with parts of the stomach with a gross margin of 1 cm, and the gastric wall was closed with double-layer sutures. The operation time was 122 minutes and blood loss volume was 60 mL. On gross examination, the resected tumor measured 18 × 15 × 11 cm and weighed 2000 g. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 9 days after the surgery. Histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of GIST (with KIT and CD34 positivity) with mitosis under 5/high-power field (HPF) and revealed a grade 1b response to preoperative imatinib treatment . Genetic analysis of the c-kit mutation revealed a mutation in exon 11, which resulted in internal tandem duplications at the 3′ end of the KIT juxtamembrane domain.
The patient received adjuvant imatinib for 3 years and has been alive for 5 years without recurrence.