A 35-year-old male soldier presented to a direct access sports physical therapist (PT) for worsening right posterior elbow pain. The subject’s pain began several months prior concurrent with an increase in upper body strength training activities and was gradually worsening in severity with this activity. The subjects’s history included a right partial triceps brachii distal tendon avulsion eight years prior which was treated conservatively, allowing him to resume unlimited military duty and weightlifting activities in subsequent years. The subject denied red flags including experiencing a new traumatic event, joint swelling, or signs of infection.
Physical examination noted a palpable defect and mild tenderness on the posterior aspect of the elbow at the insertion of the triceps tendon. There was no ecchymosis, erythema, or edema appreciated. Triceps strength (manual muscle test 5/5), elbow range of motion (0-135 degrees), and elbow stability (varus and valgus stress tests) were intact and asymptomatic. Differential diagnoses included triceps strain, triceps tendinopathy, olecranon bursopathy, and symptomatic osteoarthritic changes.
MSK US was performed by the physical therapist using a Sonosite IViz (Fujifilm Sonosite, Bothell, WA) with portable 10-5 MHz 38 mm linear array transducer with the subject lying in supine. The shoulder was positioned in internal rotation with the elbow flexed to ninety degrees and elevated on a bolster so that the hand could rest on the abdomen . The probe was positioned in the sagittal plane over the distal triceps and posterior elbow and maneuvered until the bony landmarks of the olecranon process of the ulna and the distal humeral cortex were visualized. The triceps tendon and portions of the myotendinous junction were visualized superficial to the bony landmarks.
The long-axis ultrasound view demonstrated a thickened distal triceps tendon with a loss of normal fibrous echotexture . There was hypoechogenicity of the superficial layer of the conjoined tendon compared to the deep portion and a loss of the normal tendon tapering conformity at the insertion on the olecranon process. Tendon thickening, hypoechogenicity, and a loss of normal fibrous echotexture are findings consistent with chronic tendinosis.
A week later, prior to initiating a care plan, the subject reported re-injury while performing resisted elbow extension strength training exercises. Physical examination revealed moderate elbow effusion with a more prominent palpable triceps tendon defect. Triceps strength was 3+/5 through the available range of motion of 15–125 degrees. Differential diagnoses included acute triceps tendon tear, triceps tendon avulsion, and olecranon fracture.
Immediate post-injury MSK US demonstrated a selective area of complete fiber non-visualization of the distal triceps tendon’s superficial portion near its insertion on the proximal ulna, indicating a high-grade partial tendon avulsion . The subject was referred by the physical therapist for MRI two days later. MRI findings confirmed a partial triceps tendon avulsion with a partially retracted conjoined tendon of the long and lateral heads of the triceps and tendinosis .