A 64-year-old Thai woman presented at the emergency department of our center with fever, cough, and shortness of breath for 1 day. She had a history of hypertension, well-controlled asthma, and adenocarcinoma of the sigmoid colon stage 3. She underwent sigmoidectomy 4 months earlier, and completed the fourth cycle of adjuvant chemotherapy (capecitabine and oxaliplatin) 2 weeks earlier without infectious complication. At admission, the patient was febrile (body temperature 38 °C), and she had tachycardia, tachypnea, and hypotension. Her oxygen saturation was 70% on room air. Chest auscultation showed decreased breath sounds in the right upper lung field. The remainder of the examination was unremarkable. Chest X-ray showed right upper lobe consolidation. Laboratory investigations revealed hemoglobin of 8.8 g/dl; white blood cell count of 22,610/mm3 with 40% neutrophils, 2% lymphocytes, and 32% band forms; and, platelets of 188,000/mm3. Blood chemistry showed blood urea nitrogen of 31.5 mg/dl and creatinine of 1.03 mg/dl. Her liver function tests were within normal ranges.
She was admitted to the intensive care unit, and was diagnosed with severe community-acquired pneumonia with respiratory failure and septic shock. She was intubated, and was treated with intravenous meropenem, vasopressor, and hydrocortisone. Both sputum and blood cultures yielded Acinetobacter baumannii susceptible to carbapenems. On the third day after admission, she developed acute kidney injury which necessitated prompt initiation of continuous renal replacement therapy. Clinical improvement was then observed after 10 days of intravenous antibiotic therapy. Hydrocortisone for septic shock treatment was given at 200 mg per day for 10 days followed by tapering dose to complete 15 days of corticosteroid therapy. Her blood sugars were between 130 and 170 mg/dl.
However, her respiratory status worsened on the 11th day of admission despite hemodynamic stability. Chest X-ray showed new patchy infiltrations at the left lower lung field . CT chest could not be performed due to her unstable respiratory conditions. Bronchoscopy revealed normal airway mucosa with purulent bloody secretions. Culture of the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was positive for carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae. BAL culture for acid-fast bacilli was negative. BAL galactomannan was positive at an optical density of 4.01, but fungal culture was still pending. Serum galactomannan was negative. She was treated with intravenous fosfomycin, colistin, and voriconazole. The voriconazole was given as the empirical treatment for probable invasive aspergillosis due to the positivity of BAL galactomannan.
On the 16th day of admission, after 1-day of hydrocortisone discontinuation, she developed multiple discrete ill-defined erythematous subcutaneous nodules on both arms and both legs . The lesions were 1–5 cm in diameter, and some were bullous lesions. To confirm diagnosis, a skin biopsy of a lesion on her left arm was performed. Histopathologic study of tissue sections revealed lobular panniculitis with suppurative granulomatous inflammation, and the presence of rare non-septate broad hyaline molds. Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) , Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and Gomori methenamine silver (GMS) stains showed positive for rare non-septate broad hyaline molds. Fungal culture of the skin biopsy revealed Mucor species. The fungal culture of the BAL specimen that was performed 5 days earlier also showed Mucor species . Fungal hemoculture was reported as negative result. She was then diagnosed with disseminated mucormycosis. Antifungal therapy was then changed to intravenous liposomal amphotericin B at a dose of 5 mg/kg/day. Despite treatment, our patient succumbed due to septic shock and multiorgan failure on the third day after definitive diagnosis.