A 57-year-old man, while being investigated for biliary colic, was incidentally noted to have a complex cystic/solid liver lesion in segment VII of his liver. His medical and surgical history included atrial fibrillation, hypertension, and tonsillectomy as a child. He had no known allergies. He worked as a truck driver, was a non-smoker, and consumed alcohol on a social basis.
Serial MRIs with gadoxetate disodium (Primovist) demonstrated mixed T2 signal intensity within the segment VII lesion, with arterial and portal venous phase enhancement, and no associated restricted diffusion (, ). The solid component was isointense to the liver on the transitional phase with no retention of Primovist. The size of the lesion increased radiologically from 19 mm to 25 mm in 8 months. A separate 5 mm lesion in segment V was also noted, which had imaging characteristics of a possible haemangioma.
The patient proceeded to a laparoscopic posterior sectionectomy (segments VI and VII) with concomitant cholecystectomy. Intraoperatively, the lesion and simple liver cysts were identified on laparoscopic ultrasound. Surgery was uncomplicated, and he was discharged on day eight post-operatively.
Pathologic assessment of the resection specimen revealed a 27 mm poorly circumscribed unencapsulated mass, which appeared haemorrhagic macroscopically. Microscopically, the tumour was an infiltrative vasoformative lesion, with a degree of infiltration exceeding that of capillary or cavernous haemangioma. The tumour extended to the resection margin. There was no dissection between individual hepatocytes or cytological atypia . On immunohistochemistry, the lesional cells showed a Ki-67 index of approximately 5%, p53 was wild-type (i.e. negative), and c-myc was negative. HSVN was suspected, and the diagnosis was subsequently confirmed after review by an expert gastrointestinal pathologist.
Initial follow up MRI at six months did not reveal any evidence of local recurrence. However, the previously noted segment V lesion had increased in size to 9 mm, raising the possibility of multifocal disease. Further surveillance imaging at 14 months revealed a stable appearance of the lesion. There was no local recurrence. Given the marginal growth and slow progression of the segment V lesion, and the uncertainty of the malignant potential of HSVN, the patient discussed at our multidisciplinary meeting with the decision to continue three-monthly MRI surveillance over the next five years.