A 54-year-old Caucasian man presented with a 4-month history of pain in the right hypochondrium after eating, weight loss and obstructive jaundice. On examination, the patient had a tender mass in the right upper quadrant of his abdomen. Biochemical tests showed changes consistent with obstructive jaundice (bilirubin 76 μmol/litre, alkaline phosphatase 653 U/litre, alanine aminotransferase 281 U/litre, gamma glutamyl transferase (γGT) 1792 U/litre). An abdominal ultrasound scan (USS) showed gallstones in a thick-walled gallbladder and intrahepatic duct dilatation, but no common bile duct (CBD) stones or impacted stone in Hartmann's pouch. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed dilatation of the intrahepatic ducts above a common hepatic duct stricture; no gallstone was seen in relation to this. At endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), the hilar stricture was confirmed and stented. Brush cytology was negative for neoplasia. The patient's jaundice resolved. Computed tomography (CT) showed a mass surrounding the gallbladder fossa and a ring-calcified lesion . The mass extended extrahepatically to involve the duodenum and hilar vasculature with encasement of the portal vein and its right and left branches. The appearances were felt to be most in keeping with an advanced gallbladder cancer although the possibility of Mirizzi syndrome was also considered. The patient then passed melaena and became anaemic and required a 4-unit blood transfusion. Oesophagogastroduodenoscopy (OGD) demonstrated bleeding from the ampulla (haemobilia) and no peptic ulcer. Arteriography demonstrated a 3 cm aneurysm of a branch of the right hepatic artery, at the medial aspect of the mass shown on CT . The aneurysm was successfully embolised. Two CT guided percutaneous biopsies of the mass were taken and showed no evidence of neoplasia with only acute inflammatory tissue and necrosis. Due to the doubt over the presence of a malignant process, an exploratory laparotomy was performed. The necrotic hepatic mass was entered and a large volume of organised thrombus and stones was drained from the right lobe of the liver. The gallbladder was excised. A 4 cm gallstone was found to have fistulated from the cystic duct into the common hepatic duct resulting in a Mirizzi type II syndrome. The pseudoaneurysm was immediately superior to the stone. The common bile duct was explored. There were no CBD stones or intrinsic lesion. A t-tube was inserted and a drain was left in the liver cavity. The patient made a full and uneventful recovery and the t-tube was removed after 2 weeks. Histology identified a necrotic inflammatory mass with no neoplasia.