52-year-old female presented to the hospital with chief complaints of progressive shortness of breath, orthopnea, chest pain, and dry cough.
The symptoms started one month ago and progressively worsened which prompted her to visit the hospital.
She had no significant prior personal or family history.
Vital signs were notable for blood pressure of 124/79 mmHg, sinus tachycardia with heart rate of 119 beats per minute, hypoxia with oxygen saturation of 89%, respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute and afebrile temperature. On physical examination, she demonstrated sinus tachycardia, a pericardial friction rub, and rales in her bilateral lower lung fields. She did not demonstrate pulsus paradoxus. Review of system was notable for numbness and tingling of the right hand for the past month.
Initial laboratory findings were notable normal white blood cell count of 11/nL, however with 45% peripheral eosinophilia. Troponin was mildly elevated at 1.1 ng/mL and N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT ProBNP) was elevated at 2101 pg/mL. D-Dimer was elevated at 3.66 µg/mL. Electrocardiogram revealed low voltage QRS complex with small ST-T wave changes . A chest radiograph showed cardiomegaly and bilateral opacities . At this stage, given the initial diagnostic information, differentials included congestive heart failure, pulmonary embolism, and/or eosinophilic pneumonia.
Computed tomography angiogram revealed a large pericardial effusion, moderate right and small left pleural effusions, and bilateral pulmonary infiltrates . This was followed with a transthoracic echocardiogram which demonstrated normal left ventricular cavity size, wall thickness and systolic function with estimated ejection fraction greater than 55%. No regional wall motion abnormalities were detected. Aortic and mitral valves were normal. There was trace tricuspid regurgitation. The right atrium was normal in size. The right ventricle collapsed in diastole. There was a large pericardial effusion . The diastolic compression of the right ventricle was suggestive of tamponade physiology.