A 52-year-old male was admitted to the department of nephrology in our hospital presenting with edema of the eyelids and bilateral lower extremities for 1 month. Laboratory findings upon admission revealed a large amount of proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, and hyperlipidemia, which suggested the diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome. The patient then received oral methylprednisolone 60 mg daily. Meanwhile, he was diagnosed with Good’s syndrome for concurrent thymoma and significant hypogammaglobulinemia. Two weeks later, the patient developed high fever, productive cough with non-purulent sputum. Pneumonia was confirmed by chest CT, and he received empirical ceftazidime, imipenem, and intravenous immunoglobulin without good clinical response. He also complained of myalgia and muscle swelling in his left lower extremity. Twenty-two days after admission, the patient was transferred into the medical intensive care unit (MICU) because of the aggravating respiratory failure. The patient was a non-smoker and had no history of diabetes or alcoholism. He did not recall any exposure to potentially contaminated water or animals.
On admission to MICU (day 0), he was drowsy and distressful. His vital signs were as follows: body temperature 38.0°C, pulse rate 125 beats/min, respiratory rate 38 breaths/min, blood pressure 116/74 mmHg, and pulse oxygen saturation 97% with a non-rebreather mask. Diminished breath sounds in the right lower lung were heard on auscultation. There was no audible cardiac murmur. His abdomen was soft and non-tender without hepatosplenomegaly. Shifting dullness was positive, along with moderate pitting edema of the limbs and lumbosacral area. The skin over his left calf was congestive and swollen with tenderness . Laboratory findings upon admission revealed a white blood cell count of 2.67 × 109/L with an elevated neutrophil ratio of 96.3%, hemoglobin of 120 g/L, and platelet count of 62 × 109/L. The serum biochemistry panel was remarkable for striking elevation of muscle enzyme spectrum on MICU day 0, including creatine kinase increased from 10,759 to 13,514 U/L, myoglobin from 2,820 to 93,484 μg/L, alanine aminotransferase 131 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 254 U/L and lactic dehydrogenase 1,489 U/L. The serum creatinine was 226 μmol/L with hyperkalemia. The concentration of C-reactive protein and procalcitonin was 271.33 and 100 ng/mL. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) DNA in peripheral blood was 300,000 copies/ml detected by polymerase reaction (PCR). Chest CT revealed patchy shadows and consolidations in both lungs and pleural effusion bilaterally. Presumed abscess in the right lower lobe and cavitation in the left upper lobe were noted as well .
After MICU admission, intravenous vancomycin and ganciclovir were added for the presumed skin and soft tissue infections and cytomegalovirus viremia, respectively. However, the patient’s condition kept deteriorating with persistent fever, skin lesion expanding , rhabdomyolysis and subsequently acute respiratory distress syndrome. The patient was intubated and on invasive mechanical ventilation on MICU day 1, and continuous renal replacement therapy was initiated on MICU day 2.
Tracheal aspiration was found to be non-purulent after intubation. The patient underwent a standard of care microbiologic diagnostics for bacteria, viruses, and fungi, including staining and culture, multiplex PCR, and serologic testing. Unfortunately, any clinical relevant pathogens were undetected. Although no pathogen was identified through comprehensive conventional microbiologic workup, infection was still highly suspected, and thus, blood and the skin specimen were sent for mNGS assay on MICU day 3. We performed mNGS on the Illumina platform by using DNA extracted from the peripheral blood and the skin specimen. In terms of blood mNGS, nucleic acids were extracted from the plasma and blood cell layer, respectively, corresponding to cell-free DNA (cfDNA) and intracellular DNA (iDNA). The total numbers of sequencing reads were 27 million, 12.5 million, and 51 million sequences for the libraries of mNGS on the plasma, blood cell layer, and skin sample, respectively. PathoXtract Nucleic Acid Kit (WYXM03001S, Willingmed Corp., Beijing, China) was used to extract DNA. Sequencing data were processed using Pathogen Identification Sequencing (PIseq) Metagenomic Sequencing Data Management System V2.0 (Willingmed Corp.) automatically. The high-quality sequencing data were compared with the human reference genome GRCH37 (hg19) by alignment software to remove the human host sequence and obtain clean data for use in the subsequent identification of pathogenic microorganisms. The clean data were aligned with the established reference database of pathogenic microorganisms to perform the annotation of pathogenic microorganism species, complete the final analysis, and obtain results on microorganism identification. We got the detection report the next day, revealing cell-free DNA (cfDNA) of Legionella pneumophila as high as 84,930 reads per Million (RPM) in the plasma layer, and intracellular DNA (iDNA) of the same pathogen as 6,470 RPM in the blood cell layer. mNGS of the skin specimen of left lower limb identified Legionella pneumophila with 349 RPM. The test also revealed low to moderate levels of CMV in both plasma and blood cell layer. Meanwhile, low level of Pseudomonas aeruginosa was also detected in plasma, which was 30 RPM. Further pertinent investigation revealed positive serum IgM, IgG antibodies of Legionella. PCR of Legionella pneumophila on BALF was also positive. Specific DNA sequences of Legionella pneumophila were identified by PCR in the skin specimen as well. On MICU day 5, azithromycin and moxifloxacin were used instead of imipenem according to the diagnosis of disseminated Legionella infection. The patient’s fever subsided soon afterward, along with skin alleviation of congestion and tenderness. After another 1 week of treatment, his condition improved dramatically with muscle enzymes dropping into the normal range and with the recovery of renal function. He was extubated on MICU day 9 and was transferred to general ward on MICU day 12 . The patient was in good condition during the follow-up. After rehabilitation exercises, the patient could take care of himself, with normal body temperature and no need of any oxygen support before he was discharged from the hospital.