A 38-year-old primigravida woman with conjoined twins in a monochorionic triplet pregnancy was referred to our perinatology center in the women’s Moheb Yas Hospital of the Tehran University of Medical Sciences in May 2014. She had suffered from 22 years of infertility due to male factor. She had a successful pregnancy as a result of an intra cytoplasmic sperm injection cycle (ICSI), and three frozen-thawed blastocysts were transferred into her uterine. Thirty-one days after blastocyst transfer, ultrasound study was performed. One gestational sac with a 6 weeks and 4 days old fetus was detected. After 12 weeks and 2 days of the pregnancy (72 days after blastocyst transfer), screening for aneuploidy was conducted, and in ultrasonography, triplet pregnancy was diagnosed. One amniotic sac contained a single fetus with a nuchal translucency of 1.1mm, while the second amniotic sac contained conjoined fetuses with a gestational age of 12 weeks and 3 days, according to crown rump length . Sixteen days later (88 days after blastocyst transfer: 14 weeks, 4 day), an ultrasound scan was performed, in the ultrasound a single placenta conjoined fetuses with a joined thorax and abdomen, a single heart, and two separated heads were observed. In our center, 98 days after blastocyst transfer (gestational age: 16 weeks), the ultrasound assessment confirmed monochorionic–diamniotic triplet pregnancy with conjoined fetuses with two heads and necks, a single thorax and abdomen, and two upper and lower limbs . The patient and her husband were offered two options: 1) continue the pregnancy or 2) selective feticide of the conjoined fetuses. They chose the second option, and informed consent was obtained from them. Radiofrequency ablation was performed, and the umbilical vein in the intra abdomen of the conjoined twin near the cord insertion was ablated. In a Doppler study of the umbilical cord, the blood flow was observed to stop, and after 35 min, fetal asystole was detected. Five hours later, the patient reported amniotic fluid leakage. Fern test was positive, and in the ultrasound assessment, it was found that the amniotic fluid of the normal fetus had decreased. Premature rupture of the membrane was diagnosed. The patient was observed in the hospital, and 7 days later, spontaneous labor occurred. The fetuses and placenta were aborted. In a gross pathological study, monochorionic–diamniotic placentation was confirmed .