A previously healthy 30-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to local hospital owing to fever (a maximum of 38.7℃), headache, fatigue, and loss of appetite for one week. Initial laboratory tests yielded leukocytosis (12, 000 cell/μL), hyponatremia (128 mmol/L), hypokalemia (3.2 mmol/L), and a slight increase of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (30 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (12 mg/L). Chest computed tomography (CT) and abdominal ultrasonography revealed normal findings. She was initially administrated with intravenous acyclovir and cefotaxime due to consideration of infectious causes, as well as electrolyte supplements. Her body temperature gradually dropped below 37.2℃ within 5 days, but she complained of intractable nausea and vomiting on day 13 after disease onset. Although she received proton pump inhibitors and antiemetic drugs for the next 4 days, her vomiting worsened (10–15 episodes per day) and was concomitant with dizziness and diplopia. Therefore, the patient was transferred to our center in order to further diagnosis and treatment. On admission, her vital signs were a temperature of 36.7℃, a heart rate of 102 beats per minute, and blood pressure of 100/76 mmHg. Neurological examination demonstrated bilateral horizontal gaze-evoked nystagmus and positive Kernig’s sign, without focal neurological deficit or change in bladder and bowel habits. Deep tendon reflexes were present and symmetrical. Routine laboratory investigations including complete blood picture, clotting profile, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, thyroid hormones, tumor markers, and biochemistry revealed insignificant findings.
On day 2 after admission, an upper digestive endoscopy was subsequently performed and there was no evidence of potential digestive system diseases, such as gastroesophageal reflux disease, gastroparesis or tumor. A brain and cervical spine MRI disclosed abnormal signal intensities in the dorsal medulla oblongata including area postrema, which were hyperintense on T2-weighted image and hypointense on T1WI . It was worth noting that distinctive linear enhancement surrounding the surface of the brainstem and fourth ventricle was visualized after gadolinium injection . Supratentorial or cerebellar periventricular linear radial enhancement was absent. Lumbar puncture revealed normal opening pressure. CSF analysis showed increased cell count (342 cells/mm3, 71% of lymphocytes) and protein (1.59 g/L), with normal glucose, chloride and oligoclonal bands. Microbiological investigations, including bacterial culture, acid-fast bacilli smear, T-spot, virus polymerase chain reaction, India Ink preparation, anti-HIV antibody, anti-syphilis antibody, were all unremarkable. Whole-abdomen CT did not detect any underlying malignant tumors. Work-up for autoimmune encephalitis-related panel, including anti-LGI1, anti-NMDAR, anti-CASPR2, anti-AMPAR, anti-GABA(B)R, anti-Hu, anti-Yo, anti-Ri, anti-amphiphysin, anti-CV2 and anti-Ma2 antibodies, were all negative both in serum and CSF. Antinuclear antibody spectrum screening of serum, including anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-extractable nuclear antigen (ENA), anti-DNA antibodies, anti-phospholipid antibodies, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), was unremarkable.
Based on the clinical presentation of intractable vomiting with MRI finding of area postrema involvement, the diagnosis of APS could be established. As there was no evidence of infectious encephalomyelitis or malignant condition, inflammatory demyelinating diseases of central nervous system (CNS) needed to be taken into account preferentially. CBA for GFAP antibodies were detected in both serum and CSF. Anti-GFAP antibody was only positive for CSF (1:32), while anti-AQP4 and anti-MOG antibodies were negative in both blood and CSF. Hence, the patient was finally diagnosed with autoimmune GFAP astrocytopathy and treated with high-dose glucocorticoid (methylprednisolone 1 g/day for 3 days) followed by oral prednisolone with gradually tapered off. The patient received a quick recovery and was discharged home without any residual symptoms. On day 15 after admission, a repeated MRI revealed entire resolution of the initial abnormalities . At last follow-up, 1 year later, no relapse had occurred.