A 66-year-old man with a history of occupational asbestos exposure was referred to the Department of Thoracic Oncology 4 years ago. On contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest, a mass was observed in the left pleura. The pathological diagnosis was sarcomatoid MPM. The detailed examination revealed the cancer to be a T4 N0 M0 stage IV MPM; cisplatin and pemetrexed as the first-line therapy and an immune checkpoint inhibitor as the second-line therapy were administered. Over the past years, the patient had received appropriate conservative treatment for pain, including opioids and other analgesics. Although the left thoracic pain recurred 6 months prior to admission, it disappeared after palliative radiation therapy. For a while, since then, his pain was well-controlled with the use of strong opioids. About a month before visiting us, the pain recurred and failed to respond to the administration of pregabalin, amitriptyline, and controlled-release (CR) and immediate-release (IR) oxycodone (approximately 320 mg total oral morphine equivalents). He was referred to our pain management clinic to be evaluated for SCS.
The patient presented to us with severe pain at the banded region from the left lower scapula to the left axilla and lower edge of the breast. On the numerical rating scale (NRS) ranging from 0 to 10, his maximum pain was rated at 8. The spontaneously recurring, intense paroxysmal sharp-electrical and shooting pain occurred in an area of sensory impairment and lasted for at least 2 h. Administration of IR oxycodone over 10 times a day did not improve his condition. The pain severely interrupted the patient’s sleep and daily activities. In contrast, the pain in the wide left thoracic area responded well to opioid analgesics. Therefore, it was considered that his pain consisted of mixed pre-existing nociceptive and new-onset neuropathic pain. Given that the patient was deemed a good candidate for SCS, we decided to perform a SCS trial and implantation. At the time of implantation, his quantitative prognosis was expected to be about six months to a year.
Two Tuohy needles were inserted into the epidural space of the vertebral level T12/L1. Each electrode lead (Octrode, Abbott, Plano, TX, USA) was subsequently introduced into the epidural space. The tip of the first electrode was positioned slightly left of the midline of the T1 vertebrae by fluoroscopic guidance. Similarly, the second electrode was placed on the caudal side of the first lead . Complete paresthesia coverage, extending from the left scapula to the upper precordial region, was achieved with the stimulation. The patient had a 7-day trial of SCS, and burst SCS proved to be better for him than tonic SCS. Burst SCS involves a stimulation pattern often utilized clinically, consisting of five pulses (1 ms duration) of 500 Hz, with the bursts repeated at 40 Hz. After completing the stimulation trial, and as the patient’s pain intensity improved from 8 to 4 on the NRS, he underwent permanent implantation of an implantable pulse generator (IPG). The IPG (Proclaim Elite 5, Abbott, Plano, TX, USA) was embedded in a subcutaneous pocket in the left gluteal region. The patient reported a significant increase in his daily activities as well as a decrease in sleep disturbance. He could also reduce the intake of total oxycodone (approximately 180 mg total oral morphine equivalents). Repeated chest CTs showed a further increase in the left pleural mass . About a month after the implantation, the shooting pain had spread, for which we changed some stimulation electrode sites, resulting in prolonged pain relief for the patient’s remaining eight months of his life.