A healthy 30-year-old woman presented with a two-month history of progressive visual loss in her right eye. Past medical, ocular, and drug histories were unremarkable. On ocular examination, visual acuity in the right eye was hand motion (HM) and in the left eye 10/10. Relative afferent pupillary defect and exotropia without limitation of movement was present in the right eye. Slit lamp examination of the right eye showed a clear anterior chamber, but there were 1+ cells and pigments in the anterior vitreous. Posterior segment examination revealed vitreous condensations, total rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD) with proliferative vitreoretinopathy grade C (PVR-C), subretinal fibrous bands, shifting fluid, a large subretinal orange-red cystic mass in the inferonasal part, and multiple retinal breaks sealed with surrounding retinal scars . B-scan echography showed a large subretinal cyst (8.5 × 7 × 6 mm) with non-homogenous tissue echogenicity . The left eye was entirely normal. Fluorescein angiography of the right eye showed disc leakage. Results of laboratory investigations for complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, urea and electrolytes, and urine analysis were in the normal range. Because hydatid cyst of retina and cysticercosis were the main differential diagnoses, brain and orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed. There was no mass or cyst in the brain or orbits. Dry vitreous biopsy was performed and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis was negative for hydatid or cysticercus cysts and no malignant cells were detected in cytology. Finally, pars plana deep vitrectomy and retinotomy were performed. The cyst was fused with the retina, therefore cystotomy and drainage of the intra-cyst bloody fluid was performed and the cyst with overlying retina were completely excised followed by endolaser photocoagulation and silicone oil tamponade. Histopathologic examination of the excised cyst revealed intraretinal toxoplasma cysts containing bradyzoites . The fluid inside the cyst as well as the subretinal fluid and vitreous were positive for T. gondii DNA on PCR. Serologic tests by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) supported the diagnosis by demonstrating positive IgG antibody. No systemic medications were prescribed.
After six months of follow up, vision improved to 1-meter counting fingers and the retina showed complete reattachment.