A 6-year-old girl known for SCD treated on folic acid and hydroxyurea was admitted for new-onset diplopia [day 0 (D0): refers to the start of the diplopia] 6 weeks after respiratory tract infection due to rhinovirus. She was diagnosed with a fourth nerve palsy secondary to an acquired demyelinating syndrome. The initial brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed at D5 after onset of neurological symptom showed left midbrain and pontine edema with expansion of the brainstem, right caudate nucleus, and scattered supratentorial white matter foci of high T2/FLAIR signal . Brain MR angiography (MRA) showed a normal appearing circle of Willis. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) obtained by lumber puncture was normal (WBC 1 cells/μl, RBC 0 cells/μl, glucose 2.9 mmol/L, protein 0.18 g/L, and absent oligoclonal bands). The infectious workup including blood bacterial culture, CSF bacterial and viral cultures, nasopharyngeal aspirate (tested for Influenza A, Influenza B, Parainfluenza 1-2-3, Respiratory Syncytial Virus, Adenovirus, Coronavirus 229E, Coronavirus OC43, Metapneumovirus, Enterovirus, and Rhinovirus), and serologies for Epstein–Barr virus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, HTLV I, HTLV II, HIV1, and Lyme disease were negative. Bartonella Henselae IgG was positive (1:1,280) reflecting a previously acquired common and self-limited infection in our area. Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) were positive (1:160). B12 and folate levels were normal. Smooth muscle antibodies were negative. Anti-mitochondrial antibodies were positive. Sedimentation rate was 65 mm/h. She was treated with five doses of IVMP (30 mg/kg/day) followed by 9 days of oral prednisone (1 mg/kg/day). At discharge, her neurological exam was significant only for vertical diplopia.
She presented 1 month later with 5 days of upper respiratory tract infection symptoms, fever, headache, and a rapidly progressive right-hand weakness (D30) with normal alertness. She had normal blood pressure (120/81 mmHg). She was started on cefotaxime, vancomycin, and acyclovir. White cell count was 13.4 × 109/L, hemoglobin was 7.8 g/L, and platelets were 239 × 109/L. While in the MRI machine (D30) she deteriorated with vomiting and reduced level of consciousness (Glasgow Coma Scale dropped from 15 to 8 over 30 min). Brain MRI showed a rapid progression over a few sequences of an active bleed involving both superficial and deep gray matter as well as subcortical white matter of the left hemisphere anterior quadrant. Brain MRA was normal . The patient was immediately brought out of the magnet and her physical exam demonstrated unequal dilated pupils. She received IV mannitol and hypertonic saline for the management of acute intracranial hypertension/herniation and was taken for surgery. She underwent left frontotemporoparietal decompressive craniotomy, evacuation of left frontoparietal intracerebral hemorrhage, and insertion of an external ventricular drain (EVD). Upon opening the skull, there was significant dural tension, and on opening the dura mater, there was a large amount of bleeding, in addition to brain swelling and necrosis. Estimated blood loss was 3.5 L. She received 8 units of packed red blood cells, 3 units of cryoprecipitate, 6 units of fresh frozen plasma, and 3 units of platelets. Coagulation profile showed international normalization ratio = 3.38, prothrombin time = 51.2 s, and partial thromboplastin time = 122 s. An intraventricular pressure monitor was inserted. She returned with stable vitals to PICU. At D31, the CT scan showed extensive multi-compartmental bleed involving the left frontoparietal lobes, the interhemispheric fissure, and the left hemispheric arachnoid spaces. New white matter lesions were detected in the left posterior parietal and occipital lobes and in the left caudate head. MRI at D33 showed interval worsening with disseminated gray and white matter non-hemorrhagic lesions in the right cerebral and both cerebellar hemispheres, bilateral deep gray nuclei, as well as new necrotic non-hemorrhagic lesions in the left hemisphere . She was started on IVMP (30 mg/kg/day for 5 days) and IVIG (1 g/kg/day for 2 days). Repeat MRI at D9 showed no new parenchymal hemorrhage and partial resolution of the non-hemorrhagic lesions . Prednisolone was tapered course over 6 weeks. At discharge (D71), she was able to say a few words and had better power of her right side. Brain MRI performed 3 months later showed complete resolution of the non-hemorrhagic non-necrotic lesions, mainly seen in the right cerebral hemisphere and the cerebellum.
Brain biopsy of the hematoma, some small vessels, cortex, and white matter showed necrotic area, reactive and non-specific findings which could be entirely explained by compressive changes adjacent to a hematoma. There was diffuse microglial activation and signs of early microinfarcts. Blood, CSF and urine culture, and PCR (HSV1/2) were negative for bacteria and for viruses. CSF obtained through craniotomy and EVD performed at D32 showed elevated proteins 2.56 g/L, glucose 3.6 mmol/L, white blood cells 9 cells/μL, and red blood cells 1,341 cells/μL. ANA and anti-DNA antibody were negative.
Anti-extractable nuclear antigens (SSA-RO, SSB-LA, smith, RNP) were negative. Serum autoimmune antibodies panel (NMO, NMDAR, AMPA I/II, GAB, MAG, VGCC, MOG, YO, HU, RI) were negative but GAD antibody was slightly positive, possibly due to the IVIG infusion. EBV showed no signs of recent infection.
After discharge, the patient was started on regular transfusion exchange. Six months later, the patient was diagnosed to have Crohn’s disease and primary sclerosing cholangitis. Two years later, the patient still suffers right hemiparesis but is able to walk without support. She presents an expressive aphasia. Her intellectual abilities are average, or below the mean but in the normal range, except for the speed of information processing, verbal working memory, and some elaborated executive functions.