The patient, a 36-year-old Caucasian man, initially presented with altered mental status and a 5-day history of progressively slurred speech. The patient progressively became non-verbal and then developed fecal and urinary incontinence with watery diarrhea. This patient had no history of prior cerebral nervous system events or head trauma. In addition, there is no history of recent illnesses or any prior medical conditions. Pertinent social history includes an occupation focusing on outdoor pest and termite control for 13 years as well as an 8-year history of IV oxycodone use. There is no pertinent family history and the patient denies any outdoor hobbies. On physical exam, the patient remained afebrile, had delayed speech and communicated mainly through hand gestures. Comprehension was limited to single-step commands but strength was 5/5 bilaterally in both the upper and lower extremities. The remainder of the physical exam was unremarkable. The only laboratory abnormality discovered was a mild leukocytosis at 12 800 ul−1. His urine drug screen was negative, and both the patient and family denied any drug use. In addition, the urinalysis, chest x-ray and electrocardiogram were all unremarkable. The patient’s head computed tomography without contrast demonstrated the presence of possible bilateral infarcts or masses involving the basal ganglia and periventricular white matter greater on the right.
The next day neurology examined the patient and aside from new onset right facial diplegia, the physical exam findings remained unchanged from above. At that time, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan with and without contrast, a magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) scan of the head, a carotid ultrasound and an electroencephalogram (EEG) were all ordered. The EEG returned a finding of frontal intermittent rhythmic delta activity, a non-specific finding, often found in the setting of toxic or metabolic encephalopathies. The MRI results remained uncertain of whether the patient was presenting with bilateral masses or infarcts. Of note, paranasal sinuses and mastoid air cells were reportedly clear. The patient’s condition and prognosis at this time remained unclear and after several days his condition seemed to improve clinically according to family members. The patient’s improvement, perceived low suspicion for infection, and the current prevailing diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis prompted the initiation of a 5-day course of intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g/day. On day 3 of hospitalization, the patient continued to have diarrhea and reported a headache of unknown duration. Steroid administration led to a mild improvement in the patient’s condition, but the patient continued to remain mostly non-verbal.
On day 6 of hospitalization, the patient developed a new onset left hemiparesis, which prompted neurology to conduct a lumbar puncture showing a red blood cell (RBC) count of 35 µl−1, white blood cell (WBC) count of 590 µl−1 with 82 % lymphocytes, a glucose of 41 mg dl−1, and protein of 140 mg dl−1. The lumbar puncture was suggestive of an inflammatory process consistent with autoimmune, paraneoplastic or viral process. This was consistent with the initial course of treatment, however due to the lack of improvement, the etiology of this neurocognitive dysfunction was reassessed. On day 7 of hospitalization, the patient had a repeat MRI that demonstrated increased cerebral edema on the right side with the center of the mass demonstrating necrosis (see ). On day 8, the patient’s mental condition declined, his left hemiparesis worsened and the patient was no longer able to follow simple commands. Because of the prevailing thought of an autoimmune etiology, the patient was begun on dexamethasone 4 mg every 6 h. On hospitalization day 11, with recommendation from neurosurgery, the patient received a right basal ganglia and deep white matter stereotactic brain biopsy, which demonstrated non-caseating granulomatous inflammation with giant cells (see ). With this biopsy result, the infectious disease specialist recommended the addition of liposomal amphotericin B to cover the possibility of a fungal etiology. On day 14, the full pathology report returned with Gomori methenamine-silver stain revealing the presence of fungal hyphae favoring non-septate/pauciseptate hyphae (see ), which was consistent with an isolated cerebral mucormycosis infection. More specifically, PCR demonstrated Rhizopus oryzae fungus. Otolaryngology was consulted to identify a source of the mucormycosis infection; however, no point of entry could be ascertained as the paranasal sinuses were clear and no cutaneous manifestations were present. Due to the extent of the neurologic involvement, posaconazole was incorporated into treatment at the suggestion of the otolaryngologist. Of note, the otolaryngologist identified an otitis media but denied it as the source of the mucormycosis infection. After about 4 months of consistent antifungal therapy, the patient has improved significantly. He has regained much of his neurological functioning, including the ability to speak intelligibly and purposefully move his extremities. While the patient is still in recovery, he is slowly approaching a level commensurate with his pre-infection state.