An 80-year-old man was referred to our hospital with symptoms such as anorexia, malaise, and jaundice.
The patient’s symptoms started 3 mo prior to the admission.
The patient’s medical history included hypertension and chronic pancreatitis. He was found to have dilatation of the main pancreatic duct incidentally on abdominal echography during medical examination 2 years ago. He used to consume 350 mL of beer per day for over 55 years, but he had quit 5 years ago. He smoked cigarettes briefly at the age of 20.
The patient did not have any family history.
Upon admission, his vital signs showed a heart rate of 50/min, blood pressure of 147/77 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 27/min. Body weight was 40 kg, height was 144 cm, and body surface area (BSA) was 1.27 m2. There were no physical findings to note.
The results of the laboratory tests revealed a total bilirubin level of 4.3 mg/dL (normal range, 0.2-1.2 mg/dL), an aspartate aminotransferase level of 108 IU/L (normal range, 8-38 IU/L), an alanine aminotransferase level of 282 IU/L (normal range, 6-43 IU/L), a carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level of 7 ng/mL (normal range, 0-5 ng/mL), and a carbohydrate antigen 19-9 level of 62 U/mL (normal range, 0-37 U/mL).
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed a 7 mm × 7 mm shadow defect in the duodenal papilla with a rim-enhancing lesion in the periampullary region and slight dilatation of the main pancreatic duct. Endoscopic retrograde cholan-giopancreatography revealed a 7-mm lesion deficit of the contrast medium from the duodenal papilla to the distal bile duct. A stent was placed in the pancreatic duct and the common bile duct to decompress the pancreas and bile duct. A biopsy specimen revealed well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. Based on the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of the ampulla of Vater, the patient underwent subtotal stomach-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy and was discharged after an uneventful recovery.
Gross examination showed an irregular papillary projection at the enlarged papilla of Vater measuring 23 mm × 10 mm. The papillary tumor had spread in the dilated ampullary channel and had an exophytic growth pattern . The cut surface of the tumor was gray to white in color . Histopathological examination revealed that the surface of the tumor consisted of an adenomatous component with a low-to-high grade dysplastic area , while the deep part of the tumor consisted of an adenocarcinoma showing an invasive micropapillary pattern . The micropapillary component comprised 60% of the tumor. Numerous neutrophilic infiltrations were observed in the tumor nests and stroma, and they formed focal intraepithelial microabscesses . The carcinoma invaded the duodenum, pancreas, and intrapancreatic bile duct. Metastasis was seen in five of the 13 peripancreatic lymph nodes. Immunohistochemical analysis showed the tubular and micropapillary areas were positive for CK7, a caudal-related homeobox transcription factor-2 (CDX2) , and MUC014E. The tubular component on the surface was positive for CK20 and focally positive for MUC2, MUC5, and MUC6. The micropapillary component was focally positive for MUC1 ; no tumor cells expressed MUC4.