An 88-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our orthopedic unit following a simple trip on the stairs leading to a locked knee at an 80° angle. In the fall, the quadriceps muscles were forcefully contracted on her bent knee. Prior to the incident, she was independently mobile with the use of a stick. Her medical history included osteoarthritis affecting both knees and mild, generalized, right-sided weakness following a subdural hemorrhage secondary to an RTA. The physical examination of her right knee revealed a closed injury with minimal swelling. We noted a tender, inferiorly displaced patella. Her range of movement of the knee was 80°to 115° with a definite block to extension.
The initial plain radiographs of her flexed knee revealed inferior displacement of the patella .
Under patient sedation, the patient¹s patellar swelling was reduced by hyperflexing the knee, placing downward pressure on the inferior pole of the patella, and then slowly extending her leg. Her knee was then placed in a camp splint and allowed to mobilize. The following day the patient was able to raise and straighten her leg with a relatively pain-free range of movement of the knee and was able to mobilize independently on the ward. While in the hospital, she was unable to tolerate the splint and abandoned it. Her knee then locked again following flexion past 90°. A computed tomography scan of her right knee was performed, which showed a superior patellar osteophyte embedded in the lateral femoral condyle .
The patient's knee was examined while she was under general anesthesia. When her knee was flexed past 90°, the patella locked into the lateral femoral condyle. The knee could be unlocked by slightly increasing flexion and applying pressure inferomedially while slowly extending the knee. Arthroscopy was performed using standard lateral and medial portals. This confirmed the presence of a deep ridge where the patellar osteophyte had become embedded into the arthritic lateral condyle, causing locking of the knee when flexed passed 90°. The rest of her knee had grade III-IV osteoarthritic changes. With a burr, the superior pole of the patella was trimmed and the ridge on the lateral femoral condyle was smoothed . The results of this procedure were checked using a fluoroscopic image intensifier . When reexamined, the patella tracked smoothly over the lateral condyle without locking.
Post-operatively, the patient showed marked improvement in her symptoms. She was able to raise and straighten her leg and extend her right knee. Mobilization was possible without recurrence of her right knee locking, and her pre-injury mobility was regained within one week. In her last review at the clinic 12 weeks later, she was found to have retained her pre-injury mobility and was delighted with the outcome of her surgery.