An 82-year-old woman with a history of atrial fibrillation, chronic renal failure, anemia and a bioprosthetic aortic valve replacement performed in 2014, was admitted to hospital with profound asthenia and a pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO). No coronary lesions were detected at the time of aortic valve replacement. Clinical parameters and laboratory findings on admission are summarized in Table . The chest X-ray did not show signs of consolidation. Samples of urine, blood and sputum were sent for microbiological screening. A trans-esophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was performed as part of the PUO diagnostic work-up and showed the left ventricle was not dilated with normal global systolic function, moderate mitral and tricuspid regurgitation, normal bioprosthesic function but pronounced aortic root thickening . Because of high clinical suspicion of endocarditis, empirical broad spectrum antimicrobial therapy was initiated, followed by targeted treatment (clyndamicin 600 mg three times daily) based upon the results of blood cultures (Staphylococcus aureus). The initial patient response was satisfactory. She became afebrile and the inflammatory markers improved. A conservative strategy was planned. During her first week in hospital she underwent a routine transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) and a second TEE was also repeated, 7 days later, with no new findings. Due to the stable clinical conditions, the initial management plan remained unchanged. It was aimed to complete 1 month of antibiotic therapy before performing a new TEE. However, almost 1 month after her admission, a new rise in her inflammatory markers and temperature was observed associated with clinical deterioration. 24 h later the patient developed central chest discomfort and an ECG showed new ST segment elevation in the anterior precordial leads . Immediate coronary angiography was performed. A severe narrowing, followed by complete occlusion of the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) and a critical, long tubular stenosis of the proximal left circumflex artery (LCx), was detected . The interventional cardiologist suspected that there was extrinsic compression of the coronary arteries from the aortic root abscess (Additional file : Video S3). The surgical team was involved, however due to the unstable hemodynamic condition (blood pressure: 80/50 mmHg, heart rate-HR: 110 bpm, pO2: 8 kPa in high flow oxygen treatment), it was decided to attempt percutaneous treatment. Two bare metal stents (BMS-Rebel Boston Scientific®) were implanted respectively in the proximal segment of the LAD (3.0 * 24 mm) and the LCx (3.5 * 20 mm) .
On admission to the coronary care unit the patient was in cardiogenic shock requiring inotropes, vasopressors and non-invasive ventilation. The biochemical results showed a white blood cell count (WBC) of 25,7 × 109/L, creatine kinase-MB fraction 184 μg/L, and Troponin I (TnI) > 70.000 μg/L. A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed with evidence of severe biventricular dysfunction, severe mitral and tricuspid regurgitation, and significant tissue damage in the aortic prosthetic region, where a cavity was also identified, suggesting an abscess. Despite intensive treatment the patient died within 24 h.