In April 2015 a 45 years old male who had undergone a metallic prosthetic valve replacement 10 years ago presented to a medical unit at Teaching Hospital, Kandy, Sri Lanka with fever for 5 days duration. There was no history of intravenous drug abuse. He had a diastolic murmur at the apex with muffled metallic sound of prosthetic valves and examination of the optic fundi revealed a Roth’s spot in the right eye. Investigations showed a leukocyte count of 10,000/µl with thrombocytopenia (platelet count of 117,000/µl) and elevated C reactive protein (CRP). Urine analysis showed red cells with red cell casts and urine culture was negative. Blood cultures yielded Staphylococci which were resistant to methicillin and sensitive to vancomycin with an MIC of 0.25 µg/ml. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed two mobile vegetations (10.3 × 3.7 mm and 12.4 × 1.3 mm in size) attached to prosthetic mitral valve and further a transoesophageal echocardiogram confirmed these findings. He was started on intravenous vancomycin, gentamicin and oral rifampicin.
Despite the intravenous antibiotics with adequate vancomycin trough serum levels he remained bacteremic with continuing fever and persistent isolation of MRSA in blood cultures, and high levels of CRP. On the fifth day of admission, patient complained of severe headache and computed tomography (CT) scan of head revealed a subarachnoid haemorrhage and a intracranial haemorrhage possibly following rupture of mycotic aneurysms . At that moment patient was considered for surgical treatment as he had persistent bacteraemia along with multiple embolic events. However, considering the suggestions of the multi-disciplinary team (microbiologist, neurosurgeon and cardiothoracic surgeon) the decision was made to continue the total course of antibiotics while planning for an early surgery since there was no urgent or emergency indication for a surgery. A second surgery at this point would have been more difficult and operating on an infected field carries a high risk of postoperative complications. Moreover since the patient was having intracranial haemorrhage he was at a significant risk of mortality and adverse outcome during as well as after an early surgery. In addition to the previous antibiotics he was started on oral co-trimoxazole as well. On day 15 of hospitalization there was a failure in settling the fever and resolution of bacteremia.
Fifteen days after admission, his antibiotic regimen was modified with linezolid/cipro initiation while all other antibiotics were stopped since there was no response to the treatment. He was started on intravenous linezolid 600 mg 8 hourly. Intravenous ciprofloxacin was also added to linezolid. Subsequently the patient developed frequent ventricular ectopics and Holter study revealed a heavy burden of ventricular ectopics including short runs of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia. With the opinion of the consultant electrophysiologist, he was loaded with intravenous amiodarone for which there was a reduction in the ectopic burden and he was then maintained on oral amiodarone. By this time a gradual reduction of the height of the fever spikes was noticed indicating a response to the new course of antibiotics, and after 7 days of linezolid treatment the temperature became normal and CRP level improved. Blood culture became negative on day 9 of linezolid treatment. He was continued on intravenous linezolid and ciprofloxacin for a total of 4 weeks and then converted to oral linezolid and ciprofloxacin to complete the total duration of antibiotics of 6 weeks. The patient didn’t develop any significant adverse drug reaction to the treatment. The follow up transthoracic echocardiogram revealed no vegetations and to-date the patient is being regularly followed up at our clinic with no further complications.