A 60-year-old female was admitted to our gastroenterology department; endoscopy revealed a smooth protruding lesion in the gastric cardia in another hospital . The mass was not soft when pressed with forceps and had a negative rolling sign. After admission, the results of other physical examinations were unremarkable, except for the body mass index, which was 16.44 kg/m2 (weight 37 kg, height 1.50 m). The patient did not present with abdominal pain, fever, cough, expectoration, hemoptysis, swallowing difficulties or diarrhea. The patient did not have any history of chronic or significant medical or family illnesses. After admission, routine laboratory tests did not indicate any abnormalities.
Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT revealed a 2.0-cm relatively well-defined soft tissue mass on the small curved side of the cardia . There was no enlarged lymph nodes in the upper abdomen. In addition, the CT scan of the chest was normal.
At admission, the linear EUS examination revealed a hypoechoic lesion that originated from muscularis propra, with dimensions of 22 mm × 17 mm and an heterogeneous echo and clear boundary . According to EUS, it was diagnosed as a gastric cardia stromal tumor.
The patient was originally suspected of having a gastric stromal tumor. We performed ESD. During the operation, it was observed that the lesion was filled with a milky, white liquid and white granulation tissue , suggesting that it was likely not a gastric stromal tumor. Therefore, we resected all the granulated tissue. The pathology results of the ESD specimen were negative for acid-fast staining. Hematoxylin and eosin staining showed patches of caseating necrosis and granulomatous inflammation . Gene sequencing subsequent to PCR analysis of the ESD specimen identified Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. TB) DNA fragments.
The patient received ATT consisting of 2HREZ/6HR regimen of isoniazid 5 mg/kg once daily, rifampicin 10 mg/kg once daily, ethambutol 15 mg/kg once daily, and pyrazinamide 25 mg/kg daily for the initial 2 months, followed by isoniazide and rifampicin at the same dosages for the next 4 months. The patient’s liver and kidney function was closely monitored for the first week, and it appeared normal. The patient was followed monthly, and no side effects of the ATT drugs were observed. After 6 months of treatment, she had gained 5 kg, and her appetite had improved; she was feeling healthy. We will continue to closely monitor the patient’s liver and kidney functions.