A 51-year-old male diagnosed with opioid and stimulant use disorder was receiving injectable opioid agonist treatment (iOAT) with hydromorphone (Sandoz Inc. 50mg/ml solution) at a community clinic in Vancouver. Prior to receiving iOAT he reported injecting illicit opioids and smoking crack cocaine daily for over two decades and had multiple prior oral OAT attempts. He was prescribed 200mg of hydromorphone three times per day (600mg total per day), since August of 2014 (with dose adjustments). He had trialled diacetylmorphine (pharmaceutical grade heroin) in February 2015 but preferred hydromorphone. Hydromorphone supported him to stop his illicit opioid injection however he reported ongoing daily crack cocaine smoking, on average 1015 rocks per day. He presented to his physician with the goal of reducing his crack cocaine use in January 2020.
His medical history included numerous conditions that were aggravated by smoking crack cocaine including diagnoses of hepatitis C, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and pulmonary hypertension. He had developed pulmonary embolism as a result of deep vein thrombosis moving to his lungs. The clot damaged the veins in both of his legs, and he developed associated chronic leg wounds. The ongoing use of crack cocaine contributed to poor wound healing. He reported engaging in drug dealing daily to support his use. He was motivated to reduce his crack cocaine use in order to: (1) limit his spending on cocaine, with a longer-term goal of saving money and; (2) to minimize its physical health burden. He reported that crack cocaine use helped him with remaining alert to accomplish daily tasks, and as such found it difficult to cut down on his crack cocaine use.
A trial of sustained-release dextroamphetamine sulfate (Dexedrine ) (See Fig.) was offered following the clinics dextroamphetamine dosing protocol and was taken at the clinics on-site pharmacy (See Fig.). This was his first time receiving treatment for stimulant use disorder. Prescribing began on January 24th 2020 at 15mg twice per day, though the patient was advised to begin with one capsule and could increase to two if the dose was tolerated (i.e. no or mild side effects). On February 1st 2020, the patient reported tolerating 15mg of dextroamphetamine twice per day and did not report experiencing any adverse effects (e.g. sleeping problems, agitation, changes in appetite, etc.). He reported that his crack cocaine cravings were reduced, but not eliminated. The patient and physician decided together to increase the dose and a prescription for dextroamphetamine 30mg twice per day was written.
On February 23rd 2020, 4weeks after beginning the prescription, he reported less cravings and clinically significant reductions in use, from 1015 rocks daily to between 1 and 2 rocks on average two days per week. He reported having stopped his daily drug dealing as it was no longer required to support his crack cocaine use. He was meeting his self-identified therapeutic goals of reducing his crack cocaine use and reducing his spending on crack cocaine. The patient reported that dextroamphetamine helped him to feel energized, a feeling that he had previously been seeking from crack cocaine. Clinical improvements were witnessed in his abscesses and chronic wounds, which began to heal. In addition, care providers noted that he became more cognitively alert and was more engaged and interested in conversations. On May 18th 2020, the patient discontinued the medication, stating it was no longer required to maintain the reductions in cocaine use he had attained. Upon the most recent clinical visit on October 5th 2020, the patient reported having maintained the significant reductions in cocaine use, and the prescribing physician (SM) reported persistent clinical improvements in the patients physical health, cognition and social functioning. For example, the patient maintained his reduction of crack cocaine use, and experienced persistent improvements in mobility, and reduced edema (swelling) of the legs.