An 85-year-old man presented to the hospital with progressive dyspnea on exertion associated with peripheral edema for one week prior to admission. He has a longstanding history of CLL, in remission, that has been treated with ibrutinib for five years. Approximately one year prior to this presentation, he was admitted to an outside hospital for new diagnoses of severe hypertension complicated by heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. At that time, he was also found to have AKI with creatinine of 3.4 mg/dL (from prior baseline of 1.4–1.5 mg/dL). Notably, his urinalysis at that time revealed new proteinuria (3 + on dipstick urinalysis) that was not otherwise quantified, occasional granular casts, and 50–100 red blood cells. At the time, he was thought to have acute tubular necrosis (ATN) due to heart failure and hypertensive emergency as his creatinine eventually improved to 1.8–2.1 mg/dL with treatment of heart failure including diuresis and blood pressure control. The hematuria was thought to be due to ATN and there was no suspicion of a glomerular disease. On follow up after discharge, since his creatinine was still elevated from his prior baseline, he was felt to have CKD from prior NSAID use, hypertension, and heart failure. It was not recognized that his presentation at the time could be related to the ibrutinib, so the ibrutinib was continued, despite a well-documented list of adverse reactions that include heart failure and hypertension. In hindsight, it is possible that ibrutinib contributed to the clinical picture of AKI at that time. He had also not been seen by nephrology. Other past medical history included ankylosing spondylitis and hypothyroidism. Outpatient medications included amlodipine, carvedilol, hydralazine, ibrutinib, levothyroxine, and omeprazole. He has a remote history of using NSAIDs (indomethacin) for his ankylosing spondylitis but had not used any NSAIDs in over 20 years. He had a remote history of smoking but otherwise denied any alcohol or other substance use.
Clinical findings on the current admission included the following: blood pressure 186/72 mmHg, heart rate 60/min, afebrile, oxygen saturation 94% on room air; significant lower extremity peripheral edema but clear lungs on auscultation. He did have small impetiginous peri-oral skin lesions that were healing after a brief course of cephalexin. He did not have any rash, synovitis, or arthritis on examination. Laboratory workup revealed chronic normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 9.7 g/dL) with chronic thrombocytopenia (platelets 73,000/µL) that were at baseline and consistent with his history of CLL. The serum creatinine was 2.8 mg/dL (eGFR 23 mL/min/1.73m2), from most recent baseline of 2.1–2.4 mg/dL. Albumin was 2.8 g/dL with otherwise normal transaminases. LDL cholesterol was 74 mg/dL. He had 2.8 g of proteinuria with 1.014 g of creatinine on 24-h urine collection. Urine microscopy revealed many non-dysmorphic RBCs. Renal ultrasound revealed 11 cm kidneys bilaterally with normal echogenicity. C3 was 8 mg/dL and C4 was 40 mg/dL and rheumatoid factor was 1280. Serum protein electrophoresis revealed faint IgM kappa monoclonal gammopathy with a serum kappa-to-lambda ratio of 2. Otherwise, anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-double-stranded DNA, anti-histone antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies, hepatitis B and C serologies, HIV, and syphilis serologies were negative and hemoglobin A1c was 5.5%. A renal biopsy was pursued due to high clinical suspicion for MPGN given low complements and high rheumatoid factor titers that was felt to represent cryoglobulinemia, which has been described in CLL [, , ]. Other considerations in the differential prior to biopsy included lymphoid invasion of the renal parenchyma, amyloidosis [, ] or light-chain nephropathy .
The patient was treated with oral antihypertensives including carvedilol, amlodipine, and intravenous furosemide to achieve goal blood pressure < 140/90 mmHg in preparation for kidney biopsy and for volume management. Ibrutinib was discontinued upon admission in preparation for anticipated biopsy.
Interventional radiology-guided left renal biopsy was performed on hospital day 7 after adequate blood pressure control. By light microscopy of the renal biopsy, glomeruli showed a prominence of peripheral capillary loop cells, comprised predominantly of swollen endothelial cells . Occasional possible focal segmental areas of mesangiolysis were seen . Glomerular basement membrane double contours were rare, suggesting recent onset of endothelial injury. No definite microthrombi or hyaline pseudothrombi seen. There was no tuft necrosis or crescent formation. Glomeruli showed a background of a mild nodular increase in mesangial matrix . Tubules showed signs of acute injury. There was also no evidence of neoplastic lymphoid infiltration of kidney parenchyma. There was approximately 20–25% interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy. Arteries showed moderate-to-severe sclerosis, and there was focal arteriolar sclerosis and hyalinosis. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed trace to 1 + pattern of peripheral capillary loop staining for IgM, C3, and kappa light chains, which was interpreted as being consistent with non-specific trapping and deposition of circulating factors in setting of endothelial injury. Electron microscopy confirmed the presence of glomerular peripheral capillary loop endothelial cell swelling and reactive changes and showed associated podocyte foot process effacement . There were no significant glomerular electron dense deposits and areas of peripheral capillary loop cellular interposition were a relatively rare finding.
Interestingly, the renal biopsy was not consistent with any of the diagnoses considered prior to biopsy. Instead, the biopsy findings were akin to glomerular endotheliosis described in pre-eclampsia. Given his recent diagnosis of hypertension and diastolic heart failure, which are known adverse reactions to ibrutinib, we postulated that findings of the renal biopsy were most likely a consequence of ibrutinib.
Serum complements and rheumatoid factor normalized on hospital day 10. Serum creatinine peaked at 5.2 mg/dL on hospital day 11. He did not require renal replacement therapy during his hospitalization. He was discharged on hospital day 14 with serum creatinine of 4.2 mg/dL. On follow up 5 days after discharge, serum creatinine improved to 3.3 mg/dL with cystatin C level of 2.44 mg/L. In the months after discharge, the serum creatinine stabilized at 2.5 mg/dL. He was started on lisinopril for proteinuria and proteinuria improved to 0.64 g/g. Ibrutinib was discontinued indefinitely. Hematology/oncology considered other agents, such as acalabrutinib or rituximab, but treatment was deferred as the CLL remained in remission.