A previously healthy 11-month-old girl was admitted to our department with a 2-day history of colicky abdominal pain, intermittent agitation and sudden screaming. There were no episodes of bilious vomiting, bloody stools or fever. An ileocolic intussusception was diagnosed externally by ultrasonography, and immediate ultrasonography-guided hydrostatic reduction was attempted. Because complete reduction could not be achieved, the infant was transferred to our hospital. Physical examination showed a lethargic, dehydrated infant with a distended but nontender abdomen and decreased bowel sounds. Ultrasonography confirmed the ileocolic intussusception. Colonic enema reduction was performed immediately with successfully reposition, proved by ultrasound. The infant was rehydrated overnight, showed no symptoms the following morning and tolerated drinking well. Twelve hours after reduction, the infant presented again with crampy abdominal pain and vomiting. Ultrasonography showed again the typical findings of ileocolic intussusception . Repeated hydrostatic reduction was not successful. Therefore, emergency surgery was indicated. During laparotomy, an ileoileocolic intussusception was identified and reduced . After reduction, a palpable intraluminal mass presented as possible lead point of the intussusception approximately 10 cm from the ileocecal valve . Segmental resection of the ileum and reanastomosis were performed. The further recovery period was uneventful, and the infant was discharged 6 days after the operation.
Pathological findings were as follows. The mass was a 1×1×1 cm polypoid lesion covered with hemorrhagic and partly necrotic mucosa. Microscopically, the tumor was located in the submucosa and composed of glandular structures lined by mucin-secreting columnar epithelium and smooth muscle bundles . These findings were compatible with the diagnosis of adenomyoma of the ileum. Elsewhere, the ileum showed severe mucosal ulceration and necrosis in addition to subtotal perforating enteritis with hemorrhagic infarction, all of which were consistent with changes resulting from the intussusception.