This is a 34-year-old lady (G2 P1), medically and surgically free. History of mild breast enlargement during the first pregnancy (3 years ago) which subsided spontaneously after delivery.
Early February 2019, patient was 2 weeks pregnant and started to complain of breast discomfort with mild enlargement mainly on the left side. Breast discomfort and enlargement continued to increase for the coming months. By may 2019, patient started to notice and feel the axillary enlargement in both sides specially the left one. Mid July 2019, at 26 weeks gestation age, patient was referred to us from the OB/GYN for a surgical consultation regarding her breast problem.
Upon physical exam, healthy 26 weeks pregnant woman. Breast exam revealed a massive enlargement in both breasts and the axillary region bilaterally mainly right side. Skin redness with non-significant ulceration on both breasts, dilated superficial veins and signs of skin stretch. Both axillary areas were enlarged and tender with apparent red discoloration, . Physical exam revealed no isolated breast masses rather than global enlargement and axillary involvement. .
Complete blood count, Liver function tests, Kidney function test, complete hormonal profile tests were ordered by OB/GYN specialist and showed normal results. Breast mammography was avoided, breast ultrasound showed no definite breast masses other than the global hypertrophy and enlargement, axillary ultrasound suggested the presence of bilateral accessory breast and hypervascular huge lymphatic enlargement, . Patient diagnosed as Gestational gigantomastia with axillary enlargement.
Treatment plan was based on conservative management as the patient reported self-limiting breast enlargement in her previous pregnancy, although considerably less than this time and without axillary involvement. Patient was advised to wear a supporting bra and local care creams for her breast and axillary skin was prescribed. Close follow up and monthly appointments were scheduled for her.
By the 24th of august 2019 at 31 weeks gestational age, she presented with stable enlarged breast size. But, axillary exam revealed an increasing in size compared with last visit and minimal pus discharge from right axilla ulcerated skin, , . Penicillin based anti-biotic was prescribed with proper local control. Mid-September, she presented again with right axillary skin ulceration, but no pus discharge. At this point Breast and axillary size were massive, but stable.
Electively, on the 29 of sept 2019, at 36weeks + 4 days gestational age a caesarean section with bilateral tubal ligation was performed, delivering a 3 kg healthy baby. Ten days post-partum a gradual decrease in breast and axillary size started to take place and by the end of 2019, 2 months post-partum, breast size is normal and axillary enlargement and engorgement almost subsided, .