A 76-year-old male was referred to the hospital because of acute heart failure, AECOPD and ulcers on the right leg. The ulcers were scattered as multifocal lesions with the size of 2–4 cm, with purulent discharge . The ulcers developed in two months and the patient denied histories of trauma and plant cultivation. There was 1-year history of COPD, 11-year history of hypertension, and no history of diabetes mellitus (Additional file ).
On admission, the patient was dyspneic with a respiratory rate of 30 breaths per minute. Physical examination revealed wheezing and moist rale in both lungs. Slight pitting edema and cyanosis were observed at cold extremities. Results of routine laboratory tests were as follows: WBC 18 × 109/mL; N% 92; CRP 15 mg/L; PCT 0.74 ng/mL; and GFR (glomerular filtration rate) 32 mL/min. Arterial blood gas analysis showed an acute decompensated metabolic acidosis. Several Gram stains from the ulcers showed moderate amount of Gram-negative bacteria and large amount of leukocytes. Chest X-ray showed pulmonary infection (Additional file : Figure S1A). The patient received treatment for heart failure, and incision and drainage of purulent spots. Anti-infection therapy was initiated with cefoperazone/sulbactam (2:1).
Three days after the treatment, the dyspnea was apparently remitted and wheezing and moist rale in the lung disappeared. The microbiological culture of the pus obtained on the day of admission revealed colonies of Klebsiella pneumonia and Proteus vulgaris. Laboratory reexamination showed elevated PCT (3.86 ng/mL), N% (90%) and CRP (66 mg/L). BDG (1, 3-β-D-glucan) was 554 pg/mL. Echocardiography displayed no vegetation. Pulmonary infection was improved according to the chest X-ray (Additional file : Figure S1B). Antibiotic treatment was terminated and adequate dressing change was assured.
On the seventh day of hospitalization, the patient did not show dyspnea, but the body temperature rose to 38.5 °C. The surface of ulcers on the right leg was dry and granulation was observed but with no evidence for further wound healing. Laboratory reexamination showed abnormal PCT (1.02 ng/mL), N% (85%) and CRP (68 mg/L). GFR increased to 51 mL/min. Pus obtained from deep part of the ulcer was tested and fungal hyphae were found in smear examination. MRI of the right leg indicated the skin damage as inflammatory changes. Voriconazole and piperacillin/tazobactam were administrated intravenously for suspected infection. The patient did not show fever again. Three days after intravenous administration of voriconazole, GFR dropped to 40 mL/min. Intravenous voriconazole treatment was then terminated and replaced by oral voriconazole. The lesions were obviously attenuated with anti-infection treatment and adequate dressing change . The fungal culture of the pus obtained after admission revealed filamentous fungi for several times. The isolated fungi were further identified as Corynespora cassiicola by morphological characteristics and gene analysis . Laboratory tests showed improvement in PCT (0.9 ng/mL), N% (67%) and CRP (40 mg/L).
Two weeks after voriconazole treatment, the patient was discharged but oral voriconazole treatment continued at the out-patient clinic. A month after the discharge, most of the lesions crusted and showed signs of healing . The voriconazole treatment lasted for 6 weeks was terminated and the lesions were washed with potassium permanganate (1:5000) once every day. At the 2-month follow-up, all lesions healed completely.