The CARE guidelines were followed in this case. A 3-week old girl born to Sudanese parents in Brisbane, Australia, presented with a large goiter causing upper airway obstruction and producing stridor. Her thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) on NS was 14 mIU/L (cut-off range for notification: > 13 mIU/L). The result was communicated to the relevant clinicians but, unfortunately, appropriate follow-up had not occurred. At 3 weeks of age when she presented with goiter, serum analysis showed a TSH > 100 mIU/L (reference range: 0.7–5.9 mIU/L) with low free T4 of < 3.2 pmol/L (reference range: 8.7–16 pmol/L) and high TG of 101 μg/L (reference range for all age: 1.6–59.9 μg/L). The urinary iodine concentration was 0.63 μmol/L, suggesting that she had mild iodine deficiency. Thyroid ultrasound and MRI showed both lobes of the thyroid gland to be significantly enlarged. Nuclear scan following injection of 42 MBq Tc-99 m pertechnetate showed a large goiter with homogeneous markedly increased radiotracer uptake . Levothyroxine replacement was started based on the diagnosis of CH as standard of care.
Her brother was also found to be hypothyroid based on NS, with an elevated TSH of 60 mIU/L. He had been on levothyroxine replacement since that time, with no concerns regarding growth or development. His thyroid ultrasound and nuclear scan at 2 years of age showed a eutopic thyroid gland with increased nuclear tracer uptake of 5.2% (normal range 1–4%) following withdrawal of levothyroxine replacement for 5 days. Both siblings had TSH and TH concentrations in the reference ranges while under levothyroxine replacement and with dose adjustment and they have been clinically euthyroid . The proposita’s TG decreased to 2.2 μg/L and the affected brother had low TG of 0.3 μg/L. Other members of the family had no symptoms and their thyroid tests were normal . Subsequent perchlorate discharge studies were performed on the affected brother following withdrawal of levothyroxine replacement for 3 weeks [TSH 180 mIU/L (reference range: 0.7–4.0 mIU/L), FT4 4.4 pmol/L (reference range: 7.5–17 pmol/L), TG 9.6 μg/L] and on both parents. The results demonstrated increased uptake of radiotracer in the brother and normal tracer uptake in the parents with no washout of I-123 following perchlorate administration . This suggests preservation of the organification process . Both maternal and paternal families are non-consanguineous and of Sudanese origin (maternal grandfather; Gogrial and maternal grandmother and paternal grandparents; Aweil East, of South Sudan, respectively). There was no history of thyroid disorders in either family.
Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes as previously described . The proposita’s DNA was submitted to whole exome sequencing. A panel of 50 genes related to thyroid development, function, serum and cell TH transport and hormone synthesis was evaluated (Additional file : Table S1). This led to the identification of a novel homozygous missense mutation in exon 40 of the TG gene: c.7021G > A, p.Gly2322Ser (numbering excludes 19 amino acid signal peptide). All exonic variants in the TG gene identified in the proposita are summarized in Additional file : Table S2. Sanger sequencing confirmed that the affected brother (III-2) was homozygous for the same mutation while the parents (II-2 and II-3) and maternal grandmother (I-4) were heterozygous for this mutation, indicating that they were unaffected carriers . The other brother (III-1) and the maternal grandfather (I-3) had the wild-type genotype and normal thyroid function tests . This variant was not present in the Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD) used for analysis. Since the database did not likely include a large number of Sudanese individuals, 354 alleles from 4 Sudanese ethnic groups (Nilotes, Darfurians, Nuba, and Halfawien) were also used for analysis. The TG mutation identified in our family was not present in the 177 Sudanese individuals, suggesting that the variant is rare in the Sudanese as well. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) markers with high allele frequencies in the TG locus and markers in the flanking genes were genotyped to reconstruct the haplotype for the region (8q24.22) . The haplotype associated with CH present in both parents was identical for a stretch of ~ 1.71 centiMorgans (cM). The G2322S TG mutation affects a highly conserved amino acid in various species and functional in silico prediction algorithms suggest that this mutation is deleterious (SIFT; 0.001, deleterious and PolyPhen2; 1.0, probably damaging).