In March 2002, a 27-year-old man presented with sudden loss of central vision in the right eye. Visual loss in the left eye followed within 18 days. At the time of onset, the patient was a very light occasional drinker and a moderate smoker (15 cigarettes/day for 5 years; unfortunately, cotinine and trans-3′-hydroxycotinine were not measured to assess tobacco smoke exposure). He suffered from chronic headaches, which responded to common painkillers. The headaches had reportedly worsened when he started work in a glue factory in 1998 (he had previously been an electrician) and worsened remarkably when he was transferred to the glue preparation department, where he had worked for 6 months before the loss of vision. At fundus examination, both eyes showed micro-angiopathy and pseudoedema of the optic disc. A cycle of corticosteroids was ineffective at this time. One month later, visual acuity was 1/100 in the right eye and 7/10 in the left eye. We observed the patient in June 2002 and found a bilateral paleness of optic discs and the inability to count fingers with either eye; at that time, the patient complained of disturbing photopsias. A therapy with idebenone (270 mg/day) and brimonidine (2 drops, 3 times/day) was initiated . Mitochondrial (mt) DNA testing on a blood sample was positive for homoplasmic 11778G → A/ND4 mutation. Haplogroup definition showed that this patient’s mtDNA belonged to haplogroup H (DdeI 10394-, AluI 7025-, MseI 14766-) . These findings are consistent with a diagnosis of Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON), a maternally inherited loss of central vision that preferentially affects young men ; three mtDNA point mutations (positions 11778G → A/ND4, 3460G → A/ND1, and 14484T → C/ND6) are found in over 90% of patients worldwide.
Until January 2003, visual function progressively deteriorated, reaching almost complete loss of vision (apart from hand motion) with rapid, involuntary eyeball oscillation (nystagmus). Progression of the fiber loss was documented by serial optical coherence tomography . shows the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickness in each quadrant, as measured by optical coherence tomography, for each of the patient’s eyes after 9, 10, and 15 months, alongside values for historical groups of healthy subjects and of patients in an advanced stage of LHON (with atrophy of the optic nerve) . Compared with the control group, both of the patient’s eyes at 9, 10, and 15 months follow-up showed a progressively thinner RNFL in all quadrants.
By January 2003 (10 month follow-up), the patient needed assistance to walk. After June 2003, he reported a slow but progressive improvement. A full clinical reevaluation was performed in September 2005; abnormal findings were limited to poor visual acuity, pale optic discs, and sluggish pupillary light reaction. On a standardized cycloergometer test , serum lactic acid levels were almost normal (11.5, 11.9, 23.0, and 13.0 mg/dL; normal range, 5.8–22.0 mg/dL). Folate and vitamin B12 were normal, whereas creatine phosphokinase was high (289 U/L; normal value, < 170 U/L). Muscle biopsy showed nonspecific changes, with an observable parcellar subsarcolemmal increase of succinic dehydrogenase staining, indicating some mitochondrial proliferation. The patient is now able to count fingers and is without nystagmus (both eyes). He is able to walk without assistance and is continuing the same treatment.
Because the mutations associated with LHON affect complex I subunits and, in most families, are homoplasmic (100% of mtDNA copies are mutant), we performed genealogical reconstruction for the maternal lineage of the patient’s family. After obtaining informed consent, we collected blood from the patient’s siblings and mother for mtDNA testing by restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis, as described by . These subjects were unaffected carriers of the homoplasmic 11778/ND4 LHON mutation. No history of occupational or environmental exposure to solvents (or other particular toxic substances) was reported for any of the family members tested . These results are in accordance with the current concepts regarding LHON; the mtDNA mutation is a necessary but not sufficient condition for LHON, and only a minority of carriers develops optic neuropathy. Penetrance is incomplete (and lower in women), implying that additional mitochondrial/nuclear genetic factors and possibly also environmental factors contribute to phenotypic expression of LHON ; however, these triggering factors are poorly defined.
Between 1998 and 2000 the patient had worked in the “hot-melt” department, where he controlled hot layering of a synthetic adhesive containing styrene-isoprene copolymer, isopropilic alcohol, toluene, xylene, and octanes. An environmental exposure assessment requested by factory inspectors in 2003 indicated vapor levels of the individual solvents were 10–20% of American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) threshold limit values (TLVs) . During 1998–2000, the patient recalled experiencing nausea, dizziness, asthenia, and paresthesia of the upper and lower limbs (in addition to chronic headaches) whenever he had to clean the machines—a task he performed using a mixture of styrene, isopropilic alcohol, toluene, xylene, and octanes. In 2000–2001 the patient worked in the rubber-mincing department, where he was indirectly exposed to n-hexane and toluene (no quantitative data are available). In the glues preparation department, where the patient worked from October 2001 to March 2002, exposure to n-hexane and toluene was presumably more direct because of the nature of his duties: He prepared coloring mixtures containing rubber, hydrocarbonic resin of toluene, and n-hexane in a closed production cycle, and he opened dissolver machines 5 times/day to determine if the tanks were empty. The only available environmental monitoring data for the department (again requested post hoc in 2003) report peak values of 10.7 mg/m3 for n-hexane (ACGIH TLV, 176 mg/m3) and 1.5 mg/m3 for toluene (ACGIH TLV, 188 mg/m3). In this department, the patient reported constantly feeling nauseous and dizzy. Also, during the 6-month period, four overflow accidents occurred, each reportedly followed by several hours of intensified dizziness and nausea, asthenia, tingling of the upper and lower limbs, and dysesthesia of the hands (the same set of symptoms the patient recalled experiencing after using solvents for cleaning tasks in the hot-melt department). Biological monitoring data routinely collected throughout the period of employment indicated that after the patient moved to the glue preparation department, he had a > 4-fold increase in urinary 2,5-hexandione (a neurotoxic metabolite of n-hexane) from 0.5–0.9 to 4.1 mg/L, accompanied by a > 1.5-fold increase in urinary hippuric acid (a toluene metabolite) from 360–700 to 1,040 mg/L (roughly corresponding to an increase from 0.26–0.5 to 0.74 g/g creatinine).