A 47-years-old woman with diabetes mellitus presented to our department with severe abdominal pain and fever. The local hospital’s computed tomography showed massive mural thrombosis in the thoracic and abdominal aorta from the level of the diaphragmatic muscle to the superior mesenteric artery . The spleen had a large area of infarction complicated by portal venous thrombosis. This patient underwent amputation three years ago due to extensive thrombosis of the left upper extremity artery. Further examination in our hospital showed thrombosis in the portal vein, the superior mesenteric vein and the splenic vein. Laboratory examination showed the following: prothrombin time 10.9 s, D-Dimer 1.030 μg/mL, C-reactive protein > 200 mg/mL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 99 mm/h, NH3 73.5 μmol/L. Rheumatic immune tests, liver function, kidney function and electrolytes were normal, except for an albumin of 25.6 g/L.
Preoperative preparation and intraoperative procedures were carefully performed to improve the success rate and to reduce the risk of thrombus shedding during intervention. The catheter and guide wire was placed in the mesenteric artery and left renal artery via left femoral artery puncture, so that balloon angioplasty or stent implantation could be performed immediately once those branch vessels were blocked by shedding thrombus. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the use of RFS and the right femoral artery was incised to implant the RSF. The aortic thrombus was successfully compressed and fixed without thrombosis during intervention . A transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunt (TIPSS) procedure was conducted and a thrombolytic catheter was inserted in the portal vein for thrombolysis . Urokinase 100,000 units (Lizhu pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Guangdong, China) was dissolved in 50 ml of normal saline, and given by microinfusion pump every 8 h. Warfarin sodium tablets 3.75 mg (Qilu pharmaceutical, Shangdong, China) were taken orally once a day after the procedure. In addition, 1000 units of heparin sodium (Fengyuan pharmaceutical co., Ltd., Anhui, China) and 0.6 mg of octreotide (Chinese medicine & pharmaceutical co., Ltd., China) were dissolved in 50 ml of normal saline and given by microinfusion pump every 12 h. Omeprazole 40 mg (Changchun Fuchun Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Changchun, China) and levofloxacin 0.6 mg (Yangzijiang Pharmaceutical Group Co., Ltd., Jiangshu, China) were administrated intravenously once a day.
Relief of the patient’s abdominal pain was evident 3 days after the interventional procedure, and pain resolved completely after 15 days. Angiography showed that the abdominal aortic thrombus was mostly dissolved, with only a few residual thrombi. A 12 F sheath was introduced through the guide wire and the RSF was retrieved . Catheter angiography confirmed an recovery of portal vein thrombosis via indwelling catheter. Portal vein thrombosis almost completely disappeared and the patient was discharged after 16 days . She received oral warfarin sodium 100 mg per day for anticoagulation with an international normalized ratio of 2–3. One month later, the bilateral renal artery, superior mesenteric artery, lower extremity artery and portal vein were well visualized, without thrombosis. The upper abdominal aorta was normal with a small amount of residual thrombus. The patient appears normal and no complications have occurred after 14 months.