A 52-year-old man presented to our outpatient clinic in a bad general condition of health and with severe pain of his right hip joint and os oschii. The pain developed approximately three months prior to presentation.
The patient's medical history revealed a right inguinal orchiectomy for the removal of testicular tumour performed in France in 1984. The rest of his anamnesis was clinically insignificant.
In 1984, the patient's histopathology revealed a mixed tumour, a choriocarcinoma and an embryonic carcinoma, with retroperitoneal and pulmonary metastases. To treat this, an orchiectomy was performed, followed by four cycles of bleomycin, etoposide and cisplatin (BEP) chemotherapy. Follow-up assessments were initially performed at an interval of three months, and then at an interval of six months until the fifth postoperative year.
When the patient presented to our clinic, he appeared to be in bad general health, with severe pain in his right hip joint. His serum level of alpha-fetoprotein was 169.48 ng/ml (normal range 0.0 to 7.0 ng/ml) and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (ß-hCG) was 1.30 mIU/ml (normal range <5.0 mIU/ml). The patient's lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was 1155 U/L (normal range 230 to 460 U/L) and his alkaline phosphatase level was 104 U/L (normal range is 3 to 128 U/L).
Radiological investigation, which was later confirmed through computer tomograms, demonstrated that there was an osteolytic destruction of the patient's os ischii and hip joint . In addition, enlarged lymphatic nodes were found on the patient's retroperitoneal space. Two pulmonary metastases were also found in his left lung .
A biopsy of the lytic bone lesion was carried out to confirm the diagnosis. Histological and immunohistochemical investigation of the biopsy cylinders showed an anaplastic seminoma . Immunohistochemical testing was positive for alpha-fetoprotein but negative for hCG, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CD30 and CD117 (C kit).
Due to strong pain, analgesia with peripheral and central analgesics was initiated. During the next three days, however, the state of our patient dramatically declined and he died a day before the results of the biopsy were known.