A 4-year-old girl was admitted to our paediatric department from another general hospital for an acute episode of lower respiratory tract infection associated with severe dyspnoea, polypnoea, and severe anaemia (haemoglobin level, 5.9 g/dL).
The child was born prematurely at 28 weeks of gestation with an extremely low birth weight (700 g). She had suffered from iron-deficiency anaemia since the age of 3 months and was treated with the oral administration of iron. She also experienced recurrent lower respiratory tract infections, with a significant worsening of anaemia concomitant with four of these episodes (for which she required hospital admission for blood transfusion).
At admission in our ward, the physical findings were as follows: body weight - 10.9 kg; height - 95 cm (<3rd percentile); heart rate - 124 beats/min; respiratory rate - 50 breaths/min; oxygen saturation in the room air - 78 %; blood pressure - 111/71 mmHg; body temperature - 36.6 °C. She was dyspnoeic. Furthermore, blood exams revealed the above-mentioned severe anaemia, a mean corpuscular volume of 67 fL, a reticulocyte count of 3 %, and serum iron (20 μg/dL) and ferritin (8 ng/mL) levels below the normal range. Direct and indirect Coombs tests were negative, and main causes of blood loss and haemolysis were excluded. The coagulation tests and platelet count were normal, and C-reactive protein was mildly increased (3.07 mg/dL; normal value, < 0.5 mg/dL). Serologic tests for immunologic evaluation and autoimmune diseases (i.e., immunoglobulins, anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-DNA antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, anti-smooth muscle antibodies, extractable nuclear antigen, anti-mitochondrial antibodies, anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies, and anti-proteinase 3 antibodies) were performed, and the results were negative. Celiac screening and specific cow’s milk IgE test results were also negative. Bone marrow aspirate showed hyperplastic erythropoiesis. A prompt blood transfusion was performed, oxygen with high-flow nasal cannulae was immediately administered, and i.v. cefotaxime treatment (100 mg/kg/day in three doses for 8 days) was started.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax was performed and showed a diffuse ground-glass opacity suggestive of pulmonary haemorrhage . Clinical history (i.e., severe persistent anaemia that worsened during lower respiratory tract infections) and radiologic findings resulted in the suspicion of pulmonary haemosiderosis. A bronchoalveolar lavage was requested and showed the presence of haemosiderin-laden macrophages (siderophages). Thus, idiopathic pulmonary haemosiderosis was diagnosed, and intravenous methylprednisolone (20 mg/kg/day for 3 days) was immediately administered, with a prompt improvement in respiratory symptoms and stabilization of haematological data. Then, oral prednisone (1 mg/kg/day) was started and was well tolerated by the child.
After 6 months of follow-up, the child was still receiving oral prednisone (1 mg/kg/day), had not experienced any exacerbations of the disease and had a haemoglobin level in the normal range.