We present the case of a 79-year-old Caucasian male field worker from the state of São Paulo (Brazil) with a six-month history of irritative symptoms of the prostate (urgency, frequency and nocturia) and difficulty initiating urination that progressed to urinary retention and the use of a urinary catheter. The patient had a history of Chagas disease with cardiac impairment, coronary disease (a stent in his anterior interventricular artery) and dyslipidemia and sought the urology clinic for the evaluation of obstructive symptoms of the lower urinary tract.
A digital rectal examination revealed a prostate with an estimated size of 40cm3, slightly hardened at the apex, with no nodules and a prostate-specific antigen result of 1.2ng/ml. A physical examination revealed no alterations on the penis, testicles or epididymis. An unsuccessful attempt was made to remove the urinary catheter after initiating treatment with an alpha blocker (4mg). Thus, a transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) was performed.
During his hospitalization for the TURP, the patient had the following hemogram: hemoglobin (Hb) 12.2g/mL; ematocrit (Ht) 36%; leukocytes 9300/mL; urinalysis with leukocytes 33,000 cells/mL; erythrocytes >500,000 cells/mL; negative uroculture; sodium 133mEq/L; potassium 4.3mEq/L; glucose 128mg/dL; and creatinine 1.4mg/dL. The patient remained in the intensive care unit in the immediate postoperative period at the recommendation of the cardiology team and was discharged from the infirmary asymptomatic, with no urinary catheter and a satisfactory urinary pattern.
Upon returning to the clinic, the anatomopathological analysis of the TURP revealed chronic granulomatous prostatitis of fungal etiology (PCM) with extensive necrosis .
The patient was sent to the team specializing in infectious parasitic diseases and began treatment with itraconazole at a dose of 100mg/day for six months. On the occasion, a radiological evaluation was performed and revealed the involvement of both pulmonary lobes, with preservation of the apices.
The patient remained asymptomatic for three months, but was admitted to the emergency ward of the same hospital with intense weakness, dyspnea and vomiting. At the time, the patient exhibited leukocytosis (21,300 cells/mL), with 63% segmented neutrophils, a creatinine level of 6.3mg/dL and a C-reactive protein level of 26.7mg/dL.
Radiography of the thorax revealed bilaterally diffuse nodular reticular interstitial lesions . Within a few hours, the patient progressed to respiratory failure and was sent to the intensive care unit, but suffered cardiopulmonary arrest and was pronounced dead just four hours after being admitted to the emergency ward.