A 38-year-old man presented after developing severe central chest pain shortly after taking sildenafil. His past medical history included intellectual disability and medically unexplained abdominal pain, for which he took amitriptyline, metoclopramide, and lansoprazole. He smoked five cigarettes per day and consumed caffeinated energy beverages frequently. He had no symptoms or known history of COVID-19.
His initial symptoms lasted 10 minutes, recurring throughout the day. He did not have sexual intercourse. Approximately 6 hours later, he called his brother who noticed that his speech was slurred and called the ambulance service. A pre-hospital electrocardiogram (ECG) showed inferolateral ST-elevation and was transmitted to our regional primary PCI service . Due to the history of dysarthria, the patient was diverted to the Emergency Department for clinical assessment. On arrival, he was pain-free but hypertensive (blood pressure: 166/115 mmHg). Neurological examination identified dysarthria and a right homonymous hemianopia with no other deficit (NIHSS score 3). He had bilateral equal and simultaneous peripheral pulses, no murmurs, and no signs of cardiac failure. Respiratory and abdominal examinations were unremarkable. Repeat ECG showed persistent inferolateral ST-elevation. Transthoracic echocardiography identified inferoseptal hypokinesis with no other abnormalities. The ejection fraction was 56%.
Given the two simultaneous clinical syndromes of myocardial infarction and stroke, the main unifying differential diagnoses were acute aortic dissection or cardioembolic phenomena. Primary PCI was deferred pending urgent imaging, and a computerised tomography (CT) brain demonstrated acute left occipital and right superior cerebellar infarcts . CT angiography of the aorta identified a 15 × 12 × 10 mm aortic thrombus adjacent to the right coronary artery (RCA) ostium, with smaller aortic thrombi adjacent to the origin of the left subclavian artery and at the level of the diaphragm . ECG gating was not available overnight, so the RCA was not well visualized.
After discussion with the Stroke and Cardiothoracic services, the risk of further emboli was felt to outweigh the risk of haemorrhagic transformation and the patient was anticoagulated with intravenous unfractionated heparin to a target anti-Xa activity level of 0.3–0.7 units/mL. Antiplatelet therapy was deferred to mitigate risk of haemorrhage. The patient did not meet criteria for thrombolysis. The initial high-sensitivity cardiac troponin-T concentration was 2406 ng/L (Roche Diagnostics, 99th centile upper reference limit ≤ 16 ng/L). Total cholesterol was 6.6 mmol/L (3.5–5.18 mmol/L) and LDL cholesterol 4.6 mmol/L (2.0–3.5 mmol/L). Serial ECGs demonstrated evolving inferior T-wave inversion with preservation of the R-wave. The patient remained stable and pain-free overnight.
The following morning, ECG-gated CT coronary angiography was undertaken. There was low attenuation plaque in the left system. There was contrast opacification of the distal RCA, which was a dominant vessel, although the mid-vessel was afflicted by motion artefact. There was no left ventricular or left atrial appendage thrombus.
De novo formation of aortic mural thrombus with coronary and cerebral embolization seems the likely diagnosis, as the symptom timing and preserved ventricular systolic function were not consistent with cardioembolism. However, the aetiology of the aortic mural thrombus was unclear.
The patient remained on intravenous unfractionated heparin until Day 5. A repeat CT aortogram demonstrated reduction in size of the thrombi . He was switched to apixaban 5 mg b.i.d., commenced on secondary prevention (atorvastatin 80 mg, bisoprolol 5 mg, ramipril 7.5 mg), and transferred to the Integrated Stroke Unit for rehabilitation. A thrombophilia screen, including anticardiolipin antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, and Factor V Leiden, was normal. There were no arrhythmias on telemetry.
Both vision and speech improved, and the patient was discharged on Day 14 post-admission with no functional sequelae. Lifelong anticoagulation is planned though he has defaulted his planned Cardiology follow-up appointments.