A 43-year-old man presented to Emergency Room of King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital with painful redness and loss of vision in his left eye following trauma by bee sting while he was outdoor one day prior to his presentation. He lost his right eye few years back due to open globe injury with multiple surgeries ending in blind painful eye. Apart from systemic hypertension his medical history was noncontributory. Ophthalmic examination indicated the best corrected visual acuity of poor light perception in the right eye (OD) and 20/200 in left eye (OS). (Documented previously to be 20/20). Intraocular pressure measured with applanation tonometry was within the normal range bilaterally. Examination of the right eye revealed two corneal sutures, no leak, deep and quite anterior chamber, posterior synechia, traumatic cataract and a hazy view of the fundus. Slit-lamp examination of the left eye indicated moderate conjunctiva injection, 1 mm × 1 mm conjunctival defect with inferior temporal subconjunctival hemorrhage. Clear cornea, no leak was observed. There was fibrinous reaction with +4 cells in the anterior chamber, early cataractous changes, vitreous hemorrhage, and hazy view to fundus. B-scan Ultrasonography revealed total closed funnel shape retinal detachment OD and low reflectivity, thickening of the sclera at wound site OS .
Patient kept NPO, started on topical antibiotics (ofloxacin, 0.3% 6 times per day), IV antibiotics cefazoline 1 g every 8 h and gentamicin 80 mg every 8 h and prepared for immediate exploration in the operating room for the inaccessibility to perform full ocular examination and to exclude open globe injury. It was found that during surgery no clear defect or leak from sclera. He was kept on IV antibiotics. Few hours post operatively, patient developed significant corneal edema with high intraocular pressure (40 mm HG), that was managed by oral acetazolamide 250 mg four times daily, timolol maleate (timabak 0.50%) drop twice daily, latanoprost (xalatan) 0.005% once daily and brimonidine tartrate (alphagan-p-0.15%) twice daily. His course after surgery was deteriorating with poor vision (light perception), more pain, corneal edema, and development of hypopyon over 24 h period. Thirty-six hours post operatively his vision in the left eye drop to no light perception, another B-scan Ultrasonography examination showed more vitreous opacities and retina and choroid (RC) layer thickening suggesting endophthalmitis, patient received intravitreal antibiotic of vancomycin 1 mg/0.1 ml and ceftazidime 2.25/0.1 ml and dexamethasone 0.4 mg/0.1 ml. Vitreous and anterior chamber tap was taken just before injecting intravitreal injection was positive for gram negative rods on gram stain and on culture Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Aeromonas veronii which also confirmed by another culture from corneal and at third day Visual evoked response (VER) demonstrated flat response . The patient develop pain with eye movement which indicated worsening of his condition and transforming to panophthalmitis. Follow up B-scan showed vitreous opacities with vitreal membranes, localized retinal detachment detected around the equator with dense sub-retinal opacities, almost sealed scleral defect detected inferior temporal quadrants. Computerized tomography (CT) of orbit showed diffuse preseptal thickening with evidence of extension along the episcleral and proximal part of the optic nerve with haziness, and infiltration of the tendinous space with associated diffuse thickening along the choroidoretinal thickening. At this stage, as patient have endophthalmitis with scleritis and due to spread of infectious process, retina, and oculoplastic team advice for evisceration of globe. Evisceration done and patient continued his course of intravenous antibiotics without systemic spread of infection, and he was discharge in stable condition.