A 24-year-old man was admitted to our hospital due to diarrhea, progressive jaundice, light stool, fatigue and excessive sweating for 18 days. He was diagnosed with TOF at age 3, and had undergone pulmonary valvotomy and closure of the foramen ovale at age 19. The former procedure failed, while the latter was successful. Since then hyperthyroidism was confirmed, and MMI (20 mg per day) was intermittently taken for 1 year because he refused to receive radioiodine therapy. Neither thyroid nor liver function had been regularly monitored during the treatment period or in the following 4 years. MMI (20 mg per day) was continuously taken by himself for 20 days prior to the onset of the symptoms, which, however, did not arouse his alertness, and MMI administration was continued until his admission. He denied use of any other concomitant prescriptions (including non-ADs), over-the-counter drugs or herbal remedies. The patient stated that there was no history of alcohol abuse, food allergies or liver disease.
Physical examination revealed a 112 heart beats per minute with evidences of tremor, generalized icterus, and pigmentation of the skin on the bilateral tibia. Marked carotid pulsation, jugular distension, and an enlarged thyroid gland with vascular murmur were observed. Thrill on palpation and mid-systolic murmur on auscultation were evident in the pulmonary area. A strong collapsing pulse and pistol shot sound was noted in the peripheral arteries. The liver edge and the spleen edge descended 1.5 cm and 3 cm below the costal margin, respectively, and peripheral edema was also noticed.
Laboratory tests revealed the following biochemical results (with the normal range in brackets): ALT 75 U/L (5 to 40), ALP 133 U/L (15 to 130), ALT/ALP ratio 0.56, TBIL 587.9 μmol/L (3.0 to 20.0), DBIL 288.2 μmol/L (2.0 to 6.0), FT4 154.8 pmol/L (7.90 to 14.10), FT3 30.8 pmol/L (3.86 to 6.00), thyroid-stimulating hormone less than 0.01 μIU/ml (0.340 to 5.600), PT 22.2 seconds (9.0 to 12.8), and international normalized ratio 2.3 (0.8 to 1.4). Viral serologies (hepatitis A, B, C, and E viruses; human immunodeficiency virus; Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus) and autoimmunity markers (antinuclear antibody, antimitochondrial antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-smooth-muscle antibody, and anti-liver-kidney microsome antibody) were all negative. Screening studies were performed to detect genetic and metabolic liver diseases, which excluded hematochromatosis, Wilson's disease, and alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency. The color Doppler echocardiography showed evidence of severe pulmonary stenosis, right ventricular hypertrophy, tricuspid incompetence with systolic regurgitation, and enlarged right atrium . Moreover, ultrasonography of the abdomen revealed signs of hepatic parenchymal injury, inferior vena cava dilation and splenomegaly.
Drug induced lymphocyte stimulation test for MMI was performed, and the procedure was briefly described as follows: Lymphocytes isolated from the heparinized peripheral blood sample of patient were incubated with serial concentrations of the purified MMI (M8506, Sigma). After that, the proliferative response was assessed by measuring incorporated 3H-thymidine uptake. The patient showed a positive result, with the Stimulation Index of 2.19.
MMI was discontinued on admission. The patient was treated with PTU (50 mg 8 hourly) and propranolol (40 mg 3 times daily). Methylprednisolone (40 mg daily) and liver protecting preparation (e.g. diammonium glycyrrhizinate, ursodeoxycholic acid, and ademetionine) were also administrated. The patient underwent three sessions of plasma exchange, and an 8-hour continuous hemofiltration. His general condition, liver functions and other biochemical parameters gradually improved with ALT, ALP, TBIL and PT values, while FT3 and FT4 approximately restored to normal levels; however, two days later, his liver function worsened again . A liver biopsy was performed on day 18 after admission. Pathological findings showed that the portal tracts were expanded by moderate inflammatory infiltration composed of lymphocytes, neutrophils and eosinophils. The portal tracts were surrounded by proliferative cholangioles, and some with bile plugs. Nodular regeneration of the hepatic parenchyma was delimited by loosened fibrous septa. Diffused swelling and enlargement of hepatocytes were detected within hepatic lobules, particularly around central veins. Feathery degeneration was also observed in some hepatocytes, indicative of intracellular cholestasis, but necrosis was absent within portal areas and lobules . During the following 9 days, his liver function profiles progressively deteriorated, and grade II encephalopathy developed. The patient subsequently experienced hypoxemia, hypotension, decreased urinary outflow, and metabolic acidosis. Although mechanical ventilation and intensive therapies were applied, unfortunately, the progression of his medical conditions could not be suspended, and he eventually expired as a result of multiple organ failure on day 27 after admission.