A comatose 56-year-old Japanese man with no significant familial medical history was admitted to the emergency room. He delivered newspapers and usually consumed alcohol two hours before delivery. According to colleagues, during his usual morning routine, he suddenly fell on his back. On admission, his temperature was 36.0°C, pulse rate 77 beats/min, blood pressure 153/94mmHg and Glasgow Coma Scale score was E2V2M1. On examination, splenohepatomegaly was detected, but heart murmur, chest rales, tongue biting, incontinence, diaphoresis, seizure, and xanthoma were not evident. He maintained a balanced diet and was not obese (height 164cm, weight 58.8kg and body mass index 21.9kg/m2).
Arrhythmia was not detected on admission. Laboratory test results revealed high blood glucose (28.2mmol/L), high glycated hemoglobin (11.4 percent), considerably high serum lipid levels (triglycerides 171.5mmol/L, total cholesterol (T-Chol) 17.7mmol/L, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) 0.5mmol/L, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 1.9mmol/L and type V hyperlipoproteinemia (Figure ), and slightly elevated liver enzyme levels. Serum osmotic pressure was 356mOsm/L, and alcohol concentration was 15.1mmol/L. His white blood cell count, electrolyte levels (Mg, inorganic phosphorous, and Ca), C-reactive protein level, renal function, NH3 level, coagulation (prothrombin time/international normalized ratio, activated partial thromboplastin time, fibrinogen, fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products), thyroid function, urine drug levels, vitamin levels, pyruvic acid level, and β-hydroxybutyric acid level were normal. Venous blood gas was almost normal (pH 7.389, pCO2 38.7mmHg, pO2 102.6mmHg, HCO3 22.8mmol/L, anion gap 14.3 and base excess −1.8mmol/L). Plasma viscosity was 1.90mPa/s (normal range 1.10 to 1.30mPa/s at 37°C; Lovis 2000 M/ME, Anton Paar, Graz, Austria), as observed later. Results of electrocardiography, chest radiography, brain computed tomography (CT), chest and abdominal contrast-enhanced CT, diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging, magnetic resonance angiography including examination of the cervical internal carotid arteries, electroencephalography, and auditory brainstem response testing were normal. Cultures of blood, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid were negative. Fundus examination was not performed. Hyperglycemia immediately decreased following isotonic saline infusion with no insulin therapy. By contrast, triglyceride levels gradually decreased after administration of intravenous fluids. Our patient’s consciousness level improved gradually over three days (Figure ). All serum lipid levels decreased seven days after admission (triglycerides 12.8mmol/L, T-Chol 9.5mmol/L, HDL 0.7mmol/L, and LDL 6.3mmol/L).