A 30-year-old Female patient with no comorbidities came to us with a left elbow injury after a road traffic accident. Clinical examination in the emergency room revealed a dislocated elbow with sensory hypoesthesia along the median nerve distribution and pointing index . Initial radiological investigations revealed a posterolateral dislocated elbow with a fracture of the radial head (Masson Type 4) and lateral condyle avulsion (AO 13A1.1) . Detailed neurological examination showed weakness of flexor digitorum profundus of the index and middle finger and flexor pollicis longus weakness with sensory loss over median nerve distribution. Closed reduction and splinting was done with no further deterioration in neurology (, ).
The initial plan was doing an open reduction and internal fixation through a lateral approach and exploration of the median nerve through a separate anterior incision. Under tourniquet through Kocher’s approach, the lateral condyle and radial head fracture fragment was exposed, a thick cord-like structure was found entrapped between the avulsed lateral condyle and distal humerus. Further exploration revealed a torn anterior capsule and torn brachialis muscle. Intra-operative nerve stimulation showed that cord-like structure to be the median nerve. The nerve was edematous and stretched, but there was no visible contusion and the nerve was intact. The nerve was repositioned medially by neurolysis. Post neurolysis the nerve was free of stretching. Fractured fragments were fixed with 4mm Cannulated Cancellous screw and radial head with one mini compression screw. Post fracture fixation, the elbow was stable throughout the range of motion and there was no significant varus or valgus laxity .
Once pain and swelling subsided patient was started with passive elbow range of movements in a hinged brace, but the weakness of index finger flexion persisted. An improvement in sensory distribution and motor power of Flexor digitorum profundus was noted after 8 weeks and elbow ROM recovered fully. The patient went on to recover with full motor power 12 weeks post-surgery with 2 point discrimination similar to the opposite side.