We present a case of 58-year-old male patient who presented to the outpatient department of the author’s tertiary level institute with swelling over thenar region of the left hand. He was a fully independent, nonsmoker, right handed, asthmatic patient on inhalational corticosteroids since 5 years. He noted a small, painful swelling in left thenar region 5 months back. He visited a local orthopedician who advised him to get fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of the swelling. FNAC report suggested the diagnosis of ganglion/synovial cyst and conservative treatment was started, but the swelling did not decrease in size, rather gradually increased in size and became painful with other signs of inflammation. It also affected the movements at the wrist.
When the patient presented to the author’s institute, there was a single, soft, fluctuant swelling of 5 cm × 4 cm over left thenar region with ill-defined margins, erythematic overlying skin. Swelling was not adherent to underlying structures and was nonpulsatile . There was diffuse edema over the volar surface of the left wrist and distal forearm associated with erythema and tenderness. Neurovascular examination of the extremity was normal. The systemic examination was unremarkable except for presenting swellings. There was no history of fever, trauma, joint pain, rashes, prolonged cough, decreased appetite, weight loss as well as no known or traceable history of contact with TB.
Chest radiograph of this patient was normal. No evidence of radiographic pulmonary TB was seen. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was subsequently performed to assess extent of lesion. It revealed a large peripherally enhancing cystic lesion containing multiple loose bodies involving thenar eminence of left palm. Tenosynovitis of flexor carpi radialis was also seen, and a small cystic lesion (0.9 cm × 0.5 cm × 0.4 cm) was seen superficial to flexor retinaculum laterally. Underlying carpal bones revealed focal area of altered signal intensity, with no evidence of joint effusion . FNAC was repeated which showed granulomatous inflammation with caseation, consistent with the clinical diagnosis of TB and the sample was sent for culture. The patient was started on antitubercular therapy with four first-line drugs (isoniazid, Rifampicin, Pyrazinamide and Ethambutol) for 4 months followed by biotherapy (Isoniazid, Rifampicin) for 5 months. Further, mycobacterium TB was isolated in the culture. Complete blood count revealed elevated white blood cell count of 14.8 × 109/L with a high neutrophil differential count of 90% but low lymphocyte differential count of 5%. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was also elevated (50 mm/h).
The patient was compliant to the treatment and did not have any major adverse drug effects. Swelling disappeared and normal range of movements was attained in adjacent joints at final follow-up of 12 months from initiation of antitubercular treatment . Supervised physiotherapy for fingers and wrist was initiated especially in the initial treatment phase to prevent adhesions and contractures and improve functional results.