The patient’s background is as follows: She was a 25-year-old primigravid Thai woman. Her obstetric data was limited, since she had never attended prenatal clinic before. Most of her obstetric history was obtained from close relatives. She was a low-risk pregnancy, without any known underlying diseases and with no history of significant familial diseases. The pregnancy course before the event was uneventful, but had not been documented. She attended a traditional massage service at a commercial relaxation massage shop at a shopping center in Chiang Mai, Thailand. The traditional Thai massage is a physical form of massage involving yoga-like movement, stretching, and application of direct pressure with the assistance of the massage performer. The client wears loose clothing and lies down on a padded mat on the floor, going through several poses. The performer may use his/her hands, forearms, knees, elbows, or feet to flex the joints and apply direct or rhythmic pressure to the client’s muscles without the use of oil or lotion. Each session usually takes one or 2 hours. Approximately 5–10 min after the leg and foot massage, the woman had a sudden onset of dyspnea, followed by consciousness alteration, brief spastic-like convulsion, became unconscious and suffered a cardiac arrest. First aid and resuscitation were provided by two nurses who were incidentally at the scene. The emergency medical service (EMS) of Maharaj Nakorn Chiang Mai Hospital was emergently called and arrived at the scene of the event within 20 min, while the patient was pulseless. The EMS team performed basic life support (BLS), endotracheal intubation and continuous cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) at the scene and during transfer to the hospital. About 25 min after initiation of CPR, the patient arrived at the hospital. Electrocardiogram (ECG) indicated pulseless electrical activity. Laboratory tests on admission were as follows: Hb: 11.7 g/dL; Hct: 36.0%; WBC: 12,850 cells/cu.mm; neutrophil: 50.0%; lymphocyte: 44.8%; nucleated red blood cell: 0.3/100 WBC; platelets: 159,000 cells/cu.mm. Coagulation tests gave the following results: PT: 10.50 s; INR: 0.95; PTT: 29.70 s; PTT ratio: 0.93; fibrinogen: 100 mg/dl; blood lactate: 3.14 mmol/L. Urinalysis results were within normal limits. Arterial blood gas showed severe metabolic acidosis. At the emergency room, advanced cardiovascular life support (ACLS) was immediately performed by the emergency physician team, and successful resuscitation was achieved, though the patient was still unconscious or comatose and depended on a ventilator. Bedside ultrasound after successful CPR at the emergency room showed no intra-abdominal free fluid, no pericardial/pleural effusion, no visualized aortic flap, normal left ventricular ejection fraction, hyperdynamic heart, right ventricular dilatation with poor systolic function, and interventricular septum shifted to the left, indicating right heart overload . Due to the sudden onset of dyspnea followed by cardiovascular collapse during leg massage and poor right ventricular function, pulmonary embolism was highly suspected. CTA of the chest was emergently requested and revealed multiple concentric intraluminal filling defects within the right and left pulmonary arteries and almost the entire branches that supply both lower lungs. Multiple intraluminal filling defects within segmental branches in the right middle lung and both upper lobes as well as a few broad base wedge-shaped hypoenhancing consolidation of pulmonary infarction in both upper lobes and superior segment of the right lower lung were also noted. The findings indicated massive pulmonary embolism . CT brain scan, performed to exclude neurological disorders, revealed normal results. Compression ultrasonography of both legs indicated deep vein thrombosis. Due to hypoxic encephalopathy, the CVT (Cardio-Vascular-Thoracic surgery) team decided not to perform embolectomy. However, the patient received conservative medications (Rt-PA: recombinant tissue plasminogen activator, Levophed, etc.). About 10 min after the return of spontaneous circulation, obstetric assessment was done. The ultrasound examination on admission revealed a single live fetus (fetal heart rate: ~ 130 bpm) without structural anomaly, consistent with 25 weeks of gestation, normal grade-1 placenta located at the posterior wall and normal amniotic fluid volume. Dexamethasone for fetal lung maturation was given (6 mg IM). However, 2 hours and a half later, fetal distress was observed and intrauterine resuscitation was provided. The risk and benefit of cesarean section due to fetal distress was comprehensively discussed by the care team, and the option of cesarean section was offered, but the relatives decided against operation to minimize the additional risk of the patient from cesarean section. The fetus died in utero within 8 h of fetal distress, and spontaneous labor occurred, leading to vaginal delivery without intrapartum and postpartum complication. At the time of writing this report (2 months after the event), the patient was still unconscious.