Our patient was a 51-year-old Japanese man who had undergone a left total nephrectomy for RCC 10 years ago. Four years later, he experienced back pain. Apart from sustained ankle clonus bilaterally, results of his physical examination were within normal limits. Magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography (CT) of the spine revealed spinal metastases involving the T1–T3 vertebrae, with a pathological fracture of T2 causing spinal cord compression. Metastases were also detected in the right adrenal gland, sternum, left clavicle, and sacrum . The pathology results of a CT-guided biopsy specimen of the T2 vertebral lesion were consistent with mRCC. Spinal metastases in this patient were classified as grade III according to Enneking classification, type 6 according to Tomita classification, and zones 4 to 9, layers A to D, according to Weinstein-Boriani-Biagini classification with a Spine Instability Neoplastic Score of 16, which indicated instability. The patient was treated with zoledronic acid 4 mg/month. One month after the diagnosis of spinal metastases, a TES with reconstruction—using a cryo-treated tumor-bearing bone graft—was performed.
TES was performed using a single posterior approach. The first, second, and third ribs were resected on both sides. The lower half of the C7 lamina was removed to expose the superior articular facet of T1. The posterior elements of the T1–T3 vertebrae were removed via pediculotomy using a flexible multifilament thread wire (T-saw; Pro Medical, Kanazawa, Japan). The cut surface of the pedicles was sealed with bone wax for hemostasis and to minimize tumor cell contamination due to the involvement of the T2 pedicles by the tumor. The T2–T3 nerve roots were ligated and cut bilaterally; the T1 nerve roots were preserved. Blunt dissection was performed around the T1–T3 vertebral bodies and C7/T1, T1/T2, T2/T3, and T3/T4 intervertebral discs. Bilateral pedicular screws were inserted and affixed to a rod from C7 to T5. An L-shaped chisel was used to cut through the C7/T1 intervertebral disc, and a T-saw was used to cut through the body of T3. The T1, T2, and upper half of the T3 vertebral bodies were removed en bloc. The tumor and soft tissues such as the ligaments, disc, and cartilage were removed from the excised tumor-bearing bone. The excised tumor-bearing bone was then immersed in liquid nitrogen at − 196 °C for 20 min, cut into small pieces, and packed into a titanium mesh cage. The cage then replaced the removed vertebrae, and, after being fixed to another rod, was slightly compressed by posterior instrumentation.
The pathological findings of the affected vertebrae were consistent with a diagnosis of modified International Society of Urological Pathology grade 2 metastatic clear cell RCC .
Blood samples were collected from the patient before undergoing surgery and 1, 3, 6, and 12 months thereafter. Serum interferon (IFN)-γ and interleukin (IL)-12 concentrations were measured. The preoperative IFN-γ concentration was 133.0 IU/ml, and at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months after surgery, the concentrations were 79.4, 151.0, 145.0, and 42.0 IU/ml, respectively. The preoperative concentration of IL-12 was 60.4 pg/ml, and at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months after surgery, the concentrations were 53.1, 113.0, 107.0, and 62.2 pg/ml, respectively.
Sunitinib was started 3 months after surgery. This was changed to everolimus 2 years later because of a slight increase in size of the right adrenal gland metastasis from 15 mm to 17 mm. One month after TES, sacral radiotherapy was provided, with a total dosage of 45 Gy. Two years after the patient underwent TES, zoledronic acid was substituted with denosumab 120 mg/month because of slight progression of the sternal metastasis. Thereafter, the bone metastases remained stable.
At the follow-up examination 6 months after TES, radiographic union between the bone graft site and the adjacent vertebrae had been achieved. At a recent follow-up appointment, 5.5 years after TES, no evidence of local recurrence at the spondylectomy site was demonstrated by CT . Moreover, the metastases in the sternum, left clavicle, and sacrum were stable. A sclerotic rim around the sacral lesion was clearly visualized . The right adrenal gland metastasis gradually increased in size (to 24 mm) while the patient was receiving everolimus .