A 70-year-old retired Hazara man from a rural area of the country presented to a private hospital with the main complaints of constipation, bloody defecation, and pain during defecation of 1.5 months’ duration. He did not narrate history of any remarkable disease or symptoms in the past. No family history was present. A laboratory examination showed low hemoglobin (Hb) of 9.3 m/dl with normal range of blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, alkaline phosphatase, and bilirubin. A digital rectal examination was performed and showed solid growth in the middle part of his anal canal. Colonoscopic findings showed a polypoid solid mass in lower anorectal junction. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed an irregular mural thickening in the anal canal with heterogeneous enhancement which had a maximum length of 4.5 cm. No suspected lesions were noted in his liver and lungs and there were no abnormalities noted in the bony skeleton on physical examination.
An abdominoperineal resection (APR) was performed and the surgically resected specimen was sent for histopathologic examination to the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, French Medical Institute for Mothers and children (FMIC). A 22 cm in length resected segment of the colon, consisting of lower sigmoid, rectum, and anus was received in formalin fixation. After opening through antimesenteric border, it revealed a polypoid dark-gray tumor in the anal area, measuring 5 × 3 × 2 cm in its dimensions . The tumor was located approximately 2 cm from anal resection margin. The cut section of the mass had gray and white appearance with firm-to-hard consistency and foci of ossifications .
On microscopic examination, it revealed normal anorectal mucosa lined by benign columnar epithelium. The lamina propria and submucosa showed sheets of spindle cell neoplasm arranged in a haphazard pattern. The neoplastic cells were large pleomorphic with hyperchromatic nuclei and prominent nucleoli. Many osteoid formations and immature bony tissues were noted between the tumor cells . No evidence of epithelial carcinoma was noted in the multiple sections that were examined. Immunohistochemical (IHC) stains showed that tumor cells were positive for stabilin-2 (STAB2) and negative for pan-cytokeratin (CK AE1), which confirmed the diagnosis of ESOS .