A 60-year-old male presented with a history of right lower abdominal pain, nausea with occasional vomits and no change in bowel habits for 2 years. The pain was dull, increased progressively and was relieved by simple analgesics. His appetite was good with no appreciable changes in his weight. There was no rectal bleeding, melena, mucoid stool, dyspoea or palpitations. His past medical and surgical histories were insignificant. He was generally unwell, not pale, not febrile or jaundiced and with stable vital signs. There were no stigmata of chronic liver or kidney diseases. Abdominal examination revealed minor tenderness over the right iliac fossa (RIF) without localized guarding or rigidity. There was a palpable cystic mass measuring 6 × 4 cm2 over the RIF, with a smooth surface and well-defined margins. Digital rectal examination was normal. His blood counts, glucose, liver and renal profiles were normal. Tumor markers (CEA, CA 19.9) levels were within normal ranges. Abdominal sonography showed a cystic mass measuring 6.5 × 5.5 cm2 arising in the RIF and displacing the urinary bladder to the left of the midline. Abdominal CT scan with oral and intravenous contrast revealed an oval-shaped cyst with a tubular fluid-density arising from inferomedial aspect of the caecum and extending down to the pelvic cavity in the right side posterior to the urinary bladder pushing it to the left, highly suggestive of an appendicular mucocele. No caecal masses or enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes seen. The liver was normal in size and texture with no evidence of metastatic deposits. Colonoscopy showed no luminal abnormality but the appendicular orifice could not be visualized clearly due to edema. Following informed consent, the patient had an exploratory laparotomy, which showed no evidence of peritoneal tumors, seedling or metastases. A cystic mass measuring 8 × 6 × 6 cm3 was found in the RIF arising from the body of appendix. The appendicular wall was mildly inflamed, but there was no evidence of perforation or abscess formation. Simple appendectomy was performed as the caecum, base of the appendix and mesenteric node were free of any pathological involvement. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on Day 5 postoperatively in a good condition. Histopathological examination confirmed the final diagnosis of a benign mucinous cystadenoma arising from the body of the appendix with free margins of resection. The patient remained well on regular follow-up visits over a 4-year period. The patient consented in writing to the publication of the data.