A 7- month-old, castrated male miniature pig with a body weight of 3.5 kg was referred for abnormal behavior consisting of continuous screaming, increased periods of lateral recumbency with uncontrolled pedaling motions, decreased activity and ataxia. The first symptoms appeared approximately 1 week prior to referral to the swine clinic. Previous therapy consisted of danofloxacin and corticosteroid injections with unknown dosage.
According to the owner, the other miniature pig, a castrated male littermate, did not show any abnormal clinical signs. Both animals shared an indoor pen in the house and an outdoor enclosure with a hut. The animals were fed a commercial horse feed combined with fresh vegetables and fruit, and offered water ad libitum. The miniature pigs had not been vaccinated and had never been treated for endo- or ectoparasites. Both animals had been bought 1 month before from a specialized miniature pig breeder. At presentation, the referred miniature pig was lethargic, and had a cachectic body condition. General examination revealed a slightly decreased body temperature of 36.5 °C (physiological range: 37–38 °C), a mildly increased heart rate of 100 beats per minute (physiological range: 68–98 per minute), and an increased respiratory rate of 36 (physiological range: 11–29 per minute).
Dermatological examination of the miniature pig revealed a dull, greasy coat with generalized hypotrichosis and multifocal erythema . Extensive areas of hyperkeratosis were observed on the head, bilateral on the shoulders, extremities, the abdomen and perineal area. The entrance of both ear canals was obstructed with cerumen and squames, bordered by hyperkeratotic crusts. Microscopic examination of skin scrapings and cerumen revealed numerous Sarcoptes mites, instars, fecal pellets and eggs . Cytological examination of the cerumen and crusts from the entrance to both ear canals revealed heavy colonization with rod-shaped bacteria, and a low number of coccoid bacteria and yeasts. Impression smears of the skin showed some neutrophils, extracellular cocci and corneocytes.
Upon diagnosis of sarcoptic mange in this patient, the other miniature pig was also presented and examined. This animal showed a better body condition and comparable but milder skin lesions, consisting of mild hypotrichosis over the head and trunk and greasy skin with large scales. Pale hyperkeratotic crusts were absent. Microscopic examination revealed sarcoptes mites, but in smaller numbers. Further, the owner reported that her 7- year old daughter - often in contact with the miniature pigs - had recently developed pruritic papular skin lesions on the upper legs and was referred to a physician who confirmed a scabies infestation.
Both miniature pigs remained hospitalized for 14 days. During this time, an adequate feeding regime was started and a heating source was installed to control body temperature. Both pigs were treated with a subcutaneous injection of ivermectin (0.3 mg/kg; Ivomec®; Merial Ltd, Duluth, GA, USA), which was repeated after 2 weeks, combined with an intramuscular injection of butafosfan and cyanocobalamin (vitamin B12) (0.3 ml/kg; Catosal® 10%; Bayer, Shawnee Mission, KS, USA). Furthermore, the severely affected miniature pig was washed with a 3% chlorhexidine shampoo (Pyoderm; Virbac®, SA, Carros Cedex 06511, France) three times a week until scales and crusts resolved. The other miniature pig was washed only twice. No clinical adverse effects were observed throughout the treatment period. The owner was advised to remove the straw from the hut and to thoroughly clean both pens with hot water. After cleaning the outdoor area, the pen and hut were sprayed with a 1% cypermethrin solution (Intermitox®, SaVet Pharma GmbH, Vechta, Germany). The bedding of the indoor sleeping place was washed at 60 °C. The owner’s child was treated with an antipruritic ointment prescribed by the physician.
Skin scrapings were repeated after 2 weeks of hospitalization and were negative in both animals. Subsequently, both animals were discharged from the clinic. The owner was advised on how to feed the animals properly. Both miniature pigs were examined at their home at two and 4 weeks after their return. During this time, the animals further improved and displayed normal behavior and weight gain with complete remission of skin lesions. The owner was contacted by phone 4 months later and declared that both animals and the child remained without skin lesions.