A 75-year-old woman with RA had been receiving conventional treatment with DMARDs, including 7 years of methotrexate (MTX), 10 years of hydroxychloroquine and prednisolone before this admission. Three years before this admission, she started taking the TNFI, golimumab (50 mg/month) in addition to MTX, hydroxychloroquine and prednisolone, because of high disease activity, including swelling and deformity of the proximal interphalangeal joints, metacarpophalangeal joints, and wrist joints on both sides, and a Disease Activity Score 28 (DAC28) of 4.96. Four weeks before this admission, she had developed a productive cough without weight loss, afternoon fever, and altered bowel habits. She visited our emergency room because of hematochezia, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Blood sampling revealed leukopenia (white blood count, 2200/μL; absolute neutrophil count, 770/μL) and thrombocytopenia (platelet count, 29,000/μL). A chest plain film (CxR) of the chest revealed infiltration into the left lower lung and peribronchial wall thickening in the right lung. Of note, MTX had been discontinued because of bone marrow suppression, and golimumab was stopped for infection of both lungs. She received piperacillin-tazobactam for complicated pneumonia immediately after admission.
One week after admission, the patient developed fever, dyspnea, hypoxemia, tachycardia, and increased serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level. CxR showed increased interstitial and alveolar opacity in both lungs, whereas chest contrast computed tomography revealed sparse progressive consolidation in both lung fields . We administered meropenem trihydrate because of suspected hospital-acquired pneumonia complicated by severe sepsis. Because of AB-A calcoaceticus complex infection, which is resistant to multiple antibiotics, including penicillin, cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, and fluoroquinolones (i.e., MDRAB), was detected in microbial examination of the sputum, the patient received a full course of cefoperazone-sulbactam. A post-treatment CxR showed resolution of consolidation, and her fever had subsided. Finally, she was discharged 3 weeks after admission. This patient experienced recurrent high disease activity of RA after discharge, including swelling and tender joints, a high DAC28, and high serum CRP and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Infectious diseases had been excluded at the follow-up at our rheumatology clinic. Because of the previous medical history of serious adverse effects such as stomatitis and bone marrow suppression, MTX is not suitable and has not been prescribed for her. Based on treatment guideline for RA, TNFI could be resumed after total recovery from infectious diseases. Thus, the patient received half dose of golimumab to prevent reinfection of MDRAB. We have monitored and collected this patient's sputum and fecal, which did not show AB colonization.