An 81-year-old man with 3 to 4 years of slowly progressive memory impairment visited the clinic for evaluation. The patient reported difficulty in recalling where he placed objects, and difficulty in understanding news programs. Except for memory impairment, other cognitive domains such as language, orientation, judgment, personality, and behavior were intact. In neuropsychological tests, he showed poor performance in word list recall and recognition, below − 2 standard deviation, while the scores in other cognitive domains were within the normal limit. He was receiving long-term treatment with enalapril for hypertension and had no other diseases or medications. He had a history of regular alcohol consumption (2 standard drinks per day) for 56 years, and had quit smoking 30 years ago. Detailed physical and neurological examinations did not reveal any abnormality. His blood tests were normal except for mild hypercholesterolemia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed diffuse brain atrophy and bilateral hippocampal atrophy. Medial temporal lobe scores were 1/2 each on the left and right according to the Skeltens scale . According to the Fazekas scale, the rating of white matter hyperintensities was 2 on the periventricular white matter and 1 on the deep white matter . A positron emission tomography (PET) scan showed diffuse hypometabolism in the left frontoparietal cortices. Based on clinical findings and imaging biomarkers, he was diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment due to AD according to the diagnostic criteria proposed by the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association (NIA-AA) . Donepezil was started at 2.5 mg/day, escalating to 10 mg/day over several months. At 18 months, he had difficulty with nighttime sleep, and clonazepam 0.25 mg/day was started.
Three weeks after starting clonazepam, the patient visited the dermatology outpatient clinic in our hospital with itchy eruptions on the lower extremities. His skin lesions had already improved to some extent by self-applying steroid ointment 3 days before. Because he had suffered from unspecified dermatitis for a long time and there was no history of allergy or drug reaction, a drug eruption was not suspected at the time. Since the lesions started to resolve, he was decided to follow up without special treatment, and only a p.r.n. topical steroid was prescribed. Since then, the lesions did not fully remit but rather spread, and the patient re-visited after 4 months. Physical examination revealed a violaceous scaly patch on the lower extremities, from both buttocks to feet . For further evaluation, laboratory tests and tissue biopsy were performed. His eosinophil count was slightly elevated to 7.1%, while other laboratory values were within the normal range. The histopathological findings of the eruptions on the left lower leg showed a lichenoid dermatitis pattern . Based on clinical and histopathological findings, clonazepam-induced LDE was most strongly suspected. Clonazepam was discontinued, and zolpidem was prescribed for sleep control. Additionally, he was treated with a week of oral steroids and tacrolimus 0.1% ointment.
Although new lesions appeared on the upper extremities, most of the existing lesions gradually improved 1 month after clonazepam was discontinued. All eruptions disappeared over the next month and there was no recurrence after that. Sleep was well controlled by intermittent administration of zolpidem, and no more benzodiazepine was prescribed, including clonazepam. Memantine was added due to progressive cognitive decline, but no adverse reaction occurred.