A 51-year-old postmenopausal non-Hispanic white woman was treated for a hypertensive crisis at a regional medical center in eastern Arizona. She had complained of symptoms for one week prior to admission, including light-headedness, headaches, and high blood pressure by self-measurement. Ten days prior to admission, the patient had been enrolled in a university-sponsored research trial designed to investigate the extent to which vitamin C and soy isoflavones, as supplements to a habitual diet, could provide antioxidant effects by reducing in vivo oxidative damage to cells, either alone or synergistically. During trial screening the patient reported typically consuming soy or soy products twice a week; no regular alcohol consumption; no history of hypertension or cardiovascular disease (although there was a family history of mild hypertension); no current medical supervision or care for any chronic health problems; no current use of over-the-counter or prescription medications and a routine exercise pattern of three times a week for 30–60 minutes. The participant weighed 175 pounds (79.5 kg), stood 5'8" (1.73 m), with a body mass index of 26.7 kg/m2.
Early in the research trial, the patient was randomized to receive 500 mg vitamin C plus 5 mg/kg body weight soy isoflavones. On trial day 3, the patient reported to the investigators that she felt "odd" and "light-headed." At the time, this was not attributed to the study-related supplements because the participant reported experiencing infrequent headaches for the past 20 years. On trial days 6 and 7 of the treatment period, the participant had her blood pressure checked by an automated machine; the readings were in the range of 140–150/92–98 mmHg vs. her usual BP of 120/82 mmHg. Due to this unexpected occurrence, the investigators requested that she stop consuming the supplements and drop out of the study. The incident was reported the university's Institutional Review Board Research Compliance Office, and the research trial was allowed to continue. Unbeknownst to the investigators, the participant chose to ignore the request to discontinue the supplements and continued to take the supplements on trial days 8 and 9. On trial day 9 she found her BP to be 159/110 mmHg. That night, she experienced an intense headache, a feeling of anxiety, and difficulty sleeping. Around midday on trial day 10, she stopped by a regional medical center to have her BP checked by a medical professional before going hiking. At that time, her BP was 226/117 mmHg; she reported that "my head feels like it is going to explode" and she was admitted to the emergency room. Laboratory analyses, including a complete blood count, metabolic panel and thyroid stimulating hormone test, were all within normal limits. A CT scan of the head showed no abnormalities or intracranial hemorrhages and a 12 lead EKG showed a normal sinus rhythm. At this time, the participant reported to the physician a 20-year history of chronic headaches that had resolved with better sleep habits and a higher fluid intake. The participant was then given 20 mg of the alpha1 and beta-blocker labetalol HCl via intravenous infusion (see Table ). Subsequent to administration of the medication, the participant's blood pressure slowly dropped below critical levels, but did not reach normal limits. She was dismissed from the emergency room after 3 1/2 hours with a prescription for the non-selective beta-blocker propranolol HCl (Inderal LA), 80 mg once a day. She was told to discontinue the supplements that she was taking for the research trial.
The patient notified the trial investigator of the hypertensive event several days later. The hypertensive crisis was reported to the university's Institutional Review Board Research Compliance Office, and the research trial was allowed to continue with the stipulation that all participants submit to blood pressure monitoring weekly. Later that week, the participant's BP was measured by the primary investigator's staff and was still above normal limits. When the participant saw a cardiologist and her regular physician for further follow-up, no abnormalities in cardiac function, renal function or hormone levels were identified that could have led to the hypertensive crisis. The participant continued on antihypertensive medications for the next 12 months and was gradually able to decrease the dose of the medications over time.