A 69-year-old male patient, with a three months history of abdominal pain asthenia and macroscopic hematuria, was admitted to the outpatient clinic. Abdominal CT revealed an 8 cm left renal growth suggestive of neoplasia, with the involvement of the tail of the pancreas, tumor thrombus in the left renal vein and multiple left para-aortic adenopathies . A biopsy was performed and showed to be inconclusive regarding the possibility of renal cell carcinoma. Radical left nephrectomy with distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy was proposed.
The procedure (Video 1 in Supplementary data) started with an extensive Cattel-Braasch Maneuver, allowing exposure of the inferior vena cava and the aorta, and thus isolation of the left renal vessels. The tail of the pancreas and spleen were freed, and a no-touch approach was adopted to minimize the spread of tumor cells with proximal splenic vein ligation. Caudal splenopancreatectomy was performed with section of the pancreas with a GIA 80 (vascular load), followed by proximal ligation and section of the splenic artery and what was thought to be the left renal artery . The junction of the left renal vein with the vena cava was opened, and the tumor thrombus was resected, followed by caval suture. The renal vessels were, at this point, presumably controlled. The nephrectomy was continued with the release of the kidney and para-aortic lymphadenectomy, during which only the stump of the left renal vein could be identified, lacking the previously ligated renal artery stump. The renal artery was located inside the mass of lymph node tissue in the left para-aortic space, and the stump belonged to the superior mesenteric artery, ligated flush with the aorta. There was no arterial pulse in the mesentery confirming the injury. After removing the specimen, the distal stump of the superior mesenteric artery was exposed, and a repair with a terminoterminal anastomosis was performed from the proximal stump of the splenic artery . The viability of the gut was assessed by palpation of an arterial pulse in the superior mesenteric artery.
The postoperative period went uneventfully. Histological examination showed a renal sarcomatoid carcinoma pT4N1M0G3. Control imaging at three months showed permeability of the celiac trunk and the superior mesenteric artery .