A 59-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to our hospital due to persistent epigastric distention and intermittent abdominal pain for 10 days. The patient had a 10-year history of gallbladder stones. Physical examination revealed right upper abdomen tenderness. All the tumor markers were in normal ranges. Initial chest X-ray scan found a mirror-image dextrocardia , and further computed tomography (CT) revealed a complete, right-to-left reverse transposition of the organs in the thoracic cavity and the abdomen ( and ), confirming her congenital anomaly of SIT.
A contrasted CT scan revealed a 6.3 cm × 4.5 cm mass at the gallbladder bottom, with involvement of the transverse colon and the left lateral liver ( and ). No other distant metastasis or lymph node enlargement was observed. The initial diagnosis was gallbladder cancer at stage IIIA (cT3N0M0) according to the AJCC staging guideline. Multiple vascular variations were also seen in addition to the right-to-left reversal anomaly . Specifically, the celiac trunk divided into the splenic artery and the left gastric artery, while the common hepatic artery originates from the superior mesenteric artery. Polysplenia syndrome is defined as the existence of multiple, two to six, spleens similar in size, which are different from the accessory spleen. Until now, it is not clear whether a relationship exists between polysplenia syndrome and SIT. The coexistence of polysplenia syndrome is common in SIT, for instance in our case.
The multidisciplinary board considered the clinical diagnosis of resectable gallbladder cancer with SIT, and suggested surgical resection. En-bloc radical resection of the gallbladder cancer, including partial colectomy and hepatectomy with regional node dissection, followed by colocolostomy and Roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy, was successfully performed. The whole operation took around 5 hours, and the estimated blood loss was 100 mL. Gross anatomy showed multiple gallstones in the gallbladder and a huge tumor at the gallbladder bottom, invading the transverse colon and the liver ( and ). Final pathology revealed a moderately differentiated adenosquamous carcinoma of the gallbladder, invading the submucosa of the transverse colon ( and ), further confirmed by immunohistochemical staining showing positive P63, P53, CK5/6, CK19, CK7, CK20, and CDX2, and negative ERBR expression . All the 10 dissected lymph nodes were negative. The pathological stage of this patient is pT3N0M0. The patient recovered well after surgery. Two months post the surgical procedure, she started adjuvant gemcitabine plus cisplatin regimen. She received 5 cycles of chemotherapy and was free of recurrence at 5 months post operation.