A 26-year-old man was admitted to the emergency department following a road traffic accident. He had a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 15. The surgeon diagnosed a radio-cubital displaced fracture at the elbow with no obvious neurologic or vascular injuries. The patient complained about chest pain rated 8 out of 10 on a visual analogue scale (VAS). On further evaluation, tenderness over the upper sternum with no ecchymosis/subcutaneous emphysema was noted. Chest X-ray at the time of admission did not reveal any abnormality. Electrocardiogram showed tachycardia. Troponin levels were within normal values. The patient received diclofenac 75 mg and morphine 6 mg intravenously. The VAS score decreased to 4/10. Intravenous paracetamol 1 g every 6 h and diclofenac 75 mg every 12 h were prescribed. He was posted for open reduction internal fixation of the lower third humerus electively, after 8 h.
At the pre-operative checkup, the patient was clinically having shallow breathing, with altered chest mechanics and tachycardia. Pulse oximetry value was noted at 94% using a high concentration oxygen mask with a flow at 10 L/min (fraction of inspired oxygen [FiO2] at 80%). A severe pain with tenderness over the sternum was still present. Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis noted an acute respiratory acidosis . An ultrasound examination was performed, which revealed a sternal fracture between the third and fourth ribs with complete disjunction, exposing the pericardium (see Video 1 in the supplementary material). The patient was connected to a pulmonary electrical impedance tomography (EIT) monitor (Pulmovista® 500, Dragger Lubeck, Germany), a noninvasive, real-time imaging modality which measures global and regional changes in lung volume at the bedside. EIT showed hypoventilation of the basal-anterior portions of both right and left lungs with just 1% of tidal volume being distributed within these parts .
A bilateral parasternal block was performed, after obtaining the patient’s informed consent, taking into consideration the post-injury pain, hypoventilation, acute respiratory acidosis, and EIT data. Blocks were performed on the lower border of the 3rd rib and upper border of the 4th rib under ultrasound guidance using a linear probe (linear 12L probe of a GE Logic E B12 ultrasound machine) . The ultrasound scan was performed from lateral to medial in the intercostal space. The intercostal muscles and pleura were identified along the lower border of the rib. At the lateral border of the sternum, internal thoracic vessels lying anterior to transverse thoracic muscle are identified. The needle is inserted in-plane to follow its tip perfectly to prevent pneumothorax or pericardium puncture. Four milliliters of ropivacaine 0.75% was injected beyond the internal intercostal muscles, anterior to the transversus thoracic muscle to block the terminal anterior branch of the intercostal nerve and spread to the perivascular sympathetic plexus. The collateral nerve was blocked by another injection at the upper border of the lower rib. A total volume of 16 mL ropivacaine 0.75% was injected (8 mL on both sides). After 10 min, the patient’s clinical condition improved significantly with a pain score at 0/10 at rest and on sternal pressure. Pulse oximetry improved to 100% on room air and EIT showed improved ventilation in the anterior zones (from 1% to 11%; Fig. b). We noted a correction of the respiratory acidosis . The patient remained comfortable till he was taken up for open reduction internal fixation of the elbow fracture, under supraclavicular brachial plexus block supplemented with general anesthesia in the prone position, 8 h after the parasternal block. Postoperative analgesia was maintained with paracetamol 1 g intravenously every 6 h and parecoxib 40 mg intravenously every 12 h. The patient remained stable in the postoperative period. On a postoperative visit, 6 h after the surgery, a pain score of 3/10 on a VAS on sternal pressure was noted and lack of any further effect of the block was highlighted by normal sensory cutaneous testing (pin prick and cold perception). The patient remained comfortable throughout the postoperative period without any breathing difficulty. He was discharged on the second postoperative day with oral analgesics and follow-up instructions.
Informed consent was obtained from the patient for being included in this case report.