A 22-year-old woman from Sicily presented in August 2019 at the Medical Oncology Unit of Santa Maria delle Croci hospital in Ravenna, Italy, with severe hypertension, hirsutism, oligomenorrhea, and epigastric pain. A CT scan showed a huge left adrenal mass (100x110mm) and multiple lung metastasis. Hormonal assessment revealed elevated plasma and urinary cortisol levels and elevated androgen levels. The patient’s general conditions were compromised due to a severe Cushing’s syndrome. A tumor biopsy was performed confirming the ACC diagnosis. The patient was immediately addressed to first line chemotherapy with the EDP-M regimen, administered in association with metyrapone, to rapidly obtain a control of hormone hypersecretion . A minimal disease response of lung metastases and no change of the primary tumor lesion was obtained after 2 chemotherapy cycles. The patient general conditions, however, consistently improved. Antineoplastic therapy was continued and, from the 3rd cycles onwards, mitotane serum levels had attained the therapeutic interval, ranging between 14.5 and 20.1 ng/ml. Unfortunately, a huge disease progression was observed at TC restaging after 5 cycles.
The patient was then referred to the Medical Oncology Unit in Brescia in January 2020. On admission her general conditions were poor (ECOG performance status 3). She suffered from uncontrolled pain, nausea, asthenia and dyspnea. Oxygen saturation was low (SpO2 88%), so continuous oxygen therapy was instituted.
The CT scan confirmed the voluminous left adrenal mass (160x110 mm in size) infiltrating the left kidney and revealed a dramatic disease progression in lung with multiple lesions affecting both hemithoraxes .
Due her serious conditions we deemed the patient not eligible to further intravenous chemotherapy. She was then discharged and entrusted to home palliative care in Sicily with the prescription of oral temozolomide at the dose of 200 mg/m2/die given for 5 consecutive days every 28 days and daily. Megestrol acetate 160 mg every day was also concomitantly prescribed to support appetite and patient kenesthesis. Mitotane was continued.
Progressively, the patient general conditions improved with a normalization of oxygen saturation and pain control. Temozolomide therapy was well tolerated without any relevant toxicity. After 2 months her quality of life returned to normal and megestrol acetate was interrupted while continuing both temozolomide and mitotane therapies. The CT restaging performed in March 2020 showed a partial response of lung metastases with a minimal response of the adrenal mass. The extent of lung disease further decreased at a subsequent CT in June 2020. In September the patient returned to Brescia for a follow-up visit. A CT scan revealed a complete disease response of lung metastases and a partial response of the abdominal lesion with dimension reduction (60 mm) and necrosis increase . The FDG PET scan confirmed the complete response of the lung lesions and, as regard the abdominal mass, a small peripheral uptake was described with an extensive central area with no FDG (fluorodesoxyglucose) uptake (necrosis) .
The last CT scan (December 2020) revealed a stable disease with respect to the previous control in September. At the last follow-up examination, on February 25th, the patient general conditions were excellent (ECOG performance status 0). She was still on Temozolomide treatment (12 total cycles) along with mitotane and was free from progression for 14 months.
A Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) analysis, with a wide panel of genes (genic variant in hotspot regions of 35 genes -AKT1, ALK, AR, BRAF, CDK4, CTNNB1, DDR2, EGFR, ERBB2, ERBB3, ERBB4, ESR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, GNA11, GNAQ, HRAS, IDH1, IDH2, JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, KIT, KRAS, MAP2K1, MAP2K2, MET, MTOR, NRAS, PDGFRA, PIK3CA, RAF1, RET, ROS1, SMO; amplification of 19 genes- ALK, AR, BRAF, CCND1, CDK4, CDK6, EGFR, ERBB2, FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, FGFR4, KIT, KRAS, MET, MYC, MYCN, PDGFRA, PIK3CA; rearrangements of 23 genes- ABL1, AKT3, ALK, AXL, BRAF, ERG, ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, EGFR, ERBB2, FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, MET, NTRK1, NTRK2, NTRK3, FDGFRA, PPARG, RAF1, RET, ROS1) was performed on biopsy tumor samples at diagnosis. A genic variant in CTNN1B exon 3 (p.Met14Leu) was found . This variant has never been published as pathogenetic in literature and it is not present in ClinVar, whereas it is categorized as VUS (variance of uncertain significance) in the VARSOME database. O6-methylguanine-DNA methyl-transferase (MGMT) and progesterone receptor (PgR) expression could not be assessed, due to insufficient tumor materials.