A 13-month-old healthy Nepali male with history of BCG vaccination was hospitalized for suspicion of pulmonary TB. The patient’s father (index case) was diagnosed with pan-susceptible cavitary TB the previous year, for which he completed an initial six-month course of directly observed therapy with rifampin (RMP), ethambutol (EMB) and moxifloxacin. His clinical course was complicated by interruptions secondary to suspected alcohol-induced liver injury. His wife and the infant, who was six-month of age at that time, were evaluated for latent TB infection. The infant’s initial and 8-week follow-up tuberculosis skin test (TST) were non-reactive, and the chest radiograph was normal. He received isoniazid (INH) for < 1 month because of lack of compliance. Two months after the father completed the treatment, he was hospitalized again with cavitary TB that was still pan-susceptible to first-line TB agents. At this time the infant received another TST that showed 8 mm of induration and a chest-radiograph that showed right middle lobe air-space disease and possible mediastinal lymphadenopathy with deviation of superior trachea. Per maternal history he had non-specific symptoms the month before including mildly decreased appetite, cough, unspecified weight loss, and fatigue. He had remained afebrile and had not receive any medications. On physical examination, he was playful and in no distress, his neurologic exam was normal and he did not have any focal deficits. On auscultation he had bibasilar crackles but good bilateral aeration. His abdominal exam was benign, with no masses or organomegaly.
The laboratory evaluation upon admission revealed a strongly positive interferon gamma release assay (QuantiFERON-TB Gold plus; > 0.35 IU/mL ag- nil) and the respiratory PCR panel was positive for RSV. The white blood cell count was within normal limits [15,800/μL (50% lymphocytes)], he was anemic for age (Hg: 9.7 g/dL), and platelets were elevated at 688,000/μL. C-reactive protein (2.4 mg/dL) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (69 mm/h) were both increased. Electrolytes and coagulation tests were within normal limits. Prior to receiving anti-TB drugs, liver function tests (LFTs) at admission were abnormal (alanine aminotransferase (ALT): 562 IU/L; aspartate aminotransferase (AST): 688 IU/L; Fig. ).
With concerns for miliary/disseminated TB and to further define the abnormalities identified on the initial chest radiograph, a chest/abdomen CT was performed that showed a right middle lobe opacity and marked enlargement of right hilar, superior mediastinal, and subcarinal lymph nodes. No hepatosplenic lesions were identified. Abdominal ultrasound with doppler was unremarkable and the liver and spleen were normal in size, contour and echotexture. To assess for central nervous system (CNS) involvement, a brain MRI, ophthalmologic examination, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) studies were performed and were all normal. AFB staining and PCR for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) in the CSF were both negative.
After one gastric aspirate and two induced sputum samples were obtained, a second line 4-drug TB “liver friendly” regimen was initiated including EMB (20 mg/kg/day, oral); (LVF, 15 mg/kg/day, oral); amikacin (AMK, 15 mg/Kg/day, IV); and linezolid (LNZ, 10 mg/Kg/day, IV). After 48 h, AST was 459 IU/L, ALT 715 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 184 IU/L and total bilirubin was 0.4 mg/dL. Other causes of hepatitis were assessed for, including CMV, EBV, adenovirus, HIV, enterovirus, and parechovirus, and all resulted negative by blood PCR testing. Mycoplasma was negative by throat PCR. Serologies for hepatitis A, B and C, Blastomyces, Coccidioides, Histoplasma and Aspergillus, Histoplasma urine/serum antigen, and α-1 antitrypsin were negative. The evaluation for mitochondrial liver diseases was negative.
Three days after treatment initiation, LFTs were mildly improved and upon documentation of his father’s MTB pan-susceptibility to first-line agents AMK was discontinued. The patient was discharged receiving oral EMB, LVF and LNZ with directly observed therapy. LFTs 2 weeks after hospital discharge were significantly improved (AST: 79 IU/L, ALT: 60 IU/L; ALP: 173 IU/L), and treatment with RMP (15 mg/Kg/day) was initiated. On follow-up 2 weeks later (25–30 days of therapy), the patient was doing well with normalization of LFTs. At that time LVF was discontinued and INH (10 mg/kg/day, oral) initiated. Gastric aspirate cultures on liquid culture media revealed pan-susceptible MTB complex. The Gen-Probe Amplified Mycobacterium tuberculosis Direct (MTD) test (Gen-Probe Incorporated, San Diego, CA), performed on gastric aspirate and CSF samples at the Ohio Department of Health, was negative. He completed 3 more weeks with EMB, RMP and INH followed by INH + RMP for a total of 9 months.