A 57-year-old Asian man had ESRD due to ADPKD. At the time of referral, he had undergone peritoneal dialysis for 7 years. Although he had recurrent cystic infection and chronic pain, his urine volume was maintained at about 300mL/day. A physical examination showed two obvious masses in his abdomen extending from his rib cage into his pelvis. Laboratory results were within normal ranges except for carcinoembryonic antigen (13.4ng/mL; normal range <5ng/mL) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (1,736U/mL; normal range <37U/mL). Computed tomography (CT) showed innumerable cysts of variable size in both kidneys and his liver . Positron emission tomography-CT did not show increased uptake in either kidneys or in his other organs, and an endoscopic examination demonstrated the absence of tumors.
Because of the recurrent infection, chronic pain and enlarged kidneys, our patient underwent a bilateral nephrectomy with concomitant living donor renal transplantation. He received a renal graft from his brother (ABO blood group compatible, human leukocyte antigen full match, T-cell flow cytometry crossmatch assay negative). A bilateral nephrectomy was performed through an abdominal midline incision, and the renal allograft was placed in the right iliac fossa through a modified Gibson incision. The renal graft was positioned in his retroperitoneum to prevent renal pedicle torsion. The operative time was 533 minutes, including bilateral nephrectomy, removal of the continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis catheter, and the renal transplantation. The estimated blood loss was 2,240mL (including urine from the renal allograft and ascites). He had no surgical complications. The total removed kidney weight was 6kg (8.5% of his total body weight) and the maximal diameter of his larger left kidney was 28cm. There was a tumor in his left kidney, 1cm in diameter .
The final pathological diagnosis was a type 2 papillary RCC, eosinophilic variant, pT1a . The quadruple immunosuppression induction protocol comprised cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil, basiliximab and methylprednisolone. He showed an immediate improvement in renal function. His creatinine level decreased gradually and reached 0.59mg/dL on post-transplantation day 28. His postoperative recovery was uneventful, and our patient received regular follow-up care at our outpatient clinic. At the time of this report, the transplanted kidney function was normal with no evidence of local recurrence or distant metastasis.