A 74-year-old male patient presented with abdominal pain for several days and was urgently transported to the hospital. The patient did not have any features of tuberous sclerosis complex. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed acute perforated appendicitis. The patient was hospitalized and underwent appendectomy. Histologically, the appendectomy specimen revealed phlegmonous acute appendicitis. Inflammation partially reached the serosa, indicating focal peritonitis. Post-operative CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 30 × 25 mm circular lesion without a contrast effect in the pancreatic tail, incidentally . The tumor was confined to the pancreas and had no extrapancreatic extension. Imaging revealed an enlarged spleen, without any signs of neoplastic lesions. A blood test showed that the levels of CEA and CA19-9 (tumor markers) were 1.6 ng/dL (< 5.0ng/dL) and 152.7U/mL (< 37.0U/mL), respectively. The imaging procedure findings were consistent with a malignant tumor of the pancreas, and distal pancreatectomy was performed. Thirteen months after the surgery, no local recurrence or distant metastasis was observed.
Macroscopically, there was a 27 × 25 mm mass in the tail of the pancreas. The section showed a well-circumscribed solid yellowish-white tumor with black spots. The tumor did not invade the pancreas and appeared to have been removed. The spleen was 120 × 110 × 50 mm in size and significantly enlarged. No tumor involvement was observed in the spleen.
Microscopically, the lesion was mainly composed of inflammatory cellular infiltrates. They are predominantly lymphocytes and plasma cells, with a mixture of neutrophils and macrophages, including a small number of eosinophils. Slightly increased and dilated capillaries were also observed. Brownish granular deposits were observed in macrophages and interstitium. A small number of atypical cells with large round nuclei, distinct nucleoli, and eosinophilic granular cytoplasm were observed in a highly scattered pattern. These atypical cells showed epithelioid or spindle-shaped morphology. Some formed luminal structures resembling capillaries . There was no adipose tissue or thick-walled sclerosed vessels, as is typically observed in AMLs. The margins of the lesion consisted of inflammatory cells and small amounts of scattered tumor cells, and the border with the surrounding pancreatic tissue was relatively clear. There was no extrapancreatic spillover of inflammation or tumor cells. There was no mitosis per 50 high-power fields (HPFs) and there was no lymphovascular invasion. No tumor necrosis was observed. Non-contiguous lesions with similar clusters of inflammatory cells were found on the pancreatic tail of the main lesion. Fibrosis consisting of collagen fibers was observed in the background interstitium; however, storiform fibrosis was not observed. However, no atypical cells were observed. The spleen was congested, but there was no evidence of tumor spread or metastasis.
Immunohistochemically, atypical cells were positive for vimentin, αSMA (focal and weak), Melan A, HMB-45, TFE3, Cathepsin K, and negative for CK AE1/AE3, S-100, Desmin, CD21, CD23, and ALK. EBER-ISH results were negative . The expressions of MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, and MSH6 were retained. The plasma cells in the lesions expressed IgG and IgG4. At the hot spots, the number of IgG4 + plasma cells was 22–28/HPF, with an IgG4/IgG ratio of 17.5–28.8%.