A 67-year-old Chinese male was admitted to our hospital for nearly 2 months of abdominal pain, fever, headache, vomiting, constipation, and slight cough with sputum but without shortness of breath. He is a farmer living on the outskirts of Chengdu, Sichuan Province, southwest China. He had no significant family history, had no underlying diseases, did not use glucocorticoids or immunosuppressive agents, did not drink alcohol, and had not traveled outside Sichuan, a non-endemic area of S. stercoralis. CSF analysis at a local hospital 2 months prior to the admission showed increased white blood cells (WBC, 3,534 cell/μl) and proteins (1.97 g/L) and a positive CSF culture with Enterococcus avium. He was diagnosed with bacterial meningitis and intestinal obstruction there. His condition improved after receiving vancomycin but 2 days prior to the admission he had recurrent, severe vomiting and abdominal pain and therefore was transferred to our hospital for referral. The patient had a 10-kg weight loss in the previous 2 months. On examination, he was afebrile but had neck stiffness. Anaphylactoid purpura were present on both upper limbs and facial skin. Signs of meningeal irritation were positive. Crackles were heard bilaterally in the lower lungs on auscultation. Right lower abdominal tenderness and scant bowel sounds were noted. His routine blood work on admission revealed 7.2 × 109/L WBC (normal range, 3.5–9.5 × 109/L) with 86.8% neutrophils, 7.4% lymphocytes and 0% eosinophils, and moderate anemia with 80 g/L hemoglobin. Lymphocyte test showed a decreased CD4+ T cell count of 168 cell/μl (normal range, 471–1,220 cell/μl), CD8+ T cell count of 149 cell/μl (normal range, 303–1,003 cell/μl), B cell count of 24 cell/μl (normal range, 175–332 cell/μl), and normal NK cell of 162 cell/μl (normal range, 154–768 cell/μl). Serum tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV) and syphilis were negative. PCR testing of a blood sample for human T lymphocyte virus 1 (HTLV-1) was also negative. In blood chemistry, bilirubins, alanine and aspartate aminotransferases, creatine, and urea were all in the normal range. Enhanced brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a few patches near bilateral ventricles and partial thickening and strengthening of the endocranium . An enhanced abdominal computer tomography (CT) scan exhibited proximal small intestinal obstruction . A CT scan of the chest revealed bronchiectasis with secondary pulmonary infection . Lumbar puncture on admission revealed clear CSF with 20 red blood cells and 18 WBC per microliter. Meningitis was diagnosed and meropenem was given at 2 g every 8 h for empirical therapy. Small bowel obstruction management measures including gastrointestinal decompression and fluid resuscitation were also given.
Two days after admission, the patient developed palpitations and shortness of breath. The respiratory rate was 32 breaths per minute, the blood pressure 85/55 mmHg, heart rate 160 beats per minute, and the oxygen saturation 97% while he was breathing ambient air. His hemoglobin level was 64 g/L (reference range, 120–160 g/L). His brain natriuretic peptide and troponin-T levels increased to 6,825 ng/L (normal range, 0–227 ng/L) and 34.0 ng/L (normal range, 0–14 ng/L), respectively. Electrocardiogram indicated atrial fibrillation, which improved after administration of cedilanid and amiodarone. Three sputum smear tests were negative for bacteria, fungi, acid-fast bacilli, ova and parasites. Aerobic culture of sputum grew Klebsiella pneumoniae. Because the patient has a long course of disease and the etiology of intracranial infection is unknown, mNGS of the CSF was performed using an Illumina X10 sequencer with a unilateral read length of 75 bp. The results of mNGS were available on the third day after admission and among the 10,656,825 generated clean reads, there were seven sequence reads matching Strongyloides stercoralis but no reads matched any other parasites or microorganisms. S. stercoralis larvae were identified in gastric fluid retrieved from the gastrointestinal tube on the third day after admission . DNA extracted of larvae using a DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) was subjected to PCR amplification for both S. stercoralis ribosomal DNA gene and mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (cox1) gene as described previously (, ). Both PCR assays were positive and sequencing amplicons confirmed the presence of S. stercoralis with the ribosomal DNA sequence the cox1 sequence being deposited in GenBank under accession nos. and , respectively. Strongyloidiasis was therefore diagnosed. As ivermectin and mebendazole were unavailable for human use in China, 2 weeks of albendazole (400 mg, twice daily) was used instead. The patient recovered gradually. Five months after discharge, he gained 5 kg in outpatient follow-up, but he had new purpura on both upper limbs . He was given another course of albendazole for 4 weeks and gradually improved. The timeline of the patient with relevant data of the episodes and interventions is presented in .