An 18-year-old boy presented to our centre with gradually worsening shortness of breath for 6 months. For the last 5 days, he was experiencing dyspnoea at rest, along with orthopnoea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea. There was a history of low-grade intermittent fever and polyarthralgia affecting ankles, knees, and elbows. He also experienced intermittent ankle joint swelling over the past 2 months. His symptoms were associated with productive cough and a single episode of haemoptysis. On physical examination, he was tachycardic (heart rate of 105 b.p.m.) with low blood pressure (92/59 mm/Hg) and oxygen saturation was 89% on room air. His recorded body temperature was up to 39°C. Right supraclavicular lymph nodes were palpable. His apex beat was displaced and on auscultation, he had a pan-systolic murmur at the mitral area, radiating to the axilla.
Initially, he presented to the secondary level hospital and diagnosed as infective endocarditis based on history and transthoracic echocardiographic finding of possible vegetation on the mitral valve (, , Video 1). He was started on intravenous (IV) antibiotics (Vancomycin, Gentamycin, and Ceftriaxone) without significant response. He was admitted to the cardiac care unit after transfer to our centre and started on Norepinephrine 0.03 μg/kg/min initially and then titrated according to blood pressure. Furosemide IV infusion was started at 10 mg/h. His antibiotics regimen was revised, and he was given Vancomycin 1 g IV twice daily, Gentamycin 60 mg IV thrice daily, and Tazobactam–piperacillin 4.5 g IV 6 hourly.
Transoesophageal echocardiography showed Flail anterior mitral leaflet (mainly A2 segment) due to rupture chordae with severe mitral regurgitation (, , Video 2). There was no evidence of vegetation on the mitral valve. The left ventricle was severely dilated with normal systolic function (ejection fraction = 60%). The right ventricle was normal in size and function, and other valves were normal. His blood investigations revealed negative blood cultures and low white cell count with neutropenia in the first week . He remained febrile despite being on antibiotics. All antibiotics were stopped, considering them as a possible cause of neutropenia. Bone marrow biopsy was done, which showed hypocellular bone marrow (cellularity of 40%) with trilineage haematopoiesis. There was no evidence of granuloma or malignancy. After stopping antibiotics, repeated blood cultures remained negative. His total white cell and neutrophil count started rising, and he continued to have a fever. His other investigations revealed the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 68 mm/h (normal range <15 mm/h) and C reactive protein (CRP) 9 mg/L (normal range <3.0 mg/L). His liver functions were deranged (alanine transaminase, aspartate transaminase, alkaline phosphatase) . His ferritin level was 25 499.4 ng/mL (normal range 12–300 ng/mL). Other immune markers like antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, antinuclear antibody (ANA), and rheumatoid factor (RF) were negative. The viral panel was also negative. The infectious disease team advised doing a whole-body positron emission tomography scan, which failed to show any focus of inflammation.
Considering his presentation of polyarthralgia, fever, and lymphadenopathy, rheumatology was consulted, who, based on Yamaguchi’s criteria, labelled him as an AOSD . He was started on prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day. He responded to steroid therapy, and his fever started settling along with markers of inflammation (white cell count, ESR, and CRP). After 4 weeks of this admission, he was discharged home with outpatient follow-up with rheumatologist and cardiac surgeon. He was electively readmitted for surgery after 8 weeks. The mitral valve was assessed intraoperatively and due to non-suitability for repair, it was replaced with a mechanical valve (ATS size 31) with total chordae preservation. The excised valve was sent for histopathological examination which showed areas of fibrosis and mild myxoid degeneration with no evidence of inflammation or vegetation .
On follow-up, he was stable with mild exertional dyspnoea. His international normalized ratio was in therapeutic range, and he was following the rheumatology clinic as well and he is kept on low dose steroids. His follow-up echocardiography showed normally functioning mitral prosthesis with left ventricular ejection fraction of 55%.