A 75-year-old Caucasian man was referred for invasive coronary angiography (ICA) due to atypical chest pain. Initial diagnostic workup revealed normal electrocardiographic and laboratory findings. Arterial hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and a history of smoking; cumulative five pack years, were the patient’s cardiovascular risk factors. Medications were aspirin, rosuvastatin, and losartan. On physical examination, temperature was normal, blood pressure was 134/85 mmHg, and heartrate was 58 b.p.m. Cardiac examination was normal without pathological sounds or murmurs. Bicycle exercise testing (120 W, 158 b.p.m. ≙ 109% of predicted maximal heartrate) revealed an exercise-induced supraventricular arrhythmia.
Invasive coronary angiography demonstrated non-significant atherosclerotic disease of the left coronary artery and an anomalous origin of the right coronary artery (RCA), although selective intubation was not possible. Subsequently performed coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) revealed a right anomalous aortic origin of the coronary artery (R-AAOCA) with an intramural and interarterial course. Further, a soft plaque was seen in the distal RCA . As recommended,, a physical stress single-photon emissions computed tomography (SPECT) was performed, demonstrating exercise-induced inferoapical ischaemia (130 b.p.m. ≙ 90% of predicted maximal heartrate), within the territory of R-AAOCA, in the presence of RCA dominance . Thus, according to the 2020 ESC Guidelines, a Class IC level of evidence is given for surgical correction (i.e. open-heart surgery) of the anomalous vessel.
However, in agreement with the patient, a repeat invasive angiography was performed with selective intubation of the R-AAOCA, which confirmed a significant, 80% distal atherosclerotic stenosis . This lesion was treated with direct stenting (drug-eluting stent: 3.0 mm × 18 mm). Subsequent invasive physiologic evaluation under a dobutamine/volume-challenge (maximum dobutamine dose of 40 μg/kg per body weight/min, 3000 mL ringer lactate, and 1 mg atropine),, revealed a haemodynamically non-relevant anomalous segment with a fractional flow reserve of 0.91 (145 b.p.m. ≙ 100% of predicted maximal heartrate). Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) confirmed the presence of a non-significant anomaly with only mild lateral dynamic compression of the vessel (reduction of the minimal lumen area of 11.5 to 8.1 mm2, i.e. 29.6% under maximal dobutamine/volume stress). Consequently, surgical revascularization was refrained. A repeated SPECT after the procedure showed absence of apical myocardial ischaemia , and the patient was completely symptom-free at 1-month follow-up.