A 59-year-old man came in with worsening and consistent gait difficulties and signs of dementia over the past month. He had not experienced any headaches, double vision, nausea, vomiting, or delirium. His medical history was mostly unremarkable, except for a head injury approximately 1 year ago. Additionally, he had a long history of alcohol consumption. He was initially evaluated at a local hospital, where brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed bilateral symmetrical lesions in the brain stem and basal ganglia. Due to the patient’s prolonged history of alcohol abuse and progressive cognitive decline, Wernicke’s encephalopathy was initially suspected at the previous hospital. The patient received high-dose thiamin (300 mg/day, administered via intramuscular injection) for 2 weeks. However, his condition continued to deteriorate, leading to his referral to our neurology department.
Upon examination, he took short steps, showed symmetrical rigidity in all four limbs, general slowness of movement, with mild increased muscle tone and normal strength, hyperreflexia, diminished speech, a soft voice, and cognitive decline without lamination (scoring 18/30 on the Mini-Mental State Examination, especially in attention, calculation, and execution ability). He also exhibited urinary incontinence, and a vascular murmur was audible behind his ears. Laboratory tests, including those for blood count, infections, coagulation function, protein C and S levels, lupus anticoagulant, autoimmune markers (anti-neuronal antibodies, anti-nuclear antibodies, antibodies to extractable nuclear antigen, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, ds-DNA antibodies, and autoimmune encephalitis antibodies), tumor markers, thromboelastogram, anti-aquaporin 4 antibody, anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody, anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein antibody, oligoclonal bands, and metabolic screens, all returned normal results. His blood D-dimer level was measured at 0.73 μg/mL (0–0.55 μg/mL). A lumbar puncture showed that the cerebrospinal fluid pressure exceeded 400mmH2O. Analysis of this fluid indicated normal white cell counts, glucose, and chloride levels, with a slightly elevated protein level of 592.3 mg/L. There were no signs of infection, inflammation, or bleeding.
An MRI of the brain revealed bilateral symmetrical lesions in areas such as the pontine, pontine arms, and basal ganglia. These lesions showed restricted diffusion on diffusion-weighted imaging and no enhancement (as seen in –). Additionally, magnetic resonance venography (MRV) highlighted dilated veins and a filling defect, pointing to possible sinus thrombosis in the superior sagittal sinus (as seen in ,). Cerebral angiography further confirmed thrombosis in the vein of Galen and identified a DAVF between the torcular herophili and transverse-sigmoid sinuses, fed by the occipital artery and arteria cervicalis profunda (as shown in ). The DAVF drained into the straight sinus, which flowed in a retrograde direction into the vein of Galen, as well as into the internal cerebral veins and basal vein of Rosenthal. Given that DAVFs are treatable and their symptoms can be reversed, it was strongly recommended that the patient undergo transvenous embolization of the fistula. However, the son of the patient declined for personal reasons. Even with subcutaneous injections of low molecular weight heparin (5000AXaIU) every 12 h and symptomatic treatments, including levodopa, there was no improvement in his clinical symptoms. The time course of symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment is shown in .