The patient was a 65-year-old female with a history of surgical replacement of the mitral valve by a bioprosthesis 14 years earlier. Her personal history included valvular heart disease, atrial fibrillation, congestive heart failure (functional class IV) and hypertension.
At the time of admission to the clinical hospital of the University of Campinas on July 3, 2015, the patient had had symptoms of progressive dyspnea for the preceding six months. This was also associated with paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, orthopnea and lower limb edema. Therefore, the patient had been referred for evaluation of valve dysfunction and surgical assessment.
In the initial clinical evaluation, an echocardiogram was performed on July 6, 2015, which showed increased volume of the left chambers, presence of the biological mitral prosthesis with stenosis and moderate regurgitation, pulmonary hypertension with systolic pulmonary artery depression values of 78 mmHg and left-ventricle ejection fraction of 58% through Simpson’s method. Therefore, the patient was admitted to the hospital ward.
On July 7, 2015, her condition evolved with a productive cough and crackling and wheezing observed through auscultation. Pneumonia was diagnosed, which was treated with antibiotic therapy. The patient made continuous use of diuretic and antihypertensive drugs.
After 19 days of hospitalization, the patient underwent surgery for replacement of the bioprosthetic mitral valve with a mechanical prosthesis and also underwent tricuspid valve plasty. The procedure was performed under extracorporeal circulation, with a duration of 124 minutes. There were 46 minutes of myocardial ischemia and 92 minutes of aortic clamping without blood transfusions. No intraoperative events were noted. After surgery, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit without sedation, with mechanical ventilation using dosages of dopamine diuretic. The patient was extubated in the immediate postoperative period and she started using a Venturi oxygen mask, receiving an inspired oxygen fraction (FiO2) of 50%.
Two days after the operation, the patient developed worsening of symptoms. This included tachypnea, decreased peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) and significant radiological worsening, with diffuse infiltrates, signs of pulmonary congestion and opacification of the costophrenic angle of the breasts, as shown in .
She also presented oliguria and it was necessary to administer furosemide intermittently. Noninvasive mechanical ventilation (NIV) was used for an intermittent period, but with little improvement of the tachypnea.
Since there was no improvement of respiratory symptoms, even through using NIV, it was decided on August 2, 2015, to perform an intubation procedure and start continuous sedation for better respiratory management. After the clinical signs had become stable, the weaning process was started.
At the minimum mechanical ventilation parameters, i.e. spontaneous mode with FiO2 of 40%, positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 4 cmH20 and tidal volume of 5 ml/kg, the patient did not tolerate procedures to produce predictive indexes for withdrawal of mechanical ventilation. She showed signs suggestive of respiratory failure, according to the 2013 Brazilian guidelines for mechanical ventilation. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan was then performed, which revealed the presence of extensive bilateral pleural effusion at the bases of the lungs, and more evidently in the right lung. To relieve this, it was decided to perform thoracentesis, with removal of 1300 ml of citric fluid.
To evaluate the lung mechanics, respiratory monitoring through a scanner by means of bioelectrical impedance analysis was chosen (Timpel Enlight 1800, São Paulo, Brazil). An EIT electrode belt with 16 electrodes was placed around the thorax at the level of the fifth intercostal space, and one reference electrode was also placed on the patient. A tidal image was calculated as the difference between the EIT images at end-inspiration and end-expiration for one tidal breath, which represents the regional distribution of tidal volume (the tidal variation of impedance). Thus, the predictive indexes for success or failure in withdrawing mechanical ventilation and the spontaneous breathing test (SBT) using a T piece were determined and could then be evaluated by means of tomography.
The results regarding the variation of heart rate (HR), respiratory frequency (RF), peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) and mean arterial pressure (MAP) are shown in . Any significant variations in tidal volume and in the distribution of lung parenchyma could be checked through determining predictive indexes (RSBI, PImax and PEmax) from electrical bioimpedance tomography images and through determining spontaneous breathing. The behavior of changes in tidal volume at the time of determining the predictive indices and SBT are illustrated in . The changes in the distribution of air in the lung parenchyma are illustrated in , , and . These were obtained from the scanner screen through bioimpedance at the following times: before, during and after determining the predictive indices and before and 5 minutes after completion of the spontaneous breathing test.
Importantly, the patient developed a high response to atrial fibrillation at the time of the spontaneous breathing test, without hemodynamic repercussions. Five minutes after this test was started, the patient showed signs of respiratory failure. This requiring discontinuation of the test and return to mechanical ventilation in spontaneous mode, with the minimum parameters already described above. It was also observed that after the predictive indexes had been determined, there was better distribution of air in the lung parenchyma. This was shown through the positive graphic percentages displayed on the scanner screen (, , and ).
The behavior of the air distribution within the lung parenchyma before, during and after determining the RSBI can be seen in the ventilation map distribution of 64%, 71% and 58% in the right lung and 36%, 28%, 43% in the left lung, as shown in .
From these findings and because the weaning process failed for a second time, it was decided during a clinical visit and discussion of the case to perform tracheostomy. This was done on August 11, 2015. On the days following this, progressive reduction of ventilatory parameters was observed and the weaning process was again started, using intermittent mist in a T piece. The patientprogressed satisfactorily and continued to receive continuous nebulization. After a few days, the plastic tracheostomy tube was exchanged for a metal one.