A 76-year-old male presented to the Emergency Department with a laceration on his left occipital region after a fall from standing height. The CT scan was negative for traumatic brain injury; the patient was sutured and discharged. One month later he presented again complaining of a constantly enlarging mass in his left occiput. Physical examination revealed a tender, pulsatile mass with central necrosis of the epidermis. The pulsation of the mass seized subsequent to compression of the OA proximal to the lesion. Neurological examination was normal.
Doppler ultrasound was performed to confirm the presence of a pseudoaneurysm, demonstrating a subcutaneous anechoic mass to the left lateral border of the occipital bone with a high intrinsic arterial flow. Subsequently, the patient underwent CTA, which demonstrated the anatomic continuity of the mass with the left OA. Furthermore, a large isodense mass around the hyperdense enhancement was revealed, indicating the surrounding thrombus . A three-dimensional reconstruction of the CTA better delineating the pseudoaneurysm anatomy was performed . The patient was taken to the operating room for resection of the lesion under general anesthesia through a wedge-shaped skin incision encircling the skin ulceration . After careful circumferential dissection of the lesion, the OA was identified . The lesion was mobilized and the parent OA was ligated and divided both proximally and distally to the lesion. The lesion was then resected along with the necrotic skin. Finally, the mass lesion was dissected away from the overlying skin revealing a “necrotic” component of the lesion underneath the skin ulceration .
The pathological examination revealed hyalinization of the arterial wall and a focally disrupted intima and media, which were consistent with the diagnosis of a pseudoaneurysm. The patient was discharged the next day. An uneventful wound healing with no recurrence were confirmed at 1 and 2-month follow-up visits. An informed consent for publication of this case report was obtained from the patient.