The patient was a 59-year-old woman who had been treated 18 months previously for serous adenocarcinoma of the ovary. Treatment at that time consisted of total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy, pelvic lymphadenectomy, para-aortic lymphadenectomy, and low anterior resection for direct invasion of the rectum. An anastomotic leak between the colon and rectum occurred after surgery and a diverting ileostomy was created. After adjuvant chemotherapy, the stoma was closed 8 months postoperatively. At 18 months after surgery, recurrence of the serous adenocarcinoma at the vaginal stump was detected on gynecologic examination. Radiological examination revealed no evidence of recurrence at any other site. Preoperative colonoscopy findings showed no evidence of the tumor at the prior anastomosis, which was located 5 cm from the anal verge. The patient strongly desired SPS and gave consent for treatment by this new method after a full explanation was provided.
Conventional laparotomy and adhesiolysis were conducted in the lithotomy position with the legs lowered. The tumor was located around the bladder, vaginal stump, and the prior rectal anastomosis, but no invasion of the bladder was observed. Dissection between the bladder and proximal vagina was performed without difficulty, and the ureters and superior vesical arteries were preserved. The perirectal tissues, particularly around the prior anastomosis, were dense and offered no dissection plane to secure the pelvic plexus. Dissection along the anterior surface of the sacrum was advanced as much as possible using electrocautery toward the deepest part of the pelvis, from which horizontal advancement was limited .
The patient was subsequently placed in the lithotomy position with the legs elevated. A full-thickness circumlinear incision of the rectal wall was created inside the anal canal 3 cm from the anal verge, and the proximal stump was closed with a purse-string suture. After irrigation with physiological saline, a multiple access port (GelPOINT Path®, Applied Medical, Inc., Rancho Santa Margarita, CA, USA) was placed into the anus. An AirSeal System® (Conmed, Utica, NY, USA) was used to establish pneumoperitoneum with CO2 insufflation and smoke evacuation. An anterior dissection was performed from the anterior rectal wall to the distal two thirds of the vagina using an ordinary flexible laparoscope and a laparoscopic grasper. Care was taken to ensure that the dissection did not advance as far upwards as the tumor. This procedure resulted in a space behind the vagina we termed the “terminal” space, as its creation marks the final goal and end of the combined procedure . A dorsolateral dissection was made between the internal and external sphincter muscles and advanced as far as possible through the loose connective tissue between the sphincters . The separation unavoidably included scar tissue from the prior surgery on the levator muscle and sacrum. We secured hemostasis under endoscopic guidance . The posterior dissection was advanced into the scar tissue over the tip of the coccyx . The communication to the abdominal dissection could not be completed using the TEA procedure. The lateral dissection was performed to preserve the sacral nerve.
Returning to the abdomen, electrocautery was used to advance farther along the sacral parietal fascia to finally connect to the TEA dissection , allowing for the creation of a “guidance port” for further dissection. An index finger was inserted into the connection to identify the plane between the rectal fascia and pelvic plexus. After completing the posterior dissection, the anterior and then posterior vaginal wall were sectioned with sufficient margin from the tumor to complete the terminal space behind the vagina made using TEA . Scar tissue in the deepest part of the pelvis was dissected and the specimen was extracted. Bowel continuity was achieved by hand-sewn coloanal anastomosis, protected by a temporary loop ileostomy. Operation time was 301 min and total blood loss was 441 mL. Pathological examination revealed no involvement of the surgical margins . The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 18. The diverting ileostomy was taken down 8 months later after adjuvant chemotherapy and following confirmation that there was no evidence of recurrence. After stoma reversal, the patient had frequent bowel passage, which is gradually improving with time, and has not noticed fecal soiling or mucus from the anus.