An 80-year-old man with known cervical canal stenosis due to ossification of the cervical posterior longitudinal ligament was transferred to an emergency room soon after a falling accident. The patient was alert and had complete tetraplegia, sensory deficits below the C4 cervical sensory level, and progressive restrictive respiratory failure that required assisted ventilation, and, eventually, a tracheostomy. Cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging showed cervical cord compression that was worse at the C3–C4 intervertebral level, and an intramedullary high signal at C3 and C4 vertebral levels, and the patient was managed conservatively. During the conventional weaning process of trials of intermittent spontaneous breathing in the ICU, an unexpected cardiac arrest made both the patient and medical staff reluctant to proceed with further weaning. Fifty-eight days after cervical cord injury, the patient was transferred to our hospital for further rehabilitation. He was fully conscious and received pressure-support mechanical ventilation with back-up rates of 16 breaths. He had total tetraplegia below shoulder girdle muscles with a preserved sensation from C2 to C3 on both sides, and a urinary obstruction. The limbs and trunk were stiff with contracture, and muscle stretch reflexes of the limbs were abolished. Neurological level of injury was C3 according to the ISNCSCI, with a total sensory score of four. There was no sensory sacral sparing, while the deep anal pressure was preserved, and the American Spinal Injury Association scale graded B. Chest roentgenogram and computerized tomography showed bilateral, widespread atelectasis. The patient occasionally showed signs of pulmonary infection. Intensive pulmonary care and rehabilitation, including physical support for expectoration, mechanically assisted removal of tracheal secretions (CoughAssist E70®, Philips Japan, Tokyo), ventilator muscle training, and management of the spasticity of the abdominal wall, resulted in the improvement of the roentgenological findings. His expiratory tidal volume (VT) measured 150 mL.
Although the neurological status according to the ISNCSCI was unchanged, the patient was willing to be weaned from mechanical ventilation as his general condition improved. After informed consent was given, we attempted automated weaning from mechanical ventilation using IntelliVent®-ASV on and after 131 days of injury. IntelliVent®-ASV (Hamilton Medical AG, Switzerland) is a closed-loop ventilation mode that adjusts the pressure support in terms of the percentage of the ideal minute volume (%MV). The ideal MV (100%MV) is calculated from the patient’s height and gender. Based on Otis’ equation , adaptive support ventilation will select the best VT–respiratory rate (RR) coupling for the optimal work of breathing. IntelliVent®-ASV has interrelated functions: an auto-adjustment for carbon dioxide (CO2) elimination, an auto-adjustment for oxygenation, an auto-weaning tool named Quick Wean (QW), and a spontaneous breathing trial (SBT). The setting of the target %MV is automated based on either the monitored end-tidal CO2 or monitored spontaneous breathing rate. The auto adjustment of fraction of inspiratory oxygen or positive end-expiratory pressure is based on the monitored oxygen saturation fraction of hemoglobin with a pulse oximeter (SpO2) . The QW mode is an optional automated weaning, and progressively reduces the pressure support, monitors for readiness-to-wean criteria, and provides the option to automatically conduct a fully controlled SBT. In the QW mode, when the spontaneous rate is less than the upper limit of the predicted target range, %MV is automatically decreased gradually to the selected level. To facilitate the recovery of VT by means of the loading work on respiratory muscles, we set the level of support to 70%MV for the QW mode. When spontaneous breathing satisfied the pre-determined conditions of oxygenation and ventilation for 1 min, the SBT mode was used. We operated the SBT mode during the day from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
In the QW mode, the duration of 70%MV and SBT time (25%MV) increased gradually . Twenty-two days after the introduction of the QW and SBT modes in association with intensive pulmonary rehabilitation, SBT was running almost fully during the daytime. At this time, the expiratory VT was increased to 350 mL from 150 mL upon admission to our hospital. Thereafter, we withdrew the pressure support ventilation during the nighttime 39 days after the introduction of the auto-weaning mode, and the patient’s weaning process was completed.