A 46-year-old Filipino woman was admitted to the hospital because of easy fatigability. She observed oligomenorrhea, decrease in libido and progressive coarsening of facial features, which started nine years ago . There was enlargement of digits on all extremities. Along with these clinical features, she noted progressive fatigability, orthopnea and bipedal edema. There was no headache or blurring of vision. There was no focal weakness or sensory loss. She was recently diagnosed with hypertension and diabetes mellitus. On physical examination, she has frontal bossing, nasal and mandibular enlargement, thickened lips and teeth separation. There was left ventricular heave and displaced apex beat at 6th left intercostal space anterior axillary line without any audible murmur. There is bipedal edema. On neurologic assessment, there was no visual field defect, motor and sensory loss nor sign of increased intracranial pressure.
Growth hormone assay 1 hour after 75-gram oral glucose intake was elevated (> 34.90 μg/L). Serum prolactin was elevated (38.57 μg/L in 1:100 dilution). Serum TSH, free T3 and free T4 were normal. Fasting blood sugar was 9.3 mmol/L and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C) was 9.86%. Left atrial enlargement and left ventricular hypertrophy were apparent on the electrocardiogram tracing. Severe systolic dysfunction (22% ejection fraction) was seen in the echocardiogram . Pituitary macroadenoma was seen in the Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) with foci of intratumoral hemorrhages suggestive of subclinical pituitary apoplexy. Furthermore, there were subacute to chronic subcortical infarcts with hemorrhagic foci in the left frontal lobe .
The patient has a very high risk of developing perioperative complications because of her poor cardiovascular status. Anticoagulation, though indicated, was temporarily withheld due to the pituitary and cerebral hemorrhages. Subclinical pituitary apoplexy was managed conservatively with steroids. Primary medical therapy is most appropriate in this patient after multidisciplinary discussion. Based on current evidences available, Somatostatin Receptor Ligands (SRLs) are the first line medical treatment for GH-secreting pituitary adenomas. Dopamine agonists, however, can be an alternative considering the issues of availability and cost.
Cabergoline 0.5 mg tablet once a week was started. After 6 weeks of treatment, growth hormone level (after 75-gram oral glucose) decreased to 20.6 μg/L despite no appreciable decrease in the size of the pituitary mass. There was no deterioration of cardiovascular function. The addition of SRL octreotide to cabergoline is highly considered on follow-up of this patient.