A 72-year-old female developed subacute numbness, severe pain and muscle weakness in the left lower extremity. Her symptoms gradually worsened, and she was admitted to our hospital five months after the onset of symptoms. She could not extend her left hip and knee joints because of pain in the left thigh to the knee. She also had muscle weakness in her left leg; manual muscle testing revealed grade 5/2 weakness (right/left) in the quadriceps, 5/2 in the hamstrings, 5/1 in the tibialis anterior and 5/3 in the gastrocnemius. The left patellar and bilateral Achilles tendon reflexes were absent. The Babinski sign was negative on both sides.
Laboratory examinations revealed that the serum soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) level was 445 U/mL (reference value, 220–530 U/mL), and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed mononuclear cell-predominant pleocytosis, with a cell count of 104/µL (< 5/µL) and an elevated protein concentration of 239 mg/dL (< 43 mg/dL). The sIL-2R level in the CSF was 590 U/mL. The CSF cytology showed only minor atypia due to inflammation. There were no malignant cells. MRI of the lumbar spine showed an enlarged lumbar plexus, which continued to the cauda equina via the L3 and L4 spinal nerves. The enlarged nerves showed marked contrast enhancement . Gallium scintigraphy showed no abnormal findings other than physiological accumulations.
We strongly suspected malignancy because of localized nerve root lesions with strong enhancement on MRI and severe pain. The patient refused biopsy of the enlarged nerve because of the risk of neurological sequelae. Ten months after the onset of symptoms, she was readmitted to our hospital because of paraplegia and sensory loss in both lower extremities with sphincter impairment. In the follow-up MR study, the enlarged cauda equina was tangled and filled the spinal canal space , and the spinal cord was swollen with intracord T2 high signal intensity, which continued from the lumbar to the cervical level. At that time, a CSF examination was impossible because of the decreased spinal canal space. She underwent a cauda equina biopsy, and the intraoperative findings showed that the cauda equina was surrounded by a soft solid tumor. Histopathological analysis revealed that medium-to-large B-lymphoid cells filled the subdural space and subarachnoid interstitial tissue and infiltrated peripheral nerve bundles . Immunostaining showed that the atypical lymphoid cells were positive for CD20, CD10, MUM1, bcl2 and bcl6 but negative for CD5, CD23, CD43, CD56 and CD138 . Ki-67 was positive in almost all viable neoplastic cell nuclei (Supplementary Figure ). The patient was diagnosed with DLBCL of the GCB subtype according to the recent pathological classification by the WHO and Hans et al. [, ] The left mammary cyst, which had been identified 20 years prior, was biopsied, and similar pathologic features were confirmed. The patient underwent two courses of high-dose methotrexate therapy. However, unfortunately, she succumbed to bacterial pneumonia 13 months after the onset of symptoms.