The patient is a previously healthy 22-month-old girl without perinatal abnormalities or personal or family history of seizure. The patient had not been to any nursery school prior to the event. She had two siblings, 11 and 5 years old, who had no respiratory symptoms. Clonic seizure of the patient’s right side commenced 12 h after fever development, followed by generalized tonic and tonic-clonic seizures without self-resolution. The seizure activity had persisted for 40 min when the patient arrived at our emergency room (ER) by ambulance. Spontaneous breathing was absent with SpO2 of 50% upon ER arrival. Bag valve mask (BVM) ventilation supplied with 100% oxygen was commenced immediately, and SpO2 increased to 92%. The seizure activity was terminated by intravenous administration of 0.2 mg/kg of midazolam and 2 μg/kg of fentanyl. Her vital signs upon seizure termination were as follows: Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 3 (eyes 1, verbal 1, motor 1), pupils 3 mm in diameter and reactive to light stimuli bilaterally, body temperature 38.2 °C, heart rate 185 beats per minute (bpm), systolic blood pressure 107 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure 60 mmHg, and SpO2 99% under BVM ventilation with 100% oxygen supplementation. The patient remained apneic, and SpO2 quickly dropped to 50% when BVM ventilation was temporally interrupted. Venous blood gas analysis revealed respiratory and metabolic acidosis. An endotracheal tube of 4 mm in diameter was inserted for airway protection. Copious pink frothy airway secretions were identified upon intubation, and the discharge continued until the application of mechanical ventilation with positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 6 cmH2O. SpO2 was maintained above 95% after introduction of mechanical ventilation. There were no apparent injuries or hemorrhage in the oral and nasopharyngeal cavities, nor was there laryngeal edema or airway obstruction.
Chest auscultation revealed bilateral coarse crackles, but no heart murmur was detected. An abdominal examination revealed no hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. Chest radiography showed bilateral, centrally distributed opacities without cardiac dilation . Echocardiography demonstrated normal cardiac wall motion with ejection fraction of 69% and non-pathological trivial tricuspid regurgitation. An electrocardiogram revealed sinus tachycardia of 151 bpm without significant ST-T changes, atrial overload, or ventricular hypertrophy. Laboratory examinations revealed a mildly elevated white blood cell count, hyperglycemia, hyperammonemia, acidemia, hypercapnia, and lactic acidosis . Creatine kinase (CK), platelet count and coagulation times were within normal limits. Computed tomography (CT) of the head revealed no abnormal findings, and continuous electroencephalography (EEG) findings did not suggest encephalopathy. A cerebrospinal fluid examination revealed no elevation in cell counts. Rapid immunochromatographic tests of nasopharyngeal specimen for influenza A and B viruses were negative.
Hypercapnia resolved after introduction of mechanical ventilation, and SpO2 was maintained above 95% with PEEP of 6 cmH2O and FiO2 of 0.3 or less. Pink frothy airway secretions persisted for 6 h after endotracheal intubation and then spontaneously resolved. Intravenous administration of 300 mg/kg/day of ampicillin/sulbactam (ABPC/SBT) and 20mf/kg/day of acyclovir (ACV) were empirically initiated. The patient was managed under continuous infusion of midazolam and EEG monitoring. There was no recurrence of seizure activity, and the patient became responsive without apparent neurological deficit nine hours after admission. The midazolam infusion was terminated, and the patient was extubated uneventfully 10 h after admission. There was no sign of respiratory distress after extubation, and the oxygen therapy was terminated when improvement of chest radiograph findings was confirmed on hospital day 2 . Blood, cerebrospinal fluid, and urine cultures were all negative for bacteria. Tracheal secretion cultures were positive for methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus, although the patient revealed no sign of bacterial pneumonia. Real-time PCR analysis did not reveal herpes simplex virus in cerebrospinal fluid, or human herpesviruses 6 and 7 in serum. ABPC/SBT and ACV were terminated on hospital day 6, and the patient was discharged. The follow-up EEG examination at one month after discharge was normal and the patient remained free of complications.
Molecular biological diagnostic assays were conducted for comprehensive detection of viral pathogens from the patient’s nasopharyngeal specimens collected upon admission and on hospital day 2. The BIOFIRE FILMARRAY Respiratory Panel (bioMérieux, France) and real-time RT-PCR were used to target predefined respiratory pathogens, and metagenomic RNA-Seq using NGS was performed to detect pathogens in unbiased fashion [–]. The BIOFIRE FILMARRAY Respiratory Panel (BioMérieux, France) does not targeting influenza C virus (FluC), however, it detected human coronavirus HKU1 (hCoV-HKU1) and human parainfluenza virus 2 (HPIV2) from the initial specimen. Real-time RT-PCR is an assay targeting 19 respiratory viruses including FluC. It identified hCoV-HKU1, FluC, and HPIV2 with quantification cycles (Cq) values of 21.5, 19.7, and 36.4, respectively. The following respiratory pathogens were not detected by BIOFIRE FILMARRAY Respiratory Panel or by real-time RT-PCR assay; influenza A (subtype H1pdm and H3), influenza B, human metapneumovirus, human respiratory syncytial viruses A and B, human bocavirus, rhinovirus, human respiroviruses 1 and 3, human parainfluenza virus 4, human adenoviruses (including 2 and 4), human coronaviruses NL63, OC43, and 229E, Bordetella pertussis, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae. NGS revealed hCoV-HKU1 and FluC, but HPIV2 was not identified. A nasopharyngeal specimen collected on hospital day 2 was analyzed by real-time RT-PCR, revealing hCoV-HKU1 and FluC with Cq values of 30.0 and 25.9, respectively, but HPIV2 was not detected.