A 49-year-old woman was referred to the clinic for severe left lower abdominal pain with left back pain occurring in the last two months.
The patient presented with a history of gradually enlarged, painless multiple uterine leiomyoma for 10 years, and the left lower abdominal pain was progressively aggravated without menstrual changes, menorrhagia or dysmenorrhea, despite the administration of antalgic and anti-inflammatory drugs.
The patient had not received any hormonal treatments and had undergone extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy for right renal calculus at the age of 39 years.
The patient was gravida 1, para 1, with a history of vaginal delivery. Her mother and two sisters had no history of gynecological diseases, and her other family history was noncontributory.
Physical examination revealed a large uterus with a size similar to that at 4 mo of gestation as well as slight tenderness in the left adnexal area and positive percussion pain in the left lumbar region. Other physical assessments were negative.
Laboratory analysis showed a blood hemoglobin concentration of 89.0 g/L, a slightly raised cancer antigen serum cancer antigen 153 (CA153) (36.9 U/mL; reference range: < 31.3 U/mL). Urinalysis revealed microhematuria with urinary occult blood of 3+, urinary protein 2+, red blood cell count of 1849.8 μL and white blood cell count of 1590.4 μL. Human papillomavirus (HPV)-testing of cervical cells with polymerase chain reaction showed positivity for HPV type 52, and a thinprep cytology test revealed a high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion, which was subsequently confirmed via colposcopy. Other laboratory parameters, including tumor markers [carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), CA199, CA125, CA242 and CA724], were within normal limits.
Transvaginal ultrasonography detected an enlarged uterus at 4 mo of pregnancy and a 5-cm, irregular pelvic mass in the left adnexal area, which was suspected to be a tumor. The transverse computed tomography (CT) showed a heterogeneous pelvic-abdominal uterus with a 5 cm × 4 cm × 3 cm mass in the left adnexal area that was unevenly enhanced after contrast medium injection. The exam also showed a markedly dilated left ureter and renal pelvis, right ureteral calculus and bilateral renal hydronephrosis . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also revealed an irregularly enlarged uterus with a slightly hypodense mass measured at approximately 53 mm × 39 mm in the left pelvic cavity with peripheral strengthening and central necrosis after enhancement, as well as multiple cervical cysts and a low volume of effusion observed in the pelvic cavity. No inguinal, pelvic or para-aortic lymphadenopathies, peritoneal implants or hepatic metastases were detected.