A 43-year-old male Chinese Han patient reported a 9-month history of repeated nocturnal awakenings caused by painful erections after midnight, with an average of 4–5 episodes per week, lasting for 5–10 min. This pain that was located inside the erect penis could be relieved with urination, out-of-bed activity, and cooling the penis. He was able to fall back asleep only to have the pain wake him again. Sleep loss and poor-quality sleep caused excessive daytime sleepiness, anxiety, insufficient concentration, irritability, and extreme fatigue. The patient felt very miserable because it seriously affected his normal work and life. He reported being satisfied with his sexual life and had not noticed any negative change in the quality of his erections or ejaculations since the onset of symptoms. There was no context of a significant social, family, professional, or personal experience occurring before or at the onset of the symptoms. He had no history of hypertension, diabetes, urinary or sexually transmissible infections, and taking any testosterone supplements or sexual stimulants. Examination of the external genitalia was normal. Penile artery ultrasound and serum prostate-specific antigen and testosterone were normal. Physical and urinary examinations were performed, yielding results of no clinical relevance. Abdominal ultrasound showed a mild enlargement of the spleen (2 cm below rib margin). The full blood count result revealed an abnormal increase in white blood cells (White blood cell, WBC, 123 × 109/L; Red blood cells, RBC, 5.21 × 1012/L; Platelets, PLT, 365 × 109/L), and repeat check-up results were still unusual (WBC 125 × 109/L, RBC 5.50 × 1012/L, PLT 359 × 109/L). The patient was diagnosed with SRPE. Due to high suspicion of CML, he was then referred to the hematology department for a bone marrow cytology and Ph chromosome and BCR::ABL1 fusion gene testing. Bone marrow smear results were: percentage of granulocyte red increased to 6.5:1. Most of the proliferated granulocytes were intermediate granulocytes, late granulocytes, and rod-shaped nuclear granulocytes . BCR::ABL1 fusion gene: P210 BCR/ABL (IS) was 43.439%, Ph chromosome: 46, XY, t (9; 22) (q34; q11) [10]. . The patient was diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukemia, chronic phase (Sokal score, low-risk group). The therapeutic goals of CML are to prolong survival, reduce disease progression, improve quality of life, and achieve treatment-free remission (that is, withdrawal). For this young patient who was expected to discontinue the drug, we chose the second-generation TKI drug (nilotinib 300 mg, twice a day), which can quickly obtain deep molecular response and reach the threshold of discontinuation. A total of 2 weeks after treatment, the patient’s leukemia count decreased (WBC 50 × 109/L) and he was discharged. At 3-month follow-up, the frequency of erectile pain was significantly reduced from 4–5 to 0–1 times per week. In September, the patient’s leukocyte count decreased (WBC 4.6 × 109/L) and bone marrow smear results were normal . BCR::ABL1 fusion gene: P210 BCR/ABL (IS) was 0.1475% and Ph chromosome: 46, XY [20] . The patient is still being followed-up regularly.