A 59-year-old male had a long history of coronary artery disease (CAD) and had undergone CABG 16 years before. Concurrent comorbidities included obesity (body mass index 33.4), Type 2 diabetes (T2DM), hypercholesterolaemia, sleep apnoea, and ankylosing spondylitis. The patient quit smoking 16 years before presentation but had smoked for 25 years prior to quitting.
The contemporaneous symptoms coincided with upper-limb steal syndrome, i.e. numbness and impaired function of the left fingers, hand, and arm. These symptoms persisted even without significant physical exertion. Blood pressure levels of the left limb were 30 mmHg lower than those of the right limb. Daily medication at the time of admission comprised bisoprolol, isosorbide mononitrate, aspirin, metformin, rosuvastatin, meloxicam, and buprenorphine patch, all within the recommended dosages.
Myocardial perfusion imaging with positron emission tomography (PET) showed a perfusion defect. However, there was no significant stenosis visible in the left circumflex artery (LCX) in coronary angiography, and no suitable percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) target could be identified . A non-critical ostial stenosis on a relatively small obtuse marginal branch was visualized and left to pharmacological treatment at this point. The left subclavian artery (LSA) appeared to have a stenosis proximal to the LIMA ostium. Doppler ultrasound flow spectre in the left vertebral artery was inversed during systole , and distal LSA exhibited attenuated, collateral-type currents, as did the axillary and the radial arteries.
Diagnostics were followed by a contrast CT-angiogram of the aorta and neck vessels, which showed a partially thrombosed aneurysm at the base of the LSA with significant distal calcification and stenosis .
Imaging results outlined a thrombosed LSA aneurysm and stenosis that were causing hypoperfusion of the upper limb and the LIMA graft. The patient had near-disabling symptoms, severe CAD, and the coronary bypass graft that provided most of myocardial blood supply was at risk of losing the entire inflow.
A multidisciplinary team concluded that the procedure with the lowest risk would be a prosthetic carotid-subclavian bypass. The procedure was performed under general anaesthesia with cerebral oxygenation and oesophageal echocardiography monitoring. The patient recovered well and was discharged on the third postoperative day.
The patient reported asymptomatic upper-limb function and normal physical performance at one month after the operation. The systolic finger pressures were symmetrical and the graft(s) appeared open upon Doppler ultrasound. Three months after the procedure, the bypass graft LSA and vertebral artery showed regular contrast agent enhancement. The patient remained asymptomatic.