Thirty-years-old man presented with the chief complaint of urine leakage from rectum and fistula since 9 years ago indicated complex PFUI with iatrogenic bulbar urethral necrosis (BUN), erectile dysfunction with Erection Hardness Score (EHS) score of 1, contracted bladder, and prostatorectal fistula. He had history of road traffic accident and abundant diverse surgical procedure.
Patient underwent eight various surgical procedures from previous referral hospital. Open cystostomy had been done in January 2009 continued with panendoscopy and internal urethrotomy in 2011 that causes prostatorectal fistula. Bladder repair was done in June 2013, then patient underwent internal urethrotomy, vesicolithotomy, and cystostomy closing however patient could not spontaneously urinate, then redo open cystostomy had been done afterwards. This prolonged catheterization leads to contracted bladder. Moreover many various surgical procedures that had been done leads to inadequate blood supply consequences such as bulbar urethral necrosis and erectile dysfunction. Patient then referred to Saiful Anwar General Hospital.
In physical examination we found stoma in left hemiabdomen, 15cm midline post-operative scar on cystostomy 20 Fr and 10cm of Pfannenstiel post-operative scar, lichen sclerosus (+), and fistula on perineum. Urinalysis showed urinary tract infection with increased urine pH and leucocyte. From penile USG Doppler, arterial insufficiency suggestive to bulbar urethral necrosis was found. We performed panendoscopy and obliterated and prostatorectal fistula with internal opening at left lateral distal of verumontanum was found. We performed cystoprostatectomy and fistula repair transabdominally. Continent cutaneous stoma with ileal neobladder was performed afterwards.
After cystoprostatectomy, the continent cutaneostomy urinary diversion procedure was performed. A continent cutaneous reservoir uses a low pressure tubularized chamber formed with a functional mechanism designed to prevent involuntary discharge from urine flow. Mansoura technique in this operation consist of embedding a tapered ileal segment within a serous lined tunnel provides several distinct advantages. Continence is then provided by a passive mechanism derived from the tubular resistance of the tapered ileal segment as well as a dynamic mechanism. The mucous lining of the continent outlet tolerates the trauma of and provides a natural lubricant for intermittent catheterization. The continent outlet is enveloped within a serous lined tunnel which prevents any tendency for fistula formation that is used in this case .
The reservoir is distinguished by the type of valve mechanism made can be catheterized or not, and the intestinal segments used. The advantage offered from this diversion of urine is its ability to control urine output, but must require clean intermittent self-catheterisation (CISC) through the stoma both to excrete urine and mucous irrigate. This continent cutaneous urine diversion is still used in non-functional urethral conditions such as in the case of this bulbar urethral necrosis or intraoperative urethral margins that orthotopic urine diversion cannot be done.
On the 14th day evaluation of treatment, diagnostic procedures were performed in the form of cystography and splintography as shown in Figure 6. Good results are obtained and the patient is satisfied with the creation of a new urinary tract.
Patient was counselled and educated on how to do CISC, patient was fully satisfied with his bladder function which increase quality of life. Patient was satisfied with the result. Quality of Life follow up in first month patient life was back to normal ever since, urinate can be controlled by CISC, social life was normal. Third and sixth month of operation patient satisfied for normal bladder function life he has.