A 72 year-old Caucasian man had been on treatment for many years for severe asthma with relatively good exercise tolerance. Over a period of two years he developed increasing shortness of breath and productive cough necessitating assessment in a specialist immunology clinic. His total immunoglobulin E (IgE) was 680kIU/L and specific IgE against Aspergillus fumigatus was 14.6kUa/L. Precipitins against A. fumigatus were weakly positive (titre 1/2) without a peripheral eosinophilia. Computerized tomography revealed marked emphysema and mild bronchiectasis. Based on these results he was diagnosed with SAFS and itraconazole was commenced (Sporanox™ 200 mg twice daily). His only other medicines were formoterol fumarate (6 mg inhaler, one puff twice daily), fluticasone (500 mg inhaler, one puff twice daily) and nebulized salbutamol (2.5 mg twice daily). One month later he developed progressive bilateral ankle edema . The itraconazole level by bioassay was 17.5 mg/L (therapeutic range 5-15 mg/L) and the dosage was reduced to 200 mg once daily. A month later, peripheral edema persisted and he developed weakness of all four limbs. There were no signs of heart failure and the itraconazole level was 9.8 mg/L. Itraconazole was completely stopped leading to improvement in leg edema but limb weakness persisted. After six weeks he had become bed bound and he was referred to the tertiary neurology centre.
On admission, he had mild bilateral facial weakness. Tone was normal in his upper limbs but reduced in both his lower limbs. There was a grade 2-3/5 global weakness in both his lower limbs and grade 3/4 global weakness in both his upper limbs. He was areflexic in all four limbs. His vibration sense was absent up to his tibial tuberosity, joint position sense impaired up to the level of his metatarsal joint and pinprick sensation reduced to his mid-shin level.
Nerve conduction studies revealed globally attenuated motor and sensory responses without slowing, in keeping with a marked sensory and motor axonal polyneuropathy. Blood tests were mostly normal including a normal creatine kinase level. His lactase dehydrogenase level was mildly elevated at 490IU/L (reference range 105-333IU/L) and C-reactive protein level was 21 mg/L (reference range 0-10 mg/L). His thyroid function was normal and serum albumin level was modestly reduced, ranging from 23 to 29g/L during the illness. A sural nerve biopsy revealed mild axonal neuropathy and some evidence of regeneration, without evidence of vasculitis. A muscle biopsy (tibialis anterior) showed features consistent with an underlying neurogenic process (denervation related changes) and there was no evidence of vasculitis. Results from the examination of his cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were normal with <1 leucocyte/μL, glucose 4.8 mmol/L and protein 0.4 g/L.
No immunoglobulin G (IgG) anti-nuclear, extractable nuclear, smooth muscle, mitochondrial, reticular, gastric parietal, para-neoplastic neuronal specific, acetylcholine receptor, perinuclear-staining anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA) or cytoplasmic-staining anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (c-ANCA) were detected in his blood. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 70 mm/h (range 0-65 mm/h). His repeat total IgE was 236kIU/L with Aspergillus specific IgE reduced to 6.84kUa/L (previously 14.6 kUa/L), consistent with a good response to itraconazole. Although in the initial differential, axonal Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) was considered, the results of the investigations, particularly CSF protein, and the subsequent disease course made the diagnosis of itraconazole-induced neuropathy most likely.
Our patient received supportive care initially followed by active neurorehabilitation. Gradual improvement occurred over a two-month period and our patient was discharged. He was reviewed in clinic six months after his discharge, and was able to mobilize with the aid of two elbow crutches. The power had returned to 5/5 in his distal upper and lower extremities and 4+/5 in his proximal upper and lower extremities.