A 26-year-old Caucasian woman presented with a five day history of increasing epigastric pain and nausea two weeks after the vaginal delivery of a healthy child of normal weight and size.
Physical examination revealed a normal peristalsis and supraumbilical tenderness. A small umbilical hernia (< 1 cm diameter), with no signs of incarceration, was described by the initial examining physician. Pulse and blood pressure were normal (85 beats/min, 123/83 mmHg). She was apyrexial but adynamic, with pale and clammy skin. In summary, the general status of the patient was impaired on admission (American Society of Anesthesiologists score 2-3).
Blood tests revealed an elevated white blood cell count (14.7/nL) and serum C-reactive protein (120 mg/dL). A coagulation study (international normalised ratio, partial thromboplastin time, fibrinogen and platelet count) revealed no abnormalities.
Abdominal ultrasound showed no specific pathological findings and, for further clarification, a contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) was performed. The morphologic findings of the CT were interpreted as an incarcerated umbilical hernia by the radiologist. However, due to the clinical presentation of an acute abdomen and the elevated inflammatory blood parameters, the patient was asked to consent to an exploratory laparotomy. A small laparotomy (5 cm long midline incision around the umbilicus) was performed. Contrary to the CT findings, and in accordance to the clinical examination, no umbilical hernia could be detected intraoperatively. Surprisingly, a hemorrhagic greater omentum measuring 11 × 7.5 × 2.5 cm was discovered and resected. A small amount of sanguinous ascites was also found. On further exploration we found no adhesions or other underlying causes for the infarction, such as an external or internal hernia or a vascular pedicle.
In a retrospective repeat analysis of the CT scan, a hypoperfused mass of fatty appearance in the anterior portion of the midabdomen and small amounts of free fluid surrounding the liver were observed .
Histopathological findings of the resected omental specimen confirmed fresh hemorrhagic infiltrations of the tissue, partial thrombosis of the small vessels and, in some parts, necrotic fatty tissues with an acute inflammatory cellular infiltrate . Further laboratory testing excluded potentially underlying coagulopathy or rheumatic disease.
The patient was discharged after an uneventful recovery three days after surgery.