A 62-year-old man with metastatic melanoma developed non-bloody diarrhoea up to 20 times per day after ipilimumab and nivolumab (ipi/nivo). He had no medical history and was diagnosed with cutaneous melanoma in 2009. In September 2019, he had a tumour-induced partial intestinal obstruction. A small bowel resection was performed with the removal of a 7×4×3 cm melanoma metastasis, BRAF wild type. He declined adjuvant treatment with nivolumab but relapsed and received pembrolizumab; adoptive cell therapy with tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (ClinicalTrials.gov id NCT02278887); and finally, ipi/nivo and whole-brain radiotherapy. During pembrolizumab, he had capsule endoscopic-diagnosed duodenitis treated with peroral glucocorticoids 0.5 mg/kg/day. In July 2021, treatment with ipi/nivo was initiated. After four cycles, he had cancer progression (including lymph nodes, lung and brain metastasis) and suffered from epileptic seizures treated with prednisolone and levetiracetam.
In October 2021, 3 weeks after the last dose of ipi/nivo, the patient developed non-bloody diarrhoea up to 20 times per day (output >4 L/day), equal to grade 4 at Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) V.5.0 and was admitted to hospital. The physical examination was normal. Blood samples showed prerenal acute kidney failure (creatinine 359 µmol/L, normal range 60–105). Faecal calprotectin was 694 µg/g (normal range <50 µg/g). Stool cultures , diarrhoeagenic Escherichia coli and Clostridioides difficile; parasites; virus; antigen test for cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr were negative. CT showed increased oedema around the pancreas and the intestines. He had no abdominal pain, clinical signs of pancreatitis or adhesions after prior surgery.
An upper endoscopy and ileocolonoscopy were macroscopic normal. Biopsies were taken from all sites. Minor erosions, partial villous atrophy, increased number of lymphocytes and cryptitis were observed in the duodenum. The colon surface was flattened without ulcerations but with widespread cryptitis, intraepithelial lymphocytes and numerous crypt apoptosis. The colonic lamina propria had increased cellularity of mixed inflammatory cells with lymphocyte infiltrates. A capsule endoscopy showed signs of enteritis. Microscopic lymphocytic colitis and duodenitis induced by ICIs were diagnosed. Findings are presented in .