A 24-year-old white man, a middle-distance runner (800 m) competing at national level (seasonal best/personal best of 1 minute 52 seconds), developed severe left heel pain in the pre-season in March 2013. His maximum perceived pain intensity was 10 cm on a visual analog scale (VAS) that ranged from 0 to 10 cm, with 10 cm expressing the worst perceivable pain; the athlete had to interrupt all running activity, and severe pain was perceived even when walking or standing. He continued training with aqua jogging and cycling. He got personalized hand-crafted orthopedic gel peads. Two months later he was attended by an orthopedic surgeon, who additionally prescribed oral intake of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for 8 weeks. The athlete could continue his training but was not free from pain. When discontinuing medication in July 2013, pain returned immediately, and perceived pain intensity during walking was 10 cm on a VAS (range 0–10 cm). Eight sessions of ESWT were thus added to his treatment plan, and were conducted at a German Olympic center. He did not feel better after the treatment and reported a high level of frustration. An MRI was performed in January 2014 showing a calcaneal spur, signs of inflammation at the calcaneal tubercle, and structural changes of the plantar fascia, surrounded by a large edema (see Fig. ). In February 2014 he underwent an open plantar fasciotomy. Four weeks later he was allowed to perform the first units of regenerative running. Pain returned after approximately 1 week of training. An X-ray revealed no pathology and he was recommended to continue with soft training sessions. He received a peppering injection that reduced pain for 12 hours, and NSAIDs were re-prescribed. His running performance remained at a remarkably low level in comparison to his non-injured state, despite regular personalized training sessions. He presented himself at our out-patient clinic in July 2014 (for timeline see Fig. ).
An examination identified pain to palpation at the medial calcaneal tubercle and along the medial band of the plantar fascia. Thickening and enlargement of the proximal one-third plantar fascia was noted. Full and pain-free range of motion was noted to his ankle and foot. Standing caused moderate (VAS score, 5 cm) pain; walking caused severe (VAS score, 10 cm) pain. Latent myofascial trigger points could be found in the surrounding muscles: gastrocnemius medialis and lateralis, and tibialis posterior. Apart from these symptoms no abnormalities in his medical or family history which may have been relevant to the medical case were reported and he presented himself in a good mental condition. The diagnosis based on these findings was chronic plantar fasciitis (calcaneal spur syndrome).
He was treated with neural therapy (that is, injection of < 1 ml procaine 1%, which is a local anesthetic) of the surgical scar and along the surgical puncture channel. He lay in a supine position on a treatment table. Sessions took approximately 5 minutes. In total, three sessions (at baseline, at week 1, and after 4 weeks) were performed.
At the first treatment (March 2015), he described a slurping noise, like “if something filled up the pain origin.” Afterwards he could stand pain-free and walking (not running) was subjectively improved. After the third session the pain had been completely eliminated (VAS = 0 cm). He could return to sports at the former level. Since March 2015 no recurrence of the problem could be observed. No adverse events were observed.