A three-year-old Chinese girl came to our department in December 2016. She was born in a township hospital and had never received any physical examination until kindergarten admission. She was found to have amblyopia in the left eye at that time and was then diagnosed with congenital cataract at other hospitals, yet had never received any relevant intervention in the past. The girl was a full-term birth by a 36-year-old mother who was diagnosed with thyroid cancer 5 months after delivery. There was no history of similar complaints in the child’s family.
The girl’s physical and mental development was within normal range. Her best corrected visual acuity was 20/50 in the right eye and 20/100 in the left eye. The right eye examination was unremarkable, while in the left eye, slit lamp examination revealed posterior pole cataract and posterior capsule opacification as well as a floating horizontal vessel that connected to the tunica vasculosa lentis . Other ocular examinations did not identify any abnormalities; these examinations revealed normal intraocular pressure, cornea diameters and axial lengths, no dragged ciliary processes by ultrasound biomicroscopy, no fibrovascular stalk in the vitreous body by B-scan ultrasonography, and a healthy retina through ophthalmoscopy after mydriasis. Further fundus examination conducted by fundus photography and optical coherence tomography indicated no significant anatomical abnormalities . Altogether, a diagnosis of unilateral anterior PHPV was made.
Considering that the fetal vasculature was attached to the retrolenticular fibrous membrane and the plaque was not large enough to fill the pupil , we decided to manage this case in a conservative manner instead of performing cataract surgery. The amblyopia was treated by 6 h of daily patching the fellow eye according to Amblyopia Preferred Practice Pattern of American Academy of Pediatric Ophthalmology . Patching was conducted by applying an opaque patch to the contralateral eye and was closely monitored by her parents at home. Bimonthly follow-up examinations were arranged for her to monitor the visual acuity in both eyes as well as other ocular manifestations of the affected eye in order to adjust the treatment regimen timely.
Two months later, no changes were noted in the child’s left eye except that the blood flow in the hyaloid artery had slightly decreased ; thus, it was decided that the treatment was to be continued. On seven months’ follow-up, the displaced hyaloid artery was noted to be nearly a nonperfusion vessel . An additional movie file showed this artery in more detail (see Additional file 1).
At 19 months’ follow-up, the improvement of the visual acuity of the child’s left eye to 20/50 with correction (+ 1.00D diopter cylindrical component at 85°) proved our treatment to be useful. The regression of the floating fetal vasculature into a nonperfusion ghost vessel was also observed . Comprehensive ocular examinations were conducted, and no ocular complications were detected.
Considering the patient’s age and visual acuity, she was advised to continue the treatment for amblyopia and the daily patching time was prescribed to be 2 h. Bimonthly follow-up was suggested, and the cataract would be treated with surgery if necessary.