A 50 year-old Chinese female with a complaint of bilateral blurred vision of 2 years duration was referred to us after elevated IOP of 1 week duration was documented. History revealed no family history of glaucoma, no trauma to the head or neck, and no headache. The patient did not have diplopia, pulsatile tinnitus, nor pulsation of the orbit. She reported having persistent red eyes for over 30 years, for which she intermittently used several anti-inflammatory eye drops in both eyes (OU), all of which were ineffective.
On examination, uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) was 20/40 right eye (RE) and left eye (LE), best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 (− 1.00D OU), IOPs were 36 mmHg RE and 30 mmHg LE. Findings of the adnexa were unremarkable, ocular motility was normal and no relative afferent pupillary defect was detected. No carotid or ocular bruits were heard. Anterior segment examination revealed numerous tortuous and engorged episcleral vessels bilaterally , while the conjunctival vessels were normal with no chemosis. Anterior chambers were deep without any inflammatory reaction. Dilated fundus exam revealed optic nerve rim loss with a cup-to-disc ratio of 0.8 H × 1.0 V OU, without retinal vessel dilation or tortuosity . Axial lengths measured 23.46 mm RE and 23.58 mm LE, and an ultrasound B-scan showed no thickening of the sclera in either eye. Tubular visual field was present bilaterally but more prominent RE . Gonioscopic examination showed open angles with spontaneous blood in Schlemm’s canal 360 degrees OU . Thus, secondary glaucoma, dilated episcleral veins and refractive error were the initial diagnoses. Various anti-glaucoma eye drops were administered, while scheduling of other relevant diagnostic procedures were arranged.
Orbital color Doppler examination showed that the superior ophthalmic veins were of normal calibre in each orbit, with no reversal of flow . Head MRI with-and-without contrast was normal, without blood transfer between the cavernous sinus and intracranial artery, and without vascular malformation or space occupying lesions . Cerebral angiography, which was the most valuable method of diagnosing head or orbit vasculopathy, was also negative for arteriovenous fistula. Coronary angiography, color Doppler echocardiography and chest radiographs were within normal limits. Due to an absence of thyroid history, proptosis, ptosis and facial cutaneous angiomatosis, as well as negative radiologic findings and systemic manifestations for superior vena cava syndrome, the clinical diagnosis of glaucoma secondary to IDEV was established in both eyes.
Three days after the initial presentation (July 19, 2016), the intraocular pressure reduced to 24 mmHg RE and 21 mmHg LE with use of carteolol hydrochloride 2% and brinzolamide 1% twice a day and travoprost 0.004% at bedtime OU. Although surgery was recommended, the patient declined. After 10 days (July 29, 2016), the patient visited another hospital where micropulse diode laser trabeculoplasty (MLT) was performed on the right eye, resulting in minimal IOP decrease in the days following. When surgery was recommended again, the patient still refused. One year later (July 5, 2017), the patient was referred to us again for uncontrolled IOP 18–24 mmHg RE and 15-23 mmHg LE with medication prescribed previously, and a further decreased visual field RE . With the patient’s consent for surgery finally obtained, trabeculectomy was performed (July 7, 2017) on her right eye. 5-Fluorouracil 5 mg was injected subconjunctivally at the site of incision (25 mg/ml in a volume of 0.2 ml) immediately before the surgery. During the procedure, adjustable scleral sutures were used to close the scleral flap more tightly than usual. After surgery, in addition to antibiotic and anti-inflammatory eye drops, other topical drugs were applied to the eye, including atropine 1% daily for 2 weeks, tropicamide 0.5% one administration (5 min*4) in the morning daily for 4 weeks and prednisone acetate 40 mg daily for 7 days. The IOP decreased to 12-18 mmHg with a relatively deep anterior chamber. At day 5-postop , a diffuse but congestive bleb had formed. In response, 5-fluorouracil 5 mg was injected beneath the conjunctiva near the bleb twice a week for 3 weeks. The eyeball was massaged one to three times a day after day 7-postop. Two adjustable stitches on the scleral flap were removed on the sixth and ninth postoperative day respectively. Four months later, a similar surgical procedure was performed on the left eye. During the nine-month post-operative follow-up period for the right eye, and the five-month follow-up period for the left eye, the IOP of each eye ranged between 8 and 11 mmHg with a diffuse bleb. No apparent progression of field loss was noted, but persistent episcleral vessel dilation, as well as congestion in Schlemm’s canal, were observed.