A 5-year-old boy with a history of allergy to milk and eggs experienced frequent colds. On physical examination, the patient was well-developed and showed no signs of hypoxia, such as cyanosis. He was found to have a grade 3/6 systolic ejection murmur between the second and third intercostal space along the left sternal border. Moreover, his blood oxygen saturation of the extremities was in the normal range. The patient underwent a detailed examination before the operation including chest radiography, electrocardiography, transthoracic echocardiography, computed tomography (CT), three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction and 3D printing of the heart and great blood vessels, and detailed laboratory examination. The patient's chest radiograph showed a slight swelling of the pulmonary artery. Transthoracic echocardiography showed three secondary atrial septal defects, and that a part of the right hepatic vein and inferior vena cava drained into the left atrium . The 3D reconstruction and 3D printing models showed the following abnormalities: there were three atrial septal defects (one of fossa ovalis type, one near the superior vena cava, and one near the inferior vena cava); the left hepatic vein joined the middle hepatic vein, and the opening was located in the right atrium ; the right hepatic vein drained into the inferior vena cava, and the opening of the inferior vena cava was located in the left atrium . shows that two atrial septal defects could be revealed from the right atrium incision level.
During the establishment of cardiopulmonary bypass, routine aortic cannulation, superior vena cava cannulation, cold perfusion cannulation, and superior vena cava and aortic blockade were performed. Owing to the abnormality of the inferior vena cava opening, inferior vena cava cannulation was not performed. One right atrium drain and two left atrium drains were placed in the opening of the hepatic vein in the right atrium and the opening of the inferior vena cava in the left atrium through the atrial septal defect, respectively, for intracardiac blood drainage. The field was well-exposed, and the patient's blood perfusion and vital signs were good. The foramen ovale atrial septal defect was viewed directly, and the diameter was about 15 mm . The left hepatic vein joined the middle hepatic vein, and the opening was located in the right atrium . During the operation, the interatrial septum was cut off, and we found the right hepatic vein draining into the inferior vena cava and the opening of the inferior vena cava in the left atrium next to the right inferior pulmonary vein . A transverse septum, where the inferior vena cava met the left atrium, was found . The atrial septal defect was closed by continuous suture of the bovine pericardium slice of the corresponding area with 5-0 prolene suture, and the openings of the hepatic vein and inferior vena cava were separated into the right atrium. The surgery was successful, and the patient was discharged from hospital on the fifth postoperative day. A postoperative echocardiogram performed on the third postoperative day demonstrated that there was no residual atrial shunt, and the blood supply to the heart from the IVC and the hepatic veins was corrected. At the 1-month follow-up, the patient was doing well.