A 20-year-old Black male, Division 1 collegiate basketball player presented to a student health urgent care clinic with an insidious two-day history of complaint of dry cough, sore throat, and myalgias, as well as chest pain starting one day prior to evaluation. He described his chest pain as an “achy pressure,” radiating down his right arm, intermittent and worse with deep inspiration and laying supine. He denied smoking cigarettes or marijuana but did vape frequently. He had no recent injury, chest exercises, or concern for musculoskeletal injury, or history of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or PE. The most recent airplane flight was approximately three hours long and greater than six weeks prior to presentation. He had no leg swelling. He had a remote history of right knee arthroscopic meniscus repair seven months prior. He had a history of acid reflux controlled through diet. His vital signs were normal (pulse 79 beats per minute, blood pressure 111/88 millimeters of mercury, respiratory rate 15 breaths per minute, temperature 36.8° Celsius, oxygen saturation 99%). Due to concern for cardiopulmonary pathology, he was sent to the emergency department (ED) for further evaluation.
On arrival to the ED, his vital signs were again normal. He appeared acutely ill and in mild distress. There was no edema to the lower extremities and he did not report leg pain to the emergency providers. His physical exam was otherwise unremarkable. Complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, and troponin were found to be within normal limits. Additional lab work included elevated D-dimer of 592 nanograms (ng) per milliliter (mL) (normal <232 ng/mL). A D-dimer was ordered because of the patient’s status as an athlete. PERC may not have applied due to concern that his presenting heart rate may have been above his baseline. Electrocardiogram and plain chest radiography at the time were normal. A point-of-care echocardiogram showed no evidence of right heart strain and no pericardial effusion.
Given his concerning presentation and abnormal lab work, computed tomography (CT) angiography of the chest was performed demonstrating PE involving the right posterior basal segmental pulmonary artery with associated hemorrhage vs developing pulmonary infarct . He was started on heparin infusion and admitted for further evaluation. After diagnosis of PE was made, the admitting hospitalist noted that there was tenderness along his posterior knee and distal thigh, as well as pain with active and passive range of motion of his knee. These exam findings were not noted in the initial provider’s documentation.
During his hospital course he underwent venous duplex imaging, which was negative for lower extremity DVT, and transthoracic echocardiogram was normal. His oxygen saturations remained above 97% and his highest documented heart rate was 79 beats per minute. His hypercoagulability workup was negative except for equivocal lupus anticoagulant. No clear provoking factors were identified, as his surgery was over six months prior to presentation, and he had no recent team flights or travel in the prior one month. His chest pain and shortness of breath improved on day two of his hospital stay. He was transitioned to apixaban for anticoagulation and discharged home with precautions not to participate in contact sports.
At his three-month follow-up with hematology/oncology, he was found to have a persistently elevated D-dimer and underwent repeat CT angiography of his chest. The CT showed focal right lower lobe opacity consistent with scarring but no residual PE. He was no longer experiencing chest pain or shortness of breath. Additional hypercoagulability workup including protein C, S, and cardiolipin antibody, and beta-2 glycoprotein was negative as well. The PE was ultimately determined to be provoked from either his airplane travel six weeks prior or his arthroscopic meniscus repair seven months prior. He was taken off of anticoagulation and cleared for participation in contact sports. He was instructed to take 81 milligrams aspirin on days of team travel if on a bus or plane. He was able to make a full recovery and returned to competitive Division I basketball.