In October 2015, a 51-year-old lady was admitted to Zhujiang Hospital because of a change in her bowel habits that had been going on for more than six months. Six months ago, she noticed an increase in the frequency of her bowel movements, which were typically thin and unformed stools with two to three drops of blood after the stool, and she also had a feeling of anal drop before defecation, tenesmus and endless defecation. Thirteen years ago, she underwent a total hysterectomy for uterine fibroids. The patient had a history of diabetes mellitus and was advised to control her diet without taking medications. There were no other comorbidities. There was no history of alcohol or tobacco abuse and no family history of hereditary disorders. On examination, the patient was found to have tenderness pain in the lower abdomen, and rectal palpation revealed a mass of approximately 3×3 cm on the right posterior wall of the rectum 7 cm from the anus. There were no abnormal findings on physical examination of other systems.
A recent colonoscopy performed on the patient at the local hospital revealed a cauliflower-like mass located 7 cm from the anus, blocking the bowel lumen and restricting access to the colonoscope. Pathological analysis of the specimen indicated rectosigmoid junction cancer. The patient had elevated tumor markers, with blood levels of 85.2 μg/L for CEA and 82.1 kU/L for CA199. Body CT showed significant local bowel luminal narrowing, a soft tissue mass shadow with uneven density and enhancement, and significant thickening of the bowel wall at the junction of the rectum and sigmoid colon. Many enlarged lymph nodes were seen around this section of the bowel. The results of the abdominal CT and chest x-ray ruled out liver and lung metastases. According to the patient’s condition and her wishes, we performed a laparoscopic radical surgery for rectal cancer. Intraoperative exploration revealed a 5cm × 4 cm mass in the right wall of the rectum, which penetrated the plasma membrane layer and was strongly adherent to the right peritoneum and ovary. Two white metastatic cancer nodules could be seen at the top of the vagina. The right ovary and metastatic cancer nodules were also removed simultaneously with the consent of the family and with the assistance of the gynecology department. The postoperative pathology revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the rectum with a mucinous component, infiltrating the entire intestinal wall, invading the vasculature and nerves, with metastatic cancerous tissue visible in the mesenteric lymph nodes (4/14) and metastatic tissue from the right ovary. The patient’s final diagnosis was a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the rectum (pT4bN2aM1b stage IV). Immunohistochemistry showed CK (+), CDX-2 (+) and approximately 30% P53 in cancer cells. The patient had a microsatellite stable tumor microenvironment (TME) (MSS: MLH1 (+), MSH2 (+), PMS2 (+)) and Ki-67 approximately 40% (+). Genetic testing suggested mutations at the G12D locus of the KRAS gene.
The first and second surgeries: In October 2015, the patient underwent laparoscopic radical surgery for rectal cancer and right ovariectomy. This was followed by six rounds of the XELOX (oxaliplatin and capecitabine) chemotherapy. However, 22 months after the surgery, the patient underwent a pelvic CT and plain and enhanced MRI at follow-up, which showed that the metastases had progressed and that there was a significantly larger mass anterior to the left external iliac artery than previously seen. In August 2017, laparoscopic exploration revealed a 3cm × 4cm irregular mass in front of the left iliac vessels, completely encapsulating the left ovary below, so the left ovary and metastases were removed. And six cycles of FOLFIRI (irinotecan, 5-FU, and calcium folinic acid) chemotherapy were started after the procedure.
The third surgery: At review in November 2019, imaging showed an occupying lesion on the right side of the anastomosis, poorly demarcated from the right wall of the vaginal stump, invading the surrounding tethered fascia and the right levator ani muscle, and tumor recurrence was considered. Once the diagnosis was clear, the patient was localized for radiotherapy and treated with local radiotherapy and a second-line chemotherapy regimen: FOLFIRI and bevacizumab. Due to 2 or 3 loose stools per day with painful bowel movements, the patient returned to hospital in March 2021. Since non-surgical treatment could not remove the lesion and prolong life, we performed a laparoscopic partial rectal resection and sigmoid colostomy for her.
The fourth surgery: In June 2021, a review revealed that the occupying lesion on the rectal stump continued to progress and increase in size, and tumor recurrence was considered. After multidisciplinary discussion, the final decision was made to perform abdominal radiofrequency ablation and particle implantation in collaboration with the interventional and radiology departments. The multidisciplinary consultation agreed that the patient’s lesion had progressed after previous first- and second-line treatment, and that she should be switched to third-line therapy with regorafenib, while TAC102 could be considered.
The fifth to seventh surgeries: At the follow-up in July 2022, a rectal stump mass was again observed, together with an extended invasive lesion on the right side of rectal stump. Considering that almost all medical drugs had failed to control the disease, and radiotherapy and particle implantation had failed to control the tumor progression, we proposed pelvic exenteration to the patient after discussion with the multidisciplinary team. We actively sought the patient’s opinion and her main concern was to remove the tumor and reduce the threat to her life. She was willing to undergo aggressive surgical treatment and accepted our proposal. Therefore, we performed pelvic exenteration (transsacral resection of rectum, anus, bladder, vagina and sacrum) for the patient. Due to the large size of the surgical wound which was difficult to heal on its own, we performed a free myocutaneous flap graft and skin and subcutaneous necrotic tissue debridement on the lower back in September 2022. (, ).
By 2023-1, the patient had been diagnosed with advanced rectal cancer for more than 7 years, had undergone 7 surgeries, and had survived up to 86 months. The patient’s tumor markers were not elevated during regular post-operative follow-ups after pelvic exenteration. The patient’s psychological burden was greatly reduced when we informed her that the tumor was most likely to be completely removed. Although she lived with a fistula bag after surgery, she was able to live independently with little restriction in general physical activity at our follow-up. We carried out the FACT-C (Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Colorectal) test for the patient and her quality of life was quite satisfactory.