A 27-year-old pregnant Caucasian woman (gravida 2, para 1) was referred to our center at 28 weeks of pregnancy due to the presence of megacystis and bilateral hydronephrosis on routine ultrasound, which suspected LUTO. At this time, the amniotic fluid index (AFI), lung status and the presence of a clear “keyhole sign” due to posterior urethral dilatation were not mentioned in the report. Previous ultrasound examinations at 20 and 24 weeks' gestational age were completely normal. The family history revealed a sister with a horseshoe kidney and a nephew with unilateral pyelectasis. A repeat ultrasound at our center at 29 (6/7d) weeks of gestation showed significant fetal ascites with an elevated diaphragm and thoracic compression. Oligohydramnios was present with an AFI of 2.7 cm. Urinary tract evaluation showed significant bladder wall thickening (6.2 mm) but the resolution of previously observed megacystis and hydronephrosis, suggesting a spontaneous bladder rupture with the onset of urinary ascites. The renal parenchyma appeared normal. The patient was admitted for cardiotocography (CTG) fetal monitoring, initiation of corticosteroid therapy for fetal pulmonary maturation, and further work-up.
Initially, a minimal invasive approach was chosen to avoid vesico-amniotic shunt (VAS) placement, which has a relatively high complication rate. Percutaneous ultrasound-guided fetal ascites puncture was performed with the aspiration of 420 ml of fluid, followed by amnio-infusion of 250 ml. Analysis of the urinary ascites showed a normal male karyotype and a β-2-microglobulin value of 2.1 mg/L, indicating good renal prognosis. MRI confirmed previous ultrasonographic findings of spontaneous bladder rupture with fetal urinary ascites compressing the thoracic cavity . There were no signs of pulmonary hypoplasia, and the kidneys appeared normal. Despite ascites aspiration, a repeat ultrasound at 30 (4/7d) weeks showed an increasing fetal abdominal circumference with persistent ascites and oligohydramnios. Fetal Doppler ultrasound showed a decreased venous return with presence of pulsatile flow in the inferior vena cava and a continuous elevated fetal heart rate between 150 and 170 beats per minute, leading to cardiac decompensation. Due to these cardiovascular changes, the decision was made for repeat ascites drainage and peritoneo-amniotic shunt placement. Because of the spontaneous rupture, bladder filling was insufficient for classic VAS placement. Due to the lack of experience with this procedure in our hospital, the intervention was performed at a tertiary center fetal surgery department. Fetal ultrasonography one day post-operatively showed no residual ascites, correct stent position, absence of hydronephrosis, and normalization of the AFI to 10.8 cm. The patient was transferred back to our center for further follow-up and perinatal care.
At 34 (6/7d) weeks, relapse of the megacystis was observed with bilateral pyelectasis and oligohydramnios (AFI 2.4 cm), possibly due to healing of the bladder rupture, after which elective cesarean section was planned. The male infant weighed 2370 g with Apgar scores of 9 and 10 at 1 and 5 minute, respectively, and there was no need for supportive measures. A 6 Fr transurethral bladder catheter was placed with drainage of 90 ml of urine, and amoxicillin uroprophylaxis was initiated. Inspection of the peritoneo-amniotic shunt showed prolapse of intra-abdominal tissue . Exploratory surgery showed the tissue to be a part of omentum, which was resected. The shunt was removed, and the abdominal wall defect was closed.
Cystography performed 1 week after birth confirmed the diagnosis of PUV, and also confirmed resolution of the bladder rupture and a right-sided grade I vesico-ureteral reflux (VUR) . An 8 Fr transurethral catheter was left in place which was changed for a 10 Fr catheter one week later to allow cystoscopy and PUV resection with a 9.5 Fr resectoscope at the age of one month, using cold knife incision at the 5 and 7 o’clock positions. The bladder catheter was removed on the first post-operative day, after which there was good micturition and absence of post-void residual volume (PVR). Ultrasonographic follow-up showed resolution of hydronephrosis and gradual decrease of bladder wall thickening over the following months. At 3 months of age, uroprophylaxis was changed to nitrofurantoin. Dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) scan and Cr-ethylenediaminetetraaceticacid (EDTA) study at 6 months showed normal kidneys with symmetrical function and good absolute renal clearance of 71.9 ml/minute/1.73 m2. At 12 months, in consultation with the child’s parents, a repeat cystography was performed instead of a second look cystoscopy to avoid general anesthesia and to evaluate both the presence of residual PUV and VUR. The exam showed no residual PUV and there was minimal residual gr I VUR on the right side . Therefore, uroprophylaxis was terminated.
Six-monthly follow-up with urinary tract ultrasonography and urinary sample was normal, and a repeat Cr-EDTA study at three years showed normal renal clearance of 151 ml/minute/1.73 m2. We have a total follow-up of 8 years, which has continued to show normal ultrasonographic findings and renal function. However, we report the presence of bladder dysfunction, manifesting as overactive bladder with daytime urinary incontinence, low bladder capacity and nocturnal enuresis. Standard urotherapy was initiated with limited result. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) was started as a second line treatment since the parents preferred to avoid medical treatment. There was a positive evolution of symptoms with increasement of the bladder capacity to approximately 300 ml, however with persisting urgency and urgency-incontinence. Anticholinergic therapy (oxybutynin, 2.5 mg two times daily) showed better results with resolution of the urinary incontinence. Currently, anticholinergic treatment is still ongoing and dose de-escalation is planned.