A 65-year-old right-handed woman was referred for evaluation of daily headaches occurring for a 3-week period. Her headaches were associated with nausea and vomiting. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a very large intracranial frontal fossa mass with significant bifrontal edema . She was placed on steroids and neurosurgical follow-up was arranged.
Upon presenting to the neurosurgical clinic, her headaches, nausea, and vomiting had all resolved. She denied any seizure history, balance difficulty, or speech difficulty. Her family did note that her motivation had decreased over the past few years. Her past medical history includes uterine fibroids, arthritis, and fluid retention. Her past surgical history includes a hysterectomy, tonsillectomy, and lumbar laminectomy. She has no allergies.
On physical exam, the patient was found to be neurologically intact, except a decreased sense of smell. A review of her MRI demonstrated a dural-based mass that followed the olfactory groove which was associated with an infiltrative cap-like mass that was not typical for a meningioma.
A bilateral subfrontal approach was utilized. The tumor was initially noted to be of soft consistency and to have well-defined margins. However, as the resection progressed to the superior surface of the tumor, the macroscopic characteristics changed. In this region, the tumor was noted to appear infiltrative without a clear border. A specimen from this area was sent for pathologic review. Frozen section showed numerous “small blue cells” concerning for lymphoma. At this point, the surgical resection was stopped because it was felt that the meningioma component of the tumor had been completely removed. The patient awoke from anesthesia and was noted to be neurologically intact.
Pathologic review of surgical specimens revealed two different neoplasms. The first one was a WHO grade I meningioma that comprised cells exhibiting numerous whorl formation and occasional psammoma bodies. Also, foci of dense aggregates of cells with marked nuclear enlargement and hyperchromasia were visualized. The Wright-stained cytospin showed a monoclonal population of lymphocytes with many large cells consistent with lymphoma. This specimen was further studied using flow cytometry which revealed a monoclonal population of B-cell lymphocytes. illustrates the malignant lymphoma interdigitating with the WHO grade I meningioma.
After surgical resection and pathologic review, the patient underwent an extensive work up for systemic lymphoma. She was found to be immunocompetent and free of any systemic lymphoma. Therefore, the B-cell lymphoma that was interdigitated with the olfactory groove meningioma represented a primary CNS lymphoma. She was started on treatment for a primary CNS lymphoma, which consisted of high-dose methotrexate every 2 weeks. At this time, she has completed six doses of induction treatment and now has completed seven doses of monthly maintenance treatment. She remains neurologically intact, and her Karnofsky score is 90%. Her 18-month follow-up imaging is stable without any signs of new or enlarging masses.