A 40-year-old Caucasian woman, a physician, was exposed to carbon monoxide in her one-bedroom apartment. She woke up at 3 a.m. with a severe headache, disturbed by the unusual intermittent beeps that were produced by the First Alert combination smoke and carbon monoxide detector that she had installed three months previously. She called 911 and promptly opened all of the six windows of her apartment, based on the operator’s suggestion. When New York Fire Department (NYFD) team reached her apartment, the gas supply was controlled and was turned off but the beeps from detector, accompanied with flashes and the blinking of red lights, did not cease until the batteries of the device were taken out. The NYFD found carbon monoxide (CO) levels 60 parts per million (ppm) in her home. The presentation CO level was 3.9 percent. At that moment, her blood pressure was 150/100mmHg, heart rate was 88 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute, and her temperature was 97.6°F. She had a severe headache in the frontal area, felt deep pain in the orbits, and had blurred vision, light-headedness and stabbing chest pain. She was agitated and her concentration was decreased.
The patient has no previous history of headaches, except for a similar experience three months previously when she woke up at 3 a.m. with the same symptoms, which were related to the severe continuous flow of gas from the radiator placed toward her bed. When she opened the windows, the flow of gas stopped. She was able to breathe fresh air. On the same day, when she was looking for covers for the four radiators in her apartment, the salesperson at the hardware store recommended that she buy a carbon monoxide detector. Except for this incident, she was in good health condition without any past medical illness.The patient was immediately transferred to the emergency department. While traveling, the patient was placed on a high flow of 100 percent oxygen via a mask at normal atmospheric pressure. Carbon monoxide exposure was the diagnosis. After treatment with oxygen, her vital signs were within normal limits and her blood pressure decreased from 150/100 to 140/70mmHg. She opened her eyes completely, made spontaneous movements of all extremities, became more alert, and was able to respond coherently to the questions. She was discharged from the emergency department on the same day and her headache improved the day after, but some areas at the top margin of her fingernails were completely destroyed and marked with a bite out of the border without any separation between nail bed and nail plate. The nail bed border under her fingernails showed areas of erosion instead of a curved pattern as shown in Figure . These changes occurred in all fingernail beds but prominently in the fingernails of the first and second fingers. She denied any history of trauma to her fingernails or extremities. There were no other problems such as hemorrhage, white lines, spots or deformities on the surface of the nails. The distal edge, proximal end, and lateral margins of the nails were completely normal without any evidence of paronychial infection. The fingernail beds’ color was pink, and redder and bluish at the top border. There was no pain in the nails. At the time of the 10-month follow-up examination, the nails had returned to normal .