A 39-year-old West African man who was a teacher was referred for weight loss and recent abdominal pain. He presented the following symptoms: generalized episodic abdominal pain of progressive onset that was relieved by diarrheal stools occasionally associated with rectal bleeding over the past 2 months. The patient had recurrent skin lesions of different ages on the lower limbs that had started to appear 6 months before the onset of abdominal pain. These lesions began with an inflammatory nodule that resolved within a few days with a pustule that ruptured quickly and spontaneously gave way to an ulceration whose diameter quickly reached several centimeters. The healing was spontaneous and left hypertrophic stigmata.
The patient was not a drinker or smoker and was of middle socioeconomic status. He had no personal or family medical history, especially cancer or blood or inflammatory disease. Upon admission, he had a body temperature of 37.4 °C, a pulse rate of 81 beats per minute, and a blood pressure of 110/85 mmHg. His physical examination revealed a moderate general condition, moderately colored conjunctiva, pain in the left iliac fossa, and hypogastrium without a palpated mass. The result of his rectal examination was normal. His dermatological examination demostrated objectified large, circumferential scarring lesions on both lower limbs and progressive ulceration on the posterior side of the left thigh . His Glasgow Coma Scale score was 15; he had no sensory or motor deficit, and the result of examination of his cranial nerves was normal. Biopsy of the progressive lesion showed a suppurative and inflammatory central zone with ulceration and neutrophil infiltration. The results of cytobacteriological (aerobic and anaerobic culture) and fungal studies were negative.
We concluded that these skin lesions were PG. Colonoscopy for the exploration of abdominal symptomatology revealed a necrotic and hemorrhagic budding lesion 20 cm from the anal margin, confirmed by contrast enema, which showed a narrowing of the lumen of the rectosigmoid junction. Biopsies taken during colonoscopy revealed an adenocarcinoma. An abdominopelvic computed tomographic scan revealed thickening of the rectosigmoid without associated metastases . The results of preoperative checkup (rhesus grouping; complete blood count; prothrombin time; activated cephalin time; tests for uremia, creatinemia, and glycemia; chest x-ray; and electrocardiogram) and liver checkup (serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT), serum glutamate-pyruvate transaminase (SGPT), alkaline phosphatase, gamma glutamyltransferase (GGT), total and direct bilirubin) were normal. A median subumbilical laparotomy confirmed a stenosing tumor of the rectosigmoid junction. A rectosigmoid carcinologic excision was performed with immediate colorectal anastomosis. Regular bandages were placed on the PG lesions. Postoperative treatment was initiated with ciprofloxacin 500 mg and metronidazole 500 mg twice daily for 10 days and tramadol 50 mg three times daily for 5 days. The anatomopathological examination of the surgical specimen (using hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections) confirmed the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of the rectosigmoid junction . The tumor was classified as pT2N0M0 with negative excision margins. There were no postoperative complications, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 7. No adjuvant treatment was performed. Thirteen months after the operation, all the skin lesions had healed without reemergence of new lesions, and the patient did not have metastases or tumor recurrence.