Blood-tinged sputum was observed in June 2018, which progressed to bloody sputum 2 mo later.
The 40-year-old married man noticed blood-tinged sputum beginning in June 2018, which progressed to bloody sputum 2 mo later. Therefore, he visited a district hospital where chest computed tomography (CT) showed an irregular mass over the left upper lobe of the lung with suspected pulmonary vessel invasion. In addition, endobronchial lesions caused obstructive pneumonitis and partial atelectasis of the left upper lobe of the lung . Bronchoscopy with cytology and biopsy was performed, and the pathological report demonstrated carcinoid tumors of the lung. Due to the impression of a carcinoid tumor of the bronchus of the left upper lobe of the lung, cT4NxMx, stage IIIA at least, he was referred to our medical center for further staging work-up and pre-operative evaluation.
The patient had no systematic disease or surgical history.
He was a non-smoker and did not consume alcohol. His family history was unremarkable.
The patient was considered to have a moderate nutritional status with good performance. Body weight was 80.9 kg, body temperature was 36.3 °C; respiration rate was 12 breaths/min, and heart rate was 72 bpm. Neck and head showed no palpable masses or nodules. Back and spine demonstrated no knocking tenderness.
Chest and lungs examination: No chest wall deformity, no accessory muscle respiration, and no surgical scars were observed. Auscultation showed symmetrical and free expansion, and coarse breathing sounds in the left upper field. Percussion revealed no abnormal dullness. Palpation showed symmetrical and free expansion, no tender points, and no palpable masses. The abdomen revealed normoactive bowel sounds, and was soft without tenderness.
Routine blood tests and blood biochemistry showed no significant abnormalities. Serum levels of tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen and squamous-cell-carcinoma antigen were within the normal range.
Chest CT showed an irregular mass over the left upper lobe of the lung with suspected pulmonary vessel invasion. In addition, endotracheal lesions caused obstructive pneumonitis and partial atelectasis of the left upper lobe of the lung.
Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed no evidence of metastasis. Abdominal sonography showed no evidence of intra-abdominal metastasis.
PET showed: (1) A focally intense fluorodeoxyglucose-avid lesion near the left upper lobe bronchus (maximal standard uptake value = 7.1; metabolic size: 2.0 cm) was seen, compatible with lung cancer (cT2 at least, involving the bronchus); and (2) No metastasis/malignancy associated abnormal fluorodeoxyglucose uptake was noted . Bronchoscopy showed an endobronchial tumor.