A 26-year-old male patient, not known to have any comorbidities, has a negative family history of malignancy, non-smoker, and with a history of left chest wall (7th and 8th ribs) Ewing sarcoma treated with surgical resection followed by 14 cycles of alternating Vincristine (1.5 mg/m2/dose) – Doxorubicin (37.5 mg/m2/day) – Cyclophosphamide (1200 mg/m2) – MESNA 360 mg/m2 and Ifosfamide (1800 mg/m2/day) – Etoposide (100 mg/m2/day) – MESNA (360 mg/m2) (VDC/IE Protocol) and 28 fractions of radiotherapy finished in 2008 and was declared on remission and kept on regular follow-up. On January, 2019 he presented with a right sided muscular chest pain of one-month duration associated with a non-tender mass that started to grow gradually. His initial laboratory results showed a hemoglobin 16.5 g/dl, white blood cell count of 5.8 103/μ, platelet count of 235 103/μ, and normal values for liver and kidney function tests. On physical examination, a right sided chest wall mass located close to the anterior axillary line, measuring about 5 cm in diameter. The mass was firm, non-tender, fixated to the chest wall, and without overlying skin changes. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest with contrast showed right chest wall mass involving the right tenth rib laterally with large soft tissue component indenting the liver surface. A positron electron tomography/CT (PET/CT) scan revealed a hypermetabolic mixed lytic/sclerotic bony lesion within the right 10th rib laterally associated with large heterogeneous soft tissue mass extending externally to involve lateral abdominal wall muscles and medially pushing the peritoneum medially without involvement of abdominal organs. This soft tissue mass measuring about 6 cm in maximum diameter with SUV MAX = 5 . Ultrasound guided mass biopsy was done and showed tumor cells positive for cluster of differentiation 99 and friend leukemia integration-1 suggestive of recurrent primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET)/Ewing sarcoma. The patient and his family were consulted and a multidisciplinary clinic meeting decided to proceed with three cycles of Irinotecan 36 mg that resulted in mild regression of soft tissue component of the bony lesion from 5.5 cm to 3.5 cm. he was then scheduled for surgical excision. Under general anesthesia and in a left lateral position, an oblique skin incision was done over the level of the right 10th rib. After creating a superior and inferior subcutaneous flaps, the mass was identified in the 10th rib. A wide local resection of the mass including the involved rib, with a 4 cm safety margins anteriorly and posteriorly, in addition to part of the 9th and 11th ribs, and part of the diaphragm and abdominal wall resulting in a 15 X 8 cm chest wall defect . We used a single patch of ePTFE mesh (Bard Dulex Mesh, Davol Inc., USA) for chest wall reconstruction, measuring 15 cm X 19 cm X 2 mm. After placing the mesh into a satisfactory position, a diaphragm reconstruction was done by suturing it directly along the middle part of the interior surface of the mesh using continuous runs of Ethibond Excel Polyester Suture (Ethicon, USA) . The edges of the mesh were then secured with interrupted runs of Prolene size 0 suture to the 8th and 12th ribs . Primary closure of the latissimus dorsi muscle over the mesh was done, then suturing of the subcutaneous tissue and skin. The operation had 200 ml of blood loss, did not require any blood transfusion and had a smooth course. The patient was kept in the intermediate care unit (IMU) for 24 h post-operatively and then chest tube was removed on post-operative day one with an output of 20 ml and the abdominal drain was removed on the day after with a total output of 340 ml of serosanguinous fluid. The patient was discharged on the third post-operative day with a smooth hospital-stay course. Pathology of the specimen confirmed a diagnosis of PNET/Ewing sarcoma with negative resection margins. Patient then received adjuvant chemotherapy (2 cycles of IE and 2 cycles of VDC) and radiotherapy (50.4Gy/28 fractions over II phases). Unfortunately, a year after the procedure he was found to have multiple metastatic lesions involving left subpleural space, bilateral lungs, and bone. He is currently on Cyclophosphaide and Topotecan and with good partial response and intact pulmonary function 2-years post-operatively.