A 44-year-old male with long-standing HIV infection, poor adherence to ART, and a history of successfully treated pulmonary tuberculosis was diagnosed with HF. The patient had a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 18%, MR, and TR, as indicated by specific echocardiographic parameters. These parameters included a central and holosystolic jet, mitral ring 42 mm, vena contracta width 9 mm, a velocity of 4.4 m/s, effective regurgitant orifice area (EROA) 0.4 cm2, regurgitant volume 55 mL, dilated left ventricle with a diastolic diameter of 52 mm, an indexed end-diastolic volume (EDV) of 75 mL/m2, and an EROA/EDV ratio of 0.53. The tricuspid valve was structurally normal with a velocity of 3.1 m/s, a maximum gradient of 38 mmHg, and an eccentric jet with a 16 mm vena contracta. A significant coaptation deficit was observed [in three-dimensional (3D) colour] between the septal and anterior leaflets (see , ) . Ischaemic, Chagasic, and other common causes of HF were ruled out, leading to the conclusion that HIV infection was the underlying cause of myocardial dysfunction.
Human immunodeficiency virus and HF treatment were initiated according to guidelines, but the patient exhibited a poor response. Three months later, cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator (CRT-D) placement was performed; however, symptoms and frequent hospitalizations persisted. The heart transplant protocol was initiated, and right catheterization revealed combined post- and pre-capillary PH, with a CO of 2.5 L/min, PSAP of 68 mmHg, mPAP of 48 mmHg, pulmonary artery wedge pressure (PAWP) of 22 mmHg, and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) of 5 WU , which decreased to 3 WU and mPAP to 28 mmHg after a vasodilator challenge, making HT contraindicated at that time. Despite receiving levosimendan for persistent NYHA functional class III–IV and adhering to guideline-directed medical therapy, the patient’s symptoms did not improve. In a meeting with the heart team, it was decided to perform edge-to-edge repair of the mitral and tricuspid valves to reduce PH and improve functional class. Using a femoral venous approach, a transseptal puncture was performed , and a clip was placed on the mitral valve in segments A2–P2 ( and ) (see , ) without complications. During the same intervention, the first clip placed on the tricuspid valve detached the anterior valve, necessitating the placement of a second clip in the same location . After this manoeuver, stability of both devices was confirmed (see , ).
The patient’s post-operative recovery was uneventful, and the follow-up echocardiogram showed no gradients in the valves, along with a significant reduction in regurgitation parameters ( and ) (see , ). There was an improvement in functional class (NYHA II, VO2 16%). A 6-month echocardiographic follow-up assessment revealed a PSAP of 42 mmHg, mPAP of 26 mmHg, a TR velocity of 2.8 m/s, CO 3.1 L/min, CI 1.8 L/min/m2, E/e′ ratio 4, and LVEF of 22%. The mitral clip remained in place, displaying eccentric regurgitation and mild MR (vena contracta of 3 mm). The tricuspid clip also remained in place, showing moderate TR associated with the right ventricular implantable cardioverter defibrillator (RV-ICD) wire and presenting a central regurgitation jet (vena contracta of 4 mm). Viral load was undetectable, and CD4 lymphocytes reached 876 cells/mm3 with ART. Based on these clinical and echocardiographic findings, the patient became eligible for a heart transplant. After 8 months of edge-to-edge repair of the mitral and tricuspid valves, a successful heart transplant was performed using an HIV-negative donor, with an aortic clamping time of 1 h and 14 min . Immunosuppressive therapy (basiliximab, methylprednisolone, and mycophenolic acid) was initiated 24 h after the surgical procedure. The patient’s recovery progressed favourably, leading to discharge on the 10th day of hospitalization. In collaboration with the infectious disease service, the ART was adjusted, prescribing tenofovir/emtricitabine plus dolutegravir. At the 6-month follow-up, the patient was in NYHA functional class I, the echocardiogram showed a PSAP of 29 mmHg, mPAP of 17 mmHg, normal systolic function of the left and right ventricles, and no valvular abnormalities present.