A 51-year-old male on chronic TPN for short bowel syndrome after a colectomy was admitted for sepsis and acute kidney injury. He reported a month-long history of generalized fatigue, intermittent low-grade fevers, chills, night sweats, and unintentional weight loss. On presentation, he was febrile (101.6°F), tachycardiac (HR 106 bpm), but hemodynamically stable (BP: 130/86 mm Hg) and saturating well (96%) on room air. Physical examination revealed no erythema or tenderness at the site of his peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC), through which he had been receiving TPN. No significant cardiac murmurs or sequelae of infective endocarditis were observed, and the remainder of physical examination was benign as well. Admission laboratory workup revealed a white cell count of 12,000/mm3, elevated ESR: 99 mm/hr, CRP: 139 mg/L, and creatinine: 3.56 mg/dL (baseline: 0.9 mg/dL). Urinalysis and chest X-ray were unremarkable for infection, and standard blood cultures displayed no growth of microorganisms. Electrocardiography (EKG) showed normal sinus rhythm without any conduction system abnormalities. Broad-spectrum antibacterial coverage with vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam was initiated, while micafungin was added with suspicion of fungemia given the history of TPN. Extended blood cultures from admission showed growth of Candida glabrata (C. glabrata) and Candida dubliniensis (C. dubliniensis); both species were sensitive to amphotericin-B (minimum inhibitory concentration: 0.2 mcg/ml) and micafungin (minimum inhibitory concentration: 0.12 mcg/ml). The PICC was subsequently removed; cultures from the catheter tip also grew C. glabrata and C. dubliniensis. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed an echogenic large mobile right atrial mass (4 cm × 6 cm × 2.5 cm), extending from the superior vena cava into the right atrium and prolapsing into the right ventricle and right ventricular outflow tract. There was no evidence of outflow tract obstruction. These findings were concerning for an intracardiac fungal mass versus a large thrombus. Transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) revealed similar lesions, with an additional aortic valve vegetation (1 cm × 0.5 cm) . EKGs remained unremarkable, and ophthalmologic exam was not concerning for endophthalmitis. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest showed diffuse nodular opacities in the lungs bilaterally, concerning for septic emboli. Cardiothoracic surgery was consulted for surgical intervention for the intracardiac mass. However, due to the patient's significant comorbidities and extensive size of the lesion, he was deemed a poor surgical candidate. He was, thus, treated conservatively with micafungin for 8 weeks. Following acute antifungal therapy and given the need for ongoing chronic TPN, he was started on lifelong suppressive therapy with fluconazole after sepsis resolved. Three months later, a repeat TTE showed complete resolution of the intracardiac mass without evidence of persistent vegetations, thus confirming the fungal origin of the mass .