We report a case of a 48-year-old Caucasian male patient with a past medical history of type II diabetes mellitus, obesity, dyslipidemia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and hypertension. He was initially referred to our multidisciplinary clinic for chronic lower back pain. The clinical evaluation revealed a 3-year history of chest pain caused by multiple recurrent pericarditis of unknown origin.
The patient underwent multiple para-clinical evaluations for his pericarditis, with no determined etiology. The initial transthoracic ultrasound showed a reduced ejection fraction at 33% with moderate hypokinesis of the left ventricle and left ventricular asynchrony. Subsequently, ventriculography was performed, which showed severe hypokinesis of the left ventricle, with an associated ejection fraction of 26% and no signs of mitral insufficiency. A normal coronary angiogram excluded coronary heart disease as the culprit of heart failure. Rheumatological evaluations and a search for auto-immune diseases were performed, which did not reveal any underlying disorders. With regard to lombalgia investigations, neuraxial and sacroiliac joint MRI showed evidence of facet arthritis at the levels of L3–L4, L4–L5, and L5–S1, but no signs of canal stenosis, bone lesions, or indications of ankylosing spondylitis were observed.
Our multidisciplinary pain clinic evaluated the patient for his persistent low back pain. Initially, there was no indication for spinal surgical intervention. Instead, medical treatment with interventional spine procedures was offered. Over a period of 4 years and 7 months, hydromorphone was titrated up to a maximal equivalent dose of morphine of 428 mg. Gabapentin was initiated, which was then discontinued due to the absence of a therapeutic response. Pregabalin was also tried, but the patient reported dizziness and drowsiness. Regarding co-analgesia, he was prescribed maximal doses of acetaminophen and duloxetine at 90 mg/day. With regard to his chest pain, the medical treatment for pericarditis was optimized, which improved his left ventricle ejection fraction from 26% to 40%. However, no significant reduction of his severe chest pain ensued, rated as 10/10 on the visual analog scale (VAS) despite maximal medical therapy including scheduled narcotic intake. At this point, a stellate ganglion block (SGB) was performed by an interventional pain physician, granting temporary pain relief as measured by a VAS score of 5/10, without changes in the medical management.
After a comprehensive evaluation of the patient, he was determined as an ideal candidate for SCS to address his chronic lower back pain. Due to his history of refractory pericarditis and chronic chest pain, the pain physician and neurosurgeon jointly decided to offer him the option of placing the stimulator at the cervicothoracic junction instead of the lower thoracic level. The decision aimed to target and potentially alleviate his chest pain and lower back pain. The risks of the operation and the likelihood of trial failure were thoroughly discussed. In the event of failure of the initial procedure, the possibility of a second surgical intervention to reposition the epidural paddle to the low thoracic spine was also addressed. These discussions took place separately at the pain clinic and the neurosurgeon's office. The patient was subsequently evaluated during a multidisciplinary round, and after considering all information, he provided consent for the procedure.
A 14-day trial period of SCS was conducted using an eight-contact Lamitrode® paddle with bipolar stimulation, provided by Abbott and inserted through an interlaminar approach . The configuration was optimized after multiple trials of changing the contact levels performed mainly on days 0 and 1. The programming utilized the burst mode, with 500 ms of pulse width, 50 Hz of frequency, and 0.8–1 mA of stimulation with cycling (Abbott®). During the trial, the patient reported a 60% reduction in chest pain and an 80% reduction in back pain. There was also an improvement in his sleeping pattern, with uninterrupted 5 h of sleep per night compared with his previous pattern of 1–2 h, and a reduction of equivalent dose of morphine by 164 mg, from 428 to 264 mg of daily morphine equivalent dose. Sham stimulation was conducted between days 5 and 7 of the trial period. Following the patient's evaluation, a reprogramming session was conducted, maintaining the same stimulation frequency and pulse width but setting the intensity to 0. On day 8, a clinical reassessment was performed to determine success, which is determined by the recurrence of pain or the indication of ineffectiveness compared with the initial 5-day period. This strategy has been used since the inception of our neuromodulation program and has been documented in the literature (, ).
Following a successful trial period and sham stimulation test, the spinal cord stimulator was internalized using a Proclaim internal pulse generator provided by Abbott® while maintaining the burst programming parameters. The initial follow-up was virtually conducted after 2 months, where the patient tested positive for COVID-19 and was hospitalized.
At 6 months post–SCS implantation, a transthoracic cardiac ultrasound performed on the patient showed an increase in ejection fraction to 45% despite having no changes in his previous medical treatment, and he became narcotic-free.
During the 8- and 12-month follow-ups, the patient reported consistent pain control without needing any narcotic intake. In addition, the pain relief allowed him to initiate an exercise program for weight loss.