A 66-year-old Canadian Caucasian woman presented to her family doctor in December 2012 with a 10-day history of explosive watery diarrhea. This was accompanied by an initial fever and chills for two days, abdominal cramping, nausea and poor appetite but no rectal bleeding. There had been an 8kg weight loss over the previous four months. There was no history of recent travel or infectious contacts; however she had made weekly visits to a nursing home for some months prior. Amoxicillin was prescribed for a dental infection four months previously. Approximately 14 months and again at nine months prior to this present episode, she had bouts of diarrhea lasting about one week. Past medical and family history was noncontributory. Medications included atorvastatin and diclofenac sodium/misoprostol. She looked thin and her examination showed normal vital signs, no fever and generalized abdominal tenderness, worse in the left lower quadrant. A further general physical exam was negative for other sources of infection. Lab investigations showed normal results for complete blood count, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, estimated glomerular filtration rate, glucose and liver function. Stools for culture and sensitivity and C. difficile toxin were requested. The differential diagnosis included an infectious etiology, inflammatory bowel disease or CDI. Ciprofloxacin and metronidazole were started but ciprofloxacin was discontinued following a negative sigmoidoscopy and positive C. difficile toxin test result the following day. Metronidazole was continued for 10 days along with probiotics, but severe diarrhea returned three days after finishing. Severe diarrhea recurred despite further treatment with vancomycin. Her repeat blood tests were normal apart from an increased serum calcium level of 2.7mmol/L (normal range: 2.10 to 2.55mmol/L). Her repeat C. difficile toxin test was again positive. Fidaxomicin 200mg orally twice a day was prescribed for 10 days, however symptoms recurred. Vancomycin was restarted while arrangements were investigated for out-of-province treatment with fecal transplantation.
Our patient and her husband asked their family doctor about home fecal transplantation, and had with them a copy of a journal article on home fecal transplantation by Silverman et al. . The family doctor contacted the lead author by phone for further discussion and details about the procedure. Our patient’s healthy daughter was selected as donor, and her husband was screened in the event that another donor was required. Screening tests suggested by Silverman et al. are listed in Table .
Home fecal transplant, using the protocol recommended by Silverman et al. , was done within a week, with the assistance of our patient’s husband and daughter. Vancomycin was stopped for 48 hours prior to the procedure and Saccharomyces boulardii was taken during the transplant and for 60 days after. Donor stool in the amount of 50ml, obtained immediately prior to the procedure, was added to 200ml of normal saline in a blender. The contents were blended to a ‘milkshake’ consistency and emptied into an enema bag. The mixture was administered by her family and she lay supine on her left side for five hours afterwards to prevent defecation.
Diarrhea recurred and so the transplant was repeated on day three, with her lying supine for seven hours (two hours longer than with the previous procedure). The diarrhea was resolved immediately, however both our patient and her family decided to repeat the transplant using her husband as the donor two weeks later when the symptoms returned. There was immediate resolution of the diarrhea with no further recurrence of symptoms. Her appetite and energy returned and she had gained 15lbs two months after the transplant.
She underwent further investigations for hypercalcemia during this time and subsequently underwent a parathyroidectomy for removal of a parathyroid adenoma.