A five-year-old boy presented with rapid-onset proptosis and inferior displacement of the left globe for two weeks with associated with pain and discharge. There is history of the same condition in contralateral eyes that spontaneously heal without any treatment. It was previously treated with intravenous antibiotic for three days without any improvement. There was no history of trauma, upper respiratory tract infection, sinusitis or immunosuppression. The vital signs were within normal limit. The left eye showed proptosis, periorbital edema, chemosis in all quadrants of the conjunctiva and severe exposure keratopathy . The swelling was tender and soft in consistency. Proptosis and displacement of the left globe to inferior were present. There was limitation of all movement of the globe. Examination of right eye was within normal limit. Based on history and clinical examination, clinical diagnosis of rhabdomyosarcoma was made with orbital cellulitis as differential diagnosis.
A multislice computed tomography (MSCT) scan showed lesions involving the lateral orbit and the retro bulbar space . Complete blood count showed leukocytosis with signs of infection. Systemic screening results for metastasis were negative. Consultation with ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialist confirm no clinical and radiological signs of sinusitis. A dental consultation also showed no odontogenic infection. Community acquired pneumonia (CAP) was confirmed by a pediatrician from clinical and thorax radiologic findings. A biopsy was not performed due to suboptimal condition for anesthetic procedure.
On three days' administration of broad-spectrum cephalosporin antibiotic 750 mg twice a day, there is slight improvement of the patient's condition . Patient shows resolution of clinical presentation after an additional intravenous administration of anti-inflammatory dexamethasone 5 mg twice a day for three days . The patient made a good response after additional intravenous administration of broad-spectrum aminoglycoside antibiotic 40 mg twice a day for one week . Simultaneously with intravenous therapy, an alpha receptor antagonist sympathomimetic and antibiotic were given topically to prevent further damage to the anterior segment of eyeball. After three weeks' therapy, the globe recovered, proptosis and displacement disappeared and ocular motility became normal. The visual prognosis was poor but with topical treatment, the ocular surface began to show better results. The patient’s legal guardian signed the written informed consent for publication of the case details and accompanying images. Institutional approval was not necessary.