A 49 year-old male attended a chiropractic clinic with a history of nonspecific
chronic low back pain. Upon further questioning, the patient mentioned a progressive
decrease in sense of smell and taste which was reported as complete since the last
two and a half years. Following medical consultation for this matter since a year
ago, two otolaryngologists had been consulted and both conducted nasal and
oesophageal endoscopies that were considered normal. Lifestyle review revealed an
average consumption of four alcoholic beverages daily and sometimes up to forty-eight
to seventy-two beverages weekly. The result of the CAGE questionnaire which yielded two positive answers (need to cut down on drinking (C) and
need a drink first thing in the morning (E: eyes opener)) out of four (annoyed by
people criticizing your drinking (A) and ever felt guilty about drinking (G)) was in
accordance with the patient acknowledgement of his alcohol problem. Past medical
history revealed bilateral knee meniscectomy, right carpal tunnel surgical
decompression, L4-L5 discectomy and excision of a benign cervical lipoma. The patient
reported his health status as otherwise healthy and denied the presence of any
constitutional symptoms.
Upper and lower limb neurological examination was bilaterally present, symmetric and
rated as unremarkable for deep tendon reflexes, sensation and motor strength.
Pathological reflexes were absent bilaterally. A cranial nerve exam revealed anosmia.
In accordance with diagnostic imaging practice guidelines cervical spine radiographs were ordered in light of the presence of
central nervous system sign and symptoms. The radiological examination revealed
postural anomalies, cervical degenerative disc disease and congenital non-union of
the posterior arch of the atlas. Given the patient’s age, his non-smoking
status, absence of trauma, unremitting nature of the symptoms and lack of previous
invasive investigation the chiropractor suspected a neurological compression from
internal cause. The decision was made to refer the patient to a neurologist for
further investigation of the decreased sense of smell and taste.
A computer tomography (CT) scan ordered by the neurologist upon initial assessment
revealed a 6 cm planum sphenoidale mass located in the frontal lobe, suggesting
a benign meningioma . The tumor was well circumscribed and no osseous abnormalities were
detected. The patient underwent a frontolateral craniotomy with complete resection of
the tumor mass. Post-surgical complication of a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage
through the nasal cavity occurred 3 days later. A spinal tap was initially used
to drain the CSF, but subsequent air accumulation within the intracranial cavity as
visualized on CT led to a second surgical intervention. The dural breach was repaired
through reconstruction of the anterior base of the ethmoid. No other surgical
complication was reported and the pathological analysis confirmed a diagnosis of
meningioma.
At one year follow-up, the patient did not report any neurological symptoms, except
anosmia. No further surgical complications were reported. He had no limitations to
his daily living activities and he returned back to work full time. Of interest, the
patient’s problem with alcohol resolved without treatment after the
surgery.