An 18-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital with complaint of kyphoscoliosis after birth. Her radiographs with the spine demonstrated that the Cobb angle of lumbar scoliosis was 105° (Thoracic 11 to Lumbar 4) and the distance of trunk shift was 10 cm. The kyphosis angle from T8 to L3 was 58° .
At birth, the patient was noted to have hemihypertrophy and hemangioma on her face and back. Abnormal asymmetric growth became apparent along with her age. She underwent laser therapy for her facial hemangioma at the age of 4. Three years ago, venous varicosities appeared on both lower extremities. Klippel-Trenaunay Syndrome (KTS) was diagnosed for her. In addition, the patient had a history of hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) at birth. However, the Apgar score was unclear. Her mother took some medicine for cold at her 8th week of pregnancy.
There was no family history of KTS.
Physical examination showed hemihypertrophy of the left face, trunk, lower limb . There was a port-wine stain on her back and venous varicosities on both lower limbs . Her left tonsil was swollen in 3 degrees. Her left leg was 2 cm longer than the right side. Obvious claudication was noted when she walked. Neurological examination was intact.
Positive laboratory examination results included an increased D-Dimer level of 2.02 mg/L (0~0.55, FEU), decreased hemoglobin level of 105 g/L (110–150 g/L), decreased 1,25(OH)2D3 level of 6.58 pg/mL (19.6~54.3 pg/mL), decreased Fe level of 34.7μg/dL (50~170 μg/dL), and decreased ferritin (Fer) level of 8 ng/mL (14~307 ng/mL). Thyroid function test showed increased TSH of 6.669 μIU/mL, A-Tg of 189.20 IU/mL, and A-TPO of 297.50 IU/mL. The fecal occult blood test was negative.
A computed tomographic (CT) scan of spine revealed no vertebral body deformities. Doppler ultrasound scan found no significant arteriovenous shunting. A magnetic resonance imaging of the spine showed Chiari-I-malformation without syringomyelia.
We had a consultation with endocrinologist and hematologist. However, the relation between kyphoscoliosis and other comorbidities could not be determined. Vitamin D deficiency, like other comorbidities, might be due to innutrition. Oral ferrous succinate and cholecalciferol cholesterol emulsion were administrated preoperatively. As a result, her Hemoglobin, Fe, and Fer regained normal value before surgery. However, her 1,25(OH)2D3 level was 5.21 pg/mL, which was still lower than the normal value. Subcutaneous injection of low molecular weight heparin was conducted preoperatively and maintained two weeks postoperatively. The dynamic change of D-Dimer level was shown in Fig. . Finally, posterior scoliosis correction and spinal fusion from T10 to L5 levels were performed. During surgery, we found that the scoliosis was very rigid and blood oozing from the wound surface was obvious. Bone quality was similar to other adolescent patients during pedicle screw implantation, although the patient had Vitamin D deficiency. Left pedicle of T10 poorly developed and we failed to place left pedicle screw of T10. The total operation time was about 5 hours and the amount of blood loss was 1300 mL. The motor evoked potential signal of the spinal cord was normal during the operation. Postoperative plain X-ray film demonstrated the Cobb angle of lumbar curve corrected from 105° to 60° (correction rate 43%) and the distance of trunk shift decreased from 10 cm to 1.4 cm . The kyphosis angle decreased from 58° to 26°. No thrombotic events or other complications occurred during perioperative period. At the 3rd month follow-up, there was no change of the curve in the coronal and sagittal planes . At the 8th month follow-up, the Cobb angle in the coronal and sagittal planes was 54° and 34°, respectively. The trunk shift was 1.5 cm in the coronal plane, which was not significantly different from that of postoperative . During the 31-month follow-up, the patient did not experience any discomfort. And her general appearance did not have any change until the last follow-up. However, she refused to take radiograph for worrying about radiation.