A 46-year-old Caucasian male presented to the emergency department with a presenting complaint of right flank pain for one day duration.
He has medical history of diabetes mellitus type II, hypertension, chronic lymphedema of lower extremities, and obesity. Five months earlier he developed gross hematuria and was diagnosed with non-obstructive nephrolithiasis. Cystoscopy was unremarkable, serum creatinine was normal, (0.8 mg/dL), no quantification of proteinuria was performed. He had several episodes of cellulitis of lower extremities, the latest being 6 mo prior to the current admission.
He was not in acute distress and there was no apparent neurological deficit. Heart sounds were unremarkable. Lungs were clear to auscultation but diminished in both bases. He had significant distention of the abdomen with a positive fluid shift. Skin exam was remarkable for hardening of the skin of lower extremities due to bilateral lymphedema. Chest X-ray showed no infiltrates. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen without contrast demonstrated cirrhosis and sequela of portal hypertension. There was no renal pathology by CT scan (repeated at day 4 with similar results). Patient had rapid decline of kidney function with anuria, and hemodialysis was initiated on day 2 of admission. Serological work-up was remarkable for high level of anti-GBM antibodies 151 units (normal < 20 units), high cytoplasmic anti-neutrophilic antibody (C-ANCA) titer 1:80 (normal < 1:20), normal perinuclear-ANCA, MPO, and PR3. Antinuclear antibodies were negative, serum and urine protein electrophoresis were negative for monoclonal protein. Complement levels were normal (C3-94 mg/dL and C4-22 mg/dL). Due to the high clinical suspicion of rapid progressive glomerulonephritis from anti-GBM disease, therapeutic plasmapheresis with fresh frozen plasma was initiated. Patient received 2 doses of Solu-Medrol (methylprednisolone) 1 g intravenously, one dose of 150 mg of oral cyclophosphamide and one session of plasmapheresis.
On the fourth day, the patient developed worsening dyspnea with hypoxia and lethargy. Within hours he became hypotensive and required initiation of vasopressors and mechanical ventilation. Continuous renal placement therapy was initiated. Blood cultures demonstrated extended spectrum beta-lactamase producing Escherichia coli, but urine culture showed no growth. Left lower extremity purplish discoloration of the calf associated with hemorrhagic bullae was noted. There was no evidence of wound or drainage to suspect a localized infection. Despite treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics and multi-organ support, the patient was deteriorating rapidly and passed from asystole on day 6 of hospitalization.
Renal biopsy was performed on the third day of hospitalization. Paraffin sections stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin, Periodic Acid-Schiff, Trichrome, and methenamine silver contained renal cortex with up to 20 glomeruli on different levels, two of which were globally sclerotic. Ten glomeruli had active cellular crescents with polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and segmental necrotizing lesions . Four glomeruli had fibrocellular/fibrous crescents. Glomeruli with open capillary loops had mesangial hypercellularity . Widespread active-appearing interstitial inflammation with interstitial edema and acute tubular epithelial cell injury were noted. A few tubules had RBC casts. Immunofluorescence displayed bright linear IgG staining along the glomerular capillary loops as compared with albumin , granular moderate to prominent staining for IgA in the mesangium and prominent C3 staining in the mesangium . Ultrastructurally, there were discrete electron-dense immune-type deposits, predominantly in the mesangium and paramesangium . Rare densities were also noted in the GBM along the glomerular capillary loops. The GBM was of normal thickness and texture. There was prominent podocyte foot process effacement.
Laboratory data on admission are shown in Table .