A 35-year-old female patient who underwent right hemicolectomy for cecal cancer was referred to our Liver Transplant Institute for surgical treatment of colon cancer liver metastasis.
Patient stated that she had been eating watercress for a long time.
The patient stated that she underwent colonoscopy at another clinic because of exhaustion, fatigue, and anemia, and right hemicolectomy was performed upon detection of a cecal tumor on colonoscopy. Histopathological examination revealed cecal adenocarcinoma with subserosal fat tissue invasion and five metastatic lymph nodes in 32 lymph nodes. Preoperative contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed hypodense and heterogenous lesions with soft tissue density that were 40 mm x 33 mm in diameter in the right lobe of the liver . At the 3rd postoperative week, multiple hypermetabolic lesions with SUVmax of 5.3 in segments V, VII, and VIII of the liver were detected on performing 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT (18F-FDG-PET/CT) after 5.5 mCi 18F-FDG injection . In addition, hypermetabolic lesions were detected in the subhepatic (SUVmax: 7.1), superior mesenteric (SUVmax: 7.1), and aortocaval window (SUVmax: 7.3). Six cycles of adjuvant FOLFOX (folinic acid, fluorouracil, oxaliplatin) and bevacizumab were administered to the patient. In control 18F-FDG-PET/CT, the SUVmax values of liver lesions decreased to 3.8, and the SUVmax values of the lymph nodes did not regress. Thus, the same chemotherapy regimen was continued, and control 18F-FDG-PET/CT was performed at the end of 12th che-motherapy course. In the last 18F-FDG-PET/CT, all previously seen lesions were stable, whereas they regressed significantly both dimensionally and metabolically. Subsequently, the patient was referred to our center. Dynamic liver magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed immediately after the 12th chemotherapy course showed regression of the lesions in the liver. After 6 weeks, dynamic MRI at our center revealed that the lesions were more prominent than those on previous magnetic resonance images. Because the patient had colon cancer, the lesions in the liver were hypermetabolic in 18F-FDG-PET/CT, and the lesions started to regrow after chemotherapy, and the patient planned to undergo surgery. Right hepatectomy was performed to include all lesions with intraoperative ultrasonography. In addition, all lymph nodes in the hepatoduodenal ligament, celiac, and aortocaval window were resected, and a frozen section was sent for analysis, and no tumor was detected in the lymph nodes. In the histopathological examination of the hepatectomy specimen, the lesions had granulomatous foci on a tract, characterized by suppuration enriched with eosinophils , which was noted to be compatible with F. hepatica infection by a pathologist. Based on this result, preoperative blood tests of the patient were reexamined, and eosinophil count was 0.78 × 109/L (normal range: 0–0.5). F. hepatica IgG enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (Synlab MVZ Leinfelden GmbH, Leinfelden-Echterdingen, Germany) was positive.