A 50-year-old woman was diagnosed with locally advanced esophagogastric junction (EGJ) cancer in September 2014. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy with epirubicin, oxaliplatin and capecitabine was delivered for three cycles with significant diarrhea, peripheral neuropathy and asthenia. On October 13, 2014, she underwent a total gastrectomy. The pathology report evidenced a poor response (ypT3N2), so mFOLFOX6 adjuvant treatment was administered until January 2015. She remained on follow-up until February 2016, when metastatic disease in the lymph nodes was detected on computed tomography (CT) scans. At that time, mFOLFOX6 treatment has been initiated with palliative intent at another center, and she came to our institution for a second opinion. We decided to conduct a lymph node biopsy in order to confirm the diagnosis and perform molecular testing.
After the confirmed diagnosis of metastatic adenocarcinoma, we performed a commercially targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) assay (FoundationOne from Foundation Medicine, Massachusetts, USA) in order to identify targetable molecular alterations. The assay revealed 18 somatic gene alterations and intermediate mutational load. Additionally, we analyzed the expression of PD-L1 and four mismatch repair (MMR) proteins (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2) by immunohistochemistry (IHC). We also measured Epstein Barr virus (EBV) in tumor samples by fluorescent in situ hybridization. The tumor samples were negative for PD-L1 expression, the MMR proteins were present, and EBV was not detected.
Due to the patient’s ability to tolerate mFOLFOX6, we decided to continue this treatment. After 9 cycles, progressive disease in the lymph nodes and liver was detected. We discussed that the standard treatment would be cytotoxic chemotherapy, preferably with paclitaxel and ramucirumab. She denied the use of this protocol due to the side effect of alopecia and the risk of worsening neuropathy.
We then offered to enroll the patient in the Keynote 181 clinical trial , which compares pembrolizumab to the investigator’s choice standard therapy. She was not willing to receive any standard chemotherapy and refused to participate in this clinical trial. However, she was very interested in immunotherapy. After tumor board discussion and careful conversation about the limited evidence of the efficacy of this treatment, we decided to offer her a treatment regimen with 200 mg pembrolizumab every three weeks.
In September 2016, she started pembrolizumab. After 4 cycles of treatment, an abdomen magnetic resonance imaging scan revealed significant size reduction in all disease sites. New scans were performed after the 11th cycle of treatment. The retroperitoneal lymph nodes responded completely, and liver metastases and perigastric lesions were significantly reduced. A new positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) was performed after 16 cycles of pembrolizumab and evidenced a complete remission of disease . This patient has currently completed 12 months follow up and is receiving the 19th cycle of pembrolizumab without any side effects related to the treatment.