The patient is a 55-year-old male who was first seen in May 2015 for inguinal pain which had progressively appeared in the previous 6 to 8 months. During clinical examination, the range of motion was preserved. The straight leg raise test was positive. No signs of biological or local inflammation were recorded. The complete blood count did not detect eosinophilia. Plain radiographs and CT-scan showed an osteolytic lesion on the ischiopubic branch invading the acetabulum . MRI confirmed the lesion and its extension to the left coxofemoral joint and to the obturator internus muscle , its heterogeneous nature, comprising both liquidous and tissular phases, and revealed a hypersignal inside the bone where the lesion laid. A thoracic-abdominal-pelvic CT-scan was carried out and found no other lesion.
A first CT-guided biopsy with fluid aspiration did not contribute to the diagnosis. A surgical biopsy was then carried out in June but also failed to contribute to the diagnosis, turning up amorphous material devoid of any cell. The biopsy was performed again in July, and the resulting anatomopathological analysis objectivised the hydatidosis on two fragments of necrotic tissue presenting hydatid fragments such as free scolex, hooks, and fragments of pellucid membrane.
We then started to administer Albendazole (800 mg per day in two doses) to the patient. This treatment was continued until surgery was carried out on the lesion. We then performed a resection of the left hemipelvis, with a monobloc arthrectomy performed because of the articular invasion. In order to facilitate the resection, we used patient-specific custom cutting guides that were made using fused CT-scan and MRI data (MOBELIFE®, Leuven, Belgium). The hip joint was then reconstructed with a total prosthesis combining an acetabular implant of the LUMIC (MUTARZ®) type and a cemented stem of the OCEANE (TORNIER®) type. The antiparasitic treatment was carried on for another three months.
A year after surgery, our patient does not present signs of recurrence nor sepsis. He uses a walking aid outside his home (Harris Hip Score = 80.8 at 12 months). Control radiographs do not show any signs of unsealing on the stem and show good osseointegration of the acetabulum .