A 68-year-old Asian female (Asian woman) presented with generalized abdominal pain since 5 days before admission, 80/50 mmHg blood pressure, 110 beats per minute, 39 centigrade degree of body temperature, lethargy and blood sugar = 634 mg/dl. She had soft abdomen in palpation and generalized tenderness. She had a history of blunt abdominal trauma 2 weeks ago and was admitted in intensive care unit in another center for one week, and she was under nonoperative management for splenic sub capsular hematoma (grade 3). The patient was not a suitable candidate for splenectomy due to stable vital signs and the grade of spleen injury and some risk factors as ischemic heart disease, diabetes mellitus, ejection fraction ≤ 35%, but negative past surgical history. She had a history of arbitrarily outpatient oral antibiotic therapy (Levofloxacin) due to fever during last week.
The laboratory findings revealed metabolic acidosis, 12.8 × 103/L leukocytosis and neutrophilia of 97% and anemia (Hemoglobin = 7.6), blood sugar: 634 mg/dl, creatinine: 1.9 mg/dl, CRP = 245 mg/L.
Initial clinical assessment in the admission unit revealed splenomegaly and a huge abscess that contains with 800 cc liquid in US and CT scan also confirmed these data and showed a large splenic abscess measuring 10.8 × 8.7 × 5.3 cm (centimeters) .
The patient underwent resuscitation before surgery with 1 L intravenous 0.9% sodium chloride saline and 2 units packed red blood cell and prepared for operating room. Surgery started with a midline incision, during surgery sever inflammation and capsular adhesion to colon, gastric and abdominal wall were the most important points. Splenic wall was necrotic and it ruptured immediately after touching, and 1.5 L of creamy and white and malodor pus poured out from splenic abscess. Other organs were intact. Finally, splenectomy was performed and samples sent to the pathology and cytology . We inserted a drain and the secretions from that were clear (serous secretion) and dried out after 3 days.
The patient was admitted in ICU after surgery and was treated by intravenous insulin drip and received intravenous antibiotics (Meropenem 500 mgr/TDS, Vancomycin 1 gr/BID) The remarkable point was that Blood culture, urine culture and even the culture of pus from the abscess were negative. Blood sugar levels and DKA (diabetic ketoacidosis) were controlled during hospitalization and biochemical inflammatory markers improved considerably and were in normal range before the patient’s discharge from the hospital. (CRP = 22 mg/dl, WBC = 8000/L) After one week taking care of patient in ICU the patient was transferred to surgery ward and stayed there for 5 days then she was discharged with good general condition.