A 79-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency department with complain of dyspnoea the day before the first anniversary of her husband’s death. She had been affected with persistent atrial fibrillation, taking bisoprolol and apixaban. An initial ECG showed no significant ST-T segment change. Her serum troponin T, creatine kinase (CK), and CK-MB were within normal range. However, transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed severe hypokinesis of mid- and apical-anterior segments with reduced LV ejection fraction (LVEF) of 45%. Chest X-ray showed bilateral pleural effusion. The next day after admission, a follow-up ECG showed terminal T-wave inversion with QT interval prolongation in leads V1 through V5 . Coronary computed tomography angiography found no significant coronary stenosis. One week later, TTE demonstrated normal LV wall motion, and she was diagnosed with focal type TTS based on the specific findings of ECG and TTE.
Three months after the first hospital admission, she had sore throat and cough. Three days after the onset of the symptoms, she suddenly had orthopnoea. Her blood pressure was 154/104 mmHg with tachycardia of 122 beat per minute, and respiration was accelerated at 32 per minute. On physical examination, we recognized jugular vein dilatation, gallop rhythm, and peripheral coldness. Chest X-ray showed acute pulmonary oedema, and ECG showed ST-segment elevation in leads V2 through V3 and terminal T-wave inversion in leads V2 through V6. TTE revealed broad akinesis in mid- and apical-left ventricle with akinesis of right ventricle . LVEF was significantly reduced to 23%, and neither LV outflow tract obstruction nor mitral regurgitation were observed. Her serum troponin T was slightly elevated to 0.088 ng/mL, though CK and CK-MB were within normal range. Emergent coronary angiography (CAG) showed no occlusive coronary artery . She was diagnosed with recurrent TTS, which complicated bi-ventricular dysfunction. Although we had started a vasodilator drug and respiratory support using non-invasive positive pressure ventilation, she haemodynamically collapsed, and required low dose of norepinephrine and dobutamine with support of intra-aortic balloon pumping. The following day after the admission, ECG showed marked symmetrical giant negative T-wave with QT interval prolongation in leads V2 through V6 . We had temporarily prescribed enalapril after stabilization of circulatory collapse, but discontinued it due to an occurrence of hyperkalaemia. After 2 weeks, her bi-ventricular dysfunction was completely normalized . 99mTc-tetrofosmin and 123I-beta-methyl iodophenyl-pentadecanoic acid dual myocardial single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) demonstrated a preserved whole perfusion of left ventricle and defect of fat acid metabolism in mid-anterior and apical segments . Computed tomography showed no findings of subarachnoid haemorrhage and pheochromocytoma. She was discharged on day 22.
One month after the second discharge, she suffered from herpes zoster on her back. Two days after the onset of zoster, she presented with dyspnoea, and chest X-ray showed bilateral pleural effusion. ECG showed terminal T wave inversion in leads V2 through V6 . TTE revealed mild hypokinesis in mid- and apical-anteroseptal segments, leading to reduced LVEF of 48% . Right ventricular function was preserved. CAG depicted normal coronary arteries, and myocardial biopsy showed no specific findings. She was treated with intravenous diuretics, and TTE showed complete recovery of the LV wall motion on day 10. She was diagnosed with focal type TTS. Metanephrine titration on 24 h urine was within normal range. 123I-meta-iodo benzyl guanidine (MIBG) SPECT and flouro deoxy glucose positron emission tomography detected no evidence of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma. She was discharged with enalapril, spironolactone and carvedilol.
Four months after the third discharge, she suddenly complained of central chest pain. The triggered stress was not identified. On admission, ECG showed ST-segment elevation in leads I, III, and aVF , and her serum troponin T was increased to 2.00 ng/mL. CAG showed no coronary artery stenosis, and left ventriculography revealed akinesis of mid-inferior and apical segments indicating apical ballooning (LVEF: 50%). The next day following the admission, ST-segment elevation was normalized. Normal LV wall motion was regained after 1 week. The diagnosis of quadruple TTS was established. No more recurrence was recognized after 6 months from the last recurrence.