A 28-year-old female Chinese patient presented with the onset of acute continuous right abdomen pain, nausea and vomiting at the emergency department. On admission, abdominal dynamic computed tomography (CT) with a multislice detector row CT scanner showed several air-fluid levels in the enteric cavity, and the diagnosis was considered to be ileus.
The patient was diagnosed with BD four years ago. She had received medications regularly, including immunosuppressive therapy with oral prednisone (60 mg/day) and cyclophosphamide (100 mg/day).
The patient first presented with abdominal pain at the hospital. A computed tomographic angiography (CTA) was performed, which indicated an aneurysm of 5.67 cm*5.28 cm*0.97 cm located in the left junction of the thoracic aorta and abdominal aorta. An approximately 0.8 cm segment was found to block the starting part of the celiac trunk. Subsequently, a graft stent was implanted. Follow-up CTA showed no residual aneurysm. However, six months after the intervention, a rapidly growing mass was found in the lower abdomen, and the patient presented with nausea, vomiting, progressive and intermittent pain in the abdomen which radiated to her back. Before being admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), the patient underwent CTA, which showed that there was a haematoma of approximately 6.0 × 4.8 cm in the abdomen. The extravasation of contrast agent was located in the opening of the renal artery, with a mixed soft tissue mass of 3.7 cm in the haemoperitoneum. The haemoglobin concentration decreased to 4.36 g/dL with abrupt hypotension (60/43 mmHg). The critical condition of the patient prompted the cardiac surgeons to perform open surgical repair (OSR) rather than a more conservative treatment. The patient was transferred to the ICU after the operation. Three days later, after her vital signs were stable, she was transferred back to the general ward. No recurrence of pseudoaneurysm was found during a follow-up of 15 days . She continued receiving immunosuppressive therapy as usual. This course of treatment was decided based on previous studies showing that use of immunosuppressive therapy with cyclophosphamide and corticosteroids before and after surgical intervention could help prevent BD activation [, ].
Ten months later, after the implantation of artificial vascularization in the thoracic and abdominal aorta, doppler-ultrasound indicated deep venous thrombosis in the left popliteal vein . Therefore, the patient was treated with anticoagulant therapy using hypodermic injections of low-molecular-weight heparin at a daily dose of 4100 U.
One month later, the patient suffered from persistent right abdominal pain with nausea and vomiting accompanied by oral aphtha and genital ulcer. Abdominal CT showed the occurrence of an air-fluid level in part of the ileum and colon . The diagnosis was determined to be an incomplete intestinal obstruction, which may have been caused by the previous aneurysms. Mesenteric artery angiography showed that the root of the celiac trunk and superior mesenteric artery were stenosed . Then, conservative treatment was administered, such as fasting, gastrointestinal decompression and enema. Approximately 20 days later, the patient recovered well and was discharged from the hospital.