An 18 year-old Japanese male who complained of chest discomfort for two months was admitted to the Kyorin University Hospital. Chest computed tomography revealed a well-demarcated mass in the right upper lung with atelectasis. A bronchoscopy procedure showed complete bronchial obstruction due to external tumor compression. The patient underwent lobectomy, and no relapse was noted for one year after surgery.
Macroscopically, the tumor was a well-defined white-colored firm mass, of 7.3 cm in diameter . Histological examination using hematoxylin and eosin staining showed a well-circumscribed and focally encapsulated nodule in the peripheral lung parenchyma compressed bronchi. The peripheral sclerotic change was focally identified . Relatively uniform spindle cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and blunt-ended nuclei were observed to be proliferating in the intersecting fascicles . Mild to moderate nuclear atypia without pleomorphism was identified. The mitotic count was 6/mm2, and necrosis was not observed. Scattered multinucleated giant cells and aggregates of foamy histiocytes were observed as characteristic features. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were focally positive for desmin and heavy isoform of caldesmon (h-caldesmon, clone: h-CD, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) and negative for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and rhabdomyoblastic markers, including Myogenin and MyoD1. The presence of cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), S100 protein, MDM2, CDK4 ALK, ROS1, and panTRK was not detected. A prominent histiocytic infiltration was highlighted upon CD163 immunostaining .
Break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for SS18 (18q11.2), one of the most frequently used probes in routine diagnostic practice, confirmed the diploidy of the tumor and demonstrated no split pattern with two distinct fused (red/green) signals.
PILMS was previously characterized by mutations in the MUC3A gene . To confirm this, Sanger sequencing of the MUC3A gene was carried out after PCR amplification with a pair of primers (F: TGTAAAACGACGGCCAGTCCACCACCACCAAGACC, R: CAGGAAACAGCTATGACTGATGCCCACGGATGA). The template DNA was extracted from a surgically resected fresh frozen specimen. A single nucleotide variant of the MUC3A gene [p. S811P (c. 2431 T > C), Fig. g] was confirmed.
Genome-wide DNA methylome data was also successfully obtained using the fresh frozen specimen. The DKFZ classifier (sarcoma classifier v12.2) predicted the case to be of “methylation class inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT)” with a high calibrated score of 0.91. To visualize the DNA methylome signature, the 428,230 probes selected after filtering were included in a tSNE plot using the Rtsne package (version 0.15). In the tSNE plots, our case was plotted in the vicinity of, but did not fall into, IMT among the reference samples consisting of 1,077 sarcomas (GSE140686) . The relative copy number alterations based on the DNA methylation array demonstrated an overall flat profile . The bulk DNA methylome profile was compared to seven IMT cases selected from the reference dataset using the MethylResolver package downloaded from GitHub , and our case had a larger fraction of monocytes and a smaller fraction of neutrophils when compared to IMT .