A 49-year-old Caucasian male appeared at the emergency room with fever, up to 40 °C, chills and dyspnea for one week. His medical record included hypertension, sleep apnoea, and hydronephrosis of the right kidney due to a former nephrolithiasis. He worked as a taxi driver and strongly denied any substance abuse. He neither reported any regular medication nor any signs of immunodeficiency in the past.
Upon admission the patient presented with blood pressure of 140/80 mmHg, heart rate of 113/min, body temperature of 39.2 °C, and a respiratory rate of 24/min. Physical examination yielded normal results. Initial blood tests revealed a normal white blood cell count (WBC) of 5.1 × 109/l (4–9.5), an internationalised ratio (INR) of 1.5, an activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) of 42 s (<40 s), D-dimers of 15 μg/ml (0–0.23), a CRP of 21.02 mg/dl (<0.5), a procalcitonin level of 1.35 ng/ml (<0.1), and a lactate dehydrogenase activity of 823 U/l (<250). Liver and kidney function tests were within normal range. Abdominal ultrasound examination as well as chest X-ray images did not show abnormalities besides the known hydronephrosis. To look for a source of infection and to exclude thrombosis or pulmonary embolism, we performed a whole body CT-scan with contrast agent, but without gain of information. We started an empirical antibiotic treatment with piperacillin and tazobactam. However, fevers kept spiking within the following 24 h and the patient developed leukocytopenia (3.6 × 109/l) and thrombocytopenia (66 × 109/l, 150–450). Repeated blood cultures were negative but despite normal urine analysis, urine culture was positive for Enterococcus faecium (less than 10,000 CFU). Thus, diagnosis of urosepsis with DIC was most likely and antibiotic treatment was broadened to meropenem and vancomycin to include common resistant bacteria.
Despite broad antibiotic therapy, in the following 24 h D-dimers and CRP increased and fevers were still ongoing. WBC and thrombocytes decreased further . Given the clinical course of the disease with progressive leukocytopenia and thrombocytopenia, we suspected a viral infection and performed serological screening for tick-borne encephalitis, HHV-6, HIV, HBV, HCV, EBV, Parvovirus B-19, HSV-1/2, and CMV. While most serological tests were negative or only showed signs of past infection (for EBV and HSV-1/2), CMV-testing revealed an early primary CMV infection, characterised by a low IgG concentration and a high IgM index (>5.0) along with low IgG avidity (ECLIA, Roche) . Disseminated CMV infection was confirmed by a positive PCR for CMV DNA in leucocytes and plasma. We therefore started valganciclovir treatment, with oral administration of 900 mg doses twice a day, due to the patient’s severe clinical conditions, in particular the worsened coagulopathy . After administration of four valganciclovir doses, CRP and D-dimers decreased strongly, leukocyte and thrombocyte counts increased, and fever and chills disappeared . We therefore stopped treatment with Valganciclovir after four doses. Further serological testing after four days of initiating antiviral therapy revealed still low avidity IgG antibodies to CMV; CMV-PCR was negative in leukocytes and plasma.
A follow-up in our outpatient clinic after one month showed the progress of CMV primary infection with an increase of CMV-specific IgG, avidity maturation and a decrease of IgM indices. CMV-DNA could be detected in plasma by nested PCR (LOD: 200 copies/ml) but not by quantitative real time PCR (LOD: 600 copies/ml). Therefore, the viral load ranged between 200 and 600 copies/ml of plasma. Viral shedding was observed in urine samples and throat swabs. About five weeks after the initial admission, the CMV specific antibodies had increased ten-fold, the avidity index had slowly increased to 35 %, which still represents low avidity, and IgM index had dropped from 3.2 to 1.4. Viral shedding could be documented with a viral isolate from urine microculture. Anti-CMV-gB2-IgG reactivity was not detectable, whereas gB1 reactivity was already weakly detectable . The patient had no clinical symptoms of ongoing infection. Blood count, CRP, and clotting analysis were normal and he had resumed work.
In blood tests performed at a one year follow-up in our outpatient clinic, we could not detect anti-CMV-IgM antibodies, but we did detect high avidity IgG antibodies and results from plasma CMV-PCR were negative . Blood count and clotting analysis had no pathological findings.
The follow-up tests performed show the typical dynamics of a primary CMV infection with a loss of p150 rec IgM reactivity (IgM index <1,0), a steep increase in CMV IgG (about 4-fold), and the emergence of gB2-IgG, which indicates CMV neutralising antibodies . Interestingly, the CMV specific antibody pattern had already been present with high titers at the very onset of symptoms, while gB1 and gB2 reactivity only developed slowly . These findings support the initial diagnosis of an acute onset of a primary CMV infection.
Retrospectively performed longitudinal epithelial cell-specific neutralisation experiments revealed the emergence of neutralising antibodies about five weeks after onset of clinical symptoms. This emergence is accompanied by a steep increase of CMV avidity maturation. However, the neutralising capacity was not fully developed five weeks after onset of symptomatic infection .
Details of the methodology can be found in Additional file “Methods”.