In April 2018, a 14-year-old Caucasian boy with acute onset of affective FEP was referred to the Child Neuropsychiatry Unit of the Polyclinic Hospital of Bari. Since the age of 12 he presented with debilitating intestinal symptoms as mucohemorragic diarrhea (discharge frequency, > 10/day), tenesmus, and abdominal pain, resulting in severe disability impairing his general and social well-being. He was diagnosed as having UC on the basis of clinical, laboratory, instrumental, and histologic criteria. In accordance with the “Guidelines for Management of Pediatric Ulcerative Colitis” , he was treated with conventional therapies (mesalazine, prednisone, metronidazole, azathioprine, and biological agents such as infliximab and adalimumab) with no clinical response. Before elective surgery, a medical treatment with thalidomide was started, as an off-label option for patients with primary refractory IBD, and a clinical response was gradually observed. Two months later, he showed an acute onset of irritable mood, decreased need for sleeping, abnormally increased activity, disorganized behavior and speech, and thought alterations including inflated self-esteem and flight of insight-lacking ideas. These symptoms prompted the discontinuation of thalidomide and a mesalazine-based treatment was restarted. After admission at our Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, he was found to have no history of obstetric complications, neurological or psychiatric diseases, or substance abuse and no psychopathological symptoms prior to this acute episode. His parents reported a normal achievement of early childhood neurodevelopmental milestones and a normal intelligence quotient (IQ) was assessed. General and neurological examination, laboratory tests, and a brain magnetic resonance imaging resulted in normal ranges. An electroencephalogram showed slow waves including isolated spikes in the right temporal and parietal regions. After a mild improvement of symptoms, he developed a grossly disorganized behavior, with conceptual disorganization, auditory and visual hallucinations, delusion and suspiciousness, hostility, social and emotional withdrawal, somatic concerns, anxiety, and tension. Psychopathological assessment was performed by the use of Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS). His PANSS total score was 115, while PANSS subscale scores were 29 for positive, 26 for negative, and 60 for general psychopathological symptoms. After proper informed consent, a treatment with antipsychotics and mood stabilizers (risperidone 6 mg/day, levosulpiride 72 mg/day, valproic acid 1000 mg/day) was started, leading to progressive improvement of psychopathological symptoms. During this phase his GI symptomatology remained silent, with 2–3 regular bowel movements/day and no blood or mucus emissions.
After a 6-month follow-up, a psychopharmacological maintenance with risperidone (4 mg/day) and valproic acid (1000 mg/day) ensured a partial remission of symptomatology. His PANSS total score was 71, with subscale scores of 11 for positive symptoms, 21 for negative symptoms and 39 for general psychopathological symptoms. On the other hand, only mesalazine efficiently controlled GI symptoms (2–3 regular bowel movements/day and no abdominal pain, diarrhea or rectal bleeding). Therefore, according to Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) criteria, a diagnosis of partial remission of a first episode of schizoaffective disorder was formulated.