A three-month-old Jordanian female baby was vaginally delivered at full-term to a 25-year-old mother on her second pregnancy, the first being successfully carried past 20 weeks (G2P1). The baby's parents were healthy and non-related. She presented with a history of ano-rectal malformation for further management. She underwent sigmoid loop colostomy after 24 hours of birth outside our hospital. General examination of the baby upon presentation showed a few external abnormal features such as a small head, low-set ears, corneal opacities in both eyes, and a high-arched palate in addition to signs of dehydration and being underweight. An abdominal examination revealed ulcerated inflamed skin in the left lower quadrant around a prolapsing loop colostomy, with fluid stool content. A perineal examination showed a single orifice, with urine coming through it. No anal or vaginal orifices were seen , and the labio-scrotal folds were under-developed. Her work-up showed that she was suffering from atrial septal defect (ASD), ventricular septal defect (VSD), a delay in mental development, corneal opacities, and cloacal ano-rectal malformation.
A micturating cysto-urethrogram confirmed the common channel of the deformity. Ultrasonography of the abdomen was normal. Skeletal survey and brain magnetic resonance imaging results were normal. A chromosomal analysis was carried out, involving 20 CTG-banded cells from two cultures, and five cells were karotyped and photographed, showing 46,XX,del(3)(q29) .
Our patient was treated for the colostomy complication and, at the age of nine months, she underwent full repair of the cloaca through posterior saggital ano-recto-vaginoplasty. Smooth post-operative recovery was achieved, and three months later the colostomy opening was closed. Her heart condition was stable over the three years of follow-up, the VSD and ASD reduced in size, her corneal opacities did not progress, and she remained under the supervision of our ophthalmologist. Her mental development continued to grow slowly, and she is now able to speak a few words and stand up without support.