An 81 year old South Indian female presented with a two week history of angina, mild dyspnoea, fevers and night sweats. Over the past seven years she had had regular haematology surveillance for a chronic low grade eosinophilia of uncertain aetiology. Other co-morbidities were salbutamol controlled asthma; type 2 diabetes and hypercholesterolaemia managed with metformin 500 mg OD and rosuvastatin 5 mg OD respectively.
At presentation she was afebrile with a heart rate of 84 beats per minute and a blood pressure of 97/60 mmHg. There were no clinical signs of congestive cardiac failure but a grade 2/6 pansystolic murmur was noted at the apex. Respiratory, abdominal and neurological examinations were all normal.
Her electrocardiogram was normal but her abnormal chest radiograph prompted a thoracic computed tomography which showed non-specific parenchymal distortion in the upper lobe of the left lung ; there was no heart failure. Routine biochemistry showed an elevated Troponin I level of 8.5 ng/ml (normal range <0.1 ng/mL). Renal, liver and clotting profiles were all normal. Importantly, she had a significant leucocytosis (total white cells of 27.6 × 109/litre) with a marked eosinophilia (17.39 × 109/litre), well above her chronic low grade eosinophilia (0.45-2.12 × 109/litre). Cellular morphology was normal on blood film.
Cardiac echocardiography demonstrated mild left ventricular hypertrophy and mild left ventricular systolic impairment with akinesia of the basal inferior wall and dyskinesia of the anterior septum. There was moderate tricuspid regurgitation and moderate pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary artery pressure of 53 mmHg. On the basis of her elevated troponin and echocardiographic findings, she was managed for non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) with aspirin 75 mg OD, clopidogrel 75 mg OD and fondaparinux 2.5 mg OD whilst pending angiography.
On day 5 the patient suddenly decompensated with gross heart failure and cardiogenic shock requiring intubation and aggressive intensive care therapy. Her chest radiograph showed marked pulmonary oedema, troponin I remained elevated at 7.8 ng/ml. Arterial blood gas demonstrated a Type 1 respiratory failure with a pH = 7.35, pCO2 = 4.1, PO2 = 9.5, HCO3 = 16.6, BE = -7.7 and Lactate = 9.99. C-Reactive Protein (CRP) was elevated at 50 mg/l. An urgent repeat echocardiogram showed worsened moderate to severe systolic impairment. Interestingly measurement of mitral inflow pulsed wave Doppler showed reversal of E/A ratio which compares the peak velocity of early passive diastolic filling of the ventricle (E wave) to peak velocity of active filling of the ventricle due to atrial contraction (A wave). The normal E/A ratio is 1-2. The patient’s initial E/A ratio at presentation was 0.53 suggestive of mildly abnormal relaxation. At the time of deterioration on day 5, the ratio increased to 2.5 indicating a restrictive pattern of filling .
Despite cardiac failure therapy comprising intravenous inotropes and diuretics the patient failed to improve clinically. Notably her deterioration seemed to coincide with a peak eosinophilia of 18.44 × 109/litre . Following haematology and microbiology consults oral hydroxycarbamide 1 g OD and high dose intravenous methyprednisolone 500 mg OD were commenced and view of her ethnicity, ivermectin administered to cover potential nematode reactivation.
Concomitantly, secondary causes of eosinophilia were investigated by taking into account atopy related to her history of asthma and her recent medical therapy. Invasive helminth infection (Strongyloides, Toxocara and Filaria) were screened with enzyme linked immunosorbant assays (ELISA). Other causes such as Trichinella were excluded by indirect fluorescence antibody test (IFAT). Serology for Toxoplasma and Human Immunodeficiency Virus were negative. Autoantibody screen, cANCA and pANCA were also negative and her immunoglobulin profiles were normal. Sarcoidosis was excluded with a negative serum ACE. Bone marrow aspirate and flow cytometry showed increased numbers of maturing eosinophils but no clonal expansion. Cytogenetic analysis demonstrated normal karyotype, in particular no FIP1L1-PDGFRA gene fusion .
On steroid treatment the eosinophilic count dropped dramatically and her clinical state rapidly improved. A repeat echocardiogram on day 14 demonstrated marked improvement in her left ventricular systolic dysfunction (mild-moderate systolic impairment) and her heart failure was now NYHA class I. Standard oral heart failure therapies (ACE-inhibitor, betablocker and diuretics) were optimised, hydroxycarbamide was stopped on day 24 and steroids weaned over an 8 week period.
Subsequent coronary angiography demonstrated normal, unobstructed coronary arteries and the patient was discharged home in an asymptomatic state at day 50.
An outpatient cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) at 3 months clinic follow-up showed a pattern typical of eosinophilic endomyocarditis with post-inflammatory scarring .