A 31-year-old man (180 cm, 87 kg) was admitted to our hospital for the extraction of horizontally impacted wisdom teeth in the bilateral mandible. His past history included no appreciable disease and no evidence of neck or head injuries. The preoperative neurological and anesthetic evaluation results were all within normal limits (American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status 1 and Mallampati score grade 1). Tooth extraction was conducted under general anesthesia. Anesthesia was induced by the intravenous administration of propofol and remifentanil, with neuromuscular blockade obtained with rocuronium. Transnasal intubation using a Macintosh laryngoscope (blade size 3, ACOMA Medical, Tokyo, Japan) was performed gently during the first attempt without any difficulty by a dental anesthesiologist with 6 years of experience in the field. A nasotracheal tube (Portex® Ivory PVC Soft Seal cuffed North Polar endotracheal tube; Smiths Medical Japan, Tokyo, Japan) with an internal diameter of 7.0 mm and an external diameter of 10.2 mm were secured at a depth of 29 cm in the left nasal cavity. No problem was encountered during intubation (Cormack grade 1). The cuff was inflated to a pressure of approximately 20 cm H2O, and the cuff pressure was continuously monitored and adjusted between 20 and 25 cm H2O during the surgery. General anesthesia was maintained with propofol and remifentanil. Mechanical ventilation was set as follows: a tidal volume of 800 ml and a respiratory rate of 10/min. With the use of a tongue depressor, a throat pack was inserted on the posterior part of the tongue to avoid the passage of blood into the respiratory tract. The surgery was carried out with the patient in a supine position with the neck slightly extended. During the surgery, the head and neck positions were changed from side to side several times, and no significant changes in respiratory and cardiovascular parameters or neurosurgical abnormalities occurred. At the end of the surgery, extubation of the nasotracheal tube was performed after the removal of the throat pack without any problems. Neuromuscular blockade was not reversed. The durations of the surgery and anesthesia were 221 min and 275 min, respectively. After a short observation in the operating room, the patient was transported to the ward.
After returning to the ward, the patient experienced hoarseness and difficulty swallowing. X-ray and computed tomography (CT) revealed an alveolar infiltrative shadow. In addition, an endoscopic evaluation showed unilateral vocal cord paralysis and aspiration, leading to a diagnosis of aspiration pneumonia. Treatment with intravenous sulbactam/ampicillin (SBT/ABPC) (6 g/day) was initiated immediately. Furthermore, since the tongue deviated towards the right upon protrusion, multiple cranial neuropathy was suspected, which led to a request for detailed otorhinolaryngological and neurological examinations. The results of the examinations led to a diagnosis of bilateral glossopharyngeal and vagus nerve paralysis, right recurrent nerve paralysis, and right hypoglossal nerve paralysis. The patient was not able to swallow at all. The patient underwent nonsurgical management with vitamin B12 (1500 mcg/day), together with speech and swallowing therapy. A nasogastric tube was placed to prevent aspiration and to supplement oral intake. The results of a meticulous neurologic examination of the other cranial nerves, including CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), showed no evidence of the involvement of the central nervous system. Aspiration pneumonia gradually improved, with cycles of improvement and worsening. All cases of nerve paralysis improved in approximately 6 months, and no complications remained.