A 47-year-old male with advanced lung adenocarcinoma was treated with carboplatin (area under the blood concentration–time curve (AUC) 6 on Day 1) + nab-paclitaxel (nab-PTX 100 mg/m2 on Days 1, 8 and 15 of a 21-day cycle) + atezolizumab (1200 mg on Day 1) for a total of 4 courses followed by atezolizumab maintenance therapy. He had clinical T4N3M1b stage IVA lung cancer and was negative for all driver gene mutations (EGFR-, ALK-, ROS1-), and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) tumor proportion score was expressed at low levels. He had a 26 pack-year history of smoking but had quit smoking before the start of treatment and had no other preexisting medical conditions except lung cancer. During the course of maintenance therapy with atezolizumab, he developed a fever of 38 °C and cough and came to our hospital. He had been treated with atezolizumab for 10 courses, and it had been 9 months since the first dose. SpO2 was 94% (room air) at the time of admission, and a slight decrease in SpO2 was observed.
Chest X-ray showed lung consolidation and decreased lung volume in the bilateral lower lung fields. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed that the lymph node metastases in the sub-bifurcation of the tracheal bifurcation were significantly reduced compared with those before the start of chemotherapy, indicating a partial response (PR) to chemotherapy. However, volume reduction in the lower lobes of both lungs and peribronchial consolidation were observed . The patient was admitted to the hospital after the discontinuation of atezolizumab because of drug-induced interstitial pneumonia, grade 2 on the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 5.0.
After admission, bronchoscopy was performed, and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed on the left B5. The recovery rate was 54%. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) showed an increased cell count of 3.1 × 105/mL, an increased lymphocyte fraction of 25.5%, and a decreased CD4/CD8 ratio of 0.79. Bacteriological examination showed no significant findings of general bacteria or mycobacterium. Blood tests revealed that KL-6 and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were within the normal range, and C-reactive protein (CRP) was mildly elevated. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), a tumor marker, was not elevated. Conversely, anti-ARS antibodies were positive. Serum creatine kinase (CK), aldolase, and anti-Jo-1 antibodies were normal, but anti-PL-12 and anti-Ro-52 antibodies (EUROLINE Myositis Profile 3) were positive . There were no collagen-related symptoms, such as muscle weakness or skin findings, and the clinical symptoms were only fever and cough.
Based on these results, we diagnosed the illness as ASS-ILD and started treatment with prednisolone (PSL) 60 mg/day (1 mg/kg/day). On the second day of treatment with prednisolone, the patient’s fever resolved to normal, and his coughing symptoms showed remission. Chest X-ray showed improvement of the shadows in the bilateral lower lung fields. The PSL treatment was gradually decreased, and the patient is currently receiving 5 mg/day PSL with no worsening of the ILD . During the course of treatment, anti-ARS antibodies were measured from the stored serum before atezolizumab administration and were positive (index 53.8), and an increase in anti-ARS antibody titers was observed after atezolizumab administration . However, there was no pneumonia or myositis at the time of serum collection prior to atezolizumab administration. The patient's lung cancer course was followed by the discontinuation of atezolizumab; a PR has been maintained ever since, and the patient will continue to be followed as an outpatient.