We describe a case of a 46-year-old man with hypertension and dyslipidemia diagnosed 4-months before, as well as new-onset diabetes mellitus (DM) unveiled 1 month earlier (on oral anti-diabetic drugs), referred to emergency department for hypokalemia of 2.5 mEq/L [reference value (RV): 3.5–5.1]. He had paresthesias, weakness, anorexia, and asthenia associated with a marked weight loss (about 10 kg) for over a month, along with a suspicion of endogenous hypercortisolism [morning ACTH 146.0 ng/L (RV: 9.0–52.0) and cortisol 44.5 μg/dL (RV: 5.0–25.0)] on ambulatory analysis. The patient also presented mild peripheral oedema, in the absence of striae or typical central obesity. He was then admitted to the Endocrinology department for further investigation.
Hormonal study revealed a midnight serum cortisol level of 36.2 ug/dL (RV: <7.5), midnight salivary cortisol 4.2 ug/dL (RV: <0.3) and 24 h-urinary free cortisol (UFC) 6210.0 ug/24 h (RV: 36.0–137.0). The result of 1 mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test was 42.6ug/dL (RV: <1.8) . The remaining biochemical assessment indicated serum potassium level of 3.0 mEq/L (RV: 3.5–5.1), with no other relevant changes. We subsequently performed a low-dose dexamethasone suppression test, which was compatible with CS, and a further high-dose dexamethasone suppression test showed no suppression of cortisol levels .
Initial abdominal ultrasound found multiple nodular lesions in right hepatic lobe, the largest with 65 mm diameter, suggestive of secondary lesions by neoplastic process. Cervico-thoraco-abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan exposed a 16 × 1 × 17 mm nodular image on the right parotid gland . Upper endoscopy and colonoscopy showed no significant lesions. Parotid ultrasound, subsequently performed, documented a non specific 18 mm hypoechogenic nodule in the right parotid gland, with no signs of vascular invasion or cervical adenomegalies .
Notably, parotid fine-needle aspiration biopsy revealed carcinoma (primary or metastatic), raising the suspicion of an ACC. A deeper investigation was carried out, with cervical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealing a 17 × 17 × 20 mm spiculated nodule in the superficial lobe of the right parotid, immediately posterior to the mandible angle, with a marked contrast-uptake; in addition, a 9 mm well-circumscribed nodule in the deeper planes of the left submandibular gland was reported, without malignancy features; no other cervical lesions were observed. Liver biopsy confirmed malignancy, with overlapping morphological features of the parotid cytology. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (Octreoscan) demonstrated an increased uptake in the parotid gland , whereas liver metastases exhibited mild expression . Meanwhile, 68Gallium (68Ga)-Positron emission tomography (PET) showed no uptake.
The patient underwent right parotidectomy, with concomitant right supraomohyoid neck dissection and left submaxillectomy. The postoperative period was complicated by local hematoma with airway compromise, requiring surgical reintervention which, subsequently, led to an altered state of consciousness. In face of a normal brain CT, a psychosis associated with hypercortisolism was considered. In addition, he also presented infection of the surgical site, solved after antibiotherapy course.
Pathologic examination showed an ACC: solid patterned neoplasia, without glandular features or evidence of mucin secretion, composed by cells with extensive acinic differentiation demonstrated by the presence of diastase-resistant PAS-positive zymogen granules that were immunoreactive for cytokeratins 8/18, DOG1, beta-catenin, and cyclin D1; Ki67 index 70%. There was no evidence of neuroendocrine differentiation (the neoplastic cells were immunonegative for chromogranin A and synaptophysin.). Immunoexpression of ACTH was not detected . Pathologic TNM staging: pT3N0R1.
Imaging reevaluation indicated disease progression with, additionally, multiple bone metastases in vertebral column. Thereafter, chemotherapy was started with a weekly paclitaxel-carboplatin regimen and hypercortisolism was managed with metyrapone (3 g/day), ketoconazole (400 mg/day) and lanreotide (120 mg/month). Further, high insulin doses were required to maintain an acceptable glycemic control. Posterior to case discussion at multidisciplinary team meeting, the patient was proposed to radiotherapy of symptomatic spinal metastases. Afterwards, a rapid disease progression was depicted by cervico-thoraco-abdominal CT with hepatic, bone, adrenal, and ganglionar metastases. At that time, it was decided to switch chemotherapy regimen to oral vinorelbine in monotherapy. However, in face of the clinical worsening, that treatment was withdrawn and the patient was referred to palliative care. As his condition progressively deteriorated, he eventually passed away, 15-months after initial diagnosis.