The patient case was a 50-year-old, gravid 0, para 0 (G0P0), unmarried Han Chinese woman with regular menstruation. Six months ago, she visited another medical center in Southern Taiwan for abdominal bloating, where bilateral ovarian tumors were diagnosed. At laparotomy, a left ovarian cystic tumor (35 × 20 × 10 cm) and a right ovarian tumor (12 × 8.5 × 6 cm) with normal uterus and cervix were noted. An additional tumor of about 12 × 9 × 8 cm in size was also found in the mesorectum of the rectosigmoid colon. Resection of the mesorectum and bilateral oophorectomy was performed at the first operation at another medical center. The histopathology report revealed bilateral ovarian cancer (endometrioid adenocarcinoma) and malignant mixed Müllerian tumor from the mesorectum with biphasic differentiation (adenocarcinomatous and spindle cell sarcomatous elements). No heterologous element was identified. No further treatment was performed after the first time of operation. However, she felt progressive abdominal bloating and dysuria recently. She, therefore, visited the department of surgery of our hospital. On physical examination a lower abdominal mass was palpated. An abdominal computed tomography scan revealed a large low density mass in the pelvic cavity . The maximum size of this lesion was about 15 cm in its long-axis diameter. This mass affected the bladder and the rectosigmoid colon. Laboratory tests showed that the serum lactate dehydrogenase level was 271 IU/L. The serum CA 125 level was elevated up to 154.3 U/mL, while the serum CA19-9 level was within the normal range.
On suspicion of the recurrence of a tumor, another laparotomy was performed. The pelvic cavity was fully occupied by a huge cystic mass with adjacent organ involvement. A tumor measuring 12 × 10 × 8 cm arising from the mesorectum was identified - the terminal ileum was also involved. The tumor infiltrated into the pelvic floor and the retroperitoneum and a palliative resection of the rectosigmoid colon with an end-to-end anastomosis was performed. Unfortunately, 10 days later, the patient had an anastomotic leakage caused by the penetration of the drain tube which was noted when a colonoscopy was performed. Consequently, an ileostomy was constructed for fecal diversion as the healing of the leakage site had failed. The pathologic findings showed neoplastic cells with areas of local glandular and squamoid differentiation. In addition, bizarre giant tumor cells in the carcinoma component were also noted . Patternless oval to spindled neoplastic cells were noted in the sarcoma component . Immunohistochemical studies showed that CK7 and CD10 staining were positive but that the CK20 staining was negative. After one and a half months in our department, she recovered uneventfully and was transferred to the division of medical oncology for chemotherapy. Chemotherapy, with regimen of bleomycin, etoposide and cisplatin, was arranged but pancytopenia with nosocomial infection was noted after the chemotherapy. Due to the poor response to systemic chemotherapy, hospice care was suggested and she was referred to the previous medical center.