A 45-year-old man presented with a history of progressively increasing headaches, right-sided weakness, difficulties with speech for 4 months as well as a single generalized tonic clonic seizure. Clinical examination identified some papilledema, expressive aphasia, and right-sided hemiparesis (MRC grade 4/5). There was no history of intravenous drug use or radiation exposure. Routine laboratory studies returned as within normal limits and serology was negative for HIV, Hepatitis -B Virus (HBV), Hepatitis-C Virus (HCV), and Epstein Barr virus (EBV). No other comorbidities were noted. Head CT (native + contrast enhanced) demonstrated a heterogeneously enhancing lesion located in the left temporo-parietal areas with extension to the basal ganglia. Extensive perilesional edema and mass effect with midline shift towards the contralateral side was visible .
Brain MRI again demonstrated a large heterogeneous mass with both solid and cystic components 5.9 × 4.4 × 5.2 cm in size. The lesion imposed hypo-intense on T1W images and was heterogeneously hyper-intense on T2W sequences. After I/V gadolinium administration, heterogeneous contrast enhancement of the solid part was seen. There was massive perilesional edema resulting in profound mass effect. Pre-surgical chest X-ray and ultrasound abdomen were normal. Differential diagnosis favored high grade glioma or atypical meningioma.
Patient underwent a left temporo-parietal craniotomy and subtotal excision of the tumor, under image guidance. Intraoperatively, solid and cystic components (containing xanthochromic fluid) were encountered. The solid tumor component was greyish-white in appearance, showed firm consistency that required excision rather than removal by suction-irrigation. This part of the lesion was highly vascular leading to massive blood loss (approximately 2–2.5 liters). Since the tumor displayed poorly defined dissection planes only a subtotal excision could be achieved. Intraoperatively, he received 3 units of blood transfusion. The immediate post-operative period was uneventful and there was no deterioration in her neurological status. Post-operative CT scan showed some residual tumor without tumor cavity hematoma or bleed. Repeat CT scan 3 days after surgery showed resolving mid-line shift and edema. He received steroids in tapering doses for 7 days and was discharged home 10 days after surgery.
Microscopic examination of the resected tissue specimen revealed a spindle cell tumor with marked nuclear atypia and very high mitotic index (17–20/10 HPF). No glial tissue was identified on Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein (GFAP) staining and areas of hemorrhage and necrosis were evident on histological examination. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA), S-100, and vimentin and negative for desmin, pan-cytokeratin, MIC-2, CD34, glial fibrillary acidic protein, progesterone receptor, and epithelial membrane antigen. Ki-67 positivity was 35–40%. Pathological diagnosis was made of a malignant, mesenchymal, non-meningothelial tumor favoring leiomyosarcoma. Given the diagnosis, a CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis were done, to evaluate for other potential sites of involvement, but results were negative for systemic disease. His Karnofsky Performance Scale Index was 80. Post-operatively, the patient received adjuvant radiotherapy (60 Gy in 30 fractions). The patient had a final neurological exam that showed improved motor weakness (MRC grade +4/5), but was lost in follow up one year after the surgery.