A 9-year-old African-American male with a history of steroid-dependent NS presented to the nephrology clinic for routine follow-up care in September 2018. He had been diagnosed with NS at 4 years of age, and had multiple relapses and hospitalizations for management of his disease. He was up-to-date with all his immunizations, including vaccination for S. pneumoniae; he had received PCV7 as the initial series and a booster of PCV13. He was receiving mycophenolate mofetil 200 mg twice a day for about 6 months and prednisone 30 mg on alternate days for about 1 month. The child’s only complaint was neck pain and stiffness that had begun 1–2 days prior to presentation. His mother attributed the neck pain to muscle tightness and stated that massages to the area provided some pain relief. There was no history of recent illness, fever, nausea, vomiting, photophobia, headache, seizures, or altered mental status.
On physical examination, he was afebrile and had mild periorbital swelling and edema on lower extremities. He appeared ill, exhibited neck rigidity, and revealed reflex knee flexion on neck flexion. He was transferred to the emergency department (ED) for further evaluation and management. On admission to the ED, his temperature was 99 °F, heart rate 112 beats per minute, respiratory rate 22 breaths per minute, blood pressure 101/72 mmHg, and oxygen saturation 99% on room air. The child persisted with neck stiffness, and roughly 7 hours after presenting to the ED, he developed fever (102 °F). At this time, a lumbar puncture was performed to rule out meningitis. Laboratory evaluation showed mild anemia, leukocytosis with neutrophil predominance, hyponatremia, elevated C-reactive protein (CRP), and an elevated sedimentary rate. Cerebrospinal results demonstrated pleocytosis, with very decreased glucose level. Laboratory findings are summarized in Table .
The patient was started on ceftriaxone 100 mg/kg/day and vancomycin 15 mg/kg/day, and was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) for close cardiopulmonary monitoring and further management.
By the second day of hospitalization, both cerebrospinal and blood cultures grew S. pneumoniae,, which was pansensitive, including to ceftriaxone. Vancomycin was discontinued and the child remained on ceftriaxone monotherapy at 100 mg/kg. He was restarted on daily steroid therapy to attain remission of the NS. While in the PICU, the patient developed persistent hypertension and was treated with enalapril 5 mg twice a day. Amlodipine 5 mg once a day was added later as a second antihypertensive to further optimize blood pressure (BP) control. The child was transferred to the inpatient ward where he completed a 2-week course of ceftriaxone with no complications. His overall edema improved, and his BP was controlled on two antihypertensive drugs. He was discharged home on prednisolone, enalapril, and amlodipine, with close follow-up with nephrology as an outpatient.