In 2012, a 4-year old Caucasian girl, on holiday with her parents, was brought to University Hospital Rijeka emergency department with abdominal cramps, vomiting and bloody diarrhea that had started 24 hours before her admission. Gastroenterocolitis was initially suspected, but as the abdominal pain intensified, an explorative laparotomy was performed on the third day of disease to exclude perforated appendicitis, which the surgeon eventually did not confirm. On the first postoperative day she appeared confused, dyspnoic, hypotensive, pale, oliguric and her laboratory findings were: hemoglobin (Hb) 60 g/L, hematocrit (Hct) 19%, platelet count 43×10
9/L, white blood cell (WBC) count 17×10
9/L, urea 16.6 mmol/L, creatinine 308 μmol/L, creatine kinase 971 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 317 U/L, alanine transaminase (ALT) 276 U/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) 175.2 mg/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 3856 U/L, albumins 19 g/L, complement component 3 (C3) 0.5 g/L, complement component 4 (C4) 0.08 g/L, degree of
in vivo hemolysis 50 mg/L, pH 7.265, pCO
2 3.64 kPa, pO
2 9.2 kPa, HCO
3 12 mmol/l, SBE -13.1 mmol/L. She was immediately admitted to intensive care where she was analgosedated with 6 mg of midazolam and 200 mcg of fentanyl, intubated with an uncuffed orotracheal tubus and invasive mechanical ventilation was started. During the first week of disease she received multiple transfusions of packed red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma and platelets as continuous adrenergic and diuretic support was established with 5–8 mcg/kg/min of dopamine and 50 mg/24 h of furosemide, respectively. After additional laboratory tests, typical HUS caused by reaction to
E. coli toxin was diagnosed. By the end of the first week of disease her medical condition had not improved and she became anuric, accompanied by combined metabolic and respiratory acidosis, pulmonary edema, bilateral pleural and pericardial effusions, ascites and persistent anemia and thrombocytopenia. Continuous veno-venous hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF) as well as plasmapheresis were indicated. Access was established via an intravascular catheter placed through the right internal jugular vein guided by ultrasound. CVVHDF was performed for 12 days. Characteristics of dialysis included a dialyzer membrane surface area of 0.8 m
2, solution containing bicarbonate (multiBic 2 mmol/L potassium solution for haemofiltration; Fresenius Medical Care Deutschland GmbH) and a blood flow rate of 3–6 ml/kg/min. The system was anticoagulated with 100 IU/kg of unfractionated heparin each day. An additional blood flow rate for ultrafiltration was 0.5–2 ml/kg/h. The renal replacement therapy was only stopped for 3 hours a day in order to carry out plasmapheresis which was also initiated on the 8th day of disease. This lasted for 10 days, for 2 hours each day and 40 ml/kg of fresh frozen plasma was used per day. During this period continuous analgosedation with 0.15 mg/kg/h midazolam and 0.075 mg/kg/h morphine, as well as invasive mechanical ventilation were maintained. Continuous adrenergic support was stopped after the 6th day of disease. After 12 days of renal placement therapy, diuresis started to improve while serum creatinine and urea started to decrease. Despite the polyuria during the initial phase of recovery of renal function, because of the still significant fluid retention, we established negative fluid balance by continuous infusion of furosemid. Renal function had completely recovered by the 25th day of disease . We have reason to believe that the blood levels of creatinine and urea at the time that the CVVHDF was started were falsely lower because of hemodilution caused by the body’s extreme retention of extracellular water.
During the course of plasmapheresis a marked recovery of the platelet count and hemoglobin level was noticed, as well as a significant decline of LDH levels and the degree of
in vivo hemolysis. After termination of plasmapheresis, an additional time was needed for restoration of platelets and normal erythrocytes to optimal levels because of their biological cell cycle. We were restrictive throughout in the transfusion of packed red cells, aiming for a target hemoglobin level of 70–80 g/L.
The most striking laboratory finding during the first two weeks of disease was extreme leukocytosis which persisted during the second week of disease; the highest WBC count was 94×10
9/L. As no other signs of systemic bacterial infection or invasive mycosis were noticed, we believe that leukocytosis was provoked by the systemic inflammatory response to toxemia. We observed the gradual decrease in the WBC count after the initiation of plasmapheresis and its subsequent normalization by the end of the third week of disease. This trend was correlated with the values of LDH plasma levels .
Bilateral pleural effusions needed evacuation by thoracocentesis on two occasions, on the 8th and 13th day of disease. A CT scan of the thorax performed on teh 15th day of disease revealed a massive left-sided hemothorax complicated by compressive and obstructive atelectasis of the left lung . The hemothorax had to be surgically drained on the 16th day of disease. During the second week of disease we confirmed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) according to PaO
2 to FiO
2 ratio and evidence of hepatization of the lungs on serial ultrasound scans. Because of the pulmonary manifestations of the disease, a protective ventilation strategy using was employed. We mostly used airway pressure release ventilation (APRV) and biphasic positive airway pressure (BIPAP) modes on a Dräger Evita XL mechanical ventilator and frequently applied lung recruitment with the positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) technique monitored by ultrasound. Respiratory function completely recovered by the end of the third week of disease without apparent permanent damage and the girl was successfully extubated on the 24th day of disease.
We ceased the analgosedation on the 12th day of disease in order to evaluate the neurological status of the girl. She appeared comatose, estimated as GCS 4 (E2V1M1) on the Glasgow Coma Scale with flaccid tetraparesis, rotatory nystagmus and symmetrical mydriatic pupils with slow response to light stimulation. An MRI scan of the brain recorded on the 12th day of disease revealed areas of raised signal in the pons, bilaterally in lateral parts of the thalamus , as well as in the right external capsule and the left internal capsule. These findings were analogous with lesions already described in literature believed to be the result of microvascular damage
. Analgosedation was reinstated and afterwards periodically discontinued every few days for approximately 6 hours in order to examine the girl’s clinical neurological status. After the 18th day her level of consciousness and neurological status started to gradually improve and we decided to definitively cease analgosedation 7 days later. No permanent neurological damage was recorded.
We were concerned by severe gastric retention, absent or silent peristalsis and constipation with episodical soft and rare stools during the second week of disease. An MRI of the abdomen performed on the 12th day of disease showed an edematous intestinal wall and distension of the jejunum, ileum and colon ascendens with several air fluid levels . Laboratory findings displayed elevated serum transaminases, total and direct bilirubin and amylase as well as hypoalbuminemia. After prodromal gastroenterocolitis, paralytic ileus obviously evolved and was persistent throughout the second and third week of disease. Therefore, all necessary fluid, macronutrients and micronutrients were completely delivered parenterally via a central venous catheter from the start of disease. In combination with already initiated parenteral nutrition, we carefully started enteral feeding by the end of the second week of disease. As no signs of intraabdominal compartment syndrome, perforation or peritonitis were registered, we wanted to reestablish gastrointestinal function conservatively. Therefore, we applied continuous infusion of 6–10 mg/24h of metoclopramid and intermittent rectal suppositories of 2.5–5 mg of bisacodyl for the next two weeks. We also progressively increased the contribution of the enteral input as soon as peristalsis started to improve. Bowel function slowly recovered by the beginning of the fourth week of disease.
As the patient and her family had been on holiday at the time of admission, an in-person follow up was not possible. However, the authors made contact with the family in 2013 and the parents reported that their daughter was perfectly healthy and without apparent consequences.