A 39-year-old male patient with a history of smoking for 15 years was admitted to the surgical department with complaints of mucocutaneous cholestatic jaundice, pruritus, and right hypochondrium pain for 3 months. He also reported weight loss. The clinical examination found a patient with an altered general condition classified as grade 2 on the performance status scale of the ECOG (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group)/WHO (World Health Organization) system. General examination revealed mucocutaneous jaundice accompanied by scratching lesions. The rest of the clinical examination was unremarkable.
Blood examination found hemoglobin decreased to 8.7 g/dl, a normal platelet rate of 234 000 U/mm3, hyperleukocytosis at 12 000 U/mm3, a correct prothrombin level of 72%, total bilirubin at 180 µmol/l (9 times normal), direct bilirubin at 162 µmol/l (40 times normal), gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase at 450 UI/l (10 times normal), alkaline phosphatase at 1250 UI/l (8 times normal), AST (aspartate aminotransferase) at 97 U/l (2 times normal), ALT (alanine aminotransferase) at 110 U/l (2 times normal), and CRP (C-reactive protein) increased to 78 mg/l. The renal function and ionogram were correct.
Abdominal ultrasound showed distension of the gallbladder with dilation of the intrahepatic bile ducts and common bile duct to 15 mm . Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed dilatation of the intrahepatic and common bile ducts with a mass at the biliopancreatic intersection . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed stenosis of the lower part of the common bile duct associated with a suspected malignant process at the level of the ampulla of Vater .
Duodenoscopy revealed an ulcer-budding process in the duodenal papilla. Biopsy revealed nonspecific subacute interstitial duodenitis without malignant proliferation.
The patient was taken into the operating room and underwent laparotomy. Surgical exploration revealed a tumor measuring ~3 cm in size located in Vater’s ampulla. The surgical procedure comprised cephalic duodenopancreatectomy according to the Whipple procedure. We then performed a digestive reconstruction according to the Child’s procedure (pancreatojejunostomy, hepato-jejunal anastomosis, and gastrojejunostomy). The surgical procedure proceeded without any major complications. The operating time was ~5 h and 30 min. The blood loss was ~200 ml. The postoperative course was unremarkable, and the patient was discharged 7 days postoperatively.
Macroscopic , histological , and immunohistochemical examination of the surgical specimen revealed a myofibroblastic and inflammatory tumor of Vater’s ampulla. The resection margins were healthy. Analysis of peripancreatic lymph node dissection found 8 healthy nodes out of 8.
The patient has been under clinical and CT monitoring for 2 years, with no tumor recurrence or metastases on various surveillance CT scans.