A 61-year-old Caucasian male patient presented with progressive hemiparesis of the left side, which started in the left leg and ascended to the left arm. A seizure was not reported. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of the head showed multiple intracerebral mass lesions.
Leiomyosarcoma of the right forearm had been diagnosed 9 years earlier after partial resection (R2) of a growing tumor mass. Subsequently, the patient had declined a follow-up resection or further adjuvant treatment. Due to the tumor's progressive growth, the patient was readmitted 1 year after the first diagnosis via the surgical outpatient section. On presentation, the patient had normal weight and appeared well. A cardiac exam showed a regular rate and no murmur. A pulmonary exam showed a vesicular breath murmur. The examination of the right forearm showed a rigid tumor. The neurological exam revealed no abnormalities. Laboratory test results were normal (leukocytes: 8.3 ×109/l, hemoglobin: 9.5 mmol/l, thrombocytes: 269 ×109/l, creatinine: 80.0 µmol/l). The daily medication was pantoprazole 40 mg (0-0-1) and diclofenac 50 mg (1-1-1). Besides the leiomyosarcoma, the past medical history of the patient was empty. The patient did not smoke or consume alcohol in excessive amounts.
MRI scans of the forearm revealed a recurrent tumor measuring 5.4 × 3.9 × 1.9 cm (Additional file : Fig. S1). Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scans excluded systemic metastatic disease. The locally recurrent tumor was completely resected (R0), and the patient received local radiotherapy with 50 Gy.
Another 8 years later, the patient presented with the left-sided hemiparesis that led to the most recent admission via the emergency department. The patient presented with a Karnofsky Performance Scale (KPS) score of 40. He had average weight and reduced general condition. A cardiac exam showed a regular rate and no murmur. A pulmonary exam showed a vesicular breath murmur. His temperature was 37.0 °C, blood pressure was 116/46 mmHg, and pulse was 99 beats/minute The respiratory rate was 13/minute, peripheral oxygen saturation was 95%, and the Glasgow Coma Scale was 15. The patient was alert, attentive, and oriented. The speech was clear and fluent, with good repetition, comprehension, and naming. The cranial nerve exam did not reveal any abnormalities. Examination of motor skills showed paresis of the left arm proximal 2/5, the left arm distal 4/5, and the left leg 3/5. The gait was not testable due to paresis. The stance was only with maximum support. The laboratory findings revealed elevated leukocytes (12.3 ×109/l) and elevated thrombocytes (437 ×109/l). The daily medication was folic acid 5 mg (1-0-0), calcium carbonate/cholecalciferol (1-0-0), and Novamin (oral drops) (40-0-40).
Preoperative MRI scans of the head confirmed multiple contrast-enhancing mass lesions . Microsurgical resection of the right parietal mass was performed. The left temporal mass lesion was left unaddressed since a complete resection of all masses was impossible without an increased risk of aphasia. CT scans revealed further metastasis-suspect foci in the pancreas and the first sacral vertebral body.
One month after neurosurgical resection, the patient suffered from melena, and a gastroduodenoscopy was performed. An antral swelling with oozing bleeding was found, and biopsy revealed a third metastasis of the known leiomyosarcoma. After good recovery, the patient received whole-brain irradiation with 30 Gy and local irradiation of the metastasis in the first sacral vertebra with 30 Gy. The patient showed functional recovery with discharge home possible. He refused adjuvant chemotherapy. The patient died 3 months after the neurosurgical intervention and 9 years after the first diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma due to systemic progression. An autopsy was not performed.
The first resection specimen derived from the right forearm displayed moderate cell density, with spindle-shaped cells arranged in intersecting fascicles located in the deep subcutaneous fibrous tissue. The tumor cells displayed a focally increased degree of pleomorphism, few visible mitotic figures, and small areas of fibrinoid necrosis. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the cells were positive for sarcomere actin, and Ki67 labeled around 10% of the tumor cells as proliferative. The tissue was classified as leiomyosarcoma grade 1, according to the FNCLCC [Fédération Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre Le Cancer] grading system.
On recurrence 1 year later, increased cellularity, highly elevated mitotic activity (> 20 per 10 high-power fields [HPF]), and an additional population of pleomorphic, partially multinucleated osteoclast-like giant tumor cells were noted. The recurrent tumor was classified as leiomyosarcoma grade 3 (score 6), according to FNCLCC, rpT1b Nx M0, L0 V0 Pn0, according to the TNM classification.
Resection specimen of the brain metastasis revealed moderate cell density of spindle-shaped, only slightly pleomorphic tumor cells arranged in intersecting fascicles. Giant osteoclast-like cells were absent in the brain metastasis. Mitotic count was highly elevated (>40 per 10 HPF), and necrotic areas constituted around 30% of the entire tissue. On immunohistochemical analysis, the tumor cells displayed patchy reactivity for both alpha smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) and sarcomere actin. In summary, the tumor was diagnosed as a metastasis from the formerly known leiomyosarcoma, FNCLCC grade 3 (score 6) .