A 52 year old woman presented with pain and a palpable mass in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen 18 months after completing treatment for ovarian carcinoma. She had previously undergone bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and en bloc subtotal colectomy for bilateral high-grade ovarian serous papillary carcinoma infiltrating the sigmoid colon. She also had peritoneal and diaphragmatic seedlings which were debulked concurrently. After the resection, the residual disease was estimated to be less than 0.5 cm2. Subsequently, she received 6 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin and taxol. Her CA125 level which was elevated at 149 U/L prior to resection later returned to 8 U/L (normal range = 0 – 25 U/L). Apart from chemotherapy, there was no past history of exposure to radiotherapy or any carcinogens.
During this presentation, the only abnormality on routine hematology and biochemistry was a slightly elevated alkaline phosphatase at 178 U/L (normal range = 35–130 U/L). The CA125 level was within the reference range (7 U/L) and no other tumor markers were assayed. A Computerized Tomography (CT) scan revealed a large heterogeneous mass almost completely replacing the right lobe of the liver . No other abdominal, pelvic or lung lesions were identified. Due to the recent history of ovarian cancer, this lesion was suspected to be a solitary metastatic deposit from the ovarian cancer. The liver lesion was not biopsied in order to avoid any needle tract seeding with malignant cells. In the absence of any extrahepatic disease she proceeded to undergo an extended right hepatectomy. During hepatectomy the tumor was found to be adherent to the diaphragm, a part of which was removed en bloc. Post-operatively, she made a good recovery without any complications.
Macroscopically, the tumor was a large, solid and cystic mass that included areas of necrosis and cystic degeneration measuring 18 × 12 × 8 cm . Microscopically, it consisted of pleomorphic malignant spindle cells including rhabdoid and bizarre giant cell forms on a chrondromyxoid stromal background with focal Periodic Acid Schiff-positive cytoplasmic granules. There was no evidence of epithelial differentiation which excluded the possibility of sarcomatoid hepatocellular carcinoma. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for alpha1-antitrypsin but showed no other indicators of differentiation. This contrasted with the serous papillary morphology of the previously resected ovarian tumor that showed no sarcomatoid areas and no rhabdoid differentiation. The liver tumor was therefore judged to be a second primary rather than a metastatic deposit of the resected ovarian carcinoma. The lesion was classified as primary HES on the basis of its morphology and immunohistochemical staining pattern with complete excision noted at the hepatic resection margins.
After remaining well for approximately 6 months she developed progressive shortness of breath and a follow-up CT scan demonstrated a large recurrent tumor contiguous across the right hemithorax and abdomen. A percutaneous biopsy of this mass confirmed the recurrence of the primary hepatic sarcoma. Palliative chemotherapy with ifosfamide and doxorubicin was commenced but had to be stopped after 3 cycles due to severe side effects. She received palliative care for gradual deterioration and died 6 months later.