A 77-year-old male with a history of diabetes mellitus reported to a private spine clinic for a problem with his right lower extremity. He had clinical signs of foot drop, with 0/5 muscle strength during plantar flexion, dorsiflexion, inversion, and eversion. His Achilles reflex was absent. Two-point discrimination was absent over the anterior and lateral calf and foot, with anesthesia present in the great toe, plantar fascia, heel, and calf. Anesthesia was also present in the plantar fascia of the left foot as well, with sensory Paresthesia present on the dorsum of the left foot and great toe. He was able to feel digital pressure in the superior portion of the anterior tibialis, but could not distinguish sharp and light touches. He was not being pharmacologically managed for his diabetes, and did not take any prescription medications. He reported taking only a tablespoon of red wine vinegar once daily. The patient had a mesomorphic build, and had no prior history of low back pain in the last year. In March of 2004, the patient claims that he fell in his front yard while gardening. Upon falling, he claims to have heard a loud "pop" in his lower back, but did not feel any back pain afterward. About one week after falling, he began feeling tingling and weakness in his right leg and foot. His primary care physician referred him for a lumbar spine MRI, needle electromyography, and nerve conduction velocity testing of the lower extremities.
Results of the electrodiagnostic testing showed a right L4 and L5 radiculopathy, and a lumbar plexopathy. The lumbar spine MRI report concluded L4 and L5 posterolateral disc herniations, with compression on the anterior elements. Table shows the results of the initial EMG study. Nerve conduction velocity of the right common peroneal nerve showed no response. The right posterior tibial nerve showed a prolonged distal latency with normal amplitude and low conduction velocity. The left common peroneal nerve showed normal latency with low amplitude and low conduction velocity of 37 meters per second (mps). The right sural nerve showed low amplitude with normal latency. The H-reflexes showed prolonged latency bilaterally.
The patient was referred for physical therapy, where he was fitted for an ankle-foot orthosis to maintain a dorsiflexed foot position. His physical therapy routine consisted of ambulatory exercises to modify his gait to the orthosis, ankle and foot range-of-motion exercises with therapist assistance, and strengthening exercises for the right calf and gluteal regions.
After three months with no apparent improvement, the patient voluntarily discontinued care against medical advice and reported to the author's office. His initial self-rated disability was 43%, as measured by a Functional Rating Index, found to have an acceptable level of reliability and validity . He did not report any pain in his leg, and scored a 0/10 on a numeric pain rating scale. Visual inspection revealed significant atrophy of the right gastrocnemius and tibialis anterior; however, calf girth measurements were not obtained.