A 53-year-old female presented with an asymptomatic gastric tumor found incidentally during screening upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. The lesion appeared as a flat protrusion in the lesser curvature of the lower third of the stomach . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) showed a 23 × 12-mm, hypovascular, heterogeneous lesion thickening the second and third gastric layers. The findings strongly suggested scirrhous gastric cancer . Although the lesion biopsy revealed no evidence of malignancy, our suspicion of scirrhous gastric carcinoma persisted due to the configuration of the tumor and our EUS findings. We performed an endoscopic open biopsy to make an accurate diagnosis. However, evaluation of the specimen revealed only slight chronic inflammatory cell invasion. Computed tomography (CT) scanning showed only gastric wall thickening at the angle of the stomach . Positron emission tomography-CT showed no evidence of metastasis or abnormal uptake in the tumor . The laboratory findings were normal as were levels of tumor markers (CEA, 1.6 ng/ml; CA19-9, 12 U/ml).
In spite of these findings, given our high level of suspicion, we decided to perform surgery to obtain a definitive diagnosis and treat the tumor. We chose gastric wedge resection using a combined laparoscopic and endoscopic method for several reasons. Firstly, the biopsy did not show cancer, but the tumor configuration strongly suggested malignancy; therefore, we selected a non-exposed method to prevent interoperative dissemination of tumor cells. Secondly, the tumor appeared to be a submucosal tumor (SMT), and gastric wedge resection using a combined laparoscopic and endoscopic method is among the safest procedures for resection of gastric SMTs [, ]. Lastly, we chose a wedge resection because if the tumor was not malignant, a distal gastrectomy could be considered excessive. We obtained an interoperative pathological diagnosis, and we planned to perform partial gastric resection in the absence of malignancy and laparoscopic distal gastrectomy with lymph node dissection if cancer was identified.
The first port was inserted through the umbilicus using an open technique. Four additional ports were inserted: the second in the subcoastal arch, the third at the mid-point between the camera port and the second port, and the fourth port and fifth port symmetrically. The first, second, and third ports were 12 mm. The fourth and fifth ports were 5 mm.
The lesser curvature gastric tumor was easily recognized laparoscopically. Our intraabdominal examination revealed a scar-like tumor with twitch. After preparation of lesser curvature vessels, the tumor periphery was viewed endoscopically. The entire circumference of the tumor was marked to ensure an approximately 0.5-cm margin from the tumor edge . We then injected indigo carmine into the gastric submucosal layer with an endoscopic needle. The seromuscular dissection was performed using a laparoscopic electrocautery scalpel . The specimen was pulled up along with the surrounding mucosa. A full-layer resection including the specimen was achieved using a laparoscopic stapling device . We used a hand-sewn technique for seromuscular suturing so the staple line would not be exposed . Finally, we inserted the endoscope into the duodenum to ensure that there was no gastric stenosis.
The patient had gastric hypoperistalsis on postoperative day (POD) 1. We inserted a gastric tube; however, we planned for an extended period with no oral intake in case of persistent hypoperistalsis. On POD 4, a W-elemental diet (W-ED) tube was inserted to drain the stomach and provide nutrition. We started the patient on continuous low-dose erythromycin, mosapride citrate, and Rikkunshi-Tou to treat her hypoperistalsis. The W-ED tube was removed on POD 11 after an oral contrast study confirmed gastric motility. On the same day, oral intake was initiated. The patient was discharged from the hospital on POD 18.
The submucosa tumor could be seen in the resected specimen. The tumor had 20 mm × 20 mm × 13 mm size, including spindle cells with myxoid changes and collagen fibers. There was no evidence of adenocarcinoma. In this findings, fibromatosis can be a differential diagnosis.
Spindle tumor cells were identified in the gastric wall from the submucosa to the serosa accompanied by myxoid changes and collagen fibers in the stroma . The spindle cells were strongly immunopositive for alpha-smooth muscle actin, and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), but immunonegative for c-kit, desmin, and S-100. CD34, bcl-2, beta-catenin, CD31, pankeratin, platelet-derived growth factor-A, and DOG1 were almost immunonegative . Based on these findings, the tumor was diagnosed as gastric IMT.