A 21-year old female patient presented at the emergency department of a hospital with progressive pain in the middle and lower right abdomen, nausea and vomiting. The symptoms began 12 h prior to her arrival. Defecation and stool consistency were non-contributory. Fever and chills were denied. Lactose intolerance was the only reported pre-existing condition.
The rectal temperature of the patient was 37.4 °C. The patient was alert and oriented. The described pain in the middle and lower right abdomen could be induced by pressure. Apart from these findings, the physical examination was non-contributory.
Specifically, the patient’s abdomen was soft, and there were no signs of guarding or peritoneal signs. Auscultation of the abdomen was non-contributory. A digital rectal examination did not provoke any pain in the recto-uterine pouch. The sphincter tone was normal. The stool was brown and did not exhibit any signs of blood or viscous secretions. The reported pain was noticeably decreased following novaminsulfon infusion. Overall, the patient appeared to be only marginally compromised, and dismissal from the emergency department was therefore considered.
A marked increase in the white blood cell count to 17.8 × 109/L (ref.: 3.8 × 109/L – 9.8 × 109/L) was observed, whereas the C-reactive protein level was non-contributory at 2.4 mg/L (ref.: <5). A slightly increased free tetraiodothyronine level of 15.7 pmol/L (ref.: 7.7 – 14.2) was observed as an incidental finding. All other assessed laboratory parameters were normal.
There was a trace of free fluid around the terminal ileum. Further, an intestinal cockade sign was visible, and the size of the appendix wall was increased to 3 mm . In the distal parts of the appendix, the outer appendiceal diameter was increased up to 12 mm.
The overall accuracy of ultrasonography for the identification of acute appendicitis was recently estimated at approximately 90 % based on an analysis of a small cohort of 60 patients . In this study, an appendiceal diameter >6 mm under compression was considered to be the cut-off point for a reliable diagnosis . On French submarines, ultrasonography of the abdomen is routinely performed in cases of suspected appendiceal abscesses, and the accuracy is high .
Based on the ultrasound results, a diagnosis of acute appendicitis was made. Laparoscopic surgical intervention allowed for the extirpation of an inflamed, phlegmonous appendix .
The operation and postoperative management were without any complications.
Putrid, ulcero-phlegmonous, hemorrhagic appendicitis and peri-appendicitis with putrid fibrinous serositis and fecal impaction were diagnosed. A partial spread of the inflammatory process beyond the surgical margins was observed.