We present a case of a 54-year-old woman who attended the outpatient clinic of the tertiary referral center, in March 2021, with a two-month history of blunt ear pain, aural fullness, and muffled hearing in her left ear. Through clinical examination, a solid mass at the anterior ear canal wall was revealed imitating an osteoma at first sight but with highly vascularized overlying skin . There was no palpable resistance in the neck, parotid, or mastoid regions. The patient’s pure tone audiogram was normal. Because of the atypical appearance and location of the lesion, a probatory biopsy taken from the ear canal mass revealed malignant myoepithelioma with myoepithelial differentiation . No ductal differentiation was detected. Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for cytokeratin, smooth muscle antigen, calponin, S-100 protein, and a BER-EP4 .
CT scan showed the nonhomogeneous formation measuring 20 × 11 mm in the anterior EAC wall, with the marginal osteolytic process. This formation was located dorsally to the TMJ .
Magnetic resonance imaging in T2 weighted sequence showed a signal-enhanced area with central hypodensity in the anterior ear canal wall adjacent to the left temporomandibular joint capsule. The tumor did not infiltrate the TMJ capsule. PET/CT scan confirmed a slightly enhanced area in the anterior ear canal wall (SUV 5). No distant metastases were detected.
Surgery was performed by a team consisting of head and neck and maxillofacial surgeons. The tumor was resected using a combined transmeatal and transparotid approach. Initially, using the transmeatal approach, the tumor distance from the tympanic membrane was easily visualized using a 30-degree 3-mm endoscope. The tumor ear canal portion was resected along with the surrounding ear canal bone using a Rosen knife and a Skeeter drill. During the resection, it was found that there was an osseous defect at the antero-inferior part of the EAC wall. The defect location was suspected of the Foramen of Huschke. Subsequently, using a transparotid approach, the tumor infratemporal portion was identified. The initially planned facial nerve identification was not necessary, due to sufficient distance between the tumor and the nerve trunk. Despite the tumor intimate relation to the TMJ, the TMJ joint capsule was not involved and therefore was left intact. The EAC bony defect was reconstructed with tragal cartilage to prevent joint herniation into the auditory canal.
The postoperative course was completely uneventful. The patient did not complain of any hearing loss or mastication pain but suffered from trismus for 3 weeks.
According to the multidisciplinary tumor board (MDT) recommendation, the patient was not referred for adjuvant therapy and was scheduled for a regular oncological follow-up with repeat scans. Six months post-surgery, October 2021, a minor bulging near the cartilage used for canal defect reconstruction was noted at the anterior wall of the ear canal. The patient remained completely asymptomatic. The subsequent CT scan did not rule out the recurrence of the tumor. An adequate biopsy was taken under general anesthesia. The definitive histology revealed only fibrotic tissue with no signs of malignancy. The MDT board concluded that further resection would not obtain a better surgical specimen, and only follow-up with the scheduled scans was recommended. The last PET/CT scan from March 2023 showed no signs of recurrence. The patient has been followed up every 3 months with a planned PET/CT scan 12 months down the line.