A 57-year-old man of Han nationality with a 1-month history of high fever, night sweats, and back pain was admitted to the Respiratory Department of the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University in June 2014. Before admission he had consulted with the Chinese Medical Hospital of Guangdong Province where he was treated with cefprozil tablets for a fever. He had touched an unpasteurized isolated stomach of a sheep with his injured hand about 1 month prior to admission to our hospital. The fever was initially presumed to be secondary to tuberculosis or a metastatic tumor. Routine blood testing revealed a white blood cell count of 7170/mm3 (normal, 4000 to 10000/mm3) with 80 % neutrophils (normal, 40 to 70 %), erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 35mm/hour (normal, 0 to 20mm/hour), C-reactive protein level of 3.19mg/dL (normal, 0to 0.6mg/dL), and procalcitonin level of 0.21ng/L (normal, 0 to 0.05ng/mL). A serological test for tuberculosis (Hexagon TB; HUMAN Diagnostics, Wiesbaden, Germany) was negative. The positive blood test indicated he had an infection. On the sixth day after admission, a Gram-negative bacillus was detected in his blood culture, and Sulperazone (sulbactam and cefoperazone) had already been administered intravenously. On the same day, he experienced weakness and numbness in both legs and difficulty urinating, but his temperature decreased to normal. A physical examination performed by an orthopedist revealed grade 3/5 paraparesis in his right lower limb, grade 4/5 paraparesis in his left lower limb, and hypermyotonia in both lower limbs, and positive percussion and palpation at the spinous processes of T9 and 10. No other pathological findings were detected. Thoracic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was immediately conducted, and a laminar inflammatory reaction of T9 and rear epidural abscess between T9 and 10 were found; significant cord compression was observed at these levels . Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (CT) revealed osteolytic destruction with radionuclide steps at the arch of T9 . We presumed that he had a specific infection in the neural arch of his thoracic vertebra and he was transferred to the Department of Orthopedics for an operation the next day.
After 1 day of preoperative preparation, he underwent total laminectomy at T8 to 10 with percutaneous pedicle screw fixation at T7 to 8 and T11 to 12. The abscess and lesion (composed of sequestrum fragments, inflammatory granulation tissue, and smaller separate abscesses) were removed after collecting samples for pathology and culture. Chronic nonspecific inflammation was detected in the biopsy sample, and no bacteria grew in the culture. One day after the operation, the previously cultured Gram-negative bacillus from his blood was identified as Brucella melitensis, and a with minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of 0.094ug/ml, and rifampin was also sensitive with 26 in Kirby–Bauer (KB) method. Thus, he was finally diagnosed with Brucella infection of the thoracic vertebral arch with epidural abscess formation. He received antibiotic therapy with cefoperazone sodium and sulbactam sodium (1.5g twice daily, since admission) administered intravenously for 4 weeks and antibiotic therapy with doxycycline (100mg twice daily) and rifampin (450mg once daily) administered orally for 4 months according to the drug sensitivity test. After this treatment, his recovery was confirmed by clinical findings (disappearance of night sweats, weakness, and fever), laboratory test results (three negative blood cultures), and MRI findings (adequate decompression, no abscesses, and no inflammatory reaction in his spine). He was discharged 4 weeks after the operation and followed up in our out-patient clinic for 10 months with no evidence of disease recurrence. He has also been followed up in the Epidemic Prevention Station of Guangzhou city; the Rose Bengal test was negative in his serum three times together with a tube agglutination titer of 1/24.