On July 12, 2019, a 67-year-old male patient presented to the Affiliated Jinhua Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine (Jinhua, China) because of occasional dull flank pain for 4 years and investigation of a mass on the right adrenal gland for 1 week.
The patient had suffered from pulmonary nodules for more than 10 years and regular reexamination of these nodules was performed every year.
The patient’s height and weight were 168 cm and 52.5 kg, respectively. There were no positive signs in the abdomen or a positive Murphy sign. He had no history of hypertension.
No abnormal hormone levels were detected during endocrinological examinations, and routine blood tests were within normal limits (plasma renin 7.70 pg/ml, plasma aldosterone 16.4 ng/dl, plasma adrenaline 32 pg/ml, plasma noradrenaline 730 pg/ml).
Preoperative computed tomography angiography + computed tomography urography (CTA + CTU) showed a mass with a heterogeneous shadow (9.5 × 6.3 cm) in the right adrenal gland . The mass was well-circumscribed, early peripheral enhancement was obvious in the arterial phase , with central progressive partial filling in the venous phase and in delayed imaging .
The patient was diagnosed with an adrenal tumor preoperatively and pheochromocytoma was considered. However, he was subsequently diagnosed with an adrenal cavernous hemangioma.
Retroperitoneal laparoscopic adrenalectomy was performed following the oral administration of Phenoxybenzanine Hydrochloride 10 mg twice a day for one week. Blood volume was fully expanded by fluid infusion two days before surgery to reduce intraoperative blood pressure fluctuations. It took 145 min to complete the operation. Fluctuating or sometimes substantially elevated catecholamine levels in the blood of pheochromocytoma patients can trigger severe cardiovascular complications such as TTS, heart failure, cerebral haemorrhage and sudden cardiac arrest and secondary shock ; thus, perioperative monitoring is critical. In this case, the surgeon strictly followed the principle of “minimal touch” during the operation, and intraoperative anaesthetic monitoring showed that the tumour remained stable during intraoperative contact and tumour haemodynamics. Therefore, the patient was not transferred to the ICU for advanced monitoring, but to a general ward with continuous post-operative monitoring of vital signs for 24 h. After determining that their vital signs were stable, the patient was monitored regularly and discharged 6 days after surgery. The patient was discharged 6 d after surgery.
Histopathologic analysis of the surgical specimen showed an adrenal hemangioma with extensive internal hemorrhage and necrosis .
CT was repeated regularly after surgery. No recurrence, metastasis or other complications were observed after 1 year of follow-up.