Following a trivial fall, an 89-year-old right handed male with hypertension, chronic renal failure, and orthostatic hypotension, acutely presented with a flaccid left-sided hemiplegia. He complained of severe neck pain, a limited range of cervical motion, and left lower extremity Lhermitte’s signs (e.g., “electric-like/lightening sensations”). On examination, he was hemiplegic in the left upper (0/5) and lower extremity (1/5) (e.g. the right sided weakness was mild (4/5) in these distributions) and had intact sensory and sphincter function. After 1 hour in the emergency room, his left upper extremity paralysis improved to a 1–2/5 strength level.
The cervical CT revealed a displaced comminuted C1 arch fracture on the left that involved the left lateral mass of C1 there was an accompanying diathesis of 10 mm [ and ]. There were also multiple bone fragments in the spinal canal. A single fracture of the posterior arch of C1 was also noted on the right side (e.g., diathesis of 3 mm), accompanied by an additional fracture of the left occipital condyle. The CT angiogram did not reveal a vertebral artery dissection, and/or thrombosis. The MR posterior cord compression at the C1 level; there was also focal myelomalacia and/or a high intrinsic cord signal (T2W study) with severe cord compression at C3/4 [ and ].
The patient underwent an emergent C1–C3 laminectomy with occiput (CO)–C4 instrumented fusion. Under fluoroscopy, bilateral C1 lateral mass screws, bilateral C2 pars interarticular screws, and C4 lateral mass screws were applied; no C3 lateral mass screws could be placed due to technical interference from the C2 screw heads. Occipital plates/rods were placed bilaterally from C0-C4 [ and ].
Immediately postoperatively, the patient regained strength in both his upper and lower extremities (4/5). He was discharged to a rehabilitation facility 14 days later without any residual deficits. Six months postoperatively, his neck pain resolved, and X-rays showed no subsequent instrument-related complications.