A 31-year-old Caucasian woman with increasing abdominal distension, pain and nausea was referred to our department by gastroenterologists at the ED. She had had abdominal pain and chronic constipation symptoms since the age of 17 years. These complaints had been extensively analyzed several years earlier by the gastroenterology department, when no abnormalities were identified in blood tests or a colonoscopy. One month prior to her presentation at the ED, she had been admitted to the surgical department with complaints of decreased intake, nausea and a 10-day absence of defecation. Blood tests did not show abnormalities. An abdominal X-ray showed signs of constipation. After conservative treatment with enemas and oral debulking agents, her complaints decreased and she was dismissed from hospital.
During the intake at the ED, she was found to have no history of weight loss, and, with the use of bisacodyl and close monitoring of her diet, she had managed to regulate her bowel movements, with the exception of her recent admission. For the preceding 1 year, the patient had desired to become pregnant. Therefore, she had stopped using oral contraceptives, after which she had a regular cycle without intermediate bleeding or abnormal vaginal discharge.
In her physical examination, we encountered a painful woman with a normal body temperature. She had abdominal distension, hypertympanic percussion, active bowel movements and tenderness of the abdomen without signs of abdominal guarding. Additional blood tests showed a normal hemoglobin level of 7.8 (normal range, 7 to 10mmol/l), without any signs of an infection with 6.8×104 leukocytes (normal range, 5 to 10×104) and a C-reactive protein level of 8.0 (normal level, <10mg/l). An abdominal X-ray and subsequent abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a significantly inflated cecum of 9cm and an obstruction in the sigmoid colon with a proximal distension of the colon. Because of the expansion of the cecum, a decision was made to perform emergency colonoscopy for desufflation; however, the obstruction could not be passed with a scope.
Given the threat of cecal blow-out, it was decided to perform a laparotomy. During the surgical procedure, a solitary stenosis was found in the sigmoid colon that appeared as a malignancy. Therefore, an oncological sigmoid resection with primary anastomosis was performed. Because of the distension of the cecum, a temporary loop ileostomy was constructed. Upon further inspection of the abdomen, no abnormalities were found in the liver, peritoneum or pelvis. The patient recovered quickly after the procedure and could be discharged after 1 week, with the intention to perform a loop ileostomy reversal after 3 months.
A macroscopic pathological examination of the resected sigmoid showed extensive fibrotic foci with induration in the intestinal wall without mucosal abnormalities . In the sigmoid wall, a tumor 4.4cm in size was found; however, this did not appear to have an obvious relationship to the mucosa. Microscopically, the tumor showed epithelial tubular structures surrounded by what was interpreted as cytogenic stroma and focal hemorrhage remnants, suggestive of endometriosis . Foci of tubes with ciliated columnar epithelium were present in some lymph nodes.