A 27-year-old woman with acute onset lower abdominal pain for 2 days was transferred to our hospital by ambulance. She was diagnosed as idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) 2 years ago in another hospital based on abnormal vaginal bleeding in her first trimester. After treating with prednisone and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) she got remission and delivered a healthy daughter later. After 3 months of delivery, dermal ecchymosis appeared on her arms and legs gradually and these symptoms were not completely relieved by the treatment of glucocorticoids as well as Chinese traditional medicine. No bleeding disorder was reported in her family history information. Physical examination showed mucocutaneous bleeding on arms and legs, a regular pulse of 115/min, a blood pressure of 116/69 mmHg and a temperature of 36.5 °C. There was abnormal tenderness in the lower left abdomen. Dark red blood was observed by culdocentesis test. Ultrasonography showed a left adnexal cystic mass of 61 mm × 25 mm with low level internal echoes and free liquid areas in the pelvis, bilateral iliac fossa, Morrison pouch and perisplenic space. The pregnancy test was negative. Her hemoglobin (Hgb) was 8.3 g L−1 and platelet count 53 × 109 L−1. Her activated partial thromboplastin tine (aPTT) was 91.9 s while both prothrombin time (PT) and fibrinogen were normal. A diagnosis of hemorrhagic corpus luteum combined with ITP was made. The aPTT was 92.7 s and the Hgb fell to 6.8 g L−1 after transfused with 400 ml of fresh frozen plasma. Since the risk of surgical approach was extremely high as the aPTT was enormously prolonged, a conservative management was undertaken with strict vital monitoring and blood support. Drug therapy such as tranexamic acid (TA) and aminocaproic acid (EACA) were also used. Besides, we performed the coagulation factors tests under the consultation by hematologist and found that the activity of FVIII was significantly decreased to 0.10% (50–150) simultaneously the FVIII inhibitor was 5.16 BU (0–0.6). Her lupus anticoagulant testing was negative. She was then confirmed the diagnosis of acquired hemophilia A (AHA) and treated with the recombinant factor VIIIa (rFVIIIa). The Hgb fell to 5.3 g L−1 while the Platelet count increased to 97 × 109 L−1 after 48 h of conservative management. After 3.5 U of blood and 800 ml of fresh frozen plasma transfusion, her condition began to improve in the following days. Ceftazidime injection was performed for 6 days after 72 h hospital admission since her temperature raised to 38.9 °C. The aPTT was 84.2 s after 5 days of rFVIIIa therapy. Laparoscopy surgery was not performed since the aPTT was still prolonged as well as her condition is improving. Ultrasonography after 2 weeks of conservative treatment showed that a left adnexal cystic mass of 99 mm × 65 mm with equal level internal echoes and ring blood flow. The hemoperitoneum showed a gradual resolution since there only left the pelvic liquid area which was 81 mm × 47 mm. In the meantime, her dermal ecchymosis on arms and legs faded away. In the end, she discharged in a good condition with her Hgb rose to 133 g L−1. Considering her unimproved prolonged aPTT under the treatment of rFVIIIa, we suggested her further consultation in hematology department.