A 78-year-old Japanese woman presented to our hospital with severe bilateral knee pain (right > left) for 14 months. At the first visit to the outpatient department, evidence suggestive of polyarthritis and a rash on the right knee were observed. Polyarthritis was indicated by three swollen joints (bilateral knee and right elbow) and six tender joints [bilateral distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints of the middle finger, right proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint of the index finger, bilateral knee, and right elbow]. Before presenting to our hospital, the patient had a history of psoriasis vulgaris for which she received outpatient treatment for 1 year; however, she had been in clinical remission and had completed the follow-up. Psoriasis vulgaris recurrence was ruled out by a skin biopsy performed on the rash of the right knee. On the day of her presentation as an outpatient, laboratory data showed negative results for both rheumatoid factor and anti-citrullinated peptide antibody; however, CRP (4.47 mg/dL) and matrix metalloprotease (MMP)-3 (836.5 ng/mL) levels were abnormally high. Radiographic examination showed bone cyst formation in the lateral condyles of the femur, disappearance of the bilateral knee joint space, narrowing of the left hip joint space, pencil-in-cup-like joint destruction, juxtaarticular new bone formation of the DIP, and joint destruction of the PIP . Magnetic resonance imaging was performed at 1 week after the first consultation at our hospital. Low-intensity T1-weighted and high-intensity T2-weighted images showed an intraosseous cystic lesion in the lateral condyle of the left femur, and a contrast effect was observed at the margin of the cyst. The pathological findings at synovectomy of the right knee, performed 6 months after the outpatient presentation, were only suggestive of a chronic inflammation pattern. We diagnosed PsA based on Classification Criteria for Psoriatic Arthritis (CASPAR) score of 4 points (skin psoriasis, previously present; negative rheumatoid factor; history of dactylitis; and juxtaarticular new bone formation on the radiograph) . Although treatment with methotrexate (MTX) at 4 mg/week and ADA at 40 mg/2 weeks was initiated, the patient’s joint destruction progressed and activity of daily living was severely restricted, indicating poor control of disease activity. Following severe restriction of activities of daily living owing to the right knee and left hip pain, sequential total knee and total hip arthroplasty were performed at an interval of 4 months, and MTX at 6 mg/week was recommenced at 4 weeks postoperatively. The right elbow joint pain persisted, and radiography showed bone cysts at the lateral humeral condyle in the right elbow. After 8 weeks of using MTX alone, we decided to add TCZ at 162 mg/2 weeks as a second-line biologic. At that time, inhibitors of interleukin (IL)-22/23 and 17 had not yet obtained insurance approval in Japan. At 4 weeks after initiation of TCZ treatment, the right elbow joint pain and swelling were improved. At 8 weeks after TCZ initiation, MMP-3 gradually decreased (198.7 ng/mL). Twelve weeks after TCZ initiation, MMP-3 improved further (81.1 ng/mL), and low disease activity [clinical disease activity index (CDAI) < 10] was observed. Thereafter, CDAI decreased further and the patient achieved the clinical remission rate (CDAI <2.8) at 1 year after TCZ initiation . In addition, radiographs showed repair of the bone cyst at the lateral humeral condyle in the right elbow and repair of the DIP joints . The patient has been in clinical remission for 5 years, with no restrictions of daily life activities.