A thirty-six year old female was referred to our hospital with a 16-year history of right rib pain and recurrent lower respiratory system infections. The patient had multiple computed tomography scans in the past, but the diagnosis was never established with success as intravenous contrast was never used. The patient had no other symptoms at presentation and no abnormality was found on physical examination. The only abnormal laboratory value was a slight increase in the white blood cell count, which was 14,000 cells/mm3. A chest radiograph was obtained and was normal. The diagnosis was established with a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest with intravenous contrast. The test revealed a mass in the right lower lobe (measuring 4.5 × 3.8 × 2.9 cm). An aberrant artery (3 mm in diameter) arose from the abdominal aorta and flowed into the lesion (see Figures and ). The patient was diagnosed with intralobar pulmonary sequestration and surgical exploration and treatment with video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery was planned.
After getting the appropriate consent for the operation and administering general anesthesia and intubation, the patient was placed in a full left lateral decubitus position with the table flexed at 30-degrees at the level between the nipples and the umbilicus in order to have better exposure of the right intercostals spaces. A 10 mm zero-degree thoracoscope was inserted in the right pleural cavity through a port site placed in the sixth intercostal space on the midaxillary line. Two additional port sites were placed in the fifth intercostal space on the posterior and anterior midaxillary line, respectively. The port sites were chosen with a possible thoracotomy in mind. The VATS exploration revealed immediately a mass in the base of the right lung. Upon retraction of the mass, an aberrant artery coming through the diaphragm and leading into the mass was identified (see Figure ). The artery was carefully dissected from the surrounding tissues and divided using an endothoracic stapling device (Endopath 45, Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio). The same device was used in order to perform a tailored wedge resection of the right lower lobe, removing this way the pulmonary sequestration. Inspection of the rest of the lung revealed normal pulmonary parenchyma.
After closing the port sites and inserting a chest tube, the patient was extubated and was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit for observation. Her recovery was uneventful and the chest tube was put on water seal the next morning and removed on post-operative day 2. The patient was discharged the third post-operative day and until today, about five months after the operation, remains in excellent condition. Final pathology revealed intralobar pulmonary sequestration.