A 49-year-old female patient was referred because of new corneal scars of unclear origin in both eyes, after presenting with reduction in visual acuity (left worse than right), first noticed 6 months earlier. The best-corrected decimal visual acuity was 0.6 (-2.50/-0.75/1°) at the right eye and 0.4 (-2.75/-1.75/4°) at the left eye. The patient, who had undergone a strabism operation 45 years earlier, revealed that she had indeed never seen optimally out of her left eye (amblyopia e strabismo). Other prior operations included a bilateral blepharoplasty 3 months earlier, as well as a threefold injectable dermal fillers procedure in the previous year.
The intraocular pressure by applanation tonometry was 12 mmHg and 10 mmHg at the right and left eye, respectively. Examinations at the slit lamp revealed a dry eye syndrome as well as a sharply defined anterior-stromal corneal scar at both eyes, located paracentrally at the right and left eye . In addition, the left eye showed a midperipheral pigmented lesion with small cyst-like inclusions and small pigmented specky endothelial “precipitates” . This alteration ran through the whole stroma and showed a positive Seidel test using blue light after staining with fluorescein . This fluorescein staining cannot be triggered purely by a dry eye syndrome. The anterior chamber depth was regular and equal at both sides, and no cells could be identified in the anterior chamber. No iris transillumination could be detected and both lenses were clear.
Funduscopic examination as well as optical coherence tomography of the macula showed a regular finding on both sides. The corneal sensitivity was subjectively equal on both sides, with a significantly higher motion-triggering sensitivity at a thread length of 40 mm at the right eye and 45 mm at the left eye, measured by means of the Cochet-Bonnet aesthesiometer (Luneau Technology, Pont de l’Arche, France). Using a conversion chart provided by the aesthesiometer manufacturer, this corresponds to a pressure of respectively 9.5 mg/S at the right eye and 8 mg/S at the left eye (S = 0.0113 mm2 sectional area of the filament), or of respectively 0.8 g/mm and 0.7 g/mm2.
The patient stated having no history of trauma or accident with a foreign body, and did neither take any oral nor ophthalmological medication. Following a more precise anamnesis, the patient indicated that she had been on holiday to France 5 months earlier, during a known ongoing oak processionary moth caterpillars infestation, and to ride mountain bike, climb and practice yoga. The patient was referred with a bandage contact lens as well as an initial topical therapy with Moxifloxacin eye drops q.i.d. (4 × /day) for avoiding a bacterial superinfection.
The examination using in vivo confocal microscopy (Heidelberg, Retina Tomograph III with Rostock corneal module, Heidelberg Engineering GmbH, Dossenheim, Germany) revealed a corneal epithelial ingrowth capped with a scarred structure in both eyes and confirmed the corneal perforation at the left eye . The examination using the anterior segment optical coherence tomograph (AS‑OCT) CASIA 2 (Tomey Corp., Nagoya, Japan) also revealed a scar-covered corneal lesion at both eyes, reaching the anterior-stroma at the right eye but running through the whole cornea at the left eye.
Our differential diagnosis of the unclear positive Seidel test was as follows:
corneal perforation during laser-assisted blepharoplasty. corneal perforation by foreign body granuloma (hairs of the oak processionary moth caterpillar). corneal perforation during filler surgery.
We performed a penetrating keratoplasty at the left eye using a Barron trephine. The diameter of the graft was 8.25 mm, sutured in a patient opening of 8.0 mm diameter with the double continuous cross stitch technique according to Hoffmann. Preoperatively, the corneal button was tomographically measured in a sterile manner in order to minimize refractive surprises after keratoplasty [–]. The surgery was uneventful and no surgical complications occured. The scarred and perforated host cornea was divided into 4 pieces for further investigation: microbiology, virology, histology and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Additionally, aqueous humour was removed intraoperatively for further virological examination (Polymerase chain reaction—[PCR]). Postoperative therapy involved topical corticosteroids (prednisolone acetate eye drops 5 × /day, tapered by 1 drop every 6 weeks), Ofloxacin eye drops (5 × /day for 2 weeks) as well as artificial tears (5 × /day). One year after an uncomplicated course following keratoplasty, the corneal graft appeared clear without sign of rejection. No signs of intraocular irritation could be detected.
Both the bacterial and fungal polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of the corneal abrasion were negative. The culture showed no growth neither after 7 days, nor after 4 weeks.
Neither Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-, Cytomegalovirus (CMV)-, Herpes simplex virus (HSV)- nor Varicella zoster virus (VZV)-specific DNA was detectable in the PCR of both the corneal biopsy and the anterior chamber aspirate. Consequently, there was no indication of a florid infection.
Histological examination (periodic acid-Schiff, Alcian blue, hematoxylin and eosin, Masson–Goldner and Congo red stain) of the host cornea revealed an irregular epithelium, which became centrally ingrown into a fissure of the corneal stroma through defects in Bowman´s layer . Descemet´s membrane appeared intact and the endothelial cells attached. Neither congophilic nor mucoid deposits could be detected. (Microscopes: Zeiss Axioskop 40; objective lenses: Zeiss A-Plan × 10/0,45, Zoom 6,3 × TV2/3""C; camera: AxioCam MRc5, software: ZEN 3.2 (ZEN lite); Pixel: 2584 × 1936.)
One micron-thick semithin section (toluidine blue) showed a full thickness perforation of the cornea with an epithelial plug extending to the lower third of the corneal stroma and degenerative epithelial cell remnants interspersed with pigmented cells underneath . Pigmented cells could be focally also seen within the epithelial plug and adherent to the posterior surface of Descemet’s membrane (not shown). Despite rupture of Descemet’s membrane, there was no evidence of epithelial cell migration into the anterior chamber . (Light microscope: Olympus BX51 [Olympus, Hamburg, Germany], ColorView camera [Soft Imaging Systems, Münster, Germany], Cell^F software [Olympus]).
Transmission electron micrographs (electron microscope EM 906E, Carl Zeiss Microscopy, Oberkochen, Germany) confirmed the presence of degenerative epithelial cells and pigmented cells, resembling iris stroma or iris epithelial cells, within the posterior wound . The posterior collagenous layer of Descemet’s membrane was found to extend into the wound gap from the posterior surface, along with remnants of degenerated endothelial cells. No signs of moth caterpillar hairs or other foreign bodies could be detected in serial sections. (Transmission electron microscope: LEO 906E [Carl Zeiss Microscopy, Oberkochen, Germany], integrated plate camera [Carl Zeiss Microscopy], Analysis software package [Soft Imaging Systems]).