A 26-year-old male had trauma to his left foot and sustained injury to his left great toe. He was unable to walk following injury and consulted in an outside hospital for primary care. He was diagnosed to have a fracture of proximal phalanx of left great toe. Conservative management was done in the form of buddy strapping. Patient came for review only after 6 months following injury and was diagnosed with great toe proximal phalanx non-union. At 6 months post-trauma, in our hospital, he presented with inability to walk normally and difficulty on full weight bearing due to pain in the left great toe. Patient was unable to carry on with his daily day to day activities.
On examination of great toe, he had tenderness in proximal phalanx region with abnormal mobility at fracture site in all planes. Interphalangeal joint flexion was absent and metatarsophalangeal joint flexion of 10° and extension of 5° were present. There were no distal neurovascular deficits. The movements were significantly restricted due to pain.
Plain radiograph of great toe showed displaced fracture fragments with sclerosed fractured ends and persistent visible fracture line with mild displacement in proximal phalanx .
Computed tomography (CT) of great toe revealed gap between fracture site and closed fracture ends thus confirming the diagnosis of fracture non-union of the proximal phalanx.
He was planned for open reduction and internal fixation with plate osteosynthesis and bone grafting.
Under ankle block, patient was placed in supine position on operating table. Parts painted and draped. Dorsal approach made with incision just medial to EHL tendon . Fracture site reached after splitting EHL tendon. Fibrous tissue and callus were excised. Fracture site was curetted and debrided. Fracture site was packed with freshly harvested bone graft from iliac crest. After anatomical fracture reduction, internal fixation was done with 1.7 mm “L” shaped facial plate screws. Reduction checked with image intensifier Wound closure done after suturing EHL. Below knee splint applied with ankle in neutral position.
Two-week post-surgery splint removed. Patient was started on partial weight bear walking after 4 weeks. Full weight bearing was started after 8 weeks . At 3-month follow-up, patient was able to walk normally with improvement in range of movements. CT showed signs of fracture union with good rotational alignment .