A 20-year-old woman, who had an unremarkable medical history and was immunocompetent, was admitted to another hospital due to fever, fatigue, and anorexia, and she was administered acetaminophen and antibiotics. She also experienced vomiting, as well as systemic myalgia 5 days after admission causing an inability to move. Her condition was worsening, and she was transferred to our hospital 7 days after her initial admission. Upon admission, her liver enzyme and creatine phosphokinase (CPK or CK) levels were high. She had no history of jaundice, pruritus, clay stools, melena, hematemesis, abdominal distension, or altered sensorium. She reported only an occasional small amount of ethanol intake and had not had sexual intercourse. The patient denied intake of indigenous medicine or intoxication. The patient did not report any past major surgeries, blood transfusions, or intravenously injected drug abuse prior to onset of the disease. Additionally, she did not report any history of diabetes, hypertension, tuberculosis, thyroid disease, trauma, exposure to industrial toxins or radiation, blood or blood component therapy, bleeding disorders, promiscuity, or similar complaints in the family or neighborhood.
Upon admission, her vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 37.2 °C; blood pressure, 110/72 mmHg; pulse, 75 beats/min; respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min; and oxygen saturation, 98% on room air. A physical examination revealed mild enlargement of the liver, no pitting edema in both legs, and no coarse crackles over the lung fields. Laboratory findings are presented in Table .
Additionally, a chest radiography showed absence of pulmonary congestion, pleural effusion, and cardiomegaly. Electrocardiography was not performed on admission. Computed tomography of the chest and abdomen revealed minimal pericardial effusion, diffuse swelling, and an internal heterogeneous image in the liver. These findings were compatible with acute hepatitis; therefore, we did not examine for cardiac function despite the presentation of pericardial effusion.
On the second day of hospitalization, we performed a liver biopsy, which showed parenchymal necrosis and lymphocytic infiltration . On that same night, the patient was hypotensive, with a blood pressure of 80/65 mmHg, and her heart rate was elevated (113 beats/min). Physical examination revealed cyanosis of the lips, distended external jugular veins, pretibial edema in both legs, and coarse crackles over the lower bilateral lung fields.
Electrocardiography showed diffuse ST-segment elevation . Her troponin I, CK level in the blood (CK-MB), and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) were elevated (troponin T, 0.879 ng/mL [normal value: ≤0.016 ng/mL]; CK-MB, 253 U/L [normal value: ≤5 U/L]; BNP, 1513 pg/mL [normal value: ≤18.4 pg/mL]). Chest radiography showed a normal cardiac size, pulmonary congestion, and pleural effusion in the right lung only . Echocardiography showed a dilated, spherical ventricle with reduced systolic function (left ventricle ejection fraction [LVEF], 17%) and pericardial effusion .
Cardiac catheterization on day 3 revealed high pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (22 mmHg) and a low cardiac index (2.0 L/min/m2). Coronary angiography showed no abnormalities. Endomyocardial biopsy (EMB) was performed via the right internal jugular vein, and five specimens were obtained from the right ventricle side of the interventricular septum. Endomyocardial biopsy findings showed lymphocyte infiltration of the myocardium and intranuclear inclusions, which was confirmed as acute myocarditis . In response, intravenous administration of dobutamine (4 μg/kg/min) was started on day 3. The patient’s systolic blood pressure increased to approximately 100 mmHg and stabilized, and dobutamine administration was gradually tapered off. On day 10, echocardiography showed normalization of LVEF to 71%, dobutamine was stopped, and laboratory findings were almost normalized as follows: CPK, 143 U/L (standard values: 40–150 U/L); aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 36 U/L (standard values: 11–30 U/L); and alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 278 U/L (standard values: 4–30 U/L). Laboratory findings on day 18 were normalized as follows: CPK, 123 U/L; AST, 18 U/L; ALT, 21 U/L, and BNP, 18 pg/mL. She was eventually discharged on day 19 of her hospital stay.
One serum sample for viral serological testing was collected before the EMBs were obtained. Follow-up serum samples were collected between 2 weeks, 1 month, and 6 months after the initial serum sample. The presence of HSV-specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) was detected upon admission to our hospital, increased at 2 weeks, and returned to normal 6 months later. Additionally, HSV-specific immunoglobulin G (IgG) increased from hospital admission to 2 weeks . Other viral serologic tests, including HIV, were negative . Based on this finding, we diagnosed the patient with acute myocarditis combined with hepatitis arising from HSV infection.