The patient was a 79-year-old woman with a height of 153 cm, weight of 50.0 kg, and body mass index of 21.4 kg/m2. She had previously undergone surgeries for cerebral meningioma and cervical spondylosis. One year earlier, the patient had experienced a transient ischemic attack accompanied by transient amaurosis and was prescribed aspirin. A transthoracic echocardiogram at that time found no wall motion abnormalities, an ejection fraction of 67%, and mild-to-moderate aortic regurgitation.
Five days before admission to our hospital, the patient experienced an out-of-hospital cardiopulmonary arrest. A family member performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and the patient regained consciousness. The patient denied further medical treatment at that time. However, due to continued chest pains and progressively worsening respiratory distress, the patient visited our institution. Her vital signs on arrival were as follows: temperature of 36.0 °C, pulse of 97 bpm, blood pressure of 159/88 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 26/min.
Blood analysis showed a reduction in hemoglobin level (7.9 g/dL; normal range 12.5–15.5 g/dL), elevated levels of plasma cardiac troponin I (52 pg/mL; normal range 0–26 pg/mL), and N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (5600 pg/mL; normal range 0–125 pg/mL). Arterial blood gas analysis (room air) showed PaO2 of 65.0 mmHg and PaCO2 of 47.6 mmHg on arrival at the hospital. A transthoracic echocardiogram indicated pericardial effusion, but showed no other new developments since the previous echocardiogram.
A chest X-ray showed blunting of the left costophrenic angle , indicating pleural effusion. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed type A aortic dissection with a dilated ascending aorta (55 mm) accompanied with pericardial and left pleural effusion . The pericardial and pleural effusions showed no enhancement. The diameter of the ascending aorta was 55 mm. We strongly suspected that the out-of-hospital cardiopulmonary arrest experienced by the patient had been the result of pericardial effusion culminating in cardiac tamponade. Following the diagnosis of acute type A aortic dissection, the patient was immediately prepared for ascending aortic replacement surgery.
In the operating room, the patient was hemodynamically stable during induction of general anesthesia with midazolam (3 mg), remifentanil (0.3 μg/kg/min), and rocuronium (40 mg). Anesthesia was then maintained with sevoflurane (1.5–2.0%) and remifentanil (0.1–0.3 μg/kg/min). We used propofol (2–4 mg/kg/h) instead of sevoflurane during cardiopulmonary bypass. Transesophageal echocardiography demonstrated slight pericardial effusion and a distinct echo-free space that indicated left pleural effusion.
Surgery was initiated via median sternotomy with the patient in supine position. After the initial incision, a dark red-colored hematoma (approximately 45 g) was observed in the pericardium, and a larger hematoma (approximately 600 g) was found in the left pleural cavity. We then discovered a 20 × 15-mm defect in the pericardium toward the left pleural cavity and diagnosed a congenital partial left-sided pericardial defect. A blood clot had formed around the defect that appeared to be obstructing further blood flow. A 15-mm tear was found adjacent to the ascending aorta, and ascending aortic replacement surgery was performed under cardiac arrest using hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass (20 °C). As the left ventricle and left atrial appendage were seemingly unaffected by the pericardial defect, pericardial reconstruction was not carried out. The duration of surgery, anesthesia, and cardiopulmonary bypass was 376, 497, and 254 min, respectively.
After surgery, the patient was transferred to the general intensive care unit and was weaned from mechanical ventilation on the third postoperative day. CT scans after 7 days showed that the pleural effusion had resolved completely, and an echocardiogram after 14 days did not detect any pericardial effusion. The patient recovered without any complications and was discharged 26 days after surgery.