An 82-year-old Caucasian man who had been on continuous cycling peritoneal dialysis (CCPD) for 12 years was admitted to our hospital with general malaise, loss of appetite, weight loss and somnolence. He did not describe abdominal pain or fever. His medical history included renal failure due to nephrolithiasis and he had not experienced peritonitis before. His physical examination was unremarkable and he was experiencing no abdominal tenderness at the time of his admission. His white blood cell count was 9600/ml with 80 percent neutrophils. His C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 118 mg/L (Normal range: 0-5 mg/L). His blood cultures were negative. He was started on ampicillin and sulbactam and ciprofloxacin treatment empirically. Even though his peritoneal fluid was clear and there were not any leukocytes present, peritoneal fluid cultures taken on admission revealed Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The ampicillin and sulbactam was switched to piperacillin and tazobactam and ciprofloxacin treatment was continued since the isolate was sensitive to both. Two weeks after his admission, he developed a cough with sputum production. There was a new infiltration on his chest X-ray consistent with pneumonia and his CRP level increased from 32 mg/L to 152 mg/L. He was switched to imipenem and vancomycin therapy. He still did not describe abdominal pain or fever and there was no abdominal tenderness on physical examination. Even though the peritoneal fluid count did not show any leukocytes, a control peritoneal fluid culture revealed Stenotrophomonas maltophilia which was sensitive to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was added to treatment. Despite treatment with imipenem, vancomycin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for two weeks, his condition deteriorated rapidly and he developed septic shock. While analysis of his peritoneal fluid was still negative for white blood cells, peritoneal cultures obtained during the septic shock revealed vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium (VRE). His blood cultures were negative, however stool cultures also revealed VRE. He was started on linezolide therapy however his condition deteriorated rapidly and he died six weeks after hospitalization.