A 45-year-old male referred to our institution who had a twisting injury to his right knee with a popping sensation while playing table tennis 11 months ago, causing joint pain and swelling. The patient was able to walk normally after rest and relaxation but complained of low pain and recurrent joint instability during running and other low-energy activities. He was diagnosed of right ACL rupture and tear of the posterior corner of the medial meniscus by Lachman, pivot shift tests and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Sonata Magnetom, Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany). After a discussion of his options, the patient elected for an ACL reconstruction under arthroscopy using a autograft hamstring tendon.
The patient was otherwise healthy besides undergoing tibial lengthening 20 years ago. Bilateral tibia were lengthened by 5 cm with the osteotomy just superior to pes anserinus. At present, the patient is 170 cm tall and weighs 65 kg. Two months after surgery, the patient was walking normally without crutches and gradually returning to sport. He returned to normal athletic sports two years after surgery with no particular discomfort.
The patient was positioned supine and a tourniquet was inflated to 280 mmHg on his right thigh. It was planned to harvest hamstring tendon via the longitudinal 3-cm original surgical incision medial to tibial tubercle. After dissection of subcutaneous tissue, we found that the distal insertion of gracilis and semitendinosus tendon was not located at the common PA postition. The gracilis tendon is located medial and lower to the incision and is 20 cm in length. And the semitendinosus tendon crosses over the medial collateral ligament and extends distally so that we had to make two incisions at the distal tibia to search its insertion. Ultimately we found that semitendinosus tendon was 30 cm in length and the insertion site was 13 cm below the common position and 16 cm from the midpoint of the tibial tuberosity . Then, the 5-strand graft (3-strand semitendinosus and 2-strand gracilis tendon) with a diameter of 8 mm and length of 8 cm was prepared for ACL reconstruction using a fixed-loop device in the femoral fixation and bioabsorbable interference screw in the tibial fixation.
Ultrasound and MRI were used to explore the contralateral semitendinosus tendon with the patient's consent but the path of tendon was found only in ultrasound. We found that the left semitendinosus tendon crosses the popliteal fossa and passes distally from the medial side of the original incision and terminates in the middle of the tibia as does the right .
The patient performed a specific postoperative rehabilitation training, which consisted of icing, straight leg raise, passive and then active mobilization to obtain a normal range of motion and muscle strengthening (especially quadriceps, hamstrings). The patient achieved full normal range of motion in knee flexion and extension and walked normally without crutches at 6 weeks after surgery. He were able to do low-energy exercise 3 months after surgery such as swimming, jogging and bicycling (indoor) etc. The patient was free to do non-confrontational exercise without any discomfort at six months postoperatively. The quadriceps and hamstring muscle strength of the operative limb is almost the same as that of the contralateral limb. There were no postoperative adverse events.