A 60-year-old lady, who was a hypertensive patient under irregular medication, presented with mild-to-moderately-severe headache episodes for four days for which she did not seek medical attention. This was followed by sudden onset severe headache for one day prior to presentation in our emergency room (ER). Headache was holocranial and associated with vomiting. There was no history of trauma, fever, seizures, weakness of limbs, or loss of consciousness. She was not a diabetic and did not have any addictions.
When she presented to our ER, her Glasgow Coma Scale score was 15 and did not have any neurological deficits (World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies grade I). She underwent plain Computed Tomogram (CT) scan of the brain, which showed subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) in the left sylvian fissure and interhemispheric fissure (Modified Fisher grade 1) . Suspecting an aneurysmal SAH, she was admitted in neurosurgery intensive care unit and was started on antiedema measures, anticonvulsant, analgesic, and Nimodipine.
The next day, she underwent CT cerebral angiogram, which revealed a bilobed anterior communicating artery aneurysm, projecting anterosuperiorly and measuring 8 × 7 × 5 mm in size . There was no evidence of any other aneurysms or vascular malformations. On the fourth day of ictus, she underwent right pterional craniotomy and clipping of aneurysm.
Intraoperatively, the sphenoid drilling and craniotomy were uneventful. After exposure of the aneurysm, there was controlled rupture during permanent clipping with a blood loss of around 20 ml and temporary clipping was not required. Papaverine was not instilled. Since the brain was slightly full at the end of surgery, the bone flap was not replaced. She was extubated postoperatively on table and was fully conscious.
Three hours after the surgery, she started developing right sided ptosis, which progressed into complete right sided oculomotor nerve paralysis with dilated and nonreacting pupil. An emergency CT scan of the brain was taken which revealed only postoperative changes . There was no hematoma in the basal cisterns or infarct. But her oculomotor nerve palsy persisted and was painful . Her further postoperative period was uneventful, pupillary reaction to light started to appear, and pain started to disappear by day 7. But pupillary size remained the same . She was discharged on the eighth postoperative day. On follow-up after one week, a Magnetic Resonance Imaging scan of the brain with venogram was done to rule out any infarct or thrombosis of the cavernous sinus. But it turned out to be normal. She was kept under regular follow-up in our outpatient department. Nimodipine was continued for a total of 21 days following the ictus. On review at the end of one month, her ocular movements were normal except for impaired adduction and pupils were normal in size and reaction, but complete ptosis was persisting. On the 61st postoperative day, her ptosis suddenly disappeared on waking up and when she came for follow-up in outpatient department, her ONP had fully recovered .