A 58-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital with the complaints of fever, pedal edema and facial puffiness that had begun 6 days before his admission. Six months earlier, his annual medical checkup showed normal blood pressure, no proteinuria, and an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 68.2 mL/min/1.73 m2. He had no history of loose stool, diarrhea or consumption of uncooked meat. He had no similar history including his family such as impaired kidney function. He was not currently taking any medications, health foods or supplements. His work and hobbies did not expose him to radiation or harmful substances, and he did not use recreational drugs.
On admission, he was conscious and had facial puffiness and bilateral pitting pedal edema. His blood pressure was 150/80 mmHg. His urine examination showed proteinuria and hematuria with a urinary protein to creatinine ratio (UP/UCr) of 1.2 g/g Cr. This UP/UCr remained at 0.5–1.2 g/g Cr after admission. His hemoglobin and platelet count declined within 2 weeks from 10.3 to 6.9 g/dL and from 106 to 48 × 103/μL, respectively. His albumin level was 3.0 g/dL, and decreased to 2.2 g/dL. The LDH level was 296 IU/L, and increased to 341 on the 4th day. The LDH level remained in the range of 263–341 IU/L. His haptoglobin level was 36 mg/dL, which was the lower limit of the normal range. Peripheral blood smears indicated that 3–5% of red blood cells were schistocytes. Serum levels of complement 3 and 4 were within normal ranges. Other immunological tests including anti-nuclear antibody, anti-dsDNA antibody, myeloperoxidase anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, proteinase 3 anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody and anti-lipopolysaccharide antibody showed no abnormalities. Both the direct and indirect erythrocytes antiglobulin tests were negative. Examination of plasma protein fractionation showed no monoclonal gammopathy.
The patient’s serum creatinine level rapidly increased within 3 weeks from 1.6 to 4.8 mg/dL. A kidney biopsy showed marked mesangiolysis and subendothelial swelling in 16 of 18 glomeruli contained in the sections, with the remaining 2 glomeruli being obliterated by global sclerosis . Any thrombi, fibrinoid necrosis and hemoglobin casts were not identified. By immunofluorescence, immunoglobulin, complement and fibrinogen were all negative. These findings were compatible with the definition of TMA. The patient’s ADAMTS13 activity decreased to 30% with negative ADAMTS13 inhibitor but not to a level as low as that observed in TTP.
The result of the laboratory work-up for secondary TMA was negative such as anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome, scleroderma, malignant hypertension, human immunodeficiency virus infection and homocysteinemia. In regard to etiologic analyses, no gene mutation such as CFH, MCP, CFI, THBD, C3 and CFB was identified. Anti-factor H antibody was detected by a Western blotting analysis and an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) with a titer of 76.9 AU/mL. This level was not as high as the levels in other anti-factor H antibody-positive cases. However, because both Western blotting and ELISA were positive, we concluded that the patient was anti-factor H antibody-positive. Although hemolytic assay of sheep erythrocytes was negative of 9.6% and complement factor H-related (CFHR) proteins 1 and 3 were not deleted, it seemed likely that this case was anti-factorH antibody-associated aHUS.
Plasma exchanges (PEs) and hemodialysis therapy were started on the 11th day after the patient’s admission. After eight PEs, we initiated treatment with eculizumab 900 mg/week for 4 weeks and after that every other week . As his kidney function deteriorated, his urine volume gradually decreased until he became oliguric when starting hemodialysis. Soon after starting hemodialysis, he became anuric. The hematologic abnormality and kidney failure requiring dialysis persisted. The platelet count remained 40 × 103/μL. After 8 months of eculizumab administration, the patient suddenly developed a generalized rash with itching and slight dyspnea during the eculizumab administration. Because an anaphylactic reaction was suspected, we therefore discontinued the maintenance eculizumab therapy with his consent.
We performed an analysis of C5 gene for his poor response to eculizumab, because its single missense heterozygous mutation causes a poor response to eculizumab in Japanese patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) . However, the analysis did not detect this mutation.
At 15 months after the onset of aHUS, the patient’s platelet count had increased gradually from 40 to 150 × 103/μL. At the same time, the serum creatinine level before the hemodialysis session had declined with increased urine output despite the persistence of anuria after starting dialysis . We were able to discontinue dialysis therapy, and his creatinine level eventually declined to 1.7 mg/dL.
We performed a second kidney biopsy and found that mesangiolysis markedly decreased. Mesangiolysis and subendotherial swelling with double contour of the glomerular basement membrane were only segmentally observed in some glomeruli. Mesangial widening due to increase in matrix was also observed in most glomeruli . These findings were compatible with the healing stage of TMA.
Thus, our patient developed aHUS requiring dialysis with positive anti-factor H antibody and negative CFHR protein 1 and 3, and the aHUS did not improve rapidly despite treatment with PEs and eculizumab. However, 15 months later he had a recovery of kidney function with platelet normalization and his dialysis therapy was discontinued.