A 66-year-old African man from a rural area presented to our emergency department complaining of persistent, dull lower-back pain of three months' duration and a mass protruding per anus for the previous four days. His lower-back pain was radiating to both thighs and was aggravated by farming activities. His pain was relieved by resting, and the pain was not accompanied by numbness of the limbs. He had no history of difficulty in micturition. The mass protruded per anus spontaneously while he defecated and was associated with severe pain followed by obstipation. There was no obvious bleeding per rectum upon his presentation to our emergency department. He had no history of constipation prior to the protrusion of the mass. He had no history of on-and-off mass protrusion per anus even when lifting loads. In addition, he had no history of changes in bowel habits or blood-stained stools, no history of tenesmus, and no history of incomplete bowel emptying post-defecation. He had no history of feeling any abdominal swelling and no history of significant weight loss. An attempt to reduce the mass was made at the district hospital, but the procedure failed; hence the patient was referred to Bugando Medical Centre. His medical history was uneventful.
His physical examination revealed that he was in pain, alert, afebrile (body temperature 37°C), and dehydrated, but he was not pale. His blood pressure was stable at 100/70 mmHg, and his radial pulse was 90 beats/minute, weak, regular, and synchronous with other pulses. He had no cervical lymphadenopathy, and no Virchow's node was palpable. He had a scaphoid abdomen that moved with respiration, but no visible peristalsis was observed, his abdomen was not tender, and no obvious mass was palpable. His liver, spleen, and kidneys were not palpable, and a tympanic percussion note was heard throughout the abdomen. His bowel sounds were increased on auscultation. The digital rectal examination revealed a large, foul-smelling, gangrenous sigmoid-shaped mass protruding per anus . The rest of his systemic examination was non-contributory.
A provisional diagnosis of sigmoid intussusception with a differential diagnosis of rectal prolapse was made. Blood samples were taken to measure his hemoglobin level and blood grouping. His hemoglobin level was 10 g/dL. Pre-operatively the patient received 3 L of Ringer's lactate solution over the course of one hour, intravenous ceftriaxone 1 g, and metronidazole 500 mg, and he was prepared for emergency exploratory laparotomy. The abdomen was approached through an extended mid-line incision. The intra-operative findings were that the sigmoid colon had telescoped into the rectum and out per anus . The large bowel was not dilated. No other mass or pathology was identified intra-abdominally, nor were mesenteric lymph nodes palpable. Milking of the intussusceptum was done followed by resection of the gangrenous sigmoid colon , and the two bowel ends were exteriorized to form a spectacle colostomy. Macroscopically, normal rugae with no visible lesions or hemorrhagic serosa were visualized. The microscopic findings revealed features of chronic inflammation and necrosis.