A 55-year-old Chinese woman was first seen at our hospital due to distention and vision loss in her right eye (oculus dexter (OD)) for one month. She was diagnosed with PPRCA twenty years ago and had no history of night blindness, ocular or systemic diseases or any other inflammatory and infection diseases. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) at the first visit was 0.2 in bilateral eyes, and the anterior segmental examination of the bilateral eyes revealed characteristic symptoms of AACG and PSC such as shallow anterior chamber and posterior subcapsular cataract. Intraocular pressure (IOP) in the OD was 37 mmHg and 18 mmHg in the left eye (oculus sinister (OS)). In bilateral eyes, HFA demonstrated that the visual field was extremely poor. UBM results showed chamber angle closure in the OD and narrowing in the OS. Wide-angle fundus photography confirmed retinal choroidal atrophy and osteocyte-like pigmentation along the large veins in bilateral eyes, and large choroidal vessels could be seen in the area of atrophy near the optic disc. Large foci of atrophy was seen in the inferior temporal area of the OS. Further, FAF showed significant hypoautofluorescence in bilateral eyes corresponding to the area of atrophy, with some borders surrounding the jagged hyperautofluorescence, suggesting progressive RPE atrophy. In addition, there was a weak background fluorescence in the early atrophic area and transmitted fluorescence at the edge of atrophy that was affected by pigmentation. The pigmentation resulted in obscured fluorescence seen next to the veins. A small patch of obscured fluorescence was found in the posterior pole affected by posterior subcapsular cataract. In the late stage, fluorescence staining was seen in the atrophic areas. Analysis of OCT revealed a significant thinning of the retinal nerve fiber layer in the macula of the OD and detachment of the neuroepithelial layer in the macula. The outer retina in the atrophic area had thinned. There was no RPE in the area with severe atrophy and thinning of the choroid was confirmed. Results of the ERG showed a drop in photopic and scotopic amplitudes of a-and b-wave, more significantly in the OS. EOG revealed a bimanual Arden ratio of 1.2, which was below the standard value. The axial length of the OD was 21.09 mm and the OS was 20.15 mm. These findings lead to the diagnosis of PPRCA, AACG, and PSC in both eyes.
This patient underwent trabeculectomy combined with cataract phacoemulsification aspiration followed by IOL implantation in the OD and Nd-YAG laser iridotomy in the OS. Intraoperative dilatation of the pupil in the OD revealed that the patient’s lens suspensory ligament was relaxed. Three months after surgery, the patient’s BCVA was 0.6 in the OD and 0.2 in the OS, IOP was 17 mmHg in the OD and 13 mmHg in the OS. A further OCT showed the area of intraretinal capsule-like hyporeflective signal in the macula had disappeared, but the other fundus symptoms did not improve significantly. The patient was examined for the entire exome gene, and no ocularly significant mutation loci were identified.