A 74-year-old female patient presented in July 2020 with a chief complaint of occasional pain, thermal sensitivity and slightly increased mobility of her left mandibular second premolar (tooth 35). Her symptoms started two months ago. She also reported unexpected fractures of otherwise asymptomatic teeth in the previous weeks. Four weeks prior to the first examination, a crown of the first left mandibular incisor (tooth 31) suddenly broke. Two weeks later, in a similar manner, she lost a crown of the second maxillary right incisor (tooth 12) because of the fracture in the cervical area of the tooth caused by chewing. She was referred by her dentist to the Department of Stomatology and Maxillofacial Surgery at University Hospital Martin with numerous sites of external cervical root resorption found on her recent panoramic radiograph . All roots of her 23 teeth were affected, and crowns of previously broken teeth 12 and 31 were missing. There were no signs of external cervical root resorption on her previous radiographic examination in 2017. However, the panoramic radiograph from 2017 showed signs of Generalized Stage 3 Periodontitis with moderate to severe bone loss around most maxillary and several mandibular teeth. Subgingival calculus was noted on maxillary molars. Bone loss around these teeth was severe and consistent with presence of calculus. Significant bone loss was present around maxillary premolars, between incisors, and between maxillary right canine and lateral incisor. .
There was no history of dental trauma, periodontal surgery, intracoronal bleaching or Paget disease of bone. Her medical history was positive for arterial hypertension, glaucoma and postmenopausal osteoporosis with multiple osteoporotic vertebral fractures in the thoracic spine. Her treatment for osteoporosis started in 2008 with parathormone injections. Because of an allergic reaction to parathormone, the therapy was changed to strontium renalete for the next two years. Since 2011, she has been administered antiresorptive therapy with the human monoclonal antibody denosumab (60 mg) via subcutaneous injections every six months without any discontinuation until the first presentation to our department. She received the last injection of denosumab in March 2020. At the time of her presentation to our clinic, she was medicated with the following medications: denosumab, calcium, vitamin D, nitredipine, perindopril, bisoprolol, latanoprost, and timolol.
No detectable abnormalities were identified on extraoral and intraoral examination. Intraoral examination revealed good oral hygiene, dentition with multiple restorations and no active carious lesions. Crowns of previously broken teeth 31 and 12 were missing, and the roots were covered with gingiva . Tooth 35 showed slightly increased mobility, and all other teeth were not discolored and did not exhibit increased mobility. Despite the radiographically noticeable extensive loss of root structure, all teeth tested vital with the exception of earlier endodontically treated teeth 21 and 24 and molars 26 and 37 with massive metallic restorations. Her current panoramic radiograph showed aggressive external cervical root resorption in all 23 teeth. Most resorptive lesions started in the approximal cervical area of the root and spread towards the pulp or towards the apex of the root. The resorptive process extended beyond the coronal third of the root, particularly for teeth 17, 27, and 36. There was also a resorptive defect in the apical area of tooth 16. Attempted probing of the periodontal sulcus of the upper central incisors with a periodontal probe failed to penetrate through the gingivodental junction into the cervical defects. The gingiva around the upper central incisors was pink and firm on probing without bleeding with probing depths of 3 mm . However, other maxillary and most mandibular teeth showed clinical signs of periodontitis with gingival swelling and positive bleeding after probing. Overhanging fillings of the maxillary and left mandibular premolars and calculus of the maxillary molars were apparently a potential etiologic factor for advanced generalized periodontitis .
After the examination in our clinic with the diagnosis of multiple idiopathic ECR and Generalized Stage 3 Periodontitis, the patient consulted her endocrinologist, who ordered routine laboratory tests. These test results were (including alkaline phosphatase level) within the normal range with the exception of an elevated cholesterol level of 5.89 mmol/l. In July 2020, circulating intact parathyroid hormone and serum vitamin D, calcium, magnesium and phosphorus levels were normal. Her osteoporosis treatment with denosumab, calcium and vitamin D was assessed as efficient with decreased bone turnover markers: osteocalcin level was 5.06 ng/ml (normal range, 15.0–46.0 ng/ml), procollagen type 1 N-terminal propeptide was 9.27 ng/ml (normal range, 16–76 ng/ml), and collagen type 1 C-terminal telopeptide was 0.051 ng/ml (normal range, 0.104–1.008 ng/ml). Her densitometry in 2010 showed osteoporosis. During a decade of treatment, her bone mineral density increased from 0.528 g/cm2 (T-score − 3.4) in 2010 to 0.697 g/cm2 (T-score − 2.0) in 2020.
Because of the pain and mobility of tooth 35, in August 2020, the tooth was extracted under local anesthesia with subsequent suturing of the mucoperiostal flap to avoid medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (MRONJ). The extracted root with cervical resorptive lesion was sent for histological examination . The healing of the wound was uneventful, and stitches were removed after 14 days. Histological examination of the cervical area of the fractured tooth revealed inflammation in connective tissue with the presence of CD68+ (cluster of differentiation) and CD163 + histiocytoid cells as well as CD3+ T lymphocytes and CD20+ B lymphocytes. Sporadically MPO+ (myeloperoxidase positive) leukocytes were present. In surrounding alveolar bone, osteoblasts and sparse osteocytes were found. Connective tissue in areas of resorption contains fibroblast and fibrocytes and osteoclast-like giant cells (CD68+ and CD136+) on the border between dentin and the invading resorptive soft tissue . Because the other teeth showed no symptoms or mobility, the decision was made to “watch and wait”. The extent of resorptive defects was too large, and the number of teeth involved excluded conservative treatment. In September 2020, the patient lost teeth 22 and 25 due to spontaneous fracture in the cervical area and decided on definitive treatment with extractions of teeth and restoration with removable full dentures.