A 68-year-old female with well-differentiated pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor visited an outpatient clinic due to persistent diarrhea. She had been previously found to have unresectable pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor with hepatic metastases. After disease progression despite prior therapy of long-acting octreotide analogue and everolimus, she had been treated with sunitinib as a third-line chemotherapy. After 3 months of sunitinib treatment, she showed partial response on follow-up abdominal computed tomography (CT) but complained of watery diarrhea. There was no definite cause of the diarrhea. Although it was partially controlled by loperamide, diarrhea persisted for over 1 month. Colonoscopy revealed no abnormal findings. Given the possibility of diarrhea due to adverse effects of sunitinib, the patient was treated with a reduced dose of sunitinib (25 mg/day) and loperamide concomitantly. After a brief period of improved diarrhea, however, she returned to the hospital complaining of severe diarrhea for over 1 week.
A simple chest X-ray taken on admission showed subdiaphragmatic air on the right side of the upper abdomen with severe distension. This was an unexpected finding because the patient did not complain of any signs of intestinal perforation, such as abdominal pain, tenderness, or hemodynamic instability. She complained of diarrhea, mild fatigue, dyspepsia, and vague abdominal discomfort. Her vital signs were stable as follows: blood pressure 140/90 mmHg, body temperature 36.6 °C, heart rate 78/min, respiratory rate 20/min. Blood tests showed no specific results. On physical examination, tympanic percussion on a distended abdomen and decreased bowel sounds were noted. Abdominal CT scan was performed to evaluate additional problems because her symptoms and signs were neither specific nor informative despite subdiaphragmatic air on chest X-ray. Abdominal CT scan showed diffuse air-filled cystic formation along with distal ileum and colon mimicking pneumoperitoneum . Although there was a large amount of air in the abdominal cavity on CT scan, it was along the bowel loop and confined to the intestinal wall rather than freely located. Divertucula were ruled out because the shape of air pocket was circular along with the luminal wall. Diverticulum is typically presented as a focal outpouching sac. Given the typical findings on abdominal CT, a diagnosis of PCI was made.
The patient received conservative management. Sunitinib was stopped since 1 day before admission and never reintroduced again. Supplemental oxygen was provided, and she was advised to avoid eating per os and provided with parenteral nutrition support for several days. Subsequent follow-up CT scans and abdominal X-ray showed improved gas contents within the bowel wall . Two weeks later, she was completely recovered from PCI. Diarrhea was also improved a few days after discontinuation of sunitinib with conservative management such as hydration and loperamide.