A 39-year old male presented with pain and discomfort of the left thigh. One month prior to the admission, the patient complained of discomfortness with intermittent pain in his left thigh and went to a general practitioner. However, the pain did not subside. Six days before the admission, the patient felt sudden pain in the left thigh while walking fast, then he fell down and was unable to walk. He was brought to a private hospital in Yogyakarta and X-ray examination was performed, showing a fracture and soft tissue mass in the left proximal femur . The surgeon decided to perform open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). During the surgery, abnormal appearance of the bone and the surrounding tissue was found. Tissue samples were taken for histopathology examination and skeletal traction was performed instead of ORIF. The patient was then referred to our institute for further investigation.
Laboratory examination showed normal range of complete blood count, electrolytes, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and also lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). There was no increased levels in other specific tumor marker examinations of other organs which showed no source of metastatic bone disease. Bone survey was performed and showed no sign of abnormality in other bones. Further, computerized tomography (CT) scan of the chest and abdomen were done and also showed no signs of metastasis in the regions. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was done. It showed the presence of soft tissue lesion in the left proximal femur (subtrochanteric) with the size 12.2 × 9.8 × 13.8 cm, with expansion of the lesion to femoral head, femoral neck, trochanteric area and femoral shaft causing pathologic fracture of the left subtrochanter femur.
Histologic section showed mesenchymal tumors with increased cellularity, arranged in solid and alveolar fashion and infiltration to surrounding soft tissue . Moreover, the tumor cells consisted of epithelioid cells, small to moderate in size. Eosinophilic cytoplasm was visible with caudated appearance and round to oval nuclei, while some spindle nuclei were found with irregular chromatin, and prominent nucleoli . Numerous mitosis and a wide area of necrosis were present. Based on morphology, the tumor was assessed as epithelioid rhabdomyosarcoma with differential diagnosis of epithelioid sarcoma. Immunohistochemistry examination revealed vimentin and CK positive expression , while myogenin was negative . Further immunostaining using CD34 and HMB45 were also negative . Thus, immunostaining profile was suitable as proximal epithelioid sarcoma, with the rhabdoid variant.
A radical resection was planned, and the patient was taken for surgical hip disarticulation. Following the surgery, adjuvant chemotherapy was done using Doxorubicin and Ifosfamide for 6 cycles. Then, the patient was referred to radiation oncology and underwent intensity-modulated radiation therapy at 6000 cGy to the left hip joint.
The patient had a slow yet uneventful postoperative recovery. On the most recent CT imaging of chest and abdomen done 1-year postoperatively, there was no evidence of metastasis. He returned to daily activities using a lower limb prosthesis and remained free of recurrence.