A 51-year-old woman with a history of depression for 2 years and recent morning headaches, nausea, and vomiting, and ataxic gait was admitted in the clinic. During the clinical examination a bilateral papilledema with abnormal cerebellar tests was observed.
The patient was initially evaluated with a non-contrast CT scan, and it showed three-ventricle hydrocephalus with periventricular edema and a suspicious isodense mass lesion in the posterior fossa. Consequently, an MRI was performed for the patient and it revealed a mass lesion in the fourth ventricle, which was isointense to slightly hyperintense in T1-weighted MRI and iso- to hyperintense in T2-weighted MRI. It appeared that the mass lesion had an attachment to the lateral walls and the floor of the fourth ventricle (,).
Three days after admission, she developed a sudden loss of consciousness, and a ventriculoperitoneal shunting was performed for the patient in an emergent fashion. On the first post operation day, the level of consciousness returned to normal (GCS=15), and an elective surgery for the fourth ventricle lesion was considered.
With no surgical complication, the posterior fossa tumor was resected totally by microsurgery.
The pathological report of the lesion was compatible with the diagnosis of pilocytic astrocytoma.
The patient was taken to Neuro-ICU and extubated with normal breathing. The night after the operation, the patient developed apneic episodes and decreased O2 saturation, which was displayed by pulse-oxymetry monitoring and confirmed by ABG analysis. So, the patient was urgently incubated and placed on mechanical ventilation (SIMV mode). Interestingly, when the patient was awake, she was able to breathe spontaneously, but during sleep episodes, she was unable to breathe spontaneously and developed apnea.
So, according to the breathing pattern and ABG findings, which showed PCO2=50-60 during apneic episodes and a PCO2 of about 32 mmgh when awake, Ondine’s Curse was the suspected diagnosis. By repeating the ABG test, the breathing pattern was found to be compatible with Ondine’s Curse .
It should be mentioned that all of the cardiopulmonary workup, including chest X-ray and physical examination, was normal during evaluation and the patient did not have any signs or symptoms of pneumonia or fever. 250 mg of Acetazolamide and 10 mg of Medroxyprogestrone was administered four times a day, and a few days later, tracheostomy was performed on the patient.
It should be added that during the post-operative period, the control CT scan revealed hypodense fine spots in the left lateral part of the medulla.
Finally, the patient was discharged from the hospital after 50 days, while she used to have spontaneous breathing while sleeping and awake. After 3 days she was admitted again in the hospital with signs and symptoms of aspiration pneumonia, perhaps due to poor nursing care at home. One month after treatment, she was discharged without tracheostomy and without any other complication.