A 68-year-old woman with no medical history was discovered at home, lying on the floor for an unknown number of hours and her core temperature was 26°. No medication was found lying around. On admission, she presented with a severe cardiogenic shock. The mean blood pressure was 30 mm Hg with a sinus bradycardia of 31 per minute and the arterial lactate was 2.5 mmol/L. Cardiac ultrasonography showed a global hypokinesia of the left ventricle. She had acute respiratory distress, with oxygen saturation of 93% requiring high-flow nasal oxygen. Laboratory investigations revealed an increased sodium level (157 mmol/L), a KDIGO (kidney disease improving global outcomes), three acute kidney injury (uremia was at 342 mg%, creatinine 3.95 mg/dL), and a mild rhabdomyolysis (CPK at 280 U/L, myoglobin at 3880 ug/L). The initial PT was 51%, fibrinogen rate was 6.7 g/L, and blood platelets were 248 G/L. A DIC (disseminated intravascular coagulopathy) was present with raised D-dimers (4.93 ug/mL) and fibrin monomers at 24.6 ug/mL. The International Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis (ISTH) score was 4. Initial care consisted in tracheal intubation, mechanical ventilation, external and internal rewarming (COOLGUARD 3000™ device), and continuous venovenous hemofiltration. Blood pressure quickly stabilized after initiation of norepinephrine perfusion. Complete warming occurred within 8 hours and sedation could be stopped. After awakening, the patient assessment revealed acute left leg ischemia and right hemiparesis. A whole-body CT scanner showed a constituted left Sylvian stroke, multiple tiered blood clots along the aorta, and in the left iliac artery . A surgical embolectomy and preemptive fasciotomy were performed, and the patient was initiated on anticoagulation. On day 3, the abdominal examination revealed a generalized contracture with a CT scan showing a diffuse hepatic and bowel portal gas, with multiple arterial thromboses. End of life decision was taken in view of the possible poor outcome and the patient died after treatment withdrawal.