A 24-year-old male presented to the emergency department with periauricular swelling, erythema, fever, myalgia, and generalized joint pain that had been present for 2–3 weeks. He had previously seen a primary care physician for his symptoms. At that time he was prescribed oral ciprofloxacin 750 mg and underwent computed tomography. He subsequently developed facial swelling and a rash that was considered to be an allergic reaction to ciprofloxacin. Ciprofloxacin was discontinued and the symptoms were treated with Benadryl and intravenous steroids. The jaw symptoms remitted for 1 week. The next week his primary care physician called to inform that computed tomography showed possible septic arthritis of the TMJ, and that he needed to go to the nearest emergency department.
He presented to the emergency room and was admitted. On physical examination, the patient had a large swelling and tenderness in his left periauricular area, with erythema and deviation of the right mandible. This limited the patient's ability to open the mouth to about 10-15 mm. His white blood cell count was elevated at 22.5 × 103 cells/ml. All other laboratory values were within normal limits. Antibiotic treatment was deferred until culture and susceptibility could be obtained. Computed tomography showed mild asymmetric soft tissue swelling in the left pharyngeal region and the palatine tonsils, but no soft tissue swelling, asymmetry, or erosive changes around the mandible were noted . Magnetic resonance imaging was then ordered and a large left TMJ effusion was seen . Two milliliters of turbid fluid was withdrawn from the joint space via needle aspiration. He reported immediate improvement in his symptoms s/p removal of this fluid. Gram stain (which was negative), culture, and sensitivity of the specimen was carried out, which showed coagulase-negative staphylococcus sensitive to vancomycin and ceftriaxone. On the 2nd day, the patient's white blood cell count dropped to 13.6 × 103 cells/ml. On the 3rd day of the hospital stay, all of the patient's laboratory values were within normal limits and he was discharged home in stable condition on intravenous vancomycin and ceftriaxone for 2 weeks with home care. Ceftriaxone was started for gram negative coverage and vancomycin for gram positive most notably methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.