The patient was an 11-year-old male with a past medical history positive for psoriasis that presented in December 2016 with a complaint of an enlarged lymph node on the right side of the neck of approximately 3 months’ duration. He was born in Vietnam, but adopted at a young age and raised in Michigan. Therefore, family history could not accurately be obtained. There was no history of any precipitating viral upper respiratory infection or any other inciting events. Over 3 months, there were no changes or fluctuation in size of the enlarged lymph node. There was no history of dysphagia, odynophagia, dysphonia, or otalgia. There was no history of weight loss or night sweats. In addition, there was no history of fever.
The patient had previously been evaluated by a primary care physician who trialed a course of antibiotics without any improvement or resolution of the neck mass. In addition, an ultrasound of the neck was obtained which demonstrated multiple large right-sided neck lymph nodes, with the largest measuring 2.7 cm. Multiple lymph nodes in the left neck, which measured approximately 1 cm, were noted as well. Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) serology was also performed. Epstein-Barr Virus Capsid IgG was positive, EBV Capsid IgM was negative, EBV Early Antigen AB was positive, and EB Early Antigen AB was positive. These results indicated the patient was likely exposed to an EBV infection in the past, with no active or recent infection. A Monospot test was also completed and negative.
On clinical examination, the patient’s neck demonstrated palpable right-sided cervical lymphadenopathy, with a prominent 2-cm lymph node in level 5. It did not appear infectious, as there was no evidence of erythema, edema, or warmth. Other than this palpable lesion, the remainder of his otolaryngologic examination was unremarkable and the patient remained completely asymptomatic. No other infectious serology or workup was pursued.
Given the chronicity of this enlarged lymph node, a CT soft-tissue neck with and without contrast was obtained. The Computed Tomography (CT) scan demonstrated diffuse lymphadenopathy, particularly within the right posterior triangle of the neck. The largest lymph node measured approximately 1.6 to 2 cm in greatest dimension. At this point, there was high suspicion for lymphoma. Therefore, an excisional lymph node biopsy was performed and the gross specimen was sent fresh for histopathological diagnosis. Given the low suspicion for an infectious etiology, no specimen was sent for culture.
According to the pathology report provided by the local community hospital, the specimen demonstrated “extensive necrotizing granulomatous inflammation with abscess formation, suggestive of cat-scratch disease—pending final consultation.” However, further analysis was requested, and the specimen was also sent to the University of Michigan Laboratories. On further analysis, the final pathology report concluded the specimen as a benign reactive lymph node, consistent with KFD. In detail, their report revealed the specimen to have retained nodal architecture with extensive patchy areas of necrosis. Surrounding the areas of necrosis, the cellular elements were composed by numerous histiocytes, small lymphocytes, and a few plasma cells with no neutrophils or eosinophils present. In addition, the histiocytes present in the specimen featured “crescentic” nuclei.
Additional immunohistochemical stains were performed. The majority of T-cells expressed CD-8, rather than CD-4. Numerous histiocytes stained positive for CD-68. Furthermore, the histiocytes expressed CD-163, as well as myeloperoxidase. Finally, CD-123 immunostain highlighted plasmacytoid dendritic cells predominantly located around necrotic areas. Flow-cytometry studies were also performed, showing a decreased CD4/CD8 ratio and no definitive evidence of monoclonal B-cell population or aberrant T-cells. These findings showed a benign process, consistent with KFD lymphadenitis.
The patient’s cervical lymphadenopathy resolved in 2 months without complication. On recent follow-up via phone call in July 2018, the patient continues to be asymptomatic with no development of any signs and symptoms consistent with SLE.