A 68-year-old man presented with a 7-month history of progressive multiple abscesses, followed by fever, lower extremity weakness and urinary retention. Seven months before, he occasionally found a bean-size lump with slight tenderness on the left side of the lower back. One month later, the lump increased to the size of an egg . Computed tomography (CT, for short) scan revealed an abscess inside the fascia. Chest CT scan showed pulmonary abscess formation . Repeated cultures of blood and percutaneous aspiration were constantly negative. Abscess incision and drainage were performed and empirical antibiotic treatment was given. Three months later, chest CT revealed the unresolved pulmonary abscess and additional multiple destructions of vertebral bodies, especially T5 and T11 . Empirical anti-tuberculosis drugs were administrated for 2 months. Instead of improvement, the patient became febrile to 38.4 °C, and developed weakness and numbness in both legs and urinary retention. The patient reported no significant past medical history, and he denied any exposure to bird droppings.
On examination, physician identified a skin lesion with draining sinus on the left side of the lower back. He had grade 0 muscle strength of both legs and slightly increased muscle tone. There was slight tenderness on the T4 and T5 vertebrae bodies, with hypoesthesia below T4 level. Laboratory testing revealed a leucocyte count of 16.55 × 103 cells/μL, a C-reactive protein concentration of 128 mg/L, an erythrocyte sediment rate of 120 mm/h and a negative result of HIV serology test. CD4+ T cell count was normal and the levels of serum globulins including IgG, IgA, IgM and total IgE were within normal range. T-SPOT. TB was negative. The (1, 3)-β-D-glucan test (or G test) and repeated SCLATs were all negative. Other laboratory results were unremarkable.
Spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI, for short) and subsequent CT revealed multiple bone destruction of thoracic and lumber vertebrae and ribs, with spine compressed at T4 and T5 level . Surgical excision of paravertebral abscess at T4-T5 level was performed and pathological examination of the excisional biopsy specimen found nothing but inflammatory changes. Specimen cultures were negative for bacteria, tuberculosis and fungi. Anti-mycobacterial treatment was ceased and the antibiotics changed to intravenous sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim compound and oral doxycycline. Gradually, his temperature returned to normal and abscesses regressed. The patient was discharged on oral maintenance therapy.
Two months later, the patient presented to hospital again with a complaint of fever and a 50 × 60 mm new-onset lump with slight tenderness in the right groin. CT and MRI revealed a large right iliac abscess . Repeated cultures were negative and laboratory tests revealed no specific findings. The abscess increased in size gradually. Surgical drainage yielded 700 ml of coffee ground pus. Bedside inoculation of the pus was carried out and the result of culture revealed Cryptococcus neoformans, which was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR, for short) . The contrasted brain MRI found no evidence of central nervous system involving and so did the lumbar puncture. Liposomal amphotericin B and itraconazole were given. The fevers resolved when the accumulated dose of amphotericin B reached 2.5 g, and then itraconazole was replaced by fluorocytosine. We withdrew liposomal amphotericin B when its accumulated dose reached 3.0 g. The patient discharged with 4 months fluorocytosine plus fluconazole and regular follow-up. At 18-month follow-up, the patient was afebrile, with no new-onset abscess, and he could walk slowly. A Gantt chart was used to summarize the presentation and management of the patients .