A 66-year-old female patient underwent a chest X-ray during the physical examination and incidentally found a mass in the lower lobe of the right lung 2 years ago. The patient was previously healthy and had no history of smoking, chest pain, dyspnea and other symptoms, but occasionally dry cough. The chest CT scan (November 17, 2018) showed an irregular soft tissue mass in the posterior basal segment of the lower lobe of the right lung, with a size of about 3.7 cm × 3.4 cm × 2.6 cm, with visible lobulation and clear boundary . The patient did not receive treatment. On May 10, 2021, re-examination of chest CT revealed that the volume of the right lower lobe mass was larger than that in 2018, and the size was about 5.5 cm×5.2 cm×4.2 cm. The mass was well-bounded and lobulated without pleural traction . The enhanced scan showed uniform and continuous enhancement of the lesion, and the CT value of each phase was between 75HU and 85HU, and blood vessel was visible in the arterial phase of the tumor . Bilateral hilar and mediastinal structures were clear without enlarged lymph nodes. Peripheral lung cancer was considered in imaging.
The tumor was located in the anterior segment of the upper lobe of the right lung. The surgeon removed the tumor under thoracoscopy and performed an intraoperative frozen examination. Gross examination revealed a 5.0 cm×4.5 cm×4.0 cm mass in the stump of the partially resected lung without an envelope and has a clear boundary with the surrounding lung tissue. The cut surface of the tumor was gray white, solid and granular . Moreover, the granular tissue was easy to fall off when the tumor was incised. Under microscope, the alveolar epithelial cell-like tumor cells formed a wide range of papillary structures with a fibrous vascular core. The surface of the papilla was covered with a single layer of cubic to columnar epithelium, cilia were visible, and the tumor cells were slightly atypical. After discussion by all pathologists, the final intraoperative pathological diagnosis was pulmonary papillary adenoma. Due to the large tumor, wedge resection was easy to damage the lower pulmonary artery, vein and bronchial trunk, so the right lower lobe resection was performed. In order to avoid the limitation of frozen sampling leading to the upgrading of pathological diagnosis after freezing, two groups of regional lymph nodes were cleaned up.