A 51-year-old premenopausal woman gravida 3, para 3, was diagnosed with left MCTO 7 years ago. The size of the MCTO was 59 mm at the time of diagnosis. She underwent regular ovarian examination for 2 years after the diagnosis but had not visited the hospital for 5 years. She had a history of appendectomy at 7 years of age and received medication for hyperthyroidism since she was 37 years old. She experienced left lower abdominal pain for 2 days and visited the hospital due to increasing pain. Physical examination showed a flat abdomen with tenderness around the left lower abdomen. A solid tumor was palpable by bimanual examination on the left side. Transvaginal ultrasonography revealed a 91-mm cystic and solid ovarian mass on the left ovary . She was diagnosed with ovarian tumor torsion and had to undergo emergency surgery. Height, weight, and body mass index (BMI) were 165 cm, 96 kg, and 35.3 kg/m
2, respectively. Body temperature was within the normal range, pulse rate was 84 beats/min, and blood pressure was 121/55 mmHg. Peripheral blood examination showed that the white blood cell count was 8,820/μL, red blood cell count was 4.65 × 10 6/μL, hemoglobin was 12.1 g/dL, and hematocrit was 37.5%. Biochemical data revealed that the C-reactive protein level was as high as 13.9 mg/dL. Levels of tumor makers, namely serum α-fetoprotein, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), CA125, and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) antigen were 4.0 ng/mL (reference, <10.0 ng/mL), < 2.0 U/mL (reference, < 37.0 U/mL), 84.1 U/mL (reference, < 35.0 U/mL), and 1.4 ng/mL (reference, < 1.5 ng/mL), respectively. Laparotomy was immediately performed. Operative findings showed 360° torsion of the left ovarian tumor without ascites in the pelvic cavity. There were no sign of congestion and rupture on the surface of the twisted ovary. The uterus and right ovary appeared normal. Left salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. The duration of operation was 54 min, and the volume of blood loss was 30 mL. The diameter of the extirpated ovarian tumor was 11 cm, and the tumor contained fat and hair. Histopathological findings showed both components of mature cystic teratoma and SCC with marked nuclear and cellular atypia in the solid part . The pathological diagnosis was malignant transformation with SCC of MCTO. We recommended staging laparotomy to determine the treatment strategy. The patient refused to undergo the procedure; subsequently, a strict follow-up for stage IA ovarian cancer was conducted. The patient was discharged from the hospital 10 days post operation. On postoperative day 112, the serum CA125 level was as high as 101.4 U/mL. Positron-emission tomography and computed tomography (CT) showed some nodal lesions with remarkable uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxy glucose . She was referred to a university hospital due to cancer recurrence. Her BMI was as high as 37.8 kg/m
2, and biochemical examination showed that she had hyperlipidemia and diabetes mellitus. The serum CA125, SCC antigen, CA19-9, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels were 216 U/mL (reference, < 35.0 U/mL), 2.0 ng/mL (reference, < 1.5 ng/mL), < 2.0 U/mL (reference, < 37.0 U/mL), and 3.5 ng/mL (reference, < 5.0 ng/mL), respectively. The patient underwent radical surgery with total abdominal hysterectomy, right salpingo-oophorectomy, partial omentectomy, and pelvic and para-aortic lymph node dissection. Operative findings revealed that there was no ascites or dissemination in the abdominal cavity; no metastatic lesion was found in the uterus and right adnexa. The enlarged pelvic and para-aortic lymph nodes were removed. Thereafter, complete surgical treatment was achieved. The duration of operation was 360 min, and the volume of blood loss was 370 mL. Histopathological examination showed positive lymph nodes with SCC. The numbers of positive/total resected lymph nodes in the left obturator, left external iliac, and para-aortic nodes were 1/5, 2/7, and 1/1, respectively. Immunostaining was performed to assess whether the tumor cells were of epithelial or germ cell origin ; the results confirmed recurrence of the malignant transformation of MCTO with SCC . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 10 days post-op. She received 6 courses of conventional paclitaxel and carboplatin as adjuvant chemotherapy. She has had no recurrence for 2 years after treatment. The treatment course is shown in .