A 59-year-old female presented with complaints of dull headache. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging showed no ischemic lesion, but MR angiography showed bilateral stenosis at the terminal portion of internal carotid artery (ICA), proximal anterior cerebral artery (ACA), and middle cerebral artery (MCA). Angiography showed severe stenosis involving the bilateral distal ICA and dense moyamoya vessels. A diagnosis of MMD was made according to criteria from the Research Committee on Spontaneous Occlusion of the Circle of Willis of the Ministry of Health Labor and Welfare, Japan. N-isopropyl-p-[ 123I]-iodoamphetamine single-photon emission computed tomography (123I-IMP-SPECT) did not demonstrate dramatically decreased CBF in the bilateral ACA and MCA territories. 123I-IMP-SPECT with acetazolamide showed no impairment in vascular reactivity. At the time, the working diagnosis was asymptomatic MMD without a decrease in CBF.
Four months after initial presentation, the patient complained of frequent episodes of transient right hemiparesis. MR imaging showed rapid progression of the previously identified stenosis and small white matter ischemic lesions in the bilateral frontal areas. 123I-IMP-SPECT showed decreased CBF in the bilateral ACA and MCA territories and 123I-IMP-SPECT with acetazolamide showed markedly impaired vascular reactivity bilaterally . Due to the presence of symptoms originating in the left hemisphere and a more severe decrease in left-hemispheric CBF, left STA-MCA bypass with encephalo-duro-myo-synangiosis was performed. The recipient artery at the M4 segment was a small-diameter (0.7 mm) vessel and the diameter of the STA was larger than the recipient artery (1.3 mm). Patency of the STA-MCA anastomosis was confirmed using Doppler and intraoperative indocyanine-green (ICG) angiography.
The patient had no neurologic deficits immediately after surgery, but she complained of a severe headache on postoperative day (POD) 1. On POD 2, the headache worsened and the patient began vomiting. On POD 4, 123I-IMP-SPECT showed a significant increase in CBF in the left basal ganglia . Postoperative MRI showed a patent STA-MCA bypass and no evidence of new ischemic changes. The patient was diagnosed with symptomatic cerebral hyperperfusion and intensive blood pressure control (under 125 mmHg of systolic blood pressure) with diltiazem was initiated, which gradually relieved her severe headache and vomiting.
On POD 7, although the systolic blood pressure was well controlled ranging from 120 to 110mmHg during POD 4-6, the patient returned with recurrent severe headache accompanied by aphasia, dysarthria, right hemiparesis, and numbness in the right upper extremity. Imaging showed that the hyperperfusion lesion had shifted from the left basal ganglia to the regions of the cortex surrounding the anastomosis and included left temporal, parietal, and lateral frontal lesions. The free radical scavenger, edaravone (Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Co., Tokyo, Japan), was initiated at this time. Two weeks after surgery, the hyperperfusion area had localized to the left lateral frontal area; however, her symptoms persisted for several weeks. Three weeks after surgery, hyperperfusion on 123I-IMP-SPECT had improved, demonstrating only a small hyperperfusion spot. However, the right hand numbness and right hemiparesis persisted until 5 weeks after surgery. At the time of discharge (7 weeks after surgery), the patient had no neurologic sequelae. Throughout her entire postoperative course, MRI showed no new ischemic or hemorrhagic lesions.