A 68-year-old Caucasian man was referred to our cardiology clinic in February 2008 for further evaluation of a conspicuous new heart murmur. The patient did not have any cardiac complaints and did not suffer from angina pectoris or dyspnoea. The patient had advanced gonarthrosis of the left knee, advanced degeneration of the cervical spine and advanced bilateral omarthrosis. His medical history included kidney stone surgery (1988), diagnosis of ochronosis based on a biopsy of the knee joint (1995), total hip replacement (1997), Miller-Galante II prosthesis of the right knee (1997), periosteal rupture of the left Achilles tendon with transosseous re-fixation (1999), ventral corporectomy at C4 and discectomy at C3/C4 and C4/C5 after cervical spinal canal stenosis with myelopathy at C3-C5, and ventral and dorsal osteochondrosis (2001). Family history revealed that his brother also had ochronosis. The patient was not on any medication.
On physical examination, the patient was found to be in a moderately reduced general condition and in a regular nutritional status. His body mass index was 25.8 kg/m2. He had a blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg bilaterally and a pulse rate of 80 beats/min. Dyspnoea, cyanosis and liver skin spots were not observed. Bluish-black pigmentations were found on several parts of the sclera . The patient's pupils were of average width and showed prompt response to light. No arcus lipoides, no goitre and no superior vena cava syndrome were noticed. His thorax and chest expansion were symmetrical. Breath sounds were vesicular and percussion resonant, with no crepitations or evidence of a pleural effusion. His heart beat was regular with a grade 2/6 diastolic murmur at the apex and a grade 2/6 systolic murmur over the mitral and tricuspid valves. His abdomen was soft and non-tender to palpation, liver and spleen were not enlarged, and there was no costo-vertebral-angular tenderness. Unilateral oedema on the left ankle was observed. Also, the left foot pulse was absent, while normal central and peripheral pulses were symmetrically palpable.
Results of the patient's laboratory examination showed 252 mg/dl total cholesterol, 84 mg/dl triglycerides, 66 mg/dl high-density lipoprotein and 72 mg/dl low-density lipoprotein. Inflammatory markers were not elevated and anti-streptolysin O (ASO) titre was not raised. The patient's urine turned brownish black when left standing for some time.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) test showed a sinus rhythm of 72 beats/min with left axis deviation (-57 degrees). The patient's depolarisation and repolarisation phases were normal. During an exercise ECG using a treadmill set up to 125 watts workload, his blood pressure increased from 160/90 mmHg to 160/100 mmHg and his pulse rate from 68 to 158 beats/min. When the exercise ECG was stopped at the point of exhaustion, no angina pectoris, dyspnoea, significant ST segment depression or profound dysrhythmia were observed. His blood pressure and pulse rate normalised within 3 minutes of recovery.
An echocardiogram revealed that the patient's left atrium was normal in size while his left ventricle was slightly dilated . The pumping function of the left heart was normal - there was no evidence of hypertrophy - and the aortic valve had three cusps. A Doppler echocardiogram showed a minor to moderate aortic insufficiency, a combined mitral valve defect with an opening size of 1.6 cm2 with mild to moderate regurgitation, and a mild tricuspid regurgitation. No pericardial effusion was detected. The patient's right heart was normal in size without any signs of stasis.
A histopathological analysis of the patient revealed brownish deposits between the collagen fibre bundles of a knee joint biopsy sample. The pigment was found both extracellularly and intracellularly. The appearance of the pigment was variable, being coarse, like haemosiderin and fine, like granules. Iron staining was negative and no inflammatory or post-inflammatory changes were observed. Taken together, the patient's histopathology was characteristic for ochronosis.
Based on cardiac investigations, an alkaptonuria-associated degenerative valve defect with aortic, mitral and tricuspid valve insufficiency was diagnosed. The decision for using conservative therapy was reached and the patient was treated with an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (2.5 mg/day ramipril).
At follow-up examinations in April and November 2008, the patient presented in a stable condition. However, in February 2009, the patient was hospitalised because of cardiac decompensation.