We describe a 58-year-old Korean woman who developed tremor 4 months ago. Family history was negative. The patient was taking levothyroxine 0.175 mg daily, after thyroidectomy for 1 year. On neurological examination, she showed mild rigidity and bradykinesia, more predominant in left limbs, compared to right limbs. Rest tremor was observed only in left limbs and was more predominant in the leg. Neither postural instability, nor ataxia was checked, while brisk reflexes were present on both lower limbs without pathologic reflexes. The patient had no problem with social activity, although detailed neuropsychological assessment resulted in mild cognitive impairment.
Routine laboratory work ups were unremarkable. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with T2-weighted images show bilaterally mottled high signal intensities at medulla oblongata and bilateral high signal intensity at both cerebellar dentate nucleus . Meanwhile, there is no abnormal change in basal ganglia . In addition, a sagittal T1-weighted image demonstrates considerable cervicomedullary atrophy with intact pons (tadpole sign, Fig. d). 18F- 2b-carbomethoxy-3b-(4-iodophenyl)-N-(3-fluoropropyl) nortropane (FP-CIT) positron emission tomography (PET) of the patient show severely decreased FP-CIT binding not only in the bilateral putamen, but also in the bilateral caudate nucleus with a rostrocaudal gradient , compared with normal FP-CIT imaging finding of control . Anti-parkinsonian medications improved her motor symptoms considerably. However, based on abnormalities from the brain MRI, we could not exclude the possibility of comorbidity. We further performed next generation sequencing of customized panel, targeting 95 genes associated neurologic disorders by target capture method, resulting in known pathogenic heterozygous p.Arg70Trp variant (NM_002055.4:c.208C > T) in GFAP gene , confirmed by Sanger sequencing method. Until now, the patient has been followed up for 18 months, and she has shown a good responsiveness to anti-parkinsonian medications.