A 21-year-old male presented to us with bilateral hip pain right more than left for 2 years and difficulty to walk for the past 6 months. 2 years back, the patient experienced pain in both hips insidious in onset gradually progressive aggravated while walking relived on rest. Then, the patient was walking with support, and for the past 6 months, the patient was not able to bear weight and pain was severe on the right side. The patient is a known case of polyostotic fibrous dysplasia was diagnosed around 10 years of age. The patient was initially able to walk with the help of walker, unable to do activities of daily living, unable to sit cross-legged, and unable to squat. There is no history of trauma or any constitutional symptoms. Clinical findings were consistent with coxa vara deformity of bilateral hips. There was no evidence of any endocrine disturbance or altered pigmentation or precocious puberty. On imaging, it was concluded that the patient suffered from polyostotic fibrous dysplasia with bilateral severe shepherd’s crook deformity of the proximal femur with measured neck-shaft angle of 15° on the right side and 55° on the left side . Whole body bone scan showed multiple areas of increased tracer uptake . Computerized tomography of the pelvis showed features consistent with fibrous dysplasia of the proximal femur with bilateral shepherd’s crook deformity, also bilateral iliac wing, sacral ala, L3,4,5, S1, and 2 are also involved . All the blood and serum biochemical investigations of the patient such as the hemoglobin, total and differential white cell counts, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, calcium, phosphorus, and alkaline phosphatase levels, and all the hormonal studies were within normal limits. It was decided to do correction of the deformity to realign the head, neck, and shaft and to achieve valgus at the neck shaft region, in one stage, each side at a time. On the right side, lateral closing wedge osteotomy was done at the subtrochanteric level to achieve alignment of the shaft with the proximal femur and fixed with a 135° dynamic Richard’s screw with a six-holed long side plate. 3 months later on the left side, lateral closing wedge osteotomy was performed at the subtrochanteric level to align the distal shaft with the proximal femur. Fixation was done using a 135° dynamic Richard’s screw with a six-holed long side plate to span osteotomy site. Postoperatively, we achieved a neck-shaft angle of 140° on the right side and 135° on the left side ( and ). The patient was started on active and passive quadriceps strengthening exercises, and after 6 weeks of immobilization, toe touch weight-bearing was started followed gradually by partial and complete weight-bearing mobilization. Follow-up imaging showed union at both the osteotomy sites bilaterally. At present, at 12-month postoperatively , the patient is walking full weight-bearing without support and there are no signs of recurrence of lesions of fibrous dysplasia or the deformity ( and ).