A 70-year-old man visited another hospital because he had experienced left chest pain for half a day. He had a history of atrial fibrillation and had taken an anticoagulant for many years. He had undergone VATS bullectomy for pneumothorax 20 years previously and the period of post-operative chest tube drainage had been long because of refractory air leakage. Plueodesis had not been performed. He had no history of hereditary diseases such as von Recklinghausen disease. Chest computed tomography showed a giant tumor in the apex of the lung and staple line of the pneumothorax surgery, however, he came home because his vital sign was stable. He returned to the hospital the next day because his left chest pain had worsened. Contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography showed left hemothorax in addition to the superior sulcus tumor and staple line of the pneumothorax surgery . The huge tumor in the apex of the lung was suspected to be an extrapleural huge hematoma, and it ruptured into the pleural cavity. He was raced to our hospital and a chest tube was inserted into the left pleural cavity, resulting in drainage of a large volume of bloody fluid. The patient then developed shock, and a massive blood transfusion was started.
Bleeding from the left subclavian artery was suspected, and emergency angiography via the right femoral artery was performed. Angiography showed some collateral arteries from the left subclavian artery to the apex of the left lung. Distal and proximal bleeding points were identified. The distal bleeding point was embolized using coils. The proximal bleeding point was blown out, and 8.0- × 50-mm stent grafts (GORE VIABAHN; W. L. Gore & Associates, Newark, DE, USA) were placed in the left subclavian artery with careful attention to occlusion of the vertebral artery . The shock and bleeding continued during the angiography, and the massive blood transfusion was continued. After placement of the stents, the patient’s vital signs stabilized. The amount of bleeding was 2000 ml. The chest tube was removed 4 days after treatment, and he was discharged without sequelae.