A 51-year-old male Chinese citizen was admitted to our hospital on December 30, 2014, with intermittent painless gross hematuria.
The patient’s symptoms began one week earlier when he experienced intermittent painless gross hematuria.
The patient had been diagnosed with liver cysts and gallbladder stones, but had no history of surgery.
The patient had no family history of cancer.
Upon hospitalization, the patient’s vital signs were stable. The patient’s temperature was 36.7 °C, the heart rate was 90 beats per minute, the respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute, the blood pressure was 162/96 mmHg, and the oxygen saturation in room air was 100%. A physical examination did not reveal any pathological signs.
Routine laboratory testing showed an elevation of urinary protein (1+), urinary occult blood (3+), urinary red blood cells (374/μL), and urinary white blood cells (29/μL). Other laboratory test results, including tumor markers, were within normal limits.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen yielded results indicating local wall thickening in the upper segment of the left ureter. CT urography (CTU) revealed a tumor involving the left renal pelvis . Surgery was advised, but the patient requested a transfer to Shanghai Zhongshan Hospital. Laparoscopic radical resection of the left renal pelvis tumor was performed under general anesthesia in January 2015, after excluding surgical contraindications and the surgery was successful. The postoperative pathological findings revealed urothelial carcinoma of the renal pelvis.
The patient recovered without complications after surgery and was discharged from Shanghai Zhongshan Hospital. The pathological findings revealed a noninvasive low-grade papillary urothelial carcinoma of the renal pelvis. The final pathological tumor stage was pT1N0M0. After surgery, this patient received 6 cycles of intravenous chemotherapy with gemcitabine and carboplatin, as well as bladder infusion therapy with gemcitabine. Regular outpatient follow-up appointments at our hospital were scheduled in order to detect any recurrence.
Three years later, on December 18, 2017, the patient was readmitted to our hospital because of painless gross hematuria lasting for one day. Routine laboratory tests showed an elevation of urinary protein (1+), urinary occult blood (2+), and urinary red blood cells (133/μL). A CT scan of the abdomen showed a space-occupying lesion on the posterior wall of the bladder. A CTU revealed a filling defect from the bladder . Cystoscopic examination revealed a tumor on the left wall of the bladder, adjacent to the right ureteral opening and the specimen was biopsied. The pathological result was urothelial carcinoma . On December 29, 2017, laparoscopic total cystectomy and right cutaneous ureterostomy were performed after excluding surgical contraindications. The patient was placed under general anesthesia and the surgery was successful. The postoperative pathological findings revealed papillary urothelial carcinoma of the bladder (multifocal, maximum 3.7 cm × 2.6 cm) . The bladder cancer was considered a metastasis of the renal pelvis cancer after surgery. The pathological tumor stage was pT1N0M1. The patient refused postoperative chemotherapy.
After six years, on February 28, 2023, the patient was readmitted to our hospital due to periumbilical pain over six days. A CT scan of the abdomen showed a tumor of the ascending colon. Colonoscopy examination, on the other hand, suggested a tumor in the descending colon . The pathological result of the colonoscopic biopsy specimen was adenocarcinoma of the descending colon . The contraindication for surgery was removed. On March 12, 2023, a subtotal colectomy and an ileosigmoidal anastomosis were performed under general anesthesia, and the operation was successful. The length of the colon removed was 65 cm. Three tumors were detected on the excised colon; one was 2 cm away from the distal margin and had a size of 3.5 cm × 2.5 cm, the other was adjacent to the ileocecal region and had a size of 2 cm × 2 cm, and the final tumor was 11 cm away from the proximal margin and had a size of 5.5 cm × 3.5 cm. All three tumors were recognized as adenocarcinoma based on the postoperative pathological findings . The final pathological tumor stage was pT3N0M0. The patient recovered smoothly after the operation and was discharged without any complications.