A 64-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital, because of relapsed liver cancer after interventional therapy. The patient met the indications for liver transplantation and was reviewed and approved by the hospital ethics committee to undergo the allogeneic modified piggyback liver transplantation. The operation was successful. The postoperative immunosuppressant regimen was tacrolimus. Liver function gradually recovered, and the patient was making slow progress in the early-stage post-surgery. However, on postoperative day 13, the patient began to experience fluctuating high fevers up to 39°C, especially in the afternoon and morning. Obtaining a sputum sample is by coughing deeply and then spitting the phlegm that comes up into a sample cup during fever for sputum bacterial culture. Preoperative imaging showed no significant abnormalities in the lungs. Laboratory examination showed white blood cell (WBC): 14.19*109/L, neutrophil% (NE%): 94.2%, procalcitonin (PCT): 1.73 ng/ml, 1–3-β-D Glucan test (G-test): <10 pg/ml (<10 pg/ml), and galactomannan test (GM-test): 0.25 (<0.5), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV): negative. Chest Computed Tomography (CT) was obtained showing : the base of the lower lobe, the right middle lobe, and the left lingual lobe of both lungs were streaked and densely patchy. There was no improvement in fever despite 3 days of empirical cefoperazone/sulbactam treatment. WBC remained elevated, and G-test and GM-test, EBV and CMV test were normal. Chest CT examination showed multiple patchy abnormal shadows in both lungs, which was significantly worse compared with previous chest CT . After consultation with the Department of Medical Microbiology, it was decided to switch the antibiotic regimen to meropenem and fluconazole. After 2 days of treatment, no improvements were seen. On day 5 of treatment, sputum bacterial culture was reported positive for Nocardia farcinica. According to the symptoms of the patient, repeat chest CT findings, sputum bacterial culture, combining with suggestions from the Department of Medical Microbiology and literatures, the antibiotic regimen was changed to sulfamethoxazole, minocycline, and amikacin. After an additional 5 days, the patient improved, and the fever subsided. Leucocytosis improved and a repeat sputum culture was negative. Chest CT showed that multiple abnormal shadows in each lobe disappeared. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the 36th day after the operation. After discharge, the patient was asked to continue oral sulfanilamide and minocycline for 5 months and repeat chest CT imaging regularly.