A 61-year-old woman presented with a 10-month history of exertional dyspnea. She had had rheumatic heart valve disease and had undergone mitral valve replacement with a Carpentier Edwards valve (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) without preservation of the posterior leaflet of the mitral valve 31 years ago. Because of primary tissue failure of this implanted valve, she underwent valve replacement for with an Omnicarbon valve 22 years ago. During this second replacement, the bioprosthetic valve was removed, and the Omnicarbon valve was implanted in an intra-annular position, with the major orifice orientated posteriorly. Our standard method then was a U-suture technique using 2-0 sutures with pledgets. Controlled Anticoagulation therapy combined with paramidine was applied postoperatively.
At the present admission, laboratory findings revealed a white blood cell count of 2100/μl, hemoglobin of 9.7 g/dl, and slight elevations in the serum levels of aspartate aminotransferase (54 mU/ml), lactate dehydrogenase (1277 mU/ml), and total bilirubin (2.65 mg/dl). Brain natriuretic peptide was also elevated (100.8 pg/ml).
Chest radiography showed a high cardiothoracic ratio of 86 % with right pleural effusion. Electrocardiography revealed atrial fibrillation with an extremely low f wave. Trans-thoracic echocardiography showed that the peak flow velocity of the Omnicarbon valve was 2.7 m/s, the mean pressure gradient between the left atrium and ventricle was 15 mmHg, and moderate-to-severe mitral valve regurgitation around from the minor orifice of the Omnicarbon valve with an enlarged left atrium (80 mm). The left ventricular ejection fraction was 60 % with left ventricular end-diastolic/end-systolic dimensions of 47/34 mm. Preoperative computed tomography also showed the enlarged left atrium and right pleural effusion. Left ventriculography disclosed that mitral valve regurgitation from the minor orifice of the Omnicarbon valve and the enlarged left atrium .
The patient obviously required another operation. Standard cardiopulmonary bypass was established. Under cardiac arrest, right-sided left atriotomy allowed visualization of the implanted valve. Pannus formation was apparent on the prosthetic valve ring , but it did not obliterate the prosthetic valve orifice on either the atrial or ventricular aspects. After removing the valve, the posterior wall of the left ventricle was seen to be associated with thickened endocardium. A 27 mm Bicarbon bileaflet valve (Sorin Biomedica, Saluggia, Italy) was implanted in an intra-annular position. Plication of the left atrium was undertaken along the incisional line and between the mitral posterior annulus and bilateral pulmonary vein orifices. Weaning from the cardiopulmonary bypass was easy, and her postoperative course was uneventful.
Postoperative echocardiography showed a mean pressure gradient of 4.3 mmHg between the left atrium and ventricle with no mitral valve regurgitation. The left atrium was slightly reduced to 71 mm, and the left ventricular end-diastolic/end-systolic dimension was 50/32 mm with an ejection fraction of 65 %. She was doing well after one and a half years after the operation.