The patient is a 61-year-old African American female with a past medical history only significant for bilateral knee osteoarthritis. Of note, written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report. She is an established patient of the senior author and had failed bilateral knee corticosteroid injections, with neither knee receiving significant pain relief. She also had received multiple series of bilateral Hyalgan® (Fidia, Florham Park, NJ) injections in the past with no complications. A series of Hyalgan injections entails a weekly injection for three weeks, resulting in three total injections in each knee per series. The patient had begun a series of Synvisc (Sanofi, Cambridge, MA) injections for which she had tolerated the first two doses bilaterally well. She underwent her third set of Synvisc injections and began having pain bilaterally 12 h after injection.
She presented to the emergency department three days after the third set of injections complaining of bilateral knee swelling and pain, with her left knee being significantly more symptomatic. She had pain and difficulty bearing weight bilaterally, but denied any fever, chills, or malaise on presentation. Her right knee exam was as follows: range of motion from 0–70 degrees secondary to pain, no erythema, mild suprapatellar effusion present, no pain with micromotion. Her left knee exam was as follows: range of motion from 0–30 degrees secondary to pain, no erythema, moderate suprapatellar effusion present, pain with micromotion. Her white blood cell count (WBC) was 12.83 (4.5–11 normal), her C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 159 mg/L (0–10 normal), her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 79 mm/hr (0–40 normal).
Given her clinical presentation, both knees were aspirated. Her left knee aspirate yielded 38,580 WBC with a negative gram stain and negative cultures. Her right knee aspirate yielded 29,670 WBC with a negative gram stain and negative cultures. At this point, her differential diagnosis included pseudoseptic arthritis and septic arthritis. The decision was made to hold antibiotics based off her aspirate results and clinical picture; notably, the treatment team understood that we had a very low threshold to start antibiotics and take the patient to the operating room for arthroscopic irrigation and debridement if her clinical picture worsened. The patient was given non-steroidal anti-inflammatory pain medication (NSAIDs) as well as ice therapy for pain management in house.
On hospital day 2, the patient’s left knee pain began to improve with her right knee pain being grossly unchanged. The patient’s management with NSAIDs (ibuprofen 800 mg every 8 h) and physical therapy, as well as strict monitoring of patient’s labs and clinical picture, continued for the next few days. Her pain levels steadily improved day by day in both knees. By her fourth day in the hospital, her CRP had dropped to 87.94 and her WBC had dropped to 7.95. She no longer had any pain with micromotion in her left leg. On hospital day five the patient was discharged with very strict return precautions. At her first clinic visit one week later, the patient reported a complete resolution of her bilateral knee pain to pre-injection levels .