A 63-year-old Japanese man with a medical history of diabetes for 7 years, Fahr’s disease for 4 years, and systemic steroid use for bullous pemphigoid for 2 years had been receiving intravitreal injections of ranibizumab in the left eye for 2 years according to a Pro Re Nata regimen (PRN) for macular edema associated with branch retinal vein occlusion. For his diabetes, the patient had been taking an oral anti-diabetic drug, miglitol, 50 mg, 3 times daily. His steroid therapy for bullous pemphigoid had begun with prednisolone at 20 mg/day, had gradually tapered off, and continued at 5 mg/day for the past 6 months. Twenty days after the last injection, the patient presented with a 1-week duration of left eye pain. Upon examination, his best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/15 in the right eye (OD) and 20/200 in the left eye (OS), and IOP was 19 mmHg OD and 45 mmHg OS. Slit-lamp examination of the left eye revealed mild edema of the central cornea with mild conjunctival injection, intermediate keratic precipitates (KP), mild anterior chamber reaction, and incipient cataract. Coin-shaped lesions, linear KP, and iris atrophy were not present . Dilated funduscopic examination of the left eye showed macular edema with hard retinal exudates secondary to a branch retinal vein occlusion. The patient’s right eye was completely normal. Endothelial cell density was 2719 cells/mm2 OD and 1733 cells/mm2 OS Additional file .
Laboratory tests including blood cell count, leucocytes, C-reactive protein, and angiotensin-converting enzyme were all essentially normal. Serologic tests were negative for syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus, and human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1). The results of serologic testing for HHV, herpes simplex virus (HSV), varicella zoster virus (VZV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) were positive. Based on the patient’s ocular manifestations, bacterial or viral infection was suspected. Multiplex strip PCR, which can detect 24 common ocular infectious disease pathogens , was performed on biopsied aqueous humor. Results showed that genomic DNA of HHV-6 was present. The 23 other pathogens, e.g., HSV type 1 and 2, VZV, EBV, CMV, HHV-7, HHV-8, bacterial 16s ribosomal RNA (rRNA), and fungal 28s rRNA were however not present. The concentration of HHV-6 DNA was 3.72 × 103 copies/mL, and the PCR product was specific for the HHV-6A variant sequence. Anti-HHV-6 IgG antibodies in blood samples were positive (40 times) and anti-HHV-6 IgM antibodies were negative (< 10 times).
These results led us to make the diagnosis of corneal endotheliitis with anterior uveitis related to an HHV-6 infection. We began treating the patient with 900 mg of oral valganciclovir twice daily, as well as topical 1% ganciclovir and 0.1% betamethasone 4 times per day, without discontinuation of systemic steroids. Topical anti-glaucoma agents (1% brinzolamide twice daily and 0.004% travoprost once per day) were also prescribed. Four weeks after the initiation of therapy, the copy number of HHV-6 DNA in the aqueous humor had decreased to 5.80 × 102 copies/mL. Six weeks later, the corneal edema and KPs were completely resolved. Therefore, oral valganciclovir and topical anti-glaucoma agents were discontinued. Topical ganciclovir with topical steroids was continued for 8 more months. The patient’s BCVA improved to 20/80, the same level as before the episode of corneal endotheliitis, and IOP decreased to 18 mmHg OS without anti-glaucoma agents. At the patient’s one-year follow-up examination, endothelial cell density was 2786 cells/mm2 OD and 2545 cells/mm2 OS Additional file , and the eye was essentially normal without recurrences of corneal endotheliitis and anterior uveitis.
This study was approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee, Medical Review Board of Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, and it adheres to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. Informed consent was obtained from the patient.