A 57-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to a hospital in Philadelphia, PA, USA in October, 2006 for persistent fever and pancytopenia following debridement of a buttock abscess.
Three years before her admission, she had rectal bleeding and was found to have a platelet count of 65 × 109/liter (laboratory reference values are given in Table ). Upper gastrointestinal (GI) workup revealed gastric ulcers with an associated Helicobacter pylori infection. She received appropriate therapy, but developed a rash and a decline in her platelet count to 30 × 109/liter and her hemoglobin (Hb) concentration to 80 g/liter. Bone marrow examination showed a hypercellular marrow with a myeloid left shift. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed splenomegaly without focal lesions but no lymphadenopathy. She was treated with prednisone (1 mg/kg) for a presumed autoimmune anemia with thrombocytopenia (Evans syndrome). Her anemia corrected, but her platelet count rose to only 59 × 109/liter. She continued to have cytopenias with febrile episodes. She received additional courses of steroids and was maintained on azathioprine (3.5 mg/kg/day). At one point, she had a white blood cell count (WBC) nadir < 0.5 × 109/liter and was given filgrastim. Three months before her admission, she felt well and was employed full-time. Her blood counts were: WBC 1.8 × 109/liter with an absolute neutrophil count of 1.386 × 109cells/liter, Hb 108 g/liter, mean cell volume (MCV) 85.8 fL, platelet count 112 × 109/liter.
Eleven days before her referral, she was admitted to an outside hospital with temperature of 38.6°C (101.5°F) and a right buttock abscess. Her WBC was 0.5 × 109/liter, Hb 75 g/liter, platelets 47 × 109/liter. The buttock lesion was debrided. Bone marrow biopsy showed a hypercellular marrow with erythroid and megakaryocytic hyperplasia and clusters of atypical megakaryocytes. Her medications included decadron 20 mg q 12 hours, filgrastim, darbepoietin, albumin, imipenem, diflucan, acyclovir, protonix, folate, and vitamin B12.
Examination was notable for temperature 37.7°C (100.0°F), blood pressure 126/68, respiratory rate 28, pulse 122, oxygen saturation 92% on room air. She had pallor, mild jaundice, a 2/6 systolic flow murmur, splenomegaly, a 3 × 3 cm right buttock eschar, ecchymoses on her arms and left flank, and 3+ bilateral lower extremity edema. She had no lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, or musculoskeletal findings. Her mental status exam was significant for a flat affect and orientation to self, but not to the current year, the hospital name, or her date of birth.
Laboratory studies were remarkable for pancytopenia and a coagulopathy. She had elevations in her ferritin, triglycerides, bilirubin, and liver function tests. Her haptoglobin was low, but her direct anti-globulin test was negative. Her peripheral blood smear demonstrated no spherocytic or microangiopathic changes. An antinuclear antibody (ANA) screen was also negative.
Chest CT demonstrated bibasilar patchy pulmonary consolidation, small pleural effusions, and small calcified mediastinal lymph nodes. Abdominal CT scan showed an enlarged spleen with 10 low-density, indeterminate lesions, similar lesions in the liver, bilateral renal infarcts, and a left psoas hemorrhage. Head CT and echocardiography were unremarkable.
Decadron, antibiotics, and growth factors were continued. A diagnosis of hemophagocytic syndrome was considered, and intravenous cyclosporine was started. Despite aggressive transfusion support, minimal changes were noted in her pancytopenia and coagulopathy. Blood cultures were negative for bacterial, fungal, and mycobacterial pathogens. EBV serologies were notable for IgG EBV capsid protein and IgG EBNA antibodies, but negative for IgM EBV capsid antibodies. EBV DNA copy number in the blood was 27,800/ml, and the CMV DNA copy number was 16,500/ml. Tests for human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6), Hepatitis C, Hepatitis B surface antigen, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were negative.
On the third hospital day, she had increased retroperitoneal bleeding, as indicated by expansion of her flank ecchymosis and an increased red blood cell (RBC) transfusion requirement. She developed respiratory fatigue and required mechanical ventilation. Bronchoscopic examination was unremarkable, but lavage cultures were positive for Stenotrophomonas maltophilia and CMV. Ganciclovir was initiated. She was extubated the following day, but required bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) and continued to have fever and a clouded sensorium.
A bone marrow aspirate revealed a hypercellular bone marrow containing maturing trilineage hematopoiesis with prominent megakaryopoiesis and hyperplastic dyserythropoiesis . The erythroid series showed pronounced megaloblastoid change and abundant atypical erythroid precursors, including multinucleated normoblasts and many normoblasts with bizarre nuclear configurations . Occasional large foamy macrophages containing other hematopoietic elements were noted. Rare very large atypical multinucleated cells with basophilic cytoplasm and separate oval nuclei with prominent nucleoli were also identified .
The bone marrow core biopsy revealed a hypercellular marrow with background maturing trilineage hematopoiesis and a conspicuous increase in large histiocytes/macrophages, many of which contained hemosiderin and/or other hematopoietic elements, consistent with hemophagocytosis. In addition, tumor nodules were present, composed of large, irregular mononuclear cells with scattered, bizarre tumor giant cells containing hyperchromatic nuclei with coarse chromatin and prominent macronucleoli . Occasional binucleated Reed-Sternberg (RS) cells were noted . These tumor nodules occupied approximately 10% to 20% of the total marrow cross-sectional area within the core biopsy and were accompanied by a reticulin fibrosis. The tumor giant cells were strongly positive for CD30 and Ki67, but negative for other B-cell and T-cell markers, myeloid markers, CMV antigens and EBV latent membrane protein (LMP). Significant histiocytosis was also noted with phagocytosis of erythroid and myeloid cells . CD68 staining revealed innumerable histiocytes/macrophages throughout the bone marrow interstitium, many of which contained numerous intact hematopoietic cells . On the basis of these studies, she received a diagnosis of Stage IV HL with concurrent HLH.
She received a single cycle of dose-reduced adriamycin, bleomycin, vinblastine and dacarbazine (ABVD) chemotherapy for treatment of her HL. Two days later, she had a seizure of 2 to 3 minutes duration that involved her upper extremities and facial muscles. Her bilirubin rose to 316 μmol/liter (18.5 mg/dl), ferritin to 34,820 μg/liter, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) to 265 U/liter, and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) to 388 U/liter. Following a discussion with her health care proxy, comfort measures were instituted and she died the following day.
Gross examination revealed severe jaundice, petechial hemorrhages of the skin and gastric mucosa, mediastinal lymphadenopathy, and a hematoma over the left psoas muscle. Diffuse alveolar damage was noted in the lungs. Classical HL was observed in the spleen, liver, bone marrow, left kidney, and paratracheal lymph nodes . The tumor infiltrates contained RS cells , which were positive for CD30 but negative for other B-cell and T-cell markers and EBV LMP. Taken together, the bone marrow and autopsy findings confirmed a diagnosis of stage IV HL and HLH.