A 61 years-old female with a past history of obesity and chronic hypertension was referred to the gynecological consultation of Erasme University Hospital for a painful mass of the right breast, which have been present for 6 months according to the patient. Physical examination of the breast confirmed the presence of a retroareolar mass, indurated on palpation with a nipple invagination. The rest of the clinical examination was unremarkable. No significant drug, family or psychosocial history was noted. Radiography and ultrasonography revealed the presence of a relatively well delineated 34 × 32 mm retroareolar right breast mass without calcification classified as BIRADS 4C. There were no suspicious lymph nodes. The contralateral breast was without particularity. Biopsies of this lesion have been performed and pathological examination suggests the diagnosis of a phyllode tumor "at least borderline" with suspicion of an associated well-differentiated invasive ductal of no special type (NST) carcinoma. A lumpectomy with sentinel lymph node resection were decided after a multidisciplinary meeting and performed. Macroscopically, the tumor measures 35 mm long and demonstrates a white cut surface. It appeared to be well circumscribed with nevertheless, in places, some irregular borders . Microscopically, the tumor showed prominent intracanalicular growth pattern. The stromal cellularity is non-uniform with mild or moderate atypia but without heterologous element. The stromal mitotic activity is estimated at 7 mitoses per 10 high power fields. According to these data, this phyllode tumor was classified as borderline. Within this phyllode tumor, a 3 mm focus of NST grade 1 invasive carcinoma was also found (, ). It was characterized by invasive glandular structures invading the stroma without visible myoepithelial cell (p63 and calponin immunostaining were negative) . By immunohistochemistry, as we have previously described, the tumoral cells were positive for hormone receptors (ER and PR), negative for HER2 and the Ki-67 index was estimated at about 5–10% , , . The surgical resection margins were free and the sentinel lymph node was negative for malignancy.
After the dissection of in one part the carcinomatous component and in the other part the atypical stromal component, gene mutations testing has been performed by next generation sequencing (NGS), as we have previously validated, with a panel of 16 genes , , . The E542K (exon 9) mutation of the PIK3CA gene was demonstrated both in the carcinomatous and the atypical stromal components. The surgery was well tolerated and the patient recovered after it. The adjuvant therapies included both local radiotherapy and antiestrogen tamoxifen therapy. To date, with a 3 month follow up, no recurrence or distant metastasis has occurred. Follow-up consultations every 4 months in the first two years diagnosis and yearly mammography with ultrasound have been planned.