An 11-year-old boy arrived at our institution’s emergency department after his outstretched arm hit a car dashboard in a motor vehicle accident. Our patient reported severe pain, and his elbow was swollen and had a limited range of motion. Findings on a neurovascular examination were normal. His past medical history was not significant, with no previous elbow injuries. An anteroposterior radiograph showed a small lateral epicondylar avulsion fracture and considerable soft-tissue swelling, and a lateral radiograph showed an olecranon fracture . To exclude other possible complicated fractures, computed tomography (CT) was performed. CT revealed an oblique olecranon fracture running from his proximal radius to distal ulnar . The proximal radioulnar joint of his elbow was intact and there was no Monteggia equivalent type fracture.
After induction of general anesthesia, dynamic images were obtained and surgery was performed. A varus stress image showed enlargement of the radiohumeral joint space, suggesting insufficiency of the lateral collateral ligamentous stabilizer (See Additional file : varus instability). There was no valgus instability. The posterolateral rotatory instability test easily reproduced posterolateral rotatory elbow dislocation . When the elbow was flexed more than 50°, the elbow joint was reduced with a palpable clunk (See Additional file : posterolateral rotator instability).
First, we fixed the olecranon fracture using a tension-band wiring method from a posterior approach. However, his elbow still had gross posterolateral rotatory instability, so we used a lateral approach to repair the lateral stabilizer. The lateral capsule was ruptured at the proximal attachment, and there was a large hematoma. The cartilaginous lateral epicondylar apophysis by which the lateral collateral ligament complex (LCLC) was attached had avulsed with a lateral condylar fragment . The cartilaginous lateral epicondylar apophysis was much larger than the epicondylar fragment seen on the radiographs. A part of the common extensor origin was also disrupted. His annular ligament remained intact. After we performed reduction and fixation of the cartilaginous lateral epicondylar fragment with Kirschner wires, the instability disappeared .
His arm was immobilized in a splint with his elbow flexed at 90° and his forearm at 30° of pronation. Three weeks after surgery, the splint was removed and active exercise of his elbow was started. Six months after surgery, radiographs showed bony union, and there was no instability. The Kirschner wires were removed in a second operation. Two years after the first surgery, our patient had neither pain nor subjective instability, and his elbow had a nearly full range of motion: flexion, 135°; extension, 0°; pronation, 80°; supination, 90°.