A 75-year-old male was referred by general practitioner to our hospital for recurrent deep vein thrombosis (DVT) of the lower limbs. His past medical history consisted of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease treated with a beta-adrenergic agonist and a smoking cessation several years ago. On admission, he described progressive shortness of breath and general fatigue. Clinical examination did not find any noticeable abnormality. Computerized tomography (CT) pulmonary angiography revealed bilateral and multisegmental pulmonary embolism (PE) associated with bilateral paratracheal and left hilar lymph nodes of which the largest measured 20 mm. There was no abnormality detected in the pulmonary parenchyma. On admission, anticoagulation treatment with enoxaparin 1 mg/kg b.i.d. was started, then switched on discharge to rivaroxaban according to European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines. Direct oral anticoagulant was preferred for patient’s comfort pending the investigation of thoracic lymph nodes by positron emission tomography (PET) scan. The results of the coagulopathy and thrombophilia testing were negative.
Two weeks later, the patient was readmitted to the hospital with an acute ischaemia of the left lower limb. His blood pressure was 163/78 mmHg, pulse rate was 81 beats/min, peripheral oxygen saturation on room air was 94%, and body temperature was 37.6°C. On physical exam, the left lower leg was painful, pale with decreased local temperature and popliteal, and distal artery pulses were diminished. Cardiovascular auscultation revealed a regular heart rate without an evident murmur. A standard laboratory examination showed an anaemia with a haemoglobin of 10.4 g/dL (13.5–17.5 g/dL), an inflammatory reaction with a C-reactive protein level of 40 mg/L (<10 mg/L), and a hypereosinophilia at 3 × 109/L (0–0.5 × 109/L). An electrocardiogram revealed normal sinus rhythm. A thrombosis occluding the popliteal and the medial sural arteries was detected on colour-Doppler ultrasound and confirmed by CT angiography . Treatment with subcutaneous injection of enoxaparin 1 mg/kg b.i.d. was started, and thrombectomy of the popliteal artery was performed. In our patient who had a recurrent DVT, low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) was preferred to unfractionated heparin as it has shown to be the treatment of choice for DVT/PE recurrences.
Post-operatively, the patient presented a single episode of fever 38.5°C that resolved spontaneously. Pathology examination of the thrombectomy-related material showed a fibrinous clot. Holter monitoring found sinus rhythm with rare supraventricular and ventricular extrasystoles without atrial fibrillation. Transthoracic echocardiography showed only mild mitral regurgitation and transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) detected an infracentimetric mobile vegetation of 0.5 cm × 0.3 cm on atrial side of the posterior mitral valve leaflets with mild regurgitation . There was no evidence of a patent foramen ovale. Bacterial endocarditis was suspected at this point, and the patient was treated with intravenous antibiotics, amoxicillin 12 g o.d., and gentamicin 3 mg/kg o.d. pending the results of blood cultures and the final diagnosis. Multiple aerobic and anaerobic blood cultures and an extensive thrombophilic and autoimmune testing were conducted and came back negative, including assays for antinuclear antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibodies, beta-2 glycoprotein 1 antibodies, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies, anti-extractable nuclear antigen antibodies, and anti-rheumatoid factor.
Whole-body PET scan showed pulmonary and mediastinal lymphadenopathies suggesting the presence of an underlying neoplasia . There was no evidence of mitral valve hyperfixation on PET scan. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a small hypersignal lesion on T2 FLAIR images, suggestive of embolic infarction in the left parietal lobe . The patient did not complain of any symptoms. Lymph node biopsy from Barety’s space was taken, and the pathology report indicated micropapillary predominant adenocarcinoma of bronchopulmonary origin. Sets of blood cultures and serology were negative, and there were no clinical manifestations of infective endocarditis (IE).
Based on the medical background and clinical context, the final diagnosis was in favour of an NBTE associated with advanced pulmonary adenocarcinoma KRAS+ PDL1 − (T3N3M1a).
According to ESC guidelines, the evidence of a small vegetation measured at 0.5 cm × 0.3 cm without heart failure and without uncontrolled infection despite thrombo-embolic episodes did not require surgical intervention. Conservative medical treatment was adopted after discussion with a multi-disciplinary team.
During hospitalization, repeat TOE was performed as a routine follow-up in accordance with the ESC guidelines, and showed a significant regression of the mobile echodensity of the mitral valve 10 days after the first TOE. Antibiotic therapy was stopped at Day 11. The patient was referred to the oncology department with lifelong LMWH for NBTE and cancer-associated thrombosis according to the ESC guidelines., Carboplatin and Taxol chemotherapy was started. Ultimately the patient did not respond to chemotherapy and subsequently died from cancer 4 months after the NBTE diagnosis.