A 40-year-old Caucasian woman underwent subtotal thyroidectomy in another European country due to suspicion of a thyroid goiter. The patient had no family history of ATC. Pathological examination at that time showed thyroid goiter with signs of mesenchymal tumor. Two months later, the recurrent tumor in the neck was again resected. At that time, the malignancy was diagnosed as an ATC. Because of the histopathological diagnosis, chemoradiotherapy was administered. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with doxorubicin (60 mg/m2 every 21 days) and 36 Gy in 12 fractions postoperative external beam radiation therapy.
Unfortunately, the treatment failed to contain the tumor; within 1 month after the operation, she developed tumor progression, with fast growth of a tumor mass on the neck and was admitted to our hospital.
On admission, physical examination revealed a large exophytically growing tumor mass with an invasion in the surrounding skin and a chronic nonhealing ulcer and necrotic tissue in the tumor . The patient reported significant morbidity and deterioration in her mental state. She was under high psychological stress because of the neck deformity and visible large bad-smelling tumor mass.
Computed tomography of the neck showed a widespread (130 × 73 mm) inhomogeneous mass in the thyroid lodge, with compression of the right jugular vein and extended to the right mediastinum to the supra-aortic vessels .
The tumor was identified as nonresectable, and palliative resection of the tumor mass was planned. The operation was carried out under general anesthesia. Due to the massive invasion of the tumor mass into surrounding tissue, the patient underwent intralesional excision, including the affected skin. This resulted in a 10 × 5 cm soft tissue defect on the neck; the skin defect was temporarily covered with synthetic skin replacement . The postoperative recovery was uneventful.
On the sixth postoperative day, reconstruction of the neck was performed with an IMAP flap. Initially, the internal mammary artery perforators on the right side along the sternal border were examined and marked preoperatively with a handheld Doppler. The flap based on the perforator of the second intercostal space was chosen, which was deemed the dominant vessel based on a better Doppler signal. The flap was marked so that the distal part of the flap was pulled towards the right shoulder and measured 7 × 16 cm. Skin harvesting was started from the lateral edge of the flap in a subfascial plane until the internal mammary perforator vessels were identified. The distal part of the flap extended about 2.0 cm beyond the anterior axillary fold. The perforator artery measured 2.0 mm . IMAP was islanded, the narrow skin bridge between the donor site and the neck wound was divided, and the flap rotated clockwise through 120° along the vascular axis to fill the neck defect. After suturing the flap completely without tension, two percutaneous drains were placed. The donor site was closed directly without tension. The flap was constantly well-perfused .
Postoperative recovery was uneventful, and no surgical complications occurred in the postoperative period to hospital discharge on postoperative day 5. The patient was delighted with the esthetic outcome and functional results of the operation . Molecular-targeted therapy with lenvatinib (10 mg) and pembrolizumab (200 mg) every month as a part of palliative therapy was initiated. Follow-up was performed every 3 months by computed (18F)2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) combined with computed tomography (CT). The patient died of disease due to a local invasion into the trachea 13 months after surgery.