A 71-year-old male presented with complaints of sudden blurring of vision in both eyes associated with pain and coloured haloes since morning. He had had bilateral, uneventful clear corneal phacoemulsification with posterior chamber intraocular lens implantation five years earlier with no other antecedent ocular disease. Medical history was significant for systemic hypertension for which he was undergoing treatment for the past 15 years. He was prescribed Klorzid tablets (chlorthalidone 12.5 mg, German Remedies Limited, Zydus Cadila) for systemic hypertension and AB Phylline tablets for bronchitis for the week preceding his eye consultation.
Examination revealed uncorrected acuity of 6/60 (20/200) OU. Vision was correctable to 20/20 OU with −3.75 D Sphere OD and −2.50 D Sphere OS, respectively, with near vision N6 with +2.50 addition in both eyes. Anterior segment examination revealed corneal epithelial edema, shallow anterior chambers, sluggishly reacting pupils, and posterior chamber intraocular lenses in both eyes . Evaluation of fundus revealed normal optic discs and posterior pole. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 41 mmHg OD and 36 mmHg OS, respectively, by Goldmann applanation tonometry. Gonioscopy performed with a Goldmann 2 mirror revealed 360-degree closed angles with appositional angle closure and no angle structures visible. Ultrasound biomicroscopic examination revealed shallow anterior chamber with ciliary body detachment. B-scan ultrasonography revealed 360-degree peripheral shallow choroidal detachment . A tentative diagnosis of chlorthalidone induced bilateral angle closure glaucoma secondary to ciliochoroidal effusions was reached and treatment initiated with brimonidine eye drops OU and cycloplegic homatropine eye drops OU was also started thrice a day. Chlorthalidone which has been reported to cause idiosyncratic angle closure glaucoma was presumed to be the cause of choroidal effusion and consequent angle closure and hence discontinued. Oral acetazolamide was avoided since it is known that ciliary-choroidal effusion could be caused or aggravated by cross-reactivity due its sulphonamide component. When the patient reported two days later, his uncorrected vision remained at 20/200 OU, but IOP was 20 and 18 mmHg in the right and left eyes. Anterior segment examination revealed clear corneas and shallow anterior chambers (OD > OS). Fundus examination was normal in both eyes. Gonioscopy revealed closed, angle configuration OU. UBM and B-scan ultrasonography were characteristic of ciliary body and choroidal detachments, as observed earlier. Treatment with topical aqueous suppressants and cycloplegics was continued. A week later, the patients uncorrected visual acuity was 20/30 OD and 20/20 OS. Vision improved to 20/20 OU with −1.00 × 90 D cylinder OD and −0.50 × 90 OS, respectively. Anterior segment examination revealed clear corneas and deep anterior chambers OU. Fundus examination was normal in both eyes. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 8 mmHg OD and 11 mmHg OS. Gonioscopy revealed wide open angles OU. UBM and B-scan ultrasonography revealed 360-degree resolving choroidal detachments. The topical medications were then discontinued. The patient was advised of periodical evaluation to exclude any residual glaucoma.
A 65-year-old male patient was referred to glaucoma services with complaints of sudden and painless diminution of vision associated with severe headache and nausea for 3 days. He had been treated with a fixed combination of timolol and brimonidine twice a day and Bimatoprost 0.01% once at night elsewhere. He was a known patient of diabetes mellitus on treatment for 30 years. He had uneventful phacoemulsification with intraocular lens implantation in both eyes 5–7 months earlier than onset of his symptoms. On examination his visual acuity was 6/12 improving with −0.75 D cylinder at 90° to 6/9 in the right eye and 6/24 improving with −1.25 D sphere and −0.50 D cylinder at 120° to 6/9 in the left eye. His anterior segment examination revealed clear corneal incision scars, anterior chamber depth was slightly shallow, iris was chaffed in the region of the corneal incision, and the pupil was round and acting in a sluggish way with posterior chamber intraocular lens in situ. His intraocular pressure was 4 mmHg and 8 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Gonioscopy revealed narrow angles in both eyes, open without synechiae on indentation. The fundus revealed normal sized optic nerve with healthy neuroretinal rim and a CD ratio of 0.5 : 1 in both eyes. Bilateral moderate nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy with asteroid hyalosis in the left eye and bilateral peripheral moderate serous choroidal detachments were observed. On further enquiry the patient revealed that his physician had added chlorthalidone tablets 25 mg once a day for the control of hypertension three days prior to the onset of symptoms. A provisional diagnosis of drug (chlorthalidone) induced and acute bilateral angle closure with choroidal detachment was reached and the drug chlorthalidone was discontinued. A week later, visual acuity had improved to 6/9 OU and his anterior chamber had deepened. His intraocular pressure was 10 mmHg and 8 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Peripheral choroidal detachments persisted but reduced considerably and were confirmed by ultrasonography B-scan . He was advised to discontinue Bimatoprost and report for review after a week. On his last visit about 15 days after the onset of symptoms the visual acuity was 6/9 OU. The anterior chamber had deepened considerably. His pupils were normal. The intraocular pressure was 13 mmHg OU. Gonioscopy revealed wide open angles. The trabecular meshwork was normally pigmented and there were intermittent areas of excess pigment deposition over the anterior chamber angle. The fundus appeared normal and serous choroidal detachments had resolved completely in both eyes, confirmed by ultrasonography B-scan . He was advised to discontinue timolol-brimonidine combination and report for review periodically to exclude recurrence/residual glaucoma.