A 24-year-old man was referred to our center for a recurrent and painless limbocorneal lesion in his left eye. The primary lesion had been removed 10 months earlier with a clinical impression of limbal papilloma at another eye care center. The histopathological diagnosis had been “acute bullous inflammation with granulation tissue” composed of scattered single- and multi-nucleated histiocytes.
Uncorrected visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/80 in the involved left eye. On slit lamp biomicroscopy, there was an elevated vascular mass extending from the temporal limbus to the central cornea in the left eye. Intraocular pressure was within normal limits and fundus examination was unremarkable.
With a clinical diagnosis of a recurrent limbocorneal papillomatous/dermoid-like lesion, the patient underwent mass resection together with corneoscleral patch grafting and lateral tarsorrhaphy. The excised specimen was fixed in 10% formalin and sent for histopathology. Slit lamp photography was overlooked preoperatively since the lesion was thought to be a simple recurrent limbal papilloma.
After surgery the patient received topical betamethasone 0.1% and chloramphenicol 0.5% eye drops along with non-preserved lubrication four times a day for four weeks.
On gross histopathological examination, the excised mass was cream-colored and lobulated, measuring 14×8×4 mm. Light microscopy disclosed non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium overlying a diffuse inflammatory background composed of nests and clusters of large histiocytes with indented and grooved nuclei intermixed with lymphocytes, plasma cells and eosinophils (A and 1B). The histiocytes were strongly immune reactive for S-100 protein (C) and moderately for membrane based CD1a immune staining (D).
The histopathological features were characteristic of LCH with incomplete surgical excision. During follow-up and after four months, no signs indicative of recurrence were observed and the appearance was cosmetically acceptable (A and 2B).