A 66-year-old, 57 kg, woman with bipolar disorder was scheduled for maintenance ECT. She had been diagnosed with bipolar disorder over 9 years earlier. She had undergone 12 sessions of ECT under general anesthesia in our hospital. Propofol and suxamethonium were used for general anesthesia in every ECT procedure. ECT was effective against the bipolar disorder, and she had achieved excellent clinical response with maintenance ECT every 2–3 months over 9 years in our hospital. With over 100 sessions of ECT during the 9 years, no adverse hemodynamic events of note (including bradycardia) had been observed, and no atropine had been administered at any session of ECT in our hospital. In addition, ECT procedures over the previous 2 months showed no noteworthy events, including asystole or bradycardia. Five years earlier, transthoracic echocardiography had been performed because of abnormalities on electrocardiography (ECG) in the form of incomplete right bundle branch block (IRBBB). No abnormalities were identified on echocardiography, with no asynergy of the left ventricle (LV) and an LV ejection fraction of 60–65%.
At this time, treatment with maintenance ECT was planned to be continued as usual, along with pharmacotherapy comprising oral olanzapine at 5 mg/day.
For the ECT session in which the event occurred, no premedication was administered. Pre-intervention ECG indicated normal sinus rhythm with IRBBB. No abnormality of ST-T change was observed. A cardiologist performed cardiac examinations and found no issues requiring consideration. No abnormalities were evident from pre-intervention laboratory analyses, including serum potassium concentration (3.6 mEq/L). Oral olanzapine at 5 mg was continued on the day of ECT.
In the operating room, baseline blood pressure (BP) was 161/94 mmHg, HR was 77 beats/min, and peripheral oxygen saturation was 96% under room air.
Anesthesia was induced using propofol at 1.0 mg/kg, and then 0.6 mg of suxamethonium was administered. After the induction of anesthesia, hyperventilation (end-tidal carbon dioxide, approximately 30 mmHg) was achieved by manual mask ventilation with 100% oxygen. When muscular relaxation was judged as adequate, bilateral electrodes were placed, and the electrical stimulus for ECT was delivered using a Thymatoron system IV® (Somatics; LLC, Lake Buff, IL) via bifrontal-temporal electrode placement (electric current, 0.92 A; frequency, 40 Hz; stimulation duration, 6.3 s).
Immediately after electrical stimulation, systolic BP increased from 144 to 188 mmHg, and HR increased from 81 to 151 beats/min .
Tonic-chronic seizures were induced (motor seizures, 55 s; electroencephalographic (EEG) seizures, 73 s) .
Shortly before seizure termination, HR gradually decreased, and severe bradycardia (5–6 beats/min) was identified for 15–20 s . The patient was administered 0.5 mg of atropine sulfate, and HR quickly normalized to 78 beats/min. Recovery from ECT was uneventful, with no further episodes of asystole or other arrhythmias. A consulting cardiologist indicated that no further evaluation was required and recommended conservative management.
For the next ECT procedure, 0.5 mg of atropine sulfate was infused immediately before the electrical stimulus, and no adverse hemodynamic changes, asystole, or severe bradycardia were found during ECT .