A 30-year-old female presented with numbness and heaviness left upper limb associated with a weak grip left hand for 6 months. She also complained of pain in the neck on and off for 1 year. On examination, she had weakness of the left shoulder with a weak left-hand grip. Her left shoulder power was 4/5 while her left-hand grip was approximately 80% of her contralateral normal hand without any other neurological deficits. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine revealed an elongated, bulky, and expansile mass lesion extending from the superior margin of the medulla with a dorsally exophytic component, and caudally was up to C6 vertebral level . The lesion was hypointense on T1-weighted (T1W) images and predominantly hyperintense on T2-weighted (T2W) images. In the axial images, asymmetric involvement was noted; the left hemicord was more affected than the right . Mild T2 hyperintensity suggestive of vasogenic edema was seen along the inferior aspect of the lesion, reaching up to the C7–T1 disc level and minimally in the medulla. The spinal subarachnoid space was effaced. Based on these findings, the possibility of a high-grade glial neoplasm was suspected. Suboccipital craniotomy, C1 to C6 laminoplasty, and gross total resection of the tumor were done and the whole tissue was sent for histopathological examination. Intraoperative neuromonitoring using a combination of motor-evoked potentials (MEPs), somatosensory-evoked potentials (SSEPs), and lower cranial nerve monitoring was used during surgery. Loss of SSEP in the left upper limb was noted presurgery but the MEPs in all limbs and SSEP in the other three limbs were undisturbed during the surgery. The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery. Postoperative MRI done 2 days after surgery showed complete excision of the lesion along with postoperative edema and changes in the tumor bed . The histopathological report however suggested a glioblastoma. Further studies showed that the tumor retained ATRX protein and was GFAP and p 53 positive, IDH1 R132H negative, and H3K27M mutation absent. MIB 1 index was 5–7% in the highest proliferating areas. Thus, the integrated diagnosis of this patient was glioblastoma, IDH wildtype, and WHO Grade 4. The patient had a complete neurological recovery, after the completion of radiotherapy and temozolomide at her last follow-up 24 months following her surgery without any recurrence. She was independent in activities of daily living and had resumed her previous work as a banker.