A 54-year-old lady presented to our emergency department because of left-sided burning chest pain radiating to the throat and left arm that had been present for several hours. This was associated with palpitations, nausea, and vomiting. Four months earlier, a sigmoid adenocarcinoma had been diagnosed with a solitary liver metastasis. She had undergone laparoscopic anterior resection and had started the first cycle of FOLFOX adjuvant chemotherapy (oxaliplatin, calcium folinate, and fluorouracil) as a bolus and as a continuous intravenous infusion, completed 1 day prior to the onset of the acute chest pain. She had a past history of a pituitary adenoma with transphenoidal surgery for which she was taking long-term hormone replacement as well as duodentitis and hypercholesterolaemia. She was hypotensive and tachycardic, with bilateral crepitations to the midzones of her lungs and jugular venous pressure was raised. Arterial blood gases were consistent with Type 1 respiratory failure. Electrocardiogram (ECG) confirmed sinus tachycardia with T-wave inversion in V4–6, I, and aVL. Bloods testing showed a raised troponin-I of 679 ng/L (high-sensitivity assay), white cell count of 11.4 × 109/L and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 5 mg/L. A bedside echocardiogram showed severe global impairment of left ventricular (LV) function (estimated ejection fraction 10–15%) and mild functional mitral regurgitation. She was initially managed with dual antiplatelets on the assumption that there was an underlying primary coronary cause to her presentation. She was transferred to our intensive care unit where intravenous noradrenaline and dopamine and high flow oxygen and was started. A brief period on continuous positive airway pressure was required. She responded to inotropic support and was stepped-down to our coronary care unit on Day 4 of the admission. Due to resolution of chest pain, lack of ECG evidence of evolving ischaemia and being unable to lie flat for the procedure for which she would require intubation and ventilation, a coronary angiogram was not performed emergently and was deferred for when she was more clinically stable. This was offered on Day 4 but the patient declined this due to anxiety surrounding the procedure. A cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) scan scheduled on the same day showed good contraction of the basal segments of the left ventricle but was hypokinetic from the mid ventricle to the apex (i.e. in a non-coronary distribution). Overall, LV function was moderately impaired. Right ventricular (RV) size and function were normal. T1 and T2 mapping sequences confirmed LV oedema from the mid ventricle to the apex with relative sparing at the base. Contrast (late gadolinium enhancement, LGE) imaging, showed no evidence of myocardial scar or infarction . The CMR scan diagnosed TTS secondary to fluorouracil chemotherapy and the patient was discharged with perindopril and bisoprolol. In light of the Takotsubo pattern of features on her CMR, coronary angiography was not necessary. Follow-up CMR scan 6 weeks later confirmed resolution of the acute findings: no myocardial oedema with normal T1 and T2 tissue values, normal biventricular function, and no myocardial infarction (MI).