A 39-year-old female patient presented to the outpatient clinic of the Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University with intermittent right lower abdominal pain and nausea for 7 days. Upon admission, physical examination revealed right lower abdominal tenderness, with no rebound tenderness or abdominal guarding, and the vital signs were: T: 36.7 °C, P: 72 beats/min, BP: 127/80 mmHg. The complete blood count showed mild leucocytosis (WBC count: 10.32 × 109/L, normal range: 4–10 × 109/L), suggestive of an infection. The patient previously underwent computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen in another hospital that showed inflammatory exudates in the ileocecal region and edema of the intestinal tract, while the appendix could not be visualized. The patient was subsequently transferred to our hospital for further consultation and treatment. The patient conceded that she experienced severe lower abdominal pain 2 years before but did not seek medical attention at that time and self-medicated with anti-inflammatory drugs. Her abdominal pain improved in about 5 days. Since then, she occasionally experienced dull pain in her right lower abdomen and self-medicated with oral antibiotics without seeking medical advice. Her past family and psycho-social history were unremarkable. After excluding surgical contraindications, the patient underwent emergency laparoscopic exploration.
After induction of general anesthesia, a pneumoperitoneum was established by the conventional three-port method, and the abdominal cavity was explored laparoscopically. We observed some adhesions between the small intestine and the lateral abdominal wall. After separating the adhesions, a small amount of pelvic fluid was seen, and no obvious abdominal and pelvic organ abnormalities were found. An appendix of about 2 cm in length and 1 cm in diameter protruded from the cecum during the operation with obvious edema, accounting for the patient’s right lower abdominal pain. After aspiration of the pelvic fluid, the appendix was removed.
Interestingly, further examination revealed a strip-like tissue attached to the distal mesoappendix, approximately 4 cm in length and 0.5 cm in diameter . The intestinal tract and pelvic organs were carefully examined to exclude intestinal diverticulum, abdominal foreign objects and gynecological diseases. We suspected that the strip-like tissue suspected was a duplex appendix and dissected it along the tip to the end of the strip. Intriguingly, we found it was not connected to the surrounding intestinal tract and then resected it. After surgery, the surgical specimens were sent for histopathological examination.
The postoperative histopathology showed that the excised short appendix and the strip-like tissue were appendiceal tissues. As seen in Fig. a, b, appendix 1 (short) was 1.6 cm in length, 0.8 cm in diameter with a smooth plasma membrane and visible blind end; appendix 2 (long) was 3 cm long, 0.4 cm in diameter with a smooth plasma membrane. The case was diagnosed as an acute episode of chronic appendicitis with autoamputation of the appendix .
After the operation, the patient received routine anti-inflammatory and rehydration treatment. Two days later, the patient passed gas with significant alleviation of the abdominal pain and was subsequently discharged. At 1-month follow-up after hospital discharge, the patient fully recovered without any gastrointestinal discomfort.