A46 year old male patient was presented to our Musculoskeletal Oncology Clinic at Royal Rehabilitation Center at King Hussein Medical Center complaining of progressive right shoulder pain over 8 months duration, aggravated by any movement and associated with a swelling which increase in size with time. There was no history of trauma to the same area, and no positive family history for neurofibromatosis1 nor 2. On physical examination, we found a soft tissue mass in the posterior aspect of right shoulder, tender to deep palpation and firm. As part of work up, x- ray examination was done and showed increase soft tissue intensity.
For further evaluation, magnetic resonance imaging with intravenous contrast preform and reveled a relatively well defined lobulated superficial located large soft tissue tumor about 7 x 6 x 5 cm in the posterior aspect of the right shoulder with mixed signal intensity on T1 and high signal intensity on T2 with heterogeneous enhancement in fat sat post contrast imaging .
Based on the above findings, we proceed with Open inscional biopsy under general anesthesia which revealed spindle cells and prominent mitotic activity with rhabdomyoblastic differentiation which is characteristic for MTT. To finish work up, chest abdomen pelvic CT scan was done and did not show any evidence of distant metastasis.
Later, patient underwent excisional tumor resection with safety margin with nearest margin 30 mm, microscopic examination revealed multi lobulated tumor composed predominantly of hypercellular areas containing uniform spindle cells arranged in intersecting fascicles with perivascular accentuation of the tumor cells, extensive areas of geographic necrosis and prominent mitotic activity noted (18MF/10HPF) with areas of rhabdomyoblastic differentiation evidenced by Desmin and Caldesmin immunostain and Immunohistochemical studies showed CK,PGP9.5,cd68,S-100 and SMA positive ..
The patient was referred to the Hematoncology department and started adjuvant chemotherapy. He continued to follow up in our clinic with no evidence of recurrence of the tumor nor distant metastasis after 5 years of his treatment.