We report a 14-year-old asthmatic male patient admitted to a local hospital for an acute exacerbation of asthma, after he presented with shortness of breath, cough, and fever. He was treated with bronchodilator and antibiotics. On subsequent days, the patient developed new onset generalized tonic clonic seizure in the hospital for which he was started on Phenobarbitone of 100 mg twice daily. Two weeks after initiation of phenobarbitone, the patient developed extensive blistering skin eruptions; which later subsequently exfoliated unevenly. Associated with the hypersensitivity skin reaction, the patient reported low grade fever, sore throat, and dysphagia. The exfoliation also involved oral and conjunctival mucosa; with estimated 65% body surface area involvement. Up on presentation, blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg; pulse rate 100 beat per minutes; respiratory rate was 20 breath/minutes; temperature 38.3 °C; and oxygen saturation was 94% on atmospheric air. Oral examination shows, lesions involving his oral cavity and both lips. Ruptured blisters and extensive skin exfoliation was noted all over; involving approximately 65% of total body surface area . Laboratory investigations were unremarkable, except mild leucocytosis, prolonged prothrombin time, and reduced albumin; the rest of the laboratory investigations were summarized in the table below . In the present case, skin biopsy was not performed, because, of the long appointment (1–3 months) for tissue histopathological tests at our hospital. The patient was admitted to medical intensive care unit (ICU) with consideration of phenobarbitone induced toxic epidermal necrosis, as the surface area affected by the exfoliating skin lesion was 65%; which fulfilled the criteria to diagnose TEN. Thus, Phenobarbitone was immediately discontinued and replaced with clonazepam; and in addition the patient was managed with fluids replacement, IV antibiotics, twice daily wound care, analgesics, and naso gastric tube feeding.
In the present case, the prognosis was good with mortality rate of 12% based on SCORTEN scoring system . In this case, the only predictor of mortality was large surface area involvement of the blistering lesion (65%). According to SCORTEN, surface area involvement > 10% are considered poor prognostic factor . On subsequent days in ICU, the patients’ clinical condition started improving; the skin lesion also started to heal and exfoliate in most of the affected skin surface areas. After 10 days of ICU management the patient was discharged home improvement and follow up appointment. On a subsequent follow up visit, the skin lesion on his face, anterior chest, and hands were fully recovered with scatted healing skin lesion on his back . He only reported pain on swallowing solid foods and he was advised on liquid and semisolid diet till he fully recovers.