A 56-year-old man was referred to our hospital with right upper abdominal pain, which had worsened over the previous two days. He had been free of symptoms previously. He had a history of moderate smoking and alcohol consumption, and no appreciable medical or family history. On admission, his body temperature was 37.4°C. Blood examination showed a white blood cell count of 8900/mm3, C-reactive protein level of 0.08 mg/dl, total bilirubin level of 0.6 mg/dl, aspartate aminotransferase level of 57 IU/l, and alanine aminotransferase level of 67 IU/l. Computed tomography (CT) and echography demonstrated distention of the gallbladder and thickening of its wall and dilatation of the common bile duct, but no gallstones were detected .
He was diagnosed with acute cholecystitis, and initially treated with fluid resuscitation and administration of antibiotics. However, the abdominal pain did not improve, and laparotomy was performed the day after admission, which revealed biliary ascites around the gallbladder and partial necrotic change in the neck and body of the gallbladder. We performed cholecystectomy and intraoperative cholangiography, which revealed no stones in the gallbladder and bile duct. The postoperative course was uneventful. Pathological examination of the resected gallbladder revealed inflammatory change of its wall, and no arterial occlusive change . Microbiological test of the bile showed negative results. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy performed postoperatively showed slight enlargement of the duodenal papilla. Adenocarcinoma of the papilla was diagnosed by biopsy, and pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (PPPD) was performed 6 weeks after the first surgery. Intraoperative findings revealed slight dilatation of the common bile duct, and a soft pancreas with normal pancreatic duct. Pathological examination of the resected specimens demonstrated well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma with a maximum diameter of 1.3 cm localized in the papilla, with no lymph node metastasis, classifying the tumor as TNM stage IA (T1N0M0) . Minor pancreatic leakage occurred during the postoperative course, which was treated conservatively. The patient has been free of recurrence during the 4-year follow-up after surgery.