A 60-year-old man with no past medical history was admitted with sub-acute onset of dizziness and pre-syncope. The initial assessment revealed a profound bradycardia with a blood pressure of 167/92 mmHg. On auscultation, a pan-systolic murmur was audible. There were no clinical signs of pulmonary or peripheral oedema. Twelve-lead electrocardiogram demonstrated complete heart block (CHB) with a narrow QRS escape rhythm at 30 b.p.m. Immediate focused bedside echocardiography revealed preserved biventricular systolic function with no regional wall motion abnormalities and mild-to-moderate MR. Blood tests including full blood count, urea and electrolytes, bone profile, and thyroid function tests were unremarkable. High-sensitivity Troponin-I was 6.4 ng/L (<19.8), and C-reactive protein was 2 mg/L (0–10).
The patient underwent urgent dual-chamber PPM implantation. The right atrial lead was actively fixed to the right atrial appendage and the RV lead to the mid-apical septum. The device was programmed to DDD mode at a basic rate of 60 b.p.m. Detailed transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) performed 1 day post-pacing revealed normal LV volumes, mild septal dyssynchrony consistent with RV pacing, and LV ejection fraction (LVEF) of 63%. There was minor focal posterior mitral annular calcification with slight doming and thickening of the anterior MV leaflet and a mildly restricted posterior leaflet. The mean MV gradient was 1 mmHg. Colour flow imaging revealed a central jet of moderate MR with an effective regurgitant orifice area of 0.31 cm2 (; see , ). The nature of MR was unclear but was considered due to dual aetiology from posterior leaflet restriction and a primary MV lesion. The early-diastolic mitral annular diameter was 3.0 cm, and the left atrium was moderately dilated. RV size and function were normal. Overall right heart parameters suggested a low probability of pulmonary hypertension.
At 4 months follow-up, the patient complained of worsening breathlessness on exertion and orthopnoea, which began in the weeks following PPM implantation. Pacemaker interrogation revealed underlying CHB with atrial-sensed, ventricular-paced device function. The RV pacing burden was 98%. Twelve-lead electrocardiogram confirmed a paced left bundle branch abnormality pattern with the QRS duration of 145 ms. Repeat TTE revealed worsening cardiac structural and functional abnormalities such that the LV had remodelled into a moderately dilated, volume-loaded cavity with mildly dyssynchronous septal motion. The LVEF was 57%, and the global longitudinal strain was reduced at −14.3%. There was torrential MR due to marked posterior leaflet restriction and tethering of the anterior leaflet resulting in complete absence of coaptation with a 5 mm gap between the leaflet tips (; see , ). A comparison of the quantitative echocardiographic data from day 1 post-pacing to 4 months follow-up is given in . The mean MV gradient was elevated at 7 mmHg in the context of severe MR and borderline tachycardia. However, the MV area equated by pressure half time was 2.89 cm2, suggesting no concomitant mitral stenosis. The RV was dilated with severe systolic impairment with a fractional area change of 17% and three-dimensional RVEF of 33%. Colour flow revealed a broad jet of moderate-severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR) with a dense, triangular continuous wave Doppler profile and the proximal isovelocity surface area radius of 0.7 cm. The estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure was elevated at 55–60 mmHg. Transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed absence of MV leaflet coaptation (; see , ).
Following treatment with intravenous diuretics, coronary angiography revealed a co-dominant system with severe stenosis of the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery and two diagonal branches. Right heart catheterization revealed mild pulmonary hypertension secondary to left-sided heart disease with a mean pulmonary artery pressure of 30 mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 22 mmHg, and pulmonary vascular resistance of 1.95 WU.
The patient underwent successful mechanical MVR, tricuspid annuloplasty, left internal mammary artery grafting to the LAD artery, and excision of the left atrial appendage. On inspection, the native MV was notably rheumatic in appearance, and this was confirmed histologically. Post-operative imaging demonstrated a well-functioning MV prosthesis with no transvalvular regurgitation, but severe residual biventricular dysfunction. Oral heart failure treatment was optimized to include bisoprolol 5 mg, ramipril 2.5 mg, eplerenone 25 mg, and furosemide 80 mg daily. He was commenced on warfarin with target international normalized ration 2.5–3.5. He remained well at 12 months follow-up with New York Heart Association Class I–II symptoms. LV systolic function, however, remained severely impaired (LVEF 34%), but RV systolic impairment was mild. His pacemaker will be upgraded to include cardiac resynchronization therapy in light of the severe LV systolic dysfunction and pacing dependency.