An 18-year-old Chinese man presented to the cardiac intensive care unit with chest pain radiating to the left shoulder for 1 h after choledocholithiasis by ERCP and the subsequent treatment.
The patient had abdominal pain and bloating accompanied by nausea a week prior to his admission to the hospital.
The patient had been diagnosed with gallstones and cholecystitis for four years but had not accepted treatment.
The young man reported no history of smoking, alcohol consumption, or use of medications. There was no personal or family history of CAD, hypertension, or obesity.
His temperature, heart rate, blood pressure, and body mass index were normal. His blood pressure was 130/70 mmHg symmetrically in both arms, and his pulse was 60 beats per minute. His physical examination was normal. ECG showed a sinus rhythm with ST-segment elevation in the II, III, and aVF leads compared with the baseline .
The laboratory data showed cTnI levels of 67.55 ng/mL and 80 ng/mL at the peak (relative index below 0.034 ng/mL) and creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB) levels of 56 U/L and 183.6 U/L at the peak (relative index below 24 U/L). The results of his laboratory tests at baseline, including routine blood and urine tests, blood lipid and glucose levels, renal function tests, coagulation factors, and electrolytes, were within the normal ranges. His cholesterol and triglyceride levels were within the normal ranges, and his low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level was 2.23 mmol/L (normal range 2.03-3.34 mmol). Further tests after the AMI revealed nothing remarkable in the erythrocyte sedimentation rate, thyroid function, or tumour markers.
The chest X-ray and abdominal and reproductive organ ultrasound examinations were normal. His echocardiographic examination showed no obvious abnormalities in the structure or movement of the ventricular wall and an estimated left ventricular ejection fraction of 57%.
He had been diagnosed with gallstones and cholecystitis for the previous four years. Despite the low risk of cardiovascular disease in his history, AMI was suspected, and coronary angiography was performed the second day (the chest pain stopped 1 h later and lasted for 2 h in all). The results revealed a smooth angiographic appearance of all arteries . The patient was transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit and treated accordingly. He received secondary preventive treatment for coronary heart disease during the following week and left the coronary care unit after all his laboratory parameters returned to within the normal ranges seven days later .