A 79-year-old Japanese man presented with proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, and increasing kidney dysfunction, and was admitted to his local hospital. He had a 3-year history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and hyperuricemia with mild kidney dysfunction (serum creatinine level 1.1 mg/dL at age 76 years). He had been treated with an angiotensin II receptor blocker, statin, and allopurinol for 3 years. His proteinuria and hypoalbuminemia had gradually worsened, with increasing serum creatinine levels. On admission, his blood pressure was 140/67 mmHg. Physical examination revealed no leg edema. Laboratory tests showed marked hypergammaglobulinemia with hypoalbuminemia (total protein 8.1 g/dL, albumin 3.3 g/dL), kidney dysfunction (blood urea nitrogen 28 mg/dL, serum creatinine 1.28 mg/dL), hyperuricemia (uric acid 9.8 mg/dL), high levels of beta-2 microglobulin (5.9 mg/L) and IgG (3076 mg/dL), and low levels of IgA (35 mg/dL) and IgM (24 mg/dL). Pancytopenia and autoimmune abnormalities, such as anti-nuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, and hypocomplementemia, were not detected. Urinalysis showed proteinuria without hematuria (total urine protein and albumin excretion, 1423 and 949 mg/day, respectively), and a high concentration of a tubulointerstitial injury marker (N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase 35.9 U/L). Serum and urine immunofixation electrophoresis showed monoclonal IgG(λ) M proteins in the serum and Bence-Jones proteins in the urine. Bone marrow aspiration showed plasma cell proliferation (plasma cell count 22%). Considering these findings, the patient was diagnosed with multiple myeloma. A renal biopsy was performed to determine the cause of the proteinuria and kidney dysfunction. The biopsy specimen had 30 glomeruli, including one with global sclerosis and three with adhesive lesions. Histological examination showed glomeruli with an irregularly thickened GBM and a bubble-like appearance in the capillary walls . Immunofluorescence and Congo red staining showed no glomerular deposition of immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA, IgM), light chains (κ, λ), complement components (C3, C4d, C1q), or amyloid protein. Surprisingly, electron microscopy showed podocytic infolding and microspheres in the irregularly thickened GBM as well as foot process flattening, with formation of microvilli and increased actin filaments in the foot processes . There were no electron-dense deposits in the GBM. These pathological changes were similar to those of the glomerulopathy recently described by Joh et al. , suggesting a diagnosis of PIG. Although marked hyalinosis and severe intimal thickening of the renal interlobular arteries were not observed, there were focal tubulointerstitial lesions accompanied by tubular atrophy, as well as interstitial fibrosis and inflammatory cell infiltration, suggesting focal renal ischemic changes. However, there were no changes indicating cast nephropathy or amyloidosis, which are often associated with myeloma. The patient had many risk factors for atherosclerosis such as advanced age, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, and hyperuricemia. Therefore, we considered that the increasing kidney dysfunction resulted from glomerular dysfunction due to PIG superimposed on underlying chronic renal ischemia. The patient was discharged and was treated with a moderate dose of corticosteroids (prednisolone 20 mg/day) after confirmation of the final pathological diagnosis. His proteinuria and his general condition slowly improved, but he died suddenly from a severe acute pulmonary infection 2 months after the introduction of steroid therapy.