A 32-year-old man with severe developmental delay and spastic quadriplegia due to hydranencephaly , who had been cared for by a facility for persons with severe motor and intellectual disabilities, was referred to our dermatology department for the evaluation of a subcutaneous lump in the lower right abdomen. Abdominal CT revealed a well-defined 10 × 5.5-cm solid tumor with a mix of solid and cystic components . Given that a CT scan taken 4 years previously demonstrated bilateral UDT , the origin of the tumor was suspected to be the right testis located within the lateral area of the superficial inguinal pouch. He was immediately referred to our urology department for further evaluation. At the initial visit, blood tests revealed elevated tumor markers with AFP at 10 481 ng/mL, hCG at 24.6 IU/L, and LDH at 232 U/L, leading to the diagnosis of right testicular cancer. The tumor on palpation was not fixed to the abdominal wall, and the imaging studies showed no metastasis.
Owing to his high risk for complications associated with general anesthesia and poor performance status, which made him unfit for any adjuvant treatment, the initial treatment plan proposed by urologists was observation and best supportive care. During follow-up, the tumor visibly increased in size, and his caregivers were hesitant to leave it untreated. After repeated discussions with his mother and attending physician in the facility, we eventually planned to perform a surgical resection of the tumor; however, by then, it had already been 4 months since the initial consultation. A preoperative CT scan demonstrated that the tumor diameter increased to 11 × 7 cm, and the AFP and LDH levels were elevated to 17 668 ng/mL and 335 U/L, respectively, but there was still no evident metastatic or nodal disease.
A right lower abdominal oblique incision along the tumor's long axis was made from the junction of the testicular tumor and spermatic cord, whose location was confirmed by ultrasonography. The spermatic cord was first lifted and clamped near the testis. The tumor was then mobilized from the abdominal wall, allowing the exposure of the anterior wall of the inguinal canals in the operative field. Subsequently, high ligation of the spermatic code was performed as usual .
Pathological examination revealed a mixed-type germ cell tumor comprising an immature teratoma and an embryonal carcinoma , with negative microscopic margins and negative lymphovascular invasion. He was discharged on the 23rd postoperative day. At the 5-month follow-up, no obvious metastatic lesions were observed on imaging, and the AFP, hCG, and LDH levels decreased and were within the normal range.