A 28-year-old nulliparous pregnant Japanese woman was referred for prenatal evaluation at 30 weeks of gestation because of abnormal ultrasound findings of fetal congenital heart defects. The family history of the parents was unremarkable. Fetal ultrasonography at 30 weeks and 5 days of gestation showed vascular ring, Ebstein's anomaly, ventricular septal defect, and single umbilical artery. The estimated fetal body weight corresponded to the Japanese standard for the gestational age. Fetal ultrasonography showed vertex presentation of the moving fetus and the fetal stomach appeared to be normally dilated . The pregnant woman had not felt any fetal movements since 31 weeks of gestation. At 32 weeks and 5 days of gestation, fetal ultrasonography showed absence of fetal movement with breech presentation, polyhydramnios, absent filling of stomach, and fetal growth restriction (FGR) . However, abnormal Doppler findings regarding the fetal middle cerebral artery, umbilical cord artery, and ductus venous were not observed. Clinical diagnosis of fetal akinesia was made at this point. At 32 weeks and 6 days of gestation, amniocentesis was performed to assess the possibility of chromosomal aberrations. Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis on uncultured amniocytes for chromosome 13, 18, and 21 revealed two signals, respectively. At 34 weeks and 6 days of gestation, progression of polyhydramnios with maternal respiratory compromise occurred and 2300 mL of amniotic fluid was removed. G-banding analysis on cultured amniocytes revealed a karyotype of 46,XY,22pstk+ . After discussion with the parents about the prognosis of the fetus based on ultrasound findings, including fetal akinesia since 31 weeks of gestation, FGR, congenital heart defects, and left-sided pleural effusion that indicated severe phenotype with prenatal onset of genetic disorders, perinatal palliative care was chosen. At 36 weeks and 3 days of gestation, fetal ultrasonography showed further progression of polyhydramnios with maternal compromise , and 2000 mL of amniotic fluid was removed and labor was induced with oxytocin. The breech neonate was delivered vaginally at 36 weeks and 4 days of gestation with an Apgar score of 1 at 1 min and 1 at 5 min. Birth weight was 1839 g, length 45.5 cm, head circumference 31.8 cm, and chest circumference 23.5 cm. External examination revealed marked muscular hypoplasia of upper and lower extremities, extremely thin transverse palmar creases, joint contractures of lower extremities, hypertelorism, and deep-set ears. The neonate died within 2 h after birth due to respiratory failure. Therefore, we could not assess developmental profile after birth. In addition, permission for neonatal autopsy was not obtained from the parents. Clinical features of the neonate were not sufficient to diagnose a specific disease but suggested the possibility of genetic disorders, including diseases caused by either a single gene or a chromosomal defect. After genetic counseling and obtaining written consent from the parents, whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed with genomic DNA extracted from the placenta using the eXome Hidden Markov Model v1.0 (XHMM). Although the causative gene mutations related to the phenotype of the neonate were not identified, a 3 Mb deletion of chromosome 1p was suspected . The suspected deleted region by the exome analysis using XHMM was further validated by chromosomal microarray (CMA). CMA analysis demonstrated monoallelic deletion located from positions 849466 to 3347420 on chromosome 1p36.33–p36.32 (Chr1:849466–3347420) including 76 genes, which is known as chromosome 1p36 deletion syndrome . Among 76 genes, the gene SKI, which is known to contribute to the phenotype of chromosome 1p36 deletion syndrome, is included [, ]. These results were consistent with the prenatal sonographic findings and the neonate was diagnosed with chromosome 1p36 deletion syndrome. In addition, CMA analysis revealed no additional copy number variations (CNVs), which suggested de novo deletion rather than inheritance from the parents. After genetic counseling for future pregnancies, the parents decided against genetic carrier screening. Postnatal sub-telomeric FISH analysis on cultured amniocytes revealed a terminal deletion of chromosome 1p .