A type II diabetic 45-year-old male with the complaints of right flank pain and swelling with a high-grade fever for the last 15 days was admitted to the department of nephrology of a tertiary care hospital in Northern India, in March 2019. Occasionally, he also had burning sensation during micturition. On physical examination, the patient was febrile (102°F/38.9°C) with a heart rate of 101/min and blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg. There was a lump in the right side of the abdomen, which was slightly tender, extending up to 7 cm below the right subcostal margin. The margins were ill-defined. The lump was soft and ballotable with no pulsations.
Blood test reports revealed low hemoglobin level (9 gm/dL), polymorphonuclear leucocytosis of 16500/mm3, and high serum creatinine (4.3 mg/dL). In addition, the HbA1c level was 8%. Urine test indicated 100 mg/dl proteinuria, 30-40 white blood cells per high power field (hpf), and 7-8 red blood cells per hpf. Furthermore, the urine culture and blood culture (VesaTREK automated blood culture system, USA) were sterile. With renal dysfunction and a suspicion of renal mass lesion, the patient was subjected to a non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan, which revealed a large-size intrarenal abscess . An ultrasound-guided percutaneous drainage was performed which yielded around 3 L of thick brownish material. Septa were torn during catheter insertion, and extra number of holes were created in the catheter to drain pus from different compartments. Aspirate culture grew C. tropicalis in Saboroud dextrose media (High Media, India; ) which was identified by the Vitek 2 Compact automated system (Biomerieux, Durham USA).
The susceptibility of the isolate to echinocandins (i.e., caspofungin and micafungin), amphotericin B, and fluconazole was tested using the Vitek 2 Compact. The results revealed the sensitivity of the isolate to caspofungin (MIC<0.12 µg/ml), micafungin (MIC<0.06 µg/ml), and amphotericin (MIC<0.25 µg /ml) and its resistance to fluconazole (MIC=8 µg/ml). Therefore, the patient was administered with amphotericin B deoxycholate (1 mg/kg/day) for 3 weeks. He showed improvement within a week of initiating antifungal therapy in terms of settling of fever and serum creatinine showing a downward trend.
The patient was discharged with an advice to attend the outpatient clinic for follow-up on a weekly basis for 2 weeks, followed by bi-weekly referral for 4 weeks and another referral 3 months after hospital discharge. He was completely asymptomatic without any evidence regarding the recurrence of fungal infection with a serum creatinine of 1.8 mg/dl at the end of 3 months.