The patient was a 66-year-old male. He was hospitalized for “paroxysmal abdominal pain and distention accompanied by cessation of flatus and defecation for 2 days”. Epigastric paroxysmal pain had aggravated and spread to the whole abdomen since the onset of illness. The patient was nauseous and vomited several times. He received conservative anti–inflammatory and analgesic treatments in the local hospital for 2 days without remission. He had a history of hypertension and ankylosing spondylitis. Physical examination revealed epigastric tenderness with rebound pain and muscle tension; tympany in the abdomen; The disappearance of normal liver dullness; and weakened intestinal sounds. Laboratory examination showed the following: white blood cells (WBCs), 16.84*109/L; procalcitonin (PCT), 10.02 ng/mL, creatinine kinase-MB fraction (CK-MB), 8.50 ng/mL; and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), 1263 pg/mL. Abdominal CT revealed a large amount of free gas in the abdominal cavity, probable gastrointestinal perforation; a right renal cyst; and ankylosing spondylitis. The patient’s admission diagnosis was as follows: (1) gastrointestinal perforation and (2) intestinal obstruction. The patient underwent laparotomy immediately after admission, and a large perforation of the anterior wall of the duodenal bulb was found during the operation. Subtotal distal gastrectomy, R-Y gastrojejunostomy, and abdominal lavage and drainage were performed. Drainage tubes were placed in the posterior liver, splenic fossa, pelvic cavity and duodenal stump after the operation. Among them, the indwelling drainage tubes in the posterior liver, splenic fossa and pelvic cavity drained smoothly, and the drainage volume gradually decreased. After gradual withdrawal of the drainage tubes, the drainage tubes were individually removed. The drainage fluid from the duodenal stump drainage tube was initially light red and decreased to 100 mL on the 8th day after the operation. The patient was then given permission to start consuming liquid food after exhaust. After two days of consuming a liquid diet, the patient developed abdominal pain and fever. The drainage fluid increased to 250 mL, and the colour of the drainage fluid became clear and transparent. Amylase in the drainage fluid was 14420IU/L during an emergency examination. The patient was then fasted and parenteral nutrition was administered. At the same time, somatostatin and antibiotics were given as adjuvant therapies. The drainage fluid turned light green on the 11th day and dark green on the 12th day after the operation, and the drainage volume increased continuously. So we highly suspected DSF. A contrast agent was injected through the duodenal stump drainage tube 13 days after the operation. Abdominal plain films showed that the contrast agent entered the abdominal cavity, and an APD was first displayed, then the main pancreatic duct and common bile duct showed up . A small amount of contrast agent can enter the duodenum. This suggested that the APD was connected to the abdominal cavity and that an APD fistula may exist. Percutaneous transhepatic cholangial drainage (PTCD) and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) were performed at the same time . The guide wire entered the duodenal stump drainage tube through the biliary tract during the operation. After repeated manipulation, the guide wire avoided the duodenal stump area and entered the duodenum. Then, 8.5F internal and external drainage tubes were placed according to the guide wire, and the contrast agent indicated good drainage. After PTCD, the patient returned to the ward in good condition. Enteral nutrition was increased while the amount of parenteral nutrition was decreased. Additionally, we washed the drainage tube which besides the duodenal stump with a slow drip of 1000 mL of normal saline for two days and paid close attention to changes of drainage fluid. Subsequently, the average daily drainage volume of the PTCD tube was approximately 800 mL. The drainage volume of the duodenal stump was significantly lower than that before PTCD, averaging about 50 mL per day. The drainage volume of the duodenal stump decreased to 0 on the 7th day after PTCD. So we intermittently clamped the PTCD tube for two days and then continuously clamped the PTCD tube for one week, during which we paid close attention to the drainage and general conditions of the patient. The patient’s food intake and body temperature were normal, and the drainage volume from the drainage tube near the duodenal stump did not increase again, so we gradually retreated and eventually removed the drainage tube at the duodenal stump. The PTCD tube was removed after two weeks of observation. We followed the patient at 1, 3, and 6 months after discharge, and the patient recovered well.