Our patient is a 72-year-old Caucasian right-handed male with a past medical history significant for hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, COPD, coronary artery disease, and status post a recent umbilical hernia repair, admitted for short-term memory loss that began acutely on a mid-September morning (Day 1). The patient arrived anxious, worried that he was losing his memory. As per the patient's wife, he was feeling well, driving, and behaving normally on the previous day. He had gone to sleep at approximately 21:00 in his normal state of health but awoke the following morning with inability to recall events, including their 50th wedding anniversary party, of the prior day. His wife denied any symptoms of behavioral or personality changes in her husband prior to that ominous morning. The patient had a 50-pack-year smoking history, quitting 2.5 years prior to presentation, but was without any illicit drug or significant alcohol history. The patient's review of systems was positive for cough, congestion, anxiety, confusion, dizziness, and light-headedness only, denying any chest pain, shortness of breath, abdominal pain, loss of consciousness, history of recent falls or injury, weakness, numbness, tingling, speech difficulty, slurred speech, vision changes, headache, vertigo, photophobia, neck pain, nausea, or vomiting.
His vitals were within normal limits, with the exception of his blood pressure which measured 153/78 mm Hg (supine). On neurological examination, the patient was alert and oriented to person, place, month, and year. He was able to follow complex commands crossing his body's midline. On memory span testing, he recalled all three words accurately and immediately with categorical prompts. On the digit span test, he was able to recall five digits forward and four in reverse. Abstraction was preserved. He was without aphasia. Serial 7's were intact, and he was able to spell “world” forward and backwards. He was able to name all his children's names and their spouses but had difficulty with some of his grandchildren's names. He had only 1/3 object recall at three minutes, prompting with these categories did not improve his recall. His cranial nerve, sensory, and motor exams, and cerebellar tests for coordination and gait, were unremarkable. The remainder of the physical exam was normal. His CBC, BMP, LFT, and ammonia values were within normal limits. Ethyl alcohol tested negative. Serum thyroglobulin (0.9 IU/mL) and thyroperoxidase antibody (0.4 IU/mL) counts were normal; however, serum thyroglobulin antibody was elevated at 24.5 IU/mL.
Routine EEG was within range of normal variation. Noncontrast CT head was insignificant for any acute ischemic or hemorrhagic event. MRI brain with and without gadolinium showed no evidence of edema, mass effect, or metastasis, although patchy areas of T2 prolongation in the subcortical and periventricular white matter were noted. These were initially attributed to moderate chronic microvascular white matter ischemic changes in light of the patient's chronological age. Because his chest X-rays showed a widened mediastinum with apparent mass effect and tracheal deviation to the left, a CTA thorax was obtained, which showed bulky mediastinal and right hilar lymphadenopathy concerning for malignancy. Fine-needle aspiration of the R4 lymph nodes was positive for small-cell carcinoma .
At this point, the patient's neurological symptoms were considered to be of possible paraneoplastic etiology. With this new consideration in mind, the MRI brain findings of bilateral (left more than right) medial temporal lobe hyperintensity compared with the rest of the temporal lobes were reassessed by the neurology service as possible manifestations of PLE. However, the neuroradiology service, upon reviewing the brain MRI, was not convinced that the findings represented limbic encephalitis .
Cerebrospinal fluid tests were ordered: protein was WNL at 34 mg/dl and glucose was WNL at 62. CSF was colorless and clear, with 14 RBCs and 6 total nucleated cells. Lymphocytic CSF pleocytosis was detected with 93% lymphocytes and 7% monocytes/macrophages. CSF culture and stain showed 3+ WBCs (WNL) with no organism growth. CSF pathogen panel PCR was negative for the 14 common pathogens responsible for community-acquired meningitis or encephalitis including viruses, bacteria, and yeast. CSF cytology showed no evidence of malignancy. Thus, both MRI and CSF cytology confirmed no metastasis to the brain.
On Day 3 of hospitalization, his MOCA score was 21/30 with deficits in delayed recall, visuospatial ability, and orientation. NM bone scan whole body imaging showed no evidence of osteoblastic metastatic bone disease.
On Day 4, chemotherapy was initiated and the patient received three rounds (a 3-day treatment regimen) of cisplatin/etoposide.
On Day 5, neurological improvement was noted on the second day of cycle 1 of chemotherapy, with the patient able to complete the visuospatial part of MOCA that he had missed previously, although he still had impaired delayed recall. The patient did receive 1 g of solumedrol before deciding with the neurology team to not continue with an IV steroid course because he was improving with chemotherapy. He was discharged after three days of cycle 1 of chemotherapy with encouraging signs of neurological improvement. Radiation oncology was also consulted to initiate radiation therapy as outpatient with a plan for radiation to begin with cycle 2 of chemotherapy.
On Day 13, 18F-FDG PET/CT imaging showed right upper lobe metabolically active lung mass compatible with a lung primary, and right hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy compatible with metastatic disease. Otherwise, no metastatic disease was detected. His SCLC was described as cT1cN2M0, stage IIIA. His forgetfulness showed slight improvement.
On Day 18, a serum encephalopathy autoantibody panel returned positive for NMDAR Ab (CBA). Anti-NMDAR antibody was detected when testing at 1 : 10 dilution by a cell-based assay only. Higher titers of antibody were not detected by reflex testing at 1:120 dilution by a tissue-based assay. Samples were sent to Mayo Clinic Laboratories, Rochester, for encephalopathy, autoimmune evaluation, and serum (Test ID: ENS2) which tests for AChR ganglionic neuronal Ab, S; AMPA-R Ab CBA, S; amphiphysin Ab, S; anti-glial nuclear Ab, type 1; anti-neuronal nuclear Ab, type 1; anti-neuronal nuclear Ab, type 2; anti-neuronal nuclear Ab, type 3; CASPR2-IgG CBA, S; CRMP-5-IgG, S; DPPX Ab IFA, S; GABA-B-R Ab CBA, S; GAD65 Ab assay, S; GFAP IFA, S; LGI1-IgG CBA, S; mGluR1 Ab IFA, S; NMDAR Ab CBA, S; N-type calcium channel Ab; P/Q-type calcium channel Ab; Purkinje cell cytoplasmic Ab type 1; Purkinje purkinje cell cytoplasmic Ab type 2; Purkinje cell cytoplasmic Ab type Tr.
On Day 26, on follow-up with the neurologist, the patient's wife reported that the patient's memory had significantly improved, although he intermittently would forget small details or events that happened one day back. No improvement was reported for the patient's anxiety.
On Day 32, a second routine EEG performed in the awake and asleep states showed during drowsiness an increased emergence of theta and delta rhythms and during sleep showed vertex sharp transients and K-complexes. The clinical interpretation of the EEG was that it showed abnormal results with mild slowing of the posterior dominant rhythm consistent with mild encephalopathy.
On Day 33, paraneoplastic and autoimmune CSF antibody panels returned negative for all antibodies. Specifically, the patient's spinal fluid was sent to Mayo Clinic Laboratories, Rochester, for the encephalopathy, autoimmune evaluation, and spinal fluid (Test ID: ENC2) which tests for AMPA-R Ab CBA, CSF; amphiphysin Ab, CSF; anti-glial nuclear Ab, type 1; anti-neuronal nuclear Ab, type 1; anti-neuronal nuclear Ab, type 2; anti-neuronal nuclear Ab, type 3; CASPR2-IgG CBA, CSF; CRMP-5-IgG, CSF; DPPX Ab IFA, CSF; GABA-B-R Ab CBA, CSF; GAD65 Ab assay, CSF; GFAP IFA, CSF; LGI1-IgG CBA, CSF; mGluR1 Ab IFA, CSF; NMDAR Ab CBA, CSF; Purkinje cell cytoplasmic Ab type Tr; Purkinje cell cytoplasmic Ab type 1; Purkinje cell cytoplasmic Ab type 2.
On Day 46, the patient completed carboplatin/etoposide (cisplatin was discontinued due to kidney disfunction) concurrent with 45 Gy in 1.5 Gy fractions BID radiation.
On Day 96, repeat Brain MRI showed no bitemporal hyperintensities or other acute intracranial processes.
On Day 131, repeat serum encephalopathy autoantibody panel returned entirely negative for any autoantibodies.
On Day 133, complete neurological and cognitive exams showed no deficits. As per the family, he is significantly better, although he still forgets some important dates but can recall them properly when reminded.
On Day 151, the patient completed prophylactic cranial irradiation with 25 Gy/10fx.
On Day 178, the patient continued to remain fully functional and stable.