We present a case report of a 13-year-old female diagnosed with severe developmental delay and under investigation for suspected epilepsy due to frequent episodes of brief, sudden loss of consciousness. She was medicated with levetiracetam, despite having multiple normal electroencephalogram (EEG) assessments.
She was admitted to a peripheral hospital in the postictal state of an apparent episode of epilepsy, with the physical examination at admission showing only a slight degree of dehydration. She was haemodynamically stable, in normal sinus rhythm with an average heart rate (HR) of 99 b.p.m., adequate blood pressure and peripheral perfusion, and peripheral oxygen saturation of 99%. The laboratory workup identified severe rhabdomyolysis and elevated cardiac and hepatic cellular lesion biomarkers (Creatine phosphokinase [CPK] 6640 U/L, Troponin I 1156 ng/L, aspartate aminotransferase [AST] 187 U/L, alanine transaminase [ALT] 65 U/L). The remaining laboratory assessment was unremarkable, including normal serum electrolyte levels. The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed no relevant changes, with a normal QTc interval.
Due to worsening rhabdomyolysis (CPK >42 670 U/L), levetiracetam was suspended, and she was transferred to a specialized paediatric hospital. At this time, a QTc interval prolongation was identified (QTc 570 ms) , and oral β-blocker therapy started (initial dose of propranolol at 1 mg/kg per day). In the following days, her clinical condition deteriorated, leading to the development of hypotension and severe hydro-electrolyte disturbances. She was ultimately admitted into the paediatric intensive care unit. Soon after, a non-sustained ventricular tachycardia developed, with an average HR of 200 b.p.m. . A bolus of 50 mg/kg of magnesium was administered, and a loading dose of 1 mg/kg of lidocaine was started, followed by perfusion at 35 mcg/kg/min. The echocardiogram did not identify structural or functional alterations.
She was then transferred to the paediatric cardiac intensive unit. A congenital long QT syndrome management strategy was pursued, as no diagnosis was available. The therapeutic goal was to maintain normal plasma levels of potassium, calcium, and magnesium while keeping lidocaine perfusion.
However, after a short period of normal sinus rhythm, frequent polymorphic ventricular extrasystoles of ventricular premature beats (VPB) in short-long-short sequences developed, triggering an arrhythmic storm with polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (Torsade de Pointes—TdP), with some episodes degenerating into ventricular fibrillation and leading to cardiac arrest requiring advanced life support and defibrillation.
Due to the bradycardia-dependent nature of the TdP, a temporary pacemaker lead was inserted for ventricular pacing, and perfusion of esmolol was started at a rate of 25 mcg/kg/min, maintaining lidocaine with transitory rhythm stabilization. Subsequently, two new episodes of TdP developed, requiring defibrillation; the electrical instability ran in parallel with increasing severity of rhabdomyolysis and deterioration of left ventricular systolic function (LVEF 40%).
Genetic testing identified a pathogenic variant in homozygosity in the TANGO2 gene (NM_001322141.1-c.728 + 1G > A).
With this new data, optimizing caloric intake and stable blood glucose levels was pursued while keeping hyperhydration and urine alkalinization. The metabolic stabilization made it possible to reduce continuous intravenous ion infusion while maintaining oral calcium, magnesium, and potassium supplementation. After progressive clinical and hydro-electrolytic improvement, normalization of the QTc interval and sinus rhythm stabilization was achieved, allowing for the transition from esmolol infusion to oral propranolol and down-titration and discontinuation of lidocaine. Due to the persistence of left ventricular systolic dysfunction, enalapril was started.
The patient was transferred back to the paediatric hospital. She remained haemodynamically stable during the remaining hospital stay, with a normal ECG.
At 6 months of follow-up, the patient did not experience new episodes of metabolic crisis. She remains without anti-epileptic therapy and has no record of recent seizures. However, she showed signs of neurodevelopmental regression and did not regain all her baseline competencies. A nasopharyngeal tube was placed, maintaining adequate caloric intake and avoiding periods of fasting. Regarding cardiac assessment, she keeps a normal ECG with a corrected QT of 370 ms; however, the echocardiogram still documents a left ventricular systolic function in the low normal range with an LVEF of 51%.