A 21-year-old parturient (weight, 55 kg; height, 155 cm), gravida 1, with twin pregnancy at 34+ 5 weeks was scheduled to undergo planned cesarean delivery because of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP). Her past medical history was unremarkable. She was not taking anticoagulants. Laboratory testing results were as follows: hemoglobin (Hb), 135 g/L; platelet count, 147 × 109/L; prothrombin time (PT), 12.5 s; activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 26.9 s; international normalized ratio (INR), 1.18; total bile acid (TBA), 21.3 umol/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 78 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 84 U/L. Base line heart rate was 79 beats/min, respiratory rate was 18 breaths/min, and blood pressure (BP) was 120/67 mm Hg.
CSE was attempted at the L3–4 intervertebral space using an 18G Tuohy needle (ZHEJIANG HAISHENG MEDICAL DEVICE CO., LTD). After loss of resistance to air, access to the epidural space was presumed and a 25G Sprotte needle was inserted; however, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) outflow was not obtained. A second senior anesthesiologist then attempted to repeat puncture at the L3–4 level but failed to obtain CSF outflow. An attempt was made at the L2–3 interspace: breakthrough was felt with the spinal needle but CSF outflow was still not obtained. We considered that a “valve” may have formed because of the needle design, causing poor CSF outflow. Furthermore, puncture was difficult. Therefore, a trial dose of bupivacaine (2.5 mL, 0.5 % plain) was administered via the spinal needle to verify subarachnoid space access. This produced only asymmetric blockade. The left side was blocked up to T10 with almost no blockade on the right. Next, a trial dose of epidural lidocaine (3 mL, 1.5 % with 1/200,000 epinephrine) was administered, which resulted in no evidence of local anesthetic toxicity or total spinal anesthesia. Epidural 2-chlorprocaine (5 mL, 3 %) was then administered, which caused an unexpectedly high blockade above T2 as well as tinnitus, difficulty breathing, and inability to speak. The patient’s SpO2 gradually decreased and mask-assisted ventilation was initiated. However, the SpO2 continued decreasing to 68 % even with 100 % oxygen. Propofol 100 mg and succinylcholine 100 mg were administered intravenously and a 6.5 mm internal diameter endotracheal tube was inserted under video laryngoscopic guidance. Her SpO2 increased to 100 % and the twins were delivered. Intraoperative blood loss was 400 mL and 1000 mL of crystalloid fluid was infused. However, the patient’s BP decreased to 80/40 mm Hg a few minutes before surgery was completed, which responded to repeated administration of phenylephrine. Ten minutes after the operation, the patient was awake with a normal tidal volume and the endotracheal tube was removed. Her level of anesthesia remained above T2 and she was unable to move her hands. SpO2 remained at 97 % with face mask oxygen and she was transferred to the intensive care unit for further observation. Two hours after surgery, sensation and movement in her right leg had recovered; however, her left leg remained numb and paralyzed. Left leg sensation and motor function completely recovered 3 h later. She denied headache, low back pain, or other neurologic deficit. It was unclear why sensorimotor recovery was significantly slower on the left. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggested a small (no more than 3 mL) subdural hematoma extending from T12 to the cauda equina . Postoperative PT, APTT, and INR were 23.4 s, 27 s, and 1.21, respectively. Sensory examination was normal. A neurosurgical consultant recommended in-hospital observation as hematoma absorption was expected. The patient was discharged 6 days after surgery. One month later, repeat MRI was normal.