A right upper-middle renal mass was detected in a 56-year-old man after a periodic health checkup. His past medical history included hypertension and diabetes, but he was without any clinical symptoms such as fever, nausea, vomiting, frequent urination, urination urgency, or gross hematuria, and without any tenderness in the rib area/rib-waist are. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a node with an isodensity of 4 × 3.5 cm in the upper-middle kidney. There was no other mass on chest X-ray examination, and tumor markers including AFP, CEA, and PSA and laboratory examinations including routine blood and liver function tests were essentially normal except for urinary protein at 3 g/L (reference range: 0–3 g/L) and uric acid slightly increased to 426.1 μmol/L (reference range: 208–428 μmol/L). The patient recovered well after partial resection of the right kidney and tumor by laparoscopy; anti-infective drugs were administered and he was not treated with other adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
On macroscopic examination, the specimen was composed of a nodular mass measuring 4.5 cm × 4.0 cm × 2.0 cm attached to a small portion of the normal kidney cortex . The surface of the mass was smooth and grayish-brown in color, and sectioning showed moderate texture without hemorrhage and necrosis. The specimen was fixed in a 10% neutral formalin solution, and paraffin-embedded sections were stained with hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) for microscopic examination. Microscopically, the lymphoid follicles were increased in number , with an expanded mantle zone of small lymphocytes and atrophic germinal centers, resulting in an “onion skin-like” structure . In addition, many of the follicles were penetrated by capillaries and showed a “lollipop” appearance . Another characteristic feature is vascular proliferation and hyalinization in the interfollicular zones . Follicular dendritic cells and scattered plasma cells were also seen.
Immunohistochemical staining was performed with the EnVision System by a Benchmark-ULTRA automatic immunohistochemical staining instrument (Asia-core, China). The prediluted monoclonal antibodies include Bcl-2, CD20, CD21, CD35, CD38, CD138, cyclinD1, κ light chain, λ light chain, and Ki-67 from the Fuzhou Maxin company. In addition, CD20 showed positive staining in the mantle zones , CD21 and CD35 were expressed in the dendritic cells, CD3 was positively scattered among the T cells , and CD38 and CD138 were positive in the small plasma cells. Ki-67 expression was positive in the follicle centers . In contrast, staining for Bcl-2 in the germinal centers and cyclin D1 were both negative. The staining for κ and λ showed unrestricted light chain expression. In summary, the immunohistochemical analysis supported the diagnosis of HV-CD. Half a year later, the patient recovered well, and there was no recurrence.