A 59-year-old lady presented to our hospital with complaints of right renal colic. She had no significant medical history and denied any prior episodes of hematuria. Her laboratory parameters were within the normal range. On physical examination, tenderness in the right lumbar region was noted, but no palpable mass was detected. An abdominal ultrasound revealed no renal or ureter stones, but it identified a large 135 mm hyperechoic tissue mass in the kidney parenchyma. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan confirmed the presence of a right renal tumor, invading the entire kidney parenchyma but with no extrarenal infiltration. No lymphatic or hematogenous metastasis was found, leading to a decision for radical nephrectomy. During surgery, there was a complication with a 17 mm long rupture of the inferior vena cava, requiring four units of packed red blood cells and subsequent admission to the intensive care unit. The post-operative period was uneventful. Grossly, we investigated a 170 × 130 × 100 mm large, relatively well-defined tumor with hemorrhagic and solid areas . Microscopically, the lesion was made up of epithelioid cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm forming bundles, fascicles, and storiform patterns. Adjacent to the tumor cells, small lymphocytes were observed . The tumor exhibited increased cytological atypia and a few (1 per 10 high-power field) mitotic figures , but no necrotic areas were seen. The initial diagnosis was a sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma (RCC), and due to its unusual histological appearance, an immediate consultation with a genitourinary pathologist was sought. Further immunohistochemical studies showed the tumor cells were positive for CD21, CD23, somatostatin receptor 2A, and MDM2 , while negative for HHV8, PAX8, PAX2 AE1/AE3, CK7, MelanA, S100, CD68, SMA, TdT, desmin, and podoplanin (Suppl. Figure .). In addition, the dilution, clone and source of the antibodies applied are listed in Supplementary Table . An MDM2 fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) revealed an MDM2 gene amplification , while an Epstein-Barr Encoded RNA probe returned negative results. Finally, the diagnosis of primary renal follicular dendritic cell sarcoma with FNCLCC grade 2 and AJCC pT4 stage was established. The circumferential and hilar resection lines were free of tumors. The post-operative staging investigations showed no residual tumor or metastasis. The patient did not receive any adjuvant therapy and has been followed for 91 months since the initial presentation, during which she remains alive and disease-free.