An 84-year-old British, Caucasian woman was referred to the Gastroenterology department at her local hospital with a six week history of episodic epigastric pain and iron-deficiency anemia. There was no obvious source of blood loss on systemic enquiry and she denied any recent weight loss or change in bowel habit. Her drug and family histories were unremarkable.
One year prior to referral she had been admitted with upper abdominal pain and obstructive jaundice. Ultrasound examination revealed gallstones and a dilated common bile duct. She was subsequently treated with endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and sphincterotomy. A repeat ERCP showed a bile duct free of stones. However, she continued to suffer with occasional epigastric pain and despite being offered a cholecystectomy she favoured conservative management.
On general examination there was pallor but no jaundice. Her abdomen was soft and non-tender and there was no evidence of any abdominal masses, organomegaly or blood per rectum. There was no lymphadenopathy.
Routine investigations confirmed a hypochromic microcytic anemia (hemoglobin 7.7 g/dL) consistent with iron deficiency. Notably, her alkaline phosphatase was raised (394 U/L), but this was attributed to cholelithiasis. She was admitted, was transfused with three units of blood and discharged with oral iron supplementation. An outpatient oesophagoduodenogastroscopy with duodenal biopsy and colonoscopy were subsequently reported as normal. In view of these and with normalization of her hemoglobin and symptomatic improvement, her iron replacement was discontinued.
She was readmitted six months later with a hemoglobin level of 5.5 g/dL and was transfused with four units of blood. There was no evidence of bleeding per rectum, and a history of melaena was difficult to establish in view of previous oral iron therapy. A ferritin level of 10 μg/L and iron saturation of 4% indicated severe iron-deficiency anemia, with B12 and folate within normal limits. A bone marrow aspirate showed diminished iron stores. All other routine blood tests were normal except for an alkaline phosphatase remaining above 200 U/L and a low albumin .
Our patient was reluctant to undergo further investigation and her anemia was therefore treated with regular iron infusions. However, she was readmitted for a third time one month later with hemoglobin of 4.7 g/dL, again with no hemodynamic compromise. Three fecal occult blood (FOB) samples were positive. Following further transfusion she underwent a repeat oesophagogastroduodenoscopy, which demonstrated evidence of active bleeding around the ampulla .
She was then urgently transferred to a tertiary hospital for further management. A superior mesenteric angiogram demonstrated an abnormal tumor circulation in the right lobe of the liver supplied by the right and median hepatic arteries . Subsequent computerized tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed a 2.5 cm lesion in the right lobe of the liver with proximal biliary dilatation: findings consistent with an intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma .
Suitable treatment options for our patient were then extensively discussed at a multidisciplinary meeting. In view of her age, an angiographic embolization was considered as it would avoid the complications of laparotomy and a major liver resection. However, it was noted that this procedure would be technically difficult and risked embolization of the entire right and median hepatic arteries resulting in occlusion of the cystic artery and subsequent cholecystitis.
Curative surgery was concluded as most appropriate. A right hepatectomy was therefore performed, which included biliary bifurcation with anastomosis of the Roux loop to the remaining left sided ducts. Histology showed appearances of a papillary adenocarcinoma with erosion of surrounding vessels, consistent with the earlier finding of hemobilia. The operation was successful and the patient fully recovered. She remains well and her latest full blood count and alkaline phosphatase (134 U/L) are reassuringly normal.