A 63-year-old female with a past medical history of unspecified thalassemia and hemochromatosis presented to our emergency department with worsening chronic back pain and an acute inability to ambulate with no preceding trauma. Seven months before arrival, the patient had suffered a mechanical fall and presented to an outside hospital with a chief complaint of back pain. At that time, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed acute compression fractures at T11, L1, and L2 and multiple dorsal extradural masses at the levels T6 to T10 . The patient followed up with an outside spine surgeon, who recommended referral to a pain clinic for management of her back pain, as opposed to surgical intervention, given the lack of neurological deficits.
In our emergency department, the patient reported increased lower extremity weakness and difficulty getting out of bed that had progressed over the past several weeks. On the morning of presentation, she acutely developed increased back pain, inability to ambulate, and loss of bowel and bladder function. She denied inciting trauma. On exam, the patient had significant weakness of bilateral lower extremities, consistent with an American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) Impairment Scale of “B” . Initial basic laboratory values were within normal limits other than the patient's baseline mild hematologic disturbances, which were unchanged from prior; hemoglobin was 9.6 g/dL with low mean corpuscular volume (MCV, 66.7 fL) and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC, 31.6 g/dL), and red cell distribution width was elevated (RDW, 27.4%). MRI redemonstrated compression fractures at T11, L1, and L2 and the dorsal extradural masses but also revealed a new T9 compression fracture with vacuum phenomenon . Given the patient's acute decline, she was taken to the operating room for urgent decompression and kyphoplasty.
The patient was placed in the prone position on a Jackson spine table. Baseline neuromonitoring signals were established with very poor potentials in the lower extremities, including only a small right foot response on motor evoked potentials, consistent with her baseline clinical exam. A midline incision was made and subperiosteal dissection was performed from T6 to T10. A Jamshidi needle was used to cannulate the left T9 pedicle under fluoroscopic guidance; a kyphoplasty balloon was inflated in the collapsed T9 body and cement was injected . Kyphoplasty was performed prior to decompression to avoid passing the Jamshidi needle over the exposed dura at the decompression zone. Using a high-speed burr, troughs were created along the spinal laminar junction at each level, from T6 to T10. The laminectomy was performed using a lobster-tail technique. Red, rubbery tissue was encountered within the bone of the lamina and within the spinal canal, which was removed en bloc and sent as a pathology specimen. The spinal cord was examined and found to be decompressed, and neuromonitoring was stable from baseline. Due to the patient's history of multiple compression fractures, the patient would be at an elevated risk for proximal or distal junctional kyphosis following posterior fixation . Thus, since no evidence of biomechanical instability observed, we did not pursue posterior fixation. The surgical site was thoroughly irrigated, a deep drain was placed, and the wound was closed in the usual layered fashion.
Postoperatively, the patient experienced immediate improvement in symptoms; her right lower extremity strength improved to baseline, and left lower extremity strength showed significant improvement . On postoperative day 1, the patient's hemoglobin dropped to 7.4 g/dL; she was given 2 units of packed red blood cells which resulted in a sustained hemoglobin >10 g/dL throughout the remainder of her admission. The pathology was reported as prominent trilineage hematopoiesis and marked erythroid hyperplasia consistent with extramedullary hematopoiesis in context of thalassemia. The patient was discharged from the hospital to a skilled nursing facility for rehabilitation and physical therapy on postoperative day 12. At her first outpatient visit 3 weeks postoperatively, x-rays demonstrated maintenance of spinal alignment with no extravasation of cement or new loss of height . She was noted to have superficial wound dehiscence distally and was prescribed oral antibiotics. At repeat wound check the following week, the patient was found to have increased dehiscence and drainage, at which point she was admitted to the hospital. MRI revealed no drainable fluid collection nor recurrence of her thoracic spine EMH masses . She underwent posterior subfascial irrigation and debridement and was discharged back to rehab on antibiotics. At 3-month follow-up, the patient's wound was fully healed, and she was fully neurologically intact with normal sensation and 5 of 5 strength throughout.