A 45-year-old male with known risk factors of endothelial dysfunction (including smoking and hyperlipidemia) had typical episodes of angina for 3 days. Characteristic dynamic changes of electrocardiogram (ECG) and cardiac marker of myocardial necrosis troponinT (cTnT) suggested posterior STEMI. Emergency coronary angiography (CAG) revealed complete proximal occlusion of the circumflex artery . A drug eluting stent was deployed to the proximal left circumflex artery (p-LCX). Final angiogram revealed that the PPCI was successful . Three hours later, the patient developed dyspnea and persistent pleural chest pain, and the ECG showed widespread concave ST segment elevations and PR segment depression . A follow-up CAG was performed 33 h after PPCI, and no stent thrombosis or any significant evidence of iatrogenic trauma due to the intervention procedures was found. But a significant slower TIMI flow (grade ≤ 2 grade) and abnormal TIMI myocardial perfusion frame count (TMPFC = 140 frames, at a filming rate of 30 frames/sec.) in the culprit arteries were seen through CAG. Consistent ST segment elevation on ECG with an increase in cTnT, but no recurrent CK-MB peak, seemed to suggest that the persistent focal myocardial injury might possibly involve coronary microvascular dysfunction (CMD). In recent years, assessing coronary flow reserve (CFR) by intracoronary Doppler guide wire and positron emission tomography (PET) is considered the gold standard for quantitative assessment of coronary microcirculation disorder. But this method is technically complex and very expensive, and therefore not applicable to the present case based on the patient’s condition and intention. Chest CT scan showed mild pleural effusion and interstitial infiltration in both lungs , and UCG revealed mild pericardial effusion with posterior wall motion disappearance . Blood test showed that the serum concentration of HsCRP was persistently increasing; neutrophil count and the level of cTnT were elevated in parallel with HsCRP increase in the early and later stage of PCIS, respectively . The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (83 m/s) was also significantly elevated as another inflammatory marker, while the concentration of Anti-Streptolysin O (ASO) and Antinuclear Antibody (ANA) associated with rheumatic and tuberculosis disease and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP 107 pg/ml) was still in the normal range. So we concluded that the patient had developed PCIS. After receiving full anti-ischemic drug treatment and aspirin at an anti-inflammatory dose, the patient was symptom-free during hospitalization. The pericardial effusion was gradually resolved along with the recovery of serum concentration of HsCRP and cTnT to the normal levels at 3 weeks after PPCI.