A 61-year-old female patient initially presented to the psychiatric memory clinic in August 2014. She attended school for 9 years and had been working as an untrained shop assistant in a bakery afterward. According to the patient’s self-report, she had been suffering from recurrent depressive episodes since 2011. Additional cognitive decline developed in 2012. Comprehensive neuropsychological testing was performed and revealed severe and global deficits affecting all major cognitive domains (memory, visuoconstructional and executive functions, language, and attention, including psychomotor slowing). Together with impaired activities of daily living, general International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision criteria for dementia were fulfilled. At several follow-ups, the patient repeatedly mentioned a subjective progression of cognitive deficits. However, in neuropsychological screenings and six comprehensive neuropsychological testings performed since first presentation, the patient presented stable deficits over 5 years, and substantial further decline was found only on the last visit in 2020. Since 2015, the patient experienced increasing acoustic, optic, and tactile hallucinations, and delusional parasitosis led to wounding scratching behavior. IBZM-SPECT (123I-iodobenzamide, 2015), amyloid–positron emission tomography (PET) (18F-florbetaben, 2016), DaT scan (123I-FP-CIT, 2015), and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-PET (2019) were performed yielding normal results.
While the patient initially presented with mildly slurred speech and reduced prosody, she suffered from progressive dysarthria, apraxia of speech, and increasing difficulties in swallowing in the further course and unintentionally lost 15 kg weight. In addition, she complained about deteriorating limb weakness. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cerebrum showed no abnormalities . MRI of the spine showed mild cervical spine degeneration and lateral thoracic spinal canal stenosis with initial myelon deformation, but no myelon compression and edema, respectively. The patient underwent thoracic laminectomy in 2016. However, limb weakness continuously worsened over the next years, and the patient is now increasingly restricted in walking ability.
Neurologic examination revealed pseudobulbar palsy, distal muscular weakness without fasciculations but with slightly increased muscle tone, and clearly increased tendon reflexes including bilateral positive Babinski signs, more severely affecting lower than upper limbs. Electromyography of muscles of all four limbs did not show any indication of active denervation (no fibrillations or positive sharp waves), but signs of mild chronic denervation, i.e., increased motor unit potential amplitudes and reduced recruitment. Neurographies revealed pure axonal motor neuropathy of the right peroneal and tibial nerve and a small reduction of the amplitudes of the right sural nerve. No signs of demyelination were found. Transcranial magnet stimulation revealed a prolonged central conduction time to the left leg. Sonography of the tongue did not show any fasciculations.
Extensive cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis did not show indication of inflammatory or paraneoplastic disorder, and neuronal destruction markers including beta-amyloid, tau, and phosphotau were within normal range. However, neurofilament heavy chain in CSF was significantly elevated (NfH 1137 pg/mL), strongly supporting the diagnosis of motoneuron disease. Taken together, clinical evidence suggests progressive upper motoneuron dysfunction over >3 years in the bulbar, cervical, and lumbar region, while no sensory symptoms and no signs of active lower motoneuron degeneration could be found. According to the recently published consensus criteria, the diagnosis of probable PLS must thus be made . A critical role of the cervical spinal canal stenosis is unlikely as no signs of myelon compression were detectable on MRI scans, and degeneration of the upper motoneuron was also clearly noticed in the bulbar region.
No neurologic disease was reported in the patients’ family, although only incomplete information was available . Because of the unusual presentation and suspicion of an underlying hereditary neurodegenerative syndrome, the patient underwent genetic testing with targeted next-generation sequencing panel diagnostics. Heterozygosity for the nonsense-mutation c.2467C>T, p.Q823∗ in the FIG4 gene was detected . The variant is listed as pathogenic for AR CMT4J in the HGMD® database (accession number ) and as likely pathogenic, pathogenic, or VUS in ClinVar (variation ID 447336). The variant is found once heterozygous in the ExAC browser (1/121394 alleles) and seven times heterozygous in gnomAD (7/282818 alleles). The mutation was observed in a screening study in CMT patients by ; however, a detailed phenotype and whether or not the patient carried biallelic FIG4-mutations were not reported.