A 47-year-old man of Japanese origin presented with a history of headache, general fatigue and appetite loss of 3 months' duration. He was 178.2 cm in height and weighed 57 kg. His blood pressure was 90/50 mmHg, and his pulse was 64 beats/minute. His clinical examination showed the patient to be alert with initial signs of upper-visual-field defects. His physical examination revealed no absence of axillary or pubic hair and no neurological abnormalities. The results of the initial laboratory examinations conducted to determine hormone status are presented in Table . The anterior pituitary provocation test with corticotropin-releasing hormone, growth hormone-releasing hormone, gonadotropin-releasing hormone and thyrotropin-releasing hormone revealed impairment or low response of the secretory functions of cortisol, adrenocorticotropin, growth hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, thyroid-stimulating hormone and prolactin . These abnormal responses to hormone stimulation, along with the patient's hormonal status, were indicative of hypopituitarism, specifically, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
MRI showed a clearly defined, intra- and suprasellar lesions with a diameter of 12 × 18 × 15 mm. The lesion appeared as mainly isointense to gray matter with some hyperintense areas and showed inhomogeneous contrast enhancement in the T1-weighted images . The mass was also heterogeneously iso- or hypointense on T2-weighted images .
On the basis of the above-mentioned examinations, our preoperative diagnosis was Rathke's cleft cyst (RCC) or non-functioning pituitary adenoma associated with hypophysitis. The lesion was completely removed by surgical exploration via transsphenoidal selective tumorectomy 5 months after clinical onset. Our pathological examination of the pituitary tumor revealed that the tumor was composed of abundant small epithelial cells with foamy macrophage or lymphoid infiltration, some of which were undergoing necrosis . Hemosiderin deposits were also observed . Atypically, there was no evidence of calcification or remarkable cholesterol clefts. On the basis of the histopathological examination, we confirmed the presence of an intrasellar xanthogranuloma and no observed cholesterol clefts.
Postoperatively, the patient's visual field defects and headache improved. However, he needed to continue endocrine replacement therapy (20 mg/day of hydrocortisone and 25 to 50 μg/day of thyroxine). MRI showed that the mass had been completely removed and revealed no evidence of tumor remnants.