A 64-year-old woman with history of type 2 diabetes mellitus and end stage renal disease with regular hemodialysis presented to the emergency department with a 1-day history of sudden onset of lassitude and hypotension during hemodialysis. She complained of fluctuating and persistent dull pain over the epigastric area. The painful sensation could not be relieved by lying down or adopting the decubitus position. She did not have nausea, vomiting, tea color urine, clay-like stool, muscle spasm or focal neurologic signs. She denied contact with animals or travel to foreign countries in recent days. On physical examination, the patient was actually ill and had a body temperature of 37.3 °C, pulse rate of 110 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 40 times per minute and blood pressure of 87/65 mmHg. The abdomen revealed right upper quadrant tenderness with Murphy’s sign and muscular defense of the upper abdomen. In reviewing of the system, no diarrhea, no melena or hematochezia, no dysuria, no hematuria, no flank pain, no periumbilical and flank ecchymosis/petechiae been found. In addition, the laboratory examinations revealed leukocytosis (12800/uL) with a left shift (90.4 % neutrophil), elevated C-reactive protein (44.92 mg/dL), liver function impairment (aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 237 U/L and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 232 U/L) and mild jaundice (total bilirubin:1.48 mg/dL). A plain radiography of the chest with the patient in a supine position suggested the presence of a dilated gallbladder with air in the lumen and wall . The result of a computed tomography (CT)-scan revealed air encircling the gallbladder, liver parenchymal and minimal pneumoperitoneal and liver abscess with no cholelithiasis. The patient had received empirical antibiotics with piperacillin-tazobactam 2.25 g intravenous route every 6 h for 14 days. The blood culture yield Escherichia coli on the 4th admission day. A general surgeon was consulted and cholecystectomy and surgical debridement performed. The postoperative course went smoothly without any complications . The gallbladder was found to be necrotic. The culture of the bile collected during the operation and the peritoneal fluid collected from the pneumoperitoneum were the same as the blood culture yielded Escherichia coli. Pathologic analysis of the resected gallbladder disclosed empyema with extensive transmural necrosis and neutrophils infiltration of the whole organ . The patient had developed acute delirium status with response to antipsychotic medication and active upper gastrointestinal tract bleeding with response to proton pump inhibitor therapy during the latter hospital course. She successfully recovered without any sequelae after adequate antibiotic treatement.