An 18-year-old female presented to genetics clinic with a past medical history of microcephaly, short stature, pervasive developmental disorder, moderate intellectual disability, sensory integration disorder, gastroparesis, anxiety, and hypotonia. She was born to a 22-year-old G2P2 female at 40 weeks via vaginal delivery. The pregnancy was uncomplicated until 30 weeks of gestation when an ultrasound revealed intrauterine growth restriction and oligohydramnios. Birth weight was 2097 g (< 2%) and length was 44.5 cm (< 2%). Postnatal karyotype from cord blood revealed 46,XX (parental report). No other genetic testing was performed.
Family history is unremarkable for immediate family members including a healthy 20-year-old biological brother. A maternal aunt had two miscarriages, and a maternal cousin has learning disabilities. Another maternal aunt has two children with craniosynostosis status post-surgery. No other family members have learning or developmental disabilities, short stature, or microcephaly. Parents denied consanguinity.
From a developmental perspective, the proband has global developmental delay. She did not walk until 18 months of age or begin feeding herself until 3.5–4 years old. She had speech delay but now communicates verbally without difficulties. She was followed by developmental pediatrics and received physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy for global developmental delay from a few months of life until 6 years of age. In addition, she had a neuropsychological evaluation at 11 years old that included the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children which revealed a full-scale IQ score < 45. For her anxiety, she has seen a therapist in the past. She is now able to perform most activities of daily living without assistance.
Her physical exam was notable for microcephaly, short stature, and low weight. She was non-dysmorphic. Her neurologic and musculoskeletal exam was significant for an inability to extend her shoulder above 90 degrees; however, she has normal strength and reflexes in her upper and lower extremities. There were no clinical findings that suggested mosaicism, such as differences in skin pigmentation.
Due to her global developmental delay, intellectual disability, and microcephaly, a SNP microarray was ordered to investigate any significant genomic imbalances.