A 47-year-old Caucasian male with a past medical history of schizophrenia, alcohol and drug abuse presented to an outside facility with symptoms of recurrent emesis and epigastric pain. Abdominal CT scan and chest X-ray in the emergency room revealed right pneumothorax and a chest tube was placed. Soon after, the patients went into septic shock and required vasopressors, IV antibiotics and mechanical ventilation.
Esophagogastroscopy was deferred because of his instability. His blood cultures were positive for staphylococcus hominis. The following day a transesophageal echocardiogram to rule out valve endocarditis was negative. The patient appeared to improve on antibiotics but two days later his condition worsened again, and he was transferred to our facility. Upon arrival it was noted that there was copious thick mucinous output from the chest tube. A gastrografin study of the esophagus confirmed a sizable perforation at the lower esophagus . Because of the appearance of a large esophageal defect with extensive pleural contamination, we did not consider stenting [–]. The patient was stabilized and taken to the operating room. A right posterolateral thoracotomy was done through the seventh intercostal space. The pleural space contained copious amounts of purulent fluid and gastric content which exuded from an exceptionally large esophageal defect in the lower third of the esophagus. The defect initially appeared to measure 5 × 3 cm in diameter, however after debridement of its necrotic edges it measured 9 × 4 cm . Faced with the large defect, sepsis and delayed treatment, we entertained the idea of performing an esophageal exclusion surgery, however because of concern with his behavioral difficulties and the potential lack of compliance, we decided that a one stage attempt for definitive esophageal repair would be best for him. Because of his compromised status, we felt that he would not tolerate an esophagectomy and that an attempt to patch the large defect was justifiable. After careful debridement of the edges of the defect a bovine pericardial vascular patch (Edwards Lifesciences, model 4700, Irvine, Ca.) was tailored to the defect with an extra 2 cm around its edges and sewn using a running 3/0 prolene suture to the esophageal edges and surrounding mediastinal tissue for extra support. To further protect the pericardial patch repair, the greater omentum was mobilized using a separate upper midline abdominal incision, pulled through the esophageal hiatus and sewn using interrupted 3/0 Vicryl sutures to the tissues surrounding the pericardial patch repair .
Gastrostomy and distal jejunostomy tubes were placed, and 2 nasogastric tubes were positioned proximal and distal to the esophageal repair. Two, size 32 chest tubes, were placed. Five days following his surgery and because of a worsening oxygen requirement, a chest CT was performed that showed an increasing right pleural effusion for which the patient underwent a redo thoracotomy and lung decortication.
The patient was removed from the ventilator 3 days after and continued to improve thereafter. An esophageal gastrografin study performed on day 24 showed no leak . His nasogastric tubes were removed, and he was started on clear liquids. He was discharged to a rehabilitation facility 28 days postoperatively. At 6 weeks follow up he was fully recovered and was eating a modified esophagectomy diet. His gastrostomy and jejunostomy tubes were removed. At 8 months follow up he was eating a normal diet with no difficulty and no complications with an esophageal barium study showing rapid non-obstructed flow of diet to the stomach and an endoscopic view of the pericardial patch .