A 37-year-old man with no previous medical conditions was diagnosed with a posterior fossa tumor in 2011 and underwent surgery at another institution. Histopathological analysis was consistent with HB. The patient developed recurrence of the cerebellar lesion and underwent a new surgical approach and neoadjuvant stereotactic radiosurgery in 2014. In 2017, he was diagnosed with a lesion at the Th5 level and underwent partial resection of the lesion and subsequent stereotactic radiosurgery. Detailed records of the patient’s previous procedures and treatments are not available.
In July 2019, the patient was referred to our neurosurgery facility; he was 45 years of age at the time. On admission, the patient presented with persistent neuropathic pain in the Th6 dermatome, radicular pain in the L1 dermatome, and mild paraparesis. Neuraxial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple contrast-enhancing brain and spinal cord lesions, with leptomeningeal enhancement . The patient underwent initial screening for VHL disease with fundoscopy and computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, all of which were normal.
In July 2019, the patient underwent gross total resection (GTR) of intradural and extramedullary lesions at Th10 and L1, both with histopathological analysis compatible with HB . He was discharged without new neurological deficits. In October 2019, he underwent GTR of a C5 lesion and developed quadriparesis in the immediate postoperative period with progressive improvement. Serial control examinations during outpatient follow-up showed progression of previously existing lesions and the appearance of new lesions in the neuroaxis . After a multidisciplinary discussion with the oncology team, it was decided not to perform any adjuvant treatment.
In January 2020, he underwent GTR of a C1 lesion and a small median cerebellar lesion, when he developed worsening quadriparesis in the immediate postoperative period and CSF leak, which was surgically corrected. In March 2020, he presented with a persistent headache and underwent endoscopic third ventriculostomy for the treatment of hydrocephalus.
He developed vertigo, dysphagia, and right hearing loss in April 2020 when he was hospitalized again for complete resection of a large lesion in the right cerebellopontine angle. The patient developed postoperative worsening of dysphagia and CNS infection, which was treated with antibiotic therapy. At this time, two genetic tests for VHL gene mutations in blood DNA were performed, both of which were negative. There was no family history of VHL or stigmas suggesting the presence of the disease in other family members.
In June 2020, he underwent ventriculoperitoneal shunt, when he already presented with bradypsychism and
The patient developed a generalized tonic-clonic seizure at home in early March 2021, which progressed to aspiration pneumonia. He was readmitted for the treatment of the infectious condition, but due to the prior neurological condition and clinical severity, palliative care was chosen together with the family. The patient died in March 2021 at the age of 47 years, 10 years after the first surgery, 7 years after the first local recurrence, and 4 years after the diagnosis of spinal dissemination.