A 12-year-old male visited our hospital with a 6-day history of ocular pain and hyperemia in the left eye (OS). At the first examination, his best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 1.0 OS. Slit-lamp examination revealed the presence of 2 + flare and occasional cells in the anterior chamber, but funduscopic examination did not detect any inflammatory findings in the posterior segment OS. No abnormalities were found in the right eye (OD). Ten days after the initial visit, ocular inflammatory findings appeared OD. Conjunctival and ciliary injections, 1 + flare and 3 + cells of anterior chamber inflammation, and mutton fat keratic precipitates were observed in both eyes (OU). In addition, redness and swelling of the optic disc were observed OU. The patient underwent routine screening tests including blood tests (complete blood count, biochemical tests, serological reaction tests, etc.), urinalysis, and the chest X-ray to identify the cause of uveitis. Some of the results are shown below. Soluble IL-2R (895; normal range, < 459 U/mL) and serum β2 microglobulin (2.24; normal range, 0.8–1.8 mg/dL) showed slightly high levels, along with markedly high levels of urinary β2 microglobulin (1.85; normal range, 0.03–0.28 mg/L). T-SPOT.TB, treponema pallidum latex agglutination, and rapid plasma reagin test were all negative. Angiotensin converting enzyme was within normal limits. Although renal biopsy was not performed, pediatric nephrologist determined that acute interstitial nephritis was present, and then, together with the ocular findings the diagnosis of probable TINU syndrome was established in accordance with a clinical criteria of tubulointerstitial nephritis. After oral prednisolone (PSL) at 20 mg/day was given, the ocular findings improved, and urinary β2-microglobulin levels also normalized. The dose of PSL was reduced by 2.5 mg every 2 weeks up to 5 mg/day, then by 1 mg every 4 weeks and withdrawn 6 months later.
However, recurrence was observed 1 month after cessation of oral PSL. The redness and swelling of the optic disc OS developed again, and subfoveal serous retinal detachment (SRD) and choroidal thickening OS were observed with OCT . Oral PSL at 20 mg/day was given again, and the ocular inflammation subsided. The dose of PSL was reduced more slowly, i.e., reduced by 2.5 mg every 1 month up to 5 mg/day, then by 1 mg every 1 month, and finally, oral PSL was stopped 1 year and 3 months later.
The ocular inflammation recurred 1 year and 2 months after the cessation of oral PSL OU. The patient’s BCVA was 1.2 OU. Retinal exudates and snowball vitreous opacities were observed in peripheral retina OU, and retinal exudates were seen even in the posterior pole OS . Fluorescein angiography (FA) showed leakages from peripheral retinal vessels and staining corresponding to retinal exudates OU . ICGA showed hypofluorescent dots scattered over the ocular fundus OU . OCT revealed the presence of choroidal thickenings OU (542 µm OD, 519 µm OS) and a small hyper-reflective lesion in contact with the retinal pigment epithelium OS . On LSFG, the color map showed a relatively cooler color, indicating a reduction of choroidal blood flow .
With the findings obtained from multimodal imaging, the presence of a wide range of choroiditis was suspected, whereas the pediatric nephrologist determined that the interstitial nephritis had not recurred because urinary β2 microglobulin and serum creatinine were within normal limits. Therefore, 20 mg of oral PSL was administered again, and 1 month later, the patient’s anterior chamber inflammation almost disappeared OU, and retinal exudates and snowball vitreous opacities diminished . On FA, fluorescent vascular leakage and staining corresponding to retinal exudates were reduced . On ICGA, the number of hypofluorescent dots was reduced OU . On OCT, the choroidal thickness decreased OU (493 µm OD, 489 µm OS), and the hyper-reflective lesion in contact with the retinal pigment epithelium disappeared OS . On LSFG, the color map showed that the colors had changed to warmer tones, indicating recovery of choroidal blood flow . At present, 10 months later, the dose of PSL has been gradually tapered to 3 mg/day. The patient’s BCVA is 1.2 OD and 1.5 OS, and no anterior segment inflammation is observed. The hypofluorescent dots have disappeared on ICGA, but retinal exudates and snowball vitreous opacities are still observed OU. In addition, choroidal thickening on OCT and fluorescent vascular leakages on FA have also persisted OU. No recurrence of acute interstitial nephritis was seen during the course with normal urinary β2 microglobulin and serum creatinine.