A 44-year-old woman visited our cardiology outpatient clinic in June 2013 complaining of chest tightness and shortness of breath for 2 weeks. She denied having hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, tobacco use, or any family history of atherosclerotic disease. Her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure at 124/80 mmHg, heart rate of 64 beats/minute, respiratory rate of 24 breaths/minute, and body temperature of 36.5°C. Physical examination revealed diastolic murmurs at the cardiac apex, with a grade of 2/6. Electrocardiography was normal, and chest radiography revealed no active lesions in the lungs. Initial laboratory tests were normal, except for mild thrombocytopenia (platelet count of 82,000/µl); hemoglobin was 12.5 g/dl, albumin was 4.9 g/dl, and C-reactive protein was 0.07 mg/dl. Troponin or N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide tests were not performed initially.
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a broad-based mass filling the left atrium that was attached to its posterior wall near the Q tip. The mass was composed of three different parts: a thin-walled cystic portion (2.3 cm × 2.1 cm), a solid portion with lobulating contours and heterogenic echogenicity (2.8 cm × 2.4 cm), and a thick-walled mixed portion (3.7 cm × 2.9 cm). The mixed portion of the mass protruded into the LV cavity during diastole and caused severe functional mitral stenosis (transmitral mean diastolic pressure gradient, 5 mmHg; mitral valve area, 1.7 cm2 by pressure half-time). Transesophageal echocardiography clearly revealed the heterogeneous features of the mass. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed no evidence of pulmonary vein invasion. Thoracoabdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed an intracardiac mass occupying the left atrium without local invasion and no evidence of distant metastasis. Radiography did not reveal any lesions in the skeletal system. The presumptive diagnosis was a benign cardiac tumor, such as an unusual type of left atrial myxoma, and the patient was referred to a cardiac surgeon for surgical removal of the mass.
During surgery, a 7 cm × 5 cm × 4 cm mass was observed, which had a hard part originating from the nearby left atrial appendage and two cystic parts . Complete excision of the mass and partial endocardiectomy were performed under cardiopulmonary bypass guidance. On pathological examination, the tumor consisted of proliferating pleomorphic spindle-shaped cells, suggesting a sarcoma, and massive osteoid and chondroid materials were produced by the tumor cells . High mitotic activity (14 per 10 high-power fields) and moderate cytological atypia were detected with scattered hemorrhagic and necrotic foci. The tumor cells invaded the resection margins. Immunohistochemistry revealed positive results for CD68, S-100, and smooth muscle actin. Finally, the tumor was diagnosed as chondroblastic primary cardiac osteosarcoma.
On follow-up echocardiogram performed 1 week after surgery, no cardiac tumors were observed, and no other abnormalities were detected. The patient recovered after surgery and was discharged 2 weeks later.
She received six cycles of systemic chemotherapy with doxorubicin at a dose of 25 mg/m2 and cisplatin at a dose of 75 mg/m2. During 2 years of follow up, the patient remained healthy with no evidence of tumor recurrence on echocardiography or CT scans. The patient did not receive any further follow-up or treatment until returning to the hospital 10 years later for regular health checkups. Although echocardiography and CT were not performed at that time, the absence of specific symptoms or abnormalities on physical examination suggested that the primary osteosarcoma had resolved.