The patient, a 58-year-old Chinese male, was admitted to the hospital with a 2-month history of neck pain that worsened for 4 days. In the past two months, the patient often developed neck pain without obvious cause, accompanied by radiating pain in both upper limbs and shoulders. He had been treated in a local hospital and was considered as having “cervical spondylosis”. 14 days before admission, he received neck acupuncture treatment at the local hospital, but the neck pain did not improve significantly. 4 days before admission, she developed redness, swelling and pain in her neck, and fever appeared. The highest temperature reached 38.6°C in the afternoon. After admission, a neck B-ultrasound showed an abnormal echo mass in the deep soft tissue of the right posterior neck. On the third day of admission, the muscle strength of the limbs decreased, and the decrease of the muscle strength of the lower limbs was particularly obvious. Physical examination showed extensive percussion pain in the spinous process of the neck with radiating pain in both upper limbs. The left biceps muscle strength was grade 3, the right biceps muscle strength was grade 2, the quadriceps muscle strength of both lower limbs was grade 2, the left foot dorsiflexor muscle strength was grade 2, the right foot dorsiflexor muscle strength was grade 0, and the anal sphincter muscle strength was grade 0. MRI of the cervical and thoracic vertebrae was immediately performed, showing abnormal signal shadow of dorsal spinal cord in the spinal canal at C1–C7 level, inflammatory lesions with the possibility of local abscess formation, posterior herniation of the C5/6 disc, and compression of the surrounding dura and spinal cord . The patient had a history of hypertension for 7 years, with normal blood pressure control, and denied the history of diabetes and other diseases.
Considering that the patient had developed neurological symptoms and was at risk of respiratory failure at any time due to cervical spinal cord compression, the patient was immediately treated with “cervical spinal epidural abscess removal + spinal canal decompression + neck abscess incision and drainage” under general anesthesia. The C4 spinous process was used as the center to mark a straight incision with a length of 8 cm in the posterior midline of the neck. The incision was made layer by layer, and the bilateral paraspinal muscles were dissected to the lateral edge of the lamina under the periosteum. During the operation, an abscess fistula was seen in the right paravertebral muscle, connecting the soft tissue abscess of the neck to the spinal canal. A large amount of dark yellow epidural pus spilled when the C3–C5 lamina was opened . The pus was collected for bacterial culture and drug sensitivity test. Part of ligamentum flavum was resected and sent for pathological examination. During the operation to remove the pus in the spinal canal, it is necessary to decompress the spinal canal thoroughly, but also to protect the dura mater to prevent pus from breaking into the subarachnoid space and causing subarachnoid space infection. After complete decompression, the spinal canal was rinsed with iodophor solution, hydrogen peroxide and a large amount of normal saline, and the spinal cord was found to be pulsating well without obvious spinal cord compression. One negative pressure drainage tube was indwelled and the incision was closed successively. Further incision and drainage were performed for the abscess in the deep neck. A vertical incision of 4.5 cm was made about 3 cm beside the midline of the posterior neck. The skin and subcutaneous tissue were cut layer by layer, and the abscess cavity was observed in the depth of the neck. The pus in the cavity was sucked out, and a negative pressure drainage tube was placed and sutured successively to close the incision.
After surgery, the patient was transferred to neurosurgical intensive care unit for observation, assisted breathing by ventilator, anti-inflammatory treatment was performed by intravenous infusion of vancomycin, symptomatic treatment was performed by nutritive nerve drugs, and continuous drainage was performed by negative pressure drainage tube. On day 2 after surgery, the muscle strength of the patient's left biceps muscle was grade 4, the muscle strength of the right biceps muscle was grade 3, the muscle strength of the quadriceps femoris muscle of both lower limbs was grade 4, and the muscle strength of the anal sphincter muscle was grade 4. The patient was able to control urination and remove the catheter 5 days after surgery. Bacterial culture and drug sensitivity test showed Staphylococcus aureus (susceptible to vancomycin, levofloxacin and ceftriaxone), and pathological results showed inflammatory reactions . Drainage tube was removed 10 days after surgery and vancomycin was replaced with ceftriaxone (continued for 5 weeks). Twenty days after surgery, the patient got out of bed with a neck brace and moved autonomously. MRI of the cervical spine 21 days after the operation showed that the abscess signal in the spinal canal disappeared completely . After 6 months of follow-up, the patient had grade 5 muscle strength, no sensory disturbance, and no recurrence of abscess.