The patient, a 60-year-old female, was admitted to the Breast Surgery Department of Weifang People’s Hospital on October 19, 2022, because a right breast mass was found on examination for 1 year. There was no known family history of breast cancer or other gynecologic cancers. Her physical exam was significant for a one-centimeter palpable, mobile mass in the upper right breast at the twelve o’clock position. There was no axillary or supraclavicular lymphadenopathy. Ultrasound (US) showed that 0.7cm×0.4cm and 0.6cm×0.4cm hyper echoes were detected in the direction of 12 o’clock in the right breast, both of which were adjacent to each other with clear borders and smooth margins and relatively uniform internal echogenicity ( and ). Mammography (MMG) showed a right breast nodule with calcified foci in the right breast, which was considered benign calcification. A round-like soft tissue nodule was seen in the upper right quadrant, with a local border that was not smooth. No significant mass was seen in the left breast, and a round-like high-density shadow was seen in the right breast ( and ). Dynamic MRI showed a nodular shadow at the edge of the gland in the upper quadrant of the right breast, with a heterogeneous high signal in T2WI and persistent enhancement, which was approximately 0.6 cm × 1.0 cm in extent, with clear borders and irregular morphology, and no obvious burr around it. Multiple foci of punctiform enhancement were also seen in both breasts ( and ). The patient underwent excisional biopsy. Pathological examination revealed low-grade ductal carcinoma in situ within a fibroadenoma of the breast with local infiltration of <1 mm in size. Immunohistochemistry showed AR (3+, 90%), ER (3+, 90%), PR (3+, 85%), C-erbB-2 (2+), CK5/6 (+), P63 (+), Calponin (+) . It is worth noting that CK5/6, P63 and Calponin were positively expressed in the myoepithelium but partially absent in myoepithelium, suggesting a local infiltration of carcinoma in situ. Subsequently, breast-conserving surgery and sentinel lymph node biopsy were performed under general anesthesia with tracheal intubation. Pathology showed no cancer metastasis in the sentinel lymph nodes 1, 2, and 3, and the superior, inferior, internal, and external cut margins were clear. The patient recovered well after surgery.