A 33-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital because of an abnormal pulmonary shadow found on a routine chest X-ray. He had suffered occasional hemoptysis for the past two years. A physical examination and laboratory investigation showed no remarkable findings. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed consolidation of the left lower lobe with normal bronchial tree and no confined sequestrated area . Three-dimensional CT revealed two aberrant arteries arising from the descending aorta and running into the lower lobes on each side, without a normal supply from the pulmonary artery . The right aberrant artery measured 7 mm in diameter, and the left aberrant artery was 13 mm in diameter. The bronchus and pulmonary vein appeared anatomically normal on the CT scan. These findings led us to the diagnosis of bilateral anomalous systemic supply to the basal segments of the lungs. Because simple occlusion or ligation of the anomalous artery had a risk of pulmonary infarction, we decided to remove the bilateral anomalous artery, and perform left basal segmentectomy and right S10 segmentectomy simultaneously.
He was initially placed in the right lateral decubitus position. A left thoracotomy was first performed to approach the site of origin of the two aberrant arteries. The aberrant artery to the left lower lobe was ligated and divided with an ATW 3.5-mm linear stapler (Ethicon Japan, Tokyo), and the aberrant artery to the right side was ligated at the descending aorta . Then, a left basal segmentectomy was performed. A 24-French chest tube was placed, the lung was inflated under direct vision and the incisions were closed in layers. Subsequently, he was turned to the left lateral decubitus position. A right S10 segmentectomy was performed under video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). The distal right aberrant artery was divided with an ATS 3.5-mm linear stapler. A 24-French chest tube was placed, and the incisions were closed in layers. His postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged from the hospital on the 9th postoperative day. Microscopic examination of the resected specimen revealed atherosclerosis, intimal thickening and fibrosis in the both aberrant arteries, suggesting the local pulmonary hypertension. In the left lung parenchyma, macrophages containing hemosiderin were recognized, probably resulting from the pulmonary hemorrhage and consequent hemoptysis. There were findings of obstructive pneumonia in the left lung. The normal pulmonary artery which should exist, intra- or extralobar sequestrated lung parenchyma, or any other dysplastic changes could not be identified in any of the resected specimens. On the basis of these findings, pathologic evaluation of the resected tissue from both lungs confirmed the diagnosis of bilateral anomalous systemic supply to the basal segments of the lungs with left obstructive pneumonia. At the time of this report, 12 months after the resection, he was doing well.