A 9-year-old girl presented at the Emergency Department for SCH following a distortion of the right arm occurred in horse fall. She was admitted 1 h after the event complaining of severe pain, swelling arm, and numbness of the fingers. At physical examination, the hand was hypothermic and pulses were not palpable. Vascular examination showed good capillary refill but no flow at arterial Doppler ultrasound scan was detected. An X-ray documented a Gartland IIIB fracture . The patient underwent a closed reduction of the fracture and percutaneous pin fixation. At the end of the procedure, the arterial pulses did not reappear. To rule out any vascular injury, arterial Doppler ultrasound was performed demonstrating brachial artery interruption at the fracture level associated with an intramural hematoma; an external hematoma compressing the artery, that could have been drained cutting lacertus fibrosus, was not identified.
With a percutaneous right common femoral arterial approach, digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed, showing occlusion of the distal brachial artery, with recanalization of the ulnar and radial arteries immediately below the bifurcation . The occlusion was crossed with two 0.014ʺ guide wires positioned in the ulnar and radial arteries, respectively, to protect the bifurcation. A 3 × 28 mm BVS (Absorb; Abbott Vascular, Lakeside Drive, Santa Clara, CA) was released in the distal brachial artery , followed by remodeling with a non-compliant 2.5 × 20 mm balloon catheter to solve residual in-stent stenosis . The final angiography confirmed correct positioning and patency of the stent with restoration of distal flow . The stenotic part was interpreted as a spasm of the artery and we decided to not treat it. At the postoperative ultrasound scan, the stenotic part was not detected anymore. A regular sphygmic pulse appeared on radial and ulnar arteries.
The arm was maintained with a 130° posterior splint for 40 days after surgery, to avoid complete flexion of right arm. After 40 days, cast and pins were removed. The child was submitted to physiotherapy for 3 months after the accident, avoiding rapid movement of the right arm to protect the stent. After hematological consultation, a dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg/die and clopidogrel 75 mg/die) was administrated for 24 months and a single antiplatelet therapy (only aspirin) for further 12 months. A Doppler ultrasound scan performed 46 months after the procedure showed regular patency of the brachial artery .
Patient and her parents provided written informed consent for information and images to be published as case report.