A 49-year-old female patient had been treated for advanced gastric cancer (AGC) with chemotherapy. After therapy, she expressed whole body pain, especially on the left side of the pelvis.
This patient had been diagnosed with AGC in July 2019. The pathological diagnosis indicated signet ring cell carcinoma. While receiving her first round of chemotherapy with capecitabine, the patient developed acute pyelonephritis and hydronephrosis in both kidneys, leading to a suspicion of periureteral metastases. Therefore, the patient started a new regimen of combination chemotherapy with ramucirumab and paclitaxel. However, ascites was observed after two cycles of chemotherapy. The treatment was switched to nivolumab. After five cycles, an abdominopelvic computed tomography scan was performed in April 2020 that showed improvement in peritoneal carcinomatosis compared to an image from February 2020. She received seven cycles of nivolumab, but progressive disease was observed by the positron emission tomography/computed tomography scan, and other therapeutic options were needed to be discussed.
The patient did not have any other medical history beyond AGC.
The patient reported a family history of gastric cancer in her grandfather.
Physical examination revealed pain on the left side of the pelvis.
Blood analysis revealed mild leukocytosis (14 × 109/L) with low hemoglobin (10.3 g/dL). Platelet count was in the normal range. Serum C-reactive protein was increased at 181 mg/L (normal range, 0.1-6.0 mg/L).
A positron emission tomography/computed tomography scan obtained in May 2020 revealed bone, multiple nodal, and right lateral abdominal wall soft tissue metastases after the patient had received seven cycles of nivolumab. The therapy was discontinued, and cfDNA NGS was performed immediately.
For genetic testing, the patient provided informed written consent for specimen collection and genetic analysis. This study was approved with a waiver of informed consent by the Institutional Review Board of Gangnam Severance Hospital, Seoul, Korea (IRB No. 3-2020-0268).
cfDNA was extracted using the MagMAX Cell-Free Total Nucleic Acid Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States). A DNA library was constructed with the AlphaLiquid®100 kit (IMBDx Inc., Seoul, Korea), which was designed to include intronic regions of target genes. Hybrid-capture-selected libraries were sequenced to a mean coverage of 14237x (cfDNA) and 735x (DNA) on an Illumina NextSeq-550 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, United States). GeneFuse was used to detect fusions, and a Genome Reference Consortium Human Build 38 was used for variant interpretation. All genomic variants, including fusions, were analyzed from cfDNA. Because of the patient’s family history, the presence of germline mutation was tested in parallel for the following genes: APC, ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, CDH1, CDK4, CDKN2A, and MLH1. No germline mutations were detected from the genomic DNA. Somatic alterations detected from the cfDNA were an APC frameshift mutation (NM_000038.5:c.6579del, p.V2194fs) with variant allele frequency of 0.5%, an EGFR amplification with a copy number of 17.3, and an EGFR-SEPT14 fusion with variant allele frequency of 45.3% . Because the EGFR and SEPT14 genes are closely located on chromosome 7, we tested 50 normal healthy controls with the same panel and confirmed that the fusion detected in the patient was a true positive. We also confirmed EGFR-SEPT14 fusion by complementary DNA sequencing, which was processed using the patient’s cell-free RNA extracted by MagMAX Cell-Free Total Nucleic Acid Kit. The site of fusion was exon 24 of EGFR fused to exon 10 of SEPT14 . The fusion was in-frame and considered to be proto-oncogenic.