Consent for publication was obtained from the patient. A healthy, 24-year-old, right-hand dominant male was riding his motorcycle traveling approximately 25 miles per hour when he was struck by a motor vehicle. The mechanism of fall is unclear secondary to amnesia, but he was ejected from the motorcycle as reported by bystanders. The patient subsequently presented to the clinic4 days after the injury with complaints of left arm pain and swelling. On physical examination, the patient had swelling and tenderness to palpation over the mid aspect of the left humerus, and an obvious defect was noted with an associated popeye deformity, ecchymosis was present distally though not at the rupture site . He could achieve full range of motion in his shoulder and elbow but had reduced strength with elbow flexion (4/5) and forearm supination (3/5). Radiographs revealed no fractures or other abnormalities. MRI revealed the following: (a)Sagittal short TI inversion recovery (STIR) image of the injured arm demonstrating the long head muscle belly rupture with an intact short head and partially ruptured brachialis,(b)coronal STIR image centered over the distal anterior upper arm demonstrating complete rupture of the long head biceps muscle belly with a 9 cm gap and intervening hematoma, and (c)axial T2 fat suppression image of the midshaft humerus at the level of the biceps rupture demonstrating an intact short head biceps muscle belly, partially ruptured brachialis and hematoma within the biceps compartment. As the patient was young and wished to maximize strength and minimize deformity, he elected for surgical repair 8days after the injury. An anterior midline incision was performed starting at the deltopectoral interval proximally and extending distally 12 cm. Subcutaneous edema was encountered immediately; the biceps fascia was incised, and the biceps brachii was noted to be transected with preservation of the short head deep fibers . The musculocutaneous nerve was not encountered. Intervening hematoma was evacuated, and muscle edges were debrided. An absorbable suture was then used to whip stitch the proximal and distal segments of muscle, and four modified Mason-Allen stitches using non absorbable suture were used to capture each quadrant as described by Kragh and Basamania. The deep internal muscle stitches were closed primarily followed by the superficial stitches . To augment the strength of repair, a human dermal collagen matrix was placed over the repair anteromedially . The elbow was subsequently taken through a range of flexion, extension, pronation, and supination with no blocks to motion or repair site gapping. Subsequently, fascial and skin closure was performed, and a posterior mold splint was placed in 90° of flexion. The patient’s post-operative rehabilitation protocol consisted of a 6 weeks period of progressive splinting from 90° of flexion to full extension. He was allowed to begin active pronation and supination in the splint at 3 weeks. From 6 to 12 weeks, the patient remained in a hinged elbow brace with an allowable arc of motion from 30 to 90° of flexion. He progressed 10°per week until full extension and flexion were achieved. From 3 months to 1 year the patient began a slow progressive strengthening program. The patient notably had achieved 5/5 flexion and 5/5 supination strength and retained full range of motion at his 1year follow-up appointment. A small divot was noted at the repair site but was acceptable cosmetically to the patient and similar to the contralateral arm . The patient subsequently presented to clinic 6 years following the initial injury for evaluation of a palpable suture over the proximal end of the incision. On physical examination, he had retained full range of motion and had 5/5 strength with elbow flexion and supination. A disability of arm, shoulder, and hand (DASH) score was obtained at this time and was rated a 0 (no disability) out of 100. In addition, a score of 0 (no difficulty) was reported for the work and sport modules. A follow-up MRI at this time demonstrated reconstitution of the biceps brachii muscle belly with minimal residual intrasubstance scarring .