A 78-year-old man fell backward from a height of about 1 m at his workplace, injuring the back of his head, neck, and back, and was rushed to the previous hospital. At the time of initial examination, he was conscious with no neurological abnormalities but had neck pain. He had diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and a history of laminoplasty for ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the cervical spine. Still, no significant family history and was not taking any antithrombotic agents. Cervical spine computed tomography (CT) showed vertebral body fractures at the 6th and 7th cervical vertebrae, a fracture of the left transverse process of the 6th cervical vertebra, and ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament at the 4th–7th cervical spine levels [ and ]. A slightly high-density area was noted within the foramen transversarium of the 6th cervical vertebra . Cervical spine T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging showed no evidence of compression of the cervical spinal cord. Still, a high signal area was noted in the cervical cord at the intervertebral level between the 4th and 5th cervical vertebrae . Since there were no findings of spinal cord compression or cervical spine misalignment requiring cervical spine repair and fixation and no neurological abnormalities, the patient was admitted to the hospital for observational management. Altered consciousness, respiratory depression, and anisocoria occurred six hours after the trauma. A slightly high-intensity area in the left cerebellum (posterior circulation acute stroke prognosis early CT score [pc-ASPECTS] 9 points) was observed on diffusion-weighted imaging 70 min after the onset of altered consciousness, and occlusion of the left vertebral and basilar arteries was observed on magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) [ and ]. The patient was transferred to our hospital 270 min after the onset of altered consciousness for thrombectomy.
On arrival at our hospital, the Glasgow coma scale score was E1V1M4, and there was paralysis of the right upper and lower limbs. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 32. At 310 min after the onset of altered consciousness, a head CT showed a hyperdense sign at the tip of the basilar artery and low-density areas in the left cerebellum and midbrain (pc-ASPECTS 7 points) . After CT, the patient stopped breathing and was intubated and mechanically ventilated. Because ischemic changes on CT were localized and there was a possibility of symptom improvement, thrombectomy was performed 387 min after the onset of altered consciousness.
Under general anesthesia, a 6-Fr Fubuki dilator kit (Asahi Intecc, Seto, Japan) was inserted through the right femoral artery, and systemic heparinization was performed. To restore basilar artery blood flow as quickly as possible, the 6-Fr Fubuki dilator kit was guided into the open and unaffected right vertebral artery. Right vertebral artery angiography showed occlusion at the tip of the basilar artery . Using a React 71 (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) and Solitaire X 4 × 40 mm (Medtronic) in two passes, complete recanalization was achieved 43 min after femoral artery puncture and 430 min after the onset of altered consciousness . A 4-Fr catheter was then placed through the left femoral artery into the left subclavian artery to evaluate the left vertebral artery. Left subclavian artery angiography showed occlusion at the origin of the left vertebral artery and abundant collateral blood flow from the left deep cervical artery to the left vertebral artery. The left vertebral artery had anterograde blood flow distal to the 6th cervical vertebra level and thrombi at the 4th–6th cervical vertebra levels [ and ]. Embolization of the distal left vertebral artery was planned to prevent further embolism due to the thrombus in the left vertebral artery. A 3.2/3.4-Fr Guidepost (Tokai Medical Products, Kasugai, Japan) and Phenom17 (Medtronic) were guided from the 6-Fr Fubuki dilator kit in the right vertebral artery to the left vertebral artery through the vertebral artery confluence. Coil embolization was performed from the level of the 3rd/4th cervical vertebrae, the distal end of the thrombus in the left vertebral artery V2 segment, to the left vertebral artery V3 segment . The disappearance of collateral blood flow to the left vertebral artery was confirmed by left subclavian artery angiography. Perfusion in the left posterior inferior cerebellar artery region through the left vertebral artery was confirmed, which was visualized in reverse on the right vertebral artery angiography, with no interruption of the peripheral vessels in the basilar artery region .
The retrieved thrombus was macroscopically a red thrombus with a partial mixture of white thrombus . Hematoxylin-eosin staining revealed that the surface of the thrombus consisted mainly of platelets and fibrin with a mixture of neutrophils and red blood cells mixed within the thrombus [-].
No improvement in neurological symptoms was observed after the surgery. Diffusion-weighted imaging performed 13 h after the onset of altered consciousness showed infarction in the midbrain, pons, both occipital lobes, both cerebellar hemispheres, and the left thalamus . Patency of the right vertebral and basilar arteries and occlusion of the left vertebral artery were confirmed by MRA . Given the extent of the brain infarction, a poor neurological and life prognosis was anticipated. The patient died two days after surgery due to hypotension and cardiac arrest.