A 24-year-old female patient presented with progressing shortness of breath, chest discomfort, and generalized weakness over the past 4 months. Upon admission, she presented with orthopnoea, elevated high-sensitive troponin T (0.213 ng/mL), and NT-proBNP (4440 ng/L) but normal CK and CK-MB levels. Physical examination revealed an irregular pulse (64 b.p.m.), a holosystolic murmur over the mitral valve, coarse crackles on the lungs, and hypotension (80/55 mmHg). The initial electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation (AF) with severe conduction abnormalities and ventricular extrasystoles . Echocardiography revealed a dilated left ventricle (LV) and right ventricle (RV) with severely reduced biventricular function consistent with a DCM. Functional mitral valve insufficiency III/IV° and a thrombus in the left atrial appendage were also identified. Medical heart failure therapy and oral anticoagulation were initiated and the patient referred to our centre for further evaluation. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging revealed extensive subendocardial to transmural late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) of the LV [left ventricle ejection fraction (LV-EF) 10%] as well as mid-myocardial LGE of the inferior septum and of the RV ( and , Video S1). Since post-inflammatory DCM was suspected, right ventricular EMB was performed prior to internal cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD)-CRT-system implantation. Endomyocardial biopsy revealed a severe chronic lymphocytic myocarditis with diffuse infiltration of CD3+ T-lymphocytes (42 T cells/mm2) . Additionally, the myocardium presented with a severe architectural disarray including diffuse interstitial fibrosis and marked cardiomyocyte hypertrophy . Acute or persistent infection with cardiotropic pathogens was excluded in all biopsies by polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Immunosuppressive therapy with prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day, followed by a tapering regimen as specified in the timeline) was initiated. The patient presented 3 months later for a control EMB, which revealed a slightly resolving inflammatory reaction (21 T cells/mm2 lymphocytes). However, recurrent marked architectural disarray raised the suspicion that chronic myocarditis occurred on a pre-existent genetic (hypertrophic) cardiomyopathy. Genetic testing revealed a heterozygous missense variant (c.928G>A) with effect on splicing of lysosome-associated membrane protein 2 (LAMP-2), as previously described in Danon disease. Additionally, PAS staining revealed a significantly enhanced storage of glycogen in cardiomyocytes of all biopsies investigated, as exemplarily shown in the first and second biopsies ( without and with diastase digestion). Family history indicated a de novo mutation, since the two elder brothers and the parents of the patient are clinically healthy. An improvement of LV-EF (32%) and significant symptom relief (New York Heart Association II) were noted with no significant changes in NT-proBNP levels. Six months later, the patient presented with progressing dyspnoea and acute decompensated heart failure after discontinuing immunosuppressive therapy. Echocardiography revealed a reduced LV-EF of 25% and increasing mode-switch episodes of the ICD-CRT due to paroxysmal AF, but no sustained ventricular tachycardias. Endomyocardial biopsy revealed an increased inflammatory activity (56 T cells/mm2) , enhanced interstitial fibrosis, and again, myofiber disarray . Immunosuppressive therapy with prednisolone was re-initiated and intensified by tacrolimus (1 mg 2×/day) and mycophenolate mofetil (500 mg 2×/day), as specified in the timeline section. During the 16-month follow-up, the patient was clinically stable and tolerating immunosuppressive therapy. Consequently, no changes in medication regime were instituted at the time.