The authors reported a case of 48-year old multiparous woman presented to Kassala Hospital, east Sudan, with recurrent urine retention resulting from urethral obstruction, which was caused by large vulval inclusion cyst. She had obstetric history of spontaneous home vaginal deliveries, the last one seven year back. A traditional birth attendant circumcised her when she was 5 year old. De-infibulation, re-infibulation and episiotomy were performed after each delivery. Five years before her presentation our patient observed a painless swelling in her vulva, which was gradually increasing in size. She neglected it since a relative midwife had re assured her. The swelling enlarged to extent that made the sexual intercourse very difficult. In the last month prior to her presentation, she suffered urine retention three times for which the nearby health care provider relieved her symptom by temporary catheterization of her urinary bladder without further investigation and treatment. She presented to the hospital with the fourth time of urine retention seeking medical care and asking for the cause. Local examination showed a large cystic swelling originating in the circumcision line and covering the introitus . A diagnosis of inclusion cyst at the site of circumcision was made. Systemic and bimanual pelvic examination was unremarkable. Both kidneys and other abdominal organs appeared normal on sonogram. The cyst was large enough causing bladder outlet obstruction and when the patient advised to tilt it away from the urethral orifice she passed urine without difficulties . Her urine analysis showed uncountable pus cell with trace of protein. After inserting an indwelling Foley catheter , the cyst was excised under spinal anesthesia through a vertical incision in the skin. The cyst was surgically removed by dissection along the lines of cleavage. The cyst measured 10 × 9.2 cm and weighed 1.2 kg. The redundant skin was excised and the edges were approximated. There were no complications following surgery and the patient was discharged on day two following the surgery because she resided in a remote site from the hospital. The patient followed for six months after she had been discharged home and she was symptom free.