A 48-year-old man was referred to our center after dealing with a persistent severe cough for more than a month. Past medical history was positive for hypertension. He also had a recent episode of syncope which had been resolved spontaneously. Vital signs were within the normal range with an arterial oxygen saturation of 97%. Physical examinations were unremarkable including heart and lung examination. Laboratory findings were also unremarkable.
In order to evaluate his persistent cough, spiral chest computed tomography (CT) scan with intravenous contrast was performed which revealed a heterogeneous lobulated mass in the anterior superior mediastinum measuring 125 × 77 × 99 mm in size, with pressure over the aortic arch, and mild pericardial effusion .
A tru-cut biopsy from the mass was reported as a benign vascular tumor. The patient was operated to resect the mass. During the operation a full sternotomy was conducted. The pleura was opened and a bilateral mediastinal pleurectomy was performed. The tumor was then dissected from the diaphragm, as well as pericardium. Due to encasement of innominate vein by the mass, a dissection of the tumor and innominate vein was performed, while preserving both phrenic nerves.
The specimen was sent for pathologic examination. The gross examination of the tissues obtained from surgery showed a bosselated brown soft tissue (12 × 11 × 6 cm) and a fragment of fibro-fatty tissue (7.5 × 4 × 3 cm) . Cut section of the tumor was hyper-vascular filled with blood, exhibiting brown color. Microscopic histopathological evaluation of the tumor showed large and dilated vascular channels filled with blood. The vascular spaces were lined by normal and bland looking endothelial cells. These histopathologic features were typical for CH. A reactive lymph node was also identified .
The patient had an uncomplicated surgery and a postoperative chest X-ray was unremarkable . The patient was discharged in good condition a week after the operation. The patient is relatively well and completely symptom free during his fourth month follow-up.