A 67-year-old female with multiple comorbidities presented to the emergency department following a syncopal episode. She denied any other neurological symptoms, neurological exam was normal, and a computed tomography angiography (CTA) head demonstrated an incidental 8 × 6 mm aneurysm at the right MCA bifurcation. She opted for surveillance initially, but 1 year later, CTA head showed that the aneurysm had grown to 10x7mm . At this time, after discussion with vascular neurosurgery, patient opted for elective clipping of the right MCA bifurcation aneurysm.
The patient was sedated with general anesthesia, and a right pterional craniotomy was performed. Microdissection was carried out from distal to proximal to open the sylvian fissure exposing the proximal MCA and a temporary clip was applied to the M1 to gain proximal control. The bifurcation was dissected, and a 9 mm straight permanent aneurysm clip was placed at the neck of the aneurysm. Intraoperative Doppler had shown appropriate flow of the M1 and M2 both prior to clipping and following clipping. A small area of aneurysm residual was appreciated posteriorly, and a 3-mm fenestrated clip was used to safely close off the remaining aneurysm. A spinal needle was then inserted into the aneurysm to decompress it successfully, and all layers were then closed. Electrophysiological monitoring with motor evoked potential remained stable from baseline throughout the entirety of the procedure. The patient tolerated the procedure well, and she was transferred to the Neuro ICU in stable condition and finally discharged on post-operative day 3 without any complications.
At 29 days post-op, the patient presented with acute left hemiparesis, dysarthria, headache and vomiting. Vascular studies with CTA head showed significant narrowing of M2 distal to surgical clip . Emergent MR perfusion study showed slow flow throughout the right MCA territory but no irreversible infarction was clear at this point.
Patient underwent an emergent catheter angiogram , during which she received 20 mg intra-arterial verapamil with resolution of her vasospasm , and improvement in her neurological exam. She was admitted to the neurocritical care unit and managed by volume expansion and permissive hypertension. She was also started on aspirin 81 mg daily.
Twenty-four hours later, her neurological exam deteriorated. Emergent repeat catheter angiogram revealed recurrent vasospasm in the same vessel . She received 20 mg intra-arterial verapamil again with improvement in vasospasm , but unfortunately her MRI brain showed an infarction involving the right basal ganglia, frontal lobe, and parietal lobe .
Her hospital course was further complicated by super-refractory status epilepticus with epileptic discharges originating from the right fronto-temporal region. Seizures were eventually controlled with multiple anti-epileptic medications, and she also finished a 21-day course of nimodipine. Follow-up CTA head on day 15 of admission revealed persistent absence of vasospasm. She was discharged to a skilled nursing facility after a prolonged hospital course.
The patient’s functional status was moderately improved at her follow up appointment 2.5 months post-op. MRI showed normal evolution of ischemic stroke, with no acute findings. She was able to walk but continued to have left lower extremity weakness, left visual field defect, and left-sided neglect. She had mild improvement in mental status but had difficulty with memory. She did not have any concerns for continued seizures or stroke-like symptoms.