A 34-year-old right-handed woman with diabetes mellitus type two, obesity class two, and a history of migraines presented to the emergency department after a self-resolving 5 min episode of paresthesias in her right hand, arm, and face. She also noticed a foul taste in her mouth reminiscent of French onion soup. These symptoms occurred in the setting of a 7-day unremitting headache worsened by bright lights. While in the emergency department, she experienced a second episode of paresthesias and was given lorazepam and levetiracetam for suspected focal sensory seizures. She had stable vital signs and her physical examination was unremarkable aside from trace right facial asymmetry.
A head CT demonstrated a hyperattenuating focus in the left insular region surrounded by an area of low attenuation, suggestive of vasogenic edema . A subsequent brain MRI showed prominent edema surrounding a 1.9 cm mass with central T1 hypointensity, heterogeneous T2 hyperintensity, and irregular peripheral enhancement . The treatment team felt that the radiographic images were most consistent with a malignant etiology. An abscess was considered less likely given a relative lack of bright signal on diffusion-weighted imaging and the absence of low apparent diffusion coefficient values on MRI. The neuroradiologist concurred with the treatment team’s suspicion, noting primary or metastatic brain neoplasm as leading considerations in the radiology report while indicating an abscess as less likely. This was further supported by the absence of infectious symptoms in the patient’s clinical history and a white blood cell count only mildly elevated to 11.8, a normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 18 mm/h, and a normal C-reactive protein of 6.2 mg/L. There was no evidence of a primary extracranial tumor on an abdomen, pelvis, or chest CT to suggest metastasis, thus a primary brain neoplasm was suspected.
The patient was transferred to Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) for the management of a presumed left insular tumor. Several days following her admission to MGH and before a planned awake left craniotomy, she developed expressive aphasia and intermittent disorientation to time and place. An urgent CT demonstrated enlargement of the mass to nearly 5.0 cm. Given the rapid rate of change in the size of the mass, we suspected that the insular lesion was an abscess and thus obtained a brain MRI which showed the mass to be peripherally enhancing and now obviously restricting diffusion. Her cerebral edema had also significantly worsened, causing a 2 mm midline shift to the right and mass effect on the left lateral ventricle and basal ganglia . Soon thereafter, the patient became acutely obtunded and bradycardia. Despite receiving mannitol and hypertonic saline, her examination continued to decline, and she was emergently taken to the operating room (OR) for neurosurgical intervention.
Because the patient was herniating, a decompressive left frontotemporal craniectomy was planned followed by a transsylvian approach to access and drain the presumptive insular abscess.
After exposure of the Sylvian fissure, we found that inflammatory phlegmon had layered over the entire fissure and surrounded the Sylvian veins. After much exploration, a small arachnoid window was identified and opened in the distal aspect of the fissure as we followed an M4 branch into the fissure. This opening was carried anteriorly and deepened, and as we dissected between the M2 branches, a rush of purulent fluid was encountered. A sample of this material was sent for aerobic and anaerobic bacterial, fungal, and mycobacterial testing. The cavity in the insula was then entered, and the remaining purulence was evacuated. After irrigating the region, friable inflammatory-appearing tissue was noted surrounding the cavity walls. The patient’s bone flap was left off to allow for maximal brain decompression. She was started on vancomycin, cefepime, and metronidazole for the treatment of an intracerebral abscess. A postoperative head CT showed excellent brain decompression with a reduction of the midline shift and resolution of herniation. A loculated rim-enhancing component along the superolateral margin of the dominant abscess cavity seen on postoperative MRI was suspicious for residual abscess .
Culture of the purulent material grew Streptococcus intermedius – a bacterium normal to the oral cavity and upper respiratory tract flora. An odontogenic infection was investigated, but a dental examination showed no clinical or radiographic evidence of acute or chronic intraoral infections. There was no history of dental infections or dental procedures other than routine cleaning and no oral piercings. Investigation into other possible sources also failed to find evidence of infection: (1) no valvular vegetations on transthoracic echocardiogram, (2) no pulmonary arteriovenous malformations seen on chest CT, (3) negative blood cultures, (4) negative human immunodeficiency virus antigen/antibody tests, and (5) no past medical history, family history, or examination findings suggesting hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia.
After 1 week of antibiotics, a surveillance brain MRI on POD 7 showed a likely recurrence of the abscess with rightward midline shift progression, worsening parenchymal herniation through the craniectomy defect, and subfalcine and uncal herniation . The patient was brought back to the OR for repeat transsylvian aspiration and extension of the craniectomy to allow for increased brain decompression. Intraoperatively, the brain was noted to be swollen with extensive inflammatory debris in the fissure. A rush of purulent material was again encountered on accessing the cavity. After evacuation of the reaccumulated abscess material, several locations of the abscess wall were sampled due to concerns about a potential underlying malignancy. Before closing, the craniotomy was extended posteriorly to create additional space for brain herniation. Notably, the sampled insular abscess cavity fluid was sterile and did not yield growth in cultures, reflecting the early effectiveness of the antibiotic regimen.
A postoperative head CT showed a collapsed abscess cavity and decreased parenchymal herniation through the craniectomy site. Histologic examination showed portions of brain with abundant necrosis and a dense neutrophilic infiltrate, consistent with abscess and excluding a superimposed underlying malignancy [ and ]. Surrounding the necrotic regions were areas of granulation tissue and granulation-type tissue indicative of early formation of a capsule [ and ]. Brown-Hopps and GMS stains were negative for microorganisms.
One week after surgery, head CT revealed a re-expansion of the previously collapsed abscess cavity, significant edema with mass effect, and a subcutaneous hematoma . Surgery was deemed imprudent and she was started on dexamethasone for medical management of cerebral edema and as an attempt to decrease the production of presumed sterile inflammatory fluid. Serial head CTs showed progressive reduction in the volume of the abscess cavity and slow resolution of the cerebral edema.
The patient continued to improve and was discharged home on steroids and antibiotics. She ultimately completed 1 month of steroid therapy and 6 weeks of oral metronidazole and penicillin G. She continues to be followed outpatient and has returned to her neurologic baseline. A 2-month follow-up head CT demonstrated improving cerebral edema and no evidence of a persistent or recurrent abscess . Her most recent follow-up MRI showed substantially decreased brain herniation and edema [-].