A 54-year-old Caucasian female patient with a known history of KFS was admitted for elective cholecystectomy at her local hospital. She admitted to mild breathlessness and chest pains on exertion. Past medical history revealed a long series of investigations and interventions for her spinal disorders. Previous spinal magnetic resonance imaging showed deformity of the cervical spine, with fusion of the C2–C6 vertebral bodies and a desiccated bulging disc at C4–C5 but no significant foramenal narrowing in the lower cervical spine.
On examination, she had a loud systolic murmur with no evidence of heart failure clinically. Cardiac echo confirmed severely stenosed aortic valve with a peak gradient of 96 mmHg, a mean of 60 mmHg, and a valve area of 0.80 cm2. The aortic valve was reported to be bicuspid. There were no intracardiac shunts or other cardiac pathology. The aortic root and ascending aorta were of normal dimensions. The left ventricular ejection fraction was moderately impaired at 40%. Elective cholecystectomy was deferred, and the patient was referred for aortic valve replacement (AVR). She was accepted for surgery on symptomatic and prognostic grounds. Preoperative coronary angiography showed unobstructed coronary arteries. Anaesthetic review with spinal X-rays were requested to ensure safe tracheal intubation for general anaesthesia due to the nature of the patient’s spinal deformity .
Preoperative TOE (transoesophageal echocardiogram) confirmed a heavily calcified and stenosed BAoV with a normal aortic root and ascending aorta diameters . The left ventricle was hypertrophied. At operation, the severely stenosed aortic valve was confirmed to be a Type 0 BAoV. The patient underwent AVR with a 21 mm mechanical prosthesis (Sorin Biomedica, Italy). The operation was uneventful, and the patient was discharged home on the 6th post-operative day. A transthoracic echocardiogram prior to discharge confirmed no aortic regurgitation or para-prosthetic leak.
Histopathology of the excised valve leaflets revealed fibrosis, myxoid degeneration, areas of calcification, and neo-vascularization . Unfortunately, no genetic testing was performed to establish the possible link between BAoV and KFS.
At 24 months post-operatively, the patient is well and without complications.