A 64-year old Chinese male was admitted to hospital for investigation of renal dysfunction. He was asymptomatic when his serum creatinine was found to be 143.9 μmol/L in routine medical examination 1 year ago. Subsequent laboratory testing showed marked hypergammaglobulinema along with slight hypocomplementemia (IgG 46.9 g/L, C3 0.59 g/L, C4 0.06 g/L). The patient complained loss of appetite for the recent 2 months before hospital admission. As a retired sewing worker and also a heavy smoker, he was diagnosed interstitial lung disease by CT for 6 years.
On admission, laboratory testing showed serum creatinine level was 196 μ mol/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 24 mm/h, the albumin level was 31.3 g/L in the presence of mild proteinuria (0.29 g/day) with small molecular weight proteins accounting for 62.1% of the total. There was a polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia (IgG1 16.6 g/L, reference 4.9–11.4 g/L; IgG2 4.58 g/L, reference 1.69–7.86 g/L; IgG3 2.4 g/L, reference 0.11–0.86 g/L; IgG4 34 g/L, reference 0.03–2.01 g/L) because M-protein was negative both in serum and urine. The level of complement C3 was obviously decreased to 0.405 g/L, C4 was 0.031 g/L. The antinuclear antibody was negative. Doppler ultrasonography and abdominal CT revealed enlarged kidneys. There was no evidence of masses in kidneys and other organs or signs of retroperitoneal fibrosis in CT image. 18F-FDG-PET/CT scan showed diffuse high uptakes in bilateral submaxillary glands (SUVmax 4.3), kidneys (SUVmax 4.6) and interlobular septa (SUVmax 5.1). There was extremely elevated uptake in a local region of the right kidney (28x42x50 mm, APxRLxSI), the SUVmax was 11.1 . No enlarged lymph node was detected by ultrasound and 18F-FDG-PET/CT.
The patient underwent routine ultrasonic guided right kidney biopsy. By light microscopy, there were 16 glomeruli in biopsied samples, 9 glomeruli were ischemic sclerosis. Pathological findings revealed a diffuse lymphoplasmacytic interstitial infiltrate that included lymphocytes, macrophages, plasma cells and eosinophils. The hallmark storiform fibrosis could be seen . Electron dense deposits were detected along tubular basement membrane (TBM) . IgG4 positive plasma cells count more than 10 cells per high power field. And the ratio of IgG4 to IgG positive cells was 50%. These findings conformed to a diagnosis of IgG4-related tubulointerstitial nephritis. In addition, the formation of ectopic germinal center-like structure was detected in focal interstitium, which was characterized by the clustering of T: B cells, with plasma cells scattered around the clustering area, similar as lymphofollicular-like structure . Russell body and a few “diamond” or “rectangle” crytals can be seen in some plasma cells . Notably, the immunofluorescence staining showed there was abundant deposition of immunoglobulin light chain (λ) in the interstitium compared with κ . Furthermore, there was also much more expression of immunoglobulin λ light chain in the plasmacytoid cells compared with κ by electron microscopy immuno-gold labelling . However, there was no evident monomorphic cell proliferation. Congo red staining was negative. Taken together, the high uptake disclosed in FDG-PET/CT image was consistent with the pathological findings indicating there were typical IgG4-RD and restricted de novo light chain expression.
The patient was mobilized for bone marrow biopsy, but unfortunately the patient refused at that time. He was finally diagnosed IgG4-RD, multiple organs involved of kidneys, bilateral submaxillary glands and interlobular septa. He was prescribed oral prednisolone at an initiated dose of 40 mg/day for 6 weeks then tapered. Symptoms relieved soon and serum creatinine declined gradually to 149 μmol/L at the 12-week after prednisolone initiation. With combination of oral cyclophosphamide (50 mg/day started from the 7th week for the following 20 weeks, the cumulative dose was 7 g), the IgG4 concentration was reduced to 1.27 g/L and maintained at 1.56 g/L with a daily dose of prednisolone 5 mg . Unfortunately, the patient developed a sudden enlargement of left cervical lymph nodes with fever 16 months after IgG4-RD diagnosis. Histopathological assessment of the biopsied cervical lymph node identified diffuse infiltration of abnormal large lymphoid cells that were positive for CD20 and MUM-1, but negative for CD3, CD5, CD10, BCL-6. CD38 was strongly positive in the cytoplasm of some neoplastic cells (about 40%). The Ki-67 index was 70%. In situ hybridization for Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNA (EBER-ISH) was negative. These findings conformed to a diagnosis of DLBCL, non-GCB subtype (Hans algorithm). Malignant cells stained positively for MYC (about 40%) and BCL2 (about 80%). However, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) suggested the absence of MYC, BCL2 and BCL-6 rearrangements. 18F-FDG-PET/CT showed remarkably high uptake of multiple lymph nodes in cervical, supraclavicular, submaxillary and peri-abdominal aorta areas. The SUVmax value was 15.1–22.3. However, The previous high uptakes of kidneys had completed disappeared. The patient received periodical chemotherapy of R-DA-EPOCH strategy. His serum creatinine fluctuated within a short time and eventually was stable at 125 μmol/L in a recent follow-up.