This 17-year old boy is the first child of cousin parents once removed. The second and third children, a boy and girl, died at 1 year and 5 days of age, respectively, of unrelated cause. He was admitted to us for the evaluation of his muscular weakness.
Pregnancy, delivery at term, and neonatal adaptation were uneventful; his weight was 3,000 grams but length and head circumference were not recorded. He developed hyperbilirubinemia during the first week after birth which required blood transfusion.
Severe hypotonia was noticed since birth and kyphoscoliosis developed during the first months of life. Because of muscular weakness he had to be bottle-fed with a large-holed teat.
Gross motor development milestones were delayed. He could stand without support at 2 years and started to walk at 2.5 years. He also had speech delay and could say his first words at the age of 20 months. He went to school for 5 years but did not continue because of his motor disabilities. Although intelligence has not been formally evaluated, based on his relative good performance at school we believe that there is no mental retardation. He had a history of rupture of the ocular globe at age 15 years after his father's elbow accidentally hit his face, and of multiple dislocations of both wrists and ankles. On physical examination at the age of 17, his height, weight and head circumference were 165 cm, 70 kg, and 55 cm, respectively. He had down-slanting palpebral fissures , microcornea (9 mm in diameter as opposed to 11–12.5 mm in controls), ptosis, prosthetic left eye, and slightly bluish sclera. The skin was soft, with multiple scars on knees due to poor healing, and with hyperkeratosis follicularis . He also had hypermobile joints; however, hyperelasticity of the skin was not prominent. Generalized hypotonia was noted and muscle strength was decreased. Muscle force was estimated to be 3–4 (had active movement against gravity and some movement against resistance); however, reflexes and muscle bulk were normal. Skeletal survey revealed osteopenia, kyphoscoliosis, and platyspondyly of L3 as well as distraction of the symphysis pubis and protrusio acetabuli , and downward slanting and thinning of the ribs (not shown). Bone mineral density (Norland XR-36) was normal in spine (0.991 mg/cm2) and hip (0.991 mg/cm2) but decreased in the femur (i.e., 0.810 mg/cm2 which is 1.2 SD below the age-matched reference).
Creatine phosphokinase, electromyogram, and nerve conduction velocity were normal.
Urine samples from the patient and parents were analyzed for urinary pyridinolines as reported. The ratio of urinary total pyridinolines, lysyl pyridinoline to hydroxylysyl pyridinoline, in the patient was 7.1 (controls: 0.20±0.03; EDS VI: 5.99±1.00) and slightly increased (0.25 and 0.23) in the father and the mother, respectively, as also observed in other obligate heterozygotes.
Electrophoretic mobility of the α- and β-collagen chains of the various collagen types produced by cultured fibroblasts, performed as reported, was faster than normal which indicated that the lysyl residues were not hydroxylated and that there were no galactosyl and glucosyl-galactosyl residues attached.
Mutation analysis, performed as described, on DNA of the patient showed a novel homozygous non-sense mutation in exon 12 of the PLOD1 gene at position 1302 of the cDNA sequence (c.1302 C>G) which leads to a premature stop at amino acid position 434 (p.Y434X; see also). The parents were both heterozygous for the same mutation.