A 50-year-old African-American woman presented with a 4-month history of pain, paresthesias, and mild weakness in her left upper extremity. Her past medical history was significant for hypertension and borderline diabetes mellitus. Her family history was positive for breast cancer (sister), prostate cancer (father), and ovarian cancer (two paternal aunts). The patient had a five-pack-year history of smoking cigarettes, but had stopped smoking 7 years prior to presentation. Her review of systems was negative for any hormonal imbalance. A neurological examination revealed hypesthesia and mild weakness in her left C8 spinal nerve distribution, as well as mild hyperreflexia and a Babinski’s sign in the left lower extremity. Preoperative laboratory tests (including complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, and coagulation studies) showed borderline anemia, hypokalemia, and hypoalbuminemia (all asymptomatic).
T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine (Figure , left) revealed an extradural mass behind the vertebral body of C7, eccentric to the left, indenting the spinal cord, and enhancing homogenously with contrast. T2-weighted MRI showed the hyperintense extradural mass of 2.7×1.8×1.6cm, expanding the left neural foramen at C7–T1 (Figure , right). A full metastatic work-up, including computed tomography (CT) imaging of her chest, abdomen, and pelvis, revealed no potential primary cancer. Surgical intervention was recommended to obtain tissue for diagnosis and decompress the neural elements.
Under general anesthesia, a standard anterior cervical approach exposed the C6 and C7 discs, along with the adjacent C5 and T1 vertebral bodies. A C6–7 and C7–T1 discectomy was followed by a C7 corpectomy, started slightly right of the midline and extended laterally to the left. The tumor was contiguous with the bone, but much softer, and it compressed the dura mater, but without any obvious invasion and with a clear separating plane. Frozen section pathologic analysis yielded a preliminary diagnosis of metastatic undifferentiated small cell carcinoma, with probable origin from the lung. A gross total resection of the tumor was performed. Due to the extensive and destabilizing bony removal necessary for tumor resection, a C6–T1 instrumented fixation was deemed necessary and performed in a standard fashion. The patient tolerated the procedure without complications.
Permanent tissue analysis of the specimen (hematoxylin and eosin) revealed sheet-like proliferation of neuroendocrine tumor cells in a trabecular pattern and no mitoses or necrosis (Figure ), suggesting the diagnosis of carcinoid tumor. Special immunohistochemical staining revealed strong positivity for synaptophysin and chromogranin (Figure ), which confirmed the diagnosis of carcinoid tumor.
Extensive postoperative work-up, including octreotide and technetium scintigraphy, as well as positron emission tomography scanning, failed to reveal any other carcinoid lesions elsewhere in the body. At the 6-year follow-up visit, the patient remains asymptomatic, with no evidence of local tumor recurrence (Figure ), nor any other site for carcinoid tumors.