A 9-year-old girl had been well until 2 months before admission when she noticed a small subcutaneous mass in the left temporal region. The mass thereafter rapidly became larger. A skull X-ray at the first hospital showed no bone defects or expansion; however, a skull X-ray with dynamic range compression modification showed a sunburst appearance on the left temporal bone . Computed tomography (CT) of the head also showed a sunburst appearance due to bony spicule formation in a soft mass that was attached to the surface of the left temporal bone, without osteolysis, bone expansion, or cortical destruction . She was referred to our hospital for further examinations and treatment. She was healthy, with no history of recent systemic symptoms or relevant medical history. A physical examination showed a firm, unmovable, mildly tender, and slightly elastic subcutaneous mass measuring 5 × 5 cm in size in the temporal region with apparently normal overlying skin. She had no cervical lymph node swelling. Her general, systemic, and neurological statuses were normal, as well as her blood examination results. F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (F-18 FDG PET/CT) detected a highly-labeled extracranial mass lesion on the nonlabeled temporal bone without metastasis . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a mass lesion between the temporal muscle and the lamina externa of the temporal bone without intracranial extension. The mass lesion exhibited isointensity on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) and was heterogeneously enhanced on the postcontrast T1WI [Figure –]. Postcontrast T1WI showed the enhancement of the outer and inner membranous structures that were connected to the pericranium [Figure , ; arrows and arrowheads]. For the radical removal of the tumor, the soft tumor was separated from the temporal muscle along an overlying thin membrane that appeared to be the pericranium and which likely corresponded to the outer membrane on postcontrast T1WI. The tumor was dissected from the surface of the temporal bone and removed with the deep layer of the temporal muscle. An intraoperative histological examination confirmed the margin to be negative. The outer surface of the temporal bone was slightly irregular, suggesting invasion of the tumor from the outside into the bone. The temporal bone was also resected with a margin of 1 cm. Bone replacement material was used to fill the bone defect, and then cranioplasty was performed with absorbable plates and screws. The histopathological findings were consistent with Ewing's sarcoma . The tumor was composed of small round cells that were strongly positive for CD99, focally positive for s-100, and negative for cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), desmin, myogenin, LCA, and TdT. The tumor was positive for EWS-FLI-1 translocation. The tumor was mainly an extracranial mass that was attached to the outer surface of the temporal bone with bone reaction on the surface, and with local invasion into the temporal bone [Figure –]. It infiltrated into some marrow cavities under very thin compact bone [Figure –]. Postoperative postcontrast T1WI showed no residual enhancement of the mass lesion. At 24 days after the operation, chemotherapy (vincristine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide alternating with ifosfamide and etoposide [VDC/IE]) was administered. Local radiation therapy was administered after the third cycle of chemotherapy. She completed her course of chemotherapy at 9 months after the operation and is currently in complete remission.