A 17-year-old male presented as an emergent transfer from an outside hospital after having sustained a single gunshot wound to the left chest. He was endotracheally intubated at the outside hospital, massive transfusion protocol was initiated, and a right sided thoracostomy tube was placed with drainage of 400 ml of blood. The patient was transported via air to our trauma center with an estimated transfer time of 30 min, during which he was transfused 8 units of packed red blood cells. Upon arrival, he had a Glascow Coma Scale of 3T, tachycardia at 160 bpm, and blood pressure was not detectable. Given the transmediastinal trajectory, the patient was not removed from the prehospital stretcher and a brief primary survey and roll was completed. A single wound was noted on his left chest, near the 3rd intercostal space left parasternal, and a cardiac focused assessment with sonography for trauma exam revealed a large pericardial effusion. Chest tube output was approximately 2000 ml. The patient was taken directly to the operating room by the trauma team.
A median sternotomy was performed, the pericardium was opened and large amounts of blood clots were evacuated. A bleeding site near the inferior cavo-atrial junction was identified, which was controlled by occluding the hole with a finger. This allowed for time to volume resuscitate and stabilize the patient hemodynamically. The site was repaired primarily with pledgeted sutures. The patient suffered ventricular fibrillation cardiac arrest that responded to cardiac massage, volume resuscitation, and defibrillation. The remainder of the heart was inspected and a bleeding site in the right ventricular outflow tract, previously tamponaded by the sternum, was identified and controlled with skin staples and reinforced with pledgeted sutures. Further visual inspection of the heart revealed no other myocardial injuries, the coronaries arteries were distant from the bullet trajectory and appeared intact [Fig. ].
The patient was now coagulopathic and had substantial ongoing bleeding from the right chest. Given the bullet trajectory and ongoing hemorrhage, a right thoracotomy was performed with evacuation of large amounts of blood. Bleeding sites were identified in the middle and lower lobes of the lung and were controlled with primary repair. Once bleeding was felt to be controlled and hemodynamics were acceptable, the patient was transferred with the chest packed open to the intensive care unit.
Transesophageal echocardiography was performed in the intensive care unit to identify injury to intracardiac structures. This revealed multiple mobile linear echodensities consistent with injury of the tricuspid valve apparatus including the papillary muscles and tricuspid chordae. Torrential tricuspid regurgitation and right ventricular dilatation with segmental akinetic areas of the outflow tract were identified. There was no evidence of intracardiac shunts. CXR and subsequently computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed the retained bullet in the right lower chest wall below the scapula. Coagulopathy improved and the patient underwent chest washout and closure the following day.
CT scan of his head revealed a right frontal hypodensity and patient’s neurologic status was still unclear. He had persistent high grade fever early on and was placed on antibiotics. Given his significant volume overload from the massive blood and fluid resuscitation, the decision was made to delay tricuspid valve surgery for several days while recovering from these ongoing clinical issues.
Hemodynamic agents, which included epinephrine, milrinone, and epoprostenol, were gradually weaned. Patient had non focal neurologic exam and was following simple commands, so the decision was made to proceed with extubation on postoperative day three, with the thought that he was tolerating the severe tricuspid regurgitation and that repair could be performed on a more semi-elective basis. He was subsequently re-intubated due to increased work of breathing the following day and CT Scan of the chest revealed acute segmental and subsegmental pulmonary emboli; these were felt to be related to his acute trauma and massive blood transfusions. His lower extremities were negative for deep vein thrombosis. Due to fever and positive sputum cultures, he was also treated for ventilator associated pneumonia.
On postoperative day 5, he developed a mild elevation of his transaminases (AST 251 U/l, ALT 114 U/l) and later that day elevation of his creatinine (1.45 mg/dl) and lactate (12.3 mmol/l). Transthoracic echocardiography confirmed again severe TR, moderately dilated right ventricle (RV) and diastolic flattening of the septum consistent with RV volume overload. Placement of a pulmonary artery catheter was attempted but was not possible due to the degree of regurgitation. With signs of cardiogenic shock, acute renal and hepatic failure, and a rising lactate, decision was made for for peripheral VA-ECMO cannulation.
Due to body habitus (BMI 35, with predominant lower body obesity) and evidence of small femoral vessels on ultrasound, the patient was taken to the operating room for open surgical cannulation. ECMO was instituted via an open left common femoral artery approach (17 Fr. cannula), including an antegrade limb perfusion catheter to the left superficial femoral artery (7 Fr. sheath), and percutaneous right femoral venous drainage (23/25 Fr. cannula). Postoperatively, his hemodynamics improved, while his ECMO support achieved flow of 4.3 L per minute (LPM) with FiO2 of 100% and sweep gas flow at 3 LPM. Since he had been initiated on inotropic support, low dose milrinone and low dose epinephrine were maintained and weaned slowly over the next few days. His transaminases peaked on the day following initiation of ECMO (ALT 2218 U/l, AST above assay > 4000). His hemodynamic parameters along with lactate, creatinine and transaminases continued to improve, however, his bilirubin continued to rise. After ensuring proper positioning of the venous drainage cannula and ruling out any ultrasound detectable pathology of the liver, the decision was made to proceed with surgical correction of his tricuspid valve. On the 4th day of ECMO support, he underwent tricuspid valve surgery. The anterior leaflet of the tricuspid valve was destroyed including multiple chordae up to the level of the papillary muscle. Tricuspid valve replacement with a 29 mm porcine St Jude Epic bioprosthetic valve, epicardial lead implantation and exchange of his ECMO circuit was performed. An intraoperative weaning trial of his ECMO revealed a low pulmonary artery pulsatility index (PAPI) score, and the decision was made to remain on ECMO support. He was able to be weaned off his ECMO support 3 days following his valve surgery. His RV function had fully recovered. He failed extubation and ultimately required tracheostomy for respiratory failure. He remained in the hospital until his tracheal decannulation and was discharged to rehabilitation 55 days following his initial injury.