A previously healthy 45-year-old woman was admitted with rapidly progressive pain in her left upper limb within one week, especially obvious swollen in the forearm. The pain was characterized as a dull ingravescence ache after onset despite conservative therapy. The deformity of left upper limb had strongly affected on her daily life. There was no history of trauma. Constitutional symptoms such as fever, anorexia, or weight loss were absent. Other skeletal examinations were normal.
On physical examination, multiple ill-defined swellings were palpated over the left upper limb. Some ecchymotic patches were distributed overlying the swelling. Range of motion of the left wrist was limited. No axillary lymph nodes were palpable. Laboratory investigations were normal apart from a mild elevation of the alkaline phosphatase.
Radiological examination revealed expansile cortical thickening and sclerosis were apparently presented along the humerus shaft . On computed tomography (CT), prominent periosteal reaction with intramedullary cortical destruction was correlated with the radiographic findings. Pathologic fractures were presented at the medial aspect of left humerus . Radiograph of forearm showed expansive cortical thickening and aggressive periosteal reaction along aspect of the ulna and radius. Extensive osteolytic destructions were involved in the elbow joint. The lytic lesion of proximal radius was surrounded by a thin rim of sclerotic bone. The intramedullary and subcortical radiolucent foci resembled “patchy osteoporosis” . Lamellar periosteal reaction was presented at the distal radius. The left carpal bone prominently showed multiple sharp margins of lytic lesions. The scaphoid, capitate and trapezium bones were involved. Soft tissue swellings over the abnormal bone were easily visible. . CT image demonstrated that aggressive periosteal reaction and multiple lytic lesions were presented at the proximal diaphysis of left ulna and radius. Cortical resorption and lytic destruction was obviously noted. ( & ). Because the lesion had an aggressive appearance on the plain radiographs and CT, a biopsy was performed to confirm the diagnosis. Histological examination of the specimen showed abundant intermediate-to-large ectatic vessels within a background of fibrous connective tissue intermixed with abnormal muscle fascicles. The marked proliferation of thin-walled capillaries was observed in the lesions . The dilated vessels were embedded in connective tissue and small capillary-like vessels were dispersedly distributed in the stroma . Pathologic examination revealed capillary hemangioma, and on the basis of the radiologic and clinical features, Gorham's disease was diagnosed. Massive resection and radiation therapy (total dose 3060 cGy) was planned. Two years after operation, there was no evidence of tumor recurrence.