A 29-year-old, Nigerian Igbo woman who had not pre-registered at a hospital and who was in her fourth pregnancy presented at the labor ward at a gestational age of 31 weeks with a two-hour history of spontaneous drainage of liquor and subsequent vaginal bleeding. She has had three consecutive deliveries of dead achondroplastic babies and had no living child. The vaginal bleeding was moderate, and there was no dizziness or fainting spells. There was no history of bleeding from other sites, abdominal pain, trauma, fever, dysuria, vaginal discharge, or chronic cough. She was not known to be hypertensive or diabetic. She had no history of surgery or radiation exposure. There was no family history of achondroplasia.
The index pregnancy was spontaneously conceived and was supported by her husband, who was a 34-year-old trader. She booked at a gestational age of 13 weeks in a private hospital and her booking parameters were said to be normal. There was no previous ultrasound examination, and the pregnancy had been uneventful until presentation. She was referred to the teaching hospital because of the spontaneous rupture of membranes (SROM) and vaginal bleeding.
Her first confinement was in 2005. She had SROM at a gestational age of 30 weeks and delivered a live achondroplastic female baby in a private hospital. However, the baby died a few minutes after delivery.
Her second confinement was in January 2008. She had ultrasound diagnoses of gross fetal abnormality and achondroplasia in a private hospital. The pregnancy was consequently terminated by using intra-vaginal misoprostol at a gestational age of 25 weeks.
The third confinement was in January 2009. She booked at the teaching hospital at a gestational age of 28 weeks. Her hemoglobin genotype is AA and her blood group is O Rhesus D-positive. The result of a veneral disease research laboratory test was non-reactive. The results of a test for human immunodeficiency virus I and II were negative. The results of fasting blood sugar and two-hour postprandial tests were normal. She received one course each of intermittent preventive therapy for malaria and tetanus toxoid at 28 weeks of gestation. An abdominal ultrasonography scan at 30 weeks revealed features of fetal achondroplasia and polyhydramnios. She had a premature rupture of membranes at 31 weeks of gestation. She had an intra-uterine fetal death while on conservative management and subsequently a spontaneous vertex delivery of a fresh stillborn boy that weighed 1.2kg. The following features were noted: short upper and lower limbs, a relatively large head circumference, a conjoined and patent anterior fontanelle, and a gangrenous intestine. An anatomical diagnosis of achondroplasia was made at autopsy.
A clinical examination revealed a woman who was in painful distress, afebrile, and anicteric but pale. There was no pedal edema. Her height was 1.68m and her body weight was 60kg. The height of her husband was 1.70m. Neither had any features of achondroplasia. Her abdomen was enlarged and moved with respiration. There was generalized tenderness in her abdomen. The symphysiofundal height was 28cm. The abdomen was hard, and the fetal parts were not easily discernible. The fetal heart rate was 160 beats per minute.
The urgent packed cell volume was 30%, and the results of urine analysis and clotting time were normal. The transabdominal ultrasound examination at the labor ward revealed oligohydramnios and a viable fetus with achondroplasia. The placenta was fundal with small retroplacental blood collection. A diagnosis of abruptio placentae grade 1 was made. Our patient and her husband were counseled on the diagnosis and options of delivery. They consented to delivery via Cesarean section.
The intra-operative findings included an achondroplastic live male baby who had Apgar scores of 4 at one minute and 5 at 10 minutes and who weighed 1.1kg. The baby had a relatively large head circumference, normal length of trunk, short limbs, and broad hands and feet (rhizomelic) as well as a protruding tongue, a large defect joining anterior and posterior fontanelles, hepatosplenomegaly, and low-set ears. However, the baby died 30 minutes after birth. The estimated blood loss was 400mL, excluding a retroplacental clot of about 100mL. Her post-operative recovery was satisfactory. A diagnosis of recurrent achondroplasia was made.