A 37-year-old female patient presented to the emergency department with a complaint of central chest pain since 7 days, with the pain radiating to her left shoulder. She also had a history of hemoptysis since 8 days, at a frequency of 10–15 episodes per day. Also, she had one episode of vomiting 2 days prior to presentation with streaks of blood in the vomitus. There was no associated diaphoresis, palpitation, dyspnea, syncope, melena, or fever. She had a history of severe pulmonary valvular stenosis which was treated with balloon valvular dilatation during her childhood. She was detected to have VWF deficiency when she developed a hematoma during the post-operative period. She was not on any regular follow-up or treatment for long periods and did not have any significant bleeding manifestations which warranted medical attention. Her last menstrual period was 16 days back. Examination revealed a heart rate of 71 beats per minute, all peripheral pulses felt, with a blood pressure of 200/130 mmHg, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and blood oxygen saturation of 99% in room air. She was pale on general examination. Auscultation of the heart revealed an ejection murmur in the left 2nd parasternal area. Her respiratory, abdominal, and neurological examinations were within normal limits. Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed ST-segment depression in leads I, aVL, II, III, aVF, and V4–V6 .
Her troponin I level was reported as 0.09ng/ml. Echocardiography revealed severe pulmonary stenosis and right ventricular hypertrophy with no regional wall motion abnormality and good left ventricular systolic function. The patient was transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit. VWF deficiency and presence of bleeding manifestations during the past 8 days was considered as a contraindication for starting the patient on unfractionated heparin and antiplatelet agents. Since echocardiography showed no regional wall motion abnormality and taking into consideration the previous history of complications during balloon valvular dilatation, PCI was withheld. She was started on nitroglycerine infusion, angiotensin II receptor blockers, and calcium channel blockers along with trimetazidine. Her chest pain and ECG changes settled after 2 days , and she was discharged in a stable condition.