A 69-year-old Caucasian woman presented with new ocular symptoms in her left eye, which started about ten weeks before attending our uveitis clinic in March 2023. She was symptomatic with new floaters and central flashing, and about four weeks later, she developed an enlarging scotoma and progressive vision loss. The patient was diagnosed with a COVID-19 infection via antibody testing four weeks before the current onset of ocular symptoms, along with fever, congestion, and cough. The patient had previously received the COVID-19 vaccination several months before contracting COVID-19 infection. Aside from asthma, hypothyroidism, and headaches, her past medical history and family history were unremarkable and negative for prior autoimmune disease.
A complete eye examination was performed with macular optical coherence tomography (OCT), fundus autofluorescence (FAF), and fluorescein angiography (FA) tests. ICG angiography was not done due to iodine allergy. The best corrected visual acuity was 20/30 in the right eye and 20/80 in the left eye. There was no relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD). The ocular exam exhibited PVD with moderate vitreous inflammation and a quiet anterior chamber in the left eye. No sign of intraocular inflammation was detected in the right eye. The other ocular exam findings included bilateral mild nuclear cataract, myopic refractive error with mild myopic retinal degeneration. FAF showed peripapillary and macular hyper-autofluorescent spots in the posterior pole . These spots co-localized to punctate hyperfluorescent areas on FA, arranged in a wreath-like pattern with nearly well-defined borders . OCT examination featured disruption of the ellipsoid zone (EZ) and hyper-reflective subretinal deposits in the affected left eye .
Serum testing was conducted to rule out other possible etiologies. Complete blood count (CBC) and complete metabolic panel (CMP) were normal. QuantiFERON-TB Gold (QFT), angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) test, lysozyme blood test, HLA-B29 serotyping, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), rapid plasma reagin (RPR) and fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption test (FTA-ABS) were all negative. C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) levels were slightly elevated compared to reference values.
We determined that the patient’s constellation of symptoms and characteristic imaging findings were consistent with MEWDS. The patient was prescribed a tapering course of oral steroids (Prednisone 40 mg daily for a week with a 10 mg weekly taper). At a 10-day follow-up from the presentation, the patient had no adverse events. The photopsia improved, and she had a visual acuity of 20/70 in the left eye. Hyperreflective subretinal deposits on OCT were reduced in size and number, and vitreous inflammation slightly improved. One month after the presentation, eye visual acuity improved to 20/50 and remained stable at the three-month follow-up visit. FAF and FA showed a significant improvement in peripapillary and macular autofluorescent spots and hyperfluorescent patterns, respectively . The ellipsoid zone was restored, and hyper-reflective deposits were resolved on OCT .