A 35-year-old woman, gravida 1, para 0, with end-stage kidney disease caused by IgA nephropathy was referred for kidney transplantation. Hemodialysis was initiated when she was 33 years old. She first became pregnant after starting hemodialysis and experienced spontaneous abortion at 5 months after initiation of hemodialysis. After experiencing spontaneous abortion, she received fertility treatments and tried in timed intercourse with fertility drugs. She decided to receive kidney transplantation in order to restore fertility. Embryo cryopreservation was performed considering her age before her first visit to our hospital, because she and her husband desired childbearing. She underwent an ABO-incompatible living-donor kidney transplant using rituximab from her 66-year-old father at the age of 36. Initial anti-A antibody titers were 1:128 (IgM) and 1:128 (IgG). Because she underwent two doses of rituximab infusion (150 mg/m2 on day 14 before and at transplantation) for B cell depletion and four courses of plasma exchange and double filtration plasmapheresis to remove antibodies, anti-A antibody titers were reduced to 1:8 (IgM) and 1:8 (IgG). She received maintenance immunosuppressive therapy including cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil and methylprednisolone after transplantation. The serum creatinine level increased from 1.3 to 1.6 mg/dl on the postoperative day 18. Two years after the transplant, because she had no rejection during the past year and had adequate and stable graft function with no acute infections as well as stable maintenance immunosuppression, she desired pregnancy. Although immunoglobulin levels such as IgG, IgA and IgM had recovered to almost normal range, the peripheral CD19+ cells and CD20+ cells remained depleted . At 6 months after conversion from mycophenolate mofetil to azathioprine, frozen embryo transfer was performed during the hormone replacement cycle.
During pregnancy, the serum creatinine level was 0.8–1.0 mg/dl, and blood pressure was 120–130/70–80 mmHg. Although the cyclosporine trough level decreased to approximately 50 ng/ml after the 10th week of pregnancy, the dose of cyclosporine was not adjusted, because pregnancy seems to be a state of immunological tolerance associated with immunosuppressant activity of lymphocytes which creates tolerance to fetus . The serum creatinine level elevated to 1.15 mg/dl at 36 weeks and 3 days gestation, and labor was induced at 37 weeks and 1 day gestation. At 37 weeks and 4 days gestation, a baby girl weighing 2220 g was delivered by cesarean section for arrest of labor, with Apgar scores of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. The baby exhibited no malformation and was healthy. Serum IgG and IgM levels in the maternal cord blood were 912 and 16 mg/dL, respectively. The serum creatinine level improved to approximately 0.8–1.0 mg/dl after childbirth without treatment. Her blood pressure was stable until delivery but elevated to approximately 160/100 mmHg 4 days after childbirth, and she required antihypertensives for two weeks. She did not breastfeed her baby. Depletion of the peripheral blood CD19+ cells and CD20+ B cells due to administration of rituximab continued during pregnancy . After pregnancy, anti-A antibody titers were 1:2 (IgM) and 1:2 (IgG). There were no complications in both the recipient and her baby during the perinatal period. At 5 years after the transplant, the recipient has had no major complications including rejection or infection, while the peripheral blood CD19+ cells and CD20+ B cells remain depleted due to administration of rituximab, and she is in good clinical condition with only mild renal insufficiency (serum creatinine 1.47 mg/dL) . She said that she was completely happy with childbirth after kidney transplantation and is satisfied with childcare.