In August 2010, a 57-year-old Chinese male presented with epistaxis and decreased hearing for 1 month. No additional symptoms, such as a neck mass, nasal obstruction, headache, diplopia or other cranial nerve palsies, were noted. The patient had no history of previous or synchronous tumours or any family history of cancer. Nasopharyngoscopy revealed a large exophytic tumour that was covered by smooth mucosa, which grew from the right posterolateral nasopharyngeal wall in the right posterior naris. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of the nasopharynx and neck using gadolinium enhancement demonstrated a 2.0 × 1.5 × 2.0 cm well enhanced mass over the right posterior nasopharynx with right retropharyngeal node enlargement. The tumour extended across the right parapharyngeal space and infiltrated into the medial pterygoid muscle. In addition, skull base erosion was detected with right alar lamina involvement . Cervical lymph node metastasis was not observed. Hematologic, hepatic and renal function tests revealed no abnormalities. The patients underwent chest and abdomen computed tomography (CT) as well as a bone scintigram, and no distant metastasis was found. A biopsy of the nasopharynx was performed.
In the biopsy specimen, normal salivary tissue was not present. The tumours were ill demarcated without encapsulation. Tumour cells were arranged in nests and nodules. Two morphologic patterns of the tumour cells were observed. Some small round cells exhibited dark nuclei and scant cytoplasm. Other large cells contained round to oval pale nuclei and eosinophilic to amphophilic cytoplasm. In the central region of the tumour cell nests, large cells displayed a solid growth pattern. Small dark cells were clustered at the periphery of the tumour cell nests and appeared palisaded. Prominent nucleoli and mitosis can be observed, and an average of three mitotic figures were observed per 10 high-power fields (original magnification × 400).
In the immunohistochemical analysis, the tumour cells were immunoreactive with P63, vimentin, and cytokeratin (CK7 and CK14) antibodies and focally immunoreactive with a calponin antibody. This case of BCAC was not positive for smooth muscle actin or CD117. The proliferative index as demonstrated by Ki-67 was approximately 10%. Based on the immunohistochemistry results and the pathological findings, which included tumour islands with solid proliferation, basaloid-like cells containing large pale and small dark cells, an infiltrative margin, cellular and nuclear pleomorphism, and prominent mitosis, the patient was diagnosed with a solid-type minor salivary gland BCAC .
Based on the 2002 American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Tumor, Node, Metastasis (TNM) staging system , the tumour was classified as stage III (T3N0M0).
In our case, the patient received intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) with 6 MV X-rays. The delineation of the gross tumour volume (GTV) was based on the primary tumour volume determined from the physical and imaging examinations. The clinical target volume (CTV) was defined as the whole nasopharyngeal cavity, the clivus, the skull base, the pterygoid plates, the parapharyngeal space, the sphenoid sinus, the posterior one-third of the nasal cavity, the maxillary sinus, and the drainage of the upper neck (levels II, III, and Va. A total dose of 70.4 Gy/32 F/6.2 W was administered based on the planning target volume (PTVg) (GTV with 0.5 cm margin). The PTV60 was defined as 60 Gy/30 F (CTV with 0.5 cm margin) . After radiotherapy, MRI and nasopharyngoscopy revealed complete disappearance of the tumour . The patient was followed up every 3 months for the first 2 years, every 6 months for another 3 years, and then every 12 months. A follow-up at 72 months did not detect any evidence of disease recurrence. The patient developed moderate mucositis as an acute adverse event. However, he did not exhibit any grade 3/4 late adverse events, such as xerostomia, dysgeusia, or hearing impairment.