A 49-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with a history of frequent and urgent urination for 45 the past 2 weeks. He did not have abdominal pain, fever, dysuria, or hematuria. His medical history was unremarkable except for hypertension. Physical examination revealed distention of the lower abdomen. A large, painless, immobile, and hard mass was palpable, having an estimated diameter of 17 cm. Laboratory testing revealed the following: C-reactive protein, 61.50 mg/L (normal range, 0–8 mg/L); white blood cell count, 14.94 × 109/L (normal range, 3.5–9.5 × 109/L); neutrophilic granulocytes, 80.8% (normal range, 40%–75%); hemoglobin, 101 g/L (normal range, 130–175 g/L); procalcitonin, 0.25 ng/ml (normal range, 0–0.05 ng/ml); interleukin-6, 43.49 pg/ml (normal range, 0–10 pg/ml); prothrombin time, 14.3 s (normal range, 9–13 s) and D-dimer, 1.60 ug/ml (normal range, 0–0.55 ug/ml). Routine urine tests, liver function tests, and tumor markers (AFP, CEA, CA 19-9) were all within the normal ranges. Ultrasonography revealed a large cystic mass, measuring approximately 17 cm in diameter, in the lower abdomen in front of the abdominal aorta and iliac vessels. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed an abdominal cystic tumor with an unevenly thickened wall and mural nodules; air-fluid levels were not observed within the tumor. Enhancement was noted in the cyst wall and mural nodules during the arterial phase . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a large cystic tumor with an internal fluid signal . The nature and origin of the tumor could not be diagnosed preoperatively; therefore, a diagnostic laparotomy was performed through a midline abdominal incision. The procedure revealed a large cystic tumor arising from the distal ileum invading the sigmoid mesocolon and apex vesicae. Partial resection of the ileum along with the tumor and adjacent bladder was performed. The tumor was sent for frozen sectioning, revealing proliferated spindle-shaped tumor cells . Anastomosis of the ileal was then performed using staples, side-to-side, without tumor rupture. Macroscopic examination revealed that the excised cystic mass measured 17 cm in the largest dimension and contained a large amount of foul-smelling pus.
Further examination revealed that the tumor communicated with the intestinal lumen via a mucosal fistula . The pus culture test result was positive for Salmonella enteritidis. Immunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor cells were positive for c-kit, DOG-1, CD34, and vimentin but negative for S-100 . The Ki-67 index was approximately 6%. Mitotic count was less than 5/50 high-power fields. The resection margins were negative, and there was no lymph node metastasis. Gene analyses revealed the presence of a c-kit exon 11 mutations. The final diagnosis was high-risk GIST originating from the ileum. Postoperative recovery was uneventful, and there were no postoperative complications. The urine tube was removed 1 week after surgery, and the patient was discharged on the 13th postoperative day. Adjuvant imatinib mesylate (400 mg daily for 3 years) was administered. The patient did well during the 9-month follow-up visit without tumor recurrence or metastasis.