An 81-year-old male presented to our outpatient department with a history of falls at home and was unable to walk for 2 months. On clinical examination, there was tenderness over the right hip and proximal femur. The right limb shortening of 5 cm and external rotation deformity were present. Radiographs showed a central fracture-dislocation of the right hip associated with ipsilateral femoral neck fracture . CT examination revealed a comminuted transverse acetabular fracture with a central migration of the femoral head fragment into the pelvic cavity . There was no associated neurovascular injury.
The patient had a known case of parkinsonism and was on oral tablets levodopa, carbidopa, and pramipexole for the treatment.
As a definitive treatment, we planned to do femoral head autograft and THA with DM prosthesis.
The hip joint was exposed by a posterior approach. The femoral head was migrated medially and embedded in the acetabular fracture. It was engaged with a corkscrew and found to be mobile inside the acetabular cavity and was extracted out with the assistance of blunt Hohman retractors without damaging the acetabular wall. On palpating the inner wall, the acetabulum showed a contained defect without any obvious breach into the pelvic cavity.
We used the morselized cancellous bone from the femoral head to do impaction bone grafting over the acetabular defect. Additional reverse reaming was done over the impacted bone graft. A 54-mm cementless hydroxyapatite-coated cluster acetabular shell (Modular DM Trident PSL, Stryker, USA) was used to achieve a perfect fit. A high offset 37.5 mm size 1 cemented stem was used for the femur (Exeter, Stryker, USA) with a 28 mm metal head articulating with a highly cross-linked polyethylene DM liner of 46 mm. The wound was closed in layers without a drain.
The patient was mobilized full weight bearing with the support of a walker on the 2nd post-operative day. There was no limb length discrepancy. He was able to do active straight leg raising and abduction against gravity by the 3rd week. At the end of 3 months, the patient was walking unaided with a stable and pain-free hip. At the 1-year follow-up, the functional Harris hip score was 87. Radiographs revealed a well-healed acetabular fracture with the incorporation of a bone graft. No signs of loosening were observed . We did not encounter any complications such as dislocation, infection, and heterotrophic ossification.