The decedent was a four-month-old African female infant who presented with a five day history of fever, lethargy and refusal to feed. She was in a poor general condition, had peri-orbital oedema, cold extremities, restless with reduction in the level of consciousness. A blood gas analysis performed at admission revealed metabolic acidosis, while laboratory analysis of renal function test and liver function test revealed reduction in glomerular filtration rates and hyper-bilirubinemia respectively. She received broad spectrum antibacterial treatment and supportive care. Her condition worsened and died on the sixth day. On enquiry of the family history, it was revealed that the deceased two older siblings died of similar circumstances aged three and five months respectively. The autopsy was carried out on request from the family.
Autopsy was performed four days after death. The decedent was a well-developed infant whose appearance was consistent with the stated age of four months. On internal examination, the thymus was not grossly identified. There were frontal brain abscess with dark necrotic centres . The lungs showed evidence of bronchopneumonia. Microbiological culture in specimens obtained by aseptic techniques resulted in the isolation of multidrug resistant Escherichia coli in blood, cerebrospinal fluid and jejunal contents; Serratia spp in jejunal and blood cultures; Proteus spp and Klebsiella spp in cultures of jejunal contents, blood and splenic tissue. Histology of the lung showed diffuse alveolar damage, brain histology showed evidence of meningoencephalitis and mycotic abscess organisms consistent with Mucor or Aspergillus spp while liver histology showed clear cytoplasmic inclusions.Immunohistochemistry, CD 20 and CD3, was performed on splenic tissue to evaluate the distribution of lymphocytes within the white and red pulp. This showed B lymphocytes distributed within the peri-arteriolar lymphatic sheath . When compared to control splenic tissue from an age matched infant without immunodeficiency confirmed a marked reduction in T lymphocytes .