A 16 year-old female with a six-months history of dry cough and dyspnea was previously treated elsewhere with suspicion of infection, gastroesophageal reflux disease, asthma and allergy without improvement after several treatments. On arrival to our centre, these causes were sought and thoroughly discarded. The past medical history and physical examination were unremarkable.
A fibronasolaryngoscopy showed arythenoidal and vocal cord edema (ventricular bands) with incomplete left vocal cord abduction. Diagnostic investigation for vocal cord paralysis included a head, neck and chest CT scan, excluding lymphadenopathy, malignancy or aneurysms. Flexible bronchoscopy did not show any lesions suspicious of neoplastic or granulomatous origin. There was no clinical evidence of degenerative neural disorders. The patient had no history of thoracic surgery, previous endotracheal intubation or cervical traumatisms. As airway disease is a well-described feature of GPA, ANCA by both methods (indirect immunofluorescence and antigen-specific ELISA, both by Euroimmun AG, Lübeck, Germany) were performed, with the following results: P-ANCA 1:20, MPO-ANCA 128 U/mL (normal <20), negative PR3-ANCA. Other relevant laboratory tests included serum creatinine (S-Cr) 0.73 mg/dL (64.5 μmol/L), C-reactive protein (C-RP) 1.22 mg/dL (normal <0.8), and haemoglobin (Hb) 12.7 g/dL. After careful search of potential conditions that could have explained her main symptoms, and in the absence of systemic involvement, the patient was labeled as having an "MPO-ANCA positive isolated vocal cord paralysis" and was sent to vocal rehabilitation with regular follow-up. Five months later, she presented with one-week history of vomit and distal legs edema; she was pale, with normal blood pressure, S-Cr 10.6 mg/dL (937 μmol/L), C-RP 5.88 mg/dL, Hb 9.7 g/dL. Urine sediment showed countless dysmorphic erythrocytes and granular casts. With the suspicion of acute kidney involvement associated with her MPO-ANCA positive status, treatment was started with 1 g methylprednisolone pulses, IV-cyclophosphamide (IV-CYC) (400 mg), hemodialysis and plasmapheresis, the latter stopped after 5 exchanges when renal biopsy showed pauciimmune necrotizing glomerulonephritis with global sclerosis in 90% of glomerulii. IV-CYC was continued monthly until complete remission (6x 400 mg pulses). Glucocorticoids were tapered until withdrawal and she remained in remission with azathioprine 50 mg qd and hemodialysis 3 times/week. Three years after the onset of renal failure, she received a renal graft (cadaveric donor) with optimal results. She is currently asymptomatic; S-Cr is 0.88 mg/dL (77.8 μmol/L), with normal urinalysis, blood cell count and acute phase reactants. She takes tacrolimus 3 mg bid, mycophenolate mofetil 500 mg tid and prednisone 5 mg qd. She improved after vocal rehabilitation and immunosuppressive treatment, with mild vocal cord paralysis as sequelae. The absence of granulomatous inflammation or other surrogate markers of GPA in addition to the presence of MPO-ANCA led us to establish MPA as the final diagnosis in this case.