In February 2003, a 61-year-old white female with a history of partial gastrectomy due to a peptic ulcer, and mastectomy due to breast cancer twenty years before, presented with an indolent erythematous mass on her left hard palate and attached gingiva. Her dentist had originally diagnosed periodontal disease, and she was unsuccessfully treated with antibiotics and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; she subsequently also underwent otolaryngological and radiological examinations of the mouth, but both were negative.
In September 2003, a hard palate biopsy led to a histopathological diagnosis of a chorion metastasis from a breast adenocarcinoma, but the results of subsequent mammography, abdominal ultrasound, chest X-ray and neoplastic marker analyses did not reveal any evidence of a tumour. One month later, a second hard palate biopsy revealed an undifferentiated carcinoma with a focal microglandular and diffuse signet-ring cell growth infiltrating the subepithelial chorion mucosa consistent with a gastric origin . Although the patient was asymptomatic, gastroscopy showed an ulcerated lesion of the greater curvature of the stomach, and histopathogy revealed an undifferentiated gastric carcinoma with signet-ring cells .
She was admitted to our Institution in October 2003, when a physical examination revealed left supraclavicular adenopathy, left exophthalmus, and a firm and painless erythematous mass of nearly 4 cm on her left hard palate, with no evidence of bleeding at palpation . She was negative for neoplastic markers, and denied any weight loss or gastrointestinal symptoms during the previous weeks. The results of chest and abdominal CT scans were negative, but magnetic resonance imaging of the maxilla revealed an enhanced 2.7 × 2.3 cm lesion on the left hard palate, with thickening of the genal mucosa and no bone involvement .
A review of the slides of both the oral and gastric lesions confirmed the diagnosis of a mucosal metastasis from a gastric carcinoma, and so the patient underwent five courses of chemotherapy for six months, followed by concomitant 30 Gy radiotherapy of the oral cavity. Because the oral lesion was clinically stable after radiotherapy and was the only sign of distant neoplastic disease, the patient underwent laparotomy with total gastrectomy and regional lymphadenectomy in April 2004. No other macroscopic localizations were found in the abdominal cavity. This curative decision was taken in an attempt to improve the prognosis with the aim of subsequently extirpating the only oral metastasis.
Histopathological examination of the resected specimens revealed a mixed undifferentiated signet-ring cell and microglandular carcinoma infiltrating the gastric wall, with metastases in all of the visceral lymph nodes, and moderate vascular invasion by neoplastic cells. The resected margins were tumour free.
Unfortunately, the patient's condition deteriorated rapidly and she died of heart failure a few days later.
The post-mortem examination demonstrated residual bilateral ovarian infiltration by an undifferentiated signet-ring cell carcinoma (Krukenberg's tumour), with no other abdominal or thoracic localizations.