A 62-year-old man with no medical history and a BMI of 28.3 underwent a UKA procedure for medial compartment osteoarthritis in 2018 at Queens Hospital Burton, UK. The procedure was performed to the plan, and the recovery period afterward was favorable. The postoperative radiograph showed proper alignment of the prothesis. Two years after the surgery, he experienced increased right knee soreness, stiffness, gait instability, and edema. At this time, a new radiograph was requested which has revealed a fracture of the femoral component . A complete blood count and arthrocentesis of the left knee were recommended to rule out infection, and it determined that the aspirate cultures were negative. Based on that, the case was discussed with multiple knee surgeons and the plan was decided to carry on with revision TKA. By expert knee surgeon and through the patient’s previous scar, a conventional medial parapatellar approach was performed. Fluid and synovium were sent for analysis by microbiology, culture, and histology. Components of the UKA were removed and sent for analysis to determine the cause of the failure, no issue had been found by the company. Revision has been done without any problems intraoperatively. A Zimmer Biomet prosthesis, NexGen type has been used for the revision surgery with a femoral component size G, Tibial component size 8, articular surface size 10 mm. The intraoperative stability was checked, with a range of motion of 0–100°, equal flexion and extension gap have been achieved. Post-operative X-rays revealed a proper alignment and cementation of the prothesis. On the 2nd day after surgery, the patient was discharged from the hospital without any acute complications. 2 weeks after the surgery, he was followed up in the clinic for wound check and clips removal, another assessment in 6-week time has been done. At 1-year follow-up, a new X-ray and clinical examination were satisfactory as the patient was able to flex the knee more than 100° from full extension, able to walk without any walking aids, and has not reported any pain at that time .