A 73-year-old man presented to the Department of Urology in our hospital with a chief complaint of nocturia. His past medical history was unremarkable. Pelvic computed tomography (CT) showed a large prostatic mass invading the rectum and bladder. The serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level was elevated to 14.37 ng/ml (normal range, 0.0-4.0 ng/ml). Prostate biopsy led to a diagnosis of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. In November 2008, the patient was started on maximum androgen blockade. The serum PSA level markedly declined, and has remained within the normal range since December 2008. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging showed that the prostate decreased in size, but the mass invading the rectum tended to enlarge . In April 2009, he underwent pelvic evisceration for the prostate cancer . Histopathological examination revealed a poorly differentiated Gleason 4/5 adenocarcinoma in the prostate and an undifferentiated sarcomatoid carcinoma consisting of fascicularly arranged spindle cells in the area of posterior invasion . This undifferentiated carcinoma component contained many multinucleated giant cells. Immunohistochemically, the undifferentiated carcinoma was positive for cytokeratin AE1/3, and negative for cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20, vimentin, and PSA . During outpatient follow-up, the PSA level remained within the normal range, but 3 months after the pelvic evisceration, chest CT revealed a small nodular shadow in S3b of the right lung . At the mediastinal window setting, the lung tumor showed a density similar to that of large vessels . Despite the resumption of maximum androgen blockade, the tumor tended to enlarge. Positron emission tomography revealed an abnormal fluorodeoxy glucose uptake (SUVmax = 25.0) in the small nodular shadow, and no abnormalities elsewhere in the body. He was referred to our department for further evaluation and treatment. He was otherwise in good health. Blood chemistry data were unremarkable, and the tumor markers SCC, CEA, SLX, NSE, and PSA were all within normal limits.
Bronchoscopy was nondiagnostic, and thoracoscopic wedge resection of the lung was performed in December 2009 . Pleural disease was not observed during thoracoscopy. The lung tumor, with a surface covered with the pleura, protruded into the pleural cavity in a polypoid fashion . Histopathological examination revealed a histological appearance similar to that of the pre-existing undifferentiated sarcomatoid carcinoma, leading to a diagnosis of pulmonary metastasis from the prostate cancer . Many multinucleated giant cells were also observed. As revealed by strong contrast enhancement on a preoperative CT scan, the tumor was histologically rich in microvessels. Immunohistochemically, it was positive for cytokeratin AE1/3, and negative for cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20, vimentin, and PSA .
His postoperative course was uneventful, and postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin, ifosfamide, and adriamycin was administered. At present, 10 months after lung surgery, he is free from recurrence.