A 56-year-old gentleman, was referred to Cardiology Outpatient Clinic at Shiraz Central Hospital with dyspnea on exertion since 3 months earlier, which became worse over the time. His parents had no consanguineous marriage; moreover, he had neither history of underlying disease nor major modifiable cardiovascular risk factors in him as well as his first relatives. On the physical examination, signs of left sided herat failure was detected.
On electrocardiogram, he had sinus tachycardia, low voltage QRS complex, and poor R progression in the precordial leads. TTE (two- and three-dimensional) showed left ventricular non-compaction in the presence of severe global hypokinesia. The left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), calculated by Simpson’s method, was 16%, myocardial non-compaction/compaction ratio (NC/C) = 2.2, a diameter of compacted myocardium in the apicolateral and apical segments was 10 mm, in addition to the presence of a PFO. All valves, including the aortic valve, were competent . Dilated proximal ascending aorta was up to 4.9 cm, and effacement was noted as well, confirmed by TEE . The patient refused to perform CMR, because of claustrophobia. The results of whole-exome sequencing (WES) showed three heterozygous mutations in the DSP (e.3857_3859del:p.1286_1287del.), TTN (c.C80492T:p.P26831L), and DSC2 (c.A1886G:p.N629S). These identified mutations were not reported so far and classified as a variants of uncertain significance (VUS).
The patient received carvedilol 6.25 mg twice a day, spironolactone 25 mg once a day, furosemide 60 mg once daily, warfarin 5 and 2.5 mg every other day. At first and in the first month, because he refused to be hospitalized, the patient had outpatient follow-up once per week, and then once per month. After 3 weeks and partial recovery, the patient underwent computed tomographic coronary angiography (CCTA), which showed patent epicardial coronary arteries. Then, implantation of a cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) was performed. Six-month follow-up TTE as well as TEE showed a fast growing aortic root aneurysm that reached to 5.8 cm, although the patient was receiving beta-blockers and had no clinical symptoms. The baseline and follow-up TEE results are compared in Fig. . The patient was scheduled for cardiac surgery, and according to the request of the cardiac surgeon, we did coronary angiography, LV, and aortic root cineangiography, which the results showed patent epicardial coronaries, dilated LV with remarkable recesses, dilated aortic root (6.25 cm), and competent tricuspid aortic valve . Pre-operative TEE showed no evidence of a dissecting aneurysm.
So, the patient underwent valve-sparing aortic root replacement surgery (David procedure), and the ascending aortic aneurysm was seen with a diameter of about 6.5 cm. After resection of the ascending aorta, valve-sparing aortic root replacement with gel cell Dacron graft number 28 was done. Finally, PFO was closed directly, and cardiopulmonary bypass was weaned off with inotrope. The perioperative and postoperative trans-esophageal echocardiography showed normal functioning native aortic valve with neither aortic insufficiency nor stenosis.
The gross appearance of the excised aortic aneurysm specimen showed uniform fusiform dilation of the aortic wall. Light microscopic findings of reticulum stained aortic wall of aneurysmal part of the excised aortic root, demonstrating a luminal formation within tunica media with patchy fragmentation, splitting, and destruction of reticulum fibers in the tunica media, without fibrosis or inflammatory cells that approved dissecting aortic aneurysm .
Microscopic appearance of normal aortic wall is showing for comparison .
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged 4 days after the surgery. During his admission, he appeared to be a quite pleasant and cooperative patient who established a friendly patient-physician relationship. Post-operative follow-up arranged as 1 month later and then every 3 months over the following year. At the follow-up visits, the patient had no clinical symptoms related to heart failure. Also, the result of follow-up transthoracic echocardiographies were acceptable. The previous medications were prescribed, and the dose of furosemide was changed to 40 mg daily.