A 72-year-old white female patient presents to an otolaryngology clinic complaining of intermittent throat pain for the past month.
Symptoms of throat pain persisted for a month with no response to antibiotics, antihistamines, or acid reflux medications. Alongside the throat pain, she was experiencing left, lateral, posterior headaches and intermittent episodes of vertigo.
Patient with no history of smoking or alcohol presented with a mildly elevated absolute lymphocyte count (ALC) of 4336 in February 2020. She denied systemic symptoms of fevers, night sweats, or unintentional weight loss.
The patient reported only a paternal history of prostate cancer and denied melanoma, skin and squamous cell carcinomas in her family.
No masses were appreciated on palpation of her neck, flexible laryngoscopy, nor esophageal endoscopy.
Mildly elevated ALC of 4336 in February 2020. A CBC in 2021 demonstrated an increase in lymphocyte count with an ALC of 5645. Given this increase in lymphocytosis, the patient was referred to a hematologist to be worked up for follicular lymphoma.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest abdomen pelvis with contrast was performed, which incidentally showed a single para mediastinal 2.8 cm mass in the upper left lung lobe and questionable soft tissue thickening in her left anterolateral neck. Flow cytometry of her peripheral blood revealed an abnormal CD10 positive B-cell population, co-expressing CD20, CD19, and CD45 with low CD23 present, which is consistent with a follicular lymphoma. A CT neck with contrast, followed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the neck with and without contrast were ordered to further evaluate the neck tissue. The CT and MRI of the neck confirmed a focal soft tissue lesion with residual calcifications measuring 1.4 cm × 1.9 cm × 1.7 cm centered on the left limb of the hyoid bone . MRI of the neck also revealed a suspicious thyroid nodule which required an ultrasound to be further evaluated.
Due to the improbability of follicular lymphoma in the anterior mediastinum without associated lymphadenopathy, a lung biopsy was recommended. A CT-guided biopsy of the mass in the upper left lung lobe mass identified it as invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma. Figure displays the biomarkers tested for the diagnosis. Positron emission tomography (PET)/CT revealed both the ipsilateral hilar node lesion and the hyoid bone lesion exhibited significantly higher metabolic activity compared to the primary lung cancer . Ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy of the left hyoid mass and the right thyroid nodule resulted in a diagnosis of metastatic mucinous adenocarcinoma and papillary thyroid carcinoma respectively. Correlation of the biopsy with PET/CT confirmed that the hyoid bone tumor had metastasized from the primary lung adenocarcinoma.