A 23-year-old man visited the emergency department with a 3-day history of diffuse abdominal pain. The patient complained of aggravated squeezing epigastric pain every 3 min. Furthermore, he suffered from constipation, nausea, and vomiting for the past 2 days. The patient had no history of fever, hematochezia, and weight loss and had an unremarkable drug, family, or surgical history.
On physical examination, vital signs, including blood pressure, heart rate, body temperature, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation at room air, were normal. Moderate abdominal distention with mild tenderness was noted without signs of peritonitis. The patient did not exhibit guarding or rebound tenderness. An erect abdominal X-ray showed a stepladder sign, suggesting mechanical obstruction. Laboratory examination results, including blood chemistry, routine blood tests, and tumor markers, were normal.
The patient was first admitted to the internal medicine division of gastroenterology. A nasogastric tube was then immediately inserted for gastrointestinal decompression, through which more than 500 mL of a greenish, foul-smelling fluid was drained per day. Two days later, abdominal computed tomography (CT) confirmed the presence of intussusception in the left lower quadrant . No mass-like lesion or lead point could be clearly detected on the CT scan. He was transferred to the general surgery department and offered laparoscopic surgery for the purpose of small bowel reduction and segmental resection. A 12-mm port for the 3-dimensional scope was inserted into the umbilical site, while two 5-mm ports were inserted into the right upper abdomen. Precise laparoscopic examination was performed, through which an intussuscepted segment of the jejunum 120 cm from the ligament of Treitz was detected (A). The rest of the abdominal viscera were normal. After performing laparoscopic bowel reduction, a mass-like lesion was identified (B). Wide excision of the jejunum and side-to-side anastomosis were performed through laparoscopic technique using a linear stapler. The patient was then transferred to the general ward after surgery and tolerated the procedure well. He was discharged on the fifth postoperative day without immediate complications. A follow-up appointment after discharge revealed that the patient was in good condition without any symptoms.
Macroscopic findings of the resected specimen revealed two intraluminal polyps measuring 5 × 3 × 3 cm and 2.5 × 2.3 × 1.2 cm that originated from the same location. The larger one had a pedunculated stalk, whereas the small one had a sessile stalk . Cross section of the two polyps revealed a grayish white, solid, homogeneous, and slightly glistening cut surface. The remaining intestinal mucosa was grossly unremarkable albeit edematous. Microscopic examination of the mass revealed a CD34-positive (A) submucosal lesion showing a mixture of spindle cells, inflammatory cells, and prominent capillaries, which was subsequently determined to be IFP (B). Immunohistochemical results revealed CD117 (−), bcl-2 (−), desmin (−), SMA (−), S-100 (−), and a Ki-67 positivity rate of 1%–5%.