A 4-year-old boy being speculated as having DMD was investigated in this study. The patient is the first child of healthy parents, and there was no heredity and medical history within his family. The patient's parents were eager to understand the underlying genetic factors behind the patient's symptoms and be assisted in future pregnancy to prevent the recurrence of the same mutation in the new offspring by PGD. The patient complained of reeling gait, delay in motor development, Gowers' sign on rising from floor, and having difficulties climbing stairs, which are suggestive of DMD clinical phenotypes (, ).
Upon general physical examination, fatigue, muscle weakness, and calf pseudohypertrophy were observed in the patient . An electromyograph showed that the fasciculation potential could be seen at the resting state and appeared as a pathological interference phase when the medial femoris muscle contracted vigorously; low amplitude coupled with short-duration motor unit potentials (MUPs) was also found in the medial head of the gastrocnemius and the medial femoris muscle. The patient's nerve conduction velocity was found to be normal. These findings reflect myogenic injury in the patient. Interestingly, muscle power assessment, as determined by the Medical Research Council's scale (MRC scale) of muscle power, showed a slight reduction in muscle tone.
To confirm the clinical suspect of DMD, laboratory examination was performed on blood samples, and the results are presented in . The patient's serum CK levels were significantly elevated to 11,614.7 U/L, which is 68 times the normal range. Other indicators, including creatine kinase MB (CK-MB), alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels, were increased as well. The patient's family members had no abnormalities in biochemical analyses. Along with damage to muscle fibers, CK levels can also reflect myocardial damage. Moreover, cardiomyopathy is also observed in DMD patients and poses a severe threat to their life . Electrocardiograms and echocardiographs were performed on the patient, but no abnormalities were detected. Furthermore, after informed consent was obtained from the patient's parents, a gastrocnemius muscle biopsy was performed, which revealed that dystrophin protein production was severely reduced. The combined clinical presentation, physical examination, laboratory evidence, and imaging findings provide a diagnosis of DMD for this 4-year-old boy.
Molecular diagnosis is a precise approach to discover the genetic factors causing DMD and is helpful for family counseling and future gene therapy for DMD . We recommended to the patient's parents the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis, the most reliable test for diagnosing DMD, and WES. Considering WES identifies a broader range and types of variants compared to MLPA, the patient's parents opted for WES. Thus, WES was carried out on the patient, and a hemizygous splicing mutation [NC_000023.11(NM_004006.3): c.5912_5922 + 19delinsATGTATG] of X-linked DMD was identified. This mutation was confirmed to be not previously annotated by searching common databases, such as the ExAC Browser, gnomAD, or the 1,000 genome Project. To further confirm the putative contribution of this mutation to the patient's presentation, Sanger sequencing was performed on the patient and his healthy family members. The results verified that the hemizygous mutation was inherited from his mother, which was passed on from his grandmother, while his father and grandfather did not carry this mutation (,).
To further understand the effect of the splicing mutation, a minigene assay was performed. The wild-type (WT) minigene plasmid consists of exon 40 (153 bp), intron 40 (851 bp), exon 41 (183 bp), and partial regions of intron 41 (167 bp) to construct a full length of 1,354 bp. After transfection into COS7 cells for 48 h, the transcripts were analyzed by RT-PCR. Gel electrophoresis revealed that the WT plasmid produced two fragments, indicating two splicing events . The 446 bp fragment corresponded to exon 41 and the 599 bp fragment corresponded to exon 40 and exon 41, as confirmed by Sanger Sequencing (,). Cells transfected with the mutant c.5912_5922 + 19delinsATGTATG plasmids also produced two fragments, each nearly equivalent to the WT . However, subsequent Sanger sequencing revealed that the two mutant fragments exhibited a deletion of 11 bp (TTGCACAAATT) in exon 41 and a retention of 12 bp (ATGTATGCCCAC) in intron 41 (,). Taken together, these findings suggest that the mutation in the DMD gene produced an aberrantly spliced cDNA , which accounts for DMD presentation.