A male in his 60s with a past medical history of type 2 diabetes, hypertension, tobacco, daily alcohol use, COVID vaccination without details of dosing, date, or manufacturer, and recent left-sided subdural hemorrhage due to traumatic intraparenchymal hemorrhage (day 1) presented to our emergency department for decreased mentation and difficulty with ambulation 8 days after hospital discharge (day 22). At the discharge facility, he was continued on subcutaneous unfractionated heparin for venous thromboembolism prophylaxis which had been initiated at our hospital. Upon presentation, he was readmitted for decreased mentation and difficulty ambulating due to weakness in the bilateral lower extremities. Vitals including temperature, systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, and respiratory rate were within normal limits and the patient had oxygen saturations in the 90s on room air. Neurologic examination was significant for eye opening to noxious stimuli, following simple commands, and expressive aphasia. Significant cranial nerve findings included right gaze preference unable to cross midline, right upper and lower extremity strength 3/5, and left upper and lower extremity strength 1/5. A stroke alert was called, and MR venogram demonstrated multiple CVSTs affecting the superior sagittal, right sigmoid, and right transverse sinuses for which mechanical thrombectomy and microcatheter-directed thrombolysis with 10 mg recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA) was performed. On the second day of admission, a CT of the chest showed a right upper lobe segmental pulmonary embolism with RV/LV < 1. Duplex ultrasound was negative for DVT. Two days later, repeat Duplex showed bilateral upper extremity cephalic thrombophlebitis, for which therapeutic-intensity unfractionated heparin was initiated. Thrombocytopenia developed with a 4T score of 5. Heparin was empirically switched to bivalirudin titrated to an aPTT of 1.5-2.5x mean lab normal due to suspected HIT. Additionally, HIT PF4 IgG-specific antibody ELISA (Zymutest HIA IgG, Aniara, West Chester, OH) was sent and came back positive at 1.84 OD [Reference Interval (RI) 0.00-0.30 negative, 0.31–0.49 weakly positive, 0.50-3.00 positive]. This sample was screened with an anti-Xa assay for heparin and was negative. It was reflexively sent out for SRA (ARUP, Salt Lake City, UT) and was reported as negative with 6% serotonin release in response to low dose UH (0.1) (RI ≤ 20 serotonin release). Due to high suspicion for HIT despite the negative SRA, additional testing was sent with HIT PF4 antibody which was again positive at 1.63 OD with reflex to a P-Selectin Expression Assay (PEA) (Versiti, Milwaukee, WI). The PEA results were borderline positive with P-Selectin (PS) Expression at 31% (RI ≤ 35%) in the presence of patient serum and PF4 30 mcg. Finally, a third sample was sent with a HIT PF4 antibody of 1.58 OD with reflex to PEA which showed positive PS expression at 45% in the presence of patient serum and PF4 30 mcg with complete inhibition of PS expression in the presence of 100U/ml of heparin, confirming the diagnosis of HIT. The subtle difference in PEA results between the two samples was attributed to be likely due to donor platelet variability. Given the high incidence of CVST in patients with a newly recognized entity, vaccine-induced immune thrombotic thrombocytopenia (VITT), the patient was tested in a novel, research-based VITT specific ELISA (“un-complexed PF4” ELISA), which was negative in the second and third samples tested (0.31 and 0.32 optical density, OD; cut off 1.0 OD). Complete normalization of platelet count was observed by day 27 of admission. Patient was eventually transitioned to apixaban 5 mg PO twice a day (induction dosing had been completed with bivalirudin) for a planned duration of at least 3 months. His platelets during the previous hospital admission for the traumatic SDH ranged from 200 to 300 × 103 µl, and it was confirmed that the heparin had been continued for VTE prophylaxis at the rehabilitation facility. During that time, his platelets ranged from 89 to 163 × 103 µl. Thrombocytopenia resolved and patient was transitioned to apixaban. The patient was discharged to a skilled nursing facility when medically stable . He was referred to outpatient hematology specialists, but he was eventually lost to follow up as he switched his care to a different hospital system.