This is a 37-years-old female patient with recent diagnose of SLE, who presented with persistent pulsatile bitemporal headache started 4 months ago, daily, and progressively worse. Photophobia was present, however, no nausea or vomiting or phonophobia was reported. It was accompanied by weakness in the right arm noticed 1 week before presentation, which prompted her to come for evaluation. She was taking prednisone 40 mg daily, azathioprine 50 mg twice daily, and hydroxychloroquine 400 mg daily. Family history was unremarkable. The physical examination, showed blood pressure 115/77 mmHg, heart rate 80 bpm, respiratory rate 20 ipm, and axillary temperature of 36.2°C. Bilateral rash was noticed in the malar area of the face. During neurologic examination patient was alert and oriented in time, place, and person. Speech and language appropriated. The pupils were reactive to light and accommodation bilateral. Fundoscopy without signs of papilledema. Other cranial nerves showed preserved function. Strength was 5/5 in all four extremities and with normal reflexes. Sensibility was globally preserved, and the gait was normal. No nuchal rigidity was appreciated.
Laboratory wise showed hemoglobin 13.3 g/dL, hematocrit 40%, leukocytes 7.143/mm3, platelets 223.300/mm3, creatinine 0.78 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen 10 mg/dL, sodium 141 mEq/L, potassium 3.7 mEq/L, magnesium 2.09 mg/dL, ionized calcium 1.26 mmol/L, and C-reactive protein 2.4 mg/dL.
Computerized tomography of the head showed left extra-axial parietooccipital focal hypoattenuation with adjacent bone erosion. Brain MRI reported left parietooccipital subdural collection associated with focal leptomeningeal thickening. It was considered that the cerebrospinal fluid analysis would not add a definitive diagnose in this case, even though could potentially demonstrate arachnoiditis, so it was not performed, and the patient was taken for open surgery.
Neurosurgery was consulted and recommended craniotomy for evacuation of the subdural collection. During the procedure, the collection was not purulent, which raised no concerns for subdural empyema. However, given bone erosion and concerns for chronic osteomyelitis on imaging, it was opted for partial bone resection. The adjacent dura mater was resected showing noncaseous granuloma with multinucleated giant cells and asteroids bodies on histopathology . In addition rounded birefringent structures with positive silver stain consistent with PCM were noticed. Infectious disease was consulted and itraconazole was started 200 mg daily for 12 months. After procedure, the patient showed improvement of headache and of the weakness. Follow-up was unremarkable and the patient completed treatment without side effects. After 12 months of treatment, there were no residual lesions on imaging.