A 19-year-old, white female patient was referred to the oral and maxillofacial surgery department at the Federal University of Paraná as she complained regarding her aesthetics and malocclusion. Facial analysis showed a well-positioned maxilla despite a hypodivergent face pattern, with a reduction of tooth exposure upon smiling, and favorable chin projection associated with accentuated and deep labiomental fold due to retrusion of the inferior alveolar segment . There was also a shortening of the lower third of the face. There was no transversal deformity. Preoperative imaging exams showed a favorable position of the maxilla associated with good inclination of maxillary and mandibular incisors. A class II malocclusion with a deep bite in association with accentuated curve of Spee (COS) was found. The chin (pogonion) was well positioned . The lower third molar was extracted six months before the time of orthognathic surgery. Different treatment options to correct the mandibular retrusion were offered to the patient: bilateral sagittal split ramus osteotomy (BSSO) associated with backward genioplasty or total subapical mandibular osteotomy (TMAO) which would keep the chin in position and eliminate the need for genioplasty. Another option was combined orthognathic surgery on the mandible with BSSO or TMAO, associated with forward and downward repositioning of the maxilla. The patient chose the total subapical mandibular osteotomy procedure only.
After 39 months of orthodontic treatment, surgery was performed under general anesthesia. After a local bupivacaine 0.5% infiltration, a “V” incision was conducted from the right to the left retromolar region, and a mucoperiosteal flap was carefully detached to maintain the mental nerve integrity . A ring of cortical bone was removed around the mental foramen, aiming to create a space around it. A gradual and careful removal of the buccal cortical bone with a drill, exposing the inferior alveolar neurovascular bundle and letting it free in all of its extension from the foramen to retromolar region, was done , different from the original technique . Once the inferior alveolar neurovascular bundle was viewed in its entirety, it was carefully removed from the inferior dental canal and repositioned either inferiorly or superiorly. After the repositioning, a reciprocate saw was carefully used to conduct an osteotomy from the mental foramen to the retromolar region to divide the lingual cortical bone from the basal bone, taking care to avoid damage to the posterior teeth's apices . The posterior vertical cut on the posterior body area behind the second molar was also done with 5 mm to safety margin of the tooth. The osteotomy was conducted until the parasymphyseal region, through the buccal and lingual plates, approximately 5 mm below the apices of the anterior teeth, taking care not to damage them. It is crucial to avoid as much possible damage to the lingual mucosa when cutting the lingual cortical bone due to the fact that it is the main pedicle supplying nutrition to the dentoalveolar segment after the osteotomy is completed . After the dentoalveolar segment containing the entire lower dentition was mobilized, it was repositioned to the desired site and stabilized with miniplates and screws of the system 2.0. The conducted incision was closed with absorbable sutures . Panoramic radiograph and cephalometric radiograph showed occlusal stability as well as the condyle in the right position after surgery . Postoperative orthodontics consisted of intercuspidation and adjustment of the COS, since an intentional open bite in the bicuspid area was left during surgery to allow increase of the anterior facial height. The patient finished orthodontic treatment after 12 months. In , it is possible to observe the measurements obtained from the lateral radiograph, pre- and postoperatively. Improvement in the measurements related to overjet, facial axis, jaw angle, inferior sulcus to H-line, and occlusal plane is noteworthy.
The six-year follow-up showed stability of the osteotomized segments with maintenance of plates and screws. Occlusal stability was also observed, associated with a 49 mm mouth opening. The labiomental sulcus was observed to be less deep in comparison to the preoperative stage. Patient reported of paresthesia in the mental region, which was expected, due to incisal nerve sectioning. The resolution of the main aesthetic complaint of the patient, which was a deep labiomental sulcus, was achieved through the TMAO .