Our patient was a 21-year-old Chinese man with a history of congenital idiopathic pectus excavatum without a history of documented cardiac or pulmonary compromise. He was initially seen by the authors reporting of a marked reduction in physical ability whenever he put on a loaded body vest and backpack for training. The attire was a new requirement that arose as a result of a new vocation. At the time of consult, our patient was forthcoming in the description of his symptoms. He had experienced marked dyspnea on exertion, central chest tightness and easy fatigability, which resolved upon removal of the heavy load followed by a few minutes of rest. As a result, he was never able to actively participate in proper training when in full gear, and was never able to keep up with the rest of his colleagues. Prior to this vocation, he was an active sportsman with an outstanding physical condition despite the pectus excavatum defect. His exercise routine included running of more than 30 minutes three or more times per week. His records revealed that he was able to complete a 2.4 km run in 10 minutes whilst in singlet and shorts only. A routine resting pulmonary function test, echocardiography and electrocardiography performed prior to his vocational change did not demonstrate any significant abnormalities .
Upon physical examination, the caved-in appearance of his anterior chest was clearly observed . Compensatory anterior flaring of his lower ribs at the costal margins was noted. The apex beat was undisplaced and his heart sounds were normal. No murmurs or other additional sounds were heard. His lung sounds were clear and of equal intensity bilaterally. Plain chest radiographs with anteroposterior and lateral views were subsequently taken, along with computed thoracic tomography . Interestingly, a Haller index of 2.5 was obtained, which is considered to be of mild severity based on such anatomical considerations only. Due to the nature of the precipitating factors (that is, the body vest and backpack) leading to his symptoms, it was highly possible that his chest wall defect compromised his pulmonary function upon load-stress. In order to provide objective evidence to support his symptoms, he agreed to undergo static pulmonary function testing while putting on a body vest and backpack weighing 30% of his body weight. The test was performed on a spirometer (Microlab ML 3500) under close supervision, with the best effort amongst three results recorded. The amount of air which can be forcibly exhaled in the first second (forced expiratory volume in one second, FEV1) and the total amount of air which can be forcibly exhaled after maximal inspiration (forced vital capacity, FVC), were measured. Interestingly, the results showed that, although his pulmonary function at rest was normal when he was in normal work dress (FEV1 94.3%, FVC 92.2%, FEV1/FVC: 86.7), there was a significant deterioration with a restrictive pattern when wearing the body vest and backpack (FEV1 75.5%, FVC 69.3%, FEV1/FVC 92.3). On the other hand, a physically-matched healthy control who voluntarily agreed to undergo the same test did not demonstrate such a drastic deterioration in lung function . Throughout the tests, physical examination and vital signs were otherwise generally unremarkable. A definitive diagnosis of restrictive lung function triggered by load-stress was made in this patient with idiopathic pectus excavatum, and he was subsequently referred to a cardiothoracic surgeon for follow-up.