A 22-year-old Caucasian man with a history of periodic generalized tonic–clonic seizures was admitted to a secondary hospital because of symptoms of major depression. He experienced depressed mood, decreased interest in most activities, loss of appetite (with 10% weight change), insomnia, fatigue, loss of concentration, and thoughts of death (without suicidal ideation) in the previous 3 months. In addition, he complained of paresthesias involving his toes. He had no history of substance abuse and presented no symptoms of mania. He had been undergoing treatment with valproic acid 600mg/day orally for the last 2 years (for seizures treatment) and omeprazole 40mg/day orally during the last 5 years (for dyspepsia treatment). His physical examination was normal. No sensory or motor deficit was found objectively, and Chvostek and Trousseau signs were absent. The psychiatric evaluation was compatible with major depressive symptoms according to the criteria of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition, text revision (DSM-IV-TR) . A routine computed tomography scan of his brain revealed bilateral nonenhancing hyperdense calcifications involving the putamen and caudate nucleus in a symmetrical pattern . The electroencephalogram showed bursts of high-voltage paroxysmal slow waves. The electrocardiography demonstrated a prolonged QTc interval without other abnormalities . He had a low total calcium level (5.4mg/dL; normal range 8.8mg/dL to 11.0mg/dL), low ionic calcium level (0.73mg/dL; normal range 1.0mg/dL to 1.3mg/dL), elevated serum phosphate level (6.3mg/dL; normal range 2.5mg/dL to 4.8mg/dL), low intact PTH level (8.3pg/mL; normal range 12.0pg/mL to 88.0pg/mL), and low magnesium level (0.7mg/dL; normal range 1.9mg/dL to 2.5mg/dL). His serum levels of albumin, 25-hydroxyvitamin D, thyroid-stimulating hormone, T3 and T4 thyroid hormones, creatinine, and blood urea nitrogen were normal. His 24-hour urine excretion of magnesium was low (62mg; normal range 75mg to 150mg). His fractional magnesium clearance was 0.8%, suggesting that his renal retention of magnesium was appropriate. A definitive diagnosis was made of primary hypoparathyroidism due to hypomagnesemia with major depressive symptoms as the predominant clinical manifestation. The probable etiology of the hypomagnesemia was the chronic pump proton inhibitor use, given that other causes of chronic hypomagnesemia were absent (that is, malabsorption, alcoholism, diuretic therapy, and tubulointerstitial kidney diseases). Omeprazole was discontinued promptly given that the upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was normal. He received oral treatment with calcium carbonate 3g/day, calcitriol 0.50mcg/day, magnesium pidolate 366mg/day, and sertraline 50mg/day. Of interest, during his hospitalization period of 41 days, his symptoms of major depression began to improve only after correction of total serum calcium levels. He was discharged with normal total calcium (9.5mg/dL) and magnesium levels (2.0mg/dL). His clinical and laboratory improvement was sustained as verified by a routine out-patient medical visit 2 months after hospital discharge.