A 12-year-old Syrian girl was admitted to Children's University Hospital of Damascus due to 3 months complaints of a variety of unexplained symptoms. She had generalized myalgia and arthralgia without inflammatory signs. The pain was most severe in her left shoulder and elbow, with numbness and tingling in her left arm. She also had exertional dyspnea, pallor, dizziness, and constitutional symptoms (fatigue, fever with night sweats, anorexia, and loss of approximately 7% of her weight), along with intermittent epigastric abdominal pain that exacerbated with meals and was occasionally associated with vomiting and diarrhea. In addition, she developed headache and episodes of epistaxis during her admission.
Her past medical history was significant for two episodes of tonsillitis during the last year, and she was diagnosed with iron deficiency anemia in an outpatient clinic. She was treated with penicillin G benzathine (dose: 1.2 million units intramuscular injection every 2 weeks), and iron was replaced without any improvement.
Clinical examination revealed lymphadenopathy in the cervical (1 × 1 cm) and inguinal (1 × 2 cm) regions. Her pulse was absent in the left brachial and radial arteries, and blood pressure was unobtainable in her left arm. Her blood pressure (BP) was 130/70 and 140/90 mmHg in her right arm and lower limbs respectively. Vascular bruits were heard over the left supra- and subclavian areas on auscultation.
Laboratory tests showed microcytic anemia with elevation in white blood cells (WBCs) count, platelet count, and inflammatory markers, including C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (values are presented in Table ). Tests also revealed mild elevation in anti-streptolysin O (576 U/ml, normal range 50–250 U/ml), iron deficiency (3 μmol/l, normal range 9–31.3 μmol/l), elevated Von Willebrand factor (189%, normal range 60–150%). Liver function tests, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, prothrombin time, and partial thromboplastin time were all normal. The following tests were all within normal limits: Widal test, Wright test, tuberculin skin test, direct and indirect Coombs, cold agglutinins, rheumatoid factor, anti-DNA, antinuclear antibody, perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, complement factors C3 and C4, cytomegalovirus and Epstein–Barr virus antibodies, and anti-hepatitis A virus IgM antibodies.
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy showed no significant abnormalities. Chest X-ray and pharyngeal swap were also normal.
Conventional angiography was performed regarding the difference in pulse and blood pressure values between the two upper limbs. It showed narrowing in the inlet of the left subclavian artery extending to the branching point of the left vertebral artery, and this was followed by widening of the left subclavian artery . Other arteries were normal. The results were supported with magnetic resonance angiography (MRA, Fig. ), and according to these results the diagnosis of childhood Takayasu arteritis was established.
She was given 30 mg/kg of intravenous methylprednisolone daily for 3 days as an initial management, then she was treated conservatively with close follow-up. Her treatment included prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day and methotrexate 10 mg/m2/week for 3 months along with aspirin 1–2 mg/kg, omeprazole, folic acid, calcium, and vitamin D. The clinical features of ischemia (that is, pulselessness), BP, complete blood count, ESR, and CRP were used for clinical follow-up.
After that, the patient relapsed twice when prednisolone was tapered off to a maintenance dosage, and she had additional symptoms during her relapses (details are presented in Table ).
Her first relapse was after 4 months, and the main complaint was chest pain that radiated to her left arm. On admission, a cardiac catheter was performed and no injury in coronary arteries was found. Electrocardiography, creatine kinase, troponin, arterial blood gases, and echocardiography were all normal. The pain was relieved by nitroglycerin patches. Conventional angiography showed that her disease was progressing radiologically (in addition to the narrowing of the left subclavian artery, the right subclavian artery was affected; Fig. ). Prednisolone was returned to initial dose with methotrexate, and cyclophosphamide 1000 mg/m2/month was added. She also had hypertension that was managed with amlodipine 5 mg/day. Despite adding cyclophosphamide, she had a second relapse 4 months later when prednisolone dose was reduced. Her chief complaint was severe occipital headache. The disease was still progressing radiologically . Therefore, methotrexate was replaced with azathioprine 2 mg/kg/day with continuation of prednisolone and cyclophosphamide.
The patient was followed-up closely, and after approximately 14 months since the onset of the disease; her clinical and laboratorial condition was stable (details are presented in Table ), although radiological findings did not regress . The treatment was adjusted to azathioprine 1 mg/kg/day and prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day. The patient is still following up in our outpatient clinic for continuous evaluation and dosage adjustment.