A 67-year-old female actively practicing pediatrician with a history of mantle cell lymphoma on maintenance rituximab therapy and documented uncomplicated hypogammaglobulinemia presented to the hospital in October with three months of progressive myalgias, fatigue, and decreased appetite. She was initially treated with three cycles of R-CHOP and three cycles of R-DHAP for her blastoid variant mantle cell lymphoma followed by autologous stem cell transplantation with BEAM conditioning. She was D + 1045 in first complete remission and receiving rituximab infusions every two months at her time of presentation.
Her symptoms started with a 4-week illness in July characterized by low-grade fevers, myalgias, fatigue, and nausea. Although the fevers resolved as an outpatient, her other symptoms persisted, prompting an evaluation by her primary care physician in September, where lab work demonstrated normal renal function and electrolytes, an aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 606 U/L (ref 8–37 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 698 U/L (ref 8–37 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (AP) of 631 U/L (ref 50–150 U/L), an albumin of 3.8 g/dL, and a total bilirubin of 1.4 mg/dL (ref 0.1–1.0). Further rituximab infusions were discontinued at this time. An outpatient workup for the etiology of her liver disease was performed. A positron emission tomography scan for recurrence of lymphoma was negative. Serum polymerase chain reaction testing (PCR) for EBV, CMV, HSV-1, HSV-2, adenovirus, and HHV-6 were negative. Serologic testing for hepatitis A was positive for IgG and negative for IgM. Hepatitis B surface antigen and core antibody, hepatitis C antibody, and hepatitis E antibody were negative. Ceruloplasmin was normal and alpha-1 antitrypsin, antimitochondrial antibody, and antinuclear antibody were negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the liver with and without contrast showed hepatomegaly, mild periportal edema, and mild prominence of the intrahepatic bile ducts. A transjugular liver biopsy revealed a mild lymphocytic infiltrate, no evidence of fibrosis or steatosis, and no evidence of lymphoma, and was interpreted as resolving acute hepatitis. The patient had an elevated myoglobin in the urine to 48 ug/L (ref < 20 ug/L), and an elevated serum creatine kinase of 263 U/L (ref 29–143 U/L).
Two weeks before presentation to a quaternary-care hospital in mid-October, she developed gradually progressive bilateral hearing loss and worsening myalgias without reported headache or neck stiffness. By the time of admission, her liver enzymes had improved with an AST of 262, ALT of 202, AP of 197, and a total bilirubin of 0.5. Serum albumin had fallen to 1.9 g/dL (ref 3.5–5.0 g/dL) and international normalized ratio (INR) was 1.0. Initial examination was most remarkable for diffuse pitting edema. Neurologic examination uncovered mild bilateral sensorineural hearing loss and 3 + /5 proximal upper extremity muscle strength without any other abnormalities. Her hospital course was complicated by the continued progression of her hearing loss. At first, she experienced difficulty hearing voices if words were spoken softly. One week later, she could hear virtually no noise and required a writing board for all communication. She was found to have a low-level detectable CMV PCR of 55.3 IU/mL in the peripheral blood, which was thought to be clinically insignificant viral reactivation in the setting of acute illness. Serum immunoglobulin studies showed a pan-hypogammaglobulinemia, including an IgG level of 241 mg/dL (ref 800–1700 mg/dL) from a baseline of 652 mg/dL as an outpatient. MRI of the brain and internal auditory canal with contrast were performed and demonstrated mild diffuse dural enhancement without any obvious retrocochlear or inner ear lesions or mass lesions. She was trialed on a 6-day course of prednisone 60 mg/day under a working diagnosis of vestibular neuritis with no effect. An audiogram demonstrated complete and partial sensorineural hearing loss on the right and left sides, respectively.
A lumbar puncture was performed, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed 21 white blood cells per uL (ref 0–5 WBC/uL) with 87% lymphocytes, 1 red blood cell per uL (ref 0–8 RBC/uL), CSF protein of 27 mg/dL (ref 15–45 mg/dL), and CSF glucose of 21 mg/dL (ref 50–70 mg/dL). A rapid CSF pathogen PCR (BioFire) panel was performed and resulted positive for enterovirus nucleic acid. CSF bacterial, fungal, and acid-fast bacilli cultures grew no organisms. CSF VDRL was negative. Shortly after this finding, she received infusions of intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) for therapy, first on hospital day 9 and then on hospital day 23 after a re-analysis of serum IgG levels showed improvement but persistent hypogammaglobulinemia (IgG level of 435 mg/dL). She was discharged to a subacute rehab facility on hospital day 24 with plans to recheck serum IgG levels every 2 weeks and administer IVIG if her level fell below 400 mg/dL. Figure displays the trend of the patient’s AST and ALT over time as well as her recorded IgG levels. An improvement is noted in all markers following the initial dose of IVIG. As an outpatient, her serum IgG improved to 705 mg/dL following the two inpatient infusions of IVIG and she did not require a third infusion. Although her fatigue and myalgias improved, a repeat audiogram two months following her hospital discharge demonstrated little improvement in her auditory function. She is currently being worked up as a candidate for cochlear implant therapy.