A 64-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with repeated epigastric abdominal pain on the right side and nausea.
The patient’s symptoms started 7 d ago.
The patient underwent appendectomy 7 mo ago, and she had a medical history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus.
The patient denied any personal history of alcohol and cigarette consumption. Her family history has nothing notable.
On physical examination, the abdomen was soft and tender in the epigastric area.
Laboratory analysis revealed that carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) (6.39 U/mL) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (1.98 ng/mL) levels were within the normal range (CA 19-9 < 27 U/mL; CEA < 4.7 ng/mL). Liver function tests and complete blood count, except for a slightly increased white blood cell (12000/µL) count, were within the normal range.
At the time of the diagnosis of acute appendicitis, contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen incidentally revealed a 2.6 cm × 2.8 cm multilobulated cystic mass with thin septa, and eccentric coarse calcification in the pancreatic tail . The pancreatic mass showed an indefinite eccentric mural thickening, and the main pancreatic duct was not dilated. Pancreatic tail showed severe parenchymal atrophy and it was difficult to delineate the splenic vein at the splenic hilum, which was replaced by tortuous splenorenal collaterals. We formulated a diagnosis of mucinous cystic neoplasm (MCN) or intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm. The patient had been informed that the pancreatic lesion could be potentially malignant and that further evaluation was necessary. However, after appendectomy, she voluntarily refused further evaluation and treatment and was discharged from the hospital.
After 7 mo, the patient was hospitalized through ER (Emergency Department), for nausea and whole abdominal pain; contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen was performed that showed an enlarged pancreatic cystic mass (5.4 cm × 4 cm) in the pancreatic tail with the appearance of an intra-cystic heterogeneously enhanced solid component . This solid mass almost completely occupied the existing cystic mass, and only a small cystic portion remained in the peripheral portion.
MRI of the pancreas was performed for further evaluation. An axial T2-weighted image showed a solid portion with an intermediate-to-high signal intensity (SI) within the cystic mass in the pancreatic tail . Small amount of intra-tumoral hemorrhage, which showed high SI on a T1-weighted image and low SI on the T2-weighted image, was noted. The solid portion of the mass showed diffusion restriction. Axial contrast-enhanced dynamic T1-weighted images demonstrated significant peripheral, progressive enhancement of the solid portion.
18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) was performed to evaluate distant metastasis. PET-CT showed intense uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose . There was no evidence of distant metastasis. The multimodality imaging findings indicated the possibility of pancreatic mucinous cystadenocarcinoma.
Radical resection of the pancreatic tumor was planned. At the time of surgery, the mass appeared to extend directly into the transverse mesocolon. The patient underwent distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy and colonic segmental resection.
A gross section of the pancreatic mass revealed nearly total replacement by a solid mass with a dilated cystic portion inside. The mass showed necrotic foci in 20% of the total volume. The tumor extended to the transverse mesocolon; however, there were no tumor cells in the colon and spleen. Microscopically, the cystic portion of the lesion was lined with high-grade dysplastic columnar epithelium with underlying ovarian-type stroma, which was positive for estrogen and progesterone receptors on immunohistochemistry . The part of the solid portion located near the cystic portion consisted of undifferentiated pleomorphic malignant cells, which were strongly positive for vimentin, weakly positive for pan-cytokeratin, and negative for the other antibodies such as CD56, chromogranin, and synaptophysin.