A 28-year-old Thai female (G3P1A1) without any previous medical illness presented with sudden-onset severe pain in the upper back and weakness of her lower limbs. The previous day, she had been admitted to the hospital for normal vaginal delivery. Immediately after the birth, the patient developed sudden-onset upper back pain. Within a few hours of delivery, she developed progressive weakness of her legs and urinary incontinence. On examination, she had a visible kyphotic deformity around the upper thoracic spine and marked tenderness on palpation at the midthoracic level. A neurological examination revealed the motor power of her legs to be grade II/V on all of the right side and grade I/V on the left side, except at L2, which showed grade II/V. The pinprick sensation was impaired below T7 level in both legs. Although the patient also had a loose sphincter tone, there was the presence of both anal wink and deep anal pressure. No clonus was detected. Based on the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) impairment scale, she was classified as having an incomplete spinal cord injury (ASIA B).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the entire spine revealed abnormal bone marrow signal intensity at T6 and T7, with adjacent paravertebral soft tissue formation from the T4 to the T7 levels. The lesion appeared with heterogeneous high-signal intensity on T1WI but with heterogenous low-signal intensity on T2WI/STIR. There was also an enhancement involving the vertebral bodies, left neural foramina, and posterior columns of T6 and T7. Additionally, a severe compression fracture at the T6 level and a mild compression fracture at the T7 level were observed. Furthermore, multiple nodules scattered throughout both lungs were visible, suggestive of lung metastases. The imaging findings are described in Fig. .
She was brought to operating room within 6 h after the occurrence of symptoms. Subperiosteal paraspinal muscle dissection was performed, after which partial tumor debulking at the T6 and T7 levels was done. Pedicular screws were then inserted from the T3 to the T10 levels—other than at the T6 and T7 levels—with the aid of the O-arm navigation system. Subsequently, complete tumor debulking was undertaken at the T6 and T7 levels. The tumor appeared as a sloppy mass containing a greenish-black secretion. A decompressive laminectomy was performed between the T4 and T8 levels, and posterior instrumentation was done between the T3 and T10 levels. Histopathological analysis of tissue samples from the T6 and T7 levels revealed heavily pigmented melanocytic lesions. They were composed of medium-to-large epithelioid cells with large vesicular nuclei, prominent macronuclei, and abundant cytoplasmic melanin pigment. The tumor demonstrated an infiltrative growth pattern at the periphery. Mitotic activity was relatively low (0–1/high power field). Psammoma bodies and adipose-like cells were not observed. Tumor necrosis averaged 20% of the tumor volume. A surrounding soft-tissue invasion and bone invasion were evident. The histopathological details are described in Fig. . Immunohistochemically, the tumor was positive for melanin, vimentin, S100 protein, human melanoma black (HMB)-45, and Melan A. Staining for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) was immunoreactive. However, iron and CD34 were negative. The absence of the features of psammoma bodies, adipose-like cells, EWSR1 rearrangement, nuclear anaplasia, and brisk mitotic activity meant that melanocytic schwannoma, clear cell sarcoma, and malignant melanoma were excluded. Consolidation of the various findings led to a diagnosis suggestive of PEM of the spine. Postoperatively, the patient was consulted by an oncologist and given radiotherapy. Post-operative radiographs were shown in Figs. and .
Immediately postoperatively, the patient’s back pain was subsided, and improvement was seen in her neurological status, with an assessment of grade C on the ASIA impairment scale. Nonetheless, upon a neurological assessment during 2 months postoperative follow-up, the motor power of both legs was grades 0/V, with grade B on the ASIA impairment scale. The pinprick sensation below the T4 level had also decreased on the right side and was absent on the left. Both clonus and the Babinski reflex were present bilaterally. The patient underwent a second operation 2 months after the first. The fourth to ninth ribs resection and resection of the residual tumor was done. Histopathological analysis revealed a residual PEM. Postoperatively, the patient’s neurological status reverted to grade C on the ASIA impairment scale. At the one-year follow-up, although the patient reported continued improvement of her back pain, there was no motor power improvement.