The patient is a 20 year old female that was diagnosed with ataxia-telangiectasia syndrome at 3 years of age. She had severe ataxia and was wheelchair bound by 8 years of age. She presented with a 4 week history of non-bilious emesis, early satiety, decreased appetite and a 35 lb weight loss over a one year period. The patient had undergone evaluation for these symptoms at her local hospital. A CT scan of the abdomen suggested a pancreatic mass prompting transfer to our institution. On examination, she had notable speech and cognitive delays with scleral telangiectasias, muscle wasting and other features of malnutrition. Her abdominal examination revealed a soft, non-distended abdomen with no palpable masses. Her laboratory studies were remarkable for hypokalemic, hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis, a pre-albumin level of 15 mg/dL (normal: 23–48 mg/dL), an IgG level of 461 mg/dL (normal: 546–1842 mg/dL) and an absolute lymphocyte count of 187/cu mm (normal: 1000–4800/cu mm). Other immunoglobulin levels [IgA (186 mg/dL), IgM (70 mg/dL) and IgE (<1 U/mL] were within normal limits. She was started on total parenteral nutrition (TPN) immediately upon admission. A repeat CT scan of the abdomen revealed a dilated, hypertrophied stomach consistent with chronic gastric outlet obstruction, abnormal thickening of the antrum and pylorus, and a normal appearing pancreas . Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) demonstrated diffuse gastritis and esophagitis with a normal appearing duodenum. She was subsequently placed on Pantoprazole®, Azithromycin® and Metronidazole® for presumed Helicobacter pylori infection, and kept on continuous nasogastric decompression for persistent emesis. Gastric biopsies identified non-candida fungi on the gastric epithelium and rare lymphoid aggregates in the lamina propria. A Diff-Quik stain for Helicobacter pylori on the biopsied specimen was negative prompting discontinuation of the triple antibody therapy. Several attempts to remove the nasogastric tube were unsuccessful, and so an upper GI series was obtained. This revealed a complete gastric obstruction . To address a possible submucosal infiltrative process such as lymphoma, a repeat EGD was performed to obtain deeper biopsy specimens. At this time, the scope could not be advanced into the duodenum. Deep antral biopsies identified gastric adenocarcinoma. A metastatic workup including chest CT scan and bone scan revealed no evidence of disease. After having received almost 2 weeks of TPN, she was taken to the operating room for exploratory laparotomy. Intra-operatively, she was found to have a large gastric mass involving the distal stomach which was determined to be resectable. During the dissection, there were dense adhesions between the posterior wall of the duodenum and the pancreas that were able to be divided. The tumor was resected by removing 2/3 of the distal stomach, with a minimum of 4.5 cm margins proximally and 2 cm margins distally. These margins were free of tumor on frozen and final pathologic exam. The pancreatic surface in the area of resection was biopsied in the operating room due to the finding of adhesions between the stomach and pancreas. The frozen sections showed no evidence of malignancy however, the permanent sections later revealed the presence of a focus of tumor. The patient was reconstructed with a Billroth II gastrojejunostomy after oversewing of the duodenal stump, and a feeding jejunostomy tube and Blake drain were placed. Final histologic evaluation revealed a well to moderately differentiated invasive intestinal-type adenocarcinoma of the stomach with invasion through the muscularis to the serosa, and multifocal vascular and lymphatic invasion.
Postoperatively, the patient initially did well, but then developed increased output from her abdominal drain containing high amylase and lipase levels. An UGI series revealed no evidence of anastamotic leak. On post operative day 7 she developed bloody emesis which resolved spontaneously. However, she developed increasing abdominal pain and a CT scan of the abdomen showed ascites with small bowel obstruction. She was therefore returned to the operating room for exploratory laparotomy which revealed diffuse ascites, an intact gastrojejunostomy, and an obstruction in the afferent limb of the gastrojejunostomy due to large blood clots. The clots were removed via an enterotomy in the afferent limb, and the pancreatic ascites was widely drained. She had a prolonged hospital course but recovered from surgery and was discharged to home on hospital day 48. Two months after surgery she was on continuous jejunostomy tube feeds and eating small amounts by mouth. However, three months after surgery she was refusing to eat, appeared uncomfortable although without complaints, and subsequently declined clinically thereafter. She expired 100 days from initial diagnosis while under hospice care, presumably due to wasting secondary to metastatic adenocarcinoma.