A 16-year-old female presented to our surgical unit with recurrent episodes of food vomiting that had persisted over the prior 2 mo and was complicated by recent hematemesis.
The patient had stopped eating solid food and switched to an almost-exclusive fluid diet due to the ongoing symptoms; this led to significant unintentional weight loss.
At the age of 11 years, during the transition from elementary to middle school, the patient began to rip out her hair and swallow it. This compulsory habit remained consistent for the next 5 years, and the patient often hid it from her family. During the lockdown due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the patient’s psychiatric condition worsened. The patient’s parents divorced, and she experienced a severe state of social isolation due to remote schooling, lack of interaction with family and friends, and the fact that she lived on an island with few possibilities of getting away from home. The manipulation of her hair and the particular act of tearing it off reduced her anxiety, while swallowing and eating the hair was a consequence of feeling the need to hide the torn pieces. These behaviors also worsened the aesthetical aspect of the girl, as she became hairless and over time anorexic as the mass of hair grew to become a blockage in her gut.
No remarkable event was referred in her personal and family history.
The patient was visibly underweight and presented with an irregular and hard abdominal mass that filled the left abdominal quadrants and the hypogastrium. It clearly caused a conspicuous deformation of her silhouette shape. The patient did not complain of any symptoms besides the vomiting and hematemesis after water/food intake.
Blood analysis revealed a severe nutritional impairment, with iron deficiency anemia and reduced body mass index .
An abdominal ultrasound detected a dense ovoidal formation with an average diameter of about 14 cm occupying the left lateral abdomen. Computed tomography showed a considerable gastric overdistension due to a voluminous conglomerate with inhomogeneous densitometry and cranio-caudal length of more than 30 cm. The mass occupied the gastric lumen entirely, partially preserving the fundic and prepyloric portion . Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a dense mass of ingested hair, which occupied the antrum and the body of the stomach completely causing complete pyloric obstruction. At the gastroesophageal junction, a 7-mm linear mucosal erosion was observed, which bled easily during the endoscope transit .