In this this case study, a 30-year-old gentleman had an injury to both ankles as a result of a fall from a 5 five-storey height while engaged in his occupational duties as a painter. The individual fell on the floor with both feet in a dorsiflexed position —– the potential mechanism of injury resulting from dorsiflexion, and and supination. . Upon On admission, the patient remained awake and had stable hemodynamics, four 4 hours after the occurrence of the traumatic event, the Glasgow cComa sScale scoring was 15. The patient had pronounced bilateral ankle edema, without any blisters. The extremities were warm, and there was no indication of any neurovascular impairment. Ankle Rradiographs revealed a closed talar neck fracture of the left ankle consistent with Hawkin type I classification. On the right side, there is a closed talus talus fracture of the Hawkin type II, accompanied by a fracture of the medial malleolus .
The patient received pre-operative management consisting of strict limb elevation using a below-knee splint, application of cold fomentation, and initiation of trypsin therapy from admission until the presence of skin wrinkling. . The patient had trauma to the operation operation timing of of eight8 days. For the right side, he underwent a surgical procedure including open reduction and internal fixation, using a cannulated cancellous (CC) screw for the talus and tension band wire (TBW) for the medial. Percutaneous CC screw was used after closed reduction on the left side. The surgical procedure was conducted with combined spinal-epidural anesthesia while employing a tourniquet tourniquet coverage. The surgical procedure included performing bilateral fixation in a single setting, with an operating duration of 150 minutes.
In the case of a right talus fracture, a combined medial and anterolateral approach was employed. A 7-–8 cm incision was made over the medial malleolus to access the fracture site. Following the reduction of the fracture, a 40 mm ×x 4 mm CC screw was inserted using a guide wire. In Aadditionally, an incision was made on the anterolateral aspect of the ankle joint, through which another guide wire was inserted and a 40 mm ×x 4 mm CC screw was inserted. During the surgery, a bone defect was identified and subsequently corrected using allograft material. The medial malleolus was successfully reduced under direct visualization, followed by the insertion of a Kirschner wire (K-wire) and tension band wiring (TBW) to complete the procedure.
On the other side, percutaneous CC screw fixation followed closed reduction. A stab incision was made at the posterolateral aspect of the ankle and two guide wires were inserted diagonally in an anteromedial direction to intersect the fracture site, with the use of fluoroscopy guidance. Two screws measuring 45 mm ×x 4 mm were utilized for fixation. The confirmation of reduction reduction was done done by the use of fluoroscopy. Associated metatarsal fractures were managed conservatively. The estimated blood loss during the procedure was 200 mL. Wound closure was achieved with Albert Lembert sutures.
Antibiotics were continued up to a 48-hour post-operative period. shows the immediate post-operative radiographs of both sides showing adequate fracture reduction with satisfactory position of implants. The patient was discharged after the check dress of the wound was done on the third 3rd post-operative day with below knee slab for one 1 week. He was started with standard ankle rehabilitation protocol, with a range of motion exercises. The patient was fully non-weight bearing for three 3 months, and protected weight bearing was started from three 3 m onths onwards with the help of a walker and toe touch. Postoperatively, the patient started full weight bearing without support from the 5th month. The patient was followed up regularly with no complications of the wound (wound dehiscence, infection, etc.). A three3- year post-operative X-ray showed union at both talus and medial malleolus with very minimal avascular necrosis changes and no subtalar or tibiotalar joint arthritis . Three-year follow-up showed both ankle range of motion with 30° deg plantar flexion, and 15° degrees dorsiflexion with mild intermittent pain and stiffness . The patient`’s quality of life was good with no significant disability with foot and ankle disability index(FADI) Aactivities Sscore: 99 / 104 (95%).