A 12-year-old girl presented to her general pediatrician complaining of asthenia and weight loss in the previous month. Her past medical and family history were unremarkable. Physical examination revealed a painless hepato-splenomegaly without additional clinical signs. Abdominal ultrasound revealed an inhomogeneous liver appearance, abdominal lymphadenopathy and a hypo-echogenic solid neoformation in front of the celiac artery (35 × 13 mm). The patient was admitted to the Department of Pediatrics of the Meyer Children’s Hospital for further diagnostic investigations.
Physical examination revealed palpable spleen and liver, a right inguinal lymph node of 1 cm and a lymph node in supraclavicular location, without any further objective anomaly. She had no fever. Initial laboratory tests found microcytic iron deficiency anemia (Hb = 9.8 g/dl, MCV = 65.5 ft., Ferritin = 4 ng/ml), with normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), normal total protein and protein electrophoresis, a slight increase of lipase and colic acids with normal amylase. Blood biochemistry for kidney and liver function and urinalysis were normal. Primary immunologic work-up including lymphocyte subset and immunoglobulin levels were normal. Tests for malignancies (tumor markers and peripheral blood smear) and infectious investigations, including Mantoux Test and IGRA Assay resulted negative.
Chest X-ray was negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination of the superior and inferior abdomen with contrast medium confirmed increased liver dimensions and its structural inhomogeneity with zones of signal alteration: some nodular, other confluent. It also revealed increased spleen size with zones of nodular signal alteration and multiple nodular formations in the following locations: hepatic hilar, mesenteric, lombo-aortic, at the retrocavity of the epiploon, and the greatest one in front of the celiac artery (diameter > 3.5 cm).
Suspecting a systemic lymphoproliferative disease, we performed liver and lymph node ultrasound-guided biopsy, which showed negativity of Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for potential agents of infectious diseases (including Mycobacteria and Bartonella species) on lymph node material, while it highlighted a non-necrotizing granulomatous inflammation, resembling sarcoidosis, and aspects of non-specific inflammation of the liver. .
Subsequently, we carried out measurements of serum and urinary calcium, serum phosphorus, Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme (ACE), followed by a complete cardiac evaluation, and a complete ophthalmologic evaluation (including slit lamp), all of which resulted within normality.
At this point, given the biopsy results, we performed further lung studies: pulmonary function tests which showed mild restriction and decreased alveolar capillary diffusion. The chest X-Ray revaluation revealed a pattern compatible with mild fibrosis and enlarged lymph nodes. We decided to carry out a high-resolution chest computed tomography (CT), which showed widespread fibrous strands and multiple enlarged lymph nodes (right paratracheal area, at the supraaortic trunk origin, subcarinal, with the largest in this location measuring 30 × 17 mm, pericardiophrenic, bilaterally at axillary level and along the mammary vessels). The bronchoscopic investigation with analysis of the broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) fluid revealed: macrophages 70%, neutrophils 4% and lymphocytes 26% with a CD4/CD8 ratio of 9.2 (pathological value > 3.5).
Based on these results, we carried out further investigations on liver tissue and lymph node with histochemical techniques: CD68 + nodules were found, suggestive of microgranulomas .
Having ruled out other diagnoses, with suggestive histological findings in two different tissues (liver and lymph nodes) and considering lung involvement, we made the diagnosis of pediatric-onset adult sarcoidosis.
During hospitalization, the condition of the child had always been good and she had always been afebrile. Considering lymph node hypertrophy and the signs of initial portal hypertension (due to compression of the hepatic vessels), we started therapy with prednisone 40 mg/day, and subsequent cross-therapy with mycophenolate mofetil (250 mg/m2 increasing up to 1 g/m2).
The girl came back to our attention a month after discharge for a follow-up visit: she was found in good general condition, with hepatomegaly and without other clinical signs or symptoms. A brain MRI was performed in order to rule out cerebral involvement and it revealed normal findings. One year later she maintained good clinical condition and normal laboratory tests, therefore MMF was gradually reduced and definitively suspended after 18 months. Now her periodic follow up consist of clinical and laboratory evaluation every 6 months and annual pulmonary function tests, unless clinical or laboratory new findings.