The patient is a 22-year-old right-handed male who presented to clinic for the evaluation of adjunctive therapy for medically refractory epilepsy. His seizures began at the age of 14 and were described as blank staring spells. One year later, he was diagnosed with absence (generalized nonmotor) seizures and started on pharmacologic therapy. After exploring different medications, a therapeutic regimen consisting of lamotrigine (Lamictal) 300 mg twice daily and lacosamide (Vimpat) 200 mg twice daily achieved seizure freedom for the following 4 years. However, at the age of 19, he experienced his first generalized tonic-clonic seizure (GTCS). Following the onset of GTCS at 19 years old, the patient now has two-to-three GTCS annually and furthermore has not had concomitant absence seizures.
The patient described seizure onset as feeling lightheaded, shaky, and having the need to sit down. In most cases, he is typically unable to reach a sitting position before losing balance from the onset of convulsion. The seizure lasts approximately 2 min, and it takes him up to 6 min to regain awareness. Witnesses report the occurrence of speech vocalizations during these events.
Despite compliance with his medication regimen, breakthrough unprovoked seizures continued, including once while driving. The patient has no other significant or relevant medical history. Epilepsy conference review determined that this patient was a good candidate for VNS and was subsequently scheduled to undergo left-sided VNS implantation with SenTiva battery placement.
In the operating room, dissection of the neck proceeded in the usual fashion. Briefly, the carotid sheath was opened over the carotid artery, vagus nerve, and internal jugular vein. The vagus nerve was identified and isolated for approximately 2–2.5 cm of nerve. A blue background was placed underneath the nerve. The wires were then wrapped around the vagus nerve. Once the leads were secured, the battery was placed inside the chest wall. Per standard protocol, a small volume of irrigation was then applied over the nerve and wires, and the system was appropriately interrogated with electrical stimulation. From this assessment, the system was noted to have good impedance (1820 Ohms) without any change in heart rate. The internal heart rate sensor was then utilized, at which point no further stimulation (i.e., impedance checking) occurred. This took approximately 2 min, and the heart rate was noted to be stable during this time.
The wound was further irrigated with room temperature sterile normal saline with retractors in place and the nerve exposed. A few seconds into irrigation, the anesthesiologist promptly reported a cessation of the heart rate and informed the surgical team who subsequently stopped surgery . The team prepared for cardiac life support, but after approximately 5 s, the heart rate returned spontaneously. A repeat impedance check, which included turning on the stimulation, did not cause any issues. No further cardiac events, including pauses, were noted, and the case continued to completion without issue. Postoperatively, the device was turned on and has been in use for approximately 1 month without any further complications. In review of the vital sign data, it was noted that the heart rate changes were immediately preceded by a slight elevation in systolic blood pressure from a consistent 120 to 133. The patient did well after surgery and continues to be followed for his epilepsy.