A 45-year-old female presented with worsening confusion, memory loss, and loss of bladder control for 3 days. She suffered from dizziness for the past year and altered gait for the past few weeks. Her medical history was significant for hypertension, depression, and headaches. Surgical history was limited to two cesarean sections and a tubal ligation. She was a non-smoker with no history of alcohol or drug abuse. There was no family history of brain malignancy. On physical examination, the patient presented with Parinaud's phenomenon, was orientated to person and place, but could not recall the date and relied on her husband to answer most of the questions. The remaining cranial nerves were intact. No pronator drift was present. Strength, sensation, and reflexes in upper and lower extremities were normal. Initial laboratory results were significant for an elevated white blood cell count of 16.7. Non-contrast CT scan of the head showed the presence of a large posterior fossa mass and hydrocephalus. However, it was difficult to discern the boundaries of the mass [Figure and ]. A follow-up MRI with and without contrast confirmed the presence of a 4.2 × 3.3 × 4.6 cm3 mass in the tectal region compressing the cerebellum and obliterating the fourth ventricle [Figure and ]. The mass caused a 4 mm tonsilar herniation through the foramen magnum. MRS demonstrated an elevated choline/N-acetylaspartate ratio and an increase in lactate suggesting an aggressive neoplasm as opposed to an abscess . A ventricular-peritoneal shunt was initially placed to relieve the hydrocephalus and after discussion with the patient's family surgery was performed to determine the pathology of the mass. The patient subsequently underwent a suboccipital craniotomy with biopsies of the necrotic mass. Biopsy of the lesion was consistent with GBM [Figure –]. Her postoperative CT scan showed improvement of hydrocephalus and a decrease in tumor size [Figure and ]. The family declined further treatment after diagnosis of GBM.