A 53-year-old male patient underwent sudden loss of consciousness and tonic-clonic convulsion for 2 min when playing cards. He was transported to the emergency department of our hospital 1 h later.
In addition to these symptoms, the patient also had froth at the mouth, trismus, and urinary incontinence for 8 min before admission. He appeared to be hypomanic and had chest discomfort for 30 min and tonic-clonic convulsion for 1 min since his admission. There were no obvious symptoms of dyspnea, headache, or dizziness.
The patient had a history of hypertension for more than 10 years without regular antihypertensive drugs. He did not know the stratification and severity of hypertension. He had no history of other diseases.
His personal and family history was unremarkable.
The general condition of the patient was fair. He showed persistent irritability for 30 min, his highest blood pressure on the left upper arm was 220/140 mmHg, and his heart rate was 112 beats per min. When the patient was quiet, his left upper arm blood pressure was 145/90 mmHg, and the right one was 185/113 mmHg. The other vital signs were stable. The neurological examination showed that his pupils were of the same size and shape, with a diameter of about 3 mm, and were sensitive to light reflexes. The other cranial nerve examinations were normal. Both his superficial and deep nerve reflections existed. The pathological signs were negative. He had visible limb activity but no pyramidal signs were detected. The neuromuscular examination displayed that his muscle tone and muscle strength were normal. He refused to do the other coordination movement examinations due to inconvenience.
The patient’s blood test indicated some abnormal items; for example, the white blood cell count was 24.09 × 109/L and the neutrophil ratio was 90.84%. The result of the lactate was 5.50 mmol/L in the biochemical test. In the myocardial enzyme spectrum test, the value of troponin I was 94.188 μg/L, the value of creatine kinase isoenzyme was 109.810 μg/L, the value of creatine kinase was 2078.00 IU/L, the value of myohemoglobin was 3717.750 μg/L, and the value of B type natriuretic peptide was 206.650 pg/mL. The results of the urine test, stool test, and coagulation test were normal.
The electroencephalogram displayed 2-3 Hz moderate-high amplitude slow waves mainly in the left anterior area, frontal midline area, and right frontal polar area of the head . The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm and normal ECG . The results of head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were abnormal hyperintense signals (white arrows) in white matter regions of the brain, known as the centrum semiovale . The thoracic aorta computed tomography angiography (CTA) exhibited that the AoD originated at the lower part of the ascending aorta, extended to the right common carotid artery, the brachiocephalic artery, the left common carotid artery, the left subclavian artery and the descending aorta (white arrows), and false lumens were filled with a contrast agent . Other examinations were normal.