A 43-year-old man with a history of chronic alcoholism presented with abdominal distension. The previous day, the patient had presented to a local hospital with anal bleeding and abdominal pain after an incidental insertion of barbecue skewer per anus in the drunken state; subsequently, he had undergone sigmoid loop colostomy for rectal perforation. However, after the operation, the patient had become hemodynamically unstable. At presentation, his systolic blood pressure was 90 mmHg and the pulse rate was 135 beats/min. Although there was no gross rectal bleeding, the digital rectal examination revealed a penny-sized anterior rectal wall defect 6 cm from the anal verge (AV). Computed tomography (CT) revealed a hematoma (12 × 10 × 15 cm) with active bleeding in the pelvic cavity and a pseudoaneurysm in the anterior wall of the rectum . Since the patient was hemodynamically unstable, an emergency operation was performed. During the operation, a massive subperitoneal hematoma in the rectovesical pouch and large amount of blood in the peritoneal cavity were found. After evacuation of the hematoma and blood, oozing continued in the rectovesical pouch . Thus, compression with gauze was performed for 30 min until the oozing stopped. The Hartmann procedure was performed with the suspected bleeding focus included, but the perforation site was not included.
Although the postoperative course was uneventful and there was no evidence of recurrent bleeding on the follow-up CT on the 7th postoperative day (POD), a focal enhancing lesion in the anterior wall of the rectum indicating a residual pseudoaneurysm was noted . On the 11th day POD, his hemoglobin decreased from 11.6 g/dL to 7.9 g/dL, and the follow-up CT revealed recurrent hematoma (6.0 × 4.2 cm) in the pelvic cavity and the residual pseudoaneurysm . Following the diagnosis of recurrent bleeding from the residual pseudoaneurysm, an angiography was performed. However, the angiography failed to localize the pseudoaneurysm, and definite signs of extravasation could not be ascertained. Thus, prophylactic gelfoam embolization at the anterior branch of both the internal iliac arteries was performed . The subsequent hospital course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 25th POD. After 3 months, the previous rectal lesion (AV: 6 cm) healed, and colostomy reversal was performed without morbidity.