A 28-year-old Japanese woman was referred for 5 mm of nuchal translucency (NT) at 14 weeks of gestation. She and her partner had a 3-year-old healthy daughter, and the couple had no history of abortion. Following counseling, they did not agree to further prenatal examination. At 20 weeks of gestation, fetal growth restriction was detected, and at 24 weeks suspicious findings of a left-sided CDH and atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD) were observed in the fetus. The observed lung-to-head ratio was approximately 30%. Fetal magnetic resonance imaging revealed intestinal penetration of the thoracic cavity , but liver herniation was not detected. Thus, the severity of CDH was estimated as moderate, with a survival rate of 50–60% . Giemsa-banding procedure performed on amniotic fluid aspirated by amniocentesis at 25 weeks of gestation identified the fetal karyotype as 46, XX, del(5)(p14) . In addition, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) also revealed the absence of a 5p15.2 signal . After discussion, the parents were determined to provide aggressive treatment to the newborn, who might have been refractory to treatment compared with CDH newborns with normal karyotype.
At 36 + 6 weeks of gestation, the pregnant woman was admitted with premature rupture of membranes and labor onset. A 1542 g female neonate was born by spontaneous vaginal delivery without complications. Apgar scores at 1 and 5 minutes after birth were 4 and 6 points (appearance 0 and 1, pulse 1 and 2, grimace 1 and 1, activity 1 and 1, respiration 1 and 1), respectively. Immediately after birth, the baby was intubated with sedation and muscle relaxation according to the standard of care for prenatally diagnosed CDH [, ], and was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit. The mother was discharged 5 days after delivery without complications. The surgery for CDH performed on postnatal day 1 was successful. The evacuated organs were the colon, small intestine, and spleen, and no artificial membranes were needed. The baby was extubated 13 days after birth, but nasal continuous positive airway pressure was required for laryngomalacia. Antenatally suspected AVSD was not detected, but a ventricular septal defect (VSD) was newly found. The patient was transferred to the hospital near her home 42 days after birth, and was discharged without any respiratory support 91 days after birth. At 15 months, the VSD had closed spontaneously, and the infant could not stay sitting up unassisted.
The postnatal karyotyping of peripheral blood was confirmed to be 46, XX, del(5)(p14); however, the karyotypes of both parents were normal. Therefore, the deletion of 5p was determined to be de novo. The child also showed the phenotypes associated with 5p deletion syndrome, including developmental impairment.