A 41-year-old Caucasian male, without previous medical history, presented to the emergency department of another hospital with pleuritic substernal chest pain, radiating to the neck; his vital signs were reportedly normal. After evaluation, an initial diagnosis of low-risk acute pericarditis was established-absence of fever, pericardial effusion, and haemodynamic instability—and he was discharged on ibuprofen and colchicine, according to ESC Guidelines for pericarditis management. The following day, due to persistent severe chest pain, he visited our emergency department. On admission, his temperature was 36.8°C, blood pressure (BP) of 110/75 mmHg, heart rate (HR) 85 beats/min, respiratory rate (RR) 16/min, and oxygen saturation 98% on room air. His physical examination was unremarkable. The electrocardiogram demonstrated normal sinus rhythm and diffuse concave ST-elevation and the chest X-ray was normal. The transthoracic echocardiogram did not reveal pericardial effusion and the biventricular function was normal, without regional wall motion abnormalities. Initial laboratory results demonstrated leucocytosis and elevated C-reactive protein CRP ; our infectious disease specialist attributed these findings tentatively to viral Coxsackie infection, despite lack of symptoms consistent with upper respiratory tract infection; there was an enterovirus outbreak, including many Coxsackie cases, at the time. We, therefore, continued his treatment with ibuprofen 600 mg every 8 h and colchicine 0.5 mg every 12 h, adding an opioid analgesic (tramadol), considering him a case of low-risk acute pericarditis, as per ESC guidelines, which propose a short course of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, with the adjunct of colchicine for the prevention of recurrences. Approximately 10 h later, despite the symptomatic improvement, he became haemodynamically unstable (BP = 90/60 mmHg, HR = 120 b.p.m., RR = 22/min), and he reported oliguria over the previous 6 h. On examination, distended jugular veins and pulsus paradoxus were found. His new electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus tachycardia with PR depression and diffuse concave ST-elevation. His arterial blood gases (ABGs) were pH 7.32/pCO2 17.6 mmHg/pO2 78.5 mmHg on nasal cannula 3 L/min, with lactate 7.5 mmol/L (normal value < 1 mmol/L). His new echocardiogram revealed moderate size (18 mm), semi-clear echo space between the epicardium and the parietal pericardium, indicating non-loculated pericardial effusion; in addition, there were signs of cardiac tamponade, including right ventricle and right atrium diastolic collapse and inferior vena cava plethora . We, therefore, proceeded with pericardiocentesis, via the subxiphoid route, and 600 mL of purulent fluid was drained . Despite complete pericardial drainage and with no evidence of effusive-constrictive pericarditis (absence of septal bounce and pericardial thickening), the patient remained haemodynamically unstable, even after 500 mL of normal saline administration, with signs of multi-organ failure (marble-like skin, confusion, renal and hepatic failure, and myeloid suppression) . Subsequently, the patient became hypoxic and was, therefore, intubated but soon after suffered cardiac arrest. His initial rhythm was pulseless electrical activity and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) protocol was immediately initiated, with spontaneous circulation achieved within 5 min. At this point his ABGs were pH 7.122/pCO2 72.8 mmHg/pO2 86.0 mmHg on 100% O2 administration, with lactate 19 mmol/L (normal value < 1 mmol/L). Despite noradrenaline and dobutamine i.v. infusions, the patient suffered again a cardiac arrest, and CPR was applied for 55 min, but without success. His pericardial and blood cultures were positive for S. pneumoniae.