The patient was a 56-year-old female, who presented with the chief complaint of swelling in the anterior upper gingiva in 2011 . On examination and biopsy, she was diagnosed with intraoral squamous cell carcinoma (T1N0M0) for which a maxillary resection was performed. Immediate reconstruction was not adopted because of the large defect in the alveolar mucosa and difficulty with postoperative follow-up. Five years later, there was no recurrence of the malignant tumor, and hence, a maxillary reconstruction was planned. On examination, the patients’ facial appearance was symmetrical, but without the prosthesis, her upper lip recessed. CT revealed a large bony defect involving the dental-alveolar area in the anterior maxilla . Using the data from the CT, we prepared a 3D model of the maxilla using a 3D printer (Stratasys Co. Connex 260) and the site of reconstruction was determined. Then, a custom-made mesh titanium plate was fabricated in the remote laboratory, based on the 3D model (ULTRA FLEX MESH CUSTOM, Okada Medical Supply, Tokyo, Japan) . This plate thickness is 0.6 mm. And the titanium mesh plate was given a basic hexagonal polygonal shape designed to have high 3D flexibility.
We used the custom-made titanium mesh plate and particulate cancellous bone and marrow graft (PCBM) from her iliac bone to reconstruct the maxillary defect. To prevent surgical wound dehiscence and subsequent exposure of the mesh plate and alveolar bone loss, the custom-made mesh plate was inserted using the tunneling flap technique as opposed to the alveolar crest incision. The mesh plate was fixed to the maxilla using several bone screws, following which PCBM was used to fill the inside of the mesh. Finally, we closed the surgical incision by suturing . The total operative time was 118 min, and total blood loss was 50 ml. No adverse events occurred during the surgery.
Seven months after the reconstruction, we removed the mesh plate and performed a vestibuloplasty with an atelocollagen sheet (TERUDERMIS™, OLYMPUS TERUMO BIOMATERIALS, Tokyo, Japan). . Ten months after reconstruction, three dental implant fixtures (diameter 3.3 mm, SLActive, Straumann Japan) were inserted in the graft . Before the final crown setting, we performed an additional gingivoplasty using palate mucosal graft . The patient has been completely satisfied with the treatment, both functionally and esthetically. This case report has been approved by the ethics committee of Tokyo Dental College (no. 646) (Tokyo, Japan).