An 82 year old white male was admitted with 10 day history of severe, continuous myalgia and proximal muscle weakness. He denied vigorous physical exercise, heat exposure, alcohol or recreational drug abuse. He reports no other specific complaints.
His medications Simvastatin 80 mg qhs, Metoprolol extended release 25 mg once daily, Hydrocodone/Acetaminophen 7.5/500 mg p.r.n. for pain, cyclobenzaprine 10 mg t.i.d. p.r.n. for muscle spasms and lisinopril 10 mg once daily. He had been on simvastatin for many years, pertinent to note that Gemfibrozil 600 mg b.i.d. had been started a month ago. He reports no significant food or drug allergies.
Past medical/surgical history of viral cardiomyopathy 5 years back, migraines, obstructive sleep apnea, shoulder and foot surgery, appendecectomy, Cervical and lumbosacral spondylosis status post laminectomy , BPH status post transurethral resection of prostate and non melanotic skin cancer. Family history significant for hypertension.
On admission serum K 5.9, Na 132, BUN 73, Cr 2.2, albumin 2.7, chloride 98, CO2 21, CBC was within normal limits CK was 41368 on presentation (n=35-232 U/L), ALT was 1293 (n=30-65U/L) AST 1439 (n=15-37) phosphorus 5.4, calcium 9.5. UA showed 3+ occult blood with only 4-10 RBCs per high power field.
Acute renal failure and abnormal liver function tests secondary to rhabdomyolysis was diagnosed. Simvastatin and Gemfibrozil were stopped and he was started on aggressive alkaline intravenous fluid resuscitation. In light of the elevated potassium and ARF, ACE-I was also stopped.
By hospital day 4 creatinine kinase rose to 86400, BUN 82, Cr 2, ALT 930 and AST 1326. UA showed 3+occult blood with no red blood cells on microscopic examination. He became oliguric; plasmapheresis with one and a half volume replacement with albumin was started at this point in addition to hemodialysis. The patient received plasmapheresis daily for 5 days in addition to hemodialysis
Patient was discharged to Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation at Day 30, he remained off dialysis and plasmapheresis and was discharged in stable ambulatory status.
Approximately 6 months after this episode all laboratory parameters were within normal limits, he remained at baseline health as well as functional status. Approximately 4 years after this episode, at his last outpatient nephrology clinic visit all his laboratory values remain within normal limits and he maintains baseline health and functional status.
Omega-3 fish oil supplements, diet and lifestyle changes were used to treat his abnormal lipid profile, statins and fibrates were avoided due to this episode and also due to patient’s desire that he not be treated with either of the two medications. It is pertinent to note that his last lipid profile meets ATP III guideline goals.