A 67-year-old female patient with appetite loss for more than half a year and personal history of hyperthyroidism was admitted to our hospital.
The patient suffered chronic anemia.
The patient has a history of chronic anemia and has not been treated.
The patient denies any family history of anemia and tumors.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.3 °C; blood pressure, 121/73 mmHg; heart rate, 84 beats per min; respiratory rate, 18 breaths per min. Furthermore, the patient has anemic appearance and pale skin mucosa.
Auxiliary examination after admission revealed the following: Hemoglobin = 69 g/L, mean corpuscular volume = 119 fL, vitamin B12 < 50 pg/mL, folic acid = 32.5 ng/mL, ferritin = 208.9 ng/mL, parietal cell antibody was negative, internal factor antibody was positive, gastrin 17 = 97.1 pmol/L (1.7-7.6 pmol/L), pepsinogen I/pepsinogen II = 2.17, C13 urea breath test was negative, and serum H. pylori antibody was negative.
Whole-body imaging procedures (computed tomography scan and abdominal ultrasonography) did not reveal metastatic involvement of any other organ.
Gastroscopy was performed after admission and showed that the gastric body and fundus mucosa were thinned, red, and white (but mainly white). The submucosal vascular network was transparent, and the gastric antrum mucosa was normal . The diagnosis was chronic atrophic gastritis. In order to clarify the type of atrophic gastritis, random multipoint biopsies were performed on the gastric body, fundus, angle, and antrum. Pathological examination showed that the gastric fundus and gastric body had chronic severe atrophic gastritis. The lesser curvature of the gastric body, the anterior wall of the gastric body, and the posterior wall of the gastric body exhibited hyperplasia of enterochromaffin cells. The greater curvature of the gastric body showed neuroendocrine tumor G1 (carcinoid), and the gastric antrum and gastric angle exhibited mild atrophic gastritis with mild intestinal epithelial metaplasia. Immunohistochemical examination revealed that the greater curvature of the gastric body was Syn (+), CgA (+), and Ki-67 (+, about 1%), which is consistent with neuroendocrine tumors (Grade 1; Figure ).