An 83-year-old man was referred to our department complaining of vision blurring in his right eye for six months. The patient had a confirmed family history of Wagner syndrome. On examination, best-corrected visual acuity was 20/200 on the right eye and no light perception on the left eye. From his previous ocular history, one year ago he underwent secondary IOL implantation elsewhere with an one-piece foldable hydrophilic acrylic Carlevale IOL (FIL SSF, Soleko IOL Division, Italy) due to IOL dislocation. Slit-lamp examination revealed IOL opacification . Cornea and anterior chamber examinations were unremarkable. The results of a noncontact specular microscopy examination showed that his right eye had 1900 cells/mm2. Fundus examination by Optos P200DTx (Optos PLC, Dunfermline, Scotland, UK) was difficult due to the opaque lens, but revealed fundus lesions as pigmented condensation, peripheral pigmentary changes and regions of choroidal atrophy . After discussing risks and benefits, we proceeded to IOL explantation with a secondary anterior chamber IOL (ACIOL) (MTA4UO; Alcon Laboratories, Inc. Fort Worth, TX 76,134, USA) implantation. After a thorough pars plana vitrectomy, the IOL was removed through a sclero-corneal tunnel incision. However, during the IOL explantation, when the T-shaped haptics “anchors” were withdrawn from the scleral pockets, it was discovered that the IOL was initially implanted upside down, with the anterior surface of the lens facing the vitreous cavity. . The explanted IOL was immersed in balanced salt solution and was sent for further investigation to laboratory. Three months later, vision improved to 20/25 with no further complications. A slit-lamp examination showed a clear cornea, a quiet anterior chamber, a patent peripheral iridectomy and a well-centered ACIOL . Furthermore, corneal endothelial cells were examined and revealed a density of 1730 cells/mm2. Postoperative fundus examination revealed vascular attenuation and vascular sheathing with generalized retinal pigment epithelial atrophy with peripheral chorioretinal atrophy , identical to the findings of the Wagner syndrome.