A 9-year-old girl was admitted to the emergency department (ED) presenting with respiratory distress. She has been reportedly investigated for a six-month history of less intense dyspnea and symmetrical additive polyarthritis of large and small joints (proximal interphalangeal, 2nd and 3rd metatarsophalangeal joints, wrists, elbows, ankles, and knees), with functional limitation and intermittent fever (38–39 °C), associated with malar rash aggravated by sun exposure, alopecia, petechiae in the trunk and neck, generalized lymphadenopathy, and weight loss not measured. Therefore, hydroxychloroquine 6.5 mg/kg/day and cefepime 100 mg/kg/day (maintained for 10 days) therapies were then started. Methylprednisolone pulse was not started by that time due to the possibility of infection.
Laboratory tests, imaging examinations, and myelogram were then performed. Laboratory results are shown in and . Chest ultrasound was performed in the ED, disclosing a 0.7cm left-side pleural effusion. It was complemented by a chest x-ray that depicted lingual atelectasis. Myelogram results revealed a hypocellular marrow, with < 1% blasts, mild dysgranulocytopoiesis, and dyserythropoiesis. The patient fulfilled Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics (SLICC) 2012 criteria for SLE (presence of acute cutaneous lupus, alopecia, arthritis, serositis, hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-DNA, and antiphospholipid antibodies). Thus, prednisone 1 mg/kg and azathioprine 2 mg/kg were added to the prescription after these results.
Three days after hospitalization, the patient progressed with a significant deterioration of general status, worsening of dyspnea, muffled heart sounds, jugular vein distension, hemodynamic instability, and intense pallor. Doppler echocardiogram was then performed, showing a large pericardial effusion with diastolic collapse of the right atrium. The patient was transfused and submitted to pericardiocentesis followed by water seal pleuropericardial drainage. Due to drain obstruction, a new approach was adopted the next day, without further complications. A new echocardiogram was performed two days later, exhibiting moderate left ventricular systolic dysfunction, an ejection fraction of 60%, and moderate tricuspid regurgitation. Furosemide 2 mg/day and spironolactone 2 mg/day therapies were then initiated. Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy (1 g/kg/day) was administered on two subsequent days due to persistent autoimmune bicytopenia. The following echocardiogram, two weeks later, showed no pathological signs.
CMV antigenemia was requested after a positive serology result, with titers of 15/200,000 cells. Ganciclovir 5 mg/kg/day therapy was started. After 10 days of treatment, antigenemia persisted (28/200,000 cells), and ganciclovir dose was therefore doubled. After eight days, another antigenemia showed titers of 1/200,000 cells. The patient continued ganciclovir 10 mg/kg/day treatment for two more weeks, evolving with good clinical and laboratory improvement, and was discharged using oral valganciclovir 20 mg/kg/day.