A 70-year-old female presented to the emergency department after being found acutely delirious at home by family. The patient’s past medical history included hypertension, heart failure with recovered ejection fraction (EF) secondary to non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy, documented history of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, and remote cardiac arrest secondary to ventricular fibrillation. Additionally, the patient had a cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator (CRT-D) placed in 2010 following her cardiac arrest for both primary and secondary prevention, as she had reduced EF and prolonged native QRS at that time. The patient’s CRT-D was later converted to a single-chamber ICD in 2016 at the time of battery exchange. This was presumptively due to a lack of arrhythmic events and recovery of a narrow non-pacing QRS in conjunction with recovered EF at the time of battery exchange. The patient’s prior cardiologist documented ‘non-pacing QRS is now narrow, and EF recovered’ just prior to right atrial and left ventricle lead removal, per chart review. The patient remained without arrhythmic events on serial device interrogations for several years. This remained true until ∼1 month prior to admission when she had one episode of ventricular fibrillation prompting defibrillation. She had not yet received a device upgrade by the time of this admission.
Vital signs on presentation were notable for fever to 38.4°C, with otherwise normal blood pressure and pulse, saturating >94% on room air. Physical exam was notable for altered mental status, jugular venous distention, and a soft systolic murmur at the left lower sternal border. Initial laboratory studies revealed white blood cell count of 10 880/μL (normal range 4.00–10.00 K/μL), haemoglobin 7900 g/dL (normal range 13.5–17.5 g/dL), and glomerular filtration rate of 78 mL/min/1.73 m2. Workup of altered mental status included lumbar puncture, and cerebrospinal fluid cultures grew S.pneumoniae. A chest radiograph revealed a right-sided consolidation and pleural effusion. Both pleural fluid cultures and blood cultures grew S.pneumoniae. Initial transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed a 1.0 cm × 2.0 cm TV mass with moderate tricuspid regurgitation and estimated left ventricular EF of 45%. Subsequent transoesophageal echocardiography revealed a 3.5 mm × 11.5 mm mobile mass with independent motion on the posterior leaflet of the TV, as well as a 9.5 mm × 14.7 mm mobile echodensity on the atrial aspect of the ICD pacing wire, concerning for endocarditis and CIED-related infection. With evidence of Osler’s triad of pneumonia, endocarditis, and meningitis in the setting of disseminated S.pneumoniae, she was diagnosed with the rarely seen Austrian syndrome.
The patient was initially treated with IV vancomycin 1250 mg every 12 h and ceftriaxone 2 g every 12 h and later transitioned to monotherapy with ceftriaxone at the same dose. She also received prophylactic anticoagulation with 5000 units of subcutaneous heparin every 8 h. Given evidence of CIED-related infection, our electrophysiologists performed ICD extraction in accordance with ESC guidelines. Intracardiac echocardiography employed during lead extraction provided detailed visualization of the 11-year-old lead and its adherent mass, as well as the TV mass (see , ). Extraction of the lead was complex in this case as a result of insulation build-up encountered along its route. It is a standard practice of our electrophysiologists to employ ICE during complex extractions in which there is high risk of pericardial effusion. Extreme caution is used to avoid dislodgment of any intracardiac masses including potential septic emboli in cases of suspected endocarditis. The lead was ultimately removed intact via traction through the device pocket. There were no evidence of pericardial effusion on ICE post-extraction and no clinical evidence of embolic complication post-procedure.
After multidisciplinary discussion, our colleagues in infectious disease recommended removal of the TV mass primarily to reduce embolic potential, but also to reduce risk of future CIED-related infection upon reimplantation. Given the patient’s multiple co-morbidities, she was deemed a poor surgical candidate; consequently, we opted to pursue minimally invasive debulking using AngioVac. Following ICD extraction, the patient underwent debulking of the TV mass using a 25F AngioVac with right internal jugular and right femoral vein access. Intraoperative transoesophageal echocardiography revealed a 1.6 cm × 0.8 cm mobile mass on the right atrial aspect of the TV leaflet (see , , , ). This mass was successfully debulked with multiple runs under TEE and fluoroscopic guidance, with near-complete removal evidenced on post-debulking images (see , ). Pathology of the extracted mass revealed thrombus with no growth on specimen cultures. Notably, the patient received over 1 week of broad-spectrum antibiotics (vancomycin plus ceftriaxone) prior to debulking. The patient was discharged with a wearable cardioverter defibrillator due to recent episode of ventricular fibrillation. She completed a 4 week course of IV ceftriaxone from the date of debulking. The patient achieved impressive functional recovery following treatment of her systemic infection. She subsequently underwent reimplantation of a single-chamber ICD 3 months after discharge.