A 54-year-old man who was diagnosed with HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma had successfully undergone left lateral segmentectomy for a lesion measuring 5 cm in maximum diameter. Four months after the surgery, whole-body 18-fluorine-fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission-tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) was performed due to the increased alpha fetoprotein (AFP) levels revealed malignant lesions mainly in the medial segment of the left hepatic lobe. The patient was not eligible for liver transplantation because of accompanying congestive heart failure. Additionally, due to the lesion’s proximity to the nearby vessels, radiofrequency ablation was not found to be appropriate. Stereotactic ablative radiation therapy is not available in our hospital and based on a multidisciplinary tumor board decision, the patient was referred to SIRT for the lesions in the left hepatic lobe. 99mTc-MAA particles were administered for liver-lung shunt calculation by planar imaging. It was demonstrated a lung shunt fraction (LSF) of 5% . Since there was no evidence that could interfere with the treatment, transarterial 32 mCi 90Y resin microspheres (SIR-Spheres, Sirtex Medical Limited, North Sydney, Australia) delivered via hepatic artery. Posttherapy bremsstrahlung planar images showed an unexpected liver-lung shunt . The patient was closely monitored by DLCO. The mean baseline DLCO was 98% of predicted value .
Three weeks after the SIRT, there was a significant decrease in DLCO (79% of predicted), while the patient was asymptomatic and the saturation of peripheral oxygen (SpO2) level was 99%. Chest radiogram and computed tomography (CT) of the thorax did not show any evidence of RP .
Four weeks after the SIRT, DLCO reduction was more remarkable (77% of predicted - Fig. b) and the SpO2 level was 97%. CT scan was assessed for the presence, extent, and anatomic distribution of the areas with ground-glass attenuation in the pulmonary parenchyma . The patient had no fever or dyspnea, but reported dry cough. Therefore, the patient was hospitalized and intravenous prednisone given at 1 mg/Kg/day with antibiotic therapy.
Seven weeks after the SIRT, 18F-FDG PET/CT scan was demonstrated 18F-FDG uptake in the multiple ground-glass opacities in both lungs compatible with RP . The patient was rehospitalized and glucocorticoid treatment with modified antibiotherapy continued.
Eleven weeks after the SIRT, CT scan demonstrated bilateral diffuse, patchy ground-glass attenuation/consolidation areas seemed to be progressed . Meanwhile, SpO2 decreased from 92 to 82%. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit, but one week after he died due to pulmonary complications.