A 63-year-old man presented to the emergency department (ED) with unremitting interscapular pain radiating to his neck, which he suspected to be from a myocardial infarction (MI). Onset was 1 day after performing self-manipulation of his cervical spine. He described the maneuver by grabbing his chin and applying a rapid, rotating motion bilaterally. He reported a long history (> 20 years) of performing this maneuver intermittently with perceived benefit. Initial workup in the ED aimed to identify the potential source of pain and consisted of computed tomography angiogram of the chest and abdomen, which excluded dissecting thoracic aneurysm, MI, and pulmonary embolism. Relevant past medical history included atrial fibrillation (AF) managed with long-term warfarin therapy. His international normalized ratio (INR) was 7.84 upon admission to the ED, and he was admitted to the hospital for closer monitoring of any signs or symptoms of neurovascular compromise. The following day, the patient became acutely quadriparetic and hypotensive. His blood pressure decreased to 75/38 mmHg, and his neurological level was determined to be C7 American Spinal Injury Association Impairment Scale D .
Urgent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical and thoracic spine demonstrated multilevel SEH from the lower cervical to thoracic spine . With identification of an active bleed and an INR remaining close to 7.0, the patient’s hypercoaguable state was reversed with fresh frozen plasma and factor VII prior to emergency surgery. The patient underwent partial C7, complete T1 and T2, and partial T3 bilateral laminectomy for evacuation of SEH. Placement of an epidural drainage catheter was also performed with the use of C-arm fluoroscopy.
Throughout the first 6 days following surgery, the patient recovered some function of the upper and lower extremities while undergoing hospital-based physical therapy. Post-operative MRI showed resolution of the SEH and cord compression without resultant cord damage . The patient was admitted 7 days post-operatively to an acute inpatient rehabilitation unit with: 1) INR of 1.23; 2) acute kidney injury, which improved with hydration; 3) atrial fibrillation converted to sinus bradycardia on antiarrhythmic medications, not to be anticoagulated; 4) neurogenic bladder secondary to spinal cord injury; 5) diabetes mellitus controlled with medication; 5) and anemia, which improved with iron supplementation. Physical examination revealed 4/5 manual muscle strength testing to the upper and lower extremities. He exhibited moderate dysmetria with finger-to-nose testing and slow initiation of movement. Deep tendon reflexes were 1+/4 to the bilateral lower extremities but 2+/4 to the upper extremities. There were no findings of ankle clonus or pronator drift.
The patient completed a 2-week course of acute interdisciplinary rehabilitation. The epidural drainage catheter remained in place for most of his post-operative stay. His neurogenic bladder with urinary retention resolved. At hospital discharge, the patient’s greatest deficits remained his fine motor skills to his right hand along with residual paresthesia in his lower extremities. He also exhibited mild dyspraxia with finger-to-nose testing on the right and heel-to-shin testing bilaterally. The patient regained full manual muscle strength of all 4 extremities and ultimately returned to his baseline functional status, which included ambulating independently with a cane and independence with activities of daily living.