A 60-year-old Caucasian male was admitted to the emergency unit upon having a seizure, with no significant medical history. He reported a 2-month history of numbness in the left hand and intermittent dysarthria. Physical examination showed impaired fine motor skills and hypoesthesia in the left arm. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) revealed a multifocal 38 × 42 × 38 mm lesion in the right temporal lobe and a singular lesion in the left internal auditory canal (IAC) with a discreet hyperintense signal and abnormal enhancement . Gross resection of the lesion in the right temporal lobe was performed. Immunohistopathological analyses identified the lesion as an isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) wild-type epithelioid glioblastoma with O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) methylation at 12% and BRAF V600E mutation . The patient was started on adjuvant concomitant chemoradiotherapy that included temozolomide [75 mg/m2 body surface area (BSA), d1–d42] and stereotactic radiotherapy (60 Gy split in 30 units) of the tumor cavity in the right temporal lobe and its marginalizing solid components . The enhancement in the left IAC was not irradiated as the signal alteration was not interpreted as a metastasis . To assess the therapy outcome, a cMRI was done on therapy day 42. The cMRI showed that the right-sided tumor cavity, including its solid components, remained unchanged in size but with a larger perifocal edema that was presumably a postradiogenic effect. However, the lesion in the left IAC excluded in the irradiation field was progressive . The oligoprogression prompted us to continue with temozolomide treatment at 100 mg/m2 BSA as maintenance therapy. Within 2 weeks, the patient was seen in the outpatient oncology clinic with a marked imbalance, as well as a new, rapidly advancing left-sided facial nerve weakness, dysphagia, dysarthria, and left-sided deafness albeit without lower central nervous dysfunction. The Romberg test was positive, and his gait was wide and ataxic, with assistance required to prevent falling during tandem walking trials. These symptoms were consistent with the lesion in the left IAC. Due to the fast deterioration and a fall leading to a nose bone fracture, we admitted the patient to our clinic. Owing to the persistent dysphagia, we decided to implant a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube to avoid aspiration and malnutrition. Four weeks following the adjuvant chemoradiotherapy, the cMRI demonstrated a rapid growth of the lesion in the left IAC. This lesion measured 31 × 24 × 33 mm and infiltrated the adjacent structure, that is, the cranial nerves (II, V, VII–XII), the leptomeninges, and the left parotid gland . In addition, the meninges of the Sylvian fissure showed an enhanced contrast uptake that breached the left orbit and cerebellum with suspicious infiltrations into the medulla oblongata. Moreover, the tumor cavity with its solid residues in the right temporal lobe was accompanied by an expanding edema . A lumbar puncture was performed and confirmed meningeosis glioblastoma on cytopathological analysis. Laboratory tests showed that hematological and organ functions were not impaired. To control the impact of the expanding intracranial mass, we initiated radiotherapy of the whole brain. As the patient deteriorated fast, we could neither start the patient on second-line therapy, such as antiangiogenic drugs or BRAF V600E inhibitors, nor recruit him in a clinical trial. The approval of BRAF inhibitors for treating V600E-mutated epithelioid GB was pending at the time (Swissmedic National Authorization for Drugs, cited September 2020); it would therefore have been an experimental approach. We decided to dispense further diagnostics and did not perform a biopsy of the left intrameatal lesion. At the request of the family and the patient, we focused on palliative care. The patient died 4 months after the initial diagnosis owing to the rapid tumor progression that led to paralyses of multiple cranial nerves. The family did not wish for an autopsy.