An 80-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our department with acute abdomen. She presented with abdominal pain, no passage of flatus or stool, and vomiting. In the last year she had three episodes of intermittent bowel obstruction and a weight loss of 22 kilograms, for which she was treated conservatively. Our patient had undergone a left mastectomy for lobular carcinoma of the breast three years ago. She had no history of previous abdominal operations. During the last year she presented with bone metastases (diagnosed by bone scintigraphy, which was negative for abdominal disease) and she was under continuous administration of letrozole and zoledronic acid.
On admission, her abdominal X-rays showed intestinal air-fluid levels and an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed distended intestinal loops and thickening of her intestinal wall. It showed no abdominal masses or other evidence of peritoneal carcinomatosis, but was suggestive of an obstruction at the ileocecal valve. An ileal intussusception was found during laparotomy. Her small bowel was dilated from the ligament of Treitz to approximately 10 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve. The cause of intussusception was an intraluminal mass 3 × 4 cm in size . No hepatic masses were found but some nodules were palpable in the mesentery. Approximately 30 cm of ileum were resected and continuity was re-established with an end-to-end anastomosis. A histological examination demonstrated multiple foci of lobular carcinoma of the breast . Our patient's recovery was uneventful and she is under meticulous follow up and drug administration (letrozole and zoledronic acid).
An 80-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to an internal medicine department at our hospital complaining of acute abdominal pain, no passage of flatus or stool, and vomiting. He was transferred to our department with the diagnosis of a probable bowel obstruction. His prior history revealed a skin lesion excised two years ago, with a histologic diagnosis of melanoma. Plain abdominal radiographs showed no air-fluid levels and an abdominal CT scan showed bowel obstruction with dilatation of his stomach and his small bowel full of liquid up to his proximal ileum. An intestinal loop with an abnormally thick wall (approximately 10 mm) was also observed. This unilateral, signet-ring-like thickening of his intestinal wall was, according to the radiologist, suggestive of enteric intussusception . A double (that is, the intussuscepted part was doubly imbricated) jejuno-jejunal intussusception was found at laparotomy, caused by an intraluminal mass at the terminal part of his jejunum . After manual reduction, the part of his jejunum with the intussusception was resected and the continuity was re-established with an end-to-end anastomosis. No gross mesenteric lymphadenopathy or hepatic masses were observed. Histological examination demonstrated metastatic polypoid melanoma of the small bowel.