A 77 year-old female was brought to a neighboring hospital with altered mental status, having been found unresponsive at home with evidence of bowel incontinence and bloody diarrhea. The patient had been well until two weeks prior to admission when she developed symptoms of nausea, vomiting and diarrhea that progressively worsened until the day of admission.
On presentation the patient was confused, afebrile and moderately hypotensive. Initial hemoglobin was 55 g/L with a mean corpuscular volume of 120 fL. Platelet count was 40 × 109/L and white blood cell count was 5.9 × 109/L. Reticulocyte count was 3.4 % and corrected reticulocyte count 1.2 %. The peripheral blood smear, interpreted by the pathologist, showed anisocytosis, poikilocytosis, and multiple schistocytes. Hypersegmentation of neutrophils was not noted. Other pertinent laboratory findings included a creatinine of 300 μmol/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 3981 IU/L, and INR >10 in the setting of warfarin use for a thrombosis four months prior to admission. Her fibrinogen level was 4.44 g/L. The patient received 6 units of platelets, 3 units of packed red blood cells, and 3 units of fresh frozen plasma and crystalloid support. She was treated empirically with intravenous pantoprazole. Her blood pressure normalized and mental status improved substantially although incompletely with these measures. A vena cava filter was placed. B12 levels drawn on admission returned undetectable and she was given 1 mg B12 intramuscularly. Twenty four hours after admission, she was referred to our hospital for emergent TPE for a presumptive diagnosis of TTP given her altered mental status, renal insufficiency, thrombocytopenia and evidence of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia.
Upon arrival her hemoglobin had improved to 99 g/L and platelet count to 60 × 109/L. Repeat peripheral smear was notable for marked anisopoikilocytosis with occasional teardrops cells and scattered schistocytes Fig. . Haptoglobin was undetectable and LDH remained elevated at 3360 IU/L. A direct Coombs test was negative. Her INR was 1.3. Her creatinine had fallen to 152 μmol/L. The fractional excretion of sodium and urinary sediment were suggestive of pre-renal acute kidney injury/acute tubular necrosis.
The responsiveness of the patient’s platelet count to transfusion, improvement in renal function and plausibility of B12 deficiency as an explanation called into question the diagnosis of TTP. However, given the potential adverse consequences delayed plasma exchange in TTP, the decision was made to proceed with TPE. A double lumen apheresis catheter was placed and she received TPE for three consecutive days along with daily intramuscular cobalamin. During this time, her LDH fell dramatically, her mental status returned to baseline, and her creatinine continued to decline. However her hemoglobin and platelet count did not improve.
Given the lack of appreciable change in platelets and hemoglobin after three days of TPE, the decision was made to hold plasma exchange and observe. On hospital day five (six days after starting therapy with B12), her platelet count began to rise and normalized on hospital day nine. LDH fell dramatically two days after starting therapy and stabilized at a slightly elevated level (~375 IU/L) after five days of therapy. Her creatinine continued to fall and reached a stable baseline of 57 μmol/L on hospital day ten. Anti-intrinsic factor antibody was later found to be positive. Her apheresis catheter was removed on hospital day seven. Upper endoscopy demonstrated atrophic gastritis. Colonoscopy showed left sided diverticulosis and internal hemorrhoids, thought to be the source of her bleeding at presentation. She was discharged after 12 days on enoxaparin and warfarin with the recommendation to remove the IVC filter in six months. Monthly B12 was recommended for life. Three weeks after discharge her hemoglobin was normal. She remains in good health greater than one year following discharge.