A 36-year-old G3P0111 with a past medical history significant for seizure disorder and morbid obesity (Body Mass Index 33 kg/m2) presented with a chief complaint of progressively worsening abdominopelvic pain, nausea, and vomiting for one day. Two weeks prior she presented to an outside facility for right-sided abdominopelvic pain and dyspareunia at which time her intrauterine device was found to be malpositioned with the IUD was low lying and predominantly in the cervix but otherwise there was no evidence of pelvic pathology on transvaginal ultrasound imaging. She subsequently had the intrauterine device removed by an outside gynecologist prior to her presentation to our facility. On presentation to the emergency room, she was found to be tachycardic but normotensive and afebrile. Her laboratory values were significant for white blood cell count of 18.4-cells/mm3 and a glucose level of 443 mg/dL. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated a right-sided tubo-ovarian abscess that was 8 cm in diameter with foci of internal air and extensive surrounding inflammatory changes .
The patient had not received primary care for a prolonged period of time. She was subsequently found to be in diabetic ketoacidosis with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus and a hemoglobin A1c level of 14% requiring aggressive intravenous fluid hydration and insulin. She also had a low grade temperature so one set of blood cultures were obtained and she was initiated on empiric antibiotics with intravenous gentamicin and clindamycin pending complete work-up. Interventional radiology (IR) was consulted for possible drainage of the tubo-ovarian abscess but the location of the abscess was not amenable for a safe percutaneous approach secondary to bowel loops and major arteries being in close proximity to the abscess. While she initially had mild improvement of her abdominal pain with downtrending fever curve and leukocytosis, her clinical course was complicated by oliguria and acute renal insufficiency which was thought to be due to administration of gentamicin in the setting of intravascular volume depletion. In light of the patient's deteriorating renal function and reported IgE-mediated allergy to penicillin, the antibiotic regimen was changed to oral levofloxacin and metronidazole.
On hospital day three, the patient was noted to be somnolent with decreased mentation and labored breathing. Her capillary blood glucose level was 74 mg/dL and she had fevers up to 102.9°F with the initial blood culture detecting growth of Streptococcus constellatus. Critical care medicine and infectious diseases consultations were obtained for impending septic shock and the antimicrobial regimen was empirically broadened to vancomycin, meropenem, and micafungin. She subsequently underwent endotracheal intubation for airway protection and was initiated on vasopressor support and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Consent for surgical source control was obtained from the health care proxy, who endorsed that the patient desires to preserve her fertility.
On hospital day four, the patient underwent laparoscopic lysis of adhesions, drainage, and debridement of a presumed right tubo-ovarian complex, partial right salpingectomy, and abdominal washout. Upon entry into the abdominal cavity there were copious purulent fluid and diffuse inflammatory changes throughout the abdomen and pelvis. Secondary to inflammation and friability of the tissue, the superior and medial portion of the right tubo-ovarian complex was resected with sufficient distance from the sidewall and the remaining small portion of the wall was left in situ. Of note, mostly blood clot was noted in the cavity of the complex, which was consistent with hemorrhagic cyst; however, extreme inflammation and friability of the complex made it difficult to clearly identify structures but no frank pus was noted within the adnexal structures. The uterus did not appear to be involved with any of these inflammatory processes. Postoperatively, the patient still had persistent high-grade fevers and continued to remain intubated on vasopressor support. On postoperative day two, a discussion was held with her health care proxy about her lack of clinical improvement and agreement for reoperation with possible hysterectomy. She was brought back to the operating room where she underwent an exploratory laparotomy, abdominal washout, lysis of adhesions, partial omentectomy, right salpingo-oophorectomy, right ureterolysis, and cholecystectomy in an attempt for further source control. During the procedure, multiple pockets of pus in the middle and upper abdomen between loops of bowel and omentum were noted and drained, with extensive fibrinous exudate noted to be overlying the small bowel, large bowel, and pelvis. Right salpingo-oophorectomy was performed to assure that no potential source for infection was being left behind but no frank pockets of pus were noted at this time which were similar to her initial intraoperative findings. The gallbladder was noted to be gangrenous consistent with acalculous gangrenous cholecystitis, which prompted cholecystectomy to be performed. Drains were placed and the fascia was closed, but the incision was left open to heal via secondary intention.
After undergoing the above procedures, the patient remained intubated on vasopressor support with high-grade fevers and persistent leukocytosis. She slowly was weaned off of vasopressor support, had an improvement in her ventilator settings, and became more responsive. Overall, her postoperative course was complicated by anemia necessitating blood transfusions and a left-sided lower extremity deep venous thrombosis with a right subsegmental pulmonary embolus requiring therapeutic anticoagulation. Transthoracic echocardiography did not reveal any valvular vegetations. The patient also developed a sacral decubitus ulcer as a result of her physical deconditioning. In addition, a wound vacuum was also placed over her abdominal incision secondary to poor wound healing. A peritoneal fluid culture from her initial procedure had detectable growth of Streptococcus constellatus that was susceptible to penicillin and ceftriaxone identical to the organism from the initial blood culture. The final pathology from her initial procedure demonstrated a hemorrhagic cyst with necrotic tissue and blood clot. The final pathology from her second procedure demonstrated right ovarian tissue with a hemorrhagic corpus luteum, fallopian tube, and fibroadipose tissue showing acute suppurative and chronic inflammation. It also demonstrated the gallbladder had acute suppurative and chronic inflammation, predominantly seen in the serosal surface. Another CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis was performed demonstrating bilateral upper quadrant fluid collections . Successful IR-guided drainage of the upper abdominal fluid collections was performed with drain placement. She was maintained on broad-spectrum antibiotics coverage with vancomycin and meropenem for approximately 2 weeks given persistent high grade fevers with high pressor requirements and a high concern for an uncontrolled source. As repeated blood cultures and repeated abdominal drainage cultures did not detect any bacteria so the regimen was deescalated to ceftriaxone and metronidazole.
It was also discussed that given the patients poor respiratory status with ventilation settings of both high fraction of inspired oxygen (Fi02) and positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) requirements that if further surgical intervention was indicated it would likely require use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). Further surgery would also put her at high risk of a surgical complication such as enterotomy. Moreover, additional surgical intervention was deferred as the likely source of infection at this time was abdominal and successful IR-guided drainage with peritoneal fluid cultures demonstrated no growth of any organisms.
On postoperative day 16 after her second procedure, the patient remained ventilator dependent and thus underwent tracheostomy placement with concurrent abdominal wound debridement and replacement of the wound vacuum. Vaginal cultures were also obtained at the time of this procedure and demonstrated Candida albicans for which the patient received antifungal treatment. She then subsequently had a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube placed but it failed so she remained on nasogastric tube feeds. Despite continued treatment with broad-spectrum IV antibiotics, the patient still had persistent fevers and thus the decision was made to perform another CT chest, abdomen, and pelvis to evaluate for any further intra-abdominal collections or alternative source of infection. Imaging demonstrated a significant decrease in size of the prior collections and concern for pneumonia. The patient's antibiotic regimen was adjusted per the infectious disease consultation recommendations. The intraperitoneal drains were removed as they had minimal output and could pose as a potential nidus for infection. The patient still remained intermittently febrile and thus on postoperative day 30 from her exploratory laparotomy she obtained another CT chest, abdomen, and pelvis which demonstrated an interval decrease in small bilateral pleural effusions and bibasilar atelectasis/consolidation but with upper abdominal collections again present. IR-guided drainage was again successfully performed after which the patient defervesced. The patient was afebrile after postoperative day 36 from her second procedure, without a leukocytosis and she was able to converse coherently with a tracheostomy collar in situ. Her upper abdominal drain was removed and she completed additional two weeks of ceftriaxone and metronidazole from time of last abdominal drainage. In total, she had received antibiotic coverage for approximately 8 weeks during her complicated clinical course. On hospital day seventy-three, the patient was discharged in stable condition to a subacute rehabilitation facility.