A 17-year-old Korean man with basilar artery dissection was transferred to our hospital one month after onset of symptoms. Our patient's National Institutes of Health (NIH) stroke scale score was 35. His pupils were pinpoint, his light reflex was slightly positive, and movements of his external ocular muscle (EOM) were paralyzed. On cranial nerve examination, our patient showed no response to noxious pain to his motor and sensory nerves. Our patient was in quadriplegia both with a sagging soft palate and a negative gag reflex, and showed a strong clonus of the deep tendon reflex (DTR) . Our patient was diagnosed as having a basilar artery dissection based on clinical manifestations and radiological findings, including computed tomography (CT) and MRI scans and magnetic resonance angiography . Because our patient showed no therapeutic response after treatment with antiplatelet drugs and anticoagulants for one month after onset of this disease, an alternative approach with hUCB-derived MSC was applied to our patient. Our patient's human leukocyte antigen (HLA) type was A11,24, B35,61 and DR04,14. Our patient had no history of trauma, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, stroke, seizure, and smoking or drinking. hUCB-derived MSC were prepared according to methods described previously . hUCB-derived mononuclear cells were separated and cultured for a few days. Non-adherent HSC were discarded, and adherent MSC were continued in culture, with two medium changes per week. Samples of 1.2 × 107 MSC were prepared with each unit of hUCB. Three different units of allogeneic hUCB-derived MSC were intrathecally injected into our patient on the 35th day after onset without using immunosuppressants or antibiotics. Surface markers for MSC injected were CD13+, CD29+, CD31+, CD45+, CD73+, CD90+, CD105+ and CD166+; the HLA allele types of the donors were A11,24, B35,62 and DR04,08, respectively. Treatment of patients with hUCB-derived MSC was approved by the Korea Food and Drug Administration (KFDA). The improvement in our patient's clinical symptoms, such as a positive gag reflex and relaxation of muscle tone rigidity, was observed from the fifth day after treatment. The voluntary eyeball movement of our patient was possible on the 27th day after treatment, and the rigidity of his muscle tone was reduced enough for him to sit in a wheelchair . The second and third injections of hUCB-derived MSC were performed on the 15th day and 41st day after first treatment, respectively. The HLA allele types of donors on these occasions were A11,24, B27,35 and DR04,14, respectively. No other medical treatment was performed, and the absence of new intracranial lesions was confirmed by MRI scan and magnetic resonance angiography . The improvement of clinical symptoms began to be observed from the fifth day after intrathecal injection of hUCB-derived MSC, and the significant changes from the 15th day after treatment were confirmed by radiological findings. These data were similar to our previous findings that hUCB-derived MSC had high endothelial functions .