We present a case of a 77-year-old male burdened by a multi-vessel coronary artery disease, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (EF) of 20–25%, with implanted dual-chamber implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) for primary prevention admitted to our clinic due to recurrent life-threatening VT. The patient presented the following concomitant diseases: dyslipidaemia, hypertension, and chronic kidney disease (CKD) in Stage IIIB. He had a history of two myocardial infarctions and coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) of the left internal mammary artery and the left anterior descending artery (LIMA-LAD), right internal mammary artery and the right coronary artery (RIMA-RCA), and aorta-obtuse marginal artery (Ao-OM). Coronary artery bypass graft was complicated by mediastinitis and dehiscence of a sternotomy scar (2013).
Moreover, in 2013, the patient suffered from sigmoid colon necrosis, which resulted in sigmoidectomy with a colostomy. In 2017, a patient had a biventricular ICD implanted. In 2020, a patient had the first episode of an ES. The patient has been vaccinated against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 with two doses of the vaccine.
In May of 2021, the patient presented to our clinic’s emergency room. With recurrent symptomatic, haemodynamically stable VT (150 b.p.m.) after two shock deliveries. On physical examination, the patient was alert and oriented. A sternotomy scar with telangiectasias and colostomy was observed. There were no other pathological findings regarding the respiratory, gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, or nervous system.
On admission, electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed ICD DDD stimulation with a pace of 70 b.p.m. Data obtained from the ICD device had shown several episodes of VT and anti-tachycardia pacing (ATP) therapy and two shock deliveries. Laboratory tests did not reveal any abnormalities, except for the raised level of creatinine (1.88 mg/dL, n = 0.1–1.3) with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of 34 mL/min/1.73 m2 (n = 90–120) and a slightly raised level of high-sensitive cardiac troponin T (0.022 ng/mL, n = 0–0.014). Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 rapid antigen test was negative.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) on admission has shown global hypokinesis of the LV, akinesis of the posterior and inferior wall with LVEF of 20–25% . Pericardial effusion was not observed.
During hospitalization, the patient presented with an additional incidence of VT ceased by ATP therapy. Moreover, the patient underwent planned coronary angiography that has shown insignificant 40% RCA stenosis, 60% LAD stenosis, open LIMA-LAD bypass, and non-open RIMA-RCA and Ao-OM bypass. After the procedure, exacerbation of the CKD was observed, with a creatinine level of 2.04 mg/dL and an estimated GFR (eGFR) of 31 mL/min/1.73 m2. Due to the worsening of kidney function, the pharmacotherapy was modified, and eplerenone and telmisartan were discontinued. After the improvement of eGFR, we decided to escalate the HF treatment. Sacubitril-valsartan was implemented (24/26 mg b.i.d.).
Following the diagnostic path, the patient was qualified for ablation and pace mapping of the LV with a 3D electroanatomic system (Carto3). The procedure was performed with a trans-septal and retrograde approach. It has shown a vast low-voltage area of the inferior wall, posterior wall, and ventricular septum. With the use of pace mapping, RFA was applied from the apical to the basal region in the low-voltage area. The procedure was executed without any complications. In the post-operative period, unfractionated heparin was supplemented for 24 h according to the current European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines. However, one day after, the patient had a recurrence of VT treated with amiodarone.
The patient had been discharged from the clinic, in good general condition, without ongoing arrhythmias and DDD stimulation of 80 b.p.m., with a plan of ICD to cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator upgrade.
A week after the discharge from the clinic, the patient returned to our clinic’s emergency room. The patient was in a severe condition, with signs of acute decompensated heart failure, cyanosis, and oliguria. Laboratory tests revealed leucocytosis of 24.46 103/µL (n = 4.5–11), anaemia–haemoglobin concentration of 9.80 g/dL (n = 13.8–17.2), and erythrocyte count of 3.22 106/µL (n = 4.7–6.1). Elevated CRP of 224 mg/L (n ≤ 1.0) and procalcitonin of 0.57 ng/mL (n ≤ 0.05) indicated an ongoing inflammation process, with a creatinine level of 2.19 mg/dL and GFR of 29 mL/min/1.73 m2. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed dilatation of all cardiac chambers with LVEF of 20% and segmental contractility disturbances (akinesis of inferior and posterior LV wall and hypokinesis of intraventricular septum).
Moreover, 13 × 21 mm vegetation was visible on the A2 segment of the mitral anterior leaflet without any mitral regurgitation ( and ). Transthoracic echocardiography revealed also unusual features of IE: increased thickness of inferior LV wall and thickening of interatrial and interventricular septum measured up to 12 mm . Bacteraemia was confirmed with blood samples positive for Staphylococcus aureus. The patient was qualified for elective treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics (vancomycin 1.00 g i.v. b.i.d. and gentamycin 180 mg i.v. o.d.).
In the following days, inflammatory markers presented an increasing tendency. Thus, we were seeking possible inflammation sites. Dental caries have been found. Oral cavity sanitation was performed.
Subsequent TTE monitoring during hospitalization revealed further extension of IE pathology. It has shown wall dissection with pseudoaneurysm measured as 54 × 40 mm and bidirectional blood flow ( and ).
Pericardial effusion and hydrothorax with a maximal fluid level of 7 cm in the left basal region were observed.
Cardiac computed tomography (CT) showed hydrothorax of both lungs with atelectasis, pseudoaneurysm of the LV, and pericardial effusion of 14 mm around it. Further contrast imaging (CT or cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR)) was not performed because of the progression of CKD. The patient was disqualified from the cardiothoracic procedure due to the lack of cardiac surgery option and elevated inflammation markers. Two days later, the patient suffered from a cardiac arrest. Pulseless electrical activity was confirmed. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and intubation were performed. Sadly, the patient passed away.