We present a 74-year-old Caucasian male with a history of Type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, former tobacco use, chronic pulmonary obstructive disease, and chronic kidney disease (CKD) Stage 3 [baseline estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) ranging 40–50 mL/min]. Relevant cardiac history included atrial fibrillation and ischaemic heart disease with an acute myocardial infarction (AMI) in 2009; the angiography showed coronary disease: chronic total occlusion of the right coronary artery and severe stenosis of the proximal left anterior descending artery, treated percutaneously with a drug-eluting stent.
After the AMI, the patient’s LVEF was <40%, and he developed HFrEF. He presented several acute decompensations requiring hospital admissions between 2011 and July 2017. In the latter admission, echocardiography showed a dilated left ventricle (end-diastolic volume: 67 mL/m2), LVEF 34%, moderate functional mitral regurgitation, normal right ventricle without pulmonary hypertension. A stress echocardiography was performed, showing no ischaemia and no significant worsening of mitral regurgitation. The patient was discharged in a New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional Class IIb, with suboptimal medical therapy.
It was then when the patient began follow-up in the multidisciplinary CHF management programme, which included intensive health education, and careful pharmacological titration. During follow-up, low doses of an ACEI (enalapril), a beta-blocker (nebivolol), and MRA (eplerenone) were initiated sequentially, as per current clinical practice guidelines.
Up-titration of beta-blockers up to 10 mg/day was successfully achieved after 2 months. The same did not occur with enalapril and eplerenone: both had to be discontinued 2 weeks after initiating eplerenone due to deterioration of renal function and hyperkalaemia (eGFR 30 mL/min, K + 6.3 mmol/L). There were no clinical manifestations, no significant arrhythmias and both T wave and the QRS complex remained unaltered in the electrocardiogram. Blood tests showed a recovery of renal function and potassium levels 1 week after (eGFR 39 mL/min, K + 4.9 mmol/L). A few weeks later, in a second attempt to use ACEIs, low doses of ramipril (1.25 mg/24 h) were initiated. Despite the very low dose, K+ levels raised again up to 6.1 mmol/L (eGFR unchanged). Ramipril was discontinued, and the patient was once again questioned about dietary habits, with no evidence of intake of potassium-rich foods, supplements, or other preventable causes of hyperkalaemia.
To facilitate further attempts to optimally inhibit the RAAS, calcium polystyrene sulphonate was introduced. Nevertheless, the patient spontaneously abandoned treatment due to self-reported gastric intolerance. During this period, the patient suffered a new acute decompensation of CHF in the context of a respiratory infection, leading to acute pulmonary oedema.
Certain that was unable to achieve optimal RAAS inhibition due to recurrent hyperkalaemia, we requested special permission to use patiromer, a potassium binder which had not been commercialized in Europe by then. After discharge (eGFR 50 mL/min, K + 4.6 mmol/L) patiromer 8.4 g/24 h and ramipril 2.5 mg/24 h were initiated simultaneously. The laboratory tests 3 days later showed serum potassium levels of 5.4 mmol/L, eGFR 53 mL/min. Ramipril was maintained, and the dose of patiromer was doubled (16.8 g/24 h); subsequent blood test showed serum potassium levels back to normal (4.9 mmol/L). Ramipril was then up-titrated to 5 mg/24 h, without evidence of hyperkalaemia in the subsequent controls. MRAs were then reintroduced. First, 12.5 mg/24 h of eplerenone, potassium levels being persistently <5 mmol/L, followed by up-titration to 25 mg/24 h. The patient’s subjective tolerance was excellent, and blood tests consistently showed stable eGFRs and potassium levels.
Given the persistent NYHA Class IIb, during follow-up, ramipril was replaced by an angiotensin receptor blocker neprilysin inhibitor (sacubitril/valsartan 24/26 mg), with no recurrence of significant hyperkalaemia. There were no substantial differences in renal function or electrolytes before and after patiromer initiation, except potassium levels. Creatinine and eGFR levels ranged 130–150 µmol/L and 40–50 mL/min, respectively, and phosphate levels ranged 1.1–1.2 mmol/L. Magnessemia ranged 0.6–0.7 mmol/L, i.e. compatible with mild hypomagnesemia, which was present before patiromer initiation and was not worsened by therapy. It has not been possible to further up-titrate RAAS inhibitors due to arterial hypotension (persistent asymptomatic systolic blood pressure below 90 mmHg). The patient is now in NYHA Class IIa and has had no recent decompensations.
After 3 months under optimal medical therapy, follow-up echocardiography has recently been performed, showing no significant changes: the left ventricle remained dilated, with an LVEF of 35%. The patient will soon receive an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator.