An 84-year-old woman presented to our hospital complaining of chest discomfort lasting 3 days. Her medical history comprised coronary artery disease (percutaneous coronary intervention to the right coronary artery and left anterior descending artery was performed), arteriosclerosis obliterans of the lower extremities, end-stage renal disease just before starting haemodialysis, and type 2 diabetes mellitus. There was no previous history of cardiac surgery or chest trauma.
A physical examination showed a pan-systolic murmur heard best at the cardiac apex and mild pitting oedema of lower limbs. An electrocardiogram was unremarkable. A chest radiograph revealed an enlarged cardiac silhouette and pulmonary vein congestion. Laboratory tests showed a serum creatinine level of 4.45 mg/dL (normal range < 1.04 mg/dL) (estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate 7.9 mL/min/1.73 m2), D-dimer level of 14.6 mcg/mL (normal range < 0.35 mcg/mL), brain natriuretic peptide level of 570.3 pg/mL (normal range < 40 pg/mL), and troponin-I level of 0.466 ng/mL (normal range <0.04 ng/mL), respectively. A TTE revealed severe MAC and a mass (size: 61 mm × 32 mm) located on the left atrial posterior wall that was not seen in the echocardiogram obtained 6 months previously. The mass was adjacent to the mitral valve, and there was a mild restriction of mitral valve opening. However, the mean pressure gradient of the mitral valve was within the normal limits at 3.3 mmHg. A transoesophageal echocardiogram showed the mass to contain a heterogeneous solid component and a cavity divided into two chambers by a flap. The mass appeared to be in close proximity to MAC, and colour flow mapping showed blood flow into the cavity of the mass from the left ventricle through MAC during the systolic period (Video 1). At this time, the diagnosis was left ventricular rupture with localized pericardial effusion. Therefore, we discussed an option of surgical repair. A cardiac CT was performed and revealed that the running of the atrial branch of the coronary artery was located in the pericardial side of the mass, meaning that the mass was located in intra-atrial wall. Moreover, it showed contrast filling into the cavity of the mass, and there was a communicating orifice between the left ventricle and the cavity which was located in disruption of MAC of the posterior mitral annulus. A coronary angiography showed no significant stenosis in coronary arteries, and a left ventriculography (Video 2) demonstrated a contrast filling into the cavity. These findings suggested the diagnosis of left atrial dissection caused by disruption of MAC. Her operative risk was considered to be very high (STS score: risk of mortality, 54.8%; morbidity and mortality, 69.7%). Fortunately, because her haemodynamic status was stable, we decided to manage her conservatively without an operative approach. She required an oral diuretic (azosemide 30 mg daily) for mild congestion, and she was discharged given her clinical stability.
One month later, her clinical condition was stable, and TTE image did not change. Six months later, the size of haematoma did not change in TTE and no further events occurred.