A 32-year old male patient, working for a building enterprise, broke down on the job. As the patient experienced strong pain and was tachycardic and hypotensive, he was transferred intubated by helicopter to our institution for primary care. On admission the patient was in hemodynamically stabilised condition, though an ambigiuous shot-wound like entry wound in the upper left quadrant of about 5 mm in diameter was mentioned. By computerized tomography an unique metalic fragment in the upper pole of the left kidney with subcapsular bleeding was evidenced [Figure ]. Abdominal free air was indicative for a hollow organ perforation. A lesion of the pancreatic tail was suspected. The liver and spleen were also free of signs for injury in the pre-surgical diagnostic procedures. The presence of fluid within the subhepatic space, Morrison's pouch, was suspicious for blood. It was decided to perform an exploratory laparotomy.
Exploration revealed about 400 ml fresh, partly coagulated blood. Perforations of the ventral (entrance wound) and dorsal (exit wound) gastric wall respectively (5 mm in diameter) were identified and closed by single suturetechnique utilising resorbable material. Broad exposure of the bursa omentalis showed a wound correspondending to the dorsal stomach lesion. After mobilisation of the spleen and the pancreatic tail, a tangential injury of the pancreas could be demonstrated. The major pancreatic duct was not lacerated by the metal fragment. The adipose capsule of the kidney was completely blood-filled. We split Gerota's fascia and mobilized the kidney. The upper pole showed an entrance hole on the anterior side without an exit wound. A metal fragment was removed guided by x-ray fluoroscopy. The pancreatic and the renal injuries were treated without sutures, but drained adequately transcutaneously with soft silastic drains. The exocrine pancreas was blocked by subcutaneous application of 100 μg per die octreotide for the following seven days to minimize the development of post-operative pancreas-fistula.
After surgery, the patient was transferred to our intermediate care unit for 11 days. Retrospectively the mechanism of injury was reconstructed. Not involved in the trenching of a dilapidated building with a special wire, the worker was hurt while walking by in a distance of about 12 meters to a diamond wire divice in motion in the moment of wire rupture. A fragment hit the person by maximum speed and penetrated into the abdomen.
The patient further stabilized under antibiotic coverage by Piperacillin and Sulbactam with declining infection signs in clinical chemistry. A low output pancreatic fistula closed 8 weeks after endoscopic retrograde pancreaticoscopy with placement of a decompressing stent to the common duct four days after surgery [Figure ]. The patient was transferred to regular ward and discharged from hospital in good condition and closed wounds after closure of the pancreatic fistula. The stent could be removed on an outpatient basis without any complications after 4 month.