A 67-year-old woman presented at our hospital with complaints of fever and disturbance of consciousness. The patient had no significant past medical history. However, two days prior to visiting our hospital, fever and right shoulder pain were noted. On admission, the patient complained of headache and neck stiffness. Cerebrospinal fluid examination showed that the cell count had elevated to 3467/μL. Hematologic examination revealed a white blood cell count of 16,700/μL, a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 29.57 mg/dL, and high inflammatory response. Bacterial meningitis was suspected and the patient was hospitalized. Ceftriaxone (4 g/day), vancomycin (1.8 g/day), and ampicillin (12 g/day) were administered for one week. Subsequently, Streptococcus pneumoniae was detected via blood culture, leading to a diagnosis of bacterial meningitis caused by S. pneumoniae. Thereafter, only ceftriaxone (4 g/day) was administered for an additional 2 weeks. Her clinical symptoms improved after 3 weeks of antibiotic administration, and the inflammatory response improved, with a 3200/μL-white blood cell count and 5.13 mg/dL-CRP level. However, the right shoulder pain and limited range of motion in the shoulder persisted. Physical examination revealed severe tenderness of the right subscapularis muscle belly and shoulder joint space, and we noted exacerbation of pain on external rotation of the shoulder joint. The active range of motion (affected side/unaffected side) elevation was 30°/150°, while internal rotation was Th8/Th3, and external rotation at the sides was 10°/60°. No limitation in passive range of motion was noted. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) performed on admission demonstrated abscess formation in the right subscapularis muscle . Contrast-enhanced CT performed after 3 weeks of antibiotic administration revealed a capsule of abscess in the right subscapularis muscle, and abscess in the right shoulder joint space . Gadolinium-enhanced fat-suppressed T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed widespread contrast-enhanced inflammation within the right subscapularis muscle and glenohumeral joint space . Moreover, abscess formation was observed within the inflammation . These imaging findings suggested that antibiotic resistance due to abscess and capsule formation. Therefore, we planned open surgical drainage of the right subscapularis intramuscular abscess and purulent shoulder arthritis. Exposure was performed via a deltoid-pectoral approach, and a U-shaped incision was made in the subscapularis muscle. First, when the joint capsule was incised, an exudate discharged from the glenohumeral joint, and a large amount of infected granulation tissue was detected in the joint cavity. Next, we inverted the subscapularis muscle by suturing FiberWire® (Arthrex, Naples, FL, USA) to the subscapular tendon, and dissected the dorsal side of the subscapularis muscle from the scapula using a raspatory . We detected infected granulation tissue in the subscapularis muscle belly, and performed curettage as much as possible . Moreover, we obtained a favorable visual field by dissecting the short head of the biceps brachii muscle. After washing with physiological saline containing 0.3% povidone-iodine, an indwelling catheter was placed to drain the wound and the wound was closed. The dissected short head of the biceps brachii muscle was sutured to the coracoid process and the coracobrachialis muscle. After surgery, the patient’s right arm was maintained in adduction to the chest with a sling for 3 weeks and the antibiotic administration continued for 2 weeks.
The patient experienced no notable complications during the postoperative period. The right shoulder pain subsided and the limitation in range of motion improved. The inflammatory response improved to a 3200/μL-white blood cell count and 0.21 mg/dL-CRP level. CT performed 2 months after surgery revealed no recurrence of infection .