A 42-year-old female patient presented with an 8 month history of constant and progressive vertigo. The symptoms progressed to spatial disorientation and mental confusion, associated with apathy, social isolation and anorexia. Non-pruritic yellow plaques in antecubital fossa, groin, breasts, armpits, eyelids and neck were also reported for the last 5 years . Physical examination revealed right hemiparesis with bilateral brisk tendon reflexes and bilateral Babinski and Hoffmann signs, left hemi-hypoesthesia, bilateral dysmetria, dysdiadochokinesia and ataxic gait. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed multiple supratentorial, infratentorial and periventricular mass lesions involving the basal ganglia, corpus callosum and the pons, associated with extensive edema . Her blood cholesterol levels were normal. Two fragments of skin and subcutaneous tissue were obtained, one from affected skin of the armpits and another from skin of the groin. Histopathological exams showed infiltration of eosinophils and foamy epithelioid histiocytes and Touton cells in the armpit lesions and collections of foamy macrophages, multinucleated giant cells and predominantly lymphocytic mixed inflammatory infiltrate with numerous eosinophils in the groin lesions. Immunohistochemical examination demonstrated xanthogranulomas (non-Langerhans cell histiocytomas), CD68 positive (clone KP1) and CD1a and S100 negative. Such morphological findings confirmed the diagnostic hypothesis of Erdheim-Chester Disease. Testing for BRAF mutation was negative, which precluded treatment with Vemurafenib. The patient was treated with methylprednisolone 1 g / day, during 5 days, and there was improvement of the cognitive state, but not of the referred vertigo. She was then discharged home with prednisone 60 mg/day and interferon (IFN). After 6 months she had a mild improvement in ataxia, vertigo and confusion. Follow-up MRI at 15 months revealed stabilization of the brain lesions with marked improvement in brain edema and mass effect . The patient had no further neurological deficits and was able to walk unassisted after two years of follow-up, suggesting stabilization of disease progression.