A 65-year-old male with past medical history significant for hypothyroidism on synthroid 50mcg and hyperlipidemia on lipitor 20 presented with episodes of lightheadedness and dizziness for the past two months. He was having multiple episodes of dizziness in a day, usually at rest. He denied any prodromal symptoms of nausea, diaphoresis, palpitations, chest pain, shortness of breath, or any focal neurologic symptoms. The patient reported no family history of sudden deaths or heart disease. He denied the use of any over-the-counter medications, herbal supplements, and other medications including atrioventricular (AV) nodal blocking agents including beta blockers, calcium channel blockers or digoxin. The patient had no history of alcohol, smoking, or illicit substance usage. He denied any triggers including exercise, change in position, or micturition. He denied any recent fevers, chills, appetite changes, trauma, sick contacts or recent travel. During these episodes, the patient checked his blood pressure (BP) and was found to have blood pressure (BP) in the 70s/50s with heart rate (HR) in the 30s. Electrocardiogram (ECG) was consistent with sinus bradycardia, incomplete right bundle block pattern and PR interval of 200 ms .
Patient was subsequently found to be hypotensive to 70/50 in the ED not responding to fluids, requiring dopamine drip and was admitted to the cardiac critical care unit for consideration of permanent pacemaker placement for symptomatic bradycardia and close monitoring. To investigate the underlying etiology, transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was performed which showed a normal ejection fraction of 60% with mild left ventricular hypertrophy, normal right ventricular contractility, and size. On the physical exam, there was no murmur appreciated otherwise unremarkable except for sinus bradycardia to 50. His labs were notable for sodium of 121 (Ref. 135–145 mEq/L) and hemoglobin was 9.8 g/dl (Ref. 13.5–17.5 g/dl), with MCV of 89 fl (Ref. 80–100 fL), iron 75 (Ref. 60–170 mcg/dl), TIBC 338 (250–450 mcg/dL), ferritin 856 ng/mL (Ref. 20–250 ng/mL); TSH was 5.33 mIU/L (Ref. 0.45–4.12 mU/) with a total T4 5.39 μg/dl (Ref. 5.0–12.0μg/dL). Remaining workup for his hyponatremia revealed urine osmolality of 346, urine sodium of 66 and serum osmolality of 248 consistent with AI or Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH). Endocrine was consulted and a cosyntropin stimulation test was performed. Results of cosyntropin stimulation test revealed: cortisol baseline 4 μg/dL, after 30 minutes 8 μg/dL, after 60 minutes 9 μg/dL. Of note, a standard cosyntropin stimulation test, which tests the ability of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) to stimulate the release of cortisol, in the setting of intact adrenal function usually yields a post-ACTH cortisol of ≥18 μg/dl. Given the results demonstrating acute adrenal insufficiency, the patient was started on intravenous (IV) hydrocortisone 25 mg twice daily. Given ACTH levels were not measured, we were unable to differentiate between primary and chronic secondary disease processes.
However, the patient was still bradycardic to the 50s despite correction of hyponatremia to 136, which is a common cause of hyponatremia . Patient was continued with IV hydrocortisone for the next few days and bradycardia resolved with a rate of 65. As a result, the decision was made to postpone the pacemaker implantation. His symptoms completely resolved after receiving steroids; therefore the diagnosis of sinus bradycardia secondary to adrenal insufficiency was made in the absence of hyponatremia. The patient was later evaluated in the cardiology clinic for follow-up 1-month post-discharge with no interval symptoms. He was placed on a 14 day Holter monitor for surveillance which did show any further episodes of bradycardia.