Patient is a 68-year-old female who presented to the emergency room after a fall while walking her dog with complaints of headaches, nausea, and vomiting. Patient denied any loss of consciousness. Her past medical history consisted of hypertension and peripheral vascular disease. Patient smoked one pack of cigarette per day. On physical examination, she had no focal neurological deficits but was confused. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large left 1 cm convexity acute subdural hematoma (SDH) with 6 mm midline shift. Due to her disorientation and midline shift, the patient was taken back to the operating room (OR) for evacuation of the SDH. A reverse question mark incision was made with a standard trauma craniotomy. During the operation, the superficial temporal artery (STA) was mistakenly sacrificed. Patient tolerated the surgery well and continued to improve with her mental status postoperatively. She was discharged to rehab on postoperative day 7. The patient continued to smoke despite our recommendations.
She returned to the emergency room 19 days later complaining of fever, erythema, swelling underneath the wound, and purulent drainage on her pillow. The radiographic findings suggested that the infection was superficial. After being evaluated in the emergency department, she was taken to the OR for surgical lavage and debridement. During the operating, her bone flap was felt to be viable and free of infection, so it was not removed. Intraoperative cultures were found to grow methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus, and the patient was started on IV Nafcillin. Approximately 2 weeks later, purulent drainage returned from the incision site. Radiographic findings suggested that there was an intracranial component. She was taken to the OR for a wound washout. Given the degree of infection identified during the operation, as well as the intracranial infection noted in the subdural space, the decision was made to remove the bone flap.
Over the next week, the wound started to break down. Subsequently, there was a wedge-shaped necrosis that developed on the flap . Dura was visible in the area of wound breakdown. After consulting with plastic and oral maxillofacial surgery, the patient was taken back to the OR two weeks later for resection of necrotic scalp, dura repair and wound VAC placement. The dura was noted to be frail, shredded, and portions were missing [Figures –]. Because of the risk of neurological sequelae and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) diversion with a VAC device placed on exposed brain tissue, water-tight closure of the dura was a necessity prior to placement of the VAC device. After achieving securable edges, Durepair® (Medtronic, Inc.) . was sutured in to native dura with 4-0 Nurolon (Ethicon). Water-tight closure was confirmed with a Valsalva maneuver, and fibrin glue was not used. On gross inspection, the wound vac canister did not have any CSF contents. Negative pressure therapy was set to -50 mmHg . The wound vac was changed approximately every 3 days until adequate granulation tissue was noted and the infection had subsided . Intraoperative cultures during the wound vac changes grew Candida. Patient was started on diflucan.
Two weeks later, the patient was taken to the OR with plastic and oral maxillofacial surgery for a latissimus dorsi muscle flap reconstruction. The patient was monitored in the intensive care unit (ICU) with daily Dopplers to ensure the viability of the flap. The flap went on to necros as a result of an infection caused by Pseudomonas. The patient went to the OR for removal of her flap. The dura with the synthetic graft still had a water-tight closure. The wound VAC was replaced and changed approximately every 3 days. To ensure the next flap would not fail, the granulation tissue on the Durepair® (Medtronic, Inc.) was cultured. The intraoperative culture also grew Pseudomonas, but only on the synthetic dura. After a multidisciplinary discussion, we felt that a native substitute for the dura may decrease the risk of infection.
Three weeks later, the patient was taken to the OR removal of dural substitute, harvest of fascia lata graft, and anterolateral thigh free flap. The fascia lata graft was harvested from the contralateral leg of the anterolateral thigh free flap. The fascial lata graft was secured in a water-tight fashion. The anterolateral thigh free flap was performed without any complications .
Patient returned to the ICU on the ventilator with continued sedation due to flap anastomosis fragility. The ventilator was weaned off on postoperative day 1. Patient was at her neurological baseline after extubation and transferred to the floor on postoperative day 5. Patient continued her antibiotic regimen of Nafcillin and Diflucan postoperatively. Patient followed up with neurosurgery, plastic surgery, and oral maxillofacial surgery. At the 6-month follow-up, the flap had healed without any signs or symptoms of infection. The patient has been followed for 14 months after surgery with the reconstruction intact .