A 35-year-old Chinese man who had a one-year history of wisdom teeth and no previous medical history was admitted to the hospital on April 14, 2020, with hyperthermia and abdominal pain that had been present for three days. The patient reported being exposed to rain and feeling cold three days before the onset of symptoms. Upon admission, the patient presented with hyperthermia, chills, mild cough, expectoration, headache, nausea, and watery stools (4–5 times per day). He was initially evaluated at The First People's Hospital of Linping District, Hangzhou, China, where laboratory results on April 14 showed a white blood cell count of 21.6 × 109/L with a neutrophil ratio of 93.4% and a C-reaction protein (CRP) level of over 200mg/L. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed multiple low-density shadows with unclear boundaries in the liver, prompting immediate admission to our hospital.
On the day of admission, the patient presented with a body temperature of 38.5 °C, heart rate of 117 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and blood pressure of 117/65 mmHg. A comprehensive physical examination was conducted, which did not reveal any abnormalities except for the aforementioned vital signs. Cefoperazone/sulbactam was administered intravenously at a dose of 2g every 8 hours, and blood cultures for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria were obtained before initiating anti-infective therapy. However, laboratory results obtained after hospital admission (see ) showed elevated levels of white blood cells, with a neutrophil ratio of 85%, and a CRP level exceeding 200mg/L. Additionally, the patient's alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was 47 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was 47.04U/L, total bilirubin was 16.8L, direct bilirubin was 9.0/dL, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was 88.0/L, γ-glutamyltransferase (γ-GT) was 36.0U/L, and procalcitonin (PCT) was 68.54ng/ml. A contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen revealed the presence of low-density shadows in the liver, with the largest measuring 3.7*4.2cm and located in the left lobe of the liver, suggestive of liver abscesses. The enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multifocal hypointense signals in T1, hyperintense signals in T2, and significant enhancement in Diffusion-Weighted Magnetic Resonance Imaging (DWI) (see A and B). And the liver was diffusely hypoechogenic on ultrasonography (C).
Moreover, the patient continued to have a sustained fever, and since the initial treatment showed poor efficacy, we changed the antibiotic to Meropenem 1g intravenously every 24 hours (refer to ). On the eighth day after admission, percutaneous transhepatic abscess drainage was performed (refer to ), and the fluid from paracentesis of the liver abscesses was immediately sent for aerobic and anaerobic blood culture showed positive results while the aerobic culture was bacteria immediately. On the eleventh day after admission, the anaerobic blood culture showed positive results while the aerobic culture was negative (refer to A). The bacteria from the positive anaerobic culture were identified as Fusobacterium necrophorum through MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry, and the Gram-staining of Fusobacterium necrophorum is shown in A. Subsequently, the patient was diagnosed with multiple liver abscesses infected by Fusobacterium necrophorum, and the antibiotic therapy program was promptly changed from Meropenem to a combination of Metronidazole 0.5g and Moxifloxacin 0.4g intravenously per day. The same result was obtained in the fluid culture of liver abscesses (refer to B) on the 14th day after admission, and the white blood cell count returned to normal on the 17th day. After 17 days of hospitalization, the patient fully recovered and was discharged (refer to ).
After discharge, the patient continued oral anti-infection treatment with Metronidazole 0.6g three times per day combined with Moxifloxacin 0.4g per day for 2 weeks. A follow-up CT scan on May 6th showed that the maximum diameter of the liver abscesses has decreased to 1.5 × 1.6cm (D). Additionally, abdominal ultrasonography conducted on May 27th indicated that the lesions were significantly smaller, with a maximum diameter of approximately 1.68 × 1.42cm (E), and blood tests showed normal results. The patient did not return for re-examination after May 27th. Telephone follow-ups were conducted after 3 months, and no relapse was reported. In this case report, the possibility of hospital infection and the relationship between the infection and the use of antibiotics in the early stages were not considered because a blood culture had been taken on the second day after admission; and it showed anaerobic positivity.