A 32-year-old Sri Lankan male, who was living in South Korea for the last 4 years admitted to us with altered level of consciousness, which progressed over 2 weeks. While in Korea, he was consuming alcohol daily (Soju: “Korea’s most popular alcoholic beverage” 150 mL/day) and during weekends he used to binge drink. Following a binge of alcohol he developed anorexia, nausea, lethargy, progressive difficulty in walking, dysphagia, dysarthria and drooling of saliva, which was progressive. Then he came back to Sri Lanka where his family members noticed behavioral changes, reduced speech and progressive alteration of consciousness. There was no preceding history of headache, fever, toxin exposure and he did not have diabetes, hypertension, hypothyroidism, chronic liver cell disease, consumption of caffeine, tobacco or illegal drugs. His nutritional status was adequate and there was no family history of neurological disorders.
On examination, he was an averagely built person who was drowsy, disoriented, akinetic and rigid resembling Parkinsonism. He had reduced speech and drooling of saliva. He did not have ophthalmoplegia and the vision, fundoscopic examination and light reflexes were normal. Rest of the cranial nerve examination was also normal without any subtle cranio-bulbar atrophy. Upper and lower limbs were rigid with increased reflexes and positive Babinski sign. Power was difficult to assess due to rigidity. His sensory examination was normal and did not have muscle atrophy or fasciculations. He was afebrile and there were no signs of meningism or chronic liver cell disease.
His basic investigations were normal including serum sodium, liver function tests and inflammatory markers . Blood picture showed normal and macrocytic red blood cells and normal neutrophils. Serum B12 level was normal. Electroencephalography demonstrated diffuse bi-hemispheric slowing. MRI, done 2 weeks after the onset of symptoms showed abnormal signal intensity within the central pons with low signal intensity in T1 and high signal intensity in T2 and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) . There was no contrast enhancement or diffusion restriction. Pre-pontine cistern appeared normal with no evidence of mass effects. Bilateral basal ganglia also showed symmetrical mild T2 and FLAIR hyper intensity . These were suggestive of CPM with extra pontine myelinolysis involving basal ganglia. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was normal with no cells, normal protein and sugar levels. CSF was also negative for tuberculosis Polymerase chain reaction, tuberculosis culture and oligoclonal bands.
Because of the extrapyramidal signs he was started on syndopa (37.5 mg three times a day) and he gradually recovered. Level of consciousness, speech and gait became normal within 1 week. Mini mental score examination done at this stage was normal (30/30). During the follow up, 2 weeks later, bilateral tongue fasciculations without obvious wasting were noted during this time. (Additional file : Movie 1) Rest of the cranial nerves were normal. Even though the upper limb and lower limb reflexes were exaggerated, there was no wasting, fasciculations or weakness. He did not have papilledema, down beat nystagmus or mirroring of movements suggesting a lesion at the level of foramen magnum. His sensory system examination and cerebellar examination were normal. EMG showed denervation changes (fibrillations, large amplitude, long duration, complex motor unit action potentials and a reduced interference pattern) in the genioglossal muscle suggesting lower motor type hypoglossal nerve injury. EMG and nerve conduction studies (NCS) of the limbs were normal. MRI was repeated 1 month after the first MRI and showed same changes (T1 low and T2/FLAIR high intensity without diffusion restriction or contrast enhancement) in the central pons but previously noted changes in the basal ganglia were not visualized. At the same time we did high resolution MRI of the brain stem and in this, the abnormal signal intensities were localized to the pons not extending into the medulla and the hypoglossal nuclei and bilateral hypoglossal nerves were normal.
His thyroid function tests, fasting blood sugar, HbA1c, lipid profile, chest X-ray and ultrasound scan of the abdomen were normal. Human immuno deficiency virus 1 and two antibodies, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory, hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C antibody and Anti nuclear antibody were negative. Serum ceruloplasmin level was normal and slit lamp examination did not reveal Kayser–Fleischer rings. We were unable to arrange a total body CT scan to look for occult malignancies that can be missed on the chest X-ray and abdomen ultra sound scan and during the follow up he did not manifest any symptoms or signs of such.