The patient was a 70-year-old amateur clarinetist. She presented with mucosal erosion and reported pain on the lower lip when playing the clarinet when the duration of practice exceeded 2 h. The duration of daily practice was about 1–2 h. She practices every day and has been playing for about 50 years. At the time of visit, no obvious erosions were seen and there was no color change of mucosa. However, on palpation, a friable lump was felt. The facial and intraoral photographs are shown in . The mandibular anterior teeth were plexiform and had chiseled edges. Mesio-distal classification was grade 4, and the bucco-lingual classification was grade 4 according to Chu's classification of dental crowding. The occlusal status of patient was normal occlusion (overbite 0.3 mm, overjet 0.3 mm), and the occlusal supporting area was classified as Eichner's A-1, and there was no tooth movement or defective restoration in this area. We confirmed that the pain in the lower lip occurred where it was caught between the reed and the mandibular anterior teeth when playing the clarinet and inferred that this symptom was due to clarinet playing. The authors think that the prolonged pressure on the lower lip and the resulting blood flow disturbance might be triggering the erosions. Therefore, a lip shield was applied to the mandibular anterior teeth to protect the lower lip from the pressure while playing the clarinet. In this case, the technique and materials of a sports mouthguard were applied to create a lip shield. Soft polyolefin sheets (MG21; CGK, Hiroshima, Japan), 2.0 mm in thickness, were used to fabricate the lip shield.
The lip shield was fabricated as follows. An impression of the mandibular arch was made with an irreversible hydrocolloid (Aroma Fine Plus; GC Corp, Tokyo, Japan). The impression was filled with a dental plaster (New Plastone II; GC Corp., Tokyo, Japan) to make a working cast. The lip shield was fabricated by thermoforming a polyolefin sheet over the working cast using a vacuum forming machine in a vacuum tank (Erkoform 3d motion; Erkodent, Pfalzgrafenweiler, Germany) at 105°C, in the same manner as for the fabrication of sports mouthguards (Tanabe et al., ). An image of the design and fabrication of the lip shield is shown in . The lip shield covered all six mandibular anterior teeth for enhanced retention. The margins were polished to ensure comfort during clarinet playing. We checked the fit, retention, and occlusion of the lip shield with and without a reed at the dental chair side. The thickness of the buccal lip surface of the lip shield was 1.1 mm. One week after using the lip shield, the patient visited our clinic for follow-up and evaluation.
Her performance was analyzed using psychoacoustic analyses based on loudness and sharpness (Acoustic Workstation SQ6600; Ono Sokki Co, Ltd., Kanagawa, Japan). Psychoacoustic analysis is a sound analysis method based on the characteristics of human audition. In psychoacoustic analysis, loudness and sharpness were the primary outcomes. Loudness is defined as a physical value that represents the sound intensity in human perception (Zwicker et al., ). Sharpness is defined as the physical value that represents the balance between low and high frequencies, where high values correspond to higher frequencies of sound (Bismarck, ).
Each subject was seated in the chair position and a high-quality dynamic microphone (LA5120; Ono Sokki Co, Ltd, Kanagawa, Japan) was positioned 15 cm away from the instrument. A sound processor (Sound Blaster Extigy; Creative Technology Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) was used, and the recording conditions were 16 bit/96 kHz. Subjects were given an interval of at least 1 s for breath between each test tone. The analysis of each test tone was from the beginning of the tone to the end of the tone. Subjects performed the test only one trial per tone task after one practice session. In task, the following three dynamics were used: pianissimo (very soft), mezzo forte (moderately strong), and fortissimo (very strong). Analyses were performed with and without the lip shield. shows the music-scale task used for psychoacoustic analyses.
And a self-evaluation questionnaire with items on a 10-point scale was administered at 1 week, 3 months, and 8 months to evaluate the usability of the product. The questionnaire rated the following using a 10-point scale: lip shield stability, lip shield discomfort, holding fit, blowing comfort, sound quality, and overall satisfaction, based on Hattori's reports (Hattori et al., ).
After wearing the lip shield, the patient reported that the mucosal erosion resolved and the pain of the lower lip she experienced when playing the clarinet also disappeared. The patient wore the lip shield for 1–2 h per day, almost every day. There was no staining or deformation after 8 months of regular use.
shows the loudness and sharpness results of the psychoacoustic analyses. The player was able to project the difference of the three dynamics regardless of the use of the lip shield. There was no decrease in loudness when the lip shield was worn, and it was thought that the effect on blowing was small. There was no drastic change in sharpness either with or without lip shields. There was a slight decrease in sharpness when the lip shield was worn compared to when it was not, describing the reduction of high frequencies. Furthermore, there were fewer variations in sharpness between the tones. shows the results of the self-evaluation questionnaire after 1 week, 3 months, and 8 months. All usability outcomes remained favorable over the 8-month follow-up.