A 60-year-old Japanese man presented at our hospital in April 2018. The patient, who had a medical history of angina pectoris and no family history, complained of protrusion of the left maxilla and a sensation of nasal obstruction.
The patient had noticed a bulge in the left maxillary gingiva for several years before the first examination. However, the bulge was ignored, as it was not painful. Although the patient’s face deformed gradually, the patient did not undergo treatment for financial reasons. Thus, the patient developed a sensation of nasal obstruction that started several months before the first examination and then visited our department.
For extraoral findings, the facial asymmetry was due to bulging of the left maxillary body from the left nasal ala to the left upper lip. No hypoesthesia was observed of the infraorbital region. For intraoral findings, an approximately 60 × 40 × 30-mm well-circumscribed elongated bone-like bulge with a flat and smooth surface was observed from the labial and buccal gingiva to the buccal mucosa corresponding to the left upper central incisor of the second molar . No vital response was observed on the first molar to the left maxillary canine; both were observed with mobility.
The first panoramic X-ray image showed radiolucent multilocular cystoid images around the left maxillary sinus and the disappearance of the border of the maxillary sinus. Knife-cut-like resorption of the dental roots of the maxillary teeth extending from the right central incisor to the left second molar was noted . Computed tomography (CT) images showed that a well-circumscribed, radiolucent, multilocular cyst-like 60 × 50 × 40-mm lesion, extending from the right maxillary central incisor to the left maxillary second molar and from the alveolar ridge to the floor of the nasal cavity and maxillary sinus, was observed. The interior of the tumor was solid and had partial radiopaque areas with calcification that were interspersed . For financial reasons, the patient did not consent to a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination; hence, it was not performed.
Following these findings, we made a clinical diagnosis of a left maxillary bone neoplasm and considered the treatment course. Clinically, the progression of the tumor was suspected and indications for surgery were explained to the patient. However, the patient did not consent to surgery as an initial treatment for financial reasons and the need to continue providing long-term care for his ill wife. Concurrently, the patient complained of a sensation of left nasal obstruction, and, to avoid further progression of the tumor, marsupialization and biopsy were performed. Under local anesthesia, a fine needle aspiration was performed and a dark red serous fluid was obtained . A 30 × 10-mm incision was made in the central part of the lesion, revealing the thinned bone and a thick soft tissue lesion inside it. Thus, it was peeled from the surrounding bone to sample the specimen. At this time, the same liquid that was aspirated earlier was found in the lesion, but no calcified substance was observed. The soft tissue inside the lesion and oromucosal epithelium was sutured with absorbable sutures and marsupialized. Histological examination revealed the proliferation of neoplastic epithelial cells resembling the stellate reticulum of the enamel organ . Dentinoid tissues were formed adjacent to the neoplastic epithelial cells (asterisks in Fig. A). Furthermore, a few ghost cells were observed in the tumor nests . The tumor cells showed no nuclei atypia and few mitotic figures. On the basis of these histological findings, benign odontogenic tumors, including odontoma, ameloblastic fibro-odontoma, COC, and DGCT, were suspected.
After marsupialization, the patient was fitted with an obturator and buccal protrusion gradually decreased. CT scans performed in December 2018 and 2019 showed the growth of radiopaque bone-like tissue in the interior of the tumor without metastases to the surrounding tissues . As the nasal obstruction reduced, the patient became aware of symptomatic improvement and consented to surgery during follow-up in December 2019.
To confirm the absence of new lesions in the surrounding tissues, an MRI was performed immediately before surgery. Lesions with mixed low- and high-signals observed from the left alveolar ridge to the left maxillary sinus on T2-weighted imaging were observed, but no clear metastases in the surrounding tissues . Under the clinical diagnosis of left maxillary bone neoplasm, a partial left maxillectomy and reconstruction with a split-thickness skin graft were performed in June 2020 under general anesthesia.
A Weber-Ferguson incision was made from the left filtrum to the nasal ala to secure the operative field. The buccal aspects of the left maxilla and the tumor were exposed, and radical resection with a safety margin of approximately ≥ 5 mm was planned. The oral mucosa was cut to include tumor marsupialization . Partial maxillectomy was performed from the right upper incisor to the left upper first molar, including the bottom of the maxillary sinus. The interior of the lesion was solid . Subsequently, the raw surface of the buccal mucosa was covered with a split-thickness skin graft, filled with gauze containing tetracycline hydrochloride ointment, and protected with an acrylic splint. The postoperative course was uneventful, and a maxillary prosthesis for the defect was made in the fourth postoperative month . Over 1 year has passed since the surgery and the patient has been followed up with regularly, without finding a recurrence.
Histopathological findings: the excised specimen revealed that a collagenous fibrous capsule encapsulated the lesion, and no invasive proliferation was observed in the adjacent tissues . The tumor was composed mainly of stellate reticulum-like cells with large areas of dentinoid formation . The cuboidal or columnar epithelial cells, similar to the ameloblasts, were presented at the periphery of the tumor nests and lined dentinoid tissues . A cluster of ghost cells was observed in the tumor nests (arrowheads in Fig. C). Vascular invasion, perineural invasion, or necrosis were not seen. Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3 , while nuclear and cytoplasmic were positive for β-catenin . The MIB1 (Ki67) index was < 3% . We then made a final diagnosis of DGCT.