A 55-year-old man with depressive disorders and grade I obesity performed clinical and radiological exams at the Department of Urology to undergo a biopsy of prostatic lesion, suspected for adenoma. A preoperative chest X-ray showed an indefinite opacity in the left anterior arch of the 6th rib . A chest Computed Tomography (CT) scan showed a centimeter area with a central swelling and a thick border of surrounding sclerosis .
In the suspicion of a primary bone tumor a 99m-technetium hydroxydiphosphonate (99m-Tc HDP) bone scan was performed revealing an isolated hyperfixation of 6th rib.
The patient had no previous history of chest pain, trauma or cardiovascular disease. On physical examination, no further lesions appeared. Routine laboratory tests, including blood count and C-reactive protein, were normal.
After a multidisciplinary consultation with oncologists and radiotherapists and the placement of a CT-guided percutaneous marker the lesion was removed. Under general anesthesia, a two centimeters skin incision was made and limited exeresis of the underlying rib was performed, without any chest wall reconstruction. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged the day after the operation.
On gross, a nodular, well defined, yellowish lesion, centred in bone marrow and measured cm 1, 5 was evident . Histological examination revealed a proliferation of numerous foamy cells, multinucleated giant cells and occasionally Touton-type giant cells . Foamy cells were also intermixed with few spindle fibroblasts, lymphocytes, cholesterol clefts and fibrous tissue . The bone at the edge of the proliferation was diffusely reactive. Immunohistochemical analysis showed positivity for CD68 and negativity for cytokeratin, PAX8, S100, FXIIIa, CD1a and BRAF V600E. Based on histological and immunohistochemical features diagnosis of Xanthoma of bone was made.
Due to the histological findings and suspecting an unknown hyperlipidemia, the lipid panel was performed showing hypercholesterolemia (345 mg/dl) and hypertriglyceridemia (589 mg/dl). The patient had never performed these laboratory tests before.
He also performed a color-Doppler Ultrasound of the supra-aortic vessels showing the presence of atherosclerotic plaques. He was referred to a family physician, began lipid-lowering therapy with statin drugs and a low-calorie diet. During the follow-up, the patient had lost weight, blood tests showed a reduction in lipid levels and no recurrences of xanthoma.