A 29-year-old female with past medical history of one pack-year smoking and mild idiopathic thrombocytopenia was admitted for preterm premature rupture of membranes with a dichorionic twin pregnancy at 34 weeks of gestation. Her presenting hemoglobin was 10.2 g/dL and platelet count was 84/nL. Labor was induced with oxytocin and epidural anesthesia was used. Her history is notable for a COVID-19 infection at 30 weeks; otherwise pregnancy was unremarkable. She delivered twins via vaginal delivery with a breech extraction of twin B. Due to postpartum hemorrhage, she received uterine massage and exploration. Her fundus was noted to be firm with continued bleeding thought to be from lower uterine segment atony. Her oxytocin dose was doubled in dose, and ultimately, she received two doses of intramuscular methylergonovine 0.2 mg (standard obstetric dosing). Immediately after returning from the operating room, the patient reported chest tightness with radiation to her neck, and associated shortness of breath. Telemetry showed intermittent sinus bradycardia in the 20–30’s, and frequent atrial ectopy. Initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed T wave flattening in inferior and anterolateral leads, as well as premature ventricular contractions. Her chest pain resolved spontaneously within a few minutes.
The differential diagnosis for the patient’s chest pain included spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD), coronary vasospasm, acute coronary plaque rupture, and pulmonary embolism.
CT angiography (CTA) of the chest was negative for pulmonary embolism. Laboratory testing showed an initial normal-range high sensitivity troponin I (hsTnI) at 20 ng/L. Approximately eight hours later, the patient had another brief episode of chest pain. Nitroglycerin was not given as chest pain resolved in minutes without intervention. Recheck of hsTnI showed an uptrend to a peak of 1509 ng/L. Hemoglobin remained stable at 10 g/dL. Repeat ECG showed T wave inversions in septal leads .
Transthoracic echocardiogram showed left ventricular ejection fraction of 49% with basal septal wall hypokinesis (Supplemental Videos 1–3).
Given the rapid resolution of her chest pain, the patient received one dose of 325 mg of aspirin. Heparin drip was deferred due to concern for potential SCAD and further propagation of coronary dissection.
Coronary angiography was discussed with the patient, but ultimately due to lower suspicion of a coronary occlusive event, a dedicated CT coronary angiogram was obtained, which showed patent coronary arteries without obstruction or dissection.
She was started on metoprolol succinate 25 mg daily for mildly reduced ejection fraction and was discharged with cardiology follow up.
On three-month outpatient cardiology follow up, a repeat transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal ejection fraction of 60–65% with no wall motion abnormality. Patient had no further episodes of chest pain. Review of the event with patient and her family elucidated the administration of methylergonovine just prior to her chest pain episode. Given normalization of cardiac function, transient chest pain right after intramuscular methylergonovine, coronary vasospasm was felt to be the most likely cause of myocardial ischemia. Metoprolol was discontinued and amlodipine 5 mg daily was added for vasospasm prevention.