Our patient was a 55-year-old female, who manifested shortness of breath, decreased effort tolerance, cough, and weight loss that began a few months earlier. She did not experience any fever, night sweats or other constitutional symptoms. She had no significant past medical history and never smoked or abused alcohol. On physical examination, she had stable vital signs and had no cyanosis, edema or lymphadenopathy. She had an increased air entry, dullness to percussion, and a reduced tactile vocal fremitus on the right side. The remainder of the examination was normal. She also had a normal blood count, basic metabolic panel, liver function tests, and coagulation profile. Her initial chest X-ray showed a large opacity in the right hemithorax. A subsequent chest CT demonstrated a 12 × 9 × 8 cm mass in the middle lobe of the right lung . Based on the above findings, malignancy was suspected and bronchoscopy was performed, which showed a blunting at the carina, mucosal tram lines in both bronchi, and an external compression of the right lung, but endobronchial lesions were not observed. The histopathological examination of CT-guided transthoracic biopsy material was consistent with the thyroid transcription factor-1 (TFF-1) positive lung adenocarcinoma, and no epidermal growth factor receptor-activating mutations or echinoderm microtubule-associated protein like 4-anaplastic lymphoma kinase translocations were detected. Then, the patient was transfered to our department.
Distal organ metastases were not detected with whole-body bone scintigraphy and cranial CT; in the abdomen, a 5.3 cm mass was identified . An exploratory laparotomy was performed which demonstrated several nodules in the greater omentum and the peritoneum (the largest lesion was 0.5 cm in diameter). A biopsy of the omental tumor revealed adenocarcinoma. The immunophenotype demonstrated positive TTF-1 and cytokeratin (CK) 7 staining and was negative for CK20. Those histologic findings corresponded with the primary lung cancer diagnosis and yielded an additional diagnosis of peritoneal metastases.
The patient was administered a chemotherapy based on carboplatin (AUC 6), paclitaxel (200 mg/m2) and bevacizumab (15 mg/kg) every 3 weeks. Following 6 courses of this treatement, a radiological evaluation was scheduled. A partial response was obtained and maintenance with bevacizumab was initiated. At 6 months after treatment, the patient presented brain metastases and received 30 Gy of palliative whole-brain radiotherapy. Therefore, a second line of chemotherapy based on pemetrexed (500 mg/m2) was administered every 3 weeks. Following 9 courses of chemotherapy, a clinical and radiological response was observed. Today, the patient is no longer undergoing chemotherapy and has not shown any symptoms of progression while waiting for a new evaluation.