A 53-year-old female presented with lower back pain in the setting of a fall sustained 10 days before admission to hospital. Past medical history was significant for recurrent bilateral pulmonary embolism (PE) requiring IVC filter insertion, pulmonary endarterectomy via median sternotomy, and anticoagulation with long-term therapeutic enoxaparin due to warfarin resistance. This was further compounded by functional Class III chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension on medical treatment with tadalafil and home oxygen. Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension was diagnosed 9 years back when the patient presented to the hospital with bilateral PE and right heart strain. At that time, a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed a markedly dilated right ventricle, severe right heart dysfunction, and severe pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary artery pressure [PAP] 97 mmHg) which was confirmed on right heart catheterization. Pulmonary pressures remained elevated over the preceding years, while medical therapies, including bosentan, sildenafil, and epoprostenol, were trialled. Most recent imaging revealed no PE, normal right heart function on TTE, and improved pulmonary pressures (PAP 23 mmHg) following medical therapy, anticoagulation, and endarterectomy. Regular follow-up with respiratory and cardiac physicians was done. Other significant comorbidities included primary progressive multiple sclerosis on ocrelizumab with visual disturbances and a gait abnormality, moderate obstructive sleep apnoea, osteopenia, and severe back pain with lumbar fractures attributed to multiple falls. On presentation, a computed tomography (CT) abdomen was performed due to concerns for retroperitoneal haemorrhage, given long-term anticoagulation. Imaging revealed a lumbar spine (L2) compression fracture and incidental IVC filter limb embolization to the hepatic and renal veins and the right heart . The fractured IVC filter limbs were demonstrated on axial imaging .
A CT chest was then undertaken to further characterize the IVC filter embolization. Two embolized limbs of the IVC filter were present in the right heart . The first IVC limb was ∼30 mm in overall length and located in the anterior–inferior aspect of the right ventricular myocardium; it had perforated through the myocardium into the epicardial fat by ∼5 mm. The second IVC limb was at the junction of the membranous and muscular interventricular septum of the right ventricle .
The patient remained asymptomatic and haemodynamically stable with no recurrence of PE. Routine blood tests showed no impairment in liver or kidney function. A TTE was undertaken and demonstrated normal right heart size and function, normal left ventricular function, no significant valvular pathology, and no pericardial effusion. After extensive discussion and consultation with vascular, cardiothoracic, and respiratory teams, the patient was deemed too high risk for surgical intervention to remove the broken filter or embolized filter limbs due to significant comorbidities. The broken IVC filter was left in situ, and anticoagulation with therapeutic enoxaparin was continued. The chance of further embolization or progression of the embolized limbs was estimated to be very low.