A 48-year-old man was referred to our department following a positive fecal occult blood test. He had a past surgical history of cholecystectomy for cholecystitis at around 30 years of age. He had no past history of hypertension, diabetes, or liver disease. He had no history of trauma. He had a height of 163 cm and a weight of 70 kg. His abdomen was soft, flat, and non-tender. Laboratory investigations showed a white blood cell count of 5400/μL, a C-reactive protein level of 0.16 mg/dL, and a hemoglobin of 15.1 g/dL with no notable findings.
He underwent colonoscopy, which revealed varices from the middle of the transverse colon to the splenic flexure. There was no active bleeding or red color sign in the varices . A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) examination revealed early intense contrast enhancement of the inferior mesenteric vein (IMV) as well as IMA and abnormally dilated and tortuous vessels around the left side of the transverse colon with early intense staining in the arterial phase .
Colonic varices, therefore, were suspected because of the abnormal blood flow in the IMA. And angiography was performed to investigate it further. Selective digital subtraction angiography of the IMA revealed an AVF between the first branch of the sigmoid artery and the IMV. Contrast flowed into the IMV immediately after the IMA through the first branch of the sigmoid artery and the IMV became dilated. And blood in the IMV flowed into the mesocolic vein around the splenic flexure, and tortuous and dilated veins, which were considered to be varicosities, were found around the left side of the transverse colon. Blood in the IMV then flowed into the portal vein via the colonic varices but not into the splenic vein directly .
Finally, we diagnosed colonic varices caused by AVF between the first artery in the sigmoid colon and the IMV as the reason for the positive fecal occult blood test. Endoscopic treatment targeting only varicosities while leaving an AVF intact is associated with a high risk of perforation and recurrence. Radiological intervention was considered, but the large diameter of the vessel posed challenges for embolization, further increasing the likelihood of recurrence. Furthermore, the proximity of the AVF to the intestinal tract raised concerns about potential obstruction of blood flow following embolization. Therefore, the decision was made to perform laparoscopic sigmoidectomy.
The surgery was performed under general anesthesia in the lithotomy position. Preoperative CT showed that the AVF was located at the bifurcation of the superior rectal artery (SRA) and sigmoid artery. The left side of the colonic mesentery, including the pedicle of the IMA and IMV, was mobilized by a medial approach. The IMA, SRA, first branch of the sigmoid artery, and IMV were exposed and separated from the mesenteric adipose tissue. Blood flow was evaluated by intravenous injection of fluorescent indocyanine green (ICG) dye. ICG fluorescence in the IMV was seen immediately after observation of the IMA and SRA under near-infrared spectroscopy. Tortuous and dilated colonic varices were also visualized on the left side of the transverse colon after observation of ICG fluorescence in the IMV. Considering that the AVF did not involve the IMA or left colic artery, the SRA and first branch of the sigmoid artery were dissected with preservation of the left colic artery . The sigmoid colon and mesentery were resected, and a colorectal anastomosis was created using the double stapling technique. After reconstruction, return of blood flow was confirmed by ICG fluorescence, and early fluorescence of varicosities in the transverse colon was no longer observed .
In the resected specimen, no obvious AVF was macroscopically identified, however irregularly thickened veins on the mesentery were microscopically observed around the IMA in the hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stain and large and small blood vessels were complicatedly existed. Some veins contained the organized-thrombus. The Masson's trichrome stain and Elastica van Gieson stain could not identified the fusion vessel as the definitive evidence of the AVF, however the characteristics of the vessels suggested the presence of AVF or AVM . The postoperative clinical course was favorable, and he was discharged on postoperative day 10. Contrast-enhanced CT at 3 months after surgery showed that early enhancement of IMV was no longer observed in the arterial phase, and that transverse colonic varices were not enhanced in the arterial phase. The dilatation of the transverse colonic varices were obviously improved, although the colonic varices were morphologically remained . Colonoscopy at 6 months after surgery confirmed improvement of the varices by resection of AVF with sigmoidectomy .