An 83-year-old female with recurrent primary central nervous system lymphoma was admitted for high-dose methotrexate (HDMTX) as part of HDMTX, temozolomide and rituximab induction therapy. Her past medical history included type 2 diabetes mellitus, submassive pulmonary embolism (taking apixaban) and panhypopituitarism due to extension of lymphoma into the hypothalamus, resulting in central adrenal insufficiency, central hypothyroidism, and central DI. On admission, she was taking prednisone 10 mg daily, levothyroxine 88 mcg daily, desmopressin 200 mcg orally twice daily, and midodrine 2.5 mg twice daily. She received 1000 mg/m2 methotrexate infusion on the second day of admission. After her methotrexate infusion, she became progressively encephalopathic. On the evening of the third day of admission, she became too somnolent to take oral medications, including desmopressin. Her encephalopathy was initially attributed to metabolic-toxic aetiology, given that she was hyperammonemic (87 μmol/L). Between the third and fourth day of admission, she had a significant increase in her urine output, from approximately 1350 ml to over 2700 ml per day. Her mental status waxed and waned between somnolence and agitation. From the fifth to sixth day of admission, her sodium precipitously increased from 141 to 171 mEq/L. At that time, she was found to have minimal response to noxious stimuli and was hypotensive with systolic blood pressures 60–80 mmHg.
Review of the medication administration record revealed that the patient had missed five doses of desmopressin and three doses of prednisone over the preceding 3 days. Oral medications were held due to encephalopathy and were not changed to alternative forms.
The patient was started on intravenous (IV) desmopressin (2 mcg every 12 h), IV stress-dose hydrocortisone, and IV dextrose 5% in water (D5W) and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Her blood pressure improved with systolic blood pressure readings 80–100 mmHg with a bolus of IV fluids. In the ICU, a nasogastric tube was placed for enteral free water. After receiving three doses of 2 mcg IV desmopressin, 3.5 L of IV D5W, and 2.3 L of enteral water, her sodium normalized by the seventh day of admission at ~137 mEq/L. Over the course of the following 3 days, her encephalopathy resolved. She was found to be hyponatremic on the twice daily dosing of IV 2 mcg desmopressin; therefore free water flushes were stopped, and she was eventually transitioned to her previous home dose of desmopressin (200 mcg orally twice daily) with normalization of serum sodium. The course of the patient's medication and output are presented in Figure .