A 13-year-old right-hand dominant boy presented in casualty with a history of fall 1 day back with pain, swelling, and deformity in the left forearm with bleeding from the left forearm and restriction of movement of fingers and thumb of the left hand. On examination, there was a wound of size 1.5 cm on upper third-forearm over the volar and ulnar aspect and a wound of the size of 1 cm on mid-forearm over radial aspect . No neurovascular deficit was present. X-rays were performed, which suggested Type I Monteggia fracture equivalent lesion (diaphyseal ulna and radial neck fractures without dislocation) with ipsilateral distal radius and radial shaft fractures . Intravenous antibiotics were started, and splintage was given, and the patient kept for surgery the following morning.
Surgery was performed without a tourniquet. The open wound was thoroughly debrided and irrigated. The ulnar fracture was managed with close reduction and internal fixation with titanium elastic nail (TENS). Distal radius was managed by percutaneous fixation with two K-wires under the guidance of image intensifier, while the shaft of radius fracture was managed by close reduction and internal fixation with elastic TENS nail with a lateral entry point . The insertion point was approximately 2 cm proximal to the distal epiphyseal plate. From this point, a 1-1.5 cm incision given on the radial side proceeding distally. The underlying soft-tissue retracted with blunt dissection with artery forceps. The nail advanced from the distal radius to proximally first crossed fracture of the shaft and then up to the radial neck fracture with gentle hammer taps and rotating movements. External pressure applied to the head of the radius to place it in front of the nail tip. The fracture decompacted by applying slight axial pressure to the nail and the fracture reduced definitively by rotating the nail through 180°. Wounds were closed, and the plaster slab was applied in mid-prone position. At 4 weeks follow-up, distal K-wires of radius were removed, and plaster slab applied in supination for further 2 weeks . The elbow range of motion was started at 6 weeks along with pronation and supination. X-rays showed a union at this stage in all the fractures. At the final follow-up at 6 months, fractures were consolidated with near-normal range of motion (, ).