A 16-year-old girl presented to our department with recurrent palpitations that had been occurring for 3 years. Eleven years prior, she had undergone transcatheter closure for pmVSD, and her post-operative electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm. Three years ago, she started experiencing palpitations and dizziness but never fainted. Recently, a 24-h Holter monitoring revealed a high burden of monomorphic PVCs, accounting for 17% of beats in 24 h. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 62% and no residual septal shunt. Physical examination and laboratory tests were unremarkable.
After obtaining informed consent, an electrophysiological study was performed. The baseline ECG showed a PVC with a similar morphology to the documented one . The PVC exhibited a QS morphology in lead V1, with a precordial transition in lead V2, positivity in leads II, III, and aVF, and no notch in the limb leads. We suspected that it was an idiopathic PVC originating from the septal area of RVOT or right aortic sinus.
Activation mapping was performed using an irrigated ablation catheter (OmniCool, APT Medical Inc, China) in conjunction with a three-dimensional (3D) electroanatomic mapping system (HT Viewer, APT Medical Inc, China). Initially, the local RVOT was mapped, specifically identifying the margin of the occluder through high-frequency potentials recorded near it in the 3D mapping. The area of interest was determined to be in the posterior septal RVOT, where a ventricular electrogram (EGM) preceded the QRS onset by 25 ms, indicating the proximity of the ablation catheter to the occluder ( and and ). Ablation was conducted at 30 W in this location, resulting in the recording of a junctional beat and RBBB after 12 s of ablation . The PVC morphology in lead V1 changed to rS, suggesting a more posterior origin. Subsequently, the RVOT beneath the pulmonary valve was remapped, revealing the earliest ventricular activity near the posterior septum with a timing of −32 ms ( and ), again close to the occluder ( and ). Due to the high-frequency potential generated by electric field interference, it was difficult to distinguish EGMs around the metallic occluder . However, the His bundle (HB) potential was observed adjacent to the occluder ( and ), indicating the presence of the conduction system in this region. During ablation at the location of the earliest activation for 9 s, junctional beats occurred again.
To ensure safety, we made the decision to guide the catheter to the corresponding anatomical position in the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) as the previous target. The earliest local EGM ( and ) showed a timing of −32 ms compared with the QRS onset below the right coronary cusp (RCC), where both the HB potential and the high-frequency potential were still visible. Considering both safety and efficacy, we selected an ablation target above the RCC, 25 ms prior to the onset of QRS ( and ). Confirmation through 3D mapping and angiography indicated that the catheter was positioned at the base of the RCC, with a distance of approximately 9.51 mm measured in fluoroscopy. Ablation at this location was successful, utilizing 30 W of power with a total radiofrequency delivery time of 90 s, and no further ventricular arrhythmia could be induced. The entire procedure lasted about one and a half hours, and the patient expressed satisfaction with the treatment. At the 3-month follow-up, the patient continued to display RBBB on Holter monitoring, with no further occurrences of PVCs.