We present a 7-year-old male who had been completely well until 2 days prior to the presentation. He presented with a history of inability to pass urine, associated with lower abdominal pain, penile pain when attempting to pass urine, and dribbling. The mother reported no history of such symptoms in the past, and there was no significant medical or family history. Prior to presentation, the child had been managed in a peripheral lower-level health facility, where suprapubic aspiration of urine was done to temporarily relieve the abdominal pain given that urethral catheterisation had failed. The underlying cause was not ascertained at the lower-level health facility, and the failure to pass urine persisted, resulting in a referral to a general hospital for further evaluation and management.
On examination, he was alert, with a tachycardia of 90 beats per minute and dry mucous membranes, but the rest of the vital signs were in the normal range. On abdominal examination, we noted a distention in the suprapubic region that was dull on percussion. While attempting to pass a urethral catheter, we noted that there was a whitish mass at the urethral meatus that was hard on palpation and could not be expressed out through the meatus. A working diagnosis of acute urine retention due to an obstructing stone in the urethral meatus was made. Under sedation, a stone measuring 11 by 7 mm was extracted by a general surgeon following a meatotomy, and a urethral catheter was passed .
After relieving the urine retention, urinalysis revealed the presence of gram-negative rods, the complete blood count was unremarkable, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 29.4 mm/h and an abdominal radiography did not show any other stones in the urinary tract. Ultrasonography did not reveal any anatomical abnormalities. The patient was rehydrated, and oral cephalexin plus paracetamol were administered for 5 days. The catheter was removed on the fifth day, and the child was discharged with advice on adequate fluid intake. For the 2 months of follow-up at the general hospital, the child was well, and the mother reported no symptoms related to urolithiasis.