A 26-year-old Japanese male presented with headaches, anorexia, and diplopia. The enhanced computed tomography scan showed two small intracranial masses; one was a suprasellar lesion and the other appeared at the aperture of the aqueduct, resulting in obstructive hydrocephalus. No lesions were found in the spinal cord. An endoscopic biopsy was performed of the suprasellar mass, and the accompanying third ventriculostomy resolved the hydrocephalus. The pathology revealed a germinoma and he received three courses of chemotherapy (carboplatin, 450 mg for 1 day; etoposide, 1100 mg for 5 days). This was followed by whole-brain radiation (24 Gy). Ultimately, the intracranial lesions disappeared.
Three years later, however, the patient experienced vacillating paresthesia in his right hand and both legs, but without a focal neurological deficit. Human chorionic gonadotropin β-subunit (βhCG) and α-fetoprotein (AFP) were within normal limits in the serum (βhCG <0.1 ng/ml and AFP 2.2 ng/ml), CSF βhCG was 0.4 ng/ml, and AFP was 0.2 ng/ml. The cytological examination of CSF was negative. However, oligoclonal IgG bands were positive in CSF (IgG index, 0.66; myelin basic protein, 45.8 pg/ml).
The cervical MR revealed a heterogeneously enhancing, expansile intramedullary cord lesion at the C1-C2 level, accompanied by marked edema extending from the medulla oblongata to the C4 level . There were no accompanying intramedullary or extramedullary lesions in the thoracic or lumbar spinal studies.
The main differential diagnoses included; astrocytoma, ependymoma, or germinoma along with other nonneoplastic diseases (e.g., MS, other demyelinating diseases, or inflammatory myelitis). Due to the potential diagnosis of MS, the patient received steroid pulse therapy with methylprednisolone (1 g/day) for 3 days. The more likely diagnosis of a tumor was later confirmed when the follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed reduced edema around the unchanged contrast-enhancing C1-C2 intramedullary mass .
One month later, the patient underwent a C1 laminectomy/ C2 partial laminectomy with revised laminoplasty of the C2 spinous process for resection of the intramedullary cervical lesion. A myelotomy was performed along the posterior median sulcus; just under the cord surface, the tumor was grayish, soft, and nonhemorrhagic and appeared to grow into the central canal. As the intraoperative frozen section diagnosis was consistent with germinoma, a sufficient biopsy/decompression was performed without the need for total resection.
The tumor consisted of a mixed population of large cells (e.g., large round nuclei, hyperchromasias, with clear cytoplasm) and mature lymphocytes [two-cell pattern, ]. There were no syncytiotrophoblastic giant cells. Immunohistochemical studies positively stained for placental alkaline phosphatase and C-kit . Staining for βhCG and AFP was negative, while the Ki-67 labeling index was approximately 30%. These findings confirmed the diagnosis of a germinoma that was unchanged compared to his prior intracranial surgery. Most likely, the cervical tumor resulted from dissemination of germinoma cells through the central canal. The patient recovered from surgery without any sequelae. The postoperative MRI revealed partial resection of the tumor, and he was treated with three courses of chemotherapy (e.g., carboplatin and etoposide) and begun on holospinal radiation (30 Gy).