An 83-year old never-smoking female consulted in 2017 for a dry nocturnal cough, without dyspnea. An incidental lingular consolidation had been detected on a chest computed tomography (CT) scan in 2010, and was followed by regular chest CTs and positron emission tomography– computed tomography (PET/CT) scans until 2016. She had had two undiagnostic bronchoscopies and refused further invasive examinations including thoracoscopy. She had a medical history of osteoarthritis and hiatal hernia. Until her visit in 2017, she was in good general condition, had no signs of respiratory disease, and her physical examination was normal. The PET/CT scan performed in 2015 showed no abnormal metabolic activity. The follow-up PET-CT performed 15 months later showed a slight increase in size of the consolidation (20 mm) without abnormal uptake.
When she presented in 2017, the chest examination was still normal. Pulmonary function tests (PFTs) showed the onset of a restrictive disease with 3.69 Liters (75% of predicted) of total lung capacity versus 5.19 Liters 1 year earlier, without weight gain. No oxygen desaturation was detected at rest or during a 6-min walking test. This time, a CT scan showed multifocal ground-glass and consolidative opacities with heterogeneous densities, including areas of low attenuation, indicative of intrapulmonary lipid, in the left upper lobe (LUL) . After thorough history taking concerning exposure to fatty substances, the patient denied any form of inhalation of volatile hydrocarbons. However, she had been on ASU twice daily for 20 years to treat osteoarthritis. Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) was documented using 24-h pH-metry showing 90 acid-reflux episodes per 24 h, despite treatment with esomeprazole. Bronchoscopy was performed, and the BAL fluid was macroscopically turbid white. Oil red O staining of BAL showed lipid-laden macrophages and extracellular lipid droplets. Cultures of the BAL were negative.
After confirmation of the diagnosis, in the absence of other fatty-substance exposure, a presumptive diagnosis of ELP caused by ASU aspiration in a patient with GERD was established. This treatment was stopped. No surgical treatment of her hiatal hernia was suggested in this patient who had refused invasive procedures. One year later, the patient was clinically stable, her cough regressed and her PFTs normalized. Her chest CT showed persistent lingular consolidation and regression of the ground-glass opacities.