A 71-year-old man with a history of atrial fibrillation; obesity; hypertension; obstructive sleep apnoea, managed with continuous positive airway pressure; presented with 5 days of progressive chest pain, hypoxia, and exertional dyspnoea. Vitals on admission were notable for a SpO2 of 85% on room air, blood pressure at 104/81 mmHg, and a heart rate of 95 beats per minute. There is a pulsus paradoxus noted with a systolic blood pressure decrease upon inspiration of 20 mmHg. Cardiac auscultation revealed muffled heart sounds with a normal S1 and S2. JVD was noted that increased during inspiration (Kussmaul’s sign). Further physical examination is pertinent for lungs that are clear to auscultation and 2+ bilateral lower extremity pitting oedema. Complete blood count was pertinent for a mild anaemia with a haemoglobin of 13.3 g/dL. Inflammatory markers were elevated including a C-reactive protein of 11.8 mg/dL (reference range <0.80 mg/dL) and a sedimentation rate of 37 mm/h (reference range 0–20 mm/h). An electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with low voltage . A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) confirmed a large circumferential pericardial effusion, with mild right ventricular collapse during diastole. The inferior vena cava was dilated to 21 mm and decreased less than 50% in size with inspiration . Gentle IV fluid resuscitation was initiated. Right heart catheterization (RHC) showed a decreased cardiac out of 3.7 L/min and a cardiac index of 1.4 L/min/m2 with a RA mean pressure of 34 mmHg . A pericardiocentesis in the catheterization laboratory was unsuccessful due to obese body habitus. The patient was subsequently taken to the OR for a subxiphoid pericardiocentesis was performed by cardiothoracic surgery, with drainage of 400 mL of serosanguinous fluid. The pericardial fluid analysis showed no evidence of malignant cells but abundant reactive mesothelial cells. Obtained blood and pericardial fluid cultures remained negative. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) showed bi-atrial enlargement and a tubular configuration of the ventricles, suggestive of pericardial constriction. On the myocardial tagging sequences, gridlines persisted between myocardium and pericardium, indicating pericardial adhesions. Real-time cine cardiac motion imaging revealed a septal bounce on deep inspiration, suggesting increased ventricular coupling, which supported to a diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis . Workup for autoimmune disease was negative. The patient recovered, with no further oxygen requirements, and was discharged on colchicine 0.6 mg twice daily in a stable condition.
The patient presented to the emergency department 1 week after discharge with worsening dyspnoea on exertion and was readmitted. A repeat TTE revealed reaccumulation of a moderate-sized pericardial effusion. Given the respiratory distress, the patient underwent a second pericardiocentesis with a pericardial window procedure, which led to a rapid improvement in the patient’s symptoms. A pericardial biopsy obtained during the pericardial window procedure, revealed fibro-adipose tissue with focal chronic inflammation and rare hemosiderin deposits. RHC after pericardiocentesis demonstrated an improved cardiac output of 7.7 L/min, a cardiac index of 2.9 L/min/m2, and a persistently elevated mean RA pressure of 13 mmHg, with a rapid y descent.
A follow-up echocardiogram at 1-month post-discharge showed an estimated RA pressure of 20 mmHg, an left ventricular septal E′ velocity of 14 cm/s, and a restrictive filling pattern of the left ventricle with an E/A ratio of 1.51 in absence of a pericardial effusion ( and ). At the 3-month follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic.