A 37-year-old Syrian woman came to our clinic complaining of four large masses in the leg, thigh, neck, and abdomen. The complaint started 30 months ago as a small hard mass in the upper of the right thigh. The patient underwent a complete resection of the mass. Histological examination showed that it was a liposarcoma. Six months later, other four masses appeared in abdomen, neck, thigh, and leg. The masses showed rapid growth. During the last twenty-four months, the patient was neglected because of the crisis that affected every part of Syria. She was not followed up by regular imaging. Even after the masses were visible and large, she did not receive any therapy until she got presented to our clinic. Her family history was remarkable. Her brother and sister had lipomas. However, genetic studies were not performed because they are expensive and not available in our country. Furthermore, her drug and psychosocial history was passive.
Clinical examination revealed that the masses were hard, fixed and large . Full blood count and biochemical investigations were within the normal range. Computed tomography (CT) showed masses in the abdomen, a large subcutaneous mass and a retroperitoneal mass, the pelvis, the neck and the thigh. The left cervical mass was invading the root of the neck, the cervical plexus, and the subclavicular artery. The upper outer right thigh mass was invading the femoral artery. All the masses had a low density, which was consistent with a lipomatous tumor .
A surgical biopsy from the thigh mass showed high-grade liposarcoma with prominent round cell component .
Because of rapid recurrence and multifocal disease, the multidisciplinary team suggested chemotherapy with Doxorubicin and Ifosfamide. The patient was given five cycles of chemotherapy. Postchemotherapy follow-up showed a decreasing by 30 % in the masses size. Two months after chemotherapy, the patient underwent two major surgical operations. The first one was for resecting abdominal and cervical masses and the other one was for resecting femoral and popliteal masses . Actually, the patient showed patience and she accepted all the offered treatments and procedures with satisfaction.
The first procedure was performed by a general surgery specialist with 15 years of experience in abdominal surgery. Abdominal incision showed seven tumor masses; a large retroperitoneal mass, an under left kidney mass, a peripheral retroperitoneal mass connected to the upper pole of the right kidney and compressing the inferior vena cava, two pelvic masses adherent to the right ovary and greater omentum, a small mass connected to the transverse colon, and a mass invading the sigmoid colon mesentery. They measured 30, 5, 10, 15, 5, 4 and 10 cm respectively. Therefore, the resectable masses were totally resected and the other masses were debulked. The cervical mass was only debulked to save neural and vascular elements and to avoid extremity amputation.
Seventeen days later, the femoral and popliteal masses were resected after isolating the neurovascular bundles and nerves. This procedure was performed by an orthopedic surgery specialist with 10 years of experience in extremity cancer surgery.
The pathologic report was liposarcomatosis (myxoid type). Unfortunately, a day after surgery the vital signs of the patient deteriorated. She was transformed to the surgical intensive care unit (ICU) where she died.