In 2010, a 37 year-old black woman had mastectomy and homolateral axillary dissection for invasive carcinoma in her left breast. pTNM stage was pT3 multicentric (53 mm diameter for the biggest) pN2 (seven positive lymph nodes) and no metastasis. Proliferation index was high (Ki-67 = 40%). Immunohistochemistry showed 90% of ER positivity and 60% of PR positivity. No overexpression of HER2 receptors has been found. According to multidisciplinary concertation, the patient was treated with adjuvant chemotherapy with six courses of FEC 100 (LV5FU 500 mg/m2, epirubicin 100 mg/m2, cyclophosphamide 500 mg/m2) every 3 weeks. Thereafter, she was treated by tamoxifen, at a dosage of 20 mg/day, and triptorelin (agonist analog of luteinizing hormone releasing hormone) for 4 years, until February 2014. In February 2014, the clinical exam reported a skin relapse in place of mastectomy scar. A CT scan showed multiple and bilateral pulmonary lesions and left pleural effusion. Chemotherapy with paclitaxel 80 mg/m2 and bevacizumab 10 mg/kg was initiated. Follow up imaging showed a positive partial response, so maintenance with fulvestrant and bevacizumab was initiated in August, 2014.
In February 2016, due to further progression in lungs and multiple bones sites, she was treated with exemestane 25 mg and everolimus 10 mg with an initial partial response.
In October 2016, she reported a dyspnea with dry cough. Left pleural effusion and non-specific infiltration were observed on the chest x-ray. We evocated first a mTOR inhibitor-associated non-infectious pneumonitis . According to recommendations for patients with adverse events grade 3, everolimus was interrupted and corticosteroids administered. There was only a slight clinical improvement. The patient was submitted to bronchoscopy which shown a diffuse infiltration of lymphangitic appearance of the superior left trunk. The bronchoalveolar lavage fluid was negative for bacteria, acid-fast bacilli, and fungi. However, many adenocarcinoma cells were observed .
Therefore, we concluded there was disease progression leading to visceral crisis and eribulin was started on 11.17.2016.
12.5.2016, a baseline CT scan was performed and revealed infiltration and diffuse nodules distributed throughout the lymphatic vessels confirming lymphangitic carcinomatosis . After only one course of the therapy, that is to say 14 days, a remarkable clinical response on the breathness and cough was noted.
After four courses of eribulin, a CT scan was performed and showed a significant reduction of pulmonary lesions and previously identified micronodules had disappeared . CT scan at 6 months confirmed radiological benefit .
Overall, this patient benefited of 8,5 months of eribulin with a significant clinical benefit. In August 2017, CT scan showed a major progression disease with several lesions in lung, hepatic and bones. She started a new therapeutic regimen by fluorouracil and vinorelbin with a satisfying efficacy on all target lesions. Progression free survival was 7 months. In March, 2018, the patient had a severe asthenia, dyspnea and diffuse bone pain. Chemotherapy was stopped and she benefited of best supportive care. Death occurred at hospital on 04.24.2018 with an overall survival since diagnostic of 50 months.