A 27-year-old Sri Lankan woman presented to our hospital in week 38 of her first pregnancy. An initial antenatal ultrasound scan (USS) at 37 weeks at a peripheral hospital demonstrated a multicystic lesion in the left side of the baby's chest with mediastinal shift. The stomach was found to be appropriately placed below the diaphragm, but the lesion had the appearances of a loop of small bowel. A repeat scan at 38 weeks suggested that the spleen was intermittently in the left chest. The mother was counselled while at the regional hospital about the possibility of her baby having a congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH).
The child was born at term by forceps-assisted delivery and was immediately intubated. He required minimal ventilation, and an initial chest X-ray was reported as normal. After extubation, the child exhibited intermittent signs of respiratory distress. An echocardiogram revealed a multiloculated cystic mediastinal mass . A subsequent thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan showed a mainly cystic mass within the anterior mediastinum with some solid components in the left lateral aspect, which was believed to most likely represent a mediastinal teratoma or a congenital cystic adenomatous malformation .
The lesion was subsequently completely excised via a median sternotomy approach and was indeed a multiseptated, multicystic mass with solid components. It was adherent to the thymus and right pleura in the superior mediastinum, the great vessels and the pericardium, and traversed the left pleural cavity to the left hemidiaphragm. The left lung was compressed by the lesion, which was lying very close to the left phrenic nerve. This was carefully identified and preserved. Gross and histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of cystic hygroma .
In the immediate postoperative period, dyspnoea was observed when feeding. An USS showed paradoxical movement of the left hemidiaphragm, and a left phrenic neuropraxia was suspected. This was managed conservatively, and an excellent recovery was made within 3 months. The patient is symptom free at 1 year of age.