The patient is a 70 year-old white female who has the previous history of a right breast cancer that was treated approximately twelve years ago by a lumpectomy to the upper central portion of her right breast, right axillary lymph node dissection, and postoperative radiation therapy for a pT1c, pN0, M0, estrogen receptor positive, and progesterone receptor positive invasive ductal carcinoma. She was maintained on tamoxifen for five years thereafter. In her routine annual follow-up at The JamesCare Breast Center of The Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital, she reported feeling a new pea-sized palpable event in the inferolateral aspect of her right breast for only one-week duration.
On clinical breast examination, the patient was noted to have a well-healed periareolar, curvilinear scar along the superior aspect of her right breast from approximately the 10 o'clock to 2 o'clock axis. There were no associated palpable events within this region of her right breast representing the area of her previously treated breast cancer. However, within the mid to peripheral portion of the lower outer quadrant of her right breast in the 7 o'clock axis, the patient had a less than one centimeter suspicious palpable nodule that appeared to be relatively superficially located within the breast tissue.
Mammography showed stable, asymmetrical, increased density to the tissue within the upper retroareolar portion of her right breast, consistent with her prior lumpectomy site. However, a new 0.8 × 0.5 cm mammographic density was noted in the inferolateral portion of her right breast. Targeted right breast ultrasound showed a 0.78 × 0.63 × 0.49 cm hypoechoic lesion that was located in the 7 o'clock axis and approximately 4 cm from the nipple, which was associated with acoustic shadowing. This was thought to be suspicious for malignancy and was classified as BI-RADS 4, for which a biopsy was recommended.
A minimally invasive right breast ultrasound-guided 8 gauge Mammotome® vacuum-assisted biopsy was performed. Microscopic evaluation revealed fragments of breast parenchyma in which a bland spindle cell proliferation was present, forming long interlacing fascicles . The cells showed cigar-shaped nuclei with vesicular chromatin and pinpoint nucleoli that were dispersed amidst varying degrees of collagen deposition, ranging from scant to thick bundles . In some fragments, the proliferation could be seen entrapping lobular units. Immunohistochemical stains for cytokeratin were negative.
The patient was subsequently taken to the operating room at to The Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital and underwent an ultrasound directed wide local excision of the inferior portion of her right breast in the 7 o'clock axis within the mid to peripheral breast field.
Gross pathologic evaluation of the specimen, which overall measured 7.5 × 4.5 × 4.0 cm in size, revealed a 0.8 × 0.7 × 0.4 cm gray-white firm mass abutting a 2.5 × 2.0 × 1.2 cm biopsy cavity . Microscopic evaluation revealed residual fibromatosis. All surgical margins were negative. The residual fibromatosis came to within 0.6 cm of the overlying skin margin and was 1.1 cm from the closest parenchymal margin. No evidence of carcinoma was seen.
The patient is currently nine months out from her wide local excision of fibromatosis of her right breast and she remains disease free.