A 65-year-old Japanese woman was presented to the emergency department at 1:00 a.m. with unilateral swelling on the left side of the tongue.
The patient complained of sudden development of unilateral swelling on the left side of the tongue while falling asleep.
She had a history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia for 32 years and had been receiving 20 mg/d of lisinopril, 5 mg/d of amlodipine, 1 mg/d of doxazosin, 2 mg/d of pitavastatin, and 500 mg/d of polyenephosphatidylcholine. She had been receiving lisinopril, an ACE inhibitor, for 32 years. There was no history of food allergies, allergic rhinitis, atopic dermatitis, or bronchial asthma. She had eaten her dinner the previous day at around 6:00 p.m. and had not consumed anything other than her usual diet. She had no history of alcohol consumption or smoking.
There was no family history of angioedema.
The patient’s vital signs on arrival at our hospital were as follows: Conscious with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 15 points (E4V5M6); body temperature, 35.9 ℃; blood pressure, 137/78 mmHg; pulse, 88 beats/min; no tachypnea; and SpO2 level, 98% (room air). The patient was obese; her height was 164.6 cm, weight 101.2 kg, and body mass index 37.4 kg/m2. Although she had difficulty in speaking due to unilateral tongue edema, the airway was open, and she was able to breathe . No abnormalities were detected in the heart and respiratory sounds. Edema was not observed in any region other than the tongue. Skin rashes, including wheals, were also not observed.
Table presents the results of laboratory examinations at the time of her visit. The white blood cell (WBC) count was 5560/μL (eosinophils 0.4%), C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 0.16 mg/dL, platelet count was 91000/μL, serum albumin level was 4.0 g/dL, total bilirubin level was 1.0 mg/dL, prothrombin time activity was 69.7%, and the prothrombin time-international normalized ratio was 1.25.
Computed tomography (CT) of the head did not reveal the presence of any ischemic lesions, and echocardiography did not reveal stenosis or dissection of the carotid artery. Abdominal echocardiography, performed due to a history of liver injury, revealed an irregular liver surface and coarse parenchyma, with no ascites. The Child-Pugh score was 6 points, grade A, and the fibrosis-4 index (FIB-4) was 6.53. The patient tested negative for hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C virus antibodies. Based on the abdominal echocardiography images and the FIB-4, she was diagnosed with cirrhosis of the liver due to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis.