A 51 year-old man was admitted on the surgical ward in November 2003 for a right-sided abdominal pain which had been present for three days. Clinically, he was jaundiced with a high temperature. Blood tests showed white cell count (20.8 × 103/mm3), bilirubin (103 mg/dl) and ESR (75 mm/h). All other blood tests were normal. Ultrasound and CT scans of the abdomen revealed fluid collection/mass measuring 14 cm in the right hepato-renal space. The mass was separated from the liver, pancreas and the right kidney, but there was lack of definition of the right suprarenal gland. Because the patient was jaundiced, we thought that draining the cyst would relieve the pressure on the biliary system and resolve jaundice. About 150 ml brown-coloured fluid was aspirated from the mass under CT guidance and a sample was sent for histology. Cytological examination of the sample reported presence of amorphous material with occasional histiocytic cells. There was no evidence of malignancy. The patient was discharged in December 2003 after making good recovery.
In January 2004, the patient was readmitted for an abdominal pain and pyrexia. A repeat CT scan confirmed recollection of fluids at the same site . He underwent a laparotomy for excision of the mass and right adrenalectomy in February 2004. The specimen was sent for histopathology.
Macroscopical examination of the specimen reported an open cyst measuring 190 mm × 110 mm × 0.5 mm. The outer surface was pale-dark brown with an irregular defect measuring 1.8 cm × 1.5 cm in one area. Another area showed an adrenal tissue measuring 3.0 cm × 1.0 cm × 0.5 cm with yellow areas on the surface of the cyst wall. The inner area of the cyst wall was wrinkled with an exudate-like substance coating it in places.
Microscopically, the sections showed that the normal adrenal gland was adherent by fibrous tissues to the external wall of the cyst, but the cyst was not arising from the adrenal. The cyst wall consisted of a thick layer of fibrous tissues which showed focal calcifications and areas of acute and chronic inflammation. There was no epithelial lining present, but clusters of cholesterol crystals were adherent to the internal cyst wall. Granulation tissue also formed part of the lining of the cyst . There was no atypia or malignancy. The overall appearances were those of an idiopathic benign retroperitoneal cyst.