Our patient was 32 years old when she first presented at the oncology unit of the 3rd Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, in July 2010. She had palpated nodules in her right breast. Ultrasonography (USG) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed bilateral multifocal tumor, with nodules of 8 × 7 mm and 7 × 4 mm located at 6 and 8 o’clock in her right breast, respectively, and an 8 × 5 mm tumor focus located at 5 o’clock in her left breast. Aspiration cytology confirmed the diagnosis of invasive breast carcinoma (no special type). There was no detectable distant metastasis. In her medical history, there was an ovulation induction therapy by clomiphene 3 years before, at age 29, and a childbirth via normal vaginal delivery after that.
The patient underwent bilateral mastectomy with axillary sentinel lymph node biopsy. Pathological examination showed bilateral, grade 3 invasive breast carcinoma (no special type) with ER, progesterone receptor (PR) and HER2 negativity by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) . Disease stage was pmT1b N0(sn) cM0. First line adjuvant chemotherapy was initiated in August 2010, according to the 5-fluorouracil, epirubicin, cyclophosphamide and docetaxel (FEC100-TXT) protocol (3 cycles each), after which she had breast reconstruction surgery twice. Chemotherapy and the other interventions were well tolerated. Chemoterapy doses see schedule .
Surveillance MRI in December 2013 detected two lesions indicating disease recurrence: a 10 × 5 mm mass on the outer contour of the implant on the left side, and a paracentral 22 × 28 mm lesion on the right side, the latter involving nearby ribs. USG-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) biopsy demonstrated invasive breast carcinoma (no special type). No repeated immunocytochemical reactions were performed on the sample. Positron emission tomography - computer tomography (PET-CT) showed enhancement in the supraclavicular and parasternal lymph nodes, such that tumor removal was contraindicated. Thus, we started first line bevacizumab-paclitaxel therapy for metastatic TNBC, which was given for 12 cycles. Partial regression was seen in PET-CT after 5 cycles, but surgical intervention was still contraindicated due to the activity seen in the lymph nodes, and chemotherapy was continued. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequencing performed during this time period revealed a germline mutation in the BRCA1 gene. Progressive disease was diagnosed by PET-CT at the end of the protocol. Because of the lack of new foci, the patient underwent thoracic surgery in February 2015. Pathological examination of the lymph nodes showed metastases with extracapsular extension and perineural invasion (stage pN3). Predictive markers were not investigated in the surgical specimen. Radiotherapy followed, based on the decision of the multidisciplinary oncoteam: intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT, 54 Gy) and simultaneous boost was given to the infra-axillary and axillary region and the operated area.
In November 2015, multiple lesions (progression in the parasternal lymph node, new pulmonary hilar lymph node involvement and lung metastasis) were visible by PET-CT imaging. We started second line therapy for metastatic TNBC according to the cisplatin, docetaxel (CDDP+TXT) protocol. Control CT imaging performed after 9 cycles showed progression; therefore, the patient was enrolled in a clinical trial, where she received oral capecitabine as third line treatment, and the poly (adenosine biphosphate - ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor olaparib as fourth line therapy.
Although clinically stable, progression was seen by imaging methods in May 2017 (multiple bone metastases and a new lung metastasis, in addition to parasternal, mediastinal, pulmonary hilar and pelvic lymph node involvement), and the oncological team decided on initiating fifth line therapy (vinorelbine - VNB). Meanwhile, core biopsy was taken from a tumorous mass (34x15mm) above the sternum, and pathological examination confirmed ER- and PR-negative breast cancer involvement, but – surprisingly – HER2 status turned out to be positive by FISH .
She developed motor aphasia in June 2017, while at home; she suddenly felt confused, and had a grand mal seizure. She was urgently transferred to the neurosurgery department of the National Institute of Clinical Neurosiences (NICN), and had an MRI scan, which showed a metastasis in the left frontal lobe. Neurosurgical intervention was performed, and the entire tumor was removed, which proved to be the metastasis of TNBC by histopathology .
Sixth line trastuzumab and paclitaxel treatment was initiated at the end of July – based on the positive HER2 status of the previously sampled sternal mass –, which was given for 2 cycles.
She had a repeated seizure in the middle of August 2017, and she was taken to the NICN. CT and MRI scans showed an abscess-like lesion in the cavity of the previously operated area, surrounded by large perifocal edema . Mannisole and furosemide was administered for the reduction of intracranial pressure. Stereotactic biopsy was taken on August 09, 2018, and stereotactic drainage was performed on August 29, 2018. During sampling, pus-like content was gained, therefore she received antibiotic therapy (ceftriaxone, vancomycin and metronidazole).
Aerobic and anaerobic cultures were negative for bacteria, fungi and parasites as well, and histopathology also excluded the possibility of a true abscess . After a 30 day pause, she received subcutaneous trastuzumab for the second time, without any side effect.
After seventh line chemotherapy (5 cycles of VNB), control cranial CT showed a new metastasis in the contralateral frontal lobe; the previous abscess-like lesion was not present. The new, right-sided frontal metastasis was treated by stereotactic irradiation.
To be able to decide on further therapy, FISH examination was performed from the intracranial tumor metastasis. It showed HER2 non-amplified status again, and we started eighth line intravenous cytostatic therapy according to the CMF protocol. When she arrived for the 3rd cycle of cytostatic therapy, her performance status dropped (to ECOG 3), and gastric hemorrhage was diagnosed as the cause of weakness. A nasogastric tube was introduced, and the stomach was flushed with acepramine. She received blood transfusion and had a gastroscopy, which identified a gastric ulcer (post-mortem examination later on confirmed the metastatic involvement of the gastric wall). After supportive care was concluded, the patient was placed under hospice care.
She came back to the hospital in very poor general condition (ECOG 4) in December 2017, with symptoms of dehydration, respiratory failure and cardiac decompensation. Intensive therapy was avoided because of her advanced disease. Basic life support and pain relief was provided, and she died without alarming symptoms.