A 45-year-old non-hypertensive and non-diabetic Indian Hindu male presented to the casualty with pain in the abdomen for 10 days, along with vomiting and loose stools for 5 days. The pain was constant, diffuse, and severe, with an increase in its intensity for the last 3 days, and was associated with a non-bilious type of vomiting and loose stools. Besides, there was associated history of blood in stool for the previous 3 days. The patient had a history of smoking with the amputation of his right mid-foot 4 years prior to this admission, detailed records of which were not available. The patient claimed to have stopped smoking since the amputation. There was no history of alcohol consumption or any comorbidity. There was no family history of any similar illness.
On examination, the patient was afebrile, normotensive, conscious, alert, and cooperative. The pulse rate was 110 per minute. The abdomen was slightly distended with the presence of diffuse tenderness and guarding. The liver dullness was not obliterated, and the bowel sounds were sluggish. On the digital rectal examination, the rectum contained blood-stained fecal matter. Appendicular perforation peritonitis and an ischemic bowel pathology were kept as differentials (the possibility of Buerger’s disease of intestine was never suspected). The ultrasonography of the abdomen showed dilated small bowel loops. His complete blood count and liver and renal function tests were within normal limits. Serum antinuclear antibody (ANA) and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) tests were negative.
On exploratory laparotomy, an omental band was found adherent to the tip of the appendix . This appeared to be causing an intestinal obstruction as the proximal bowel loops were dilated. Hence, an appendicectomy along with the release of the appendico-omental band was done. The patient clinically improved initially for a few days postoperatively, when oral liquids were started. However, symptoms of vomiting and blood-mixed stool recurred, and the abdomen was tender. He started discharging pus from the midline abdominal wound from the 2nd postoperative day, for which the wound was laid open. On the 6th postoperative day, there was feculent discharge from the wound for which he was re-explored, which revealed multiple patchy areas of gangrene in the jejunum with perforations starting 5 cm distal to the duodenojejunal (DJ) flexure up to 60 cm distally. There were multiple jejunal perforations in this involved segment of the jejunum. In addition, there were two small perforations adjacent to each other approximately 10 cm proximal to the ileocecal junction . Two feet of the affected jejunum was resected, and a Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy and distal loop ileostomy were performed along with a feeding jejunostomy. The patient again developed feculent discharge from the wound site on postoperative day 3 of the second surgery, for which another laparotomy was undertaken. The feeding jejunostomy and the gastrojejunostomy site were found to be leaking . A primary repair of the feeding jejunostomy and a falciparum ligament patch repair of the gastrojejunostomy leak sites were performed. However, the patient developed septicemia with persistently elevated serum lactate levels, which progressed to refractory septic shock, and he ultimately succumbed to the illness on day 23 of the first surgery.
The appendicectomy and jejunal resection specimens from the first two laparotomies were sent to for histopathology examination. The jejunal segment measured 70 cm in length. It contained multiple patchy gangrenous areas along with perforation approximately at distances of 3 cm, 5 cm, 15 cm, 37 cm, 42 cm, 50 cm, and 66 cm from the proximal resection end. The corresponding mucosal surfaces showed transverse ulcers with bile staining and multiple transverse perforations at places. The largest ulcer measured 5 cm in length, whereas the smallest one measured 0.5 cm. The jejunal wall was paper-thin at the gangrenous patches, and the serosa showed the presence of fibrinous exudates. The intervening mucosa was edematous and erythematous. The cut surfaces of the mesenteric vessels did not show any thrombi.
Microscopy from different areas showed multiple intestinal ulcers that were superficial mucosal, deep, and transmural . The submucosa was fibrotic and contained mixed inflammation. Notably, vascular pathology was demonstrated in both arteries and veins of small and medium caliber at the ulcer base as well as in the submucosal vessels underneath the non-ulcerated mucosa . The small and medium-sized arteries showed near-total to complete obliteration by intimal proliferation that showed peculiar fibrocellular hyperplasia in a myxoid stroma. The proliferated intima contained refractile red degenerated elastic material in a few arteries. The corresponding internal elastic laminae of these arteries were extremely hypertrophic, markedly tortuous, and at places crumpled . Nevertheless, in a few arteries, the internal elastic lamina showed abrupt discontinuity at places. The arteries did not show any inflammatory infiltrate except for a few where infiltration of the media by a few histiocytes and lymphocytes was noted. The submucosal veins showed a spectrum of changes from containing fresh fibrin thrombi to old occlusive thrombi completely/near-completely obliterating their lumina. The fresh fibrin thrombi were partially occlusive with a cellular inflammatory infiltrate traversing the vessel wall and beyond. Organization and recanalization of these thrombi were also noted. Both the arteries and the veins showed mild adventitial fibrosis. No cholesterol cleft, atheromatous plaque, calcification, or fibrinoid necrosis was noted in any of the vessels to suggest atherosclerosis or other forms of vasculitis. Similar changes were also observed in the resected specimen of the appendix. A diagnosis of thromboangiitis obliterans involving the gastrointestinal tract was rendered.