A 48-year-old male patient presented to our hospital with a 2-year history of lower back pain and bilateral lower limb numbness, which worsened over the past 3 months. An Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine performed at an outside hospital showed a lesion at the lower border of the L2 vertebral body within the spinal canal. Physical examination revealed slightly hyperactive biceps and triceps tendon reflexes and bilateral Hoffmann signs (+). The lumbar lordosis was flattened, and there was tenderness and right-sided radicular pain upon palpation of the L5/S1 spinous process and paraspinal area, radiating to the right buttock and posterior thigh. Bilateral knee tendon reflexes were reduced, and the dorsiflexion of the foot and ankle muscles was weakened to approximately grade IV (Medical Research Council grading system). Electrophysiological testing showed evidence of left lower limb radiculopathy involving the L5 root and right anterior tibial muscle. Laboratory tests showed no abnormalities. MRI plain scans showed an elliptical abnormal signal in the spinal canal at the L2/3 level, with slightly high signal on T1WI and slightly high signal on T2WI and fat-suppression sequence . Contrast-enhanced scans showed that the lesion was located in the spinal canal at the L3/4 level and was significantly enhanced .
Through a posterior midline approach, a tumor resection was performed, along with laminectomy and durotomy at the L3/4 level. The cauda equina was explored, and a spindle-shaped mass was identified with a bundle of nerves passing through the center . The affected nerves were cauterized using bipolar electrocoagulation, and the mass was dissected with micro scissors and sent for pathological examination. Pathology revealed a gray-brown, firm mass with fibrous bands on the cut surface. Under the microscope, the tumor cells were spindle or short-spindle-shaped, with some arranged in a swirling pattern . Immunohistochemical analysis showed S-100 (+), SOX10 (+), EMA (−), Ki-67 (approximately 1% +), and Vimentin (+). The pathological diagnosis was (lumbar spinal canal) schwannoma. Luoyang Orthopedic-Traumatological Hospital of Henan Province (Henan Provincial Orthopedic Hospital) exempted this study from review, and informed consent from the patient has been obtained.