A 61-year-old male was referred to our department in September 2017 due to decreased vision in his left eye (LE) over the preceding 6 months. His ocular history was negative, and his medical history included arterial hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and a cardiac stent implanted 4 years prior. The patient was on antiplatelet therapy with acetylsalicylic acid. The best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 80 Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) letters in the right eye (RE) and 43 ETDRS letters in the LE. Intraocular pressure was within normal limits in both eyes. A slit-lamp examination of the anterior segment was physiological in both eyes. Fundus biomicroscopy showed drusen in the macula of both eyes and a circular greyish lesion and edema in the foveal region of the LE . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) was performed, showing a dense lesion above a small reflective pigment epithelial detachment (PED) and intraretinal cystic edema surrounding the lesion . The central subfield thickness (CST) was 719 µm. OCT angiography (OCTa) showed a type 2 CNV above the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) in the subretinal space . Under the RPE, a poorly circumscribed type 1 CNV was visible with a feeder vessel connecting it to the type 2 CNV above . Because the CNV was clearly visible on the OCTa, fluorescein angiography was not performed. A diagnosis of nAMD with a mixed CNV was made and therapy with intravitreal ranibizumab was introduced starting with the initial dose of 1 injection per month for 3 months. After the 3 injections, the BCVA in the LE improved slightly to 49 ETDRS letters. However, OCT showed persistent intraretinal cystic edema in the macula, and the CST was 647 µm. Flattening of the PED was observed as was the absorption of the dense lesion above the RPE . OCTa indicated a resolution of the type 2 CNV above the RPE, where only the feeder vessel remained visible . In the subRPE space, the type 1 CNV was not only present but had greater vascular density than before the introduction of ranibizumab . The therapy with ranibizumab was continued and the patient received 2 more monthly injections. On the follow-up visit 7 months after the baseline visit and after 5 ranibizumab injections, BCVA in the LE was 42 ETDRS letters, OCT showed cystic edema, and the CST was 610 µm . The OCTa of the area above the RPE showed that the feeder vessel had disappeared, and there was no sign of CNV . However, both the area and vessel density of the type 1 CNV in the subRPE space had increased . Due to the non-response of the type 1 lesion of the CNV to the ranibizumab, the therapy was switched to aflibercept. The patient received 3 monthly injections of aflibercept. Two months after the last aflibercept injection, the BCVA had improved to 53 ETDRS letters. The CST was 334 µm and a reduction of the edema was observed on the OCT , although some persistent intraretinal cysts were still present. OCTa showed stable findings in the space above the RPE . A reduction in both the area and vessel density of CNV in the subRPE space was observed . Therapy with aflibercept was continued using a fixed regimen of 4 bimonthly injections. In June 2019, one month after the 7th aflibercept injection, the BCVA worsened to 43 ETDRS letters and the CST was 273 µm . OCTa findings above the RPE remained stable , below the RPE there was a further reduction in both the area and vessel density of the type 1 lesion of the CNV . Some intraretinal cysts were still present in the macula along with atrophy of both the RPE and outer retinal layers. The patient received another 2 injections of aflibercept without any effect on the BCVA or intraretinal cysts. Treatment was then discontinued due to the lack of efficacy, i.e., presence of atrophy in the macula. No adverse events related to intravitreal injection procedure, ranibizumab nor aflibercept were recorded during the patient follow-up.