A 25-year-old woman who was in week 36 of her first pregnancy was admitted to our obstetrics department on October 18, 2019. She complained of bleeding from the sclera of her left eye, nose, and gingiva and reported dyspnoea. She also had a 2-day history of diarrhoea and blurred vision in the left eye. There was no medical history or family history of abnormal bleeding. The foetal heart rate was normal (140 beats per minute) and there were no uterine contractions. Obstetric ultrasonography revealed that the foetus had an appropriate gestational age. An initial complete blood cell analysis indicated a platelet count of 7.0 × 109/L, a haemoglobin level of 66 g/L, a reticulocyte count of 5.71%, and a white blood cell count within the normal range. The unbound bilirubin level was elevated to 57.83 μmol/L and the serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level to 4886 U/L. Direct and indirect Coombs tests were negative. Anti-SS-A/60KD (+), anti-SS-A/52KD (++), and anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) (+) were detected and anti-double-stranded DNA was negative on regular screening. TTP was suspected. However, she had no neurological symptoms or fever. No schistocytes were identified in her blood smear. Given that her blood pressure was increased to 140/80 mmHg, her renal function tests showed slight proteinuria (+++), and her aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was increased to 52 U/L, a diagnosis of pregnancy-related thrombotic microangiopathy was made. However, in view of the difficulty in distinguishing between TTP, HELLP (Haemolysis Elevated Liver enzymes Low Platelets) syndrome, pre-eclampsia, and haemolytic uraemic syndrome, an ADAMTS13 test was requested.
While waiting for the ADAMTS13 test result, the patient progressed to hypoxaemia, bilateral hydrothorax, and heart failure. Given that the patient was nearly full-term and had a significantly decreased platelet count, a caesarean section was performed immediately. This resulted in delivery of a healthy female baby weighing 2100 g (with Apgar scores of 9 after 1 min and 10 after 5 min) who was transferred to the neonatal care unit. The operation went well, and 100 mL of bloody ascites was noted during surgery. However, the patient’s platelet count was still very low (approximately 30 × 109/L) after delivery. According to the PLASMIC scoring system , the PLASMIC score of the patient was 6.Although the ADAMTS13 test result was still not available, we decided to initiate plasma exchange immediately. Intravenous methylprednisolone 40 mg/day and intravenous immunoglobulin 20 g/day were started at the same time. As expected, the platelet count started to rise after the first plasma exchange. After daily plasma exchange for 4 days, the platelet count increased to 85 × 109/L , the LDH level decreased to 548 U/L, and the LDH/AST ratio decreased to 24 on October 25, 2019 . The platelet count finally returned to normal on day 10 after delivery . One week later, the ADAMTS13 result because available and indicated that the enzyme activity was 0%.
Gene sequencing of the ADAMTS13 gene and ADAMTS13 inhibitor analysis were performed to clarify whether the patient had cTTP or aTTP. The ADAMTS13 inhibitor assay was performed as described by Yue et al. . Surprisingly, there were no pathogenic mutations in the patient’s ADAMTS13 gene and no inhibitor was detected. At the same time, given that she was anti-SS-A antibody-positive, which led to suspicion of pSS, an ocular and dental sicca evaluation and a labial gland biopsy were also performed. Lacrimal gland and salivary function was found to be normal and the labial gland biopsy showed Sjögren’s syndrome that met the diagnostic criteria for pSS . Given that aTTP is usually associated with autoimmune disease , the patient was strongly suspected to have aTTP. To confirm the diagnosis, an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was performed as described previously and clearly identified the ADAMTS13 IgG antibody . Due to the low enzyme activity in this patient, which suggested a high risk of recurrence, we administered rituximab (375 mg/m2 qw * 2 w, 100 mg/m2 qw * 2 w) as preventive treatment. One month later, the ADAMTS13 enzyme activity increased to 100%, which also pointed to a diagnosis of aTTP. Therefore, a diagnosis of pregnancy-associated aTTP secondary to pSS was finally made. Six months later, the patient’s platelet level had stabilised at a normal level and the activity of the ADAMTS13 enzyme was still 100%. However, her anti-SS-A antibody and ANA were still positive. The patient suffered from occasional arthralgia. She has been treated with hydroxychloroquine 200 mg twice daily, prednisone 5 mg every other day and methotrexate 10 mg once a week until now. The child had a normal development at eighteen-month-old.