An 84-year-old Asian woman was electively admitted to our hospital for investigation of a 6-month history of liver function test (LFT) derangement, abdominal pain, fatigue and weight loss. The results of her LFTs were as follows: alkaline phosphatase 953 U/L, gamma glutamyl transpeptidase 1164 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 81 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 89 U/L, bilirubin 13 μmol/L and albumin 33 g/L. She had experienced Raynaud’s phenomenon for 50 years and had a confirmed diagnosis of CREST complicated by pulmonary hypertension, for which she had been treated with bosentan for the past 7 years. Her abdominal pain was initially attributed to esophageal dysmotility associated with her CREST and had improved with pantoprazole.
The most frequent severe side effect of bosentan is liver toxicity, typically manifested by a transaminasemia . Of interest, animal models have demonstrated that bosentan may also cause cholestatic liver injury through inhibition of the bile salt export pump (BSEP) . Our patient’s LFT derangement was initially attributed to bosentan and this was decreased and then changed to macitentan which does not interfere with BSEP . However, her LFT derangement gradually worsened despite these measures and therefore other causes were sought. There were no other new medications, her hepatitis serology was negative and there was no evidence of cholecystitis, cholelithiasis or biliary obstruction on ultrasound. Computed tomography (CT) of her abdomen was also unremarkable. An autoimmune screen revealed positive antinuclear antibody consistent with CREST, antimitochondrial antibody and other liver autoantibodies negative. Immunoglobulin levels including immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4) were normal. Tumor markers including cancer antigen 19–9 (CA 19–9) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were similarly normal. She proceeded to magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) which demonstrated a prominent common bile duct and prominent irregular central hepatic ducts with areas of beading and narrowing in both lobes favoring stricturing and PSC .
A liver biopsy was not pursued given her age and comorbidities, in particular her pulmonary hypertension. While this may have provided useful additional information particularly in the exclusion of other differential diagnoses, findings can be nonspecific . In addition, a biopsy is generally not required for the diagnosis of PSC where cholestatic biochemical abnormalities and characteristic changes on cholangiography are present.