A 29-year-old female complained of the right sternoclavicular joint and back pain accompanied limited activities and pustulosis-like rashes on the palms for 1 month without any clear predisposing cause. She took analgesic medicine by herself (an unknown analgesic), while without obvious effect. Physical examinations on admission revealed pustules on the palms and multi-erythematous nodules on the lower legs. There were also redness, swelling and tenderness in the right sternoclavicular joint area and tenderness in the lower back.
Laboratory assays revealed an elevation of the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, 87 mm/h, normal range 0-20 mm/h), levels of C-reactive protein (CRP, 28.30 mg/L, normal range 0–7.44 mg/L), prothrombin time (12.7 s, normal range 9.4–12.5 s), fibrinogen assay (5.13 g/L, normal range 2-4 g/L) and complement C4(40 mg/dL, normal range 16-38 mg/dL), and a slightly decline of hematocrit (33.9%, normal range 35–45%). In addition, rheumatoid factor(RF) and human leukocyte antigen B27(HLA-B27) tests were negative. The results for the remainder of her biochemistry and hematology were within normal range, including immunoglobulins, antinuclear antibody (ANA) spectrum and tumor markers.
Computerized tomography (CT) scans of the thoracic(T) and lumbar spine revealed multiple vertebral lesions (T8–11 and T2 vertebral bodies) while without the sternum and sternoclavicular joints . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of thoracic spine and ankle demonstrated multiple vertebral lesions (T4, T8–11 and L2 vertebral bodies), right ankle arthritis and pathological fractures (T9–10 vertebral bodies) , same as CT scans. We diagnosed the patient with SAPHO syndrome. For further diagnosis, a whole body bone scan (WBS) was performed 4 h following the injection of 20 mCi 99mTc-methylene-diphosphonate. Anterior and posterior views of the WBS illustrated intense uptake at the proximal end of the right clavicle, left first front rib, T8–11 vertebral bodies, right ankle joint and pubic symphysis. The thoracolumbar Single-Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT)/CT fusion imaging showed a low density of bone in the same location and different levels of radioactivity uptake around the lesioned bone . Pathological section of tibial lesions demonstrated massive neutrophil infiltration in bone marrow.
A diagnosis of SAPHO syndrome was made. For the vertebral fractures, the patient was treated conservatively with the thoracolumbar brace and bed rest for 3 months. Besides, the patient was treated with dynastat (80 mg, BID) until the pain eased or disappeared and Compound Troxerutin and Poreine Cerebroside Injection(10 ml, BID)for improving blood circulation on the fourth and tenth days. And Technetium [99Tc] Methylenediphosphonate Injection (99Tc-MDP, Product Name: Yunke Injection, 3 sets, QD)in combination with betamethasone sodium phosphate injection (20 mg, QD) was introduced on the tenth day for treating SAPHO syndrome. The patient experienced a moderate decrease in the intensity of the pain without any anodyne. On the seventeenth day, betamethasone sodium phosphate injection (12 mg, QD) was introduced again. There were normal ESR (8 mm/h) and CRP (0.36 ng/L), improved dermatoses and no relapse of joint pain on the eighteenth day. The patient was discharged on the twentieth day. During the 6-month telephone follow-up of the patient (phones are followed up every half month), there was no relapse of joint pain according to the patient’s description, however, the patient refused to review for economic reasons.