A 12 year-old girl presented to KIST Medical College Teaching Hospital in 2011 with complaints of painless lymph node swelling in bilateral neck and axillae for three years, along with a history of weight loss, generalized weakness, and fever. However, there was no history of joint pain, skin rash, edema, hematuria, or bone pain at the presentation. There was no contact history of tuberculosis, and there was no history of similar illness or of autoimmune diseases in the family.
In 2008, she was evaluated at another hospital for lymphadenopathy which showed reactive changes in fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) and no further treatment was instituted. She had developed generalized swelling of her body in 2009 for which she was evaluated at a different institute and improved after taking oral medications for one month. However, detailed medical records were not available.
On examination, she was febrile, BP 100/60 mm Hg and was pale. There were multiple enlarged lymph nodes in both cervical, axillary and inguinal regions which were soft, non tender and discrete with the largest measuring 5 cm × 5 cm in diameter. She had hepatosplenomegaly, but there was no edema, skin rash, or bone tenderness. Her BMI was 14.03 (below 3rd percentile) and she was in prepubertal SMR stage.
She was evaluated keeping diagnostic possibilities of tuberculosis, HIV, connective tissue disease, lymphoma, and sarcoidosis as shown in Figure . Her investigations revealed as follow .
Abdominal ultrasonography showed multiple mesenteric lymph nodes, the largest measuring 17 mm × 10 mm in diameter with no ascites. Her chest x-ray and bone marrow aspiration cytology were normal.
FNAC of cervical lymph node was suggestive of granulomatous lymphadenopathy . Excisional biopsy of cervical lymph node on H & E staining showed intact capsule and lymph nodal architecture was partially effaced by epithelioid granuloma admixed with several eosinophils, lymphocytes and plasma cells. Other areas showed lymphoid follicles with prominent germinal center. The paracortical area showed an exaggeration of high endothelial venules . Ziehl Neelsen staining as well as Acid Fast Bacilli (AFB) culture of the lymph nodes was negative. Immunohistochemistry study of lymph node was not available.
She was suspected to have brucellosis on the basis of serology and was treated accordingly. However, she continued to have fever and persistent lymphadenopathy. She was admitted in the pediatric ward several times over a two months period. During the last hospital stay, she developed a malar rash extending to nasal bridge sparing nasolabial fold along with arthritis of small joints of both hands .
On renal biopsy, there was normal cellularity, absence of sclerosis, crescents and blood vessel thickening in light microscopy. IgA and IgM autofluorescence in tubular casts, C3 autofluorescence in blood vessels were seen in immunofluorescence microscopy which suggested the diagnosis of lupus nephritis (pure mesangial alterations), WHO class II. Anti-Sm antibody level was not available.
Thus the final diagnosis of SLE was made and treatment was started with oral prednisolone and hydroxychloroquine. Malar rash disappeared a few days after initiation of steroid treatment. On subsequent follow up after two weeks, lymph nodes size drastically reduced, hepatosplenomegaly size was decreased, and constitutional symptoms had also improved. She was kept under close follow up on maintenance prednisolone. However, on subsequent follow up, she had persistent non-nephrotic range proteinuria (17.5 mg/m2/hour), low C3 level (42.3 mg/dl) and high ESR without flaring up of other symptoms. After ruling out noncompliance to steroid therapy, possibility of progression of lupus nephritis or incorrect initial staging was suspected. Hence, repeat renal biopsy was considered in March 2013 and histopathology showed features of glomerulopathy exhibiting segmental mild increase in mesangial cellularity and matrix. Direct immunofluorescence studies revealed mesangial granular staining with dominance of IgA, and similar less intense staining for other immunoglobulins and light chain components. Staining for C3 and C1q was weak in glomerular mesangial areas. This was consistent with mesangial lupus nephritis, Class II (ISN/RPS). She is presently on maintenance prednisolone and on regular follow up.