12-year-old boy presented with history of trauma to his right ankle three days back. He complained of pain and swelling of right ankle. He also gave a history of associated cough and fever since 5 days. The personal and past history was insignificant.
Patient was febrile with 38.5 degree Celsius temperature; tachycardia at 125/min and respiratory rate 25/min. Right ankle was mildly swollen with redness, local rise of temperature, tenderness over lateral malleolus, lower 3rd leg laterally . There was restriction of ankle movements. No neurovascular deficits. Rest of the limb was normal. Plain X-ray of right ankle with leg was normal. His blood parameters were; haemoglobin-12.5gm%;total count- 21.28K/uL; neutrophils-19.77K/uL; lymphocytes-0.75K/uL%, CRP- 360.1mg/L(positive); ESR--60mm/hr; RAfactor-negative; ASO-titre- 400IU/ML; sickling-negative. Urine routine was performed and found to benormal. Patient was admitted for treatment of suspected cellulitis, pediatric opinion was sought for cough. Chest X-ray: revealed pneumonia, therefore he was started on IV Cloxacillin 1gm four times daily. Later blood culture revealed growth of Staphylococcus aureus which was sensitive to Cloxaciilin. On the 3rd day, patient’s general condition deteriorated with persistently elevated temperature, tachycardia (140/min), respiratory rate at 40/min and SPO2- 87% at room air with moderate swelling on whole of right leg with tender calf and a positive Homan sign. D-Dimer test was negative. CT angiogram of chest was carried out to rule out pulmonary embolism. There was no evidence of embolism, but showed right sided pleural effusion and bilateral patchy pneumonia. The duplex scan of right lower limb was suggestive of popliteal vein thrombosis (, ), thrombophilia work up for protein C &S; anti- thrombin III was negative. Patient was treated with low molecular heparin and IV cloxacillin (for pneumonia) in intensive care unit. Patient improved clinically, calf swelling was reduced and blood parameters were also reverting to normalcy at the time of discharge. Patient was discharged on 14th day and was treated with warfarin for next 3 months. Repeat duplex scan at 6 weeks was normal. Patient was followed up for period of 6 months, and there were no signs of recurrence.