A 78-year-old male patient with a history of hypertension, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, and symptomatic severe aortic stenosis was scheduled to undergo surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) at another hospital. However, he was diagnosed with cold agglutinin disease during the preoperative examination, which led to a change in the plan to perform SAVR. He was referred to our hospital for TAVR. His cardiac symptom was shortness of breath, classified as New York Heart Association Class III. On physical examination, he had normal respiratory sounds, a systolic ejection murmur, and slight leg oedema. Electrocardiography revealed a normal sinus rhythm, normal axis deviation, and left ventricular hypertrophy. Chest radiography showed mild cardiomegaly and mild pulmonary congestion without pleural effusion. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a mildly reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (44%) with severe aortic stenosis, a peak velocity of 4.0 m/s, a mean pressure gradient of 40 mmHg, and an aortic valve area of 0.75 cm2. Aortic regurgitation was mild, and mitral regurgitation was moderate. All laboratory values were within the normal range except for cold agglutinin, which had a high titre value. Although his EuroSCORE II was 3.47%, our heart team considered TAVR appropriate for this patient because SAVR was considered too risky due to cold agglutinin disease with possible thrombolysis caused by hypothermia.
Pre-procedural MDCT measurements showed that the mean diameter (area derived) and area of the native annulus were 27.2 mm and 580 mm2, respectively. No extensive calcification was detected in the aortic valve. The sizes of the left ventricular outflow tract, SOV, and sino-tubular junction were sufficiently large (, , Video S1). We selected a 29-mm SAPIEN 3 valve (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) with −3 mL underfilling (12% area oversizing when the valve was deployed with a nominal volume). Transcatheter aortic valve replacement was performed under general anaesthesia. After balloon valvuloplasty with a 25-mm balloon (nominal volume), a 29-mm SAPIEN 3 valve was deployed with −3 mL underfilling (, Video S2). After the deployment, sudden haemodynamic collapse occurred. Transoesophageal echocardiography revealed pericardial effusion, which led to an immediate diagnosis of cardiac tamponade following aortic root rupture (, , Video S3). Fluoroscopy revealed aortic leakage just above the calcification of the left SOV (, Video S4). After pericardial drainage via a subxiphoid approach, heparin neutralization, and blood transfusion, the haemodynamics were stabilized within 15 min. No further surgical treatment was performed because of his haemodynamic stability and risk of thrombolysis caused by hypothermia due to the cold agglutinin disease. After 10 days of close observation, the patient was discharged on Day 39 without additional problems, although he required physical therapy because of muscle weakness. The patient remained alive at the 6-month follow-up without sequelae. Valve performance was maintained throughout the 6-month follow-up period despite a 2-week interruption of antithrombotic therapy due to aortic root rupture. He had received apixaban as antithrombotic therapy for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation before TAVR, but we treated him with warfarin after TAVR because the effects of apixaban are not easily adjustable and neutralizing drugs remain unavailable.
The pre-procedural MDCT showed that a flat calcification existed 4.0 mm above the aortic annulus at the 5 o’clock position . Post-procedural MDCT revealed that this calcification penetrated the left SOV with extravasation.