A 58-year-old non-alcoholic man was experiencing short episodes of upper gastrointestinal bleeding and was referred to the Hepatology and Tropical Diseases Unit of Acre, in the Amazon region of northern Brazil, in October 2008.
Clinical examination revealed a distended abdomen and hepatosplenomegaly. An ultrasound scan showed impairment of the hepatic parenchyma, a hyperechoic nodule in the right lobe and signs of portal hypertension with severe ascites.
The serological and virological tests were consistent with a diagnosis of chronic hepatitis caused by HBV and HDV coinfection. A real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for HBV deoxyribonucleic acid (TaqMan; Roche Diagnostics AG, Rotkreuz, Switzerland) showed high viral loads (log 6.22), and HDV ribonucleic acid (RNA) was detected using the same method. Serological tests for HCV were negative, and serum alanine transaminase (ALT) levels were five times higher than the normal upper limit. The patient began antiviral treatment with entecavir (1.0 gram once a day).
A pretreatment liver biopsy showed impairment of the hepatic parenchyma, moderate periportal inflammation and piecemeal necrosis with severe focal cell damage and cirrhosis (Metavir score: A3; F4).
A computed tomography scan of the liver nodules showed three hypervascular lesions in the right lobe. The largest of these was in segment VI, and it had a diameter of 5.0 centimeters. The two other nodules were in segments VII and VIII, and both had diameters of 1.9 centimeters. These findings led to a preliminary diagnosis of suspected HCC of viral etiology caused by HBV and HDV coinfection, which is an indication for liver transplantation based on the modified Milan criteria used in Brazil.
-
The patient's model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score was 14, and he was put on the liver transplantation waiting list. Despite the MELD score of 14, the patient's good clinical condition led the doctors to opt for segmental hepatectomy of the right lobe involving segments V and VI, which extended to resection of the largest nodule. This procedure was followed by observation of the patient with an expectation of further liver resections or an OLT.
Histopathological analysis on the liver confirmed the presence of a well-differentiated multifocal HCC without vascular invasion and without lymph node involvement.
The patient's condition deteriorated rapidly and progressively during the days after the procedure, and he experienced gastrointestinal bleeding caused by a variceal hemorrhage. The variceal hemorrhage was controlled using an endoscopic procedure that placed seven elastic bands on the variceal columns, with intravenous administration of terlipressin.
Tests performed at this time led to a diagnosis of HCV infection, which had not been revealed previously. Hence, the patient was coinfected with HBV, HCV and HDV.
Following the decompensation of the liver, the doctors decided not to resect the smaller nodules, and they waited to perform an OLT.
In June 2010, the patient's corrected MELD score was 29 and he underwent an OLT. This was followed by immunosuppressive therapy that comprised mycophenolate mofetil (720 milligrams once a day), tacrolimus (5.0 milligrams twice a day) and prednisone (20 milligrams once a day).
During the anhepatic phase of surgery, hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) prophylaxis was not administered because entecavir therapy was maintained, the HBV levels in the serum were undetectable and the liver donor was serologically negative for total hepatitis B core antibodies.
After transplantation, the patient's clinical status improved. The serum liver enzyme levels normalized, an RT-PCR demonstrated that HBV and HDV had been cleared out and a serological test demonstrated that seroreversion of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) had taken place. However, hepatitis B surface antigen antibodies (anti-HBs), which are the specific marker of immunity to hepatitis B virus infection, were not detected.
An RT-PCR test showed high levels of HCV RNA genotype 1 (log 7.07). Furthermore, progressive elevation of serum ALT levels began, which reached 400 IU/l six weeks after transplantation.
In January 2011, the patient began hepatitis C treatment, which comprised peginterferon alfa-2A (180 micrograms once a week) and ribavirin (500 milligrams twice a day), in accordance with the Ministry of Health's protocol.
The patient responded well to treatment over the next few weeks, despite the presence of HCV genotype 1, which meant that he might have been less responsive to treatment. A significant decline in the HCV viral load occurred. The viral levels were undetectable after the fourth peginterferon alfa-2A dose and normal serum hepatic transaminase levels were restored.
After 52 weeks of treatment and 20 months after the OLT, the patient stopped receiving hepatitis C antiviral treatment.
Currently, the patient is clinically stable. HBV, HCV and HDV are at undetectable levels, the serological markers HBsAg and anti-HBs are negative and the liver enzymes are within the normal ranges. Thus, he experienced triple hepatitis virus infection and achieved a sustained virological response, such that the HBV and HDV levels have been undetectable for 36 months and the HCV levels have been below the detection limit for 27 months. An ultrasound scan performed 30 months after OLT showed no signs of liver fibrosis or new nodule development.
On the other hand, the patient developed diabetes mellitus and requires insulin therapy. The patient continues to receive an immunosuppressive regimen comprising tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil, and he receives entecavir to prevent HBV recurrence.