A 27-year-old male was presented with a chief complaint of deformity on his left shoulder since ten months before hospital admission. The patient slipped in a bathroom and fell in sitting position with left arm supporting the body. After the accident, the left shoulder was painful and looked deformed. Then the patient went to a bone setter and was massaged, but the shoulder was still painful and looked deformed. The patient used an arm sling to immobilize his left shoulder for about six months. Gradually, patient could do his normal daily activity with limited movement of left shoulder. Ten months after the accident, patient decided to seek medical help to treat his left shoulder.
The patient complained of limited movement of his left shoulder with some pain. On physical examination we found deformity on the left shoulder, liked a squaring shoulder (A), and muscle atrophy. Neurovascular examination was normal. The range of motion (ROM) of left shoulder was extension-flexion 20°–90°, abduction-adduction 20°–70°, internal-external rotation 30°–30°. The antero-posterior X-ray imaging showed anterior dislocation of left glenohumeral joint (B) and Computed Tomography (CT) scan showed a Hill-Sachs lesion on the humeral head (C). We diagnosed the patient had a neglected anterior shoulder dislocation with a Hill-Sachs lesion and performed an open reduction and Latarjet procedure [,] to treat this patient.
We performed an open reduction surgery using anterior approach of shoulder and found massive fibrotic tissue around the joint and the Hill-Sachs lesion . We removed all the fibrotic tissue to create the space for shoulder joint to be reduced. After succeeded reducing the dislocation, we inserted a Kirschner wire to add stability for maintaining the reduced shoulder, then continued on Latarjet procedure. The Latarjet procedure was performed by cutting the coracoid process and transferred it with conjoint tendon to antero-posterior part of glenoid and fixed by two screws [,].
The final result showed that the glenohumeral joint has been reduced with wire fixation (A). Post-operative X-ray showed a reduced shoulder joint (B). Unfortunately there was a claw hand on his left hand due to a neuropraxia of the ulna. The patient was discharged 2 days after surgery. We removed the K-wire after 3 weeks, then the patient started the rehabilitation program. The patient also underwent Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation (TENS) and range of motion exercise for 12 times. We evaluated the patient for 3 months in outpatient clinic. Three months after surgery, the ulnar neuropraxia was healed but we found there were an osteolysis of coracoid graft and also an avascular necrosis of the humerus head . The patient still had a limited ROM, (abduction 0°–100°) on his left shoulder. At ten months follow-up, the patient had no recurrent dislocation.