The 45-year-old white female patient presented with left arm vascular proliferative disease within and around the humerus bone resulting in a pathological fracture. A clinical diagnosis of Gorham-Stout disease was made following pathological and radiological investigations of the lesion at this site (Additional file : Fig. S1). Macroscopic examination showed an abnormality of the upper arm muscles which appeared vascular and spongiotic, soft in some areas and fibrotic in others. The cortical bone of the humerus was thin around the fracture site and the bone marrow appeared, similar to the soft tissue, vascular with some large cysts and hemorrhage noted. Tissue blocks of all the abnormal areas from the soft tissue and humeral bone were sampled for histological examination and further investigations.
Histological sections of the affected regions confirmed indeed an abnormal vascular proliferation dissecting through fibroadipose connective tissue, skeletal muscle, and bone. Despite its dissecting nature, the vascular proliferation was composed of thin-walled vascular spaces and papillary projections lined by cytologically bland endothelial cells. The site of the fracture showed reparative fibrotic changes, with extensive granulation tissue and fibrosis. The dissecting vascular proliferation also affected the bone and was associated with cystic changes within the bone. The bone marrow showed vascular and fibrotic changes with some granulation tissue. Occasional discrete granulomas were scattered throughout the lesion. These changes are all consistent with the clinical diagnosis of Gorham-Stout disease or vanishing bone disease. Past medical history includes a previous diagnosis 1–2 years earlier of a benign vascular proliferation/vascular malformation involving both bone and soft tissue of the left humerus compatible with Gorham-Stout disease. The expert pathological review from the Department of Musculoskeletal Pathology, Royal Orthopaedic Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Stanmore, was in agreement.
Small DNA variants were called using whole-genome sequencing data of GS vascular proliferation tissue and surrounding normal tissue extracted from the same patient (Additional file : Methods). Although the clinical characteristics of GS can be similar to those manifested in Ewing’s sarcoma , the genomic profile differs from most cancer-like diseases, as it doesn’t seem to be mutation-driven. A total of 643 mutations in 233 genes were found in GS lesional tissue when compared to the adjacent normal. Of those mutated genes, neither TP53, RB1, CDKN2A nor any of the known sarcoma biomarkers were reported to contain any small mutations.
The classification of variants showed that, although most of the variants code for missense mutations, a considerable number of insertions and deletions were found. Among the top mutated genes , most of the genes reported contained insertions, deletions, or splice site changes. Some known cancer-related genes like the mucin family (MUC3A and MUC12) in colorectal cancer, or ZNF703 in breast cancer, seemed to be mutated. Other genes like CST5 and UNC5B, related by previous studies to the P53 pathway [, ], were also involved in other signaling pathways that are manifested in GS, like endochondral ossification and autophagy respectively. Other relevant gene families affected are those from TNFRSF10A and ANKRD36 genes, previously identified as mutated in a scapular lesion affected with Gorham-Stout disease .
We noticed a high proportion of genes with insertions and deletions displayed in the top 20 mutated genes. This motivated an analysis of larger indels and structural variants to explore the possibility that those alterations might have been caused by major chromosomal events. . Matching our previous discoveries, a high number of structural variants were identified, especially in chromosomes seven, twelve, and twenty. Around 1000 structural variants were found, showing duplications, deletions, and tandem repetitions. The most frequent structural events detected were chromosome translocations, suggesting that gene fusion variants could be a major event for GS disease. To further explore these rearrangements, we combined DNA and RNA gene fusion calls for the case . The fusions were categorized in different tiers depending on the evidence of the mutation at both the DNA and RNA level based on the genes surrounding the fusion or reads containing the translocation (Additional file : Table S1). Although most of the fusions reported were intrachromosomal events, chromosomes twelve, seven, and twenty shared a relevant number of interchromosomal mutations.
Based on the evidence of the gene fusions and their biological relevance, seven gene fusions were selected for RT-PCR validation (Additional file : Fig. S2). The fusion of ATG101 and SLC4A8 in chromosome 12 involves the autophagy-related protein part of the macroautophagy signaling pathway . The other validated fusion involves sarcoglycan delta (SGCD), a gene known to cause muscular dystrophy in mammals when deleted or mutated [–], an event that could lead to vascular malformations as reported in the GS lesions.
The differential expression analysis of the technical replicates from Gorham-Stout lesional tissue and attached normal revealed that a high proportion of genes (36.6% out of the 58,884 total) were either up-regulated or down-regulated . Gene set enrichment analysis showed statistically significant differences in pathways like lymphangiogenesis (Additional file : Table S2) and osteolysis (Additional file : Table S3), suspected of being drivers of the pathological characteristics and potential targets of drug treatments for the disease . Inside these pathways, gene families like VEGF or NOTCH were detected to change drastically in expression from normal to Gorham-Stout lesional tissue (Additional file : Fig. S3).
One of the main pathways affected by changes in expression is the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), involved in the proliferation, growth, and regulatory processes of the cell. In our study, we detected that the expression of PI3K is considerably downregulated in GS lesions when compared to normal tissue, therefore the phosphorylation of PIP2 to PIP3 by this gene will be decreased in the disease. This event is confirmed by the up-regulation of PTEN which regulates PI3K by the dephosphorylation of the PIP3 product .
The changes in expression of the PI3K and PTEN pathway are reminiscent of other cancers, where the pathway is deactivated or mutated affecting regulation of mTOR . The expression of PI3K, AKT, and mTOR in the Gorham-Stout lesion was decreased, while PTEN expression was higher when compared to the attached normal. The alterations suggest the promotion of irregular endothelial cell growth and angiogenesis through VEGFA and VEGFB via the VEGFR1-PI3K-AKT signaling pathway [, ].
Another expression event that may be related to cancer is the activation of the NF-kB signaling pathway, which is down-regulated in Gorham-Stout lesional tissue when compared to matched normal. The levels of expression of NF-kB and IKK in the normal adjacent tissue could contribute to inflammation and macrophage activation [, ].
Although the expression changes previously mentioned are occurring in normal adjacent tissue, there are events in GS tissue that share similarities with cancer. One of them is the high expression of MDM2, a p53-specific E3 ubiquitin ligase, which leads to the degradation of the p53 tumor suppressor protein . All the events linked to the PI3K signaling pathway paint a picture of the possible inner mechanisms in Gorham-Stout and surrounding tissue providing unique insights into the disease that could lead to the development of new therapeutic strategies targeting the mentioned pathways.
Immunohistochemical and H&E staining was carried out using formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) sections to investigate the immune system response of a single case. Evaluation of the immune cell infiltration was assessed by immunohistochemistry with five immune cell markers: CD3+ T cells, CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, CD20+ B cells, and CD163+ M2 macrophages . Stained Gorham-Stout disease slides were scanned using a Hamamatsu NanoZoomer XR slide scanner at × 40 magnification. Digital images were analyzed using QuPath (version 0.2.0-m7) to quantify the positive staining, validated by manual counting in selected areas that showed a highly significant correlation .
The Gorham-Stout disease specimen showed significantly higher CD163+ M2 macrophage infiltration, compared with other examined immune cell markers . This was consistent with the RNA data that revealed increased infiltration of M2 macrophages in Gorham-Stout disease compared with normal samples . In contrast, CD4+ T cell staining was particularly low with only 0.06% positive staining . Moderate staining was found for the other 4 lymphocytic cell markers: CD3+ T cells (8.22%), CD8+ T cells (5.93%), and CD20+ B cells (4.86%).