A 58 year-old female with a past medical history of diabetes mellitus and thyroid disease presented for weight loss consultation. There was no other pertinent surgical history. Prior to her endoscopy, her only subjective finding was mild occasional gastrointestinal reflux disease (GERD).
The patient underwent a pre-operative esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy (EGD) and was found to have a 3 cm submucosal mass along the anterior aspect of the gastric body, near the incisura angularis; biopsy at that time was indeterminate. As such, the patient was referred to gastroenterology for repeat EGD and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS).
Subsequent EGD re-demonstrated a 3 cm mass near the incisura. This had a positive pillow sign (pillowing of the surface of the lesion when prodded). Stack biopsies were obtained, with apparent fat within the biopsy, consistent with lipoma . EUS was performed, revealing a 3.3 x 1.6 cm relatively echogenic mass arising from the gastric submucosa in the area of the gastric lesion consistent with lipoma . Pathology was consistent with submucosal lipoma. Ancillary H. pylori biopsy was negative. CT scan re-demonstrated the lesion, confirming a lack of extra-gastric component .
Due to the lipoma's location, resection was critical, as it would have led to obstructive symptoms following sleeve gastrectomy. The patient underwent a simultaneous laparoscopic vertical gastrectomy, gastric lipoma excision, EGD, and laparoscopic cholecystectomy. A longitudinal gastrotomy was made on the greater curvature. Exposure was achieved using retraction sutures. Following this, a laparoscopic submucosal resection of the lipoma was performed. We then used electrocautery to open the mucosa overlying the lipoma. Blunt and ultrasonic dissection were used to mobilize the lipoma. We then identified the vascular pedicle and divided this using the harmonic scalpel. A primary closure of the mucosa and greater curvature followed. The gastrocolic and gastrocolic omentum was taken down using the harmonic scalpel. We then used the linear cutting staple to perform the sleeve gastrectomy. Concurrent endoscopy was performed during the first two stapler firings to ensure that the mucosal suture line was not crossed by the stapler. We then inserted a 40 French Bougie and completed the sleeve in standard fashion. At 3 month follow up the patient was doing well.