A 31-year-old woman presented to a clinic with complicated cataract. She reported that when she was 10 years old, she was admitted to regional hospital in Bosnia and Herzegovina due perforative corneal war injury. At the age of 11 years at Germany on her left eye corneal transplantation was performed. She reported that she wasn’t ever seeing quite good, due high myopia. Twenty years after war injury she was admitted to hospital. At that moment patient has been ophthalmologicaly examined (visual acuity testing, biomicroscopy, tonometry, ultrasound of both eyes with biometry and ophthalmoscopy). Ocular examination on admission day to hospital revealed her best visual acuity to be 0,9 RE (right eye) and light perception on her LE (left eye). Results on his slit lamp revealed no pathological findings on right eye and on left eye we found occlusion of pupil and complicated cataract. Her pupil size and reaction on right eye was normal, while reaction on her left eye was slow. Her ocular movements were normal in all gazes. Her intraocular pressure was also normal. Examination of the right fundus revealed a myopic, tilted disc, peri-papillary atrophy and staphyloma. The vitreous was quiet and retinal vessels were of normal caliber. Details on the founds of left eye were impossible to asses due the changes in anterior segment .
An ultrasonographic evaluation was performed on both eyes and a measurement of depth of anterior chamber. Depth of anterior chamber on her left eye was 3,2 mm and axial length (AL) of her lef eye was 29mm.
Operation was performed in local peribulbar anesthesia, which was achieved using 2% lidocaine, with antiseptic preparation based on povidone - iodine use, 10% on periocular area skin during dilation and 5% into conjunctival sac on the operating table and vancomycin (1.0 mg/0.1 mL) intracameral injection at the end of the procedure. Phacoemulsification was performed under operating microscopes Operative Microscope OPMI Visu 150 Carl Zeiss Meditec Inc, Dublin, using Alcon Infiniti® Vision System Fort Worth Texas USA, sodium hyaluronate (Provisc® Alcon) as viscoelastic and surgical instruments Alcon and Geuder AG Heidelberg Germany. We performed cataract extractions with phacoemulisification. The implantation of posterior chamber intraocular lens was done using an adequate injector. The remaining viscoelastic material was aspirated from the anterior chamber .
Follow up was performed on days 1 and 7, and then after one month and 10 months. Postoperatively, the patient used dexamethasone-neomycin polymyxin B eye drops four times a day for 1 month. One month after cataract surgery her best visual acuity on operated left eye was 0.1 without correction. The patient achieved a best-corrected visual acuity of 0,2 without correction at 10 months’ follow-up with a clear corneal graft.