We report a 59 year-old Caucasian female diagnosed with EPSCC of the left parietal lobe without evidence of an extracranial primary tumor. The patient presented with a three-week history of progressive deterioration of right upper extremity coordination and motor strength. A staging PET/CT scan and CT scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, prior to surgery, were performed that revealed a left parietal lobe mass with an intense, FDG-avid rim anteriorly. Neither study showed evidence of metastasis in the lungs or elsewhere in the body. A magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the brain revealed a 4.4 × 4.2 × 4.5 cm left parietal mass.
The patient was treated with intravenous steroids and subsequently underwent an MRI-guided sterotatic left parietal craniotomy with complete resection of the tumor one day after admission. Samples of the resection were sent for pathological review. At diagnosis the complete blood count and complete metabolic profile were within normal limits. The patient did not experience either immediate or late post-surgical complications and was discharged to a rehabilitation facility for post-operative recovery and improvement of her performance status for future chemotherapy.
Pathologic examination of the parietal lobe resection was consistent with small cell carcinoma . The tumor was reported as high-grade with nuclear pleomorphism, sparse cytoplasm and large areas of necrosis. The cells showed strong reactivity for synaptophysin and focally for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1). The tumor cells were negative for S-100, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), cytokeratin AE1/AE3 keratin, anti-cytokeratin (CAM 5.2) and chromogranin .
Two months after initial resection surveillance MRI of the brain revealed recurrence of a left parietal tumor. The patient developed profound, progressive neurological deterioration consisting of hemiparesis and expressive aphasia. At this point she underwent a second complete resection of the tumor. Pathology again revealed a small cell carcinoma with an immunoprofile identical to that of the original specimen.
The patient experienced profound improvement in her neurological status after the second resection although her ECOG status was 2. She was discharged to a neuro-rehabilitation facility for recovery and optimization of performance status.
Four months following the second resection a 1.7 cm left parietal lesion was identified on MRI and chemotherapy with topotecan was initiated. This patient received six cycles of topotecan at the standard dose of 1.5 mg/m2 on days 1 through 5 of a 21-day cycle. Overall, the patient tolerated therapy well with only grade 2 nausea and grade 2 anemia. Response to therapy was assessed by monthly MRI scans of the brain. After two months of therapy a reduction in tumor size greater than 50% was observed. The disease eventually progressed and was referred to hospice care 2 months following progression.
On repeat PET/CT scans, following the second resection and 9 months after diagnosis , there was absence of FDG-avidity in the left parietal lobe. Approximately one year after diagnosis of EPSCC, her disease progressed and the patient chose to enter hospice care.