Twenty-six days after an ACLR, a 23-year-old man showed a deterioration in his general state (asthenia, fever and chills) and local signs of an early knee septic arthritis: pain, heat, redness, and edema.
The patient reported an episode of abdominal pain associated with mucoid bloody diarrhea 10 d before the onset of the arthritis symptoms, which quickly resolved within 48 h. Further questioning on risk factors for Salmonella spp revealed the patient had eaten an egg-based picnic 24 h before these symptoms appeared.
This patient was suffering from chronic instability in his right knee, following a soccer injury. An isolated ACL injury was reported on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Three months after the injury, an ACLR was performed, using a hamstring autograft (semi-tendinosus and gracilis). The procedure was performed under general anesthesia with a tourniquet at the proximal thigh for duration of 40 min. An outside-in drilling technique was used for the femoral tunnel. Femoral and tibial fixation was with interference screws.
The patient followed a standardized post-operative rehabilitation protocol aimed at controlled restoration of range of motion, muscle strength and proprioception. He was discharged the same day full weight bearing assisted with crutches. At 15 d after surgery, a routine consultation was performed to verify the absence of pain, hematoma, wound inflammation and/or serous or purulent discharge.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
A collection in the external femoral approach site was confirmed.
A biological inflammatory syndrome was found with an initially raised C-reactive protein (CRP) of 51 mg/L increasing to 130 mg/L over the first 24 h , alongside a white blood cell count increase from 11000/mm3 to 13300/mm3 during the same period.
The joint fluid aspiration performed in the emergency room showed neutrophils at direct examination and was followed by administration of intravenous antibiotic therapy – oxacillin 2 g every 8 h and gentamycin – 270 mg/d.
A knee ultrasound examination reported an intra-articular effusion. X-rays showed no fracture.