A 50-year-old male patient with type 2 diabetes was observed air filling in mediastinal drainage tube, 12 days after esophagectomy for esophageal squamous carcinoma. Chest computed tomography presented normal anastomosis. From the lung window of chest multi-slice CT, the connection of intermediate bronchus and mediastinal drainage tube tract was observed . Bronchoscopy revealed massive white necrotic materials attached the wall of intermediate bronchus. Distal intermediate bronchus was compressed . After biopsy was harvested, the end of mediastinal drainage tube emerged and located in the center of necrotic materials . Biopsy result is depicting numerous fungal hyphae . Benign Intermediate bronchial fistula and fungal infection were diagnosed.
Silicon stent was the first choice for benign tracheobronchial fistula. However, small diameter Y-shaped silicon stent placement in second carina is not available in our hospital. An individualized Y-shaped covered self-expandable metallic stent (SEMS) temporary placement and antifungal treatment were developed. Initially, stent was designed depending on the diameter and length measurement result of right main bronchus, right upper bronchus and intermediate bronchus from CT. The diameter of bronchial part, upper lobe part and intermediate bronchial part is 14 mm,10 mm and 12 mm. The length is 10 mm, 10 mm and 25 mm, respectively. Under the guidance of fluoroscopy, two super-stiff guide wires were exchanged into the right lower and right upper lobe bronchi. Once the delivery system that contained Y-shaped covered SEMS in place, the stent was released . No procedure related complications happened. Bronchoscopy were performed to demonstrate the closure of fistula . Mediastinal drainage tube was withdrawn gradually. Forty days later, CT shows the fistula tract was cured . The stent was successfully removed. Bronchoscopy revealed the fistula was healed with some granulation hyperplasia . He was free from respiratory symptom during 1 year follow-up.