The patient was a 51-year-old female who presented with a left breast lump in the One-Stop Breast Clinic of Shaukat Khanum Memorial Cancer Hospital and Research Center, Lahore, Pakistan. In the clinic, she had a standard triple assessment of breast mass.
Mass was present for the past 6 months, remained static, painless and with no other palpable lump elsewhere. There was no history of nipple discharge or any nipple changes. She was the mother of two kids. Her first child was born at the age of 25 years, and she breast-fed both her kids. She gave a history of lumpectomy in the ipsilateral breast 5 years ago, of which the report was not available. She denied a history of oral contraceptive intake or a family history of breast cancer. She attained menarche at 14 years. Mass was firm, painless and 2 cm in size. It was not adherent to skin or muscle and was present in the upper outer quadrant of the left breast. The ipsilateral axilla was unremarkable and the contralateral breast and axilla. The rest of the physical examination was normal.
A radiological investigation was performed as part of the triple assessment of breast mass. The mammogram revealed heterogeneous dense parenchyma. It demonstrated post-excisional architectural distortion in the lower central quadrant. There were scattered benign calcific foci. No pleomorphic calcification was seen. A well-circumscribed mass was seen on the mediolateral oblique view in the outer posterior of the left breast. The overlying skin and nipple-areolar complex were normal. The left axilla showed enlarged lymph nodes. [ and ] Ultrasonography demonstrated a circumscribed hypoechoic mass of 1.7 cm in the middle outer quadrant. Multiple suspicious lymph nodes, the largest measuring 2 cm, were observed in the ipsilateral axilla.
The core of the left breast mass suggested extensive necrosis with atypical lymphoid infiltrate. Fine needle aspiration cytology of axillary lymph node showed reactive lymphoid tissue.
The case was reviewed at a multidisciplinary tumour board meeting and discussed in detail with radiology, pathology, general surgery, radiation oncology and medical oncology specialists. On recommendation, wide local excision of breast mass and axillary nodal mass was performed.
Microscopic examination of breast lumpectomy and axillary lump excision revealed lymph nodes with neoplastic follicles comprising of atypical small lymphoid cells and approximately 8–9 centroblasts in a high-power field [ and ]. Immunophenotypic analysis was performed on paraffin-embedded tissue sections and a strong positive stain for CD20, CD10, BCL2 and BCL6 antibodies was demonstrated [ and ]. The definitive histological diagnosis revealed non-Hodgkin’s follicular lymphoma grade 2/3.
A further staging workup was performed to categorise into PBL and SBL. A computed tomography study of the chest, abdomen and pelvis revealed left-sided cervical lymphadenopathy suggesting lymphoma. Bone marrow aspirate showed lymphoid cells indicating bone marrow involvement with the lymphoma. The patient was planned for six cycles of Rituximab, a monoclonal antibody, following surgery.