A 21-year-old male presented to the emergency department with a three-day right-sided inner thigh pain and swelling history. The patient had no history of trauma or local surgery. He was known to have recurrent painful oral ulcers. Eighteen months before presentation, he developed bilateral lower extremity deep vein thrombosis and was initially treated with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), which overlapped with warfarin. He denied skin rashes, fevers, chills, malaise, weight loss, poor appetite, red eyes, chest pain, shortness of breath, changes in urination, nausea/vomiting/diarrhoea, Reynaud's phenomenon, joint swelling or photosensitivity. He had a positive family history of rheumatoid arthritis in the mother and Hodgkin lymphoma in the father. He currently smokes 15 cigarettes a day and is not married. No allergy to any drug has been reported. The patient had never undergone any surgical intervention.
On examination, he was afebrile. His vital signs on arrival were: heart rate 78/min, respiratory rate 16/min, blood pressure 110/70 mmHg, and O2 saturation on room air was 100 %.
Clinical examination revealed a well-defined, pulsatile swelling in the right medial thigh without palpable thrill or audible bruit. The lesion was 8.0 × 7.0 cm, soft and tender . Right popliteal, posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis pulses were all impalpable.
There were numerous reddish-purple nodular scars on both lower extremities. The oral mucosa was moist, and no ulcerations were observed. Head and neck examination revealed left submandibular and cervical lymphadenopathy. Respiratory, abdominal, and neurological examinations were unremarkable.
Arterial and Venous Doppler Ultrasound showed non-occlusive deep vein thrombosis (DVT) in both common femoral veins with good filling, patent right common femoral artery (CFA) and patent proximal right superficial femoral artery (SFA) with triphasic signals. In addition, about 80 × 75 × 70 mm pseudoaneurysm is noted at the mid-level of the right SFA with a wide neck leading to compression of the middle segment of the SFA. However, the distal right SFA was patent with a biphasic signal. In addition, distal vessels, anterior and posterior tibial arteries, were patent with biphasic signals .
Laboratory studies revealed a severe inflammatory reaction; WBC was 19,000 /μL; the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 95 mm/1st h (normal range < 25), and the C-reactive protein (CRP) was 44 mg/L (normal range 0.0–5.0). A complete blood count (CBC) revealed normal hematocrit and platelet count. The coagulation profile: Prothrombin time (PT) was 16.5 s; Activated Partial Thromboplastin Clotting Time (aPTT) was 36.5 s; and an international normalised ratio (INR) was 1.7. The HLA-B51 was negative. Anticardiolipin (aCL) IgG and IgM antibodies were negative. The pathergy test was positive. The ophthalmic assessment was performed without significant pathological findings. Fine-needle aspiration cytology of cervical lymphadenopathy was negative for malignancy. The patient fulfilled the International Criteria for Behçet's Disease (ICBD) by rheumatologic assessment.
Based on clinical data and investigation results, the diagnosis of Vasculo-Behçet's Disease was established, and the patient was started on immunosuppressive therapy for his active disease. The decision was then made to arrange emergency surgery due to severe, intractable pain and a high risk of pseudoaneurysm rupture and lower limb ischemia. In preparation for surgery, a chest, abdomen and lower extremities computed tomography angiography (CTA) was performed to exclude aneurysmal lesions. CTA revealed an 80.2 × 76.9 × 69 mm pseudoaneurysm in the right superficial femoral artery [, , , ].
Preoperatively, the patient received a pulse of methylprednisolone 1 g/day for 3 days and cyclophosphamide 500 mg intravenously.
After receiving confirmation of consent from the patient, the preoperative assessment included an imaging review and planning of proximal and distal anastomosis points. In addition, a venous examination of the right upper limb was also done to select a suitable autologous vein for use as a graft for arterial reconstruction. Preoperative Doppler ultrasound revealed a patent right basilic vein with good calibre.
General anaesthesia was performed by endotracheal intubation. Prophylactic antibiotics were administered. A urinary catheter had already been inserted. The patient was positioned supine with the right knee rested on a sterile saline bag to allow slight hip and knee joint flexion. The right upper and lower extremities were prepped and draped routinely. A medial approach was used to expose the right superficial femoral artery, in which a giant pseudoaneurysm was identified. A longitudinal mid-thigh incision was made with a subsequent opening layer opening to reveal the adductor muscles anteriorly and the sartorius muscle posteriorly. Proximal and distal control of the right SFA were performed. An incision along the pre-marked right basilic vein was made, followed by harvesting the vein to be used in reversed technique to repair the femoral artery after excluding a pseudoaneurysm. [, ]. The patient underwent open surgical exclusion of a pseudoaneurysm. Then, using a reversed basilic vein graft interposition, we performed a femoral-femoral bypass from the proximal femoral artery to a distal superficial femoral artery .
Postoperatively, the patient had an uneventful recovery; pain and swelling subsided immediately. During his hospitalisation, the patient received oral antimicrobial treatment and oral calcium plus vitamin D. Oral prednisolone and intravenous cyclophosphamide were continued postoperatively and adjusted according to the disease activity and rheumatologic assessment.
The patient was discharged from the hospital on the 5th postoperative day with palpable peripheral pulses and triphasic arterial Doppler waveform of the lower limb. Pre-discharge instructions were given for strict smoking cessation advice and regular follow-up in the clinic.
He was placed on warfarin (Coumadin®) 5 mg daily, clopidogrel (Plavix®) 75 mg daily, atorvastatin (Lipitor®) 10 mg at bedtime, and prednisolone (Deltasone®) 1 mg/kg/day (Initial daily dose 60 mg/day); begin tapering dose after 2 weeks; with slow tapering over 6 weeks.
After two weeks, the patient returned to the clinic in good condition, without complications. At one-month and three-month follow-up visits, the patient had no symptoms or physical signs of aneurysm recurrence associated with normal ESR and CRP values. In addition, arterial Doppler ultrasound performed at 3 months and computed tomography angiography (CTA) performed at 6 months after the procedure confirmed pseudoaneurysm exclusion, the vein bypass graft patency, and the absence of recurrences.