A 35-year-old woman with VHL who underwent total pancreatectomy and right nephrectomy for pancreatic SCN and renal cell carcinoma (RCC), respectively, had postoperative follow-up examinations performed every 6 months . At the 4th year follow-up examination, 12-mm and 15-mm tumors in the liver segment VIII and VI, respectively, were detected as hyper-enhanced mass in the early phase by contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan . Gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA)-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed arterially hyper-enhanced lesions in the liver, which were the same as the findings of the CT scan , showing iso-enhancement in the portal phase and hypo-enhancement in the delayed phase compared with the liver parenchyma. The liver tumors were radiographically diagnosed as metachronous metastases of pancreatic SCN or RCC. Partial resections of the liver were performed 53 months after the initial surgery. Contrast-enhanced intraoperative ultrasonography (CE-IOUS) using Sonazoid (gaseous perflubutane) showed early enhanced hyperechoic tumors in the liver, whereas intraoperative indocyanine green (ICG) fluorography showed no liver tumor. In the intraoperative macroscopic findings, the liver tumors were obscure. In microscopical observations, the tumors were confined in portal regions without invasion into the hepatic parenchyma, which consisted of microcysts lined by cuboidal epithelial cells with clear cytoplasm containing large amounts of glycogen that were stained by periodic acid Schiff with abolishment by diastase. Furthermore, immunohistochemically, the tumor was positive for pan-cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK18, CK19, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), inhibin α, laminin, type IV collagen, neuron specific enolase (NSE), and mucin (MUC) 6, but negative for CK20, CA125, S-100, CD10, CA19-9, paired-box gene (PAX) 8, vimentin, CD56, MUC1, MUC2, and MUC5AC. These immunohistochemical findings were similar to those of the primary pancreatic SCN, but differed from the RCC resected previously . Thus, the tumors were pathologically diagnosed as liver metastases of the pancreatic SCN, synonymous with serous cystadenocarcinoma in the World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of Tumours of the pancreas .
After the second surgery, the patient had follow-up examinations performed every 6 months again. At the first follow-up examination, one and two tumors located in the liver segment III and VIII, respectively, were detected by contrast-enhanced CT and Gd-EOB-DTPA-enhanced MRI . Compared to the contrast-enhanced CT scan, the Gd-EOB-DTPA-enhanced MRI more clearly showed the tumors of segment VIII , as in the previous examination. On the other hand, the tumor of segment III was clearly detected by the contrast-enhanced CT, though undetectable in the Gd-EOB-DTPA-enhanced MRI . Liver metastases of SCN were radiologically suspected. Since it was a short period since the hepatectomy, radiological follow-up examinations were additionally performed every three months to observe changes in the number and size of the tumors. No increase in the number of the tumors was seen in the radiological examinations after 6 months. Thus, the liver tumors were considered to have a surgical indication. Anterior segmentectomy and partial resection of segment III were performed 66 months after the initial surgery and 13 months after the second, respectively. Findings of CE-IOUS using Sonazoid and intraoperative ICG fluorography were similar to those in the second surgery. Pathologically, the resected tumors again showed morphological and immunohistochemical features similar to the primary pancreatic SCN, hence these tumors were pathologically diagnosed as multiple metachronous liver metastases of pancreatic SCN, synonymous with serous cystadenocarcinoma . Although the radiological findings of CT/MRI in the tumor of segment III were different from those in the tumors of segment VIII, no histopathological findings suggesting a difference in the radiological findings were observed.
Since then, radiological follow-up examinations have been continuously performed. The patient has remained disease-free without any recurrence after the third operation for 6.5 years until the recent last follow-up.