A 59-year-old man with an incidental right renal mass was referred to the department of hematology, for follow-up of follicular lymphoma. After complete remission of the lymphoma, he had been periodically followed up by CT. We diagnosed right kidney cancer cT1aN0M0 by enhanced CT. The past medical history was follicular lymphoma and type 2 diabetes mellitus. There was no surgical history with the skin incision. The tumor was located near the hilum of the kidney, and he underwent laparoscopic right radical nephrectomy without any adverse intraoperative event. The operation time was 210 min . Three days after surgery, he had a high-grade fever (>39°C). Physical examination, CT and blood tests (white blood cell 7900/μL, hemoglobin 13.2 g/dL, c-reactive protein 18.2 mg/dL, procalcitonin 0.23 ng/mL) were performed. Considering the possibility of bacterial infection, we started empiric antibacterial drug treatment (ceftriaxone 2 g/day, vancomycin 0.5 g/day). Five days after the surgery, he complained of fatigue and pain at the surgical site. The camera port and one of the 12 mm instrument ports presented flare, exudate, vesicular-bullous lesions, and peeling of the epidermis. We initially thought it was a surgical site infection. Therefore, we reopened and checked the wound and did blood culture tests. However, there was little discharge from the wound, which suggested necrosis of the epidermis rather than infection .
Regardless of continuous treatment, the high-grade fever worsened. Consequently, DIC (JAAM DIC diagnostic criteria score: 5) occurred with a high level of serum FDP (11.6 μg/mL), thrombocytopenia (6.2 × 104/μL) and extension of PT-INR (1.22). Since wound culture was negative and surgical site infection was not plausible, we consulted a dermatologist. The dermatologist suggested a possible diagnosis of PG. We rechecked the wound culture, performed a skin biopsy, and started both intravenous administration of predonisolone (20 mg/day) and administration of a topical corticosteroid. Because we could not completely deny infectious disease, we continued the antibacterial drugs and started relatively low-dose predonisolone. Thereafter, his condition greatly improved and the second wound culture was negative. Thus, we discontinued the antibacterial drug treatment and raised the predonisolone dose from 20 to 80 mg/day (1 mg/kg/day). His blood test results, general condition, and the dermatological appearance of the port site dramatically improved and we reduced the dosage of intravenous predonisolone to once a week based on consultation with the dermatologist . Skin biopsy pathology was negative for infection with Gram stains and showed predominantly neutrophilic infiltrates, consistent with a diagnosis of PG . Thirty-seven days after surgery, he was discharged from our hospital. In outpatient care, the dermatologist decided on a maintenance predonisolone dosage of 5 mg/day. At 3 months after discharge, the symptoms resulted in great improvement without resuture . The pathological diagnosis was right kidney cancer, clear cell carcinoma G2 > G1, INFa v0, pT1a, margin free, and without any abnormality relevant to dermatological findings.