A 68-year-old Caucasian man presented with several years history of low back pain, occasionally radiating to the left lower extremity. The pain was described as 10/10 in intensity (on the Visual Analog Scale, with 1 = no pain and 10 = the worst pain ever experienced), incapacitating, improved in supine position and increased by walking or standing. The patient has already tried extensive conservative treatment, including medication (non-steroidal anti-inflammatories such as ibuprofen and naproxen, occasionally oral opioids such as oxycodone/acetaminophen, and muscle relaxants such as cyclobenzaprine) and physical therapy, with minimal relief. His past medical and surgical history was significant for hypertension and depression, and a thoracic 11–12 laminectomy and fusion about 8 years prior to presentation, respectively. The patient had a 15-pack-year history of smoking cigarettes, but had quit smoking 20 years prior to presentation. The neurological examination was normal. Preoperative routine laboratory tests: complete blood count (CBC), basic metabolic panel (BMP), prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), and urinalysis (UA) were normal.
The flexion–extension and lateral bending lumbar X-rays revealed extensive degenerative changes in the lumbar spine, but no grossly abnormal motion. A lumbar CT confirmed the loss of disc height at all lumbar levels and sclerotic changes, particularly at L1–2 and L2–3 . The MRI confirmed the CT findings and also showed multi-level foraminal stenosis, but no critical central canal stenosis .
The patient was advised regarding the results of imaging and was told that, based on the available information, we could not reliably identify a single pain generator. A CT–SPECT was obtained and demonstrated significantly increased uptake at the L1–2 disc level, with only minimal uptake at the other degenerated levels . The patient underwent a lateral retroperitoneal/retropleural approach for a minimally invasive L1–2 interbody fusion with lateral plate . At the 3-month postoperative visit, the LBP decreased to 1/10 on the average and 2/10 at its’ worst, and these results were maintained at patient’s last clinic visit, 12 months after the surgery. The usage of Percocet® (oxycodone 10 mg + acetaminophen 325 mg) decreased from 3 to 4 per day before the surgery to occasionally one per week at 3-months postoperatively. The rest of medication (aspirin, lovastatin, amlodipine) usage remained the same.