A 27-year-old female (46,XX) patient with normal cognition visited the Endocrinology Clinic of 1st affiliated hospital of China Medical University (Shenyang) for amenorrhea with an unknown etiology. The patient had labial fusion when she was born and underwent plastic surgery afterward. During puberty, the patient underwent another surgery for an ovarian cyst. The patient was treated in another hospital as PCOS for several times resulting with mild remission of amenorrhea and recurrence of ovarian cysts. The patient was suspected of having 21-OHD due to increased 17OHP levels and came to our hospital for a genetic test for CYP21A2 mutations. The patient did not have fatigue, loss of appetite or other symptoms and was the only child in the family. Her parents appeared to be normal. She was born by vaginal delivery, and the mother had no complaints of abnormal manifestations during the perinatal period or history of reproductive system diseases. Her parents are nonconsanguineous. Physical examination of the patient revealed the following characteristics: a height of 165 cm and weight of 55 kg; no hyperandrogenism symptoms like hirsutism or acne; and no purple stripes. The patient complained of difficulty of bending the metacarpophalangeal joints from childhood . There were no obvious abnormalities in the genitals.
The ultrasound showed the presence of a 1.2 × 1.4 cm fluid area in the left ovary, and there was a 9.5 × 6.3 × 4.3 cm cyst in the right ovary behind the uterus. Digital radiography (DR) suggested there were no bone abnormalities . The adrenal CT scan showed there were no obvious hyperplasia changes . The laboratory test results of the patient and her parents are shown in Table . The levels of progesterone and 17-hydroxy progesterone of the patient were significantly increased. Androgen levels were not increased, and the basal level of cortisol in the morning was within the lower limit of the normal level. Cortisol was stimulated by the ACTH stimulation test. There were no abnormalities in the other measurements or in those of the parents.
CYP21A2 (NM_000500) was tested first due to the suspicion of 21-OHD, but no mutations were found in the patient. Then the patient’s complaint about a mild difficulty of bending the metacarpophalangeal joints reminded us to consider PORD, which usually presents with skeletal deformities and sexual dysfunction, so POR (NM_000941) gene was tested secondly. Exon 11 of PORharbored a homozygous mutation (c.1370G > A) which leads to a conversion of arginine at amino acid position 457 to histidine (R457H). The patient’s parents were both heterozygous carriers of this variant . Since the disease-causing homozygous mutations in POR gene were found, no further genetic analysis was performed.
Our patient once underwent surgery to remove a large ovarian cyst; however, since the diagnosis was unclear and hormone replacement therapy was not given, the ovarian cyst soon recurred. The patient was given low-dose corticosteroids twice a day (hydrocortisone 5 mg in the morning and 2.5 mg in the afternoon) and estrogen/progesterone sequential therapy in our hospital, and her ovarian cysts gradually decreased in size (the biggest ovarian cyst shrank to 3.5 × 3.3 × 2.3 cm) with regular menstruation in the following visits. The serum levels of ACTH, LH, 17OHP and P were declined accordingly . No adverse effect of corticosteroids was found in the follow-up.