In November 2015, a 51-year-old man was hospitalized because of myalgia for more than 1 month. He had a history of Hepatitis B envelope Antigen (HBeAg) positive hepatitis B for 13 years without being treated with antiviral drug. Two years before admission, he was diagnosed with hepatitis B and cirrhosis by local hospital, and HBV DNA was 6.5*103 copies/ml. Then he began to take telbivudine regularly and HBV DNA became undetected after some time. However, two months before admission, HBV DNA again reached 7*103 copies/ml. Considering HBV resistance to telbivudine, the antiviral treatment converted to the combination of telbivudine and tenofovir. After taking combination treatment, he began to feel muscle pain, especially in both lower limbs after walking. He also had hypoesthesia in distal limbs. There were no other concurrent symptoms, such as fever, headache, abdominal pain and altered level of consciousness. The symptoms became increasingly heavier. After 1 month of combination treatment, telbivudine and tenofovir were discontinued, and he began to take adefovir instead. However, his symptoms didn’t relieve. Ten days before admission, laboratory testing revealed an elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT, 66 U/L), aspartate transaminase (AST, 129 U/L), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH, 474 U/L) and CPK (1050 U/L). Total bilirubin and indirect bilirubin level were normal. To rule out liver cancer, abdomen magnetic resonance (MRI) was done, which revealed cirrhosis and gallstone. The patient received liver-protecting treatment. Two days before admission, he had chest tightness and short of breath. The blood lactate level was 12.7 mmol/L. The arterial blood gas analysis showed pH 7.25, base excess − 21.1 mmol/L. The patient received sodium bicarbonate (NaCO3) for the treatment of acidosis and eventually transferred to our hospital diagnosed with LA and RM. On the day of admission, he began to develop chest tightness and palpitation. The blood routine test showed normal white blood cell count and percentage of neutrophils. His urine color was black and urine output was about 200 ml per day. ALT was 77 U/L, total bilirubin was 25.2 μmol/L, CPK was 991 U/L, LDH was 509 U/L, creatine was 83 μmol/L, myoglobin was 1745 ng/ml and lactic acid was 20 mmol/L. The electrolytes test was normal, while uric acid was 1.019 mmol/L. HBV markers showed Hepatitis B surface Antigen (HBsAg), HBeAg and Hepatitis B core Antibody (HBcAb) were positive, while HBV DNA was undetected. Physical examination on admission revealed swelling and tenderness of all his extremities, muscle dumbness and weakness in both lower limbs, which quantitative value was 3 grade without redness and warm skin. Besides chronic hepatitis, the patient denied a past history of significant comorbidities, including diabetes and chronic kidney disease. He had no previous trauma and also denied any other drug, Chinese herb and nutritional supplementary use except antiviral drug for CHB.
Low extremity MRI showed mild atrophy in both lower extremities and increased signal intensity , consistent with the manifestation of myopathy. Electromyography revealed multiple peripheral neuropathy with predominant motor and sensory axonal injury. Muscle biopsy on left biceps revealed myogenic lesion with abnormality of mitochondria and fat metabolism . Muscle fibers are of variable size and irregular shape, with scattered atrophy and degeneration. In atrophic fibers, Modified Gomori trichrome (MGT) stain showed red granular changes, with increased succinic dehydrogenase (SDH) activity and negative cytochrome oxidase (COX) activity.
As the patient had myalgia, oliguria and black urine, combining with serum myoglobulin>500μg/L, severe metabolic acidosis and his past medical history, he was diagnosed with RM, LA and HBeAg negative CHB. Without the history of injury, other concurrent drug intake and infection, we concluded that RM was caused by telbivudine and tenofovir.
After admission, the antiviral treatment converted to entecavir because of its lower reporting portion of muscle-related adverse drug reaction. The patient was given hemodialysis twice. He was also given hydration, alkalization and supplementation treatment. After one week, the blood lactate, myoglobin and CPK dropped rapidly, but the blood lactate level fluctuated between 3 and 5 mmol/L . His arterial blood gas analysis returned to normal, showing pH between 7.40 and 7.45. Then he received tenofovir disoproxil instead of entecavir and methylprednisolone for 40 mg each day. In the following four weeks, blood lactate reduced to normal range and didn’t rebound. Five months later, the patient could walk naturally. His dumbness in distal limbs relieved but still existed. During the whole period from 2015.9 (before taking tenofovir) to 2016.6, the patient’s renal function was normal and GFR levels were estimated between 106.1 to 120.2/ml/min/1.73m2.