A 25-year-old woman with no medical history presented to the neurological department of our hospital for evaluation of bilateral ptosis. Before that, she had visited several ophthalmologists, but no clear diagnosis was established. Three months previously, she suddenly complained of bilateral ptosis without any apparent cause. Simultaneously, non-painful tender subcutaneous nodules and eschar-like skin lesions were observed on her extremities and trunk with diameters of 5–15 mm . Neurological examination revealed bilateral ptosis and fixed mydriasis: left and right palpebral fissures were 7 and 12 mm, respectively. Both pupil diameters were 8 mm with no anisocoria. She also had ophthalmoplegia with left gaze palsy, upward and downward paresis of the right eye. Paresis of adduction of the lateral gaze in the left eye was observed . Laboratory data showed mild anemia, low growth hormones (insulin-like growth factor 1, factor binding protein 3), and low sex hormone levels (luteinizing hormone, estradiol, progesterone, testosterone), and significantly elevated levels of liver enzymes (alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase). Autoimmune indicators including antinuclear antibody, antibody to double-stranded DNA, and complement level were normal. No remarkable findings were obtained after tuberculosis tests (T-spot) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination. Hepatitis virus, human immunodeficiency virus, syphilis, and rubella virus serology tests were negative, but the patient was positive for cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, and Epstein-Barr (EBV) IgG antibodies. There was no hepatosplenomegaly or lymphadenopathy as assessed by ultrasound. Magnetic resonance imaging showed an abnormal signal in the pituitary gland without significant change for optic nerve . Retinal examination was normal. The right and left eyes had visual acuities of 5/10 and 7/10, respectively.
A skin biopsy from the left thigh showed a substantial lobular panniculitis and perivasculitis (mainly dermal veins involved) with infiltration of lymphocytes, neutrophils, plasma cells and histiocytes. There were numerous infiltrating lymphocytes, plasma cells, eosinophils and macrophages in the subdermal fat tissue. The phagocytic histiocytes (“bean bag” cells) phagocytosing erythrocytes, leukocytes, platelets and nuclear debris showed no atypical cytology. Both liquefactive and coagulative local adiponecrosis were observed. Some adipocytes were rimmed by lymphocytes in a ring-like structure . Immunohistochemical examination showed results of CD4, CD8, CD 56 (a marker of natural killer T cells) and monoclonal rearrangement of the T-cell receptor were negative while that of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) EBER-1 positive. Examination of CD123 was not performed . Aspiration of bone marrow was normal. Therefore, a diagnosis of CHP was made.
Intravenous corticosteroid therapy was administered for 7 days, followed by oral corticosteroid treatment. However, no improvement was obtained; instead, she developed fever with progressively worsening pulmonary infiltration. Her condition continued to worsen, even with the addition of an immunosuppressive agent (thalidomide). Therefore, the treatment was switched to chemotherapy. Though CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone) is the most common chemotherapy regimen, we decided to use THP-COP (pirarubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisolone) for its proven superior efficacy. Pirarubicin (THP) is an analogue of doxorubicin . Significant improvement was noticed after three cycles of chemotherapy, with partially recovery of ptosis, eye movements, and decreased pupil diameters . A decrease in the number of subcutaneous nodules and recovery of hepatic function and lung performance were obtained and no relapse has happened through June 2015 . However, her visual acuity has remained the same.