The 9-year-old otherwise healthy girl presented with minimal physical clumsiness and progressive mild left hemiparesis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a giant deep AVM. This lesion was considered a grade-V AVM according to Spetzler–Martin scale. Surgical treatment of the AVM was declined as it was too risky. Radiosurgical treatment was instituted due to the size and location of the AVM. She received one course of radiotherapy (20 Gr) resulting in a slight reduction in the size of the AVM. Last follow-up digital subtraction angiography (DSA) at the age of 12 showed no change in AVM [Figure and ]. At the age of 18, she admitted to our hospital with loss of consciousness and left hemiparesis (mRS score 5). A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed large intracerebral hemorrhage due to ruptured arteriovenous malformation.
The decision on the surgical treatment of the AVM was made with a help of endovascular embolization. Onyx embolization was admitted with minor success. Treatment continued with microsurgery. The patient was taken to the operative theater for the removal of intracerebral hematoma and resection of the AVM. During the evacuation of hematoma major intraoperative bleeding (1 L) occurred from Onyx embolized intranidal aneurysm. Bleeding was effectively held by emergency clipping of some feeders originating from the middle cerebral artery (MCA). Resection of the AVM could not be performed because of the unstable medical conditions of the patient.
Postoperatively, the patient clinical condition was the same neurologically as during admission. However, 3 days after the first operation, the patient's condition deteriorated suggesting intracranial hypertension. The patient underwent a placement of external drainage catheter with the intracranial pressure monitor. Intracranial hypertension was eliminated. Further treatment continued with a new round of endovascular modality. A new attempt of Onyx embolization through the posterior cerebral artery (PCA) was made. On the same day, the patient underwent a second microsurgical operation using the same craniotomy. We used total temporary clipping under mild hypothermia (33°C) for almost 4 hours; P2 segment of PCA, A1 segment of anterior cerebral artery, anterior choroidal artery (AChA), and the supraclinoid segment of internal carotid artery (ICA) . Most of the lateral part of AVM underwent removal . A postoperative angiogram demonstrated remaining medial and some of the lateral parts of AVM . MRI with diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) performed next day showed a lack of global ischemia . The next day the patient underwent the third operation using the same craniotomy. Remaining part of the medial AVM was completely removed, and only a small lateral part was left.
Three weeks after the third operation, shunt for cerebrospinal fluid diversion was inserted, and the patient remained conscious with left hemiparesis. The patient was transported to the department of neurology for rehabilitation. However, few days later, new minor bleeding occurred, adjacent to the residual part of the AVM. Two embolizations were performed through MCA and PCA. Residual part filling via MCA was completely occluded, however, small residual filling via PCA remained [Figure and ].
Shunt for cerebrospinal fluid diversion was removed. Ten days later, the patient underwent the last microsurgical operation. Eventually, AVM was completely occluded [Figure –]. The patient was discharged with strong left hemiparesis, visual changes, memory difficulties, and aphasia (mRS score 4). These symptoms gradually improved, and 5 years after her initial surgery, she could walk without assistance, however, visual changes and memory difficulties remained (mRS score 3) .