A 43-year-old Malay man presented to our facility with a three-month history of fever, non-productive cough and weight loss. He was a chronic smoker and had no significant medical history. Results of a physical examination were unremarkable. A chest radiograph revealed a large right lower zone lung lesion, and a subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax and abdomen revealed a large heterogeneously enhancing soft tissue mass in the right lower lobe of the lung with intra-cavitary extension into the left atrium via the right inferior pulmonary vein . Transthoracic needle aspiration of this mass was suggestive of carcinoma. Surgery was performed for the resection of this mass; a right posterior lateral thoracotomy was performed, followed by a right lower lobectomy. The left atrium was opened at the inferior part of the superior pulmonary vein and the tumor resected with a small cuff of left atrium. The entire tumor and right lower lobe was delivered en bloc, and the left atrial defect subsequently patched. Histology demonstrated a high-grade clear cell sarcomatoid tumor, suggestive of metastatic clear cell renal cell carcinoma, a diagnosis specifically considered by the pathologist. On immunohistochemistry, the lesion was focally positive for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), CD10 and vimentin, but negative for anticytokeratin CAM5.2, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), smooth muscle actin (SMA), S100, HMB-45, Melan-A, Hepar and synaptophysin. However, as no renal lesion was evident on the CT scan , a diagnosis of alveolar soft part sarcoma was considered. An additional extensive investigation did not reveal a primary lesion or any other metastatic lesions.
Then, four months later, our patient developed a subcutaneous mass in his left loin. A CT scan of the abdomen confirmed a large 11 cm tumor occupying nearly the entire right kidney with involvement of the pelvicalyceal system and proximal ureter . The tumor also extended into the right renal vein and the inferior vena cava, with a 2 cm soft tissue nodule was seen in the subcutaneous layer of the left flank. Further imaging of the thorax demonstrated multiple lung nodules, a large right pleural-based mass and an enlarged subcarinal lymph node. A bone scan was performed, and suggested involvement of the right humeral head and multiple thoracic vertebrae. Excision biopsy of the subcutaneous nodule was performed, and histology demonstrated a tumor morphologically similar to the initially resected lung lesion, suggestive of a high-grade clear cell renal cell carcinoma with sarcomatoid differentiation . On immunohistochemistry, the tumor was strongly positive for vimentin, CD10, focally positive for epithelial membrane antigen, melan-A and negative for TTF-1, S100, inhibin and synaptophysin The positive vimentin and negative inhibin results weighed against the likelihood of an adrenocortical tumor.
Our patient was given palliative first-line therapy of sunitinib, with initial best response of stable disease. After three cycles of sunitinib, the disease progressed; our patient declined any further therapy and he eventually died 13 months after his initial lung resection.