A 41-year-old-male, left-hand dominant, heavy machine operator, presented to a local community emergency department (ED) with an injury to his left ring finger after his wedding band was caught in machinery. He sustained a circumferential degloving injury to his left fourth digit, just distal to the proximal interphalangeal joint (PIP). The patient was given intravenous hydromorphone, cefazolin, and tetanus prior to transfer to a tertiary care hospital for orthopedic evaluation. The case was discussed between the transferring and accepting EPs, and disposition was deemed acceptable to both parties.
Upon arrival to the tertiary care hospital ED, examination revealed a complicated ring avulsion injury with complete tendon and neurovascular disruption with exposed intact bone and distal ischemic tissue attached at the distal interphalangeal joint (DIP) ( and ). The wedding band was deformed but still affixed to the distal soft tissue. Radiographs showed no signs of fracture. The EP contacted in-house orthopedic hand surgery. Having recognized the degree of neurovascular compromise and potential need for replantation, the EP concurrently initiated contact with hand surgery at another tertiary care hospital with microsurgical revascularization capabilities.
In a phone discussion between the EP and the in-house orthopedic hand surgeon, both parties agreed that further management should be guided by responding microsurgical revascularization specialists at the neighboring institution. After extensive discussion with the outside hand surgeon, as well as shared decision-making with the patient and family, the decision was made to transfer to a tertiary care hospital with microsurgical revascularization capabilities. Removal of the ring at this juncture was deemed unnecessary given the complete degloving of the soft tissues down to bone with complete disruption of neurovascular bundles and the clear ischemic nature of the distal soft tissues.
In the ED of the third hospital, the ring was removed after digital block to facilitate examination, revealing a central slip complete laceration, transection of both radial and ulnar neurovascular bundles, and PIP and DIP joint dislocations. The distal soft tissues were notably dusky. Given the extensive neurovascular, ligamentous, and tendon damage, as well as prolonged ischemia of distal soft tissues, there was a high likelihood of significant dysfunction even after microsurgical revascularization and aggressive rehabilitation. The decision was made with the patient and family to proceed with amputation, instead of revascularization.