A 61-year-old Chinese male was initially admitted to the gastroenterology department of our hospital with chief complaints of recurrent abdominal pain, diarrhea, mucopurulent hematochezia and weight loss.
The patient was diagnosed with UC 12 years prior to admission, and he had been treated with multiple conventional therapies, including, oral and topical aminosalicylates, dexamethasone enema, oral corticosteroids, selective leukocyte absorption treatment and intestinal flora adjustment treatment. In spite of these treatments, he experienced frequent flare-ups and was admitted to the hospital 3 times over the past 9 mo. Due to these failed conventional therapies, the patient was administered adalimumab 160 mg by subcutaneous injection. However, the symptoms continued with 10 to 20 bowel movements daily, and the modified Truelove and Witts severity index suggested moderately to severely active UC. As a result, the patient was started on vedolizumab. After the first dose of vedolizumab (300 mg intravenous infusion), fever at 39 °C and fatigue occurred the next day. He was treated with intravenous mezlocillin, foscarnet sodium, and ornidazole, but the fever persisted. The second dose of vedolizumab was administered 2 wk later, and the patient responded well regarding his intestinal symptoms; however, he presented with new-onset dyspnea at rest and nonproductive cough 2 d after the second vedolizumab treatment. Half a month later, the patient was admitted to the Department of Respiratory and Intensive Care Unit (RICU) due to severe dyspnea.
There was no significant medical history.
Upon arrival to the RICU, a body temperature of 36.8 degrees Celsius, a blood pressure of 128/90 mmHg, a heart rate of 97 beats/min, and a respiratory rate of 28 times/min were noted. The remaining physical examination was unremarkable except for diffuse inspiratory crackles in both lungs.
Lab data revealed the following: white blood cells 11.10 × 109/L, neutrophils 68.6%, lymphocytes 23.2%, hemoglobin 130 g/L and platelets 328 × 109/L. Serum C-reactive protein was increased at 111 mg/L (normal range ≤ 8 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate at 64 mm/h (normal range ≤ 15 mm/h), fecal calprotectin at 250.9 ug/g (normal range 0-50 ug/g) and procalcitonin was normal at 0.07 ng/mL (normal range ≤ 0.5 ng/mL). A fecal occult blood test showed positive occult blood with 0-1 white blood cells per high-power field. Stool cultures for Salmonella, Shigella and Campylobacter were all negative. Arterial blood gas analysis showed that pO2 was 41 mmHg breathing ambient air. Extensive microbiology assays (blood and sputum culture, 1,3-beta-D-glucan, galactomannan testing, aspergillus antibody, cryptococcal capsular polysaccharide antigen, mycoplasma antibody, human immunodeficiency virus antibody, cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, A and B influenza virus PCR assays, and, antibodies of Toxoplasma gondii, rubella, herpes simplex virus and legionella) identified no infectious causes. Serologic examination included rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody panel, ds-DNA antibodies, anti-extractable nuclear antigen antibodies, myositis antibody panel, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody panel, and immunoglobulin, which were not elevated to pathologic levels. Cardiogenic pulmonary edema was excluded due to normal myocardial enzymes, B-type natriuretic peptide, echocardiogram and echocardiography. Some tumor markers, including, carcinoma embryonic antigen, cytokeratin 19 fragment and neuron-specific enolase, were increased at 7.68 ng/mL (normal range 0-5 ng/mL), 12.37 ng/mL (normal range 0-5 ng/mL) and 26.61 ng/mL (normal range 0-24 ng/mL), respectively, while alpha-fetoprotein and carcinoma antigen 125 and 199 were in the normal range. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) were also performed. Cultures from the BAL were negative for bacteria, mycobacteria and fungi. Samples from the BAL and the peripheral blood were sent together for metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS). This sequencing uses an untargeted DNA/RNA sequencing method to detect all potential pathogens, including, bacteria, fungi, viruses, and parasites. In brief, the negative results of both mNGS and multiple microbiological cultures together effectively excluded infection.
On high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT), new-onset diffuse infiltrates, interlobular thickening and fibrosis were noted compared to a HRCT from one month prior .
On histopathology, irregular glandular structures in the hyperplastic fibrous tissue were noted with scattered lymphocytes infiltrated in the interstitium. Intranuclear vacuoles, nuclear fragmentation, binuclear cells were seen . No tumor cells were noted and immunohistochemistry showed that adenoid structures were positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3; epithelial cells were positive for the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), p53 and negative for vimentin; positive immunostaining for Ki67 in some larger epithelial cells accounted approximately 15%; negative immunostaining for desmin was detected.