A 21-year-old male patient with PDA and PAH (mPAP, 75 mmHg; systolic/diastolic pulmonary arterial pressures, 102/58 mmHg; systolic/diastolic systemic arterial pressures, 112/67 mmHg; pulmonary arterial wedge pressure, 9 mmHg; right atrial pressure, 7 mmHg; cardiac index, 3.4 L/min/m2, pulmonary vascular resistance, 11.5 Wood units) was referred for 3 T cardiac magnetic resonance (MR) function and 4D flow imaging (Magnetom Trio, Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany) after right heart catheterization (RHC) within a prospective study approved by the local ethical review board (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier NCT01725763). Cardiac function was assessed by cine steady-state free precession real-time imaging during free breathing. Volumetric evaluation revealed enlarged left (LV) and right (RV) ventricular volumes (end-diastolic volume, LV: 126 mL/m2, RV: 121 mL/m2; end-systolic volume, LV: 55 mL/m2, RV: 70 mL/m2; ejection fraction, LV: 56 %, RV: 42 %), normal left (65 g/m2) and increased right ventricular mass (61 g/m2). Left (LA) and right (RA) atrial volumes (maximum volume, LA: 39 mL/m2, RA: 65 mL/m2; minimum volume, LA: 19 mL/m2, RA: 30 mL/m2) were within normal ranges .
MR 4D flow data were acquired in free breathing, covering the heart, pulmonary artery and aorta with gapless slices of a retrospectively ECG-gated, segmented, two-dimensional spoiled gradient-echo-based cine phase-contrast sequence with three-directional velocity encoding in RVOT orientation. Velocity fields were calculated, visualized and analyzed by dedicated prototype software (4D Flow V2.4, Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany) .
Multi-planar reformatted anatomical phase contrast images demonstrated a dilatated main pulmonary artery (cross-sectional area, 15.8 cm2), and a tubular ductus arteriosus 24 mm in length and 104 mm2 in cross-sectional area connecting the proximal descending aorta to the left pulmonary artery near its origin . Time-course of PDA maximal velocity and net blood flow rate during the cardiac cycle, as well as streamlines and particle traces (see Additional file ) originating from the PDA, demonstrated biphasic left-to-right shunting without Eisenmenger’s syndrome. The systolic/diastolic pressure gradients between aorta and pulmonary artery of 7/2 mmHg, calculated from systolic/diastolic peak velocities across the PDA via the Bernoulli equation (pressure gradient in mmHg = 4 · v2, with v being the PDA peak velocity in m/s), matched the difference between systemic and pulmonary systolic/diastolic pressures. Shunt volume across the PDA was 33 mL, which was in agreement with the difference of measured net forward volumes in the ascending aorta (120 mL) and main pulmonary artery (81 mL). The resulting pulmonary-to-systemic flow ratio was 0.7.
Streamlines and particle traces (see Additional file ) originating from the main pulmonary artery, as well as 3D velocity vector fields , demonstrated that left-to-right ductal shunting caused retrograde blood flow along the anterior wall of the main pulmonary artery, reversing direction from retrograde to anterograde above the pulmonary valve. This anterograde flow adhered to the forward flow through the pulmonary valve during systole.
The typical flow pattern in patients with PAH - i.e., vortex formation at the posterior wall of the main pulmonary artery - was not seen. Instead there was a vortex at the anterior wall of the main pulmonary artery nested between retrograde and anterograde PDA-caused blood flow and rotating counter-clockwise (i.e., opposite the typical clockwise direction) . The duration of this vortical blood flow was the complete cardiac interval (tvortex = 100 %), which translated into mPAP of 79 mmHg (according to the formula mPAP in mmHg = 16 + 0.63 · tvortex) and was very close to the value measured during RHC.