A 13-year-old boy, affected by severe chronic asthma with abnormal lung function: a forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1 < 80 %) of the predicted value before bronchodilation with β2 agonist: salbutamol. The first respiratory symptoms appeared when he was about two years old.
He had dust mites and olive pollen allergies -confirmed by skin prick tests (average diameter of wheal for Dermatophagoides Pteronyssinus, Dermatophagoides Farinae, and Olive pollen: 9, 7, and 5 mm, respectively) and specific IgE levels (100, 82 and 68 IU/ml, respectively) and high total IgE (1003 IU/ml) levels with normal eosinophil count (110/mmc).
He performed long-term anti-asthma therapy with high-dose inhaled corticosteroids (fluticasone up to 750 μg/day), also associated with a leukotriene receptor antagonist (montelukast) and sublingual specific immunotherapy (SLIT) with dust mite extract (since he was 5 years old for 3 years continuously) with poor disease control (without any precise seasonal correlation) and reduction of FEV1 according to GINA guidelines .
When he was 8 years old, for the appearance of gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea, vomiting, heartburn), after endoscopy-biopsy of the upper digestive tract, eosinophilic esophagitis was diagnosed .
The prick tests were positive to milk (average diameter of wheal for milk extract 8 mm; α-lactoalbumin 10 mm; β-lactoglobulin 7 mm; casein 6 mm; Prick by prick with fresh milk 10 mm) and soy (5 mm).
He was placed on semi-elemental diet with benefit on esophageal symptoms and a strict food allergens (milk, dairy products and soy) avoidance, and histology (performed after 3 months since the beginning of each therapy, respectively at 9.3 and 10 years of age) but with heavy burden on his quality of life. Symptomatic response to therapy (improvement/impairment/no change) was assessed evaluating changes of the patient’s answers concerning the following items: frequency of trouble swallowing; duration of trouble swallowing (≥/< 5 min); pain when swallowing. Furthermore, a visual dysphagia question addressed the severity of dysphagia when consuming food of 8 distinct consistencies. Behavioural adaptations (avoidance, modification, and slow eating of various foods) also were assessed in the context of consuming 8 distinct food consistencies . Afterwards, courses of topical steroid therapy (oral budesonide) were also carried out with symptomatic and histological efficacy. The latter was detected after the second (at 10.6 years of age), and the sixth run (under omalizumab, at 12.6 years). However, the effects (on both symptoms and histology) were transient and the treatment was sometimes complicated by oral candidiasis, for which the therapy was interrupted and antimycotic treatment was performed by patient.
At the age of 11.5 years, for inadequate asthma control (in the last 2 months he presented daytime symptoms 3 to 4 times/week, some night waking due to asthma, reliever needed 2 to 3 times/week, limitation of his activities- e.g. going upstairs- due to asthma) , he started to receive therapy with omalizumab. According to technical data sheet, the dose and frequency of dosing were guided by a nomogram that is derived from the total serum IgE level and the body mass index (375 mg subcutaneously every 2 weeks). After the first month of treatment, conventional long-term therapy for asthma was reduced up to the suspension (at the 4th month of omalizumab therapy), with an improvement both in asthma symptoms and in spirometric parameters for the entire duration of treatment (18 months) . Broncodilatator reversibility test remained positive over time, before and after omalizumab therapy, with a significant increase in FEV1 after bronchodilator (salbutamol) indicating a reversible airflow obstruction and supports the diagnosis of asthma .
Regarding EoE, during the first three months of treatment the patient presented in clinical remission even if not accompanied by histological remission (endoscopy performed at the 3rd months of treatment). Afterwards, he experienced an exacerbation of gastrointestinal symptoms with confirmation of eosinophilic infiltrates in the esophageal mucosa (endoscopy at the 7th month of treatment). Therefore, he performed treatment with topical steroids (galenical oral viscous budesonide) with improvement of nausea and vomiting. In detail, we used a product prepared by the chemist in the laboratory of our pharmacy. The product was made mixing a vial of budesonide (1 mg/2 ml) with 5 g of sweetener (2.5 g of aspartame and 2.5 g dextrose) [, ].
On the other hand, at the 18th month of omalizumab therapy the patient continues to have a good asthma control according to GINA assessment without other anti-asthmatic therapy and his EoE is steroid-dependent. He is going on treatment with omalizumab s.c. and viscous budesonide per os.