The patient was a 51-year-old woman with no previous history of allergy. She presented to the emergency room for bilateral severe eyelid swelling for 1 week. On eye examination, visual acuity was 20/25 for both eyes and intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg bilaterally. Slit-lamp examination was unremarkable except for conjunctival injection without conjunctival swelling. Fundus examination was also unremarkable. Severe eyelid swelling of both eyes was noted . To rule out orbital cellulitis, facial computed tomography (CT) was performed in emergency department. On facial CT, no signs of inflammation near orbits were found .
Two weeks previously, the patient had visited the local clinic with symptoms of eye congestion, gritty feeling, and tearing. She was diagnosed with conjunctivitis and was prescribed levofloxacin 0.5% (Cravit®; Santen Pharm. CO., Japan) and fluorometholone 0.1% (Fumelon®; Hanlim Pharm. CO., LTD., South Korea), with no improvement. One week later, she was prescribed alcaftadine 0.25% by a local physician based on a presumptive diagnosis of allergic conjunctivitis. The patient said eyelid swelling with erythematous changes in both eyes started the day after starting alcaftadine 0.25%.
When she was referred to our department, we suspected ACD and consulted with dermatology for evaluation of ACD; the patient was instructed not to use alcaftadine 0.25%. To evaluate ACD and to find the cause, a patch test was performed on her forearm. The three ophthalmic agents the patient had used were applied and covered with Tegaderm™. She was prescribed only oral steroids for treatment of the swelling and erythema. There was no topical steroid used. After 2 days, patch test results showed well-bordered erythematous lesion which was only on the area where alcaftadine 0.25% had been applied . It was confirmed by our hospital’s dermatologist. Therefore, the diagnosis of alcaftadine 0.25%-associated ACD was confirmed. On eye examination, there was no specific change and no specific ophthalmic problems, although the severe eyelid swelling remained. Oral steroids were maintained as 8 mg of methylprednisolone. One week after discontinuing alcaftadine 0.25%, the eyelid swelling was remarkably improved. She was instructed to continue oral steroids for two more weeks with dose tapering as 4 mg of methylprednisolone. Nine days after discontinuation of alcaftadine 0.25%, the eyelid swelling had vanished, and conjunctival injection had disappeared . The patient was prescribed artificial tears and followed up for 2 months, and there was no other event thereafter.