A 47-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our department of radiation oncology for treatment of locally advanced cervical cancer. The chief complaint was an increased amount of vaginal discharge. Her menstrual cycle was regular with a 40-day interval, and there is no history of irregular vaginal or postcoital bleeding. Additionally, she had no relevant medical history. On histopathological examination of the tumor biopsy specimen, the tumor formed irregular solid sheets and confluent glandular/cribriform structures . The glandular structures were lined with flattened to cuboidal or columnar cells, and the lumens occasionally contained periodic acid-Schiff-positive and diastase-resistant eosinophilic secretions . On immunohistochemistry, luminal CD10 positivity and diffuse nuclear expression of TTF-1 and PAX8 were observed. The tumor cells were negative for p16, ER and calretinin. These findings led to the diagnosis of MNA. Pelvic examination revealed a cervical mass without vaginal invasion, although with left parametrial involvement that did not reach the pelvic wall. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also showed an irregular tumor (65 mm in diameter) with similar findings to the pelvic examination . The chest-abdomen-pelvis computed tomography (CT) and 18-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (F-18-FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showed no evidence of metastasis to the lymph nodes or other organs. On the basis of these findings, the disease was staged as T2bN0M0 (based on the 7th edition of the Union for International Cancer Control) and stage IIB (based on the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics 2009).
The patient was enrolled in a clinical trial, a prospective interventional study on the safety of carbon ion radiotherapy and image-guided brachytherapy for locally advanced uterine cervical cancer (GUNMA1202), and received definitive treatment consisting of CIRT, 192Ir-based high-dose-rate image-guided adaptive brachytherapy (IGABT), and five courses of concurrent weekly cisplatin (40 mg/m2). The CIRT consisted of whole pelvic irradiation and local boost irradiation. For the whole pelvic irradiation, a total of 36.0 Gy (relative biological effectiveness [RBE]) in 12 fractions was delivered to the primary tumor site (encompassing the gross tumor, whole uterus, parametria, ovaries, and the upper half of the vagina) and the prophylactic lymph node regions (encompassing the common iliac, internal iliac, external iliac, obturator, and presacral node regions) . For the local boost irradiation using an inserted vaginal spacer, a total of 19.2 Gy (RBE) in four fractions was delivered to the gross tumor . CIRT was performed as one fraction per day, four fractions per week. After the local boost irradiation was completed, three sessions of CT-based IGABT using a Fletcher-Suit Asian Pacific applicator (Elekta, Stockholm, Sweden) were performed for a total of 3 sessions in 2 weeks . The following dose aim for the target, and dose constraints for the organs at risk, were used: D90 (i.e., the minimum dose at which 90% of the volume is irradiated) for the high-risk clinical target volume (HR-CTV) greater than 16.5 Gy; and D2cc (i.e., the maximum dose at which 2 cc of the volume is irradiated) of the rectum and sigmoid colon below 16.5 Gy. The resulting HR-CTV D90, rectum D2cc, and sigmoid colon D2cc were 20.3 Gy, 15.7 Gy, and 14.0 Gy, respectively, showing that the dose aims and constraints were achieved. Five courses of weekly cisplatin at a dose of 40 mg/m2 were given during the C-ion RT and brachytherapy period. The first course of cisplatin was administered on day 1 of C-ion RT in principle. Cisplatin was administrated on a different day during the brachytherapy period.
MRI obtained at 3 months (with the first day of treatment defined as Day 1) showed remarkable shrinkage of the cervical tumor to 25 mm in diameter . The tumor showed further shrinkage to 15 mm in diameter at 6 months , reaching a radiological complete response at 30 months . At 9 months, the patient developed rectal bleeding due to radiation proctitis, which was resolved by argon plasma coagulation and hyperbaric oxygen therapy.
In contrast to the control of the primary tumor, the patient developed multiple metastases to the lung (i.e., eight lesions) at 4 months. The patient received six courses of paclitaxel (175 mg/m2) plus carboplatin (area under the curve, 5 mg/ml/minute), followed by two sessions of dendritic cell vaccine therapy; these treatments led to a radiological complete response for seven out of the eight lesions, with the other lesion (in the right S1) being stable. The right S1 lesion was treated with photon stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT). From 22 to 78 months, the patient received SBRT for a total of 10 metastatic lesions to the lung, i.e., the original right S1 lesion, six new lesions, and three post-chemotherapy relapse lesions .
No adverse effects other than asymptomatic pneumonitis with radiological findings only were observed post-SBRT. All lesions treated with SBRT were controlled until the latest follow-up. At 8 years (i.e., 2 years after the last SBRT), the patient is alive without any evidence of recurrence on CT workup every 6 months, and maintains a high quality of life.