An 11-year-old girl presented with the delayed eruption of tooth 43 (two digit tooth notation system of the FDI) and mental nerve palsy. She had no history of trauma. An intraoral examination revealed that tooth 43 had not erupted after the loss of tooth 83 and the gingiva and alveolar mucosa of the right mandible were normal. Panoramic tomography showed a unilocular radiolucent lesion in the right anterior mandible resorbing the root of tooth 42 and the medial side of the root of tooth 44 . Tooth 43 was not impacted in the mandibular bone. Computed tomography showed a well-circumscribed non-expansile 3-cm osteolytic lesion in the right anterior mandible that eroded the buccal cortical plate and resorbed the root of tooth 42 and the medial side of the root of tooth 44 . Root resorption and cortical plate erosion suggested a locally aggressive tumor. The tumor lesion was entirely curetted out. No recurrence was detected in 18 months of follow-up.
A histopathological investigation revealed plump spindle cell proliferation with a storiform architecture and lymphocytes scattered around the spindle cells . The background stroma included a focal myxoid matrix. These spindle cells had ovoid nuclei with a pale eosinophilic cytoplasm, suggesting a myofibroblastic, myoepithelial, or fibroblastic lineage. Small islands of an odontogenic epithelium were detected. No mitosis or necrosis was observed. The histomorphological findings suggested that spindle cells were of a myofibroblastic, myoepithelial, or fibroblastic lineage. Small islands of an odontogenic epithelium suggested that this tumor was an odontogenic tumor. High-grade malignant tumors were excluded because neither mitosis nor necrosis was observed. Differential diagnoses included myofibroma, myoepithelioma, an odontogenic tumor, solitary fibrous tumor, giant cell granuloma, and IMT.
Immunohistochemical staining revealed that spindle cells were positive for α-smooth muscle actin (SMA) , ALK , CD10, and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), and negative for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, S100 proteins, and p63. The Ki67 labeling index was 3%.
A fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) (ALK) analysis was performed on a formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue block. Rearrangements in the ALK gene at chromosome band 2p23 were detected by FISH utilizing a Vysis ALK break apart probe (Abott Molecular). The FISH analysis revealed the translocation of a part of the ALK gene locus .
Total RNA was extracted from frozen tissue using an RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In order to obtain cDNA fragments corresponding to a novel ALK fusion gene, a rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) analysis was performed using the 5′-full RACE core set (TaKaRa Bio) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. First-strand cDNA synthesis was performed with a 5′ end-phosphorylated RT primer (5′-ATCTGGGCCTTGTATTTATCACTC). The primer set used for the first round of PCR was the A1 primer (5′-ACTTCCTGGTTGCTTTTGCTGGGGTAT) and S1 primer (5′-AGAAGGAGCCACACGACAGGGGTAA). The primer set used for the second round of PCR was the S2 primer (5′-CTCCTTCACAAACCAGAGACCAA) and A2 primer (5′-TTCAGGCAGCGTCTTCACAG). The second round PCR product covering the break point was sub-cloned into a pT7Blue plasmid vector (TaKaRa Bio). The DNA sequence was analyzed using universal primers (M13M4 primer or T7 promoter primer) and the Big-dye terminator ver3.1 kit (Applied Biosystems). A RACE analysis confirmed a rearrangement in ALK and identified ATIC (NM_004044) as a partner of this ALK fusion mutant .
First-strand cDNA was synthesized from total RNA using the SuperScript First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RT-PCR was used to confirm the presence of the AITC-ALK fusion gene in this case. The primer set used was as follows: forward (5′-CCAAGCTTCCCATCACAGTGTACC) and reverse (5′-GAGGTCTTGCCAGCAAAGCAGTAG). RT-PCR was used to confirm the presence of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) in this case. The primer set used was as follows: forward (5′-TGGAGTCCACTGGCGTCTTC) and reverse (5′-ATGACGAACATGGGGGCATCAG). A RT-PCR analysis confirmed the ATIC-ALK fusion in tumor cells .
Based on these results, the final diagnosis was IMT.