A 34-year-old healthy female working as a teacher presented with her persistent symptoms five months after her COVID-19 infection.
She tested COVID-19 positive by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using a nasal swab five days after the onset of fever and sore throat. Her symptoms were mild, lasted about two weeks, and she did not require any hospitalization. After a month she visited an emergency with a history of generalized progressive weakness lasting for two weeks and frequent dizziness on sudden standing. Work-up done at this time included repeating COVID-19 swabs, urinalysis, complete blood count, lipid profile, blood glucose analysis and chest x-ray. The reports were all within normal range including the vitals. Her menstrual cycles were normal. She was prescribed multivitamin tablets and she felt fine over the next three days.
After a month she again visited an outpatient clinic with similar symptoms of fatigue, weakness and body aches. The above tests were repeated along with thyroid profile and Widal test for typhoid. The reports were again negative, after which she was referred to a psychiatrist to rule out depression and anxiety. Symptoms later progressed over the next month, including frequent dizziness, palpitations, worsening of fatigue, delayed cognition, headaches and generalized weakness.
The patient came to our OPD about five months after her first symptoms of profound weakness. The laboratory investigations were repeated, and she was on a mild dose of escitalopram and multivitamin tablets. On lying down position her heart rate was 76 beats per minute and blood pressure was 114/70 mmHg, while on standing her heart rate got raised to 108 beats per min and her blood pressure was 112/70 mmHg. Thus, there was an increase in heart rate of greater than 30 beats per minute upon rising from a lying position. Patient was alert, conscious and oriented to time, place and person. COVID-19 antibody titre was immensely positive. Complete blood count, serum ferritin, triglycerides level, vitamin B12 level, glucose level, thyroid, urine analysis and C reactive protein were all within normal range. ECG was normal. She had not taken the COVID-19 vaccine yet.
The next day few clinical tests were done to check her autonomic function. She was asked to do a 10-minute active stand test. This was positive for a greater than 30 beats per minute increase in heart rate within the first two minutes of standing. Throughout the test, the patient experienced lightheadedness, headache and cooling of her hands. The symptoms subsided rapidly within one minute of lying down in a supine position. These findings are indicative of POTS. Cardiac parasympathetic integrity was assessed by measuring the heart rate response to standing by continuous electrocardiographic tracing. The shortest R-R interval at the 15th beat after standing is compared with the longest R-R interval at the 30th beat. The 30:15 ratio is calculated, and a result greater than or equal to 1.04 being regarded as normal. Ratios between 1.01 and 1.03 are borderline and below or equal to 1.00 is considered to be abnormal. Our patient had a 30:15 score of 1.01.
Sympathetic damage was assessed by measuring the postural fall in systolic blood pressure on standing from a lying position, which was 2 mmHg. The normal fall in systolic pressure is less or equal to 10 mmHg. Sympathetic damage was further assessed by measuring the rise in diastolic blood pressure on the sustained hand grip. Maximum voluntary contraction was first determined with a hand grip dynamometer. Hand grip was then maintained at 30 per cent of that maximum for as long as possible up to five minutes. Unfortunately, our patient was unable to perform the test because of anxiety. An increase in diastolic blood pressure of more than 16 mmHg during this test is considered to be normal.
Additionally, we went for another cardiac workup after consultation with a cardiologist, which included a normal transthoracic echocardiogram and a dobutamine stress echocardiogram that was negative for ischemia and angina, yet there was an exaggerated heart rate responsive to exercise.
She was advised for post-COVID-19 rehabilitation tasks which included lifestyle changes, adequate intake of fluids, fruits and sodium, graduated exercise programmes to correct autonomic dysfunction, participation in yoga and changing positions frequently. Over the next two months, she strictly followed the advice and felt much improvement in her condition. She could join her work.