A 29-year-old female with pregnancy of 27 weeks presented at hospital with the chief complaint of “systemic edema for three days,headache for two days and vomiting for seven hours” on February 22,2022.She was transferred to the emergency department of our hospital. At 22:30, she developed limb spasms, trismus, foaming at the mouth, and loss of consciousness. Her blood pressure was 200/150 mmHg. An emergency intramuscular injection of magnesium sulfate 5 g was given and the consciousness was restored in 2 min and the other symptoms also resolve.
It was determined that she had PRES due to eclampsia, and she was admitted to the obstetrics department.Our diagnosis was based on the following presentation: Temperature, 36.1℃, Pulse Rate 120 bpm; Respiratory Rate 22 bpm, Blood Pressure 140/95 mmHg. She was consciousness, had normal visual field in both eyes, had negative meningeal stimulation sign, moderate edema in both lower limbs, abdominal distension, a uterine height of 23 cm, and an abdominal circumference of 108 cm. No obvious abnormality was found in the fetal ultrasonography. The fetal position was head first, and the fetal heart rate was 140 bpm. The patient’s clinical background showed no history of epilepsy or neurological disease and normal blood pressure during pregnancy. Hypothyroidism for the past four years was treated with oral Euthyrox (62.5 ug/day).
Auxiliary examination using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) showed multiple areas of flaky edema with high signal intensity in the bilateral frontoparietal cortex and subcortex. Hyperintensity was also observed in diffusion -weighted imaging (DWI) and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), and local gyri swelling . Additional, multiple areas of flaky edema were observed with low-density foci in the bilateral parietal lobe computerised tomography (CT) scan.The patient was prescribed magnesium sulfate for prevention of eclamptic seizures, furosemide for diuresis, and dexamethasone and cefuroxime for anti-infection. Thyroid function examination indicated high thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)、high C-reactive protein (CPR). No abnormalities were identified according to the dilated fundus examination. An emergency caesarean section was carried out after the assessment. Negative amniotic fluid (AF) culture was observed. However, the creatinine and brain natriuretic peptide(BNP) were seen to be increased on re-examination and impaired cardiac and renal functions was considered. In addition, mild hypertension (141/81 mmHg) was investegated after the caesarean. No neurological symptoms or convulsions were observed. Magnesium sulfate was continued to control the patient ‘s blood pressure and sedation, and furosemide was given for diuretic therapy. In order to prevent the patient’ s seizures again, sound and bright light stimulation were avoided as far as possible.
On the fifth day after the attack of eclampsia, the patient was discharged from the hospital. The typical PRES signs and symptomshad almost completely subsided according to the follow-up MRI, and blood pressure and thyroid function returned to within the normal range after delivery. The patient had no complaints of headache or further convulsions. (See Table for laboratory tests during hospitalization).