The patient was a 4-year-old boy, the first child of non-consanguineous parents of Croatian origin. The family history was unremarkable. The pregnancy was complicated by polyhydramnios. The boy was delivered by caesarean section at 39 weeks of gestation with a length of 56 cm (+ 1.8 SD), weight of 3640 g (+ 0.4 SD) and occipitofrontal head circumference (OFC) of 35 cm (mean). The Apgar scores were 10, 10, and 10 at 1, 5, and 10 min, respectively, and the umbilical arterial cord pH was normal with 7.30. After birth, physical examination showed a maldescensus of testes which was surgically corrected in the first year of life.
He started walking at 14 months. His speech development was delayed. At the age of 2 years and 6 months his speech and language development was assessed as that of a child of one year and 6 months. At 33 months, he was able to comprehend simple questions and commands and could speak two word sentences. At this time, his length was 84 cm (− 3 SD), his weight was 11.7 kg (− 2 SD) and his OFC was 45.5 cm (− 3.8 SD). His facial features included thick and laterally broad eyebrows, wide set eyes, a short nose with a broad nasal bridge and nasal tip, epicanthus, a wide mouth with full lips, uplifted earlobes, low posterior hairline and dorsal hypertrichosis . His fingers were short with bilateral clinodactyly V. His toes were also short. At the age of 3 years, septic arthritis of the left hip occurred requiring antibiotic drug treatment. During this treatment a closure of the left femoral artery occurred which required surgical recanalization. X-ray examination of the hand showed that, according to Greulich and Pyle, his skeletal age of 1.5 years, at the chronological age of 2.5 years, was retarded. Furthermore, re-infected cancellous bone markings, cup-shaped metaphyses of the distal radius and ulna on the left with incipient sclerosis, only slight blurring and narrow cortex of the phalanges were detected, indicating compensated hypophosphatemic rickets.
At that time, abdominal ultrasound examination indicated that bilateral nephrocalcinosis was at stage IIa. Further diagnosis revealed partially generalized hyperaminoaciduria as seen in Fanconi syndrome, macroalbuminuria and hypophosphatemia (Additional file : Table S1). In addition, there was pronounced tubular proteinuria. The findings were compatible with tubulo-intestinal nephropathy. He was treated with an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor, he was supplemented with phosphate and vitamin D.
In the neuropediatric examination at the age of 4 4/12 years, the patient showed mild global developmental delay, including speech delay and mild intellectual disability. He was able to speak fluently in short sentences, but grammatical structure and articulation were reduced. Speech comprehension was good. Fine motor function was slightly reduced. He showed adequate social contact with good face-to-face-interaction and no sign of an autistic spectrum disorder. At this time, he received speech therapy and occupational therapy.. He achieved sphincter control during the day at the age of 3 3/12 years, but had not achieved sphincter control during the night at the age of 4 4/12 years. Echocardiography showed no discernible valve defects. At the age of 4 4/12 years, his length was 92 cm (− 3.2 SD), his weight was 14.0 kg (− 1.81 SD), his OFC was 46.5 cm (− 3.8 SD) and his body-mass-index was 16.5 kg/m2 (+ 0.71 SD). His mother was tall (180 cm), had nystagmus but was otherwise healthy. Low-molecular proteinuria was found in her urine analysis.
The results of cytogenetic analysis of the index patient were normal. A microdeletion 22q11.2 was excluded by Fluorescence in situ Hybridization (FISH) analysis.
Standard cytogenetic analysis with a high resolution 550 GTG-banding was performed according to standard procedures, using a lithium-heparin peripheral blood sample from the patient and his mother.
High molecular weight genomic DNA from the patient was isolated from an EDTA peripheral blood sample (Qiagen, QIAamp DNA Blood Midi Kit) and processed according to manufacturer’s protocol for the CytoScan 750 K assay. The genomic DNA was cut by restriction digest, adaptor-ligated and PCR-amplified. Purified amplicons were fragmented by DNAse digest, end-labeled with biotin and hybridized onto an array. After washing and staining, the array was scanned using the Affymetrix GCS3000Dx V2 system. The DNA sample from this patient was analyzed with the Affymetrix microarray platform (GeneChip® System 3000Dx v.2). Primary Image Data were analyzed using the Chromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS) software version 3.1.1.27 with parameter settings allowing the detection of copy number changes of at least 50 kb and smaller and detection of contiguous regions of homozygosity (ROH) > 5 Mb. The copy number changes were analyzed by using multiple clinically relevant databases (e.g. DECIPHER, OMIM, DGV, UCSC, PubMed) and our own patient database. Interpretation and classification in terms of pathogenicity were carried out according to the American College of Medical Genetics guidelines .
To clarify whether SHROOM4 is also affected by the microdeletion Xp11.23p11.22, we performed real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) for the patient and his mother, measuring two amplicons covering the SHROOM4 and the CLCN5 genes. Genomic DNA from the patient and his mother was extracted from EDTA peripheral blood samples. LNA (locked nucleic acid) probes, contained within the Universal Probe Library, and primers were designed with the Roche Probe Finder Software. Real-time quantification of primer and probe pairs was carried out in comparison to a single-copy gene with efficiency correction using a calibrator normalization to determine the copy number. The qPCR analysis was performed on a Roche LightCycler v2 Instrument. The primer sequences are annotated in Additional file : Table S2.
Whole exome sequencing was performed on DNA extracted from blood. Library preparation of 100 ng DNA was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol using SureSelect Human All Exon V6 (Agilent, Waldbronn Germany). Sequencing was performed on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform. Reads were aligned to the reference genome (Human Genome Assembly GRCh37) with Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) and variants were called according to best practice guidelines . For further analysis, all variants that have been reported in a homozygous state in more than three individuals in the cohorts of the 1kGP project, ExAC, gnomAD, or variants that have been classified as benign in ClinVar, were removed.
Variant analysis was carried out with GeneTalk . Rare and coding, heterozygous, compound heterozygous, homozygous, and hemizygous variants in known ID (intellectual disability) genes were assessed with MutationTaster .
While the standard cytogenetic analysis showed a normal male karyotype in this patient, we identified, by molecular karyotyping, a hemizygous interstitial microdeletion Xp11.23p.11.22 of about 700 kb, according to HG19 arr Xp11.23p.11.22 (49,649,226_50,351,579)× 0 .
The genome coordinates chrX: 49649226_50,351,579 in the UCSC human genome 19 indicated that the deletion included CLCN5, the last three exons of SHROOM4 and four additional genes .
For confirmation, we used target-specific qPCR analysis and validated this microdeletion, including a deletion of SHROOM4 in the patient and his mother. The coordinates for the minimum and maximum deletion intervals are chrX: 49649226–50,351,579 bp and chrX:. 49648874–50,358,217 bp, respectively.
To rule out mutations in known genes related to intellectual disability, whole exome sequencing was performed. No known or predicted pathogenic mutations, that could explain the phenotypic features, were identified. However, the alignment of reads on chromosome X confirmed the deletion identified by array CGH.