A 65-year-old man with anemia and general malaise was referred to our hospital. CT imaging revealed 8 × 8 cm left renal tumor and multiple lung metastases. RCC of cT2aN0M1 was diagnosed, with intermediate and poor risks in the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and IMDC risk scores, respectively. Left nephrectomy was performed, and pathological findings showed clear cell RCC, pT3b . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed infiltrating CD8+ TILs , no PD-L1 expression , and Foxp3 + Treg as the suppressive factors in tumor immunity .
IFNα shrank lung metastasis resulting in 72% decrease consistent with partial response (RECIST version 1.1). As lung metastasis had not enlarged, IFNα was discontinued 5 years postoperatively.
New lung and adrenal gland metastases appeared 7 years and 4 months after nephrectomy. Following sunitinib treatment, CT revealed shrinking lung metastasis but growing right adrenal metastasis .
Axitinib therapy commenced and after 9 months, CT revealed 58% increase in adrenal metastasis growth.
Everolimus was initiated as a fourth-line therapy, but 2 months later it was discontinued due to grade 1 acute kidney injury (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 5.0).
The patient complained of fatigue, and laboratory tests revealed high C-reactive protein and low hemoglobin levels due to progression.
Nivolumab was administered as the fifth-line therapy; thereafter, the patient’s symptoms and laboratory results dramatically improved. Lung metastasis diminished with complete response, and grade 2 maculopapular rash appeared. By the seventh course, grade 2 acute kidney injury developed, which was clinically diagnosed as irAE. At the thirteenth course, nivolumab therapy was discontinued due to irAE. CT revealed 59% decrease in adrenal metastasis since starting nivolumab. After administering oral prednisolone (20 mg/day), the rash and renal dysfunction improved.
After that, the metastasis continued to shrink resulting in further 11% decrease. Given the possibility of existing viable cells and the limited options of further systemic treatment for this case, we performed adrenalectomy to obtain surgical complete response. Pathological findings showed no viable cells in the surgical specimen . CD8+ TILs were remarkably observed in the metastasis treated with nivolumab . No local recurrence or metastasis has been observed for >20 months postoperatively.