A young patient (female, 16 years old) was referred to the Oral Surgery Unit of the Policlinico Umberto I Hospital–Sapienza University of Rome with the chief complaint of asymptomatic swelling in the left side in the posterior region of the maxilla, gradually increased to the present size of 3.5 cm since approximately 12 months.
Medical history and extraoral examination were noncontributory, and there was no regional lymphadenopathy.
Intraoral examination revealed, in the buccal fold of the left maxillary posterior region, a swelling extending from behind the canine up to the tuberosity, covered by normal oral mucosa . On palpation, the buccal cortical plate was expanded, and the swelling was smooth, nontender, and nonfluctuant, and its consistency was bony hard.
The involved teeth were sound, positive at cold sensitivity test, and without mobility.
Panoramic radiograph showed in the left maxillary posterior region a well-defined, unilocular radiolucency, root resorption of the first and second molars, and presence of an unerupted third molar .
Panorex view of the Computed Tomography (CT) revealed a hypodense intrabony, unilocular lesion circumscribed by radiopaque border, extending from the mesial margin of the first premolar to the distal margin of the second molar and apicocoronally from the sinus floor to the alveolar ridge. The resorption of the first molar roots and the second molar mesial root and the unerupted third molar not related to the lesion were also detectable .
In the axial view of the CT, a limited expansion and thinning of the buccal and palatal cortical plates, limited cortical perforation in the vestibular wall upper the first molar, and small foci of radiopacity near the mesial root of the first molar were observed .
The resorption of the first molar roots was also evident in the coronal view of the CT .
Based on the clinical and radiographic findings, different pathologic conditions, such as dentigerous cyst, calcifying odontogenic cyst, odontogenic keratocyst, central giant cell granuloma, unicystic ameloblastoma, calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor, ameloblastic fibroma, and ameloblastic fibroodontoma, were considered, and the preventive histological diagnosis was needed for treatment planning.
Incisional biopsy was performed under local anesthesia .
Histological examination showed a nodular proliferation of polyhedral epithelial cells of probable odontogenic origin, organized either in small cystic spaces with intraluminal basophilic PAS-positive material or in syncytial and trabecular nests. The stroma was poorly cellular, either intensely eosinophilic or amorphous like dentin, with some calcifications . A diagnosis of AOT was made.
Conservative surgical enucleation of the lesion, extraction of the first molar, and apicectomy of the involved teeth, previously endodontically-treated, were planned.
The surgery was performed under general anesthesia. Surgical access was obtained through a full-thickness trapezoidal intrasulcular buccal flap, extending from the mesial aspect of the canine to the distal aspect of the second molar . The flap was detached, and the cortical bone was exposed .
After the first molar extraction, ostectomy was performed under sterile saline irrigation with a round tungsten carbide burr mounted on a low-speed handpiece used with a tangential movement not to involve the underlying lesion. The fibrotic capsule surrounding the tumor was dissected from the bony wall, and the mass was completely enucleated .
Before flap repositioning, amputation of the resorbed mesial root of the second molar, and apicectomy of the premolars and the remaining roots of the second molar, thorough debridement of the bony cavity and trimming of the rough bony edges were carried out.
A releasing periosteal incision was made at the bottom of the buccal flap to enhance its elasticity and to achieve tension-free primary closure, the tumor cavity was packed with absorbable gelatin sponge (Gelfoam®, Pfizer, New York, USA), and the interrupted sutures were placed (4-0 Vicryl, Johnson & Johnson Medical, Norderstedt, Germany) .
The surgical specimen was submitted for histopathological examination, and the diagnosis confirmed the previous incisional biopsy .
Healing was uneventful without any complications and follow-up was performed at 3, 6, and 12 months.
One year after the surgery, clinical examination and radiographs showed restitutio ad integrum both of the bone and the soft tissues and no local recurrence .