A 38 year old Vietnamese man was admitted with a 10 month history of epigastric pain, fatigue, 10 kg weight loss and recent onset jaundice. He had no other significant medical history. Clinical examination demonstrated anaemia and a tender mass in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. A computerised tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed a 7 × 5 cm thick-walled, complex mass adjacent to the second part of the duodenum, which contained fluid and air and abutted the hepatic flexure of the colon. The working diagnosis was a collection secondary to a colonic perforation and he was treated with intravenous antibiotics. He improved with conservative management and was discharged a month later for outpatient colonoscopy. The colonoscopy revealed a lesion in the transverse colon, histology of which showed a mucinous adenocarcinoma.
He subsequently returned to the Accident and Emergency Department following an upper gastrointestinal bleed. On his second admission, a repeat CT scan again suggested localised colonic perforation with formation of an abscess adjacent to the duodenum, along with thickening of the ascending colon, predominantly centred around the hepatic flexure. Given the clinical presentation and diagnostic uncertainty a diagnostic laparoscopy was performed which revealed a large perforated tumour at the hepatic flexure with ascites and peritoneal tumour nodules. A laparotomy was performed via a transverse incision and following mobilisation of the hepatic flexure, a colonic tumour was found to have invaded the gallbladder and duodenum with an abscess cavity anterior to the second part of the duodenum. At the base of the abscess cavity a large hole was apparent in the second part of the duodenum with malignant tumour invading the duodenum. Given the size of the defect (5 cm × 2 cm) and the presence of tumour it was not possible to resect and form a primary closure of the duodenum. The presence of metastatic spread precluded a curative resection by pancreatoduodenectomy.
A right hemicolectomy was performed to debulk the tumour and an ileotransverse anastamosis formed. Due to the extent of the disease and associated abscess the anterior wall of the duodenum came away with the colon during this manoeuvre. A retrograde cholecystectomy was carried out to resect the residual tumour invading the gall bladder. The ampulla was identified with the aid of a transcystic catheter. An 82 mm expandable covered duodenal stent with a diameter of 18 mm (Hanarostent, duodenal/pyloric, M.I. Tech Co. Ltd, Seoul, N. Korea) was manually inserted through the duodenal perforation into the proximal duodenum with the distal end of the stent inserted into D2. A small opening into the side wall of the stent was made prior to the positioning of the stent to accommodate the ampulla and thus facilitate drainage of bile within the stent. A per-operative cholangiogram confirmed free flow of contrast in the duodenum. The residual duodenal wall was closed over the stent and following antrectomy a gastrojejunostomy was formed to bypass the duodenum (Bilroth II reconstruction).
The patient was discharged 7 weeks later following a prolonged, but otherwise uncomplicated recovery. He subsequently underwent a palliative course of chemotherapy survived for a further 18 months without gastrointestinal symptoms, before succumbing to his disease.