The patient was a 64-year-old female with primary biliary cirrhosis, esophageal-fundal variceal hemorrhages, and decompensated hepatocirrhosis in September 2017.
A 64-year-old female received a liver from an ABO-matched (A-positive) 12-year-old male cadaveric donor. The donor and recipient details are shown in Table . The donor was a 12-year-old male. Three weeks following liver transplantation, the recipient developed pyrexia, diarrhea, rashes, and antibiotic-unresponsive pancytopenia.
A 64-year-old female with primary biliary cirrhosis, esophageal-fundal variceal hemorrhages, and decompensated hepatocirrhosis.
The patient grew up in her locality, denies any contact with contaminated water or radiation exposure, and denies smoking and alcohol consumption.
On physical examination, we found her poor nutritional status, the abdomen was moderately distended with mild tenderness, and there was moderately yellow staining of the skin and mucous membranes. The rest of the physical examination revealed no abnormal findings.
The following timeline of events refers to post-operative days. On day 22, the patient developed pyrexia of unknown origin, fluctuating between 38.2 °C and 39.3 °C. On day 26, sex chromosome FISH was performed on peripheral venous blood samples. No gastrointestinal tract lesions were apparent, and no evidence of aGvHD was noted on gastrointestinal endoscopic biopsy (histologically normal esophagus, stomach, and ileum). On day 31, the presumptive diagnosis of GvHD was made based on the following clinical ground observations: Generalized maculopapular eruption (largely involving the back, neck, and face), pyrexia, pancytopenia, low blood pressure, and watery diarrhea . FISH revealed chimerism (presence of the fluorescently stained donor XY chromosome) consistent with aGvHD .
Two days following the development of thrombocytopenia, a bone marrow biopsy revealed marked hypocellularity. No skin rash was yet apparent. The findings of detailed post-operative laboratory investigation are summarized in Table . Because no sample of indwelling peripheral blood from the donor prior to LTx was available, donor lymphocytes could not be identified in recipient peripheral blood using short tandem repeat sequencing or human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing.
Abdominal computed tomography and color ultrasound findings suggested laminar portal vein, inferior vena cava, hepatic artery, and hepatic venous flow .