An 88-year-old man was admitted with progressive dyspnoea and fluid overload. There was no history of chest pain or syncope. He had a background of immunoglobulin A (IGA) nephropathy and underwent renal transplant in 2011. His renal function was gradually deteriorating with an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 13 mL/min/1.73 m2. Prior to his admission, left arm arteriovenous fistula was performed in preparation for future dialysis. His transthoracic echocardiogram revealed severe aortic stenosis (a peak gradient of 75 mmHg, a mean gradient of 45 mmHg, and an aortic valve area of 0.88 cm2) and global impairment of left ventricle systolic function with an estimated ejection fraction of 40% . He underwent ultra-low-dose contrast computed tomography (CT) in preparation for TAVI with no decline in his renal function. The CT confirmed heavily calcified aortic valve leaflets and a suitable transfemoral approach for TAVI. His heterotopic transplant kidney was supplied from the right iliac artery, making this site less favourable for vascular access . Given the absence of chest pain, regional wall motion abnormalities on echocardiography, or calcified obstructive proximal coronary arteries segments on CT, coronary angiography was not planned to avoid the use of contrast media.
The procedure was planned using the left common femoral artery (single vascular access as an unpalpable right radial artery, functional fistula of the left arm, and vascular pedicle of the transplanted kidney from the right iliac artery), aiming to avoid using contrast to preserve the failing transplanted kidney. An ipsilateral second vascular access was planned (but not obtained) as a bail-out vascular strategy. Access was obtained using ultrasound and a 6-French sheath was inserted in the left femoral artery, and subsequently upsized to a 14 Fr eSheath (no second vascular puncture was performed). A 6-French pig-tail catheter was positioned in the non-coronary cusp under fluoroscopy. An acquisition was obtained to identify the landmarks of calcified leaflets and annulus (; see , ). Calcium distribution on fluoroscopy was comparable with the identified calcium on CT, which helped in guiding an optimal positioning of the transcatheter heart valve . Subsequently, the pig-tail catheter was withdrawn, and the stenotic aortic valve was crossed using an amplatz catheter in a standard fashion and exchanged for a pre-shaped left ventricle wire. Central venous access was not obtained, and pacing was tested for stability using sterile alligator clips attached to the patient (via fine gauge needle) and the left ventricle wire (positioned in the apex). The middle balloon marker of 26 mm Sapien Ultra (Edwards Lifesciences) was fully positioned below the calcified aortic valve leaflets with the bottom border of the marker at the level of the annulus . This was guided using the calcium silhouette visible at the bottom border of the pig-tail catheter. The transcatheter heart valve was deployed under rapid pacing via the left ventricle wire (see , ). The total radiation time was 7 min and 59 s.
Following deployment, invasive haemodynamic assessment did not reveal any gradient across the valve. Echocardiography and invasive measures revealed no evidence of aortic regurgitation. No conduction system disturbances were noted. Vascular access was closed in a standard fashion without complications. The patient underwent a post-procedural echocardiogram, which demonstrated an improvement in the left ventricle ejection fraction of up to a rate of 50% with a mean gradient of 14 mmHg . There was no meaningful difference in renal function post-TAVI. The patient was symptomatically well at a 4-week follow-up.