A 67-year-old man presented with weight loss of 7 kg over two months, fatigue, and fever. The patient is a livestock farmer whose cattle were diagnosed with brucellosis 14 months prior and culled and had since undergone two brucellosis microagglutination tests (MATs), both of which were non-reactive. The patient underwent oropharyngectomy for tonsil cancer three years prior and was on medication for hypertension, diabetes, and dyslipidemia. An outpatient blood test revealed a hemoglobin level of 11.4 g/dL, a white blood cell count of 4.7 × 109/L (neutrophil percentage 92%), a platelet count of 113 × 106/L, and an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 32.7 mg/L. The patient was seen in an infectious disease outpatient clinic the following week, where blood cultures and Brucella antibody tests were performed; doxycycline and rifampin were prescribed according to World Health Organization guidelines . Two pairs of blood drawn from peripheral veins were inoculated into BACT/ALERT FA Plus and BACT/ALERT FN Plus (bioMérieux, Durham, NC, USA) and incubated in the BACT/ALERT Virtuo system (bioMérieux). Two aerobic bottles were positive after 48 and 62 h, respectively, and small Gram-negative coccobacilli were identified in the positive blood culture media. The patient was admitted for antibiotic treatment for suspected brucellosis two days after a positive blood culture and was admitted to an isolation unit because he had been diagnosed with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) two days earlier. The isolated Gram-negative coccobacilli formed small gray colonies after 48 h of incubation on sheep blood agar plate (Asan Pharmaceutical, Seoul, Republic of Korea) at 35 °C and 5% CO2 and did not grow on MacConkey agar plate (Asan Pharmaceutical). Due to a lack of experience in diagnosing brucellosis, the laboratory omitted essential biochemical tests, such as oxidase, catalase, and urease tests, all of which should yield positive results in the isolate. The isolate was identified as P. fluorescens by a GN ID card with the VITEK 2 system (bioMérieux) but failed to be identified using the Phoenix M50 (Becton Dickson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). Gentamicin and piperacillin/tazobactam were added based on the identification results.
On the third day of hospitalization, the infectious disease physician requested accurate identification due to discrepancies in the clinical presentation and pathogen identification. Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization–time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI–TOF MS) was performed using a microflex LT (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany), and the results were analyzed with the MALDI Compass Library (DB9607, version 10.0) based on MALDI Biotyper Compass software 4.1. MALDI–TOF MS showed an unreliable identification as Ochrobactrum grignonense (score value: 1.411). The isolate was 16S rRNA sequenced using universal primers, DNA amplified with 27F/1492R primers, and sequenced with 785F/907R primers. Sequences were retrieved from the GenBank database using the BLAST algorithm and interpreted according to CLSI guidelines . 16S rRNA sequence analysis of the isolate showed 100% identity to several species of the genus Brucella. The patient was released from isolation on Day 6 because he did not develop COVID-19-related pulmonary infiltrates, symptoms, or desaturation. On Day 7, the national reference laboratory reported a brucellosis MAT result of 1:320, strongly suggesting brucellosis. Peaks from the MALDI-TOF MS were reanalyzed and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) MicrobeNet’s MICROBENET 2022 1.0 library yielded results for Brucella sp (score value: 2.023). After consulting with Bruker Korea and using a Security-Relevant (SR) database to reanalyze the peaks, the isolate was identified as B. melitensis (score value: 2.29).
At the time of hospitalization, the patient complained of back pain and underwent lumbosacral spine magnetic resonance imaging, but there was no evidence of infectious spondylitis. He also underwent endoscopy, transthoracic echocardiography, and transesophageal echocardiography, which were unremarkable. A follow-up blood culture performed on hospital Day 1 was negative, and he was discharged on hospital Day 9 with resolution of fever. After discharge, doxycycline was maintained for a total of 6 weeks. Three weeks after discharge, his CRP level decreased to 0.9 mg/L, and he had regained weight three months later.
Colonies were subjected to heat inactivation at 95 °C for 20 min, followed by DNA extraction with the MagNA Pure 96 system (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) and whole-genome sequencing (WGS) using the MiSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA) through the MAFGEN project (CJ Bioscience, Suwon-si, Republic of Korea), as previously described . After quality control with Trimmomatic , the reads were assembled with Unicycler v.0.5.0 . The assembled genome was 3,186,837 bp, with a GC content of 57.8%, 73 contigs, an N50 of 109,700 bp and a complete BUSCO of 98.4%, indicating good assembly quality [, ]. The genome was analyzed using the EzBioCloud Genome Database (CJ Bioscience), which showed an absolute nucleotide identity of 99.98% with B. abortus, followed by 99.73% with Brucella microti . Core genome multilocus typing (cgMLST) with 1,764 genes using representative strains of Brucella spp. showed that this clinical strain clustered with B. abortus . It was found to be close to B. abortus cgMLST sequence type 69 but was somewhat different, with 22 allele differences. In addition, it shows 93 allele distances with the only B. abortus strain reported in South Korea.