A 67-year-old man was referred to our hospital for treatment after being diagnosed with gastric cancer following an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy during a health checkup. Six years prior, the patient was diagnosed with ectopic bile duct drainage in the stomach. After diagnosis of ectopic bile duct, barium fluoroscopy was prohibited; the patient was followed up annually, with upper gastrointestinal endoscopy performed at each follow-up. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a bile duct opening in the lesser curvature of the stomach, with bile flowing out of the foramen . The tumor was located in the anterior wall of the lesser curvature on the anal side of the foramen, and it was slightly elevated with a central depressed lesion of approximately 25 mm . Rough mucosal changes were observed around the pyloric ring. Biopsy of the tumor lesion was performed, leading to the diagnosis of gastric cancer. An upper gastrointestinal examination with a double-contrast study showed a deformity of the gastric angulus and niche in the lesser curvature of the stomach . Computed tomography revealed an ectopic bile duct in the lesser omentum with no lymph node swelling or distant metastasis . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed ectopic bile duct drainage in the left liver with no communication between the right hepatic ducts. A signal defect was detected inside the ectopic bile duct, suggesting the presence of remnant food or stones . Blood tests showed no abnormal findings or evidence of Helicobacter pylori infection.
Based on these preoperative findings, we concluded that the clinical stage of the tumor was cT1N0M0 Stage I, according to the Japanese Gastric Cancer Classification, 15th edition. We considered endoscopic submucosal dissection as a treatment option; however, the patient preferred surgical resection because of the possibility of additional surgical resection and simultaneous treatment for ectopic bile duct. Therefore, we performed distal gastrectomy, D1 + lymph node dissection, and gallbladder resection along with gastric jejunostomy (anterior colic), jejunum–jejunum anastomosis, Braun anastomosis, and cholangiojejunostomy for reconstruction . Food scraps were also present in the ectopic bile. The resected stomach exhibited adequate margins from the tumor. A tumorous lesion was observed in the coarse mucosa around the pyloric ring, which could not be observed on preoperative examination . Histologically, both lesions were adenocarcinomas localized in the mucosal layer. CK19 expression was observed within the muscular layer of the ectopic bile duct . The final pathological findings indicated T1b N0 M0 Stage I, according to the Union for International Cancer Control TNM classification.
The patient progressed well without any post-operative complications and was discharged. Post-operative adjuvant chemotherapy was administered for 1 year, and no recurrence was observed until 39 months after the surgery.