We are reporting a case of 45 years old female from Surkhet presented to the medicine department of TUTH on August, 2015 with the complain of fever for 4 months which was irregular in nature, pain in the right hypochondriac region with jaundice and occasional vomiting with anorexia for same duration. She gave the history of drinking local river water with the habit of eating aquatic plant (water-cress), there was no history of consumption of raw fish. She had visited to different health institute of Nepal as well as India for seeking proper treatment, however no proper diagnosis was done and finally she was admitted in department of medicine (gastroenterology) of TUTH, Kathmandu, Nepal. A complete blood count was performed that revealed eosinophilia (Eosinophil’s: 25%, Neutrophils: 53%, Lymphocytes: 18%, Monocytes: 4% and Basophils: 0%). Total leucocytes count was 13,120/μL of blood and platelet count 325,000/μL of blood. Her hemoglobin was reduced to 7% and packed cell volume (PCV) was 22.3%. Her liver function test revealed an elevated alkaline phosphatase level (679 U/L) and gamma-glutamyl transferase (121 U/L) but normal ALT (17 U/L) and AST (10 U/L) with reduced albumin level (22 g/L). So, ERCP was done to evaluate the cause of her right hypochondriac pain, eosinophilia, an elevated alkaline phosphatase level by which an uncommon morphology of an adult worm was seen in common bile duct .
The morphology of the adult worm revealed flat, leaf like measuring approximately 2–2.5 cm in length by 1 cm in width and brown to pale grey in color . It had a distinct conical projection at the anterior end and broadly pointed posterior end. Patient’s stool sample was collected and processed for routine macroscopic and microscopy examination. For increased yield of ova, stool was concentrated by modified zinc sulphate concentration technique and wet mount was prepared for microscopy. On macroscopic examination of stool, it was yellowish–brown with soft consistency. Microscopic examination of the wet mount of the stool sample showed large, elliptical to oval, operculated, light yellowish brown ova measuring 140–142 μm by 70–75 μm . The size of the detected ova was measured using cell sensation software version 1.12 for DP73 camera installed to the Olympus BX53 microscope used for the microscopy. On the basis of morphological appearance of adult worm and characteristic feature of the detected ova and its measurement, F. hepatica was identified. The photographic evidence of the ova was sent to Centre for Disease Control and prevention (CDC), Atlanta, USA for confirmation and it was confirmed as ova of F. hepatica by CDC, Atlanta. Patient was treated with nitazoxanide 500 mg twice daily for 7 days. On third of treatment she developed high fever due to immunological reaction against the toxic product liberated by the dead worms and was managed with steroids. Follow up stool examination 2 weeks after treatment revealed no ova of F. hepatica.