A 69-year-old woman was diagnosed with MM, complicated with a pathological fracture of the fourth lumbar vertebra. She was known to have arterial hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, and obesity (body mass index 32 kg/m2). No other cardiovascular risk factors were identified. The patient underwent antalgic radiotherapy and was started on systemic therapy with lenalidomide 25 mg (Days 1–21), bortezomib 1.3 mg/m2 (Days 1, 4, 8, 11), and dexamethasone 20 mg (Days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, 16, 22, 23) in a 28-day cycle regime (VRd). As per protocol in our hospital, enoxaparin 40 mg once daily subcutaneously was started as thromboprophylaxis together with the start of VRd treatment. Nineteen days after initiation of chemotherapy treatment, she presented at the emergency department with acute onset of abdominal pain in the last 12 h associated with nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea. She denied chest pain, shortness of breath, muscle pain, or fever. She mentioned increasing fatigue and pruritis since the third administration of bortezomib (on Day 8) and development of a rash on her chest, abdomen, and back over the last week.
At physical examination, her blood pressure was 114/54 mmHg, heart rate 76bpm, saturation 100% at room air, and temperature 36.8°C. Abdominal palpation revealed a tender right hypochondrium with muscle resistance on deep palpation. There was an extensive erythematous rash . Cardiorespiratory examination remained normal without clinical signs of cardiac decompensation (no rales, no oedema, and normal jugular venous pressure).
In the presence of muscle resistance on deep palpation of the abdomen, a computed tomography scan of the abdomen was performed. It did not reveal any acute abdominal abnormalities and excluded mesenteric ischaemia and angio-oedema. Laboratory analyses showed elevated C-reactive protein (47.4 mg/L, normal value < 5.0 mg/L), elevated liver enzymes, lactate dehydrogenases (718 U/L), and creatine kinase (2122 U/L). Surprisingly, serum high-sensitive Troponin T (HS-TnT) were markedly elevated up to 5.47 µg/L (normal value <0.013 µg/L) without any complaints of chest pain. Furthermore, there was a significant increase in N-terminal pro-natriuretic peptide type B (1440 ng/L). Follow-up HS-TnT after 1 h remained stable (5.40 µg/L), which makes an acute coronary syndrome less probable. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a sinus rhythm with convex ST elevation in the lateral leads and reciprocal ST depression in the inferior leads . Bed-side echocardiography showed mild concentric hypertrophy of the left ventricle with normal systolic function and unremarkable regional wall motion. There was a localized, posterolateral pericardial effusion measuring 8 mm without haemodynamic repercussion . Bull’s eye plot showed subtle reduction of global longitudinal strain (GLS) in the anterolateral regions.
Differential diagnosis included acute coronary syndrome, myocarditis, and rhabdomyolysis. Since the patient had clinical signs of lenalidomide toxicity, in the absence of chest pain with non-progressive troponins and echocardiographic absence of any regional wall motion abnormalities, lenalidomide-induced myocarditis was most likely. The patient was admitted to the cardiac intensive care unit for monitoring. An immediate coronary angiography was decided not to be indicated. She was started on pulse dose with methylprednisolone 1 g for the first 3 days, followed by oral methylprednisone 64 mg (1 mg/kg) with gradual tapering every 2 weeks. High-sensitive Troponin T levels started to drop shortly after treatment initiation. Further diagnostic work-up with coronary angiography during admission did not reveal any significant coronary lesions, after which a right-sided endomyocardial biopsy was taken. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the heart confirmed the diagnosis of (mainly) left-sided myocarditis, revealing a pseudo myocardial infarction pattern with myocardial oedema and inflammation, most pronounced in the mid anterior wall with localized severe dyskinesia, but also in the inferior and lateral wall . As the patient was receiving enoxaparin 40 mg OD and cardiac ultrasound/cardiac MRI did not show intracardiac thrombi, myocardial infarction with non-obstructive coronary arteries was very unlikely. Both the abdominal discomfort and the rash disappeared after the initiation of methylprednisolone.
On Day 4, the patient developed sustained ventricular tachycardia. She experienced palpitations but remained haemodynamically stable. Sinus rhythm was restored 30 min after administration of loading dose amiodarone (300 mg). Maintenance therapy with amiodarone orally was continued, including after discharge, but ventricular tachycardia did not recur.
The patient was discharged from the cardiac intensive care unit on Day 10 with methylprednisolone 64 mg OD, in combination with a low-dose angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ramipril 2.5 mg) and betablocker (bisoprolol 2.5 mg). Troponin levels had decreased till 0.165 µg/L. After 12 days of hospitalization she was discharged home with a follow-up visit in our outpatient clinic after 5 days. Gradual tapering of prednisolone was planned with dose reduction every 2 weeks (64 mg, 48 mg, 36 mg, 24 mg, 16 m, 12 mg) and up titration of the heart failure therapy. Follow-up MRI scan was performed 6 weeks after initiation of treatment and showed thinning of the anterior left ventricular (LV) wall with persistent, albeit less intense, contrast enhancement, suggesting regression of myocardial inflammation and allowing further tapering of corticosteroids. Lenalidomide and bortezomib were withheld after this event. The patient was switched to second line treatment with Daratumumab, which was tolerated well. At the moment (January 2022), she is still being treated by our colleagues of haematology for her MM with currently a very good partial response, without signs or symptoms of heart failure.