A 58-year-old Hispanic woman presented to our clinic with blurred vision. She had been diagnosed with RP two years prior to presentation. Her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/70 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left. Slit-lamp examination revealed anterior subcapsular as well as nuclear cataracts in both eyes, but worse in the right eye. No phacodonesis or iridodonesis was noted. Dilated fundus examination revealed bone spicule pigmentation in the retinal periphery, arteriolar attenuation, and optic disc pallor in both eyes, but which was more prominent in her right eye than in her the left. She had severe field loss of peripheral visual in the right eye (measured by Humphrey visual field. Humphrey Field Analyzer, Zeiss Ophthalmic, Dublin, CA, USA), leaving only the central 10°. Her left eye was found to have only mild loss of peripheral vision nasally. Electroretinography demonstrated an isoelectric potential in her right eye consistent with the diagnosis of RP. In her left eye, there was a generalized decrease in amplitude. She underwent an uncomplicated cataract extraction by phacoemulsification of the right eye. A continuous curvilinear capsulorrhexis was performed without any zonular stress observed. The capsulorrhexis was approximately 6 mm in diameter. A foldable acrylic intraocular lens (Tecnis Abbott Medical Optics Inc. Santa Ana, CA, USA) was inserted and observed to be well-centered at the end of the case.
Post-operatively, her BCVA improved to 20/40 in the right eye. The intraocular lens was well-positioned within the capsular bag. However, three months after the surgery, she again presented to the clinic with blurry vision. She denied any history of trauma or fall. At this time her BCVA was 20/100 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye. On slit-lamp examination, the edge of the intraocular lens was displaced nasally and the capsular bag was displaced temporally . There were prominent capsular bag folds indicating severe bag contraction. Fundus examination again revealed changes from RP that were stable compared to previous examination. She was offered surgery, but declined it