A 73-year-old Caucasian female, never smoker, with a past medical history of hypertension was diagnosed with stage IV colon adenocarcinoma with liver metastasis in October 2008. She received chemotherapy with capecitabine, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin (XELOX) and bevacizumab for five cycles, then underwent a right hemicolectomy and a partial hepatectomy followed by maintenance therapy with bevacizumab. In February 2011, she was initiated on fluorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan (FOLFIRI) and cetuximab for disease progression in the liver. In May 2011, she underwent a resection of the new hepatic lesion followed by intra-arterial chemoembolization sessions for 3 months. Three years later, in August 2014, a positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) scan showed evidence of metastatic retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy, consistent with disease recurrence. She was then initiated on mFOLFOX-6 with bevacizumab with a good imaging response, followed by a year of maintenance therapy with fluorouracil, leucovorin, and bevacizumab. In December 2016, her treatment plan was switched to fluorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan (FOLFIRI) for disease progression to the lungs, followed by maintenance therapy with fluorouracil, leucovorin, and bevacizumab. A few months later, in August 2017, a PET–CT scan showed a new lung nodule. She was then shifted to mFOLFOX6 with panitumumab followed by maintenance therapy with fluorouracil and leucovorin. In May 2018, the treatment protocol was changed to FOLFIRI with cetuximab, until a new disease progression in the lymph nodes, and then around the hepatic artery stent, occurred in January 2019. The patient was then reinitiated on mFOLFOX6 with bevacizumab. She received her first cycle on 21 February and later experienced an episode of neutropenia for which the second cycle was delayed. On 11 March, she received her second cycle of chemotherapy with a 25% dose reduction.
On 13 March, she presented to the emergency department with fatigue, malaise, orbital headache, nausea and vomiting, mild abdominal pain, and chills. She stated that her symptoms started hours after the chemotherapy infusion and reported a decrease in urine output and a darkening of urine. On physical examination, the patient had jaundice with icteric sclera since a day ago. Her vitals showed a temperature of 37.1 °C, a heart rate of 88 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, a blood pressure of 16.7/7.2 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 100%. A cardiac workup ruled out acute myocardial infarction. The initial blood workup was significant for thrombocytopenia (platelet count 30.103 cells/mm3) and anemia (hemoglobin 8.1 mg/dL). The anemia was defined as hemolytic by markedly increased bilirubin (total bilirubin 6.4 mg/dL, indirect bilirubin 3.3 mg/dL), high aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (1725 IU/L), high lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (4866 IU/L), and low haptoglobin (< 0.1 g/L). The patient also showed signs of acute renal failure (serum creatinine had markedly increased from 0.9 to 5.5 mg/dL within a week, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 78 mg/dL, and uric acid 10.6 mg/dL). The blood film inspection showed signs of hemolysis with a slight anisopoikilocytosis, slight hypochromia, some ovalocytes and echinocytes, few schistocytes and helmet cells, rare teardrop red blood cells, and rare stomatocytes. There were also occasional polychromatophilic red blood cells (reticulocytosis). Antibody screening was negative, confirming the MAHA diagnosis. The coagulation panel was normal. Relevant laboratory parameters are documented in Table . Her chronic medications included irbesartan/amlodipine and atenolol.
The clinical laboratory findings were consistent with thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA). An ADAMTS13 activity test was performed to investigate a potential TTP, whereas the significant picture of the predominance of renal failure was more suggestive of HUS. The occurrence of TMA after the chemotherapy session was suggestive of drug-induced thrombotic microangiopathy (DITMA), notably related to the administration of a chemotherapy agent.
Treatment was started promptly with daily plasma exchange and immunosuppression with methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) until a diagnosis of TTP was ruled out, then tapered later on. She also received packed red blood cell transfusions and platelet transfusions, and underwent daily intermittent hemodialysis. Electrolyte imbalances were also managed. Seven days later, the patient’s laboratory studies showed a stable hemoglobin level, a much-improved platelet count, and no clinical evidence of hemolysis. Her platelet count normalized on day 12. Daily plasma exchange was continued for eight consecutive days, and dialysis for eight consecutive days. The patient was transferred to another medical center in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) for continuity of care and possible treatment of the DITMA with eculizumab.