A 52-year-old male patient was admitted to the Seventh Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University with a triad of chills, fever and arthritis for 2 weeks.
The patient had refractory gouty arthropathy for 30 years. He had been prescribed many uric acid-lowering drugs and analgesics, such as colchicine, allopurinol, febuxostat, glucocorticoids, and NSAID analgesics, to alleviate his complaints. The uric acid level was poorly controlled due to poor diet and treatment compliance. Tophi were found to have precipitated in multiple joints and in subcutaneous tissue. In the last 2 years, his incidents of gouty flares had become more frequent (about once or twice a month), and resistant to medications, including colchicine, allopurinol, febuxostat, glucocorticoids, and NSAID analgesics. Repeated eruptions of “pus” (likely monosodium urate crystal, MSU) were drained from his toes. Two weeks prior, he had developed a triad of chills, high fever and arthritis (mainly involving interphalangeal joints, elbow joints, and wrist joints). Therefore, he took 2 mg colchicine twice daily for 2 weeks with no improvement in his pain.
The patient had a history of ischaemic heart disease for 8 years, and was diagnosed with chronic kidney disease 5 years earlier. He denied medical history of hypertension and diabetes, without habit of drinking and smoking.
On hospitalization, the patient was alert with a blood pressure of 98/66 mm Hg, heart rate 100 beats/min, respiratory rate 18/min, and body temperature 38.2°C. His height was 168 cm, body weight 75 kg, and body mass index 26.6 kg/m2. Tophaceous deposits were found in subcutaneous tissues and multiple joints , which had led to the development of articular deformities. He had lost the fine motor function of his fingers. Scars were found scattered on his toes because of repeated cycles of “pus” eruptions followed by wound healing. We assessed that the joint pain score was 8–9 points by the visual analogue scale (VAS, with a dynamic range from 0 to 10 points).
His laboratory results revealed a normal serum UA level of 403 µmol/L (reference range 210–420 μmol/L) (owing to the irregular administration of febuxostat), creatinine at 117 µmol/L (reference range: 57–97 μmol/L), estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 74 mL per minute, elevated white blood cell counts (WBC) (13.93*10^9/L, reference range 3.5-9.5*10^9/L), neutrophil counts (12.1*10^9/L, reference range 1.8-6.3*10^9/L), C-reactive protein (CRP) (21.4 mg/L, reference range<10 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (40 mm/h, reference range 0-15 mm/h), and a normal procalcitonin level (PCT) (<0.05 ng/mL, reference range <0.05 ng/mL).
None.
Gout flare.
Febuxostat, glucocorticoids, and NSAID analgesics failed to control the symptoms, although serum UA levels were found to have lowered to normal levels after conventional treatment (331.6 µmol/L). On the 4th day of hospitalization, the patient began to experience chills followed by high fever (Tmax 39.5°C) and arthralgia once again. Blood tests showed increased white blood cell and neutrophil counts (16.08*10^9/L and 13.91*10^9/L respectively), as well as elevated PCT levels (0.27ng/mL). Repeated blood cultures were found to be negative. This was accompanied by extremely elevated IL-6 and TNF-α levels of 184 pg/mL (reference range <8.1 pg/mL) and 53.9 pg/mL (reference range <5.9 pg/mL), respectively.
Routine drug therapy had limited effects, probably due to the existing cytokine storm. Then, blood purification was employed to remove inflammatory cytokines and excess colchicine. We performed PA (Multifiltrate CiCa ®, FMC, Bad Homburg, Germany; plasma filter: P2, Fresenius Germany; sorbents: Mediosorb, Bellco, Italy) every two to three days along with enoxaparin sodium to prevent coagulation after obtaining written informed consent.
After 2 cycles of therapy, proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 and TNF-α levels declined, but symptoms did not improve as expected. Although he had moderate pain relief, there were large fluctuations in body temperature, which were accompanied by an exacerbation of swelling and pain in his extremities for approximately 2 days after treatment. After 4 treatment sessions, the patient had become afebrile, and his symptoms had improved significantly with reductions in swelling and joint pain. During the 5 cycles of plasma adsorption therapy, proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 and TNF-α were found to continue declining until they reached normal levels, whereas the levels of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 eventually stabilized . This was accompanied by notable improvements in the clinical manifestations of gouty arthritis. Finally, there were 6 treatment sessions in total. However, due to the sharp fluctuation in the values and the small sample size, we did not find any significant difference in IL-6 and TNF-α before and after PA treatment . No adverse events were found for the treatment. During follow-ups over the next 8 months, the patient’s tophi was stable and gouty arthritis was found to only have flared up twice in response to a high-purine diet, with no fever reported and a joint pain score of 4–5 points (VAS). These symptoms were alleviated by NSAIDs, and the patient’s serum uric acid was found to be maintained at an acceptable level over the long term.