An 83-year-old woman started taking 50 mg of minodronic acid hydrate monthly 5 years before admission because of osteoporosis. She had regularly been taking some additional medications, such as aspirin, clopidogrel sulfate, and rosuvastatin calcium. She developed itchy erythematous papules 44 days before admission. Her family doctor suspected clopidogrel-induced skin rash. She was ordered to stop the drug and prescribed a betamethasone-d-chlorpheniramine maleate combination agent. Despite the treatment with anti-allergic medicine, she developed a fever and dry cough in addition to the persistent rash. Then, she was referred to our hospital for additional evaluation.
On hospital admission, her vital signs were as follows: a body temperature of 36.9 °C on acetaminophen, respiratory rate of 17/min, and percutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 97% (ambient room air). On physical examination, chest auscultation revealed no crackles. Palpitation revealed bilateral inguinal lymphadenopathy and slow pitting edema on both legs. Erythematous papules with desquamation were recognized on the trunk and limbs . Laboratory investigations showed elevation of the white blood cell count (8030/μL) with eosinophilia (1090/μL) with the administration of betamethasone-d-chlorpheniramine maleate combination agent and high immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels (240 U/mL). Liver and biliary enzymes were also elevated. Chest radiography showed bilaterally diffuse granular shadows . CT scan of the chest demonstrated bilateral diffuse ground-glass opacities with ill-defined centrilobular nodules from the central to peripheral regions of the lungs. . Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) revealed inflammatory changes with a cell differential count of 40% macrophages, 58% lymphocytes, and 2% neutrophils, and the CD4/CD8 ratio was elevated at 6.2. Transbronchial lung cryobiopsy (TBLC) was performed in the left lower lobe. Histological examination revealed infiltration of lymphocytes in the alveolar walls and hyperplasia of type II pneumocytes . Few eosinophils were recognized. Fibrinous exudates and floating macrophages were observed in the alveolar lumina . Immunohistochemistry of biopsy specimens with CD4 and CD8 staining showed more CD4+ T cells than CD8+ T cells . Among the CD4+ T cells, there were few Foxp3+ T cells . Two abdominal skin lesions were biopsied; they showed light perivascular infiltration of lymphocytes.
The titer of serum anti-HHV-6 immunoglobulin G (IgG) measured in the blood samples was obtained on hospital day-4, and it showed less than ×10; it increased to ×320 after 3 weeks. Drug-induced lymphocyte stimulation test (DLST) and skin patch test were performed. The skin patch test was positive for minodronic acid hydrate. The DLST for minodronic acid hydrate revealed a slight elevation in the stimulation index (SI 1.7), while both tests for other drugs, including clopidogrel, were negative. Based on these results, we diagnosed her condition as DIHS/DRESS due to minodronic acid hydrate and considered the pulmonary lesions to be related to DIHS/DRESS. Observation without medication was performed because minodronic acid hydrate had already been discontinued, and her fever, cough, and skin rash were improving due to the administration of a small amount of steroid treatment by a family doctor on admission. She was discharged on hospital day-12. Her symptoms and chest CT findings were entirely resolved, and she had no recurrence .