A 41-year-old man suffered from recurrent coughing episodes from recurrent aspiration for six weeks when eating or drinking. These symptoms started after a shrapnel injury from a mortal shell penetrated the right third intercostal space from the back, medially to the shoulder. The patient denied any significant personal or family history. The patient lived with his wife and children and had no significant psychological or genetic history. He also lost around 8% of the weight due to unsatisfactory nutritional status. Corrective surgery to remove the shrapnel could not be performed at that time due to the conflict around the city, and therefore the surgery was conducted around 2 months from the injury (2 weeks after presenting to the hospital).
Chest x-ray (CXR) showed the shrapnel in the right hemithorax near the mediastinum . Computed tomography (CT) scan showed the shrapnel placed in the postero-internal portion of the right hemithorax near the mediastinum at the 4th thoracic vertebrae level. Endoscopy proved the opening of the fistula in the oesophagus. Bronchoscopy found a 4 cm fistula opening, 2 cm superiorly to the carina of the trachea. The fistula involved the tracheal membrane wall and extended 2 cm to the left bronchus. The fistula was partially covered by granulomatous tissue and massive thick mucus secretions. There was no stenosis detected. Furthermore, a bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was taken for culture which was normal.
Trans-thoracic surgical approach was indicated and the surgery was conducted in Al Mouwasat University Hospital by the leading author and the second author. A small (size 35) tracheal tube that has double-lumen was inserted into the left bronchus and the right lung was isolated. A right posterolateral thoracotomy in the 4th intercostal space was performed. Multiple adhesions were released between the lung and the pleura. The shrapnel in the postero-internal portion of the pleural cavity was found and removed. Then, the fistula and the defect in the posterior wall of the trachea and left bronchus and in the anterior wall of the oesophagus measuring 4 cm in length were found. This defect measured 2 cm at the trachea and carina, and it included 2 cm of the left main bronchus. To get over this difficulty, the tracheal and left bronchial defect were sutured without stretching while trying to avoid future stenosis by using a part of the oesophageal wall that was not damaged by the shrapnel; two flaps that were well-perfused were used from the oesophagus to cover the lesion in the trachea and each measured around 2 × 0.5 cm. The lesion in the wall of the oesophagus was also longitudinally sutured around the naso-gastric tube (35 Fr.), which was a smaller size than the normal size (normal size is 39 Fr). Using the oesophageal wall and a smaller tube were believed that this will provide less stress when suturing and better outcomes. After the trachea and oesophagus were sutured, an intercostal muscle flap was placed between them to help with the oesophageal injury from the shrapnel. A chest drain tube was installed and the incision through the chest wall was sutured. Then, laparotomy was performed, and a jejunostomy catheter was inserted. There was no need for mechanical ventilation.
The patient remained NPO, and his condition was relatively well post-operatively. Nutrition was introduced by jejunostomy and the wife helped in management and was very cooperative. Daily CXRs were taken which found a right cavity with air-fluid level on the third day of surgery , despite the chest tube being in place at that time. A chest CT scan was performed which confirmed the pleural cavity. Subsequently, the chest tube drainage was removed, and a CT-guided new drainage tube was installed into the pleural cavity. It drained 200 ml of saliva-like fluid and air. Methylene blue oral administration yielded blue dye from the drainage tube which indicated an oesophageal leak. A conservative approach was indicated and NPO remained for another 2 weeks. The patient was later permitted to drink water and other soft liquids as he could tolerate it despite the leaking oesophago-pleural-cutaneous fistula. Further CXRs were taken, and methylene blue administration was weekly repeated. The amount drained from the tube gradually decreased until it ceased approximately 24 days after the surgery, and chest tube was removed on the 31st days after the surgery.
The patient was told to come back to the hospital if any symptoms reoccurred as he now lives in a place accessible to the hospital. The patient recovered well and came back after four months for check-up, and he was well and started to regain weight and had a normal CXR.