A 57-year-old female patient presented with exertional dyspnoea at New York Heart Association levels II–III and atypical pectanginous chest pain. The patient had an unremarkable cardiac history apart from mild arterial hypertension. Pre-existing medical conditions included iron deficiency anaemia. In addition, cement augmented dorsal stabilization had been performed in the lumbar spine two years before due to osteoporotic fracturing. In the clinical examination, the patient's general condition was slightly reduced with regular vital signs (blood pressure 131/82 mmHg, heart rate 85/min, and peripheral oxygen saturation 99%). Auscultation showed no heart murmurs.
Laboratory tests revealed a reduced Hb 10.1 g/dL (normal range 13.5–16.9 g/dL) and D-dimer elevation (2319 ng/mL; normal range <500 ng/mL) in the setting of iron deficiency anaemia. Due to the dyspnoea and the elevated D-dimer, a chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiography were performed, which ruled out pulmonary artery embolism. However, the images showed an elongated radiopaque structure in the right heart cavities, approximately 10 cm in length . Transthoracic 2D echocardiography showed a preserved left ventricular function without relevant heart valve dysfunction and particularly no signs of right heart strain. In addition, a hyperechogenic linear structure of almost 10 cm in length, running from the apical lateral wall of the right ventricle through the tricuspid valve to the roof of the right atrium could be observed. As the foreign body appeared to be rigid with the tip drilled into the lateral ventricular myocardium a cement obstruction resulting from dorsal cement augmentation was suspected. Coronary angiography was performed to clarify the symptoms further and did not show significant stenosis of the coronary artery disease. For further workup and evaluation of the right ventricular foreign body, cardiac multidetector CT was performed. Here, the suspicion of foreign body entrainment was confirmed by 3D reconstruction. In addition, the apically located portion of the foreign body appeared to penetrate the myocardium in the region of the right ventricular lateral wall . Therefore, with the threat of ventricular perforation, surgical removal of the foreign body was performed by median sternotomy. Macroscopically, the picture of a cement embolization was confirmed .