From a local health institution, a 35-year-old male was referred to our facility (Tertiary Hospital). Six hours earlier, during a domestic incident, he had been struck in the skull with a nail, resulting in an unbearable headache.
A gang of around twenty individuals is said to have arrested the young guy for stealing on the street. He was restrained on both his upper and lower limbs, and one of the attackers used a hammer to drive a nail into his brain.
Post incidence, there was no prior history of external bleeding, unconsciousness, vomiting, seizures, loss of hearing or vision, or weakness in the limbs. No comorbidities pre-existed.
While lying supine on a stretcher, a focused examination revealed a nail was in situ in his skull near the midline, 2 cm posterior to the coronal suture, and 6 cm of the nail above the skin without external bleeding or clot. He had multiple shallow abrasions over the face, trunk, and upper and lower extremities.
His Glasgow coma score was 15, his pupils were normal in size and response to light, his cranial nerves were intact, had maximum strength in all limbs. Every vital sign was within normal range .
A metallic foreign body traveling through the parietal bone with an intracranial section of 9 cm and its tip immediately above the brain stem was discovered on a non-contrast sagittal CT scan. There was also edema along the tract and a sparse epidural hematoma. The ventricles and basal ganglia were unaffected. Preoperative CTA/computed tomography venography (CTV) was not done due to the patient’s financial status. Injury to the major vessel, such as the superior sagittal sinus, was unexpected because a plain CT scan already done at a peripheral hospital did not reveal a significant amount of intracranial bleeding .
Prophylactic wide-spectrum antibiotics, IV fluids, tetanus vaccination, and analgesics were administered.
Under general anesthesia in the emergency operating room, a lineal incision and minor craniotomy were performed. The impacted nail was gently pulled off together with a bone flap. A little extradural hematoma was evacuated, washout with normal saline was done, and then the dura was repaired watertight. There was no evidence of damage to the larger intracranial blood vessels .
Extubated on a table, the patient was admitted to the surgical intensive care unit and monitored closely. Antibiotics, strong painkillers, and prophylactic anticonvulsants were prescribed.
On the 1st postoperative day, the patient was fully conscious, ambulant, and had no focal neurological deficit.
From a control brain CT scan, there was no hematoma or edema along the foreign body tract, and he was discharged from the hospital two days later [ and ].
There were no headaches, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks, seizures, or intracranial infections throughout the follow-up. On day 14 following the incident, a CTA was performed, and no aneurysms were found. Three months later, he was released from follow-up care.