The case of a 66-year-old female with recurrence of PTC after initial surgery and radioactive 131I therapy combined with external beam radiotherapy is presented. Six years before admitting to our clinic, she visited a vicinity clinic with a hard nodule in the thyroid region of the left neck, which was found during a physical examination. The lump (3.8 × 2.5 × 2.0 cm3), which located in the left lobe of thyroid has grown into the laryngeal cartilage and the metastatic tumor cells was found in left submandibular lymph nodes. She received thyroidectomy and dissection of central neck compartment; pathological result revealed papillary carcinoma. She was diagnosed with PTC (T4aN1bM0; IVa stage) and accepted the TSH-suppression therapy with taking 150 µg/day dose of levothyroxine (L-T4) immediately. One year after the initial thyroidectomy, the patient underwent locoregional surgery again for the left neck recurrence (3.0 × 3.0 × 2.0 cm3). Then radioactive 131I was used for ablation of residual thyroid tissue after surgery. She received the external beam radiotherapy with a total of 54 Gy in 2 Gy fractions for the left neck and 40 Gy in 2 Gy fractions for the other side of neck. Three years later, the recurrent tumor (5.0 × 4.5 × 3.0 cm3) in the ipsilateral neck was diagnosed and removed by the third time surgery. Postoperative pathology confirmed invasion of PTC. The patient's condition remained stable for one year until a complaint of oppressive pain with a stony hard mass with serious skin fibrosis in the left neck in 2014. She had an abnormal MRI scan revealing an area of distortion of approximately 3.7 × 3.0 × 2.3 cm3 and 2.0 × 1.5 × 1.5 cm3 in size (see ). Despite recommendation for subsequent palliative resection, the patient refused surgery. She was referred to our clinic for treatment and accepted the suggestion of brachytherapy.
Before processing each treatment, informed consent was obtained from the patient. Treatments were performed with standard institutional approval. High-dose-rate interstitial brachytherapy of 30 Gy in 6 fractions during 3 days (5 Gy each fraction, twice a day with 6 hours interval, 3 days) was administered to the patient. OncoSmart ProGuide needles (Nucletron, an Elekta company, Elekta AB, Stockholm, Sweden) were used and the treatment was performed under anesthesia. Electrocardiogram, arterial oxygen pressure, respiration, and blood pressure monitoring were performed during the procedure. Five applicator needles (1.1 mm in external diameter and 20 cm in length) were inserted to the target under image guidance, with interval of 1.0 cm to make sure the adequate dose distribution and target volume coverage (see ). OncoSmart ProGuide CT-Markers were put inside the catheters in order to facilitate their reconstruction. After implanting the applicators, fine-pitch (2 mm) X-ray CT images were then acquired and transferred to the treatment planning computer (see ). The CT-imaging data combined with the MRI before interstitial brachytherapy were used to contour the gross target volume (GTV) and the clinical target volume (CTV). The CTV was expanded from GTV by 10 mm and restricted by the volume of critical organs. A CT-based treatment plan was created using a graphic optimization tool (Treatment Planning System Oncentra V4.3, Nucletron, an Elekta company, Elekta AB, Stockholm, Sweden). The normalization and optimization to the target volume was performed.
The dose volume histogram (DVH) parameters are recommended for the evaluation of target volume and organs at risk (OARs). The dose distribution to target volume and OARs were showed in . In the brachytherapy plan, 30 Gy was prescribed to 100% of the target volume. Dmax (the maximum dose) of the spinal cord and left intervertebral vessel, Dmean (the mean dose) of larynx, left parotid gland, and hypopharynx were mainly considered. The equivalent dose for a 2 Gy fraction schedule was calculated using the EQD2 model, at α/β = 3 (GyEQD2, α/β = 3) for the OARs and α/β = 10 (GyEQD2, α/β = 10) for the target. Dose volume histogram parameters were analyzed taking into account the volume ratio of the target receiving 90% or 150% of the therapeutic dose (V90% and V150%, respectively), the equivalent dose delivered to 98%, 90% and 50% of the target volume (D98%, D90%, and D50%, respectively), the maximum equivalent dose delivered to spinal cord and left intervertebral vessel (Dmax-spinal cord and Dmax-left intervertebral vessel), the mean equivalent dose delivered to larynx, left parotid gland, and hypopharynx (Dmean-larynx, Dmean-left parotid gland, and Dmean-hypopharynx). The following values were accepted: below V90% was 4.2%, V150% was 58.1%; D98% was 28.2 Gy, D90% was 39.0 Gy, D50% was 75.0 Gy; Dmax-spinal cord was 7.8 Gy; Dmax-left intervertebral vessel was 25.2 Gy; Dmean-larynx was 8.4 Gy; Dmean-left parotid gland was 5.4 Gy; Dmean-hypopharynx was 6.6 Gy.
After transporting the planning data to an 192Ir remote afterloader system (Microselectron HDR 192Ir; Nucletron, an Elekta company, Elekta AB, Stockholm, Sweden), irradiation has started. The irradiation took approximately 5 min. The applicators were removed after irradiation was complete and the patient was discharged after 2 hours under observation. No complications were reported during the treatment and the brachytherapy was well tolerated by the patient. The patient is regularly followed-up at our affiliated clinics.