A 63-year-old male, who recognized an abdominal mass 1 year before this admission, presented with a slight expansion of the tumor, weight loss of 5 kg in 3 months, and malaise. A massive non-tender abdominal tumor was palpated. Haematological examination found anaemia and high levels of CRP and LDH, while the levels of CEA, CA19-9, and AFP were within the normal ranges.
Abdominal ultrasonography found microcyst clumps and some solid areas in the periphery of the lesion. Abdominal CT (computed tomography) revealed a cystic lesion of 26 cm in diameter with a clear boundary from immediately below the interseptum to the pelvic cavity, and imaged the septum and cystic wall. No ascites were detected. MRI was performed (magnetic resonance imaging) and revealed a thick septum in the tumor center, which divided the tumor into the upper and lower regions. T1- and T2-weighted imaging showed slightly high signal intensity within the tumor, and T2-weighted imaging showed coexistence of areas with high and low signal intensity. There was no continuity between the tumor and the surrounding organs. Angiography revealed no enhancement of the tumor but exclusion of blood vessels by the tumor. The findings by endoscopy of the upper digestive tract, contrast of the small intestine, and enema were normal. We considered that the patient had a cystic tumor in the abdomen, of which the primary lesion was unknown, and scheduled surgery. Unfortunately, the patient developed shock and abdominal pain before the scheduled day of surgery. The tumour became unclear by palpation, and CT revealed reduction of the tumor and development of ascites. Hematological examination showed no aggravation of anemia.
We considered that the cystic tumor had ruptured, and performed emergency surgery on the day. There was about 2,000 ml of sanguinous ascites in the abdominal cavity, and a rupture about 4.5-cm long was observed on the right side of the tumor. The tumor occurred primarily in the greater omentum, with no adhesion to the surrounding organs. A large number of peritoneal buds with a size of 5–10 mm were observed on the abdominal wall and in the small intestine. Total excision of the tumor, including the greater omentum, was performed. The tumor, weighing 3,600 g, was mostly cystic, and filled with sanguinous fluid and clot. Solid regions were observed partially on the cystic wall. Microscopically, the tumor mainly consisted of spindle cells, which showed fascicular growth. Immunostaining demonstrated c-kit positive, partial α-SMA positive, and S-100 protein negative. Based on these findings, the tumor was diagnosed as GIST primarily occurring in the greater omentum. Postoperatively, the patient was undergoing chemotherapy with STI571 for the treatment of the abdominal buds, and was alive as of 13 months after surgery.