In February 2020, a 52-year old HIV positive bisexual male patient was admitted to our Department with a 4-month history of moderately itchy cutaneous lesions localized at his neck, trunk and arms. The patient had been under antiretroviral therapy for 13 years. At that moment, the patient was under treatment with emtricitabine/rilpivirine/tenofovir alafenamide (Odefsey®), with successful results. In fact, the patient had been virally suppressed for 10 years, with no diagnosis of AIDS nor AIDS-defining diseases. At the moment of our observation, CD4 count was 622 cells per mm3, CD8 count was 771 cells per mm3, while CD4/CD8 ratio was 0.76. Personal medical history was negative for hepatitis B or C virus co-infections, while it was positive for previous hepatitis A virus. Furthermore, his medical history was positive for relapsing cutaneous and mucosal herpes simplex virus infections and for three previous episodes of syphilis, in 2013, 2018 and 2019. First syphilis diagnosis dated back to 2013, as a secondary syphilis. Clinically, the patient presented with a classic syphilitic roseola of the trunk. Serological tests showed increased levels of rapid plasma regain (RPR), Treponema pallidum hemagglutination assay (TPHA), anti-Treponema pallidum IgM and IgG Index, as reported in Fig. . The patient refused injection therapy and underwent a systemic treatment with oral doxycycline 100 mg twice a day for 20 days, with resolution of the lesions in few days and negativity of RPR and IgM in 10 months.
The second episode of syphilis occurred in August 2018, as a primary syphilis with multiple ulcerative lesions of the penis, and serological tests showing increased levels of RPR, IgG and IgM. Doxycycline 100 mg twice a day for 20 days was prescribed, with normalization of IgM and RPR after 4 months.
The third episode of syphilis took place in April 2019, as a secondary syphilis, and was treated again with Doxycycline.
At the moment of our visit in February 2020, on physical examination, erythematous and papular lesions with vesicular components and urticarial erythema multiforme (EM)-like lesions were present at the neck, trunk and arms . The patient reported a stable partner and no occasional intercourses in the last year. Serological syphilis tests were discordant with active infection. In fact, increased levels of RPR and IgG were present, but anti-Treponema IgM were negative. Nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) for syphilis performed on an erythematous-papular scapular lesion was negative for Treponema pallidum. Based on the polimorfo-like aspect of the lesions, a topical and systemic steroid and antihistamine treatment was started, with no benefit. In consideration of the resistance to local treatments, an incisional biopsy with histological exam of a cutaneous lesion of the trunk was performed. The histological exam revealed the presence of mild hyperkeratosis and acanthosis of the epidermis; at the superficial and middle dermis, a non-specific parvocellular inflammatory infiltrate with predominant perivasal distribution was also present. The dermal infiltrate was mainly composed by lymphocytes, plasm cells and rare histiocytes; dermal vessels showed thickened cell wall and endothelial cell swelling, with no clear signs of vasculitis . Immunohistochemical analysis with anti-spirochetal antibodies was mandatory for the diagnosis, showing clusters of rod-shaped elements, some of which with spiral form, focally present at the epidermis and adnexal structures .
Indeed, a diagnosis of secondary syphilis was made, even if serological syphilis tests were discordant with active infection. A single intramuscular dose of 2.400.000 IU of penicillin in association with intramuscular betamethasone 4 mg was administered, once a week for 3 weeks with resolution of the clinical condition and no relapses at a 3-month follow up.