A healthy 26-year-old female with a history of recent miscarriage presented to the emergency department with 5 days of progressively worsening headache, neck pain, photophobia, and fatigue . Four months prior to presentation she was found to be pregnant. Two months later (at 18 weeks of pregnancy) she experienced spontaneous vaginal bleeding and passing of the conceptus, followed by daily spotty vaginal bleeding and intermittent fevers. She did not consult her obstetrician. She experienced approximately 7 kg of weight loss during the month prior to presentation. Five days prior to presentation, she developed headache, neck pain, and fatigue. On the day of admission, she experienced what she described as “the worst headache of her life” and presented to the emergency department, where she denied cough, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, rash, trauma, sick contacts, recent travel, and chronic illness. She was taking no medications. She worked as a housekeeper and had immigrated to the United States (US) from the Marshall Islands 9 years prior.
Vitals signs demonstrated temperature 38 °C, pulse 101 per minute, blood pressure 123/80 mmHg, and SpO2 96% on room air. Physical exam revealed nuchal rigidity and a diffusely tender abdomen. Laboratory workup revealed white blood cell count 6.7 × 103/µl, hemoglobin 10.1 g/dL, and platelets 431 × 103/µl. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain showed no intracranial hemorrhage, edema, midline shift, or mass effect. A lumbar puncture (LP) revealed clear cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with glucose 19 mg/dL (reference range 40–75 mg/dL), protein 486 mg/dL (reference range 15–45 mg/dL), and white blood cell count 391 per mm3 (reference range 0–5 per mm3) with neutrophil predominance (60%). A BioFire FilmArray meningitis/encephalitis PCR panel (bioMerieux, Inc.) was negative. This panel tested for Escherichia coli, Haemophilus, Listeria, Neisseria, Streptococcus agalactiae and pneumoniae, Cytomegalovirus, Enterovirus, herpes simplex virus, human herpesvirus-6, human parechovirus, Varicella, and Cryptococcus. CSF was sent for aerobic and anaerobic culture. Bacterial meningitis was suspected; vancomycin and ceftriaxone were started empirically.
Given the patient’s recent miscarriage, abdominal pain, and continued vaginal bleeding, a transvaginal ultrasound was ordered which revealed retained products of conception and a tubal mass that wrapped around both ovaries. Abdominal and pelvic CT demonstrated dilated, fluid-filled fallopian tubes with wall-enhancement consistent with tubo-ovarian abscess and a large abscess (9.8 × 4.3 cm) adjacent to the fallopian tubes . Additionally, CT demonstrated abscesses in the anterior mid-abdomen (6.7 × 1.3 cm) and left mid-abdomen (3.7 cm) as well as diffuse peritoneal thickening consistent with peritonitis. Doxycycline and metronidazole were added to cover anaerobes and common sexually transmitted bacteria associated with endometritis.
On day 2 of admission the primary team consulted infectious disease specialists, who suspected tuberculous (TB) meningitis given the sub-acute course of illness and the patient’s origin from the Marshall Islands (a TB endemic region). Therefore, empiric treatment with rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, ethambutol (RIPE therapy), vitamin B6 (pyridoxine), and intravenous dexamethasone were started. She was placed in airborne isolation. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed multiple supratentorial and infratentorial enhancing lesions, some showing rim enhancement, consistent with tuberculomas, with associated minimal leptomeningeal enhancement . Her headache significantly improved with initiation of RIPE and dexamethasone, but did not resolve completely.
Also on day 2 of admission, the obstetrics and gynecology service performed dilation and curettage (D&C) to remove retained products of conception. Specimens were sent for histopathology as well as aerobic and anaerobic culture.
Chest X-ray appeared normal, but a chest CT demonstrated a consolidation in the left upper lung lobe suspicious for early TB. Three early sputum samples were negative for TB by PCR, AFB smear, and culture. A second LP was performed, and CSF was positive for TB by PCR on the Xpert MTB/RIF platform (Cepheid, Inc.).
On day 7, the interventional radiology service placed a drain in the tubo-ovarian abscess. Fluid from this drain was purulent and Gram-stain demonstrated many polymorphonuclear cells, but no organisms. At this point, it was not clear if the TB meningitis and abdominal/pelvic infections represented separate coincidental processes or a single disseminated process. She was maintained on RIPE and other antibiotics were narrowed to moxifloxacin since this agent has activity against both common abdominal/pelvic pathogens as well as TB. Histopathology of the endometrial specimen obtained during D&C eventually demonstrated necrotizing granulomatous inflammation with positive AFB stain , prompting discontinuation of moxifloxacin.
As all her clinical symptoms including headache gradually improved, dexamethasone was replaced with oral prednisone daily. Unfortunately, this replacement resulted in a recurrence of headache. Therefore, therapy was switched back to dexamethasone with improvement of headache. Four days after drain placement in the tubo-ovarian abscess, a repeat CT demonstrated a significant decrease in abscess size, prompting drain removal.
On day 14 of hospitalization, the patient was discharged home with RIPE therapy, vitamin B6, and a 2-month taper of dexamethasone. After discharge, TB culture demonstrated pan-susceptibility, therefore ethambutol was discontinued. Eventually, all AFB cultures from the CSF, endometrial samples, and tubo-ovarian abscess grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis, indicating her entire disease could be attributed to disseminated TB.
Unfortunately, five weeks after discharge she presented again to the emergency department with two days of progressively worsening distal paresthesia and left lower extremity weakness. She denied bowel or bladder incontinence. MRI of the spine demonstrated an intradural mass at the level of T3/T4, compressing the spine . There was high T2-weighted/STIR signal extending from T1 to T7 concerning for cord edema. She was taken emergently to the operating room for decompression, requiring T3-T4 laminectomy and T5 partial laminectomy. In surgery, an intradural extramedullary tuberculoma was observed and washed out. AFB and fungal cultures of the mass remained negative. The cause of the spinal mass was suspected to be paradoxical TB reaction. Repeat spinal MRI showed increased cord T2-weighted/STIR signal at the surgical site. High dose dexamethasone was continued out of concern for persistent inflammatory changes in the spine as well as back pain. Pyrazinamide was discontinued after three months of treatment. Given the anticipated long duration of dexamethasone therapy, she was also prescribed trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PJP) prophylaxis. It should be noted that current guidelines only recommend PJP prophylaxis for individuals receiving glucocorticoid doses equivalent to ≥ 20 mg of prednisone daily for one month or longer and have another immune-compromising condition . At a 36-week follow-up appointment, she was taking isoniazid, rifampin, moxifloxacin, and dexamethasone and reported only mild back pain. Ultimately, her treatment duration will depend on her repeat spine MRI findings and her clinical course.