The first patient was an 86-year-old woman with a history of hypertensive cardiomyopathy with severe mitral regurgitation and atrial fibrillation on anticoagulant therapy with warfarin. She presented to the Emergency Department after experiencing a sudden onset of shortness of breath on mild exertion and peripheral edema.
At admission, the patient was afebrile, eupneic in oxygen therapy at rest. Thoracic physical examination revealed decreased breath sounds and crackles in the lower lung lobes, bilaterally.
Blood investigations revealed a total leucocyte count of 9140/mcL (normal 4000–11,000/mcL), Hb 11 g/dL (normal 13–18 g/dL), C-reactive protein (CRP) 15.8 mg/dL (normal < 0.50 mg/dL), Procalcitonin (PCT) 0.32 ng/L (normal < 0.5 ng/L), fibrinogen 707 mg/dL (normal 200–400 mg/dL), creatinine 1.23 mg/dL (normal 0.7–1.20 mg/dL), INR 2.36 (normal 0.82–1.19). Chest CT revealed bilateral pleural effusion with passive atelectasis of the lower lobes. Patient was diagnosed with COVID-19 on April the 8th, 2020, on the basis of RT-PCR testing that detected SARS-CoV-2. The patient was admitted to our Geriatric department and began to receive hydroxychloroquine, intravenous ceftriaxone and doxycycline, as per local protocol, observing a good clinical response and the decrease of inflammation markers. Weaning and discontinuation of oxygen therapy was possible once the patient was stable with satisfactory oxygen saturation. The anticoagulation (AC) therapy was maintained, however, we decided to switch AC therapy from warfarin to low molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) enoxaparin 6000 U BID.
Suddenly, 5 days after admission, she started complaining of pain and loss of movement of her left leg, which appeared swollen. Venous compression ultrasound (CUS) and evaluation of D-dimer excluded deep vein thrombosis, but a Chest computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast revealed an 11 × 8 × 14 cm hematoma in the left thigh . Laboratory tests showed a fall in hemoglobin from 11 g/dL to 7.8 g/dL and, despite the absence of active arterial extravasation, prophylactic embolization of small branches of superficial and deep femoral artery was performed. Blood tests at that time also showed alterations of coagulation system, with reduced prothrombin time, increased fibrinogen and international normalized ratio (INR), despite a platelet count within normal limits. Interleukin-6 levels were 67,9 pg/mL (normal < 12.7 pg/mL). Overall, the patient was transfused 3 unit of packed blood cells, which raised her hemoglobin to 10.1 g/dL. Table shows the patient’s routine blood test during the hospitalization. In the following days, the patient’s hemoglobin remained stable and the hematoma showed no evidence of further expansion. The patient recovered completely and was discharged shortly after the event.