A 48-year-old male (178 cm, 60 kg, body mass index 18.9 kg/m2) was scheduled for urethral scrotal fistula repair. He had been diagnosed with anxiety disorder, imprisoned for illegal drug use, and diagnosed some 15 years previously with hepatitis C. Ten years before visiting our hospital, he experienced a mental status change, was hyperammonemic, but with normal liver function, and was diagnosed with citrullinemia type II based on biochemical assay results. He had never experienced ascites or esophageal varix, but had experienced recurrent uncompensated hyperammonemia, for which he was taking arginine and sodium benzoate. Prior to transfer to our hospital, he had been living in a sanatorium in a bed ridden state with slurred speech and motor weakness. Subsequent brain computed tomography demonstrated progressive diffuse brain atropy.
The patient was admitted to our urology department for urethral fistula repair and cystolitholapaxy. Preoperative electrocardiographic and chest x-ray findings were normal, and pre- and post-operative serum ammonia levels were illustrated in Fig. (normal value 12-66 μg/dL). Serum ammonia level fluctuations were controlled by daily lactulose enema and intravenous arginine and sodium benzoate. The medical team involved prescribed a 1000 kcal/day diet with a PFC ratio of 14 %:27 %:59 %. Preoperatively, his blood pressure was 100/50 mm Hg, heart rate 88 beats/min, and body temperature 39.3 °C, and he had a scrotal abscess. His preoperative laboratory data were as follows: hematocrit 31.3 %, platelet count 161 × 103/ml, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 10.4 mg/dl, creatinine (Cr) 0.5 mg/dl, prothrombin time (PT) 14.5 sec (INR 1.34), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) 38.5 sec, serum albumin 2.4 g/dl, aspartate aminotransferase 88 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase 43 IU/L, total bilirubin 0.5 mg/dl, direct bilirubin 0.32 mg/dl, and serum gamma-glutamyl transferase 349 IU/L, the latter of which was moderately elevated (normal 0-72U/L).
Surgery was performed 5 days after admission. He was not administered premedication and in the operating theatre his vital signs were monitored by pulse-oximetry, ECG, and a non-invasive blood pressure device. Spinal anesthesia was performed using 12 mg of 0.5 % hyperbaric bupivacaine using a 25-gauge Quinke needle to block the T6 thoracic level. Dexmedetomidine was administered for sedation during surgery. Plasma solution (600 ml; sodium chloride 5.26 g, sodium gluconate 5.02 g, sodium acetate hydrate 3.68 g, potassium chloride 0.37 g, and magnesium chloride 0.3 g per liter; Plasma solution A inj., CJ Health Care, Korea) was infused during the 120 min operation, which involved open cystolitholapaxy, fistula repair, and removal of the abscess pocket, and estimated blood loss was 100 ml. No adverse event occurred during surgery. The surgical team planned a second-look operation after fever control had been achieved and confirmed the absence of bacterial growth in the surgical wound. No neurologic events of significance occurred before the second operation despite poorly controlled serum ammonia levels.
Twenty days after the first operation, while still hospitalized, the patient underwent a second operation under spinal anesthesia (T8 with 12 mg of 0.5 % hyperbaric bupivacaine) for wound repair and cystoscopic examination; 0.9 % normal saline was used as distension medium during the cystoscopic examination. During the 60 min operation, 400 ml of plasma solution was infused. The patient did not experience any change in consciousness level, despite fluctuating serum ammonia levels, during his 43-day hospital stay.