A 37 year old man developed breast cancer 24 years after the treatment for HD. In 1983, when 13 years old, he was treated with chemotherapy (6 cycles of MOPP/ABVD) and irradiation of the neck and upper thorax, retroperitoneal and inguinal nodes (25 Gy) for stage IIIBS HD. Afterwards he was followed, at the Department of Paediatrics and after 1995 at the Late Effect Clinic at the Institute of Oncology in Ljubljana.
Eleven years after the treatment we observed primary hypogonadism with low levels of testosterone, bilateral gynecomasty and azoospermia and at the age of 37 a palpable tumour 6 cm in diameter in the central part of the left breast, infiltrating the skin, with an inverted nipple. Ultrasounds of both axillae, of the abdomen, chest X-ray films and Technetium bone scan were normal.
Histology showed an invasive ductal carcinoma, grade III, with negative progesterone and estrogen receptors and positive Her2 status. His family history was negative. He was treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy, left mastectomy with axillary node dissection, adjuvant treatment with trastuzumab and postoperative irradiation of the left mammary region.
Patient’s DNA was isolated from peripheral blood using the DNA blood isolation kit Quiagen (Hilden, Germany). It was screened for variants in tumour suppressor genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, p53, CDKN2A) and MMR genes (MLH1 and MSH2).
Four methods were used: DGGE (denaturizing gradient gel electrophoresis) or HRM (high resolution melting), direct sequencing and MLPA (multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification). The screening of BRCA1/2 genes was performed for all exons by the DGGE while MLH1 and MSH2 genes were screened using the HRM. Positive fragments were subsequently sequenced to determine the nucleotide change. Genes BRCA1, BRCA2, MLH1 and MSH2 were also screened for large deletions or insertions using the MLPA method. All coding regions of p53 and CDKN2A were sequenced.
HRM was used for discrimination between two DNA molecules with different sequences for the detection of SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphism) and small deletions and insertions. PCR (polymerase chain reaction) was performed on LC480 instrument using the LC 480 High-resolution Melting Master Kit (Roche, Manheim, Germany) according to manufacturer’s instructions.
DGGE was used for detection of SNPs and small deletions or insertions. The PCR amplification of DNA samples was performed using a set of GC-clamped primers (Ingeny International BV, Goes, Netherlands) according to the cycling conditions provided by the primer-manufacturer. Different denaturing and running conditions were used for specific primer sets. When electrophoresis was complete, gels were stained with EtBr and documented using the GelDoc system.
Direct sequencing was performed using the ABI PRISM Big Dye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, UK) and products analyzed on the ABI Prism® 310 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). Data were collected with ABI Prism 310 software (Applied Biosystems), and the results analyzed with the ABI Prism DNA sequencing analysis software (Applied Biosystems). Sequence data were analyzed utilizing the Gene Runner software tool.
The MLPA was applied for the detection of large deletions and insertions. The probe-mixes labelled as P003 for MLH1 and MSH2, P045-B1 for BRCA2, and P002 for BRCA1 from MRC Holland (MRC Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands) were used, according to manufacturer’s instructions.
With MLPA, DGGE and direct sequencing we did not find any changes in the sample. We detected some polymorphisms at the frequently polymorphic loci but no mutations.
However, we found a rare polymorphism in BRCA2 gene p.V1269V which did not code a different amino acid; therefore, it did not affect protein function . The sample was also tested for the presence of mutation 1100delC in CHEK2 gene with MLPA kit P045-B1. In the samples mutation 1100delC was not detected.
Tumour suppressor gene p53 was sequenced in total. No mutations were found, but some common polymorphisms were .
By direct sequencing of exons of CDKN2A gene (p16 and p14ARF) we detected two polymorphisms: c.1-191A>G in 5′-UTR (untranslated region) and c.471+69C>T in 35′-UTR .
We detected no changes by means of the MLPA. The screening of the patients’ DNA was therefore continued through HRM and sequencing. With these two methods no mutations were discovered, but we found some polymorphisms which were frequently detected in a general population. We also detected three variants of DNA which were described as variants with unknown influence on the protein function .