A 21-year-old male patient presented to a local hospital with acute respiratory distress due to pulmonary oedema. He had a previous history of mitral valve replacement with a 25/33 mm On-X valve four years prior for mixed mitral valve disease due to rheumatic heart disease. A month prior to presentation, his international normalized ratio (INR) was subtherapeutic at 1.54, and his warfarin was adjusted. He presented with sudden onset of severe shortness of breath, dyspnoea grade IV and minor haemoptysis. On arrival at a local hospital, he had signs of severe respiratory distress with a saturation of 75% on room air and hypotension. He required resuscitation: intubation, ventilation, intravenous diuretics, and inotropes (dobutamine).
Once stabilized for transport, he was transferred by air to our centre (300kms) with suspected mechanical valve dysfunction. The laboratory findings were unremarkable except for an INR of 1.73. His chest radiograph showed fulminant pulmonary oedema .
A two-dimensional echocardiogram (2D echo) and fluoroscopy screening were done . Both showed a single leaflet with normal mobility. The second leaflet was not visualized, and a working diagnosis of a stuck mitral valve prosthesis in a closed position was made. The patient underwent emergency redo mitral valve replacement. Intraoperatively on exploring the mitral valve prosthesis, a single leaflet was noted, and there was no pannus or clot formation . The second leaflet was missing. The missing leaflet was not found inside the heart nor in the chest on an intraoperative transoesophageal echocardiogram. The valve was excised, and a size 25 mm On-X was implanted. We decided to reimplant the On-X valve because we could not find the literature on previous On-X valve leaflet fracture cases at the time of surgery. We assumed it was an isolated case of a possible manufacturing defect. Off bypass, all the patient’s peripheral pulses were present. He had no ischemic limb, organ or cerebrovascular accident /transient ischaemic attack at any stage. We elected to locate and remove the leaflet once he was out of the intensive care unit.
Post-operatively an unenhanced computer tomography (CT) of the whole body was done, which showed the leaflet had embolized to the aortic bifurcation and another fragment to the proximal left external iliac artery . The patient underwent a successful open removal of the fractured leaflet via midline laparotomy on day 13 post-cardiac surgery . His post-operative course was uneventful, and an echocardiogram showed normal functioning mitral valve prosthesis with a good ventricular function. He was discharged, and his follow-up at the outpatients department continues. The valve was sent to On-X for examination. The valve report stated that the mechanism of valve failure was noted to be cavitation. There was no definitive root cause found, and it was not possible to conclusively eliminate iatrogenic damage and patient factors, but no manufacturing defects were found.