A 66-year-old man underwent pancreatoduodenectomy 3 years previously for treatment of pancreatic head cancer. Pathological examination of the excised specimen revealed pure pancreatic adenocarcinoma with no lymph node metastasis . The pathological diagnosis at that time was T2N0M0 Stage IB according to the UICC TNM classification. The tumor was 1.4 × 1.0 cm in diameter, with invasion into the duodenum. Lymph node metastasis and invasion into the perineurium, plexus, portal vein, arteries, or other surrounding organs were not observed, but lymphatic and venous invasion around the tumor was observed. Postoperatively, the patient underwent periodic imaging and blood tests to search for recurrence. Three years after pancreatoduodenectomy, computed tomography (CT) revealed a 3-cm tumor lesion in the right lobe of the liver . The tumor showed low signal on T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and high signal on T2-weighted MRI. The tumor was depicted on gadoliniumethoxybenzyl diethylene triaminepentaacetic acid-MRI as enhanced peritumor in the early phase and as deficient in the hepatobiliary phase . The enhancement dynamics were similar to those of metastatic liver tumors such as adenocarcinoma. Liver tumor biopsy showed atypical cells with large nuclei growing in sheets, and the diagnosis was SCC . Immunohistochemical staining showed that the atypical cells were positive for p40 and CK19, but negative for CK7. A search of organs in which SCC might occur (head and neck, esophagus, skin, and anus) revealed no obvious primary lesion. Because primary SCC of the liver is extremely rare, the liver tumor was considered a metastasis of the pancreatic cancer. The patient underwent three courses of combination therapy of gemcitabine plus nab-paclitaxel. The disease was evaluated by CT, which showed that the tumor had increased in size and that the disease was progressive . Therefore, the patient was treated with a combination of carboplatin and paclitaxel, which is expected to be effective for SCC. Before the efficacy could be confirmed, the patient was referred to our hospital at his request.
A detailed review of all tissues from the previous surgery revealed no SCC-like tissue; similarly, no adenocarcinoma elements were identified in the liver biopsy specimen. Therefore, we decided to perform a partial hepatectomy with a presumed diagnosis of primary SCC that had developed after the surgery for the pancreatic cancer. At the time of surgery, the tumor had grown to 5.0 cm in size with some invasion into the diaphragm. Combined partial hepatic S5/6resection and diaphragmatic resection was performed by open laparotomy. The defect in the diaphragm was 5.0 × 4.0 cm and was closed with horizontal mattress sutures using monofilament sutures. Gross examination of the excised specimen revealed a 6.0- × 5.5-cm white tumor with diaphragmatic invasion . On microscopic examination, the tumor cells showed SCC histology with keratin-like material and necrosis . There was no obvious glandular duct formation. However, because primary hepatic SCC is extremely rare, we compared the pancreatic and hepatic lesions for p53 expression and KRAS abnormalities. Immunohistochemically, p53 was strongly nuclear stained in both lesions . KRAS genomic analysis of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens was performed by polymerase chain reaction using reverse sequence-specific oligonucleotides (SRL, Inc., Tokyo, Japan). We found that the Q61R mutation was present in both lesions, and the diagnosis was therefore pure SCC metastasis from the pancreatic adenocarcinoma .
In a postoperative course, intraabdominal abscess at the resection site was observed, but it immediately resolved only with antibiotic therapy. The patient was discharged home on the 35th postoperative day and remained recurrence-free for 1 year. The benefit of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy in these patients has not yet been proven, so it was not performed.