A 67-year-old Caucasian male patient presented to the Emergency Department with fever, pain, swelling and bruising of his left thigh. He denied trauma to the leg.
A month before presentation, he was admitted for evaluation of painless jaundice. At the time of admission, his laboratory results showed acute kidney failure (serum creatinine 446 µmol/L, urea 10.7 mmol/L), normocytic anaemia (haemoglobin 90 g/L, mean corpuscular volume 86 fL), elevated liver enzymes [aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 2.6 µkat/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 3.6 µkat/L, gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) 12.1 µkat/L, alkaline phosphatase (AP) 12.1 µkat/L] and elevated bilirubin levels (186/145 µmol/L), indicating cholestasis. Malignant stenosis of the distal common bile duct was discovered upon abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan with no evidence of distant metastases . He underwent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography with stent placement in order to overcome the stenosis . Kidney function tests (serum creatinine 369 µmol/L), liver enzymes (AST 1.9 µkat/L, ALT 3.67 µkat/L, GGT 3.87 µkat/L, AP 9.86 µkat/L) and bilirubin levels (149/124 µmol/L) improved, however, levels of haemoglobin remained low (86 g/L). His case was discussed at a multidisciplinary cancer team meeting and surgical treatment was proposed.
His background medical history was remarkable for arterial hypertension, hypercholesterolemia and stage 3 chronic kidney disease.
Upon admission the patient was alert, oriented and cooperative. He was febrile with body temperature of 38.1 °C, blood pressure of 135/72 mmHg, heart rate of 71/min and oxygen saturation of 100%. Physical examination revealed swelling and large suffusion on his left thigh.
Laboratory results showed severe normocytic anaemia (haemoglobin 65 g/L, mean corpuscular volume 93.0 fL), elevated liver enzymes (AST 1.08 µkat/L, ALT 1.68 µkat/L, GGT 10.86 µkat/L, AP 10.72 µkat/L) and bilirubin levels (52/33 µmol/L) and moderately raised inflammatory parameters (C-reactive protein 63 mg/L, white blood cell 9.4 × 109/L, procalcitonin 0.31 ng/mL). Coagulation tests showed normal prothrombin time/international normalized ratio (1.03). Laboratory values upon admission are summarized in Table .
Deep vein thrombosis was excluded with a venous point-of-care ultrasound. Ultrasound of the soft tissues of the left thigh revealed a large hematoma (13 cm × 5 cm × 3 cm) in one of the muscles of the anterior/extensor compartment. Later on, when no significant improvement in haemoglobin level (73 g/L) was observed despite treatment with multiple erythrocyte transfusions, a CT angiography of the abdomen and lower limbs was performed. Here, hematoperitoneum with a large haematoma in the left iliacus muscle (5 cm × 9 cm × 29 cm) and left femoral rectus muscle (7 cm × 5 cm × 30 cm; previously described) was discovered, both with multiple active bleeding sites .
After presentation, the patient received three units of packed red blood cells and was admitted for further treatment and evaluation. Antibiotic treatment due to cholangitis, confirmed upon abdominal ultrasound, was initiated and another endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed to replace the poorly functioning choledochal stent. A haematologist was consulted and ordered additional coagulation tests that revealed elevated activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT; 92 s), normal prothrombin time (1.00) and international normalized ratio (1.00), solely reduced FVIII activity (1%) and appearance of anti-FVIII antibodies, with titre of 30 Bethesda units (BU)/mL . Von Willebrand factor (vWF) antigen, vWF activity and vWF ristocetin cofactor activity were normal.