A 63-year-old woman with a history of hypertension, hyperuricaemia, and uveitis presented to our hospital complaining of dyspnoea upon exertion (NYHA Class II). We heard coarse crackling in both lungs, and systolic murmur of the Levine IV/VI within the apex. Mild pitting oedema was detected on both legs. Laboratory tests indicated an elevated B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) value of 2601 pg/mL (normal < 18.4 pg/mL). A chest X-ray showed a 62% increase in the cardiothoracic ratio (normal < 50%).
Transthoracic echocardiography showed dyskinesis of the posterior wall of the left ventricle (LV) accompanied by thinning. The left chamber diameter was increased [LV diastolic diameter (normal 30–50 mm), 66 mm; LV systolic diameter (normal 20–30 mm), 51 mm] and the LV ejection fraction (LVEF) (normal 55–80%) was reduced to 33.5%.
A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) revealed that contraction of the posterior wall caused significant tethering of P2, thereby resulting in severe functional MR. . The regurgitate volume was 92 mL (severe: >60 mL) .
Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging with late gadolinium enhancement revealed contrast effect and thinning of the posterior wall , thereby suggesting that it was not viable. The abnormal accumulation was also observed on fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography . We suspected cardiac sarcoidosis due to the presence of wall motion abnormalities that were confined to portions of the LV. The patient’s uveitis was confirmed to be iris adhesions, which is the characteristic ocular lesion of sarcoidosis. Coronary angiography was performed to exclude ischaemic heart disease, and no significant stenosis was detected. The patient experienced a period of heart failure, during which her BNP increased to 2601 pg/mL (normal < 18.4 pg/mL). This patient had moderate TR (TR pressure gradient 49 mmHg) associated with mild right heart failure [TAPSE (normal > 16 mm): 14 mm; FAC (normal > 35%): 32% with accompanying tricuspid valve annulus expansion (47 mm)], such that intervention was necessary. Pre-operative cardiac catheter data after heart failure treatment using a diuretic was as follows: Pulmonary artery (PA) (normal 15–30/3–12 mmHg): 33/12 (20) mmHg; Right ventricle (RV) (normal 15–30/2–8 mmHg): 34/1 (3) mmHg; Right Atrium (RA) (normal 2–8 mmHg): 5/2 (2) mmHg; pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (normal 2–15 mmHg): 6/6 (5) mmHg.
The surgery was performed using ELIET, mitral annuloplasty, tricuspid annuloplasty, and the MAZE procedure. Initially, an incision was made in the LV at the centre of the scar area along the coronary artery. The first layer was linearly closed with 3-0 polypropylene continuous sutures to approximate the border between the normal and infarcted myocardium. The second layer was closed with a combination of interrupted and continuous sutures . The cardiopulmonary bypass time was 273 min, and the aortic cross clamp time was 132 min.
Histopathological analysis of the resected posterior wall myocardium revealed thinning of the endocardium, replacement fibrosis, lymphocyte infiltration, and epithelialization . CD68 staining was positive . Together, these findings are consistent with sarcoidosis. An echocardiogram taken 6 months after surgery revealed reversal of remodelling and a disappearance of the tethering. There was no recurrence of MR and no signs of heart failure.
In the TOE, the pre-tenting height/PL angle was 13 mm/56°, which was reduced to 10.2 mm/23° post-operatively. These data showed improvements in tethering. Additionally, MR had not recurred during the 6 months of follow-up. Additionally, post-operative CT scans can indicate the efficacy of linear aneurysm resection compared to Dor-plasty, since the sphericity index was decreased from 0.75 to 0.61 (normal 0.45–0.62) . There were no post-operative complications or symptoms of heart failure. Since this patient did not have a diagnosis of sarcoidosis before being admitted to our hospital, there was no history of relevant medical treatment before surgery. Corticosteroid treatment has been used as a therapeutic option for patients with cardiac sarcoidosis, and the initiation of corticosteroid therapy before systolic dysfunction develops produces excellent clinical outcomes. Thus, prednisolone therapy was performed post-operatively in this case.