A 25-year-old woman, G3P1L0A1 presented at 17 weeks of gestation. She was a known case of TOF with PA and the lesions were uncorrected till now.At 22 years of age she conceived spontaneously and had preterm vaginal delivery of a stillborn at local hospital. Then she again conceived after one year and had spontaneous abortion at 8 weeks of gestation. During that time treating physician noticed grade 4 clubbing, cyanosis and low arterial saturation of 85% by oximetry and she was referred to our centre for further evaluation.
Her chest X-ray showed boot shaped heart with clear lung fields . Transthoracic echocardiography showed hypertrophic right ventricle, large misaligned subaortic ventricular septal defect with right to left blood flow, more than 50% aortic override, no visible flow across pulmonary valve and small pulmonary arteries (features suggestive of TOF with PA) (Additional file : Video S1). CT Pulmonary Angiography (CTPA) was also done which showed more than 50% aortic override, main pulmonary artery (MPA) was not visualized, right pulmonary artery measured 12 mm and left pulmonary artery measured 8 mm and prominent MAPCAs were seen. Aortic root measured 4.3 cm,ascending aorta 4.8 cm, arch of aorta (mid)2.8 cm, DTA (proximal) 2.8 cm and DTA (hiatus)1.4 cm. Invasive cardiac catheterization showed both left ventricle and right ventricle emptying completely into aorta, large ventricular septal defect, dilated aortic root and multiple MAPCAs emptying into confluent pulmonary arteries (Additional file : Video S2). She was planned for intra cardiac repair (ICR) in follow up and was started on oral propranolol 40 mg once daily.
She however failed to follow up due to the COVID pandemic and presented in her second trimester of index pregnancy. On examination her pulse rate was 82 regular beats per minute, blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg, arterial saturation of 80% by oximetry at room air. She had grade 4 clubbing in fingers and toes. Her body mass index was 18 kg/m2 and per abdomen fundal height was corresponding the period of gestation. She had NYHA class 2 dyspnoea on exertion. Further management was discussed by a cardio-obstetric team. She was explained about the maternal and fetal risks, but she and her family decided to continue the pregnancy. On laboratory assessment, hemoglobin was 20.1 g/dl, hematocrit was 65.5% and platelet count was 87,000/mm3. Fetal ultrasound and cardiac screening were normal. Therapeutic phlebotomy was performed at 26 weeks of gestation when her hematocrit was 65.5%. Her platelet counts also improved to 120,000/mm3 and she was started on oral Ecosprin 75 mg once a day for polycythemia. In the 3rd trimester her haematocrit remained between 53 and 63%. She was on regular follow up in our cardio-obstetric clinic. At 28 weeks she was diagnosed with (fetal growth restriction) (FGR) and was followed up biweekly for fetal surveillance. Doppler studies showed absent end diastolic flow (AEDF) at 33 weeks of pregnancy and at 34 weeks she was admitted for early delivery in view of severe FGR (< 3rd centile) with AEDF. Upon admission, she was hemodynamically stable with SpO2 of 85% at room air, hemoglobin was 19 g/dl, hematocrit was 60% and platelet count was 64,000/mm3.
She underwent emergency caesarean for fetal distress under general anaesthesia. Preinduction arterial access and central venous access were established. Modified rapid sequence induction was done with preoxygenation (ETO2- 90) in left up tilt of 30 degrees. Fentanyl 100 mics, titrated dosed of ketamine 80 mg and thiopentone 50 mg weregiven according to hemodynamicsand succinylcholine 100 mg was given for induction. She delivered a live born baby of 1198 g (< 3rd centile), with Apgar score of 6, 8. In post-operative period after 4 h of caesarean she had atonic peripartum hemorrhage (PPH) which was managed with uterotonics and Bakri balloon insertion. Two units of single donor apheresis platelet(SDAP) were transfused as her post operative platelet count was 57,000/mm3and sonoclot showed platelet dysfunction. She remained stable thereafter and was discharged on day 7 of postpartum and advised for further follow up in cardiology OPD. Baby had some feeding issue secondary to AEDF and hyperbilirubinemia, managed and was discharged after 15 days. At 6 weeks of follow up both baby and mother are doing well.