A 59-year-old male patient with a medical history of hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus presented with a left adrenal mass. The patient reported experiencing dull pain in the left flank area, weight loss, and fatigue for a period of 4 months. There was no reported family history of malignancy, and the patient denied experiencing headaches, diaphoresis, bouts of hypertension, nervousness, palpitations, diarrhea, vomiting, change in bowel habits, flushing, skin changes, or any other complaints. The patient is employed as a teacher with no occupational exposure to toxic substances, alcohol, or tobacco. Upon evaluation, the patient’s hemoglobin level was found to be low at 7.5, compared to 11 g/dl 8 weeks prior to presentation.
CT revealed the presence of a solid tumor measuring 17 cm in diameter at the upper pole of the left kidney, with peripheral calcifications . The tumor was found to be abutting the spleen and displacing the left kidney inferiorly, as well as the tail of the pancreas anteriorly. The imaging did not show any evidence of free fluid, regional, or paraaortic lymphadenopathy. The radiographic features of the adrenal lesion were consistent with primary adrenal carcinoma, and there was no indication of distant metastasis. Serum levels of aldosterone, renin, cortisol, testosterone, DHEA-S (dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate), estradiol, androstenedione, 17-OH progesterone (17-hydroxyprogesterone), metanephrine, and normetanephrine were within normal limits.
The patient underwent a total adrenalectomy procedure with negative surgical margins. An open radical adrenalectomy was performed, and a hypervascular retroperitoneal mass measuring 20×20 cm was excised through a subcostal intraperitoneal incision . Despite its adherence to adjacent structures such as the stomach, pancreas, spleen, and blood vessels, the mass could be dissected from these structures without causing any damage. As the tumor did not invade the left kidney, only Gerota’s fascia was removed along with the tumor. No residual tumor tissue was detected during the surgery. The tumor was demarcated from the left kidney and the tail of the pancreas.
The excised specimen showed a well-circumscribed encapsulated mass with a size of 14 cm upon gross pathological evaluation. The tumor had invaded through the adrenal capsule and exhibited areas of necrosis and hemorrhage. No residual adrenal tissue was observed, and lymphovascular invasion was identified . Immunohistochemistry results were positive for pan-cytokeratin, CD31, FLI-1, and D2-40 and negative for chromogranin, synaptophysin, melan-A, inhibin, S100, desmin, and myogenin. These findings were consistent with epithelioid angiosarcoma .
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and underwent six cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with doxorubicin and ifosfamide with good tolerance. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan evaluation performed after completion of the chemotherapy revealed an ill-defined mass at the site of the previous mass with areas of calcification that could not be separated from both the pancreas and the left kidney. The mass exhibited minimal nonspecific heterogeneous fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) activity and measured ~7×4.5 cm in its maximal axial dimensions . The scan also revealed multiple bilateral pulmonary nodules throughout both lung fields, showing variable degrees of FDG avidity, suggesting a metastatic process. As a result, the patient was considered to have metastatic disease and started on a new line of chemotherapy consisting of gemcitabine (825 mg/m2) and docetaxel (75 mg/m2). The patient completed a total of six cycles and underwent a follow-up PET scan that showed no definite hypermetabolic lesion at the surgical bed and complete resolution of the previously seen hypermetabolic pulmonary nodules . At 11 months postoperatively, the patient was alive and in remission.