A 35-year-old female of Indian origin presented with complaint of depression over left parietal area noticed accidentally about four years back. At that time the size is about a coin. It is slowly and gradually progressive in nature. At present it is about 4 × 4 cm in size. There were no other symptoms at this time duration. There was no history of any trauma. Her neurological examination was normal. Local examination shows a well-defined nontender rounded left parietal depression of 4 × 4 cm in size without any soft tissue mass with normal overlying scalp. Plain x-ray skull was showing a well-demarcated rounded lytic area in parietal region with normal margin. There is no other abnormality seen in plain x-ray. CT scan revealed a well-defined skull defect with complete disappearance of the central bone matrix and no evidence of new bone formation . The soft tissue widows showed no associated soft tissue mass in or around the calvarial defect. MRI brain showing calvarial defect to be filled with thin soft tissues that were hypointense on both T1-weighted and T2-weighted . Tc-99 m MDP bone scintigraphy reveals no bone uptake in the resorbed site as well as around the margin. Whole-body bone scan was undertaken, which revealed no similar bony lesion any where in the body. . The preoperative differential diagnosis included Paget disease at destructive stage, eosinophilic granuloma, Brown tumor, and osteolytic metastasis but none of them correlated well with the clinical and radiologic features.
A left parietal craniectomy was performed, a bony defect of 4 × 4 cm with a very thin remainder of the inner table was found. There is involvement of overlying galea and subgaleal tissue in form of thickening and increased vascularity was found. The inner table was removed and bone specimens taken from the edges. Dura was normal in texture colour and vascularity. Cranioplasty done with bone cement. (CMW-1 Johnson's and Johnson's) . Histopathological examination of bone pieces showed intraosseous angiomatosis with mixed patterns of bone destruction, fibrous connective tissue replacement by highly vascularised collagenous tissue, and abnormal small vessel proliferation . The combination of clinical, imaging, and pathologic findings strongly suggested the diagnosis as Gorham disease. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on 7th postoperative day.