A 62-year-old man was admitted to our department with a history of hypertension, intermittent palpitation, shortness of breath and chest pain for 10 years. Laboratory examination showed that NT-ProBNP was of 1050 ng/L. Echocardiography revealed congenital QAV (Supplemental video 1) with massive aortic regurgitation (the regurgitant jet area was measured as 12.4 cm2) and mild aortic stenosis, left ventricular enlargement . Ventricular function was normal with the left ventricular ejection fraction of 59%. Cardiac computed tomography (CCT) revealed type A QAV without significant valvular thickening or calcification, average aortic annulus diameter was 25.9 mm, ascending aortic diameter was 31.8 mm, sinotubular junction was 28.8 mm, average left ventricular outflow tract diameter was 28.2 mm. The patient had relatively low coronary ostial height with the left coronary artery arising only 11.5 mm from the valve annulus, and the right coronary ostial height was 14.7 mm (Supplemental Figure ).
The patient was prescribed with digoxin 0.125 mg, metoprolol 12.5 mg, spironolactone 20 mg, hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg, and potassium chloride 1 g, all every 8 h after admission to improve his symptoms. After one week of treatment, the above symptoms alleviated significantly and the patient had a strong wish to repair the aortic valve. The patient was evaluated as stage D and the EuroSCORE was 2 . However, due to the patient’s strong refusal of surgical intervention, and the commercially available transcatheter valve implantation was also inappropriate, our heart team recommended TAVI using J-Valve system. The informed consent was obtained from the patient. Hospital ethics committee approval was also granted.
Under general anaesthesia, the patient underwent successful implantation of a 27-mm J-Valve via transapical access in a hybrid operating room. At the beginning, a 6F pigtail catheter was inserted into the aortic sinus via the left femoral artery and a temporary pacemaker was implanted to the right ventricular apex via the left femoral vein (Supplemental video ). Aortic root angiography and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) were utilized for evaluation of the valve pathology and apical position. The C-arm position was adjusted according to the previous CCT data so that the three aortic sinuses are simultaneously displayed and located in the same plane. Next, a 4-cm tiny incision was made at the fifth costal margin to expose the pericardium. The apical puncture was performed, TEE and fluoroscopy showed that super-stiff guidewire was placed in position and did not affect mitral valve tendinous cord (Supplemental video ). According to preoperative assessment, a 27-mm J-Valve (Jie-cheng Medical Technology, Suzhou, China) was crimped into the delivery system and transported into a supra-annular position following fluoroscopic guidance. With the assistance of pigtail catheter under fluoroscopy and TEE, the three “U-shape” graspers were carefully folded as three “long elliptical shape” in favor of positioning and then totally released into the left-, right- and non-coronary sinuses to clamp the native leaflets (Supplemental video 4). The correct position was confirmed by fluoroscopy and TEE, the valve was then delivered into the annular plan guided by the graspers and released with rapid ventricular pacing at 120 bpm (Supplemental video ). After withdrawing the delivery system, TEE and aortic root angiography showed no aortic regurgitation as well as no paravalvular leak with patent coronaries and good valve stent position, and the artificial aortic valve worked well (Supplemental videos and 7). There was no intraoperative or perioperative complication. The patient did well postoperatively and the NT-ProBNP was of 1940 ng/L on postoperative recheck. Then he discharged home in good clinical condition after 10 days. Six months later, our patient was followed up at the outpatient, he made a successful recovery, the NT-ProBNP was down to 104 ng/L and enchocardiography revealed that the artificial aortic valve functioned normally, the left ventricular diameter and ventricular function were normal with the left ventricular ejection fraction of 64% .