A 42-year-old woman complained of lower left abdominal fullness. Her serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), cancer antigen (CA) 125, and CA19-9 levels were within normal limits. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 10-cm cystic mass at the pelvic cavity with a 5-cm nodule in its wall. The laparoscopy showed a 10-cm cystic mass at the left adnexa. The right ovary and uterus were grossly normal. The patient underwent left salpingo-oophorectomy and adhesiolysis. The patient was symptom free 10 months after surgery.
On macroscopic examination, the cyst measured 10 cm in maximal diameter and had a thickness of 0.2–0.5 cm. This cystic tumor focally adhered to the peritoneum. The inner side was slightly uneven and attached with clot-like material in some area. The cyst had a solid mural nodule protruding from the wall into the lumen measuring up to 5 × 4 × 4 cm in size . The mass was found penetrating the surface of the cyst and invading to the tubal fimbria. The cut surface was fleshy and gray with the area of hemorrhage and necrosis .
Microscopic observation showed that the cystic walls were lined mainly by single-layered tall mucinous columnar epithelium . Some epithelium of cystic walls showed slightly atypical proliferation with glandular budding and stratification. The cells exhibited mild to moderate nuclear enlargement and hyperchromasia. Acellular pools of mucin in the stroma were present in some areas . Old hemorrhage can be found in the cystic wall . In addition, there was a proliferation of large mononucleated cells and scattered multinucleated giant cells in an area of the cyst wall without forming a true nodule .
A 5-cm mural nodule was identified in the hysterectomy specimen protruding into the cystic cavity, extending onto the serosal, and involving the tubal fimbria. The mural nodule had a characteristic of striking myxoid change, preservation of arteriolar pattern, and a “tonguelike” infiltration . There was a sharp demarcation between epithelial and sarcomatous components . The mural nodule consisted of sheets of small cells with oval to spindle nuclei, whorling around spiral arteriole-like vessels . There was mild to moderate nuclear atypia and the mitosis was 4/10 HPF .
Immunohistochemical staining is shown in Fig. . The tumor cells of the mural nodule were strongly positive for cluster of differentiation 10 (CD10) and progesterone receptor (PR) and was negative for cytokeratin 7 (CK7), CK20, estrogen receptor (ER), a-inhibin, calretinin, caldesmon, and smooth muscle actin (SMA), which is a typical feature of endometrial stromal sarcoma. The tumor cells had a high index of Ki67. The epithelium of cystic wall was locally positive for CK7 and CK20.
Taking into account the above features, we made the diagnosis as ovarian mucinous borderline tumor accompanied by LGESS with myxoid change involving the tubal fimbria.