A 53-year-old male patient who was operated on for a right inguinal hernia subsequently developed a postoperative wound infection 2 weeks after surgery and was started on IV antibiotics. Despite medical management, the patient’s wound discharge did not improve and therefore a computed tomography (CT) scan was conducted which revealed a right psoas abscess. The abscess was partially drained, and he was continued on IV antibiotics. After a few days, the patient demonstrated progressive deterioration of his sensorium. Biochemical and hematological parameters revealed hemoglobin: 14 g/dL, WBC: 18,000 cells/mcL, platelet count: 280,000 cells/mcL, peripheral smear: normocytic and normochromic, neutrophils showing multiple toxic granules, no hemolysis or schistocytes, CRP:14 mg/L, INR: 0.9, D-dimer: normal, and fibrinogen: 2.4 g/suggestive of sepsis. Based on the imaging findings, a diagnosis of septic embolism to the brain was made. Culture sensitivity of the purulent discharge revealed a multidrug-resistant Escherichia coli and was managed with IV tigecycline (100 mg IV, followed by 50 mg IV q12 hourly for 14 days). Over the next 4 weeks, the patient improved dramatically, and repeat imaging showed significant resolution of the hemorrhages.
CT abdomen with contrast showed an enlarged right psoas muscle with multiple hypodense loculations enhancing peripherally on contrast suggestive of a psoas abscess. CT brain imaging showed diffuse multiple micro- and macro-hemorrhages of varied sizes involving the cortical gray-white matter junction . However, there were no hemorrhages within the cerebellum or deep nuclei.
The detection of CMB alone is nonspecific and can be found incidentally, thus clinical correlation is imperative. The two most common causes are hypertensive small vessel disease and congophilic amyloid angiopathy (CAA). In hypertensive small-vessel disease, CMBs are found in the basal ganglia, thalamus, brainstem, and cerebellum. In contrast, bleed in CAA tends to occur at the corticomedullary junction and can lead to lobar hemorrhage.[,,]
Less common causes include diffuse axonal injury leading to microhemorrhages near the gray-white matter junction. In patients with a known history of malignancy, hemorrhagic micrometastasis from melanoma and renal cell carcinoma can also cause microbleeds. CMBs can also be associated with critical medical illnesses such as sepsis and infective endocarditis; hereditary and idiopathic diseases such as cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy, Fabry disease, Moyamoya disease, and radiation-induced vascular injury.[,,]