A 60-year-old man with a history of hypertension, congestive heart failure, dyslipidemia and gastro-esophageal reflux disease was admitted for right shoulder rotator cuff tear. His medications included spironolactone 25 mg once daily, aspirin 325 mg once daily, pantoprazole 40 mg once daily, olmesartan 40 mg once daily, colesevelam 625 mg three times a day, furosemide 20 mg once daily and ezetimibe 10 mg once daily. The patient then underwent right shoulder arthroscopy and rotator cuff repair.
The postoperative course was uneventful until three weeks later, when he developed pain, swelling and a purulent drainage from his right shoulder. The patient returned to the emergency department and an arthroscopic irrigation and drainage was performed. Intraoperative fluid was sent for gram stain, culture and sensitivity, which later revealed the presence of Methicillin susceptible staphylococcus aureus, vancomycin-sensitive Enterococcus spp. and Serratia marcescens.
The patient had no known allergies. After reviewing antimicrobial susceptibility, he was started on vancomycin 1500 mgs intravenously (IV) every 12 hours (to treat both Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococcus spp) and ciprofloxacin 750 mgs by oral induction every 12 hours. The patient's vancomycin peak level was at 36.2 mcg/ml, and the trough level was at 14.7 mcg/ml after the third dose. The patient's shoulder pain and swelling improved after antibiotic treatment. He was discharged and allowed to go home on IV vancomycin and oral ciprofloxacin. His platelet count on the day he was started on vancomycin therapy was 253 × 103/mm3 (the normal range is 150 to 400 × 103/mm3). His complete blood count, vancomycin peak and trough levels were monitored in the infectious disease clinic. The platelet count was 231 × 103/mm3 in the first week and 272 × 103/mm3 in the second week. The platelet count was 6 × 103/mm3 in the third week after treatment.
The patient was admitted for further work-up of thrombocytopenia. In addition to vancomycin and ciprofloxacin, he received heparin flushes (50 units daily) for three weeks to maintain potency of the peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC). In the emergency department, his vital signs were reported as 37.4 degrees Celsius temperature, pulse of 88 per minute, respiratory rate of 18 per minute and blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg. Further examination revealed the presence of extensive petechial hemorrhages on both of his lower extremities. Peripheral pulses were present and equal in all extremities. A repeat platelet count in the emergency department yielded a result of 9 × 103/mm3.
On the first day after admission, administration of aspirin, vancomycin and heparin flushes of the PICC on the patient were discontinued. As part of his thrombocytopenia work-up, blood cultures, a disseminated intravascular coagulation panel and heparin-induced antiplatelet antibodies were obtained. Given the patient's presentation, vancomycin-induced anti-platelet antibodies were also ordered - this was done at the Blood Center of the Wisconsin Platelet and Neutrophil Immunology Laboratory, using immunofluorescence flow cytometry. These results were reviewed three days after the blood specimen was drawn. During this time, the patient received one unit of platelet transfusion, which raised his platelet count from 9 × 103/mm3 to 28 × 103/mm3. On the second day, the patient was given another unit of platelet transfusion, which further elevated his platelet count to 60 × 103/mm3. By the third day, his platelet count had increased to 271 × 103/mm3. He was discharged home on an initial dose of 100 mg intravenous tigecycline, followed by 50 mg IV every 12 hours. The patient continued with a follow-up at the infectious disease clinic and his platelet count was already at 344 × 103/mm3 after one week and 338 × 103 /mm3 after two weeks.
The differential diagnoses considered were: 1) disseminated intravascular coagulopathy; 2) heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT); and 3) vancomycin-induced thrombocytopenia (VIT). Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy was ruled out because his prothombin time, fibrinogen level, D-dimer level and peripheral smear were all normal. Blood cultures also showed no growth. HIT was excluded by the absence of heparin-induced anti-platelet antibodies. A vancomycin-induced anti-platelet antibody test revealed IgG-positive antibodies detected in the presence of vancomycin. IgM antibodies were negative.