A 68-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with a chief complaint of persistent pain throughout the abdomen for 3 d.
The patient suffered from persistent pain throughout the abdomen for 3 d, especially in the upper and middle abdomen, accompanied by vomiting and diarrhea without fever, shortness of breath, edema, pain in the lower extremities, and other discomfort. She was diagnosed with AP in a local hospital. The patient gradually developed shortness of breath and difficulty in breathing during treatment of AP.
The patient had a history of hypertension for more than 10 years and diabetes for more than 6 years.
The patient denied a history of smoking, tuberculosis, and alcohol or drug use. No family members had similar diseases.
On admission (day 4 of onset), the patient’s vital signs were recorded as follows: blood pressure was 189/108 mmHg, respiratory rate was 21 breaths/min, pulse rate was 117 bpm, and SPO2 was 93%, with epigastric tenderness on deep palpation. Slightly rapid breathing and lower lung breath sounds were observed, and a small amount of wet rales were heard. The entire abdomen was tender with no rebound pain and no edema in either lower limb.
After admission (day 4 of onset), plasma amylase and lipase were elevated to 956 U/L and 796 U/L, respectively. Blood lipids were normal. The levels of D-dimer and fibrin degradation product (FDP) were 5.73 mg/L and 18.7 mg/L, respectively. The white blood cell count and neutrophil ratio were 22.95 × 109/L and 87.1%, respectively, and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein was 233.06 mg/L. After treatment, D-dimer and FDP levels gradually increased . On the 16th d of onset, B-type natriuretic peptide was 983.6 pg/mL, and high-sensitivity troponin T was 0.159 μg/L. Both D-dimer and FDP increased to 12.69 mg/L and 62.06 mg/L, respectively. Enoxaparin was administered for anticoagulation. The patient’s dyspnea gradually eased, D-dimer and FDP levels gradually decreased, and blood pressure returned to normal.
After admission (day 4 of onset), an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed severe necrosis of the head and body of the pancreas . Abdominal color Doppler ultrasound showed silt-like deposits in the gallbladder and fluid in the gallbladder. The patient was diagnosed with acute necrotizing pancreatitis. Chest CT on the 5th d after admission showed a small amount of inflammation in both lungs and a small amount of pleural effusion on both sides. After treatment, re-examination by the chest CT scan showed that pleural effusion had gradually reduced, but the patient developed progressively worsening dyspnea. On the 16th d of onset, the patient developed extreme dyspnea and respiratory failure and was treated with mechanical ventilation with tracheal intubation. Her electrocardiogram showed no myocardial infarction or atrial fibrillation. Heart color Doppler ultrasound indicated pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary artery systolic pressure was approximately 30 mmHg), and ejection fraction was 60%. Chest CT revealed a small amount of pleural effusion on the left side with atelectasis of the left lower lobe. Color Doppler ultrasound of the lower limbs showed thrombosis in the common femoral vein and bilateral posterior tibial veins on the right, and thrombosis in the saphenous vein on the left. On the 24th d of onset, chest CT angiography showed PE in the left main pulmonary artery and multiple branches of the left and right pulmonary arteries.