A 58 year old Tanzanian man, chagga by tribe with a BMI of 28 kg/m2 and newly diagnosed with type II diabetes mellitus was admitted to the internal medicine department of Kilimanjaro Christian Medical Centre (KCMC), a tertiary referral hospital in Northern Tanzania. His presenting complaint was polydipsia and unilateral abnormal movements of the right upper limb for four days. At presentation we observed choreiform movements of his right wrist, followed by the whole upper limb and continuing for one minute at a time. These movements were slow and repetative in a stereotypic manner, and continued intermittently, even during sleep. The choreiform movements started with a stretching of his right wrist into an abnormal spastic posture. The involuntary movements were exaggerated by attempting to perform any active movements such as attempting to shake hands with a doctor. These patterns of movement were misdiagnosed as epilepsy, stroke, cryptococcal meningitis and a SOL in the primary health centre—where there is no access to CT imaging or electroencephalogram (EEG) -prior to referral to our tertiary hospital. He was found to be hyperglycaemic (serum glucose 549 mg/dl) and to have a raised gylcated haemoglobin (HbA1c 18.9 %). His physiological observations were normal on admission, with a blood pressure of 130/70 mmHg, a pulse rate of 76 beats per minute, an axillary temperature of 36.4 °C, a respiratory rate of 19 breaths/minute and an oxygen saturation of 98 % on room air. The urine dipstick findings were glucose 4+, ketone-trace, protein-negative, pH 5 and leucocytes were trace. Serological testing for HIV, hepatitis BsAg, cryptococcus antigen and toxoplasma immunoglobulin was all negative. A chest radiograph excluded pulmonary tuberculosis and pneumonia. The patient’s full blood picture, lipid profile and biochemistry were all within normal range. A CT scan of the brain was done for exclusion of malignancy, intracerebral haemorrhage or ischemia, and was found to be grossly normal . Epilepsy was excluded by a normal EEG. Unfortunately, in this setting MRI is not available but may have been helpful in confirming the diagnosis in this case.
The patient was managed with regular intravenous insulin and the frequency of choreiform movements started to decrease on the second day (serum blood glucose 270 mg/dl). On the fourth day of his admission, he was initiated on oral hypoglycaemic medications (metformin and glibenclamide). On the fifth day in hospital his serum blood glucose reduced further (129.6 mg/dl) and no more chorea was observed. On the sixth day, when his blood glucose levels were fully controlled he was discharged with oral hypoglycaemics, and his involuntary movements had resolved. On the day of discharge the patient was very happy saying ‘I was very depressed to be told in the primary health care centre that I have epilepsy while in our family there is no one with such an illness. But after a CT-scan and EEG at this referral hospital and treatment it was confirmed that it wasn’t epilepsy rather hyperglycaemia’.