We report a case of a 36-year-old woman of Yoruba ethnicity who presented with absence of menses. A physical examination revealed a woman with feminine appearance characterized by long plaited hair and well-developed breasts. As part of the investigations to unravel the sex status, she had a resting standard 12-lead ECG following standard protocol. The ECG was in sinus rhythm and it revealed a masculine electrocardiographic pattern with OSDES score of 9 (T-wave pattern in lead V1, 3; ST segment in lead V2 or V3, 3; QRS rotation, 2; heart rate of 79, 1) as shown in Fig. . An abdominopelvic ultrasonography done by a radiologist showed absence of uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries. When our patient was considered for transvaginal scan, she declined but embraced translabial ultrasound as she claimed to be a virgin. Translabial ultrasonography revealed the presence of undescended hypoplastic testes with associated testicular microlithiasis at the external inguinal rings bilaterally . The karyotyping done using blood revealed no gross chromosomal abnormalities involving structural or number changes. The chromosomal sex of male (46,XY) was reported . The sex-determining region Y (SRY) was also done using QIAmp Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen) by extracting deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) from a peripheral blood sample of our patient. Polymerase chain reaction was done with a pair of SRY forward (tacaggccatgcacagagag) and reverse (tcttgagtgtgtggctttcg) primers and Taq DNA polymerase with the use of appropriate positive and negative controls. Electrophoresis of the polymerase chain reaction product was done in 2% agarose gels and the bands visualized under ultraviolet (UV) light. The result showed that the blood sample was positive for the SRY gene which further confirmed the male status . The genetic sex testing result confirmed initial electrocardiographically determined sex status of our patient. She was counseled and later had the testes removed to prevent malignant transformation.