We present the case of a 32-year-old Romanian woman, with no remarkable medical history, who was injured by her own Crotalinae snake (also known as a pit viper or rattlesnake) on her left forearm. She self-presented to the hospital within the first 45 minutes after the event; on her way to medical services, the forearm and hand developed important oedema, pain and paraesthesia. When she was presented to our Emergency Department, upon clinical examination, she was conscious with a Glasgow coma scale of 12/15, somnolent, febrile, and suffering from headache, and tachypnoea. The marks of the snakebite were located in the distal part of the anterior left forearm; she had pain and bleeding at the bite site and swelling of the left upper limb with lymphangitis up to the axilla, with local dolour and calour together with tender axillar and epitrohlear lymph nodes . Local pain was very severe and movements of the hand including fingers were also very painful; a diagnosis of compartment syndrome was made.
The urgent Doppler ultrasound evaluation of the left upper limb indicated non-compressibility of the brachial vein and micro-thrombosis on its lumen that enabled the diagnosis of deep vein thrombosis. The local neurological function was within normal range expected for paraesthesia of the median nerve. She was not administered polyvalent anti-snake venom because there was a lack of serum at that time in our centre and the surroundings. Concerning her laboratory findings, the haemoglobin was 15.3 mg/dL, white blood cell count was 16.700/mmc, with a left predominance, her coagulation profile revealed prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) and prothrombin time, and elevated D-Dimer and fibrinogen degranulation products plasma levels, but her renal and liver functions were normal. She was put on antibiotics treatment with piperacillin/tazobactum, linezolid and metronidazole. The local treatment required fasciotomy, and the evolution started to improve soon after the intervention .
The second day of post-operatory evolution revealed a reduction of the clinical signs of compartment syndrome. Considering the early onset of deep vein thrombosis, she received unfractionated heparin and was monitored using aPTT evolution. Local improvement was achieved in the next 4 days with progressive diminishment of local tenderness and swelling; soon, the movement was re-established .
Before discharge, the patient underwent repeated Doppler examination and the local flowmetry was normal with no micro thrombosis. She was prescribed warfarin under the regular evaluation of the international normalised ratio (INR).