A 64-year-old female with a history of chronic constipation and schizoaffective
disorder on clozapine, risperidone, benztropine, and glycopyrrolate presented to the
emergency department via emergency medical services (EMS) for a chief complaint of
altered mental status concerning for acute stroke. The EMS personnel noted she was
found by her boyfriend with slurred speech, left-sided weakness, and a severely
distended abdomen. On first assessment she was obtunded and in shock with a heart
rate of 131 beats per minute and blood pressure of 60/40 mm Hg. Oxygen saturation
could not be obtained via skin probe, and respirations were 31 breaths per minute.
She was hypothermic at 34.8 degrees Celsius. Her abdomen was grossly distended and
tense with dullness to percussion in all quadrants. The patient was unable to
provide any history but review of the electronic health record showed that she had a
history of severe constipation and had seen her primary physician two weeks prior
for the same complaint.
Femoral central access was obtained after three attempts with the first two attempts
complicated by lack of blood return from the catheter after passage over the
guidewire, which was misinterpreted as line misplacement. Point-of-care ultrasound
demonstrated normal compression of the common femoral veins at both sites. Initial
point-of-care blood testing showed a severe metabolic acidosis with pH of 6.36 and a
lactic acid of 21.9 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (reference range: 0.5–1.0
mmol/L) as well as profound anemia with a hemoglobin level of 3.7 grams per
deciliter (g/dL) (reference range: 12.0–15.5 g/dL). Her creatinine level
measured at 1.3 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL), (reference range: 0.6–1.1
mg/dL) which was increased from her baseline of 0.9 mg/dL.
In total, she received two liters of 0.9% saline, three units of packed red
cells, and two units of fresh frozen plasma without improvement of hemodynamics. A
norepinephrine infusion was then initiated with improvement of blood pressure to
128/78 mm Hg. After improvement of hemodynamics the patient was intubated. Cefepime
and metronidazole were given for presumed intra-abdominal sepsis. She also received
a total of 250 milliliters (mL) of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate with improvement
of her acidosis from pH 6.36 to pH 7.33. Her hyperkalemia of 7.8 mmol/L (reference
range: 3.4–4.8 mmol/L) improved with fluids and sodium bicarbonate to 5.2
mmol/L. A forced-air warming device was applied to the patient after intubation.
Point-of-care ultrasound revealed no intra-abdominal fluid. Supine chest radiography performed after
intubation showed low lung volumes with a massively dilated colon. General surgery
was consulted for acute abdomen, and additional imaging was obtained once her
hemodynamics stabilized. Computed tomography (CT) of the head showed no intracranial
hemorrhage or ischemic stroke. However, CT angiography of the chest, abdomen and
pelvis was remarkable for a markedly dilated, stool-filled colon with diffuse
pneumatosis ; no transition
point was identified. The inferior vena cava was compressed , and there was ostial stenosis of the celiac
trunk and superior mesenteric artery . Impaired perfusion of both kidneys was noted. Although
intra-abdominal pressure was not transduced, the evidence of organ dysfunction with
a tense abdomen and CT findings led to the diagnosis of ACS.
General surgery took the patient to the operating room emergently for decompressive
laparotomy and total colectomy. Upon opening her fascia, the ischemic-appearing
colon explosively decompressed, sending stool across the room. She subsequently
experienced a wide complex tachycardia in the setting of a potassium of greater than
10 mmol/L. After multiple rounds of medications per Advanced Cardiac Life Support
protocol, she was pronounced dead due to severe reperfusion injury. The surgeons
noted a loop of sigmoid colon trapped by a band of tissue in the pelvis, when
removing the colon for pathology assessment.