A 26-year-old male patient had road traffic accident and sustained a close fracture of the right tibia along with segmental fracture of the adjacent fibula. The patient also had a fracture of the base of 5th metatarsal left foot. The right tibia was fractured at the junction of middle 1/3rd and lower 1/3rd shaft with a lateral butterfly fragment . The tibia nailing was undertaken at tertiary care hospital for the said patient under combined spinal and epidural anesthesia. The proximal tibia was approached by a midline incision with splitting of the patellar tendon. The reduction of the fracture fragments was achieved and confirmed on the image intensifier on antero-posterior (AP) and lateral projections. The guide wire was inserted and passed across the fracture site which was confirmed on AP and lateral projection on the image intensifier. The medullary canal was narrow and hence the initial reaming was started with the smallest available, that is, 8 mm reamer. The reamer was noted to pass the fracture site and entered the medullary cavity of the distal fracture fragment which was confirmed on image intensifier . At this juncture, the reamer stopped progressing further. On visualization with image intensifier, to our surprise we noticed that the reamer coiled shaft got broken into multiple pieces in the medullary cavity at the junction of upper 1/3rd and middle 1/3rd tibia about 8 cm from the tip of the reamer . As there was no way the broken reamer could have been removed from the top of the tibia, decision was made to expose the fracture site. The fracture site was exposed with a vertical incision. A linear osteotomy (5 × 2 cm) was done in distal tibial fragment without disturbing the anterior and medial border to make a small window keeping intact the soft tissue attachment. Through this window the broken reamer was pushed in the retrograde manner and was delivered out through the opening made in the proximal tibia. Most of the broken metal pieces of the reamer shaft were removed through the proximal tibia opening with pituitary rongeur. An 8 mm solid IM nail (SIGN nail, www.signfracturecare.org) was passed in antegrade manner across the fracture site. The nail was locked distally with two screws and proximally with one screw in dynamic mode . The reduction and fixation of the fracture was confirmed on image intensifier. The operative wounds were irrigated with normal saline + povidone iodine solution and closed in layers with absorbable sutures for deeper tissues and skin was approximated with skin stapler. The patient was allowed partial weight bearing on the operated leg at 3 weeks post-surgery gradually progressing to full weight bearing at 10 weeks after confirming clinical and radiological union .