A 67-year-old right-handed man presented to our department with a 4-month history of progressively worsening headaches and a 2-week history of slurred speech and lower limb weakness. On physical examination, the patient was alert and oriented but with a transcortical sensory aphasia associated with ideomotor apraxia and episodes of spatial disorientation. No other focal motor, sensory, or cerebellar abnormalities were detected, and the remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable. He was afebrile and had normal vital signs and normal findings of routine laboratory studies.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head showed a purely cystic mixed density parietal mass on left hemisphere. A contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a minimally enhancing cyst wall, full of fluid, without a solid nodular component .
A left parietal craniotomy was performed. After the dura was opened, most of the cyst was removed and five soft-tissue samples specimens were sent for pathological analysis.
Feeding vessels were found deep near the area of the ventricular ependyma, but the ependyma of the ventricle was not breached during the operation. A partial excision of the cyst was performed, being the lesion in full eloquent area.
An autologous fibrin glue was used to enhance hemostasis and dural sealing. The patient tolerated the procedure well, and there were no intraoperative complications. All the examined tissues pointed a histologic diagnosis of CPP (WHO grade I). We performed a CT scan in the immediate postoperative period so as to rule out surgical complications (hemorrhage, ischemia) . On the basis of a partial removal of the lesion and the known histological diagnosis of grade I, after a multidisciplinary assessment, an adjuvant therapy was ruled out and we programmed an enhanced examination (CT to MRI) in follow-up after 6 months . The patient did not follow any oncological treatment.
After 7 months the patient developed ataxia, dizziness, vomit, and worsening headache. Imaging showed significant regrowth of the known residual parietal tumor and a new cystic lesion in the cerebellar vermis and left fronto-basal supratentorial region . He underwent a midline suboccipital craniotomy and macroscopic resection of tumor. Histology on this occasion showed, after only 7 months, a choroid plexus carcinoma (CPC) of WHO grade III. The postoperative course was uneventful and was referred for consideration of adjuvant radiotherapy. The patient died after 6 months.
Gross examination of the fresh tumor specimen was performed on all available pathological samples (net weight of all the specimens: 5.5 g of size 4–12 mm). Histological diagnosis was assessed according to the WHO criteria for CPTs. CPP was composed of a delicate and vascularized connective tissue frond covered by a single papillary layer of uniform cuboidal to columnar epithelial cells with round or ovally, basally situated monomorphic nuclei. Mitotic activity was extremely low (<1 mitose per 10 hpfs). Brain invasion, increased cellular density, necrosis, and nuclear pleomorphism were absent. Immunohistochemically, CPP expressed cytokeratins. CK7/CK20 combination was CK7-positive and CK20-negative. Glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP) was focally present. Benign CPP (WHO grade I°) was diagnosed.
The specimens from the second surgical procedure after 7 months were significant for multiple fragments of tan-pink, soft, and friable tissue collectively weighing 10.5 g and measuring 3 × 2, 5 × 2 cm. The tissue was fixed in 10% formalin and processed for paraffin embedding. The paraffin blocks were sectioned at 5-μm intervals and then stained with hematoxylin and eosin for microscopic examination. Histologically, malignant progression of CPP was reported. The tumor showed frank signs of malignancy. According to the WHO criteria, the surgical specimens showed frequent mitoses (>5 per 10 randomly selected hpfs), increased cellular density, nuclear pleomorphism, blurring of the papillary pattern with poorly structured sheets of tumor cells, and necrotic areas. The tumor strongly immunostained for cytokeratins and it was focally positive for GFAP. Immunohistochemical analysis of tissue proliferation was carried out using a monoclonal antibody against Ki67 (MIB-1, 1:100; DAKO) using the avidin–biotin method on an automated staining system. The differential diagnosis included papillary anaplastic ependymoma and metastatic carcinoma. Because the recurrence was characterized by frank signs of malignancy, according to the current WHO criteria, a diagnosis of CPC (WHO grade III) was made .