A 61-year-old woman presented to the emergency department for evaluation of painless jaundice.
A week before presentation, the patient noticed darker urine and pruritus. Her stools became completely pale and yellowing of her skin appeared. She denied abdominal pain, fever, and chills but reported nausea and loss of appetite, with a loss of 4 kg over the last 4 mo.
The patient’s medical history was notable for ankylosing spondylitis and arterial hypertension. She had undergone cholecystectomy due to cholecystolithiasis in the past.
The patient reported an 18 pack-year history of smoking. She had no history of alcohol abuse. Her medications included esomeprazole for ulcer prophylaxis, perindopril/indapamide for arterial hypertension, meloxicam for ankylosing spondylitis, and cholecalciferol for prevention of vitamin D deficiency-related disorders. She had no known allergies. Her family history was unremarkable.
The patient’s vital signs were normal on admission. Physical examination revealed jaundice. Her abdomen was nondistended, soft, and nontender with no palpable mass.
Initial laboratory findings showed elevated levels of bilirubin (total: 91 µmol/L; direct: 65 µmol/L), and pancreatic (amylase: 3.27 µkat/L; lipase: 3.79 µkat/L) and liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase: 3.84 µkat/L; alanine aminotransferase: 9.73 µkat/L; gamma-glutamyltransferase: 27.31 µkat/L; alkaline phosphatase: 10.61 µkat/L). Serum levels of the tumor markers carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were within the normal range (CA 19-9: 20.8 kU/L; CEA: 3.9 µg/L).
Abdominal ultrasound showed grossly distended intra- and extra-hepatic bile ducts with a probable level of obstruction at the ampulla of Vater. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and chest revealed a well-defined homogenously enhancing mass measuring 15 mm × 12 mm × 14 mm in the duodenal ampullary region, causing upstream dilatation of intra- and extra-hepatic bile ducts and the main pancreatic duct . An enlarged lymph node measuring 1 cm in the hepatoduodenal ligament and separate lymph nodes measuring 8 mm in the retroperitoneum were observed. In the laterobasal segment of the left lower pulmonary lobe, a small 4 mm soft tissue nodule of uncertain potential was described. There was no convincing evidence of distant metastases. Following discussion of the patient’s case at a multidisciplinary team meeting, the patient underwent pancreatoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure) and was discharged after an uneventful recovery.