A 53-year-old man presented with a recurrent tachycardia and was referred for catheter ablation. The patient suffered from frequent palpitations, and the tachycardia was haemodynamically stable. A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) during sinus rhythm (SR) exhibited a slight right axis deviation , and the ECG during the tachycardia exhibited a right bundle branch block (RBBB) configuration, north-west axis deviation, QRS duration of 110 ms, and cycle length (CL) of 274 ms , and it was terminated by an infusion of low-dose verapamil. No specific abnormalities were identified on echocardiography, thallium myocardial scintigraphy, or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. The patient had an episode of palpitations a half a year prior. The frequency of the palpitations gradually increased as time passed, and they began to occur about once a week. Taking verapamil and flecainide could not completely suppress the tachycardia. Since the patient had a symptomatic recurrent idiopathic left VT, catheter ablation therapy was recommended as a class I indication.
An EP study was performed. A CARTO3 three-dimensional mapping system (Biosense Webster, Diamond Bar, CA, USA) was used with intracardiac echocardiography (SoundStar catheter, Biosense Webster). A 5-Fr decapolar steerable electrode catheter with 2 mm interelectrode spacing (Abbott Laboratories, Chicago, IL, USA) was positioned on the left ventricular (LV) septum through a retrograde transaortic approach. A 5-Fr quadripolar electrode catheter (Japan Lifeline, Tokyo, Japan) was positioned in the high right atrium region, 5-Fr decapolar electrode catheter (Japan Lifeline, Tokyo, Japan) in the coronary sinus (CS), and 5-Fr 12-pole electrode catheter (Japan Lifeline, Tokyo, Japan) at the His and right ventricular (RV) apex regions. VT1 was induced by both atrial and ventricular pacing. During VT1, a multipolar electrode catheter (MEC) placed on the LV septum showed a pre-systolic potential (P2) and LV myocardial potentials . However, no diastolic potential (P1) was recorded. An excellent pace map was obtained from the mid to distal parts of the MEC on the LV septum. Radio frequency (RF) energy (with a power setting of 30–35 W and 60–120 s duration) using an irrigated catheter (SurroundFlow, Biosense Webster) was applied to the distal area of the LPF during SR, and VT1 became non-inducible. The patient was followed up with pill in the pocket therapy using verapamil after the ablation.
However, the same tachycardia still occurred at the same frequency as that after the 1st session, and a 2nd EP study was performed. A CARTO3 system was used. During the second session, RF energy (with a power of 30–35 W and 60–120 s duration) using an irrigated catheter (SurroundFlow, Biosense Webster) was delivered to the mid-LPF region during SR, and VT1 became no longer inducible. After the 2nd session, an ECG during SR revealed an LPF hemiblock, which was not evident after the 1st session . The patient was followed up with pill in the pocket therapy using verapamil after the ablation.
However, after the 2nd session, the patient still suffered from palpitations with the same frequency as that before the ablation and they started 1 month after the 2nd ablation session. Six months after the 2nd ablation session, a 12-lead ECG revealing a different VT was documented. VT2 had an RBBB configuration, right axis deviation, QRS duration of 112 ms, and CL of 286 ms, which had a quite different axis from VT1. A 3rd EP study was performed using a CARTO3 system with a SoundStar intracardiac echocardiography catheter. A 5-Fr decapolar steerable electrode catheter with 2 mm interelectrode spacing (Abbott Laboratories, Chicago, IL, USA) was positioned on the LV septum through an antegrade transseptal approach. A 5-Fr quadripolar electrode catheter (Japan Lifeline, Tokyo, Japan) was positioned in the RV apex region, 5-Fr decapolar electrode catheter (Japan Lifeline, Tokyo, Japan) in the CS, and 5-Fr hexapolar electrode catheter in the His region. In addition, an 8-Fr non-irrigated ablation catheter (Japan Lifeline, Tokyo, Japan) was positioned on the non-coronary cusp. VT2 spontaneously occurred after an isoproterenol infusion. There was a slight variation in the VT2 CL, and the preceding H-H had the same interval as the V-V . Entrainment pacing from the RV apex exhibited constant fusion, and the post pacing interval (PPI) (337 ms) was longer than the VT2 CL (294 ms). Due to the RF energy applications in the 1st and 2nd sessions, entrainment pacing from the mid to distal LPF area did not capture the fascicle or ventricle. The His-Ventricular (H-V) interval (20 ms) during VT2 was long and was similar to that of VT1. From those EP findings and the QRS morphology, we estimated that VT2 was an US-VT, and a retrograde slowly conducting limb should possibly have been connected to the proximal site of the LPF. Due to the RF energy applications in the 1st and 2nd sessions, the LPF potentials were only detected in a very limited area of a proximal site. By placing the ablation catheter at that point, VT2 transitioned to a pleomorphic fusion beat, and 30 W of RF energy using an irrigated catheter (SurroundFlow, Biosense Webster) terminated the VT within a few seconds. The successful ablation site corresponded completely with the earliest P2 site during VT1 in the 1st session . VT2 became no longer inducible. The 12-lead ECG and H-V interval (60 ms) did not change after the ablation . After the ablation, the patient was followed up without any antiarrhythmic drugs, and the VT has never recurred during 21 months of follow-up.