A 54-year-old Chinese male was referred to our hospital for further evaluation of a liver mass, which was discovered incidentally during routine physical examination in a local hospital. The patient had a 10-year history of hypertension and was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus approximately 5 years before. He denied history of liver cirrhosis and hepatitis B virus (HBV) or hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. The patient underwent splenectomy 5 years earlier owing to a high-altitude falling accident. No mass was identifiable on abdominal palpation exam. Serum tumor markers (alpha-fetoprotein, CA199, and CA125) were within the normal range. Abdominal ultrasonography (US) revealed a 5 cm iso-echoic lesion that located in the left hepatic lobe near the capsule. A 1.2 cm gallstone was also observed. An abdominal plane-computed tomography (CT) scan revealed an oval, slightly hypodense mass located in segment IV of the left liver lobe measuring 4.5 × 3.3 cm. The lesion had an inhomogeneous enhancement during the arterial phase and diminished enhancement during the portal and equilibrium phases on a contrast-enhanced CT scan . Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a slightly hypointense mass on both T1- and T2-weighted images, which appeared slightly hyperintense on diffusion-weighted images. After the injection of gadoxetic acid, the lesion appeared strongly heterogeneous and hyperintense during the arterial phase and relatively hypointense during the portal and equilibrium phases . An indication of a pseudo-capsule was also observed. Partial hepatectomy and cholecystectomy were performed with the suspicion of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
During the operation, the intrahepatic mass was found to be located in segment IV of the liver, measuring 4.0 cm in diameter. It was completely embedded in the liver tissue, and no other mass was found. Postoperative hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed sinusoidal structures and lymphoid tissue hyperplasia. A capsule separating the spleen tissue from liver tissue could be clearly detected , which confirmed intrahepatic splenosis. Detailed immunohistochemical staining showed positivity for CD3 and CD20, specific markers for lymphocyte T cells and B cells, respectively. Meanwhile, the expression of the Ki-67 antigen was quite limited. The polyclonal nature of the lymphocytes and the low proliferation activity further confirmed the benign characteristic of the mass, as malignant tumors are always monoclonal with active proliferation. The patient discharged uneventfully after the operation, and no symptoms of recurrence have been observed during 2 years of follow-up.