A 74-year-old woman (height, 148 cm; weight, 50 kg) was diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma in the right lower lobe (RLL). The clinical stage was 1A2 (T1bN0M0, UICC 8th), and a robot-assisted right lower lobectomy with lymph node dissection was performed under one-lung ventilation with a double-lumen endobronchial tube. Port placement was performed according to the methods reported by Dylewski et al. . We used the da Vinci surgical system type Xi (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Three da Vinci arm ports using an 8-mm reusable metal da Vinci trocar were set in the seventh intercostal space: one below the subscapularis angle, the other on the posterior axillary line, and the third on the anterior axillary line; they were docked with a cadiere forceps, 0-degree lens scope, and curved bipolar dissector, respectively. A 12-mm metal port was placed on the ventral side of the eighth intercostal space, and this port was docked with tip-up fenestrated grasper and the da Vinci-equipped stapler. A 12-mm AIRSEAL access trocar (Conmed, Largo, FL, USA) was placed in the 10th intercostal space as CO2 insufflation combined assistant port, and the console operation was started .
The surgery proceeded uneventfully before the bronchial resection. After dissecting the RLL bronchus by the da Vinci-equipped stapler, we found that an endobronchial suction tube (EST) had been pinched in the bronchial stump . There were no warnings, such as high resistance during clamping or stapling. The EST was placed to maintain the collapse of the right lung at the discretion of the anesthesiologist. Since the EST was firmly trapped in the staple line, the EST could not be withdrawn manually. Although we considered modifying our technique to VATS, which is a familiar approach, we attempted to see if the repair could be performed using RATS, with sufficient attention to safety (Additional file : Video). First, the bronchial stump was grasped with cadiere forceps and staples were grasped one by one with a curved bipolar dissector while observing the site under magnification to avoid unnecessary bronchial injuries . All staples involving the EST were extracted successively, and the EST was removed from the RLL bronchus . Next, we sutured the partially opened bronchial stump with three interrupted suture ligations using 3–0 Prolene and covered the bronchial stump with a pedicled pericardial fat pad . No endobronchial defect was seen on the suture line on bronchoscopic evaluation, and no significant air leak was detected during a leakage test of the operative lung at a positive pressure of 20 cmH2O. A chest tube was inserted to check postoperative bleeding and air leakage. The operation was finished without any other adverse events, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for close observation. The operation time was 3 h and 33 min, and the surgeon console time was 2 h and 45 min; intraoperative blood loss was minimal. No air leakage was found through the chest tube. The patient was discharged on the 5th postoperative day without complications. Furthermore, the patient experienced no perioperative complications during a follow-up of 8 months after discharge.