A 41-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for further evaluation due to a thyroid nodule that was detected during a routine examination six months ago. She reported no symptoms at the time. Upon physical examination, a hard and fixed mass of 20mm in size was detected. No apparent lesions were detected in the oral cavity, nasopharynx, oropharynx, or hypopharynx. Neck ultrasonography (US) showed a solid hypoechoic nodule, sized 16mm×11mm×13mm in the middle-lower region of the right thyroid gland. The ratio of nodule longitudinal diameter to transverse diameter was less than 1. The nodule exhibited an irregular shape and unclear border, but calcification and linear hyperechoic patterns were not observed. Color Doppler sonography indicated meager blood flow within the nodule . Notably, no visibly abnormal lymph nodes were detected in the neck area. The tumor was categorized as the fourth tier of Thyroid Imaging Reporting and Data System (TI-RADS), as designated by the American College of Radiology. A comprehensive biological examination was conducted, which encompassed a serum lipid profile, blood glucose level, thyroid hormone level, antithyroglobulin antibody level, thyroglobulin level, parathyroid hormone level, calcitonin level, and tumor marker level, all of which returned normal results. Enhanced neck computed tomography (CT) indicated an 11mm sized heterogeneous, slightly enhancing mass. The local thyroid capsule was not prominently displayed. A fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) guided by US was subsequently performed, revealing smears with plump epithelioid and spindle cells, accompanied by infiltration of lymphoid cells and eosinophils.The tumor cells exhibited nuclear atypia, displaying very high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratios. The aspirate was diagnosed as a poorly differentiated malignant thyroid tumor. To obtain a definitive diagnosis, we scheduled an excisional biopsy of the mass. During the procedure under general anesthesia, the tumor, found in the middle-lower section of the right thyroid, was solid and had infiltrated a part of the sternothyroid muscle. At last, she underwent total thyroidectomy and the right central neck dissection (ND). Surgical margins were negative. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of atypical cell nests separated by dense fibrous septa with many lymphocytes and plasma cell infiltration. The neoplastic cells displayed mild-to-moderate atypia and demonstrated squamous differentiation. No histological findings were observed that indicated the presence of the typical thyroid tumors, such as papillary carcinoma, follicular carcinoma, or medullary carcinoma. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the tumor cells were positively reactive to CD5, CD117, CK19, P40, P53, Pax 8, and Bcl-2, and negative to thyroglobulin (Tg), thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), and calcitonin . All lymph nodes were found to be negative. Postoperative staging surveillance with PET scan was carried out, revealing no abnormal FDG uptake in distant areas, blurred fat space in the operative area, and increased uptake in the operation bed, which were considered postoperative changes. External beam radiation therapy (50.0 Gy/25 fractions) was administered to the thyroid bed and bilateral cervical lymph node area. The decision to administer adjuvant radiotherapy was grounded in institutional guidelines for primary thymus epithelial tumors (TET). The reason for this is that ITTC shared similar characteristics with TET in terms of morphology, immunohistochemistry, and genetics. Therefore, in the absence of established guidelines, the decision to apply adjuvant radiation therapy for ITTC should be based on the clinical practice guideline for primary TET. In this case, the tumor infiltrated a portion of the sternothyroid muscle, which corresponds to extraparenchymal extension of TET (equivalent to Masaoka clinical stage IIb which will be further discussed in “Discussion”). In this situation, adjuvant radiation therapy is usually indicated for improvement of local control. During the 4-year follow-up, which included physical examination of the neck, thyroid function tests, and US for the neck, she showed no signs of locally recurrent or distant disease .