A 77-year-old Japanese man presented to our hospital with esophageal mucosal abnormality in the middle thoracic esophagus. This abnormality was discovered in a barium study for a health checkup. His medical history was significant for primary hypertension. He reported a 50-year history of smoking 8–10 cigarettes per day. There was no family history. Physical and neurological examinations were unremarkable. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed 20-mm, reddish, elevated, and flat lesions in the middle thoracic esophagus . Narrow band imaging (NBI) endoscopy showed dot-like microvessels in elevated lesions . However, the microvascular pattern showed irregular, fine, reticular blood vessels, of Japan Esophageal Society (JES) classification type R, near the center of the lesions . Magnifying endoscopy with NBI revealed type B1 in elevated area, and type R near the center of the lesion in the JES classification. Endoscopic ultrasound showed that the lesion was localized in the mucosa . Therefore, this area of invasion was: cancer limited to the epithelium (EP)/cancer invading into the lamina propria (LPM) to cancer invading into the muscularis mucosa (MM). Biopsies showed SCC of the esophagus. Computed tomography (CT) showed no evidence of lymph node and distant metastases. En bloc resection of the tumor was performed successfully by esophageal ESD without any complications .
Histopathological findings showed an admixture of endocrine cell tumor with SCC with an invasion depth into the muscularis mucosa . No complications were related to the procedure. Immunohistochemical analysis showed positivity for CD56, chromogranin, and synaptophysin in the NEC component . Small cell type NEC was arranged in a sheet fashion existing in the center of the tumor, and these were partially surrounded by well-differentiated SCC. Lymphovascular invasion of the NEC component occurred in the deep part of the muscularis mucosa. Our patient underwent additional surgical treatment consisting of video-assisted thoracoscopic esophagectomy, three-field lymph node dissection from the cervix, mediastinum, and abdomen, and gastric conduit construction. Regional lymph node metastasis was identified in 1 of 76 nodes (number 108 lymph node), and the node metastasis stage was pN1. This lymph node contained NEC and no metastasis of SCC . After surgical treatment, he received chemotherapy consisting of etoposide and carboplatin for 3 months. He is alive and shows no sign of disease recurrence 12 months after surgery.