A 36-year-old male presented with progressive CKD after kidney transplant.
His history began at age five when he was incidentally found to have proteinuria during a workup for developmental delay. He underwent kidney biopsy and was diagnosed with primary type 1 MPGN, though it was noted at the time that he had normal complement levels. Family history was notable for his mother also being diagnosed with MPGN type 1. He developed progressive CKD, and ultimately ESKD necessitating initiation of hemodialysis at age 17. At age 23 he received a living unrelated donor kidney transplant.
His post-transplant creatinine nadir was 1.1 mg/dL; however, in the two months following transplant, his creatinine progressively increased, stabilizing in the 1.8–2.2 mg/dL range (see Fig. for creatinine and proteinuria trends). Workup at that time, including kidney biopsy, was unrevealing—notably there were no signs of rejection or glomerular disease, and specifically there were no deposits noted on immunofluorescence (IF) staining or electron microscopy (EM).
His immunosuppression followed a standard protocol consisting of cyclosporine (Neoral®) and mycophenolate. His maintenance regimen was cyclosporine (goal trough 75–100 mcg/L) and mycophenolic acid 540 mg twice daily. He was on trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia prophylaxis. Post transplant hypertension was managed with a calcium channel blocker and a beta blocker due to previous issues with hyperkalemia on an ACE inhibitor (ACEi). His medical history is also notable for hypothyroidism, intellectual disability, and secondary hyperparathyroidism.
At 12 years post-transplant, proteinuria was noted to have increased from 1.0 g/g Cr to 1.7 g/g Cr and the serum Cr simultaneously increased to 2.2 mg/dL prompting repeat kidney allograft biopsy .
Light microscopy showed a membranoproliferative pattern of injury with lobular accentuation with marked mesangial expansion and variable thickening of glomerular basement membranes by silver-negative and periodic acid-Schiff-positive material. There was no significant glomerular or extraglomerular staining by routine and pronase IF staining. However, EM showed massive electron dense deposits in mesangial and subendothelial regions with a focal vague fibrillar appearance. Subsequently, IF staining for fibronectin was performed and was positive in the deposits . These findings were consistent with FG. Genetic testing was performed using the commercially available, CAP acrredited Renasight CKD Gene Panel which tests for 385 gene associated with CKD. The testingrevealed an FN1 mutation, the primary gene associated with FG. This consisted of an A to G substitution leading to a missense Tyr to Cys change at codon 973 in exon 19 of the FN1 gene, (NM_212482.2:c.2918A > G(p.Tyr973Cys), Pathogenic mutation) that has been previously described .
Recommended treatment of FG is general CKD management. There is no role for immunosuppression. Therefore with the increased proteinuria, the patient was successfully initiated on an angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) despite prior hyperkalemia on an ACEi. Fortunately, the proteinuria and creatinine returned to previous baselines . The patient was additionally referred for genetic counseling. Table is a timeline of major events in this case.