The patient was a 50-year-old female hospitalized in our center due to edema, microscopic hematuria, and increased proteinuria. She had no problems until she was diagnosed with hematuria and proteinuria of less than one gram per day in a routine test 4 years ago and was treated with Losartan and Atorvastatin with a possible diagnosis of IgA nephropathy. Although she had no regular follow-up during this time, she did not report any particular complaints. Only a few months ago, she developed lower extremities edema, and tests showed that proteinuria had increased to more than one gram, so she was referred to our center for a biopsy and further examination. The patient did not report any particular complaints at the clinic, except for the swelling of both lower limbs below the knee, which had developed and gradually increased in recent months.
Medications used included Atorvastatin, Losartan, and Pentoxifylline. The patient’s father had no problems in the family history, and her mother was deceased, but there was no other information about her mother’s medical records except the history of high blood pressure. This patient had four sisters, and five brothers, 3 of whom had kidney failure, and 2 of them underwent kidney transplantation under the age of 30. The two had undergone kidney biopsy, but the findings of one case were not conclusive, and for the second case, IgA nephropathy was reported based on histopathological findings and diagnostic IF. She (our patient) also had five children, and all were boys; two of whom underwent kidney transplants under the age of 30. One of the two children underwent a pre-transplant kidney biopsy, which reported IgA nephropathy. However, the latter was not a candidate for biopsy due to the small size of his kidneys at the time of diagnosis of renal failure. At the time of hospitalization, the patient had BP = 120/80 mmHg, and a temperature of 37° C. Physical examinations were negative in other respects except for edema, which was 2 + in the lower extremities. Laboratory tests included CBC, platelets, BUN, creatinine, electrolytes, liver tests, thyroid hormones, serum lipids, complement, ANA, ANCA, and viral markers were normal. Urine analysis showed blood 4 + , with many RBCs, and protein of 3 + . The 24-h urine collection contained 1,542 mg of protein. On sonography, it was reported that the size of the kidneys was normal, with a slight increase in the echoes of both kidneys; in addition, a 11 mm cortical cyst was located in the left kidney. Eye examination and audiometry were unremarkable. A kidney biopsy was performed to assess renal involvement severity and rule out other possible diagnoses. In addition to previous medications with a possible diagnosis of IgA nephropathy and due to family history, Prednisolone was started at a dose of 1 mg/kg body weight, and it was recommended to return with histopathological results.
The patient’s tissue biopsy results were reported as follows: on LM and IF studies, no significant pathologic finding identified. However on electron microscopy, GBM changes including multilayering of lamina densa and irregular thickness were suggestive of hereditary nephritis (Alport syndrome). Neither IgA deposit on IF study nor electron dense deposits on EM were seen .
Due to the high cost and lack of access in our center, genetic testing was not possible. Also, in our center, the only examination that was possible was evaluation of the five chains of collagen IV in the kidney biopsy specimen, which was performed for the patient, and no abnormality was reported. According to the pathology report, the medical history of the family members were re-examined, and it was found that one of her children and her brother had severe hearing loss in the course of the disease. Furthermore, the daughter of one of her brothers (He had been diagnosed with IgA nephropathy), underwent a kidney biopsy at the age of four due to hematuria and proteinuria, and histology and electron microscopy findings favored Alport syndrome.