A 64-year-old man was referred to our hospital for a swelling in the left inguinal region. He reported no other symptoms and his medical history was unremarkable. Computed tomography showed a left inguinal hernia with no other findings. Preoperative laboratory tests were normal. We decided to perform TAPP hernia repair in accordance with our institution’s policies.
We established three ports, one at the umbilicus and the other two in the lateral abdominal region on each side . During laparoscopic inspection, we found a 2-cm diverticulum located contralateral to the mesentery of the ileum approximately 30 cm from Bauhin’s valve . It was not inflamed and had a narrow base and some surface irregularities resembling a tumor; there was no evidence of peritoneal dissemination. Because of the potential risk of future complications, such as hemorrhage, diverticulitis, or tumor development, we decided to resect it after fixation of mesh and closure of the peritoneal flap. The hernial orifice was 2 cm in diameter and diagnosed as L2 according to the European hernia society groin hernia classification . After making sufficient space in the preperitoneal cavity, we fixed 15 × 10 cm of polypropylene mesh (Bard® Soft Mesh; Becton–Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) with poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) tacker (AbsorbaTack®; Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) . Thereafter, the umbilical port site was extended and wedge resection of the ileum performed extracorporeally . The diverticulum was wholly soft and removed along minimally invasive line. The ileum was sutured by Gambee technique. The pathological diagnosis was a NET (G1) in a Meckel’s diverticulum . The tumor was 2 mm in diameter, invaded the submucosal layer, and positive for INSM1 (insulinoma-associated protein 1). Ki-67 was positive in < 1% of cells. No ectopic mucosa was detected. The postoperative course was uneventful with no mesh infection or postoperative complications. No further therapy was recommended because the tumor was quite small and the Ki67 labeling index low. The patient has had no recurrence in three years of follow-up.