The patient was a 56-year-old male with no medical history. His BMI was 25.7 kg/m2. Serum PSA level before prostate biopsy was 37.8 ng/ml and MRI showed that prostate cancer with T2WI low intensity and strong diffusion restriction was detected on the left lobe. Moreover, extracapsular invasion suspected. The PI-RADS (version 2) score was 5.
Pathological findings of the prostate biopsy revealed adenocarcinoma. There was no increase in inflammatory response or anemia, and no other obvious abnormality was observed.
We performed RARP under diagnosis of adenocarcinoma with cT3aN0M0. A 3.5-cm skin incision was placed 16 cm from the midline of the pubic bone, a 12-mm camera port was placed, and 10 mmHg was insufflated . Two 8-mm ports, which were the robotic right-hand arm and third arm, were created in the right flank. Another 8-mm port, which was the robotic left-hand arm, a 5-mm port for the left-hand of the assistant, and a 12-mm port for the right-hand of the assistant were disposed on the left upper abdomen. The wound was sutured with a 2-0 absorption thread together with the fascia and peritoneum with one needle. That closure had not been confirmed visually from the abdominal cavity that the fascia and peritoneum were securely sutured. The drain was placed at the robotic third-arm port. Surgical time was 140 min, console time was 75 min, and bleeding volume was 250 mL.
Pathological findings were adenocarcinoma with Gleason score of 4 + 4, EPE0, RM0, sv0, n0, pT2cN0Mx.
The drain was removed on the first postoperative day. A bowel movement occurred on the second postoperative day, after which a dysphagia advanced diet was normally initiated. The patient suddenly complained of nausea and acute abdominal pain and an abdominal X-ray showed abnormal intestinal gas on the fourth postoperative day . A CT scan showed that the intestine had escaped from the peritoneum from the 8-mm port site of the robotic right-hand arm, which was diagnosed as postoperative ileus due to port site hernia . As an attempt at manual reduction failed, we decided to perform emergency surgery to release the hernia. We made a camera port at the same site used in the RARP. The 5-mm ports were made at the assistant’s right-hand port as well as at the robotic left-hand arm port used in the RARP . We observed the interior of the abdominal cavity and confirmed the Richter-type incarcerated small intestine at the robotic right-hand arm port . The indwelling was easily released when pulled by the grasping forceps . We found no damage or necrosis in the intestinal tract and considered that it could be preserved safely. The fascia and peritoneum were sutured with three endoscopic needles and was then closed . The patient was discharged after 14 days of hospitalization.