A 62-year-old female with a past medical history of anxiety, fibromyalgia, coronary artery disease, major depressive disorder, essential hypertension, and tobacco use presented to the emergency department via ambulance from her home with the chief complaint of shortness of breath that started several hours prior. She had no pertinent family history and she smoked half a pack of cigarettes daily. She had no known documented genetic history. Her home medications consisted of fluoxetine, lorazepam, tizanidine, amlodipine, aspirin, and atorvastatin. Her vital signs on admission revealed a blood pressure of 136/76 mmHg, heart rate 116 beats per minute, respiratory rate 16 per minute, temperature 98.5° Fahrenheit, 92% oxygen saturation on room air, and a BMI of 21.46. Arterial blood gas data revealed a pH 7.50, bicarbonate 33 mEq/L, and pCO2 70 mmHg. Her D-Dimer was elevated at 900 ng/ml. She was placed on nasal cannula at a rate of 3.0 L/min due to increased oxygen demand. She only required room air at baseline. She was an active smoker with a 13-pack year smoking history but had quit 3 years prior. She had recently been hospitalized for a respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection one month prior. At this time, our differential diagnoses included pulmonary embolism, pneumonia, a new chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbation, and panic attack. On physical exam, her lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally, no wheezing or rhonchi, and she had no cough. Thus, COPD and pneumonia were unlikely. A panic attack was also unlikely as her anxiety was well controlled for years with no identifiable trigger. Initial chest radiograph revealed mild cardiomegaly, and mild thickening of the interstitial lung markings but was overall unremarkable. A subsequent CTA of the chest revealed an intraluminal filling defect in the right bronchus intermedius, potentially representing mucous plugging or neoplasia. No embolism was seen on imaging. However, there was a large dilation of the main pulmonary artery measuring 5.0 × 6.4 cm in transverse and anteroposterior dimensions (a, b).
For the intraluminal filling defect, a bronchoscopy was initially planned. However, our patient's dyspnea spontaneously resolved by the following morning and on repeat CTA imaging, resolution of the defect was seen, leading us to believe that it was a mucous plug rather than neoplasm. Her bronchoscopy was subsequently canceled. After a thorough conversation with the patient, the decision was made by our cardiothoracic surgery team not to operate, as we felt the risks of the procedure outweighed the benefits given that she remained asymptomatic and hemodynamically stable. There was no concern for rupture or dissection upon discharge. The decision was made to conservatively manage with serial imaging and close observation. At the patient's subsequent 6-month follow up, a repeat CTA revealed a 15% reduction in the size of the PAA and conservative management continues to be the treatment plan for our patient (a, b). There were no complications or adverse outcomes in this case. Our work has been reported in line with the SCARE 2020 criteria .