A 28-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because of bilateral knee pain. The patient reported that her pain started approximately 1 year ago in both the knees, and the feeling of locking in her right knee started 1 month ago. She had no trauma history. Her medical history included thrombocytopenia in early childhood.
An orthopedic physical examination of the right knee revealed tenderness from the patella tendon to the anterolateral joint line. Watson-Jones test was positive. Joint effusion, ligament instability, and the McMurray test were all negative. The range of motion was restricted between 0 and 145 degrees because deep extension or flexion exacerbated the pain. The knee injury and osteoarthritis score (KOOS) was 49.4 points.
An orthopedic physical examination of the left knee revealed tenderness at the popliteal fossa. The McMurray test was positive for pain, whereas joint effusion and ligament instability were negative. The range of motion was restricted between 0 and 145 degrees because deep extension or flexion exacerbated the pain. The KOOS score was 84.5 points. Imaging studies were performed with plain radiography, including the total length of the lower limbs with weight-bearing, frontal and lateral views of the bilateral knee, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the bilateral knee. Plain radiography showed normal results bilaterally. For the right knee, MRI showed a mass-like lesion, measuring 24 × 9 mm in the anterior compartment. Homogeneous low-signal foci were detected on T1-weighted scans , and heterogeneous low-signal foci with clear borders were depicted on T2-weighted scans at the same site . For the left knee, MRI showed a mass-like lesion, measuring 26 × 10 mm in the posterior compartment. Relatively, homogeneous low-signal foci were detected on T1-weighted scans , and heterogeneous low-signal foci with clear borders were depicted on T2-weighted scans at the same site .
Arthroscopic resection of the right knee lesion was performed using the anterolateral and anteromedial portals. A yellow-brown mass was found in the anterior compartment; this mass had an irregular surface and was continuous to the infrapatellar fat pad . The continuous part was cut and removed in one piece, and total synovectomy was performed after the removal of the mass. The removed specimen was tested for pathology. The patient was allowed to lead a normal life from the day after the surgery.
Subsequently, 1 month after the right knee surgery, arthroscopic resection of the left knee lesion was performed using the anterolateral and anteromedial portals. A yellow-brown mass was found in the posterior compartment, which had an irregular surface . One part of the mass was removed; the rest of the mass was shaved and removed. Total synovectomy was performed after the removal of the mass. The removed specimen was tested for pathology. From the day after the procedure, the patient was allowed to continue his or her routine functions. Neither radiotherapy nor chemotherapy was used.
Pathologic analysis showed hemosiderin deposits, multinucleated giant cells, histiocytic cells or spindle cells, and lipid-laden macrophages in the bilateral knee lesions . These results confirmed the diagnosis of bilateral PVNS.
At a 6-month follow-up, pain in the bilateral knees had improved, and there was no recurrence of locking symptoms. Furthermore, no recurrence was observed on MRI . The KOOS score was 82.1 points for the right knee and 86.3 points for the left knee.