In July 2020, a 69-year-old Caucasian male patient was admitted for cholangitis and cholecystitis. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed, which was followed by a cholecystectomy and subsequent diagnosis of metastatic cholangiocarcinoma cT2NxM1. The patient’s diagnosis was discussed with a multidisciplinary tumor board, and chemotherapy consisting of cisplatin and gemcitabine was initiated. Nevertheless, after two cycles, the patient’s disease progressed. As previous immunohistochemistry had revealed a high PD-L1 expression on the tumor cell membrane, immunotherapy was initiated. After receiving the first dose of nivolumab (3 mg/kg body weight) and ipilimumab (1 mg/kg body weight), the patient presented with mild epigastric pain. The pain was continuous in nature, but was not specifically described as chest pain. He had no symptoms of dyspnea, palpitations, nausea, or changes in stool pattern. Furthermore, there were no signs of weight loss or anorexia. However, fatigue was more pronounced during the last week. Aside from the current cancer treatment, the patient was not on any other medication. No recent infections, vaccinations, or new medications were reported in the last few months. Prior to treatment initiation, baseline viral serology showed no history of human immunodeficiency virus-1/2 (HIV), hepatitis B virus, or hepatitis C virus. In addition, there were no reasons to believe that the patient had any active viral infections. Physical examination revealed no specific cardiovascular abnormalities (no signs of fluid overload or other evidence of cardiac dysfunction). The neurological and overall physical examinations were reassuring. Vital signs were also normal (blood pressure 114/73 mmHg, pulse of 72 beats per minute, and temperature of 36.8 °C). He was not known to have any relevant medical history, previous cardiac events, or cardiovascular risk factors. However, 18 years ago, he was diagnosed with prostate cancer that was subsequently treated with a nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy.
Three weeks later, a blood sample was taken prior to the second dose of ipilimumab-nivolumab and depicted a normal cardiac troponin T (cTnT) level; however with an elevation of N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP level) [214.3 pg/mL; (normal level, < 125 pg/mL)]. The third dose of immunotherapy was withheld owing to asymptomatic troponinemia [43.02 ng/L; (normal level, < 14 ng/L)]. A nasopharyngeal swab for detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) was negative. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 57% and normal global longitudinal strain (GLS) of −18% with normal bull’s eye, and the electrocardiogram (ECG) taken was reassuring . Moreover, creatine kinase (CK) and creatine kinase–myocardial band (CK-MB) were within normal range, and 72-hour Holter ECG monitoring did not identify any signs of arrhythmia.
The flowchart of the European Society of Cardiology, as described by Hu et al., was followed and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, which revealed a subtle zone of contrast captation in the inferior segment of the left ventricular wall, indicating a recent episode of myocarditis . Steroid therapy was initiated, that is, oral prednisolone 0.5 mg/kg/day. Troponin levels kept increasing (peak, 176 ng/L) despite steroid introduction .
Meanwhile, the patient had reported very brief, rare episodes of low retrosternal epigastric pain in the absence of dyspnea or any other cardiac symptoms. Cardiac catheterization revealed no remarkable findings . The dosage of prednisolone was increased to 100 mg daily.
Nonetheless, troponin levels kept increasing, and a follow-up fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT), performed 28 days after initial onset, depicted multiple zones of active myocardial inflammation: basal septal, mid-anterior, and apical inferior . ICI therapy was permanently discontinued, and the oral dosage of prednisolone was further increased to 2 mg/kg per day. Subsequently, the patient experienced an episode of transient diplopia with vertigo that required hospitalization for further investigations. Brain MRI elucidated both infra- and supratentorial infarction. The MRI report described subacute infarctions in both the left and the right side of the brain (more present in the posterior circulation compared with the anterior). There were no signs of vasogenic edema or inflammation of the blood vessels. The specific pattern on MRI was highly suggestive for emboli of cardiac origin rather than vasculitis or a posterior reversible encephalopathy disorder. However, we could not detect any signs of atrial fibrillation, and TTE was reassuring. Aspirin 80 mg and 14,000 IU of tinzaparin once daily was started subsequently.
Currently, the patient is still being monitored closely by oncologist and cardiologist. Steroid therapy is slowly being tapered every 2 weeks after routine blood analysis and physical examination.