A 43-year-old man with a history of hypertension and sleep apnea syndrome underwent an acetylcholine (ACh) provocation test as part of examination to determine the cause of rest angina in 2004 . There were no significant obstructions in the right (a, c) or left (a’, c’) coronary artery, but intra-coronary ACh administration induced multivessel spasm (severe vasoconstriction in the distal right coronary artery [arrowheads in b]), and complete occlusion of the middle left anterior descending coronary artery [LAD, arrowhead in b’]). The man was diagnosed with coronary vasospastic angina, and his symptoms completely resolved with anti-angina medications including long-acting diltiazem and fluvastatin. Regarding the moderate stenosis of the middle LAD, revascularization was deferred on the basis of negative findings of exercise stress perfusion imaging. However, rest angina accompanied by myocardial infarction recurred 11even years later, after 1 month of medication nonadherence (maximum high sensitivity troponin T: 1.04 pg/mL). An emergency coronary angiogram demonstrated no de novo lesions . Intracoronary OCT was performed to provide detailed evaluation of the middle LAD lesions . The current episode of cardiac enzyme elevation was diagnosed as intractable sustained coronary spasm-induced anterior myocardial infarction based on the following: 1) absence of plaque rupture or plaque erosion on OCT; 2) abnormal left ventricular anterior wall motion on echocardiography; and 3) clinical history of recurrent rest angina after nonadherence to anti-angina drugs. The OCT image revealed a coronary plaque with homogeneous high signal intensity , and clearly visualized an intraplaque NVMC network arising from the distal portion (direct communication into coronary lumen [arrowhead], Fig. ) to the tightest lesion . The NVMC network spread further proximally, and was distributed within the intra-medial plaque, not connected to the adventitial vasa vasorum . There were no obstructions at other sites of the LAD . The intra-plaque NVMC was traced automatically using a three-dimensional visualization system (Amira 5.4, Maxnet Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), and was reconstructed in three dimensions . The plaque characteristics were assessed by integrated backscatter intravascular ultrasound (ViewIT, Terumo Co., Tokyo, Japan). The iso-echoic eccentric plaque on gray-scale intravascular ultrasound was mainly composed of fibrous tissue , as previously reported by our department .