A 7.5 year-old boy, the second child of non-consanguineous Caucasian healthy parents (father 33 years-old, with a height of 161.5 cm and mother 36 years-old, 166.1 cm) was referred to our Department because of short stature. His height was 110 cm (−2.25 standard deviation score (SDS), weight 17 Kg (body mass index (BMI) −4.78 SDS) and bone age 6.5 years. An intrauterine growth restriction was documented by ultrasound scan between the 20th and 22nd week of gestation. Labor was induced due to interruption of fetal development and fetal distress at 33 weeks. The birth weight was 1,450 g (−1.81 SDS), birth length 41 cm (−1.49 SDS) and head circumference 28 cm (−2.29 SDS). Apgar scores were 6 and 9 at 1 and 5 min. He required intubation and mechanical ventilation because of pneumothorax. He was discharged from the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit after 37 days with the diagnosis of chorioretinal coloboma. The patient’s family history was not significant for chromosome abnormalities, developmental delay or intellectual disability. His 3 year-old sister was healthy.
At 1 year of age, brain magnetic resonance image (MRI) showed lateral and third ventricle enlargement, stenosis of the aqueduct of Silvio and decrease dimensions of cerebellar vermis. These pathologic features were later confirmed by further MRI.
The patient had a history of significant developmental delay and intellectual disability. He sat at 13 months and walked at 2 years. He achieved language acquisition at 4 years and required speech therapist and psychologist care. At the age of 6 year the patient was diagnosed with bilateral mixed hypoacusis. At the age of 9.5 years, his intelligence quotient (IQ) was 49.
He presented dysmorphic features including microcephaly, triangular face, high forehead, protruding low set ears, small teeth, micrognathia, esotropia, epicanthus, right palpebral ptosis and flat feet .
At the age of 7.5 years, he was investigated because of short stature. After exclusion of celiac disease, malabsorption, inflammatory bowel disease, hypothyroidism and other chronic diseases, GH response to two pharmacological stimuli (arginine and glucagon) revealed a GHD (GH peaks: 4.8 and 8.1 ng/ml, respectively; normal values >10 ng/ml). No other pituitary hormone deficiencies were found to be associated. MRI of the hypothalamic-pituitary region revealed a flattened pituitary gland . Substitutive GH therapy (0.21 mg/Kg subdivided into 6 weekly subcutaneous injections) was started and led to a satisfactory increase in height .