A 23-year-old Caucasian woman spending her holidays in Italy was admitted to INMI in Rome. The otherwise healthy patient presented with a two-day history of fever, severe abdominal pain, diarrhoea with bloody stools and haemorrhagic skin lesions.
Two weeks before, she had rhinorrhoea, a sore throat and a cough. She had received the first dose of human papillomavirus vaccination one month prior to her admittance. On examination, the patient looked pale, tired and feverish with a body temperature of 38.8°C. She manifested an extension of haemorrhagic purpura all over her limbs and complained of severe abdominal pain. Nasopharyngeal and rectal swabs evidenced a 2009 H1N1 virus by reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay. Her blood count showed mild anaemia (haemoglobin, 11.70 g/dl), neutrophilia (white blood cells 15.700/mmc: neutrophils 13.400/mmc (85.1%), lymphocytes 1.200/mmc (7,7%), monocytes 800/mmc). C-reactive protein (2.70 mg/dl) and Dimer test values (4.788 ng/dl) were elevated. Platelet count, clotting tests and ESR were normal. A urine examination showed proteinuria, red cells, leukocytes, hyaline and erythrocyte casts. Specific laboratory tests were performed ruling out immunological and autoimmune disorders, including anti-nuclear antibody profile (autoantibodies against RNP/Sm, SS-A, Ro-52, SS-B, Scl-70, Jo-1, centromere B, dsDNA, histones, anti-mitochondrial M2 antibody), anti-smooth muscle, anti-liver-kidney microsomal antibodies, anti-platelets, anti-gastric parietal cell, anti-cardiolipin IgG and IgM, anti-neutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), lupus anticoagulant, rheumatoid factor (RF), and Coombs test. Serological tests ruled out acute bacterial or viral infections including Brucella species, Salmonella species, Rickettsia conori, Coxiella burneti or viruses such as dengue, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, herpes simplex, HIV, coxsackievirus, echovirus and adenovirus. Bacterial nasopharyngeal, blood and urine cultures were sterile. Chest and abdomen X-rays were normal. A computed tomography (CT)-scan of her abdomen and pelvis without contrast revealed only a small effusion in the pouch of Douglas. Oseltamivir (75 mg twice a day, orally) and ciprofloxacin (400 mg twice a day, intravenously) were administered. A short course of methylprednisolone was administered intravenously, starting at 40 mg on July 15 and then reduced by 10 mg daily until it was withdrawn on July 20. Her clinical condition improved during hospitalization. By Day three the leukocytosis decreased (white blood cells 10.100/mmc, neutrophils 5.600/mmc, lymphocytes 3600/mmc). The fever disappeared in three days, her abdominal pain was resolved and there was a marked improvement in the vasculitic lesions. On Day seven she chose to leave the hospital against medical advice.