We are reporting about a previously healthy 21-year-old female with an ileus due to a large-size bezoar in the stomach and small bowel after a history of eating her own hair for several years.
The woman presented to the emergency department with a history of unspecific abdominal pain and vomiting after food or water intake. Furthermore, similar but less severe symptoms were reported since a few years. According to the mother, a habit of eating hair was observed by family members. A mild anemia was previously supplemented by intravenous iron treatment. Diagnostic GIT-endoscopy was pending. Apart from that, medical history was unremarkable, and the patient never had abdominal surgery before. The patient presented with normal weight and shoulder long hair. Abdominal exam showed reduced bowel sounds with otherwise normal findings. No abdominal tenderness was noted. Ultrasound showed pendulum peristalsis in the small bowel, a greatly enlarged stomach and a non-vascularized obstructing mass in the lower abdomen . Plain radiograph of the abdomen showed multiple air fluid levels with distended small intestinal bowel loops . Laboratory work-up revealed a leukocytosis (19.8 G/L, ref 2.6–7.8) and a hyperregenerative microcytic and hypochromic anemia (95 g/L, ref 115–148). C-reactive protein (CRP)-levels, complete metabolic panel, as well as liver and pancreatic enzymes, were normal. A urine sample was contaminated and therefore non-conclusive.
Because of young age of the patient, computed tomography (CT) scan was discussed considering exposure to radiation versus direct explorative laparoscopic surgery with a high risk for laparotomy. It was decided to perform a CT scan nevertheless due to the ileus-like picture of the abdomen and the repetitive vomiting to evaluate extent of the likely needed operation. CT scan confirmed the suspected diagnosis of a mechanical-caused ileus due to a large mass in the small intestines in the left lower abdomen. Furthermore, there was a large mass seen distending the whole stomach .
Conclusively, a mechanical ileus due to a bezoar in the small intestine and a bezoar in the stomach was diagnosed. Additionally, extensive collateral circulation with portacaval shunting was present, most likely due to compression of the portal vein .
A virtual CT-reconstruction of the findings initially showed a possible tapering tail reaching from the stomach downwards . This finding was consistent with subsequent intraoperative findings .
A primary upper median laparotomy with gastrotomy and ileotomy was performed and a 29*19*10 cm trichobezoar was removed from the stomach and a smaller 14*4*4 cm trichobezoar was removed from the small intestine , each in one piece. The trichobezoar removed from the stomach showed a tapering tail extending into the small bowel and was a perfect cast of the stomach, pylorus and duodenal bulb .
Trichophagia was diagnosed by the in-house psychiatric staff. In psychiatric exploration, the patient reported having memories of "playing with her own hair" since the age of five after observing her mother showing similar behavior. The patient reported increase in pulling hair with subjective stress level. While the patient initially stored the pulled out hair in the nightstand, swallowing started after family members became aware of it. While the patient described herself as socially rather isolated and with only a few friends, there were no obvious signs of psychopathology. Especially denied were mood disorders, anxiety or/and a history of abuse or neglect, commonly reported in patients with trichophagia . However, the patient reported suffering from severe sleep disorders, which she attributed to nausea and stomach cramps during the night.
The patient further described hair pulling and swallowing possessing stress relieving qualities, albeit being performed mostly secretly at home and not in public. Previous attempts of stopping the compulsive acts have failed. The patient furthermore described hair pulling and swallowing as happening somehow “out of her own conscious perception”. Even though the patient realized that there was something “out of order” with appetite and digestion, she did not consciously attribute the symptoms to trichophagia.
The patient was discharged 5 days after admission after a clinically good recovery but against surgeon’s recommendation due to still highly elevated CRP-levels (202 mg/L, ref < 5). Due to the extent of trichophagia and lack of insight into severity of the disease, a specialized in-patient psychiatric clinic to treat the obsessive–compulsive disorder was recommended but rejected by the patient. An out-patient appointment was organized. In a follow-up psychiatric evaluation, the patient stated that she has continued eating hair after hospital discharge. The patient perceived eating hair as “hard to control” and “happening rather unconsciously", followed by frustration and a feeling of failure.
A check-up with the family doctor showed good wound healing, decreasing CRP-level and increasing hemoglobin levels.