A 36-year-old Caucasian man with a past history of intellectual impairment, epilepsy and end-stage kidney disease diagnosed in childhood, leading to kidney transplantation at age 14, presented to our hospital.
He had high-grade fever, abdominal pain, and had been vomiting for a week. While obtaining the medical history from his mother, she described a propensity to swallow coins related to childhood behavioral difficulties. Despite her suggestion that he had not done so since the age of 12, an abdominal radiograph was performed. Surprisingly, it revealed a periumbilical, circular, radiopaque density, thought to be a coin . However, the double-bubble sign or halo sign was absent. There were no clinical features of gastric outlet syndrome to suggest duodenal stenosis leading up to the presentation. A computed tomography scan with contrast localized the coin in the second part of the duodenum, revealing the suspected diverticula, and common bile duct and pancreatic duct dilatation . Blood laboratory tests suggested pancreatitis: bilirubin 14umol/L (<20), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 132U/L (53 to 128), gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) 269U/L (<55), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 29U/L (<45), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 11U/L (<35), and lipase –580U/L (<60).
After broadening the antibiotic coverage due to concerns regarding ascending cholangitis, our patient underwent an emergency endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, which confirmed not only the nature of the foreign body but also the underlying anatomical abnormality causing the duodenal and pancreaticobiliary dilatation. Both common bile duct and common hepatic duct were moderately dilated up to 15mm with no intrahepatic ductal dilatation. Even though no purulent bile was seen, due to concerns of ascending cholangitis, a common bile duct stent was inserted during the procedure following removal of the coin.
When retrieved, the coin was found to be a 1975, copper two-cent piece . Such coins have been out of circulation in Australia since 1994, suggesting that the coin may have been swallowed and lodged in the duodenal diverticulum at least 14 years earlier, a hypothesis consistent with the collateral history obtained from the patient’s mother.
The differential diagnosis of duodenal stenosis could be broadly classified into congenital and acquired causes. Congenital obstruction is caused by either an intrinsic or extrinsic anomaly. Intraluminal duodenal diverticulum and duodenal atresia comprise intrinsic stenoses. Annular pancreas, choledochal cyst, and malrotation account for most extrinsic obstructions . All of these differential diagnoses were effectively excluded by the investigations instituted.
Our patient underwent an elective reconstruction of the obstructed duodenum by Roux-en-Y. During surgery, we confirmed the tight stricture at D2 distal to the pancreas with proximal dilatation of the duodenum and significantly dilated bile duct.