A 26 years old female patient came to Jimma University department of ophthalmology (JUDO) with a compliant of bilateral painless and progressive reduction of vision of 2 years duration. She underwent total thyroidectomy 7 years back for toxic diffuse goiter. A week after the surgery, she started to have circumoral numbness, paresthesia of the hands and legs, muscle cramp, stiffness of joints, mental confusion and irritability. Then she was diagnosed to have hypocalcemia due to damage to the parathyroid gland during the surgery and has been on supplemental calcium gluconate.
At the time of diagnosis her serum calcium level was very low (3 mg/dl) and she was started on calcium gluconate supplement 500 mg three times a day. Currently her serum calcium level raised to 8.4 mg/dl (8.2–10.4 mg/dl) after which she stopped using the supplement and was told to increase calcium reach foods only. She denied any history of trauma to the eye. Otherwise she has no other known systemic diseases like Diabetes Mellitus (DM), Hypertension (HTN) or Tuberculosis (TB).
On Physical examination her visual acuity (VA) was 6/36 in both eyes. Intra Ocular Pressure (IOP) was 14 mmHg in the right and 12 mmHg in the left eye. Conjunctiva was quite, cornea was clear and transparent, anterior chamber (AC) depth was + 3 with Van Herrick (VH) classification and devoid of cells or flare. Pupil was round regular and reactive, there was no posterior psynechiae in both eyes. There was bilateraly symmetrical posterior sub capsular opacity and punctate iridescent opacities in the anterior and posterior cortex of the lens . The fundus examination revealed no abnormality. On systemic examination she had horizontal surgical scar on anterior neck and she had Positive Chvostek sign.
The parathyroid hormone was significantly low (4.03 pg/mL, reference 10–65 pg/mL). The serum phosphate level was 6.5 mg/dl (reference 2.5–4.5 mg/dL). The level of serum magnesium was 1.8 mg/dl (reference 1.7–2.4 mg/dL). The level of troponin I was 0.01 ng/ml.
Other systemic Investigations revealed no remarkable finding. Complete Blood Count (CBC) was with in normal range. Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) was 30 mm/hr.; Fasting Blood Sugar (FBS) was 103 mg/dl. Venereal Diseases Research Laboratory (VDRL) and Provider Initiative HIV Counseling and Testing (PIHCT) were negative.
With the above findings she was diagnosed to have hypocalcemic cataract and we planned and counseled her to do phacoemulsification with Posterior Chamber Intra ocular Lens (PC-IOL). However the patient wanted to take some time to try alternative (religious prayer with Holy water) treatment. With the alternative treatment to date there was no change in the maturity of cataract.