A 78-year-old Caucasian female was admitted to our Emergency Department after an accidental domestic fall on her left hip. The patient cannot bear any weight on her left leg that was painful, shorter, and in external rotation. Her general status appeared good, and she had no neurological symptoms. She had no significant past medical history apart from high blood pressure in treatment with angiotensin-converting-enzyme-inhibitor. Conventional radiograms of her left hip showed a transcervical fracture of the femur (AO classification 31-B2) . Laboratory blood tests did not reveal any kind of alteration. The day after, the patient underwent left cemented hip hemiarthroplasty using a posterolateral approach and a spinal anesthesia . According to our thromboembolism prophylaxis protocol, the patient received 4000 UI of enoxaparin (Clexane) subcutaneously once daily since the day of the trauma for a month. The post-operative course was regular apart from moderate anemia treated with blood transfusions. In the following days, hemoglobin level returned in the normal range, and the patient started are habilitation program. When the patient was discharged on the 5th post-operative day, she had no motor or sensitive peripheral deficit and was able to walk with a walker. 15days after surgery, the patient was admitted again to our Emergency Department because of worsening left groin pain and left leg muscular weakness. She denied any other trauma or fever episode. She could not bear any weight on her left leg. She had reduced sensibility in her left thigh and was unable to extend actively her left knee. From a clinical point of view, left patellar reflex was absent, left quadriceps force was 0/5 (Medical Research Council scale), while left tibialis anterior and left extensor long ushallucis were normal (5/5). Surgical wound was completely closed and showed no signs of infection. At that time, conventional X-rays of the hip and the pelvis showed no abnormalities. The hip prosthesis appeared well integrated and had no signs of mobilization or mechanic dysfunction. An enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated the presence of three voluminous left hematomas with a diameter ranging from 5 up to11 cm involving psoas and iliac muscles dislocating the femoral neurovascular bundle under the inguinal canal and in absence of active bleeding . Electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction study were performed, and they evidenced a compression of the left femoral nerve with the weakness of left vastus medialis, vastus lateralis, and iliopsoas muscles. Blood tests only revealed a mild anemia (hemoglobin was 9,7 g/dL), and no alterations of coagulation, renal function, and liver function were found. Given the severe pain and functional disability, we decided to perform surgery to drain the hematomas. We decided to use the first window of the ilioinguinal approach to reach the greatest one, and in our opinion, the most compressive one on the neurovascular bundle. The biggest hematoma was found between iliac muscle and iliac fossa and was drained, extracting about 280 cc of blood partly clotted. Post-operative CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis evidenced a drastic size reduction of the hematomas . Even if neurological deficits remained, inguinal pain disappeared immediately after surgery, and 4 weeks after surgery, the patient was able to stand up and to walk using a walker for small distances. The patient underwent a protocol of physical rehabilitation, and after 6 months, she was able to walk with crutches, and a new EMG documented a partial recovery of left femoral nerve lesion.