76 year old woman without a family or personal history of autoimmune disease and the diagnosis of systemic arterial hypertension, grade II obesity (BMI: 39.9) and recent SARS CoV2 infection (02/06/2021) that didn’t require oxygen therapy nor hospitalization. She currently uses nifedipine and metoprolol as her antihypertensive treatment and denies any current use of steroids, statins or recent changes in her medication. She gets the first dose of BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine in March (03/07/2021) and the second dose in April (04/27/2021).
One day after the second dose of the vaccine she presents disseminated dermatosis with erythematous plaques in shoulders, cleavage, abdomen, hips and tights along with bilateral muscle aches 10/10 in VAS in both pelvic and scapular members. 7 weeks later she noticed edema and a violaceous coloration in both eyelids accompanied by weakness with a symmetrical pattern affecting the proximal muscles of the four extremities that limited her daily life activities and later on started with dysphagia to both solids and liquids that made her seek medical assistance in our hospital.
She arrived at the emergency department with the next vitals: Blood pressure: 111/74 mmHg, heart rate: 80 bpm, respiratory rate: 18 breaths per minute, body temperature: 97.16°F, oxygen saturation: 94%. The skin had non-confluent, well defined erytematoviolaceous plaques with hyperpigmentation and scratch marks in the proximal third of arms and tights . Strength was tested with MMT8 score with 58/75 and there were no changes on osteotendinous reflexes or sensitivity.
Initial laboratory findings evidenced elevation of muscles enzymes, transaminases and lactic dehydrogenase.
The patient got 8.4 points of the EULAR-ACR 2017 criteria : Age of onset ≥40 years; Objective symmetric weakness, usually progressive, of the proximal upper extremities; Objective symmetric weakness, usually progressive, of the proximal lower extremities; Neck flexors are relatively weaker then extensors; In lower extremities proximal muscles are relatively weaker than distal ones; Dysphagia or esophageal dysmotility; Elevated serum creatin kinase (CK), dehydrogenase lactate (DHL), aspartate aminotransferase (ASAT/AST/SGOT) or alanine aminotransferase (ALAT/ALT/SGPT). Which classified her as a definite idiopathic inflammatory myopathy with a ≥90% diagnostic likelihood, and a 7.5 added score without biopsy and was admitted to fulfill diagnostic protocol and start treatment.
The patient had dysphagia as severity criteria, so after ruling out possible infections we initiated pulses of methylprednisolone for 3 days and after that oral prednisone 1mg/kg/day and intramuscular methotrexate 25mg/week.
During her hospital stay we monitored the muscle enzymes and autoantibodies detection by semi automatized immunoblot technique , and because of her age group and the known association between dermatomyositis and cancer we decided to run cancer screening by doing seric tumor markers and a torachoabdominal and pelvic tomography that showed no sign of neoplasm.
Electromyography reported changes compatible with active denervation, motor unit potentials with a myopathic pattern and early recruitment with a predominance in proximal muscles in both upper and lower extremities. Motor and sensitive neuroconduction study came out within normal limits .
Left deltoid muscle biopsiy showed characteristic findings with perivascular and endomysial linfocytic infiltrate with regenerative and atrophic muscle fibers without necrosis, compatible with dermatomiositis .
The patient showed adequate clinical response to the high dose of glucocorticoids treatment. Three days after her admission she tolerated oral intake to both solids and liquids and the MMT8 score increased to 52/75 as well as showing shrinking of the dermatosis and no active lesions. She was discharged 7 days after her admission with prednisone and Methotrexate as immunosuppressive agent. A month later in her follow-up visit we found an improvement in his muscle weakness as noted in her MMT8 and CK levels.