We present a case of a 26 year old female with a fracture of the 8th and 12th thoracic vertebrae, subsequent to a motor vehicle accident. Upon admission, physical examination revealed a hematoma on the face, and the upper extremities. Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 15/15 and the pupils were equal and reactive to light. The neck was not swollen and no hematomas were observed. Carotid arteries were palpable. Airway was unobstructed and breathing was satisfactory. The patient was hemodynamically stable. The abdomen was soft and non tender. During rectal examination the sphincter tone was normal and no blood was detected. Neurological examination did not reveal any focal deficit.
Imaging studies revealed fractures of the 8th and 12th thoracic vertebrae. Furthermore, she suffered of a fracture of the distal end of the right radius and a type III acromioclavicular separation of the left side .
Following appropriate preoperative work up, posterior segmental instrumentation was performed for stabilization of the T12 fracture with the use of pedicle screws. Intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring was utilized, without any change in the baseline signals .
Postoperatively, she was lethargic and confused. The patient also developed a right sided hemiparesis. Since it was estimated that the change in the patient's neurological status was of central origin, a new CT-scan of the head was performed as well as a triplex of the carotid arteries. Neither study demonstrated any pathology.
Subsequently, an MRI of the head was performed. The later revealed the presence of a cortical infract at the area of the paracentral lobe as well as a high signal intensity at T2W image and low signal intensity at T1W image in the left caudate and left lentiform nuclei, indicating ischemia in the above mentioned anatomical areas. Pathological signal intensity, indicative of ischemia, was also detected at the anterior portion of the right lentiform nucleus. No other lesions were detected in the areas of brain stem, cerebellum or ventricular system.
Further evaluation included Digital Subtraction Angiography (DSA) and MR imaging which demonstrated a dissecting aneurysm at the subpetrous portion of the internal carotid arteries bilaterally. No lesions were detected in the endocranial vessels and in the vertebral arteries .
The patient was placed in anticoagulation therapy with intravenous heparin, according to BCI (Blunt Carotid Artery Injury) protocol , aiming for an APTT of 40–50. Intravenous anticoagulants were gradually substituted by per os administered Coumadin for at least 3 months [,,]. During the hospital stay, the patient's neurological function improved. At her latest follow up, six months post op, the patient did not demonstrate any motor or sensory deficit in her upper and lower extremities with persistence of brisk deep tendon reflexes in the right side. She is fully ambulatory and is able to perform her activities without difficulty.