A 47-year-old woman presented to a nearby neurosurgical clinic because of memory loss, left hand weakness, and gait disturbance. Multiple tumor-like lesions were identified on cranial magnetic resonance imaging. The lesions were as follows: (1) a non-enhancing lesion in the anterior part of the right temporal lobe; (2) an enhancing lesion in the right temporal lobe; and (3) the largest enhancing lesion in the right parietal lobe, extending through the corpus callosum to the left parietal lobe . These three lesions appeared to be non-contiguous and independent on T2WI and FLAIR images . The two enhancing lesions exhibited ring enhancement. The largest lesion, located in the right parietal lobe, had been partially resected at a different hospital. Histopathological examination had revealed proliferation of atypical cells with enlarged hyperchromatic nuclei, accompanied by microvascular proliferation and partial necrosis . Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated retained ATRX expression, with a high Ki67 index of 40%. IDH1-R132 and IDH2-R172 were wild type, leading to diagnosis of glioblastoma, IDH-wild type, classified as World Health Organization Grade 4. The patient was transferred to our hospital for further treatment and received radiation therapy and temozolomide (Stupp regimen) .
The tumor initially decreased slightly in size and the patient was discharged. However, 1 month later the tumor began to enlarge again, accompanied by worsening impairment of consciousness and left hemiparesis. Lesion (3) had extended further to the contralateral side. Lesions (1) and (2) were completely resected, and lesion (3) underwent partial resection within the right hemisphere, including a part of the splenium of corpus callosum. The ventricle was not opened. Carmustine wafers were placed and photodynamic therapy administered. Lesions (2) and (3) resected during the second surgery exhibited typical findings of glioblastoma with degenerative changes attributable to chemoradiation therapy, including fibrosis, ghost-like cellular changes, and calcification. Similar atypical proliferating cells were identified in some regions of lesion (1) .
All lesions were IDH1-R132 and IDH2-R172 wild type, with unmethylated MGMT. Lesion (1) did not show TERT promoter mutation or EGFR amplification, whereas both lesions (2) and (3) exhibited TERT promoter mutation (C228T), lesion (2) showing EGFR amplification of 50 copies and lesion (3) showing amplification of 55 copies . Moreover, both lesions (2) and (3) showed homozygous deletion of CDKN2A/B. In addition, mutations of PTEN C720T and T405C were observed in lesions (2) and (3); however, mutation T405C was not present in lesion (1). A mutation involving a 13-base sequence that included C720T was also detected in lesion (1) . Postoperatively, short-term memory impairment persisted, but our patient’s conscious state improved and her left hemiparesis resolved. She was discharged home on postoperative day 19. Following discharge, maintenance therapy with NovoTTF-100A system (tumor treatment fields), temozolomide, and bevacizumab was continued in an outpatient setting. The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report, attached as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).