A 58-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for a detailed examination of a posterior mediastinal tumor. She had been receiving treatment for hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus. She underwent surgery for sialadenitis at 40 years of age and developed a pancreatic nodule at 45 years of age; she was being followed up with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The patient reported no new subjective symptoms. The MRI, however, revealed a posterior mediastinal tumor along the thoracic vertebral bodies 3 years ago. Over the next 3 years, the tumor size increased by 1 cm. Because the patient had a history of salivary gland inflammation and autoimmune pancreatitis, IgG4-related disease was suspected. Her serum IgG4 concentration was measured preoperatively and was found to be elevated at 349.7 mg/dL. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed a smooth tumor, measuring 55 mm, along the right side of the seventh to ninth thoracic vertebrae, with no invasion into the surrounding tissues . Therefore, an IgG4-related disease affecting the posterior mediastinum was suspected. The tumor grew over time, and a histological diagnosis was required to exclude malignancy. However, performing a needle biopsy was deemed difficult due to the tumor’s location. Thus, complete surgical excision of the tumor was performed.
RATS was performed via the right thoracic approach with the patient in a left semi-prone position. During the procedure, carbon dioxide gas was insufflated into the thoracic cavity through a trocar at a pressure of 8 mmHg. Then, 8-mm trocars were inserted into the third, fifth, and eighth intercostal spaces (ICS) through the anterior axillary line for the da Vinci surgical system. A 12-mm trocar was inserted for the assistant at the eighth ICS through the middle axillary line. The irregularly-shaped tumor was located at the level of the seventh to ninth thoracic vertebrae along the sympathetic nerve. It was elastic, hard, and firmly attached to the chest wall. The parietal pleura around the tumor was opened for mobilization. The sympathetic nerve, three intercostal veins, and two intercostal arteries were excised, and the tumor was removed using the joint motion of the robot arm . The total duration of the surgery was 139 min. Histological examination revealed infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells with collagenous fibers. In the immunohistochemical analysis, a proportion of IgG4-positive cells/IgG-positive cells exceeding 60% was observed. Additionally, the IgG4-positive cell count significantly surpassed the 10/high power field, meeting the diagnostic criteria for IgG4-RD .
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the third postoperative day. The patient underwent follow-up on an outpatient basis without additional medications since there were no signs of residual disease. The patient has been recurrence-free for six months following surgery and has not complained of symptoms related to the sympathectomy.