A 14-year-old boy presented to the emergency room (ER) at Regional Public Hospital of Agats in Asmat Regency, Papua, with the chief complaint of weakness that had been worsening for 30 minutes before admission. The patient had reported experiencing fever, chills, headache, myalgia, arthralgia, and diarrhea for one week before admission and had not taken any medication. The patient's mother brought the patient to the clinic that morning. The patient was diagnosed with Plasmodium falciparum malaria with a parasite density of 4+ (more than 10 parasites per high power field (HPF)), then the patient was given dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DHP) for three days and a single dose of primaquine, along with other supportive drugs. Those were taken once before he was finally taken to the ER. The patient also had a history of Plasmodium falciparum malaria, which was treated with the same DHP and primaquine regimens last year.
The patient looked agitated and had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 13. Initial vital signs revealed tachycardia (123 beats per minute, regular and strong pulse), an axillary temperature of 38.0°C, and others were within normal limits. Physical examination revealed icteric sclera, hepatosplenomegaly, and epigastric tenderness. Other neurological examinations were normal.
Laboratory tests revealed parasitemia with a density of 196,655 parasites/μL, mild anemia, thrombocytopenia, and moderate hyponatremia. Impaired liver and kidney function were observed . “Coca-cola”-colored urine was noted following urinary catheter insertion. The urine output was 0.3 mL/kg/hour for the last 6 hours of observation, therefore this patient was diagnosed with AKI.
The patient was hospitalized with BWF as the primary diagnosis based on the signs and symptoms of fever, “coca-cola”-colored urine, anemia, jaundice, and AKI. Because parenteral antimalarials were unavailable at that time, this patient was treated with oral antimalarials, DHP for two more days, with close monitoring of vital signs and urine output, as well as intravenous antibacterial and other supportive medical care, such as fluid replacement and electrolyte management.
On the second day of care, there was a significant improvement and the patient only complained of mild epigastric pain after completing the second dose of DHP. Physical examination revealed no icteric sclera, a GCS of 15, and improved urine color. Blood tests revealed a decrease in parasite density, a decrease in hemoglobin, an increase in urea, and improvements in other parameters .
Recovery was favorable on the third day of care. The patient did not experience any symptoms, urine color was normalized, and laboratory parameters were improved . The patient was discharged from the hospital on this day. Six days after being discharged, the patient returned for a medical check-up without any complaints and demonstrated significant improvement in laboratory results .