A 39-year-old female presented with a history of abdominal hysterectomy 10 years back followed by exploratory laparotomy and adhesiolysis for adhesive intestinal obstruction 5 years back, development of incisional hernia, and repair by open onlay mesh hernioplasty 2 years back. Physical examination showed a supra- and infraumbilical incisional hernia with a periumbilical midline scar . She underwent ultrasonography of the abdomen; further radiological investigations could not be done. There was a defect 11 cm long and 6 cm wide around the umbilical region containing omentum. We decided to perform a laparoscopic e-TEP Rives repair in March 2018. The operative technique has been followed according to the technique put forward by Belyansky et al., except for the transfascial suture reconstruction of the linea alba . The omentum was reduced, the midline defect was closed with interrupted transfascial 1-0 polypropylene sutures, and the defect in the posterior layer was closed with 2-0 polygalactin continuous without any tension. Then, a polypropylene mesh measuring 21 cm long and 14 cm wide was placed in the retrorectal space to ensure adequate overlap of the mesh edges. The previous onlay mesh did not need removal because it was in a completely different plane. She had an uneventful postoperative recovery and was discharged on the 4th postoperative day . In 1-year follow-up, she is completely free of any complaints.
A 45-year-old female had a history of open cholecystectomy 19 years back and developed hernia in the medial part of the incision at the right subcostal region. She underwent an onlay mesh repair with a polypropylene mesh 8 years back which recurred after 2 years. She underwent intraperitoneal onlay (IPOM) mesh repair with a proceed composite mesh (Ethicon) tacked with a securestrap (Ethicon) and transfascial sutures 4 years back; after 6 months, it recurred again along with another infraumbilical port site hernia. She was subjected to a contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen, which showed the hernias: right subcostal hernia measuring 6 × 6 cm and the infraumbilical port-site hernia about 4 × 4 cm in size . In June 2018, we did a retrorectal Rives-Stoppa repair with right-sided transversus abdominis release (TAR) following the principles of Belyansky et al. . After reduction of the hernia, the hernia defects were approximated with no. 1 polypropylene, the peritoneum was opposed with 2–0 polygalactin continuous , and retromuscular polypropylene mesh was placed . A component separation in the form of TAR was needed in this patient due to the unusual location of the hernia, viz. subcostal; TAR provided the space to be extended beyond the costal margin on the right side; closure of the posterior layer without tension and retromuscular/retrorectal mesh placement was possible only with the addition of TAR. Though we witnessed the previous remains of the IPOM mesh, it was found densely adhered to the omentum and intestines, so we did not try to dissect it further or to remove it. She was discharged on the 6th postoperative day without any events. At 10-month follow-up, she did not have any complaints.
A 30-year-old male had epigastric hernia for the last 10 years; he had undergone IPOM repair with Composix™ E/X mesh (polypropylene/e-PTFE prosthesis for laparoscopic ventral hernia repair, Bard) 1 year back which recurred after 3 months. On examination, he had 6 cm × 6 cm epigastric hernia. A preoperative computed tomography scan showed the hernia with the same dimensions along with the radiopaque e-PTFE layer mesh . In August 2018, we did laparoscopic Rives-Stoppa repair, the removal of the previous mesh with a placement of the retrorectal polypropylene mesh . He developed a collection detected after 5 days, which started increasing ; so we put a drain on the 10th day; about 600 ml of serosanguinous fluid that came out the drain was kept for 8 days more after which it was removed. The drain wound healed completely on the 20th day postoperatively. Repeat CECT abdomen showed a well-apposed mesh in the parietal wall. He is completely satisfied at the 6th month of follow-up.