We report a case of a 36-year-old Asian female known case of recurrent urolithiasis. She presented to the clinic after liver hemangioma was incidentally diagnosed in abdominal computed tomography (CT) scans of the abdomen performed for urolithiasis. The patient reported long-standing right upper quadrant and epigastric abdominal pain, on-and-off in nature, associated with nausea, vomiting, and early satiety. Her family history was unremarkable. At that time, CT showed a right lobe lesion measuring 14.6 x 15.7 x 13 cm, with peripheral discontinuous nodular enhancement and gradual central filling, with an area of low attenuation. as the lesion replaced the right lobe, the right hepatic vein was completely compressed. In addition, the right portal vein has reduced caliber (A and 1B).
Tumor markers, including CEA, AFP, and CA19-9, were negative. Other laboratory indicators were unremarkable, except for slightly elevated liver enzymes; as a result, the decision to proceed with the surgical intervention was made. During the preoperative workup period, she developed unexplained fever spikes with negative biochemical or radiological sources for sepsis other than a liver hemangioma. The patient underwent a right hepatectomy with access to the abdominal cavity through a right-sided inverted L incision. The intraoperative ultrasound (US) was used to assess hemangioma and its relation to the middle hepatic vein and other major liver vasculature and bile ducts. Due to the large-sized hemangioma and mobilization difficulty, the right Glisson pedicle was approached first using Takasaki extrahepatic glissonian approach to allow shrinkage of the hemangioma. Infra hepatic IVC was then controlled to lower the venous return during transection and minimize back bleeding and pringle’s maneuver. The hanging technique was applied to facilitate the transection. Despite the rupture of the hemangioma capsule, bleeding was managed by hemangioma resection. Hemostasis was confirmed at the end of the procedure and bile leak was ruled out using intraoperative methylene blue injection through the cystic duct. The operative timing was 240 minutes, and the estimated blood loss of 800 ml, Total Pringle time was 45 minutes (15 minutes clamped and 5 off-clamped). No inotropes were required intraoperatively, and the patient extubated well at the end of the procedure. The pathological result came as sclerosing hemangioma.
Follow-up CT angiography and duplex studies showed good contrast filling in the portal, middle, and left hepatic vein with good liver regeneration. In addition, duplex studies confirmed normal portal and hepatic artery and vein flow. However, despite patent inflow and outflow vasculature and good remnant liver, she developed a transient increase in her bilirubin levels and INR suggestive of post-hepatectomy liver failure (PHLF). She also developed ascites managed using abdominal drains and diuretics. The bilirubin levels and INR normalized within one week of the operation with supportive treatment, but she required diuretics for three months post-discharge.
Postoperative follow-up imaging studies (at 3 and 6 months) showed well regeneration of the remnant liver with no signs of portal hypertension or ascites. In 12 months follow-up patient was in good condition, with no active complaint with normalization of liver enzyme.