A 62-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with complaints of rapidly progressive dizziness and unstable gait, which had been present for the previous 2 months. He deviated to the left when walking. The patient had a 10-year history of hypertension and a 1-year history of gout without systematic diagnosis and treatment; he denied having any history of diabetes, autoimmune diseases, blood transfusions, or other familial conditions. Neurological examinations showed no abnormalities, except for spastic paralysis of the left lower limb. It showed decreased muscle strength of the left lower limb (level 4) with hyperactive tendon reflexes. And the Babinski and Chaddock signs were positive on the left side.
The level of serum glycosylated hemoglobin was 6.20% (reference value: 4.27–6.07). MRI of the head showed abnormal lesions in the corpus callosum, the semi-oval center in both hemispheres, and the area below the frontal cortex with contrast medium enhancement . The lesions were hyperintense on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery and hypointense on diffusion-weighted imaging with aggressive growth and irregular margins . To determine whether the lesions were inflammatory, demyelinating, or neoplastic, we tested for the presence of all the related cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) antibodies. The patient tested positive for anti-GAD65 antibodies. Spectral analysis of lesion metabolites showed that N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) was decreased and choline (Cho) increased . The ratio of Cho and creatine (+ Cr) to NAA (Cho + Cr/NAA) was 4.47, 3.20, and 2.79 in the corpus callosum, semi-oval centers, and the area below the frontal cortex, respectively. Lactic acid peaks were also increased in these regions. Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) showed high metabolism in the corpus callosum and both ventricles, suggesting the presence of a malignant glioma .
During hospitalization, the condition of the patient deteriorated rapidly, and, unfortunately, due to the family’s economic situation, he decided not to undergo stereotactic brain biopsy and forfeited further treatment.