A 25-year-old French, Caucasian woman presented to the emergency room with an acute episode of dyspnoea at Munich’s Octoberfest. Upon questioning, the patient reported occasional fatigue in the weeks preceding the event but no exertional dizziness, history of syncope, or constitutional symptoms like fever.
Physical examination showed lung auscultation clear anteriorly and posteriorly, minor sinus tachycardia (112 beats/min) with no extra heart sounds or murmurs as well as normothermia (36.5°C), and regular blood pressure (108/52 mmHg). The patient reported being generally fit and well, with no regular medication use or smoking habits, and her family history did not reveal any notable illnesses.
Further laboratory workup revealed an elevated C-reactive protein (4 mg/dL) and raised liver function tests (GOT 70 U/L, GPT 72 U/L) as well as slightly increased NT-proBNP (1200 pg/mL) and leucocytes (15.5G/L). Electrocardiogram was normal, but an echocardiography and a CT scan (see ) revealed a massive tumour extending into both atria, measuring 8 × 5 cm on the left and 5 × 4 cm on the right side interfering with mitral and tricuspid valve function resulting in a minor, functional mitral stenosis as well as minimal mitral and tricuspid valve insufficiency and therefore obstructing ventricular filling. Due to the significant findings, the patient underwent surgery the following morning.
For surgical excision, the patient was cannulated via the right femoral vein as well as the superior vena cava and ascending aorta. Cardiopulmonary bypass was commenced, and the heart arrested with cold Bretschneider cardioplegia.
The incision of the right atrium showed a mass filling the whole atrium (see and ) and adhering to the septum as well as the fossa ovalis. The left atrium was inspected transseptally and showed the rest of the sizable tumours. The septum was circumferentially excised in order to easily mobilize and remove the myxoma (see ). The resulting atrial septal defect (ASD) was closed with a bovine pericardial patch using a 4-0 prolene running suture (see ).
The post-operative course proceeded without any complications and the patient displayed normal sinus rhythm without the need of a permanent pacemaker. She was extubated 14 h after surgery, stayed in the ICU for 2 days, and received ampicillin and azithromycin to treat a hypostatic pneumonia, which was thought to be caused by pulmonary congestion due to the myxoma. The final pathology report revealed that the mass was, indeed, myxoid tissue, with metaplastic ossification but no signs of malignancy. The patient was discharged from the hospital after 10 days without any residual symptoms of dyspnoea. Upon routine follow-up via telephone 3 months later, she also reported the disappearance of the occasional fatigue that was mentioned in the weeks before the diagnosis and surgery.