A 74-year-old man had undergone left lower lobectomy for NSCLC . The tumor was pathologically diagnosed as squamous cell carcinoma of the lung (1.9 cm in size) without lymph node metastasis (TNM classification 7th edition, pT1aN0M0 and stage IB) . He was followed up periodically, and a computed tomography (CT) scan that was taken 1 year after the operation revealed an 8.3 cm, irregularly shaped mass lesion in segment five of the liver . Retrospectively, CT performed 6 months prior showed a 3.1 × 2.9 cm low-density lesion at the identical site . Since 18-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography and enhanced brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) ruled out any metastatic lesions other than the one in the liver, the patient was referred to a gastroenterological surgeon. Liver MRI demonstrated a well-defined mass, which was hypointense relative to the liver parenchyma on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images . The hepatic mass exhibited clear hypointensity in the late dynamic and hepatobiliary phases on ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid-MRI . Moreover, MRI showed that the mass had increased to 9.6 cm in diameter within a 1-month interval. Although serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; cut-off value, 3.4 ng/ml) and cytokeratin 19 fragment (CYFRA; cut-off value, 3.5 ng/ml) were both within the normal range at the time of lung resection, both CEA and CYFRA levels increased to 11.0 ng/ml and 23.0 ng/ml, respectively, along with enlargement of the hepatic mass (CEA and CYFRA levels at each time point are indicated in Figs. and ).
Since his general condition was good and his major organ functions were tolerable to general anesthesia, the patient underwent right hepatectomy 14 months after the lung resection at the primary site. Intraoperatively, a huge mass was detected in the right liver, but no other metastatic sites were identified. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 10.
The macroscopic examination of the cut specimen showed an irregular, grayish mass that measured 10 × 8 × 5.5 cm, with massive central necrosis . The pathologic examination confirmed metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the lung . He did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy and was free from recurrence 41 months after the hepatectomy.