A 55-year-old gentleman presented to A and E with 24 h history of increasing swelling and redness of his left foot with associated superficial blistering. He had poorly controlled Type 2 diabetes mellitus (HbA1C- 95 mmol/mol) and associated peripheral neuropathy. He had an injury to the plantar aspect of his left foot, while he was on a holiday in July 2022 and developed a non-healing ulcer ever since and has been managed without surgery. On presentation, he had a red, hot, and swollen left foot with an infected plantar ulcer. His inflammatory markers were significantly elevated (C-reactive protein [CRP]-295 mg/L). He has a background of metastatic renal cell carcinoma with brain metastases managed with chemotherapy and Grade-2 hepatitis secondary to immunotherapy awaiting a liver biopsy. He was started on broad spectrum antibiotics and a MRI showed a collection measuring 48 × 37 × 35 mm extending from the dorsal to the plantar aspect of the foot traversing between second and third metatarsal heads with chronic osteomyelitis around third metatarsal head . There were no obvious changes in a plain X-ray of the foot and ankle in the form of sequestrum (dead bone fragmentation-indicative of chronic osteomyelitis). Hence, MRI was performed, as it would be gold standard imaging to aid in diagnosis of Osteomyelitis and as well delineate any collections and its extent. As shown in , apart from extensive collection and changes in third metatarsal head, there was no extension of osteomyelitis into calcaneum and other tarsal bones. This helped in planning the surgical debridement accordingly. Patient underwent an extensive debridement of his left foot 3 days after his admission, intraoperatively, there was extensive necrosis along the tissue planes of 1st, 2nd, and 3rd MTP along with massive volume of pus tracking up to EHL tendon dorsally from the plantar aspect. After thorough debridement wound was packed with 20 mL of stimulan (Calcium sulfate dihydrate) impregnated with meropenem, vancomycin and gentamicin, wound was loosely closed with sutures. He was clinically unwell post-surgery and his inflammatory markers were persistently high (WBC-29.1*109/L, CRP-236 mg/L) and hence decision was made for a second washout and debridement ( and ) and organised an MRI of the whole leg, to assess the extent of infection and eventually showed extension along the superficial posterior compartment of the leg. We could confirm that there were no involvement of musculature and no extension into deep compartments. Patient had to be shifted to intensive care unit post his second washout as he became hemodynamically unstable in the ward, diagnosed with sepsis. His inflammatory markers were not within limits despite treatment with intravenous antibiotics (meropenem and vancomycin) specific to his wound swab (Heavy growth of Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli and Enterococcus faecalis). Hence, a third washout and debridement was carried out. This time extensive debridement was made along the posterior compartment of the leg. Despite extensive debridement, there were no obvious muscle loss intraoperatively. There was no requirement to perform a bone debridement, as no obvious erosion or sequestrum noted. Two-day post-third look showed significant improvement and was transferred to ward. His inflammatory markers gradually came under normal limits 2-week post his initial admission. His foot wounds were left to heel by secondary intention and were discharged on oral antibiotics and advice on regular dressings with the district nurses. He was followed up in our foot and ankle clinic in 2 weeks, his wounds had healed significantly , and his inflammatory markers were well within normal range. He was discharged with advice on review if necessary.