A 24-year-old Hispanic man presented after a witnessed tonic–clonic seizure with urinary incontinence that resolved after lorazepam administration. He had a remote history of seizures but was not on any medications. He was postictal, afebrile and tachycardic with a pulse of 124 beats per minute (bpm) and blood pressure (BP) of 144/66mmHg. Initial laboratory was remarkable for a lactate of 17mmoles/L, which resolved rapidly. A routine urine toxicology screen was positive for cannabinoids and benzodiazepines and negative for cocaine, phencyclidine, opiates and amphetamines. The next day he complained of abdominal pain, diarrhea, vomiting and developed progressive agitation and confusion. His lipase level was normal; however, his serum creatinine had increased from 1.4 to 4.3g/dL and subsequently increased further . Within a few hours his respiratory distress worsened, becoming hypoxic with an arterial saturation of 70%. Also noted were a fever of 38.89°C (102°F), heart rate of 140bpm, and BP of 163/104mmHg. After failing a trial of non-invasive ventilation, he was intubated. A chest X-ray revealed bilateral infiltrates . He remained hypoxemic after intubation requiring 100% fraction of inspired oxygen. Despite not meeting compliance criteria for acute respiratory distress syndrome his oxygenation responded to high positive end-expiratory pressure. Antibiotics were initiated for possible pneumonia. Bronchoscopy revealed normal airways and clear secretions, not compatible with aspiration or bacterial pneumonia. Bronchoalveolar lavage was performed. Subsequently, an echocardiogram demonstrated an ejection fraction of 30% with wall motion abnormalities. Bronchoscopy and echocardiogram findings suggested the etiology of hypoxemic respiratory failure was most likely fluid overload. The etiology for acute kidney injury (AKI) and congestive heart failure (CHF) was unclear. After three sessions of hemodialysis, his oxygenation, urine output, and creatinine levels improved. He was extubated on hospital day eight allowing further history. Apparently several hours prior to symptom onset he had consumed the street drug “Molly” with alcohol, marijuana, and “purple drank”, a slang term for a drink containing codeine and promethazine. No further hemodialysis was required and a repeat echocardiogram demonstrated normalization of his left ventricular function. He was discharged home on day twelve of hospitalization.