A 70-year-old man, who had been diagnosed with RA 13 years previously and who have been treated with 6 mg MTX per week and 1.5 mg tacrolimus per day, presented shortness of breath and productive cough. Before the presentation, RA was controlled well without any symptoms such as arthritis, which could mean that activity of the disease was low. There were no other clinical symptoms such as fever up. A blood test showed high C-reactive protein (1.32 mg/dL), Lactate Dehydrogenase (269 U/L) and soluble interleukin-2 receptor (1860 U/mL) levels. EBV antibody tests confirmed prior infection. Other results of blood test were as follows: red blood cells (3,910,000/µL), Hb (13.5 g/dL), white blood cells (6300/µL), aspartate aminotransferase (14 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (12 U/L), blood urea nitrogen (15 mg/dL), Cr (0.63 mg/dL). Chest computed tomography revealed multiple nodular shadows with interstitial pneumonia in the bilateral lower lung fields (, left). Since infectious pneumonia was suspected, sputum cytology was performed. Macroscopically, the sputum was colorless and showed no atypical findings. Necrotic debris was observed in the background of the sputum cytology . The sputum cytology showed many atypical lymphoid cells with low cell connectivity, a high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic (N/C) ratio, foamy cytoplasm, coarsely granular chromatin and distinct nucleoli ( and ). Cytomorphologically, reactive lymphoid hyperplasia, lymphoproliferative disorder, adenocarcinoma and neuroendocrine tumor were considered as the differential diagnoses. Bronchoscopy showed protuberating mucosa with vascular proliferation and bleeding tendency. Lung biopsy revealed atypical mid- to large-sized lymphoid cells with a high N/C ratio, cleaved nuclei and distinct nucleoli . Immunohisto-chemical staining of the lung biopsy specimen showed that the atypical lymphoid cells were positive for CD20 and MUM-1 , and weakly positive for bcl-6, but negative for CD3 and CD10. ISH-EBER showed no EBV-infectious lymphoid cells . The patient was finally diagnosed with MTX-LPD (non-germinal center B-cell-like DLBCL histological type). Most of the nodules disappeared spontaneously about 3 weeks after the withdrawal of MTX (, right); thereafter, only tacrolimus was used. Total follow-up period after MTX withdrawal was 15 months and there is no progression of the disease.