A 74-year old man, hypertensive, diabetic for 30 years, with chronic smoking symptoms, was admitted to the cardiovascular surgery department of the Mohamed Vth military teaching Hospital of Rabat, for single bypass. Ten days after surgery, the patient had febrile peaks at 39 °C and purulent sternum discharge. Aerobic and anaerobic blood cultures were performed. The C-reactive protein was at 327 mg per liter and the leukocyte counts to 24*103 cells per microliter, predominantly neutrophils (92%). In immediate postoperative, the patient developed bronchitis with interstitial pictures on chest radiograph but without purulent secretions.
The scanner has objectified the presence of a hypodense mass in the anterior mediastinum.
Microbiological examination of deep pus drained during a revision surgery of surgical site showed the presence of two bacterial strains . The identification of bacterial colonies obtained on Chocolate-isovitalex agar, was on biochemical basis using NH API* strips and bacterial grow in presence of the X-factor and the V-factor on Muller-Hinton agar which allowed the isolation of Haemophilus influenzae and Aggregatibacter aphrophilus. Susceptibility analysis of the isolated strains was carried out with the disc diffusion methodology according to the CA-SFM*. It showed the same susceptibility profile for the 2 strains with a susceptibility to the aminopenicillins, cephalosporins third generation, tetracyclines, quinolones and fluoroquinolones, rifampicin and erythromycin, chloramphenicol and imipenem.
The minimum inhibitory concentration (MICs) of aminopenicillins obtained by E-test strip was 0.75 μg/ml and imipenem was 2 μg/ml .
Blood culture performed during the same episode objectified the presence of the same bacterial strains with the same susceptibility profile to antibiotics.
The patient was treated by empirical antibiotic therapy: ciprofloxacin (800 mg per day), cephalosporins third generation (2 g per day) and vancomycin (2 g per day). Treatment was adjusted to the result of susceptibility studies (Amoxicillin 2 g per day with fluoroquinolone for 3 weeks) with the installation of an irrigation-suction system using suction drains (VAC® therapy).
The evolution marked by the improvement of the patient on the clinical and biological way after 10 days of curative antibiotic therapy.