An 83-year-old previously healthy woman, with no growth or developmental abnormalities, presented to the emergency room with fever and immobility 2 days after her fourth dose of the COVID-19 vaccine (BNT16B2b2, an mRNA vaccine containing spike-protein mRNA), and was admitted to our hospital. She had previously received three doses of the same COVID-19 vaccine; however, after each session, she presented with only slight side effects such as pain, redness, and fever at the injection site, which disappeared within a few days. She also had hyperlipidemia, hyperuricemia, and an overactive bladder, for which she received rosuvastatin calcium, febuxostat, vibegron, and vonoprazan fumarate for an extended period. She was a social drinker and did not smoke.
On examination, the patient had impaired consciousness (Glasgow Coma Scale: 14 [E4V4M6]) and fever (37.9 ℃). Her pulse rate was 92 beats/min, blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, height was 149.1 cm, and body weight was 53.2 kg. We observed discharge and skin redness around both eyelids. No abnormalities were observed in the thyroid gland, chest, or abdomen. Laboratory tests revealed an elevated inflammatory response (C-reactive protein, 2.89 mg/dL; Table ). Computed tomography (CT) of the head revealed enlargement of the sella turcica with extension into the suprasellar region . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head also revealed a large-for-age pituitary gland and a thickened pituitary stalk .
The next morning, her serum cortisol was low (4.4 μg/dL) and adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) level was normal (21.6 pg/mL). All thyroid hormones including thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH, 0.46 μIU/mL); free triiodothyronine (1.86 pg/mL); and free thyroxine (0.48 pg/mL) were low; hence, central hypothyroidism was suspected. Her prolactin levels were elevated (55.45 ng/mL). Immunoglobulin G (IgG), IgG4, and angiotensin-converting enzyme levels were within the normal ranges .
Hormone replacement therapy comprising prednisolone (30 mg/day) and levothyroxine (12.5 μg/day) was administered, after which her consciousness improved. On the 4th day, the cosyntropin stimulation test was performed and secondary adrenal insufficiency was suspected as the peak value was < 18 µg/dL . Thyrotropin-Releasing hormone (TRH) and gonadotropin-releasing hormone loading tests on the 8th day also revealed growth hormone deficiency and delayed responses to TSH, luteinizing hormone, and follicle-stimulating hormone . Growth Hormone (GH)-releasing peptide-2 testing performed on the same day revealed a peak value below 9 µg/L, hence the diagnosis of adult GH deficiency . These anterior pituitary hypofunctions suggested panhypopituitarism.
On the 7th day of hospitalization, the patient developed polyuria (4150 mL/day). AVP deficiency was diagnosed using a hypertonic saline test . Her MRI showed that the high signal intensity (bright spots) in the posterior pituitary lobes had disappeared . Polyuria resolved spontaneously on the 15th day. Replacement therapy comprising thyroid and adrenal corticosteroid hormones was continued. Growth hormone replacement was not initiated due to the absence of symptoms. The patient was discharged on the 19th day.
On the 134th day, the patient was readmitted for evaluation of endocrine function. The cosyntropin stimulation test showed a normal response; however, the TRH stimulation test had a low response. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone and GH-releasing peptide-2 load tests also showed low responses . Contrast-Enhanced MRI of the pituitary gland showed further improvement in the edematous changes in the pituitary stalk . As hormonal secretion partially improved, supplementation with thyroid and adrenal corticosteroid hormones was continued. The patient’s condition stabilized after hormone supplementation.