A 45-year-old, otherwise healthy male visited our hospital with a complaint of progressive abdominal swelling. Radiological assessments including computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging revealed a giant (>20 cm) cystic adrenal tumor. The tumor compressed right lobe of liver upward, right kidney downward, and inferior vena cava inward, respectively . Both serum and urine norepinephrine values showed high scores above normal range (serum: 1423 pg/mL; urine: 569.3 μg/day), whereas serum and urine epinephrine values were slightly high or within normal range (serum: 72 pg/mL; urine: 27.8 μg/day). Comprehensive endocrinological assessments determined the tumor as pheochromocytoma; the tumor was also positive for 123I-MIBG scintigraphy (data not shown).
After administration of doxazosin (gradually increased up to 8 mg/day) and preparative fluid replacement (24 h before surgery), the patient underwent radical surgery, that is resection of the adrenal tumor together with the right lobe of the liver and right kidney. The tumor reached a maximal diameter of 27 cm at the time of surgery and could be identified on the surface of the body . In the surgical procedure, right lobe of liver was first resected as planned through a midline incision combined with a right thoraco-abdominal incision (ninth intercostal thoracotomy). We then attempted to mobilize the tumor but could not because of its large size and fixation to surrounding structures. Consequently, we decided to puncture a lateral cystic part of the tumor which strongly compressed the right abdominal wall and aspirate cystic fluid to improve the tumor's mobility. However, during the aspiration with an aspiration tube, the patient's blood pressure suddenly went down to 45/26 mmHg without any sign of bleeding . Blood pressure soon recovered by withdrawal of aspiration and administration of vasopressor. To improve the tumor's mobility, we punctured another cystic part of the tumor and suctioned the content fluid again. During this second suction, blood pressure decreased to 41/25 mmHg, then recovered with vasopressor therapy. We collected a total of 2450 mL cystic fluid (1250 and 1200 mL in the first and second aspirations, respectively). After these events, the tumor was successfully mobilized and eventually excised together with right lobe of liver and right kidney with negative surgical margin (operation time: 9 h 35 min; total blood loss: 2603 mL; blood transfusion volume: 16 units of red cell concentrates and 8 units of fresh frozen plasmas; total infusion volume: 4700 mL; total tumor weight: 6950 g [including the aspirated 2450 mL fluid]). Pathological diagnosis was pheochromocytoma with a PASS of 15 points . Biochemical examination of the cystic fluid demonstrated extremely high concentrations of catecholamines (norepinephrine: 814 500 pg/mL; epinephrine 23 825 pg/mL).