An asymptomatic 66-year-old female was diagnosed with a mass in the lower lobe of the right lung from a screening X-ray. She had a history of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) in 1984, which had been treated with radiotherapy and chemotherapy, and she had been undergoing follow-up since 1990. Moreover, she had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease relating to tobacco smoking for many years, and congestive heart failure. Computed tomography confirmed the lesion, and a transbronchial biopsy showed the presence of poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma.
The tumor had invaded the parietal pericardium, and the hilar nodes had become enlarged; thus, it was staged as IIIA. Pneumonectomy was contraindicated because of the patient's surgical risk, and combined treatment could not be performed because of the extent of the predicted radiotherapy field. At this time, the patient had already noted thyroid enlargement, and the head and neck surgeon's impression was that she presented multinodular goiter. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy was not performed, because she was going to begin oncological treatment.
Induction carboplatin and paclitaxel were administered. After the second cycle, the patient presented symptoms of bowel subocclusion, subsequently followed by diarrhea. Colonoscopy showed the presence of an incidental cecal polyp, and biopsy on this polyp revealed that it was an undifferentiated malignant neoplasm. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the polyp was AE1/AE3 (+), cytokeratin 20 (-), 34BE12 (+) and TTF-1(-), i.e. compatible with metastasis from squamous cell carcinoma of the lungs . Treatment with vinorelbine was started. After the eighth cycle, the thyroid nodule enlarged even further , and therefore an aspiration biopsy was performed, which detected metastases from squamous cell carcinoma. Treatment with gemcitabine was started. After the first two cycles, she developed a bowel obstruction . Exploratory laparotomy detected a retroperitoneal mass that was causing ileal obstruction, proximally to the ileocecal valve. The patient therefore underwent enterectomy and right hemicolectomy. She died from septic postoperative complications. No necropsy was performed.