A 55-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) with a several day history of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. The patient was hypotensive with a blood pressure (BP) of 84/63 mmHg, a heart rate of 123 beats/min, and a temperature of 37.1 Celsius. On laboratory examination, he had a white blood cell count of 12 mm3, a lactate level of 8.1 mmol/L, a sodium level of 129 mEq/L, and a total bilirubin level of 2.4 mg/dL. His creatinine level of 2.3 mg/dL was consistent with acute kidney injury. Due to emergency department screening protocols, the patient was tested and found to be positive for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which he was unaware of at the time of his presentation. The patient was aggressively resuscitated with three liters of intravenous crystalloid with a moderate improvement in his systolic blood pressure.
He was admitted to the medical intensive care unit (ICU) for continued resuscitation and further evaluation of the persistent hypotension and tachycardia. Blood cultures were obtained, and empiric intravenous antibiotics were initiated, as well as intravenous vasopressor support (norepinephrine (Hospira, Inc., Lake Forest, IL)) to maintain a mean arterial pressure (MAP) greater than 65 mmHg. A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed significant air, fluid, and inflammation around the rectum and scrotum tracking proximally through the pelvis and into the left retroperitoneum with inflammation just below the left kidney which prompted a surgical consultation. The patient underwent emergent debridement of the perineal and scrotal abscesses and was admitted to the American Burn Association- (ABA-) verified burn center . The patient was repeatedly operated upon every 24 hours for a more extensive perineal and scrotal debridement . On early hospital day three, the patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy for a left colonic medial visceral rotation with extensive debridement of the left retroperitoneum. Infected necrotic tissue and foul-smelling exudate were found in the retroperitoneum requiring a wide excision of the left psoas muscle, lateral abdominal wall, and Gerota's fascia of the left kidney and ligation of a thrombosed left gonadal vein. Anoscopy was performed, which identified a left posterior fistula, communicating with the left ischiorectal space, which was identified to be the initiating site of this soft tissue necrotizing infection. A temporary negative pressure wound therapy device (temporary abdominal closure (TAC) device) was placed to the open abdomen, and the patient returned to the OR daily for further abdominal washouts and retroperitoneal debridements until the infection had been completely debrided. The anal sphincter complex required complete excision secondary to necrosis which then necessitated a proximal colonic diversion for control of his fecal incontinence .
Tissue cultures revealed a polymicrobial mixture of Parabacteroides distasonis, Prevotella melaninogenica, and Fusobacterium nucleatum, while his blood cultures grew Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron. He was treated with intravenous piperacillin/tazobactam (Sandoz, Princeton, NJ) and linezolid (Pfizer, Inc., New York, NY). Initially, the patient was noted to have a CD4 count of 14 and a viral load greater than 349,000. His chest X-ray (CXR) revealed a diffuse interstitial prominence and peribronchial cuffing while sputum studies revealed a Pneumocystis jirovecii infection. The patient was treated with clindamycin (ACS Dobfar SPA, Switzerland) and primaquine (Sanofi-Aventis, St. Louis, MO) for approximately 3 weeks followed by Mepron (GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC) for prophylaxis. Antiretroviral therapy was initially deferred due to the patient's hemodynamic instability and renal failure; however, Triumeq (ViiV, Brentford, UK) was eventually initiated, once his hemodynamic condition stabilized.
The patient spent three months admitted to the burn center and was subsequently discharged to a skilled nursing facility with follow-up in the burn clinic. After approximately six weeks convalescing, there was sufficient granulation tissue on the perineum and testicles, and he underwent one-to-one meshed split-thickness skin grafting for cutaneous coverage and creation of a neoscrotum for the testicles . The patient was discharged by the fifth postoperative day with follow-up in the burn center clinic.