A 59-year-old female with history of presumptive chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy developed further abnormalities in other organ systems. She fulfilled the diagnostic criteria of PS: polyneuropathy, monoclonal gammopathy, elevated VEGF levels , sclerodermoid skin features, subclinical hypothyroidism, and extravascular volume expansion. She was started on lenalidomide and dexamethasone.
A few months later, she developed progressive dyspnoea and presented with hypoxaemic respiratory failure for which she received urgent intubation and mechanical ventilation. Physical examination revealed decreased air entry that was more prominent over the right lung field than the left on auscultation with bilateral lower limb oedema. Her abdomen was also distended. Chest radiography showed an asymmetrically larger right-sided pleural effusion, cardiomegaly with upper lobe diversion . A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with subtle ST depressions in the inferolateral leads and small QRS complexes in the limb leads . High-sensitivity troponin was slightly elevated with no significant delta change. Brain natriuretic peptide was normal. The full blood count and renal panel were both unremarkable.
She was started on intravenous diuretics and underwent right-sided pleural drainage. Whilst being intubated, she developed an episode of intermittent complete heart block with slow narrow complex escape, the longest duration lasting 30 min, without any precipitating events or prior rate-lowering medications . Intravenous noradrenaline was started for haemodynamic stabilisation. Transcutaneous pacing pads were placed on her for temporary pacing support. She required high pacing burden for the first 2 days before she recovered intrinsic atrioventricular (AV) conduction and sinus rhythm thereafter. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed globally depressed left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (35%) with a moderate pericardial effusion without features of cardiac tamponade. The pulmonary pressure was not elevated . She was subsequently extubated after adequate diuresis and drainage of the right pleural effusion and transferred to the general ward with close continuous cardiac telemetry monitoring, assessing for further heart block.
She remained stable post-extubation without further arrhythmias and did not require additional cardiac monitoring. However, just prior to her coronary angiogram, she developed an episode of ventricular standstill lasting for approximately 1 min which needed transcutaneous pacing support. The coronary angiography showed no significant coronary stenosis. Due to multiple episodes of intermittent, unprovoked, high-grade AV block and ventricular standstill, she was counselled on implantation of a dual-chamber permanent pacemaker after undergoing cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging to evaluate for possible infiltrative and cardiomyopathic processes. CMR imaging showed globally increased native T1 values (1188 ms) and elevated cardiac extracellular volume (ECV) fraction (46%) without myocardial late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in the left ventricle ( and ), suggesting a possible early cardiac infiltrative process.
Extensive haematological evaluation was undertaken, including evaluation of her immunoglobulin levels, which showed she had failed to respondto lenalidomide and steroid combination therapy . She was switched to a daratumumab-based treatment regimen and discharged with fluid restriction advice, oral maintenance diuretics as well as joint cardiology-haematology clinic follow-up. Subsequent review 5 months later showed both clinical and biochemical response to daratumumab. Patient was euvolaemic and her pacemaker device interrogation revealed normalisation of AV conduction system with no pacing required from pacemaker.