Decreased vision in the right eye.
A 45-year-old African American female presented to our ambulatory surgical center for right corneal transplantation due to corneal perforation in the setting of cicatricial conjunctivitis, as well as diffuse corneal neovascularization from LABD. At the time of the surgery, the severity of the disease was unknown. The patient had been lost to follow-up with dermatology and was not taking any medications for her LABD. The severity of the patient’s history of LABD diagnosis was only discovered after the operating room case and an in-depth conversation with her dermatologist. The patient’s LABD was considered idiopathic per her dermatologist, given the absence of any inciting medication or infection. She began experiencing skin rashes and blisters in 2017. In June 2019, she sought medical attention due to mucosal membrane involvement, but at that time no medical therapy was initiated. In January 2021, she developed visual problems with her right eye and, following a confirmatory skin biopsy, was officially diagnosed with LABD in February 2021. Dapsone therapy was initiated in April 2021. She was hospitalized in May 2021 for a corneal ulcer of the right eye and was treated with one dose of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), rituximab infusions, and 25 mg of oral dapsone twice each day. The patient received 4 doses of rituximab and was lost to follow-up until August 2021. This case was emergent due to the risk of permanent visual loss. The surgery was scheduled at the freestanding outpatient surgical center due to the presence of necessary equipment, personnel, and materials.
The patient’s medical history consisted of anxiety, depression, chronic benzodiazepine dependence, chronic back pain, hypertension, constipation, genital herpes, prior cocaine abuse, and LABD.
The patient had a strong family history of autoimmune disease, with paternal cousins having sarcoidosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and multiple sclerosis. The patient was married and lived a few hours away from our hospital location. She was of a lower socioeconomic background and had trouble affording medications for her treatment.
The patient had visible nasal ulcers and some white ulcers on her tongue . There was no history of bleeding in her mouth or of previous anesthetic complications. The rest of the physical exam was normal.
No laboratories were needed for preoperative evaluation before this emergent case.
Figure shows the preoperative oral and nasal lesions.