A 75-year-old female was transferred from another hospital to the emergency department of our hospital for acute aortic dissection during coronary angioplasty. She had a history of dyslipidemia, diabetes mellitus type 2, and hypertension, all diagnosed 5 years ago. She also had a history of urinary tract infections. Her surgical history was insignificant. She had no known food or drug allergies. Home medications included aspirin 100 mg (Bayer Bitterfeld GmbH, Germany), lovenox 4,000 IU anti-Xa/0.4 mL (Sanofi Winthrop Industrie, France), plavix 75 mg (Sanofi Pharma Bristol Myers Squibb SNC, France), concor 5 mg (Merck KGaA, Germany), and glucophage 850 mg (Merck Santé SAS, France). She had 13 pregnancies and 9 full-term births by normal vaginal deliveries with no complications. No history of cigarette smoking, drug abuse, alcohol intake, or multiple sexual partners was reported.
Prior to presentation to our hospital, patient had been undergoing an elective PTCA at another hospital for acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction, when iatrogenic acute ascending aortic dissection occurred. During PTCA, an MP 3.75 4Fr guide catheter had been used to perform the coronary angiography, revealing double vessel coronary artery disease with a 90% proximal left circumflex artery (LCX) lesion and 90% right coronary artery (RCA) lesion. While inserting the Launcher 6Fr 3.75 guide catheter, resistance occurred with the brachiocephalic artery due to calcified aortic arch. Reperfusion was successfully achieved afterward by passing an ORSIRO sirolimus-eluting coronary stent (Biotronik, Bülach, Switzerland) into the RCA. However, while inserting the second stent into the LCX, aorta started its dissection. Therefore, the patient was transferred urgently to our hospital within 30 min for coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) and aortic dissection repair. Fortunately, the patient remained hemodynamically stable throughout.
At presentation to the emergency department of our hospital, the patient was sedated, afebrile (36.8°C) with blood pressure of 150/100 mmHg, pulse rate of 68 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and O2 saturation of 99%. Physical examination was normal except for bruit heard at the aortic area, with regular first and second heart sounds and no murmurs. On electrocardiogram, there was atrial fibrillation and rapid ventricular response with aberrant conduction or ventricular premature complexes. Emergent trans-thoracic echography was performed revealing an estimated ejection fraction of 60% and enlarged ascending aorta. Patient was admitted for emergency CABG surgery and aortic dissection repair.
During CABG surgery, Stanford type A DeBakey type II ascending aortic dissection with intramural hematoma behind brachiocephalic trunk was found. The ascending aorta was enlarged with an approximate diameter of 4.5 cm and dark reddish in color along its length . It was opened after hypothermic circulatory arrest induction at 22°C, revealing calcified left coronary cusp of the aortic valve . The dissection entry, measuring around 5 mm, was situated at the intima of the anterior wall of the ascending aorta, near the sinotubular junction. Extent of the aortic dissection reaches nearly 7 cm high. First, decalcification of the aortic valve cusp was done, and then due to the presence of 25 mm hypertrophy of the cardiac septum, 1 cm septal myomectomy was performed. After that, 7 cm length supracoronary aortic tube graft 28 mm (InterVascular Inc., LaCiotat, France) was placed directly at the sinotubular junction . Saphenous vein graft from the left lower extremity was also placed between the grafted ascending aorta and the LCX . The patient was successfully weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass and discharged after recovery on the 11th postoperative day. No postoperative complications were reported afterward.