A 45-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to the Accident and Emergency Department of our hospital after presenting with a two-week history of progressive walk impairment associated with paresthesias around his mouth and the fingers on his right hand. The most remarkable features of his medical history were the presence of type 2 diabetes (recently diagnosed), dislipemia, high blood pressure and morbid obesity (body mass index: 41.3).
A medical examination showed a lower limb paresis (grade 3/5), which was more prominent in dorsal flexion of both feet, an absence of reflexes and a loss of superficial sensitivity in his left limb. The presence of enlarged lymph nodes in the cervical area was also evident; they were variable in size (some of them of more than 1cm) and mobile. Furthermore, a large scalp mass was identified in the parietal-occipital area; it was stuck to the skull, had an irregular shape, a tough texture, and palpation was not painful. Apart from these findings, the presence of a bilateral gynecomastia and a hyperpigmentation of the skin, mostly of the areoles, were noteworthy.
An electromyography (EMG) test was performed to better determine the neurological symptoms. The EMG showed a motor-dominant polyneuropathy with demyelinating features in his lower limbs. The administration of steroids only partially improved his neurological symptoms.
A cranial computed tomography (CT) scan was performed and showed a mass in the scalp with intense underlying bone erosion . The mass was in contact with the posterior part of the sagittal sinus, but did not invade it. There were no signs of brain damage or infiltration and the tumor presented intense vascularization, mainly from vessels of the external carotid artery (ECA). A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan could not be performed because of our patient’s high body weight. A whole-body CT scan was carried out and revealed adenopathies in the cervical area, mediastinum and retroperitoneum. Splenomegaly was also identified.
His laboratory test results showed a significant increase of immunoglobulin G (IgG) with a clear peak in the proteinogram, increase of lambda and kappa light chains in serum and high levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) . No Bence Jones proteinuria was identified. A bone marrow biopsy showed reactive changes and intense plasmocytosis and pathological analysis of one of the cervical lymph nodes showed reactive changes with peripheral follicular proliferation, hyalinization of the vessels and the presence of plasma cells . These findings were compatible with Castleman’s disease. Serological tests for human herpes virus-8 (HHV-8) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection were performed, with negative results, because of the association between Castleman’s disease and these viral infections [,]. Castleman’s disease occurs in about 11 to 30% of patients with POEMS syndrome .
The decision was taken to surgically remove the parietal-occipital mass, with a previous embolization of the main arteries feeding the tumor in order to avoid excessive bleeding during surgery. The patient was operated on under general anesthesia. We performed a circular craniectomy around the tumor and a complete excision of the lesion by dissecting its adherences with the dura mater, which did not seem to be damaged . A titanium mesh was placed in the osseous defect.
Pathological analyses concluded that the tumor was a well-differentiated plasmocytoma with expression of CD38, IgG and lambda light chain . A bone marrow biopsy showed reactive changes with intense plamocytosis.
Subsequently, according to the definitive pathological results, dexamethasone pulse therapy was initiated (three pulses per month of 20mg/day for four days) and the patient also received radiotherapy to the skull to complete the treatment, with an accumulated dose of 50Gy in the surgical field.
As mentioned above, his neurological status improved slightly with the initial prescription of steroids, but neurological deficits recovered progressively after surgery. The rest of the POEMS features also improved after surgery and even more so when steroids and radiotherapy were initiated (two weeks after surgery).
Apart from his clinical status, his response to treatment was evaluated with positron emission tomography (PET), which was performed two months after the last steroid pulse. It showed a complete resolution of adenopathies in the different areas and no abnormal activity was identified in the skull. Moreover, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and lambda chain serum levels normalized progressively. During the 18-month follow-up, there have not been any clinical or laboratory abnormalities to indicate a recurrence of the disease. No complications related to the surgical procedure were reported .