A 16 year old Sri Lankan male, diagnosed with FA, presented to University Medical Unit (UMU) of National Hospital of Sri Lanka for further assessment of central cyanosis and clubbing. He was a product of a non consanguineous marriage and had been "healthy" up to 13 years of age when he had developed petichiae and found to have thrombocytopenia. There was no organomegaly. His platelet counts were persistently low around 20,000/ɥl. A trephine bone marrow biopsy showed severe bone marrow hypoplasia with haematopoietic tissue accounting for less than 25% of marrow spaces. No abnormal cells were noted and it was concluded to be compatible with severe aplastic anaemia. All other routine blood tests including liver function tests, renal function tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and tests of coagulation were within normal limits. Ultrasound scan of the abdomen was also normal. A clinical diagnosis of FA was made and genetically confirmed by chromosomal studies. Three chromosomal cultures with a) no mitomycin C (MMC), b) 10 ng/ml of MMC, c) 50 ng/ml of MMC all demonstrated increased chromosome breaks in metaphase chromosomal spreads in the patient when compared with a control. He continued to be followed up at a regional tertiary care centre where the progressive clubbing and cyanosis were noted. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) performed initially by a paediatric cardiologist revealed a structurally and functionally normal heart without any evidence of an intra-cardiac shunt. Increased interstitial shadowing was noted in bilateral lung fields in the chest roentgenogram and lung function tests revealed a severe restrictive pattern. The high resolution CT (HRCT) of the thorax failed to demonstrate any evidence of pulmonary fibrosis.
Upon admission to UMU, in addition to central and peripheral cyanosis and grade 5 clubbing, the patient also had persistent desaturation with paltypnoea (breathlessness worsening on sitting up) and orthodeoxia (desaturation worsening with sitting up from lying down position). His oxygen saturation on pulse oximetry was persistently around 70% on air and further desaturation was noted upon standing.
A contrast echocardiography demonstrated early crossover of contrast during 3rd and 5th cycles raising the possibility of pulmonary arterio-venous fistula. No other cardiac cause was identified that could account for his cyanosis and clubbing. To account for the severe degree of desaturation, we assumed the shunt to be of large calibre. The CT pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) was inconclusive in this regard. A subsequent cardiac catheterisation study demonstrated bilateral diffuse pulmonary arterio-venous fistulae not amenable for surgical intervention.