An 86-year-old woman (height, 130 cm; weight, 36 kg) with a history of osteoporosis had been receiving alendronate, a bisphosphonate, since the age of 77 years. She discontinued alendronate sodium hydrate and underwent extraction of the right lower molar due to periodontitis. However, the swelling and pain in the right mandibular gum persisted. She was referred to the dental surgery department and diagnosed with medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw based on the observed swelling, pus drainage from the gingival fistula, and osteolysis of the right mandible. The pain persisted even with incisional drainage and debridement of the abscess, multiple sequestrectomy attempts, repeated administration of antibacterial agents, and extraction of the right lower residual molars. Moreover, she showed no response to 25 mg of pregabalin daily, tramadol was gradually increased to 75 mg daily, and acetaminophen was gradually increased to 2650 mg daily, which caused severe side effects such as extreme staggering. Five months after the diagnosis, she was referred to our pain management clinic for pain evaluation and treatment.
She presented with persistent right mandibular pain with a numerical rating scale (NRS; 0–10) score of 3. Additionally, she experienced paroxysmal electrical pain with an NRS score of 5 upon mandibular movements, which lasted several tens of minutes and occurred approximately 20 times per day. Otorhinolaryngological and other cranial nerve examinations did not reveal any abnormal findings. Given her normal white blood cell and neutrophil counts, low C-reactive protein levels, and physical examination findings, systemic inflammation was ruled out. The aforementioned medication therapy only yielded transient beneficial efficacy. Moreover, the dose could not be increased due to side effects. She was unable to chew solid food or sleep well, which led to a gradual weight loss of 6.6 kg, and the pain significantly diminished her quality of life. Therefore, we decided to perform minimally invasive RFT of the right mandibular nerve.
The patient was placed in a supine position with the head slightly bent backward using a shoulder pillow; subsequently, the right foramen ovale was visualized using radiographic fluoroscopy. The puncture point was placed at the midpoint and inferior border of the right zygomatic arch, ≈3 cm ventral to the tragus. After applying local anesthesia with 2 ml of 1% mepivacaine subcutaneously at the puncture site, a 22-gauge, 54-mm radiofrequency needle (TL-S; Top Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) was used to reach the foramen ovale; subsequently, 0.3 V sensory stimulation at 50 Hz was used to produce pain . Within minutes after injecting 0.5 mL of 2% mepivacaine, sensory loss in the right mandible was obtained. Next, RFT was performed for 180 s at 50 °C (TOP Lesion Generator TLG-10; Top Corporation). The post-interventional course was uneventful without complications. The intractable pain in the right mandible improved immediately after RFT. She experienced a slight numbness in the right mandibular nerve area without masticatory atonia.
She obtained complete pain relief, and all analgesics were discontinued 4 days after the procedure. After receiving appropriate dental treatment for osteonecrosis of the jaw, the patient was discharged from our hospital following a satisfactory treatment course. Her pain was well controlled, with an NRS score of 0 without medication for 3 years. Additionally, she was able to eat meals that she could not before and her weight increased to the original.
This case report complied with the applicable “Improving Quality and Transparency in Health Research” Guidelines. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the presentation of this case report.