A 33-month-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat was referred to the Animal Health Trust for the investigation of urinary incontinence and straining to urinate without producing urine. This was first noticed when the cat was 9 months old. The cat had been treated with multiple courses of meloxicam (Metacam Oral Suspension; Boehringer Ingelheim) at 0.05 mg/kg q24h PO and amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (Synulox; Zoetis) at 20 mg/kg q12h PO.
On examination, vital signs were within normal limits. A constant slow dribbling of urine was observed from the vulva.
Results from a complete haematology and serum biochemical panel were unremarkable.
Abdominal ultrasonography showed a moderately filled urinary bladder. The bladder wall was diffusely thickened (3 mm) and showed mucosal irregularity . A membrane-like structure was seen within the lumen of the bladder neck, extending vertically from the mucosa of the dorsal wall to the mucosa of the ventral wall . Caudal to this membrane-like structure, the bladder neck and urethra were dilated to about 5 mm in diameter and the vesicoureteral junction could not be identified. A bilateral, mild dilation of the renal pelves was observed.
Ultrasound-guided cystocentesis was performed and urinalysis identified bacteriuria and pyuria. The bacteriology result showed growth of Enterococcus species, which was susceptible to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid.
To better characterise the lesions observed on ultrasonography, a radiographic contrast study of the urinary tract was planned.
A retrograde vaginourethrocystogram was performed using an 8 FG Foley male dog catheter and 2 ml soluble, non-iodinated ionic contrast medium (CM) (Iopamidol 300 mg I/ml [Niopam; Bracco]). CM was seen in the urethra and bladder neck, but only a small volume passed into the body of the bladder .
A further 3 ml of CM were used, injected against mild resistance . The urethra was seen to be markedly distended and widened cranially. The CM column widened up to 10 mm before terminating abruptly with a rounded contour in the region of the trigone. This termination was suspected to be related to the presence of the membrane visualised on ultrasonography. CM was also observed filling the ureters, which entered the bladder in the region of the trigone, but only a small volume of CM was seen within the body of the urinary bladder. For this reason, only a small communication between the body of the urinary bladder and the urethra and bladder neck through the membrane-like structure was suspected. The ureters were assumed to terminate caudal to the membrane due to the ureteric reflux noted. CM filled the entire length of both ureters, the renal pelves and renal silhouettes. This was an unexpected finding, and therefore further immediate assessment of the kidneys was performed.
A CT scan of the abdomen confirmed the radiographic findings ( and ). However, subcapsular accumulation of the CM was also seen around both kidneys but not in the renal parenchyma or in the retroperitoneal space.
The final imaging diagnosis was that a soft- tissue membrane arising from the bladder wall was partially occluding the lumen of the trigone immediately cranial to the ureterovesical junctions.
Surgery was planned to remove the membrane-like structure. A cystotomy was performed on the ventral wall of the urinary bladder and an intraluminal division was identified in the bladder neck. This division was resected en bloc. The ureters were identified immediately caudal to this membrane .
A urinary catheter was passed in a retrograde fashion into the urinary bladder and remained in place for 4 days. The cystitis was treated with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (20 mg/kg q12h PO for 7 days); in addition, buprenorphine (Buprecare; Animalcare) 20 μg/kg q8h sublingually and meloxicam (0.05 mg/kg q24h PO) were given for 5 days. After surgery, there was slight improvement of the clinical signs, but the cat remained incontinent.
The histopathological study of the excised membrane-like tissue consisted of dense, moderately inflamed, highly vascularised, exuberant fibrous connective tissue. This was discontinuously covered by transitional epithelium. The urinary bladder wall showed severe hypertrophy of the muscle layer and mild atrophy of the submucosal and mucosal layers.
Follow-up ultrasound was performed 4 weeks after surgery. Recurrence of the membrane was evident. A repeat urinalysis, including culture, was unremarkable.
Owing to the postoperative recurrence of the membrane, balloon dilatation was performed . A percutaneous guide wire was placed in a normograde fashion into the bladder and attempts were made to pass the wire down the urethra. Unfortunately, it was not possible to pass the guidewire through the membrane to enter into the trigone and proximal urethra. An introducer and vascular sheath was then placed in the urethra in a retrograde fashion. The guidewire was then inserted through the introducer, across the membrane and into the bladder. An 8.0 mm balloon catheter (40 mm in length; Infinity Medical) was then introduced over the guidewire, within the sheath, into the bladder, with the balloon seated across the membrane-like lesion. The balloon was dilated and maintained for 30 s before being removed. A retrograde urethrocystogram was then performed with the aid of the vascular sheath. A small, patent lumen was visible across the lesion. The balloon dilatation treatment was repeated with a 10.0 mm balloon catheter. A repeated urethrocystogram showed satisfactory patency across the trigone. The guidewire and the vascular sheath were removed.
After balloon dilatation, abdominal ultrasonography was performed. The membrane-like lesion was not visualised and from this point, treatment with prednisolone (Prednisolone; Actavis) 1.4 mg/kg q24h PO was started.
Two weeks later, abdominal ultrasonography was repeated and again revealed the presence of a membrane. Recurrence was apparent after each of five ballooning treatments performed at weekly intervals. At that time, the decision was made to place a nitinol stent (Infinity Medical) in the bladder trigone and proximal urethra ( and ).
For the procedure, the membrane was dilated with a balloon to 8 mm before a 10 × 40 mm self-expanding nitinol stent was deployed across the proximal urethra and the trigone.
There was no evidence of incontinence overnight and urination was normal. However, multiple episodes of stranguria were observed. These were probably explained by mechanical cystitis secondary to stent placement and surgery. Follow-up ultrasonography performed the next day showed no signs of renal pyelectasia. Urine culture at that time showed growth of Enterococcus species that was sensitive to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid. The cat was discharged with prednisolone (1.4 mg/kg q24h PO for 5 days) and amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (20 mg/kg q12h PO for 4 weeks).
Six weeks after surgical stent placement, the cat showed no signs of urinary incontinence. On abdominal ultrasonography irregular, hypoechoic tissue was seen encircling the stent and protruding into its lumen, narrowing it . Urine culture, taken at this time, was negative.
Follow-up information was obtained by telephone interview of the owner. Neither urinary incontinence nor other abnormalities were reported 5 months post-treatment.