A 65-year-old Caucasian woman with history of hypertension and Parkinson's disease presented to an emergency department because of severe sudden onset sub-sternal chest pain radiating to left arm and jaw that woke her up in the morning. Her blood pressure was well controlled with Lisinopril. She was taking multiple anti-Parkinson medications including Levodopa-Carbidopa and Trihexyphenidyl with a recent addition of Rasagiline and Pramipexole. Two months prior to her current illness she was admitted to the hospital with a non ST elevated myocardial infarction and her coronary angiography demonstrated a right dominant circulation without significant coronary artery disease. Echocardiogram revealed normal cardiac structure and function.
At this presentation, her electrocardiogram showed ischemic ST-segment elevation in inferior and lateral leads with reciprocal changes while she was haemodynamically stable with an unremarkable physical examination. Initial laboratory tests including complete blood count, electrolytes, renal and liver functions were within normal limits. Later her cardiac enzymes were elevated with peak troponin of 12.2 ng/mL (reference range, <0.04 ng/mL) and creatinine kinase MB fraction of 47 ng/mL (reference range <5 ng/mL).
The medical treatment with Tenecteplase, Enoxaparin, Aspirin, and Metoprolol was started immediately. Shortly after thrombolysis her ST-segments improved but she developed ventricular fibrillation and therefore cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed. Following successful resuscitation, the patient was transferred to our facility for further management.
Upon arrival to our cardiac catheterization laboratory, we performed first thoracic aortography that showed normal aortogram with no aortic dissection. Then, coronary angiography was proceeded which revealed focal spontaneous type C dissections in her four coronary artery braches including right posterior descending artery with a branch of posterolateral artery , an obtuse marginal, and a septal artery . All four vessels with dissections were small in caliber and not technically suitable for percutaneous coronary intervention. Medical management was initiated with Eptifibatide, Aspirin, Clopidogrel and β blocker in addition to holding her medications for treatment of Parkinson's disease. She recovered well with medical management and was discharged home in stable condition.
In order to determine possible reported causes of coronary dissection, other laboratory studies were completed including an erythrocyte sedimentation rate, c-reactive protein, antinuclear antibody and rheumatoid factor levels as well as a toxicology screen. All were negative.