A 42-year-old housewife came to the orthopedic outpatient department with complaints of insidious onset dull pain and mild generalized ankle swelling in the right ankle for 2 years. On examination, there were no skin changes over the swelling and ankle range of motion was complete without any pain. She was given treatment in the-form of analgesics which failed to relieve her symptoms. She was referred for further evaluation to our center. Radiographic examination showed a lytic lesion in the talus with a narrow transition zone and irregular calcifications at the center . A computed tomography scan without contrast (NCCT) was performed which revealed a 4.2 × 3 × 2.3 cm [AP × ML × SI] hypodense lesion involving almost the entire talus with hyperdense calcific foci noted within it. No obvious cortical destruction was noted ( and ). A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the patient was suggestive of neoplastic etiology possibly enchondroma or low-grade chondrosarcoma (-). The patient was advised biopsy to rule out malignancy. Biopsy was taken under an image intensifier by J-needle . On histopathological examination, chondrocytes did not show nuclear atypia hypercellularity or pleomorphism suggestive of a benign pathology such as enchondroma . A tentative diagnosis of the benign chondroid tumor was made, and the patient was followed up on an outpatient basis. Two months later, the patient was complaining increase in the intensity of ankle pain. In suspicion of malignancy, the patient was referred to an oncologist. A repeat biopsy was performed which showed a moderately cellular tumor arranged in lobules of an extracellular hyaline cartilaginous matrix with focal myxoid degeneration and atypical chondrocytes embedded in it . Findings were suggestive of grade 2 conventional chondrosarcoma. Metastatic work up for patient was done. Chest radiograph was normal. Furthermore, FDG-PET scan revealed a lytic low-grade metabolically active lesion with the chondroid type of calcification in the talus. There was no metabolically active disease elsewhere in the body. The presumptive diagnosis of chondrosarcoma of the talus was made and the patient was explained about the disease and its progression. All possible treatment options were explained to her. The patient opted for below-knee amputation due to the high possibility of recurrence of the tumor. The amputation stump was sent for histopathology which confirmed grade 2 conventional chondrosarcoma. The post-operative course was uneventful. She is walking with below knee prosthesis without support. A 1-year follow-up examination and radiological imaging revealed no evidence of metastasis.