A 74-year-old woman with type 2 diabetes mellitus was admitted to our hospital for management of poorly-controlled diabetes. Diabetes, diagnosed at age 49 years, was treated with insulin injections. She was taking insulin glargine 14 units, insulin aspart 24 units, sitagliptin 50 mg and metformin 500 mg, daily, for treatment of hyperglycemia before the first admission. She was also administered antihypertensive, lipid-lowering and antiulcer medications (nifedipine 40 mg, trichlormethiazide 1 mg, rosuvastatin 2.5 mg and famotidine 20 mg per day). She had undergone cataract and pelvic fracture surgeries at 63 and 71 years of age, respectively. She had no history of diabetic ketoacidosis, diabetic coma, severe hypoglycemic episodes, impaired renal function, hepatic dysfunction or central nervous system manifestations, including chorea, before the first admission. She had no history of either smoking or habitual alcohol consumption.
This patient’s clinical course is presented in Fig. . No physical, including neurological, abnormalities were found. Glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c) and the serum glucose level on admission were 11.1% and 213 mg/dL, respectively. Intensive treatment with insulin injections was thus necessary. After several days, her glycemic control improved. The patient showed symptoms of hypoglycemia, such as palpitations and cold sweats, from a few days to 1 day before the first attack of hemichorea. Hypoglycemia was managed with glucose ingestion. The last symptomatic hypoglycemic episode during hospitalization appeared 1 day prior to the first hemichorea attack. Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) was performed for daily evaluation of glycemic control, and the lowest serum glucose level measured during CGM was 49 mg/dl.
On the 19th hospital day, sudden involuntary movements involving the left face, shoulder, arm and leg [see Additional file ] were observed. These involuntary movements were exacerbated by stress, but diminished during sleep. No other remarkable neurological abnormalities were noted and there was no muscle weakness in either the upper or the lower limbs. A brain MRI scan was obtained during the involuntary movements. However, no abnormal high-intensity areas on T1-weighted images associated with the involuntary movements were detected in either the putamen or the striatum . In addition, there were no abnormal signal intensity findings in the putamen were on T2-weighted, FLAIR, or diffusion-weighted images. Neither the cerebral nor the carotid artery was stenotic on brain MR angiography imaging and carotid ultrasonography. She had no family history of diseases characterized by involuntary movements, such as Huntington’s disease. In addition, our patient’s thyroid functions were within normal range and serum thyroid autoantibodies were negative. Collagen disease antinuclear antibodies and antiphospholipid antibody were also negative. These data pointed away from Hashimoto encephalopathy or encephalopathy associated with collagen diseases such as antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes (MELAS) seemed very unlikely because none of the typical clinical abnormalities associated with this disease (mental disorder, cardiomyopathy, or deafness, etc.) was present. In addition, infection- associated forms of hemichorea, such as Sydenham’s chorea, seemed very unlikely because our case had no history of infectious disease from several months before admission. Furthermore, the last symptomatic hypoglycemic episode had occurred 1 day before the onset of hemichorea, and the clinical course and examinations of our case showed no diagnostic indications of other etiologies of chorea unrelated to hypoglycemia- associated chorea. We thus speculate that the choreiform movements in this case, while not being accompanied by abnormal high- intensity in the contralateral putamen on T1-weighted brain MRI scans, were associated with hypoglycemic episodes.
Administration of dopamine receptor antagonists (tiapride 50 mg and haloperidol 0.75 mg per day, respectively) was initiated. During the first 4 days after the chorea attack, choreic movements occurred frequently and persisted for several hours, but the frequency of such involuntary movements decreased 5 days after the onset. Her involuntary movements showed improvement at 8 days after the onset of hemichorea. She was discharged on a maintenance regimen of dopamine receptor antagonists. A brain MRI scan was obtained 1 month after discharge, and again no remarkable changes were recognizable .
12 months after the first admission, she required readmission due to marked deterioration of glycemic control. Her HbA1c levels ranged from 10.0 to 12.0% during the time between admissions, but she had been free of hemichorea. She received intensive treatment consisting of food intake restriction and an increased insulin dosage, leading to improved glycemic control. No hypoglycemic episodes occurred during the second hospitalization. Follow-up brain MRI showed no remarkable changes . Dopamine receptor antagonists were discontinued before discharge. 1 month later, i.e. 38 days after administration of these medications had been stopped, the left-sided hemichorea recurred. Her serum glucose levels, measured with a self-monitoring device during the few days before the hemichorea re-manifested, had ranged from 187 to 231 mg/dL. The severity of hemichorea at recurrence was milder than that during the first episode. No brain MRI changes associated with hemichorea were detected at the time of recurrence . She resumed taking the dopamine receptor antagonists and the recurrent hemichorea showed immediate improvement. In the 5 years, to date, since restarting the dopamine receptor antagonists she has experienced no further episodes of hemichorea.