A 14-year-old male diagnosed with an 8-month history of psychosis, presented as schizophrenia-like symptoms, including emotionally unstable, auditory hallucinations, involuntary movement of the head, suspected delusions, repetitive peculiar behavior and inconsistent convulsion on the upper arm. He had multiple episodes of tonic-clonic seizure in a day and lasted for around 20 seconds each time. He presented manic episode and violent behavior occasionally. He also had a quite unstable mood and could shifted from extremely aggressive to totally peace in seconds. He sang the same song and walked in the ward back and forth repetitively. The psychological CT revealed a severe abnormality in mental state in November 2020. Treatment with Olanzapine 2.5 mg/d, Valproic Acid 500 mg/d, and Artane 2 mg/d were given in another psychiatric hospital, and the symptoms remained controlled within the following 6.5 months until his next visit to the clinic, where he had a tonic-clonic seizure attack on both of his upper arms and was admitted to the hospital for treatment. Re-administration of the above-mentioned treatment with a maximum of Olanzapine 2.5 mg/d did not relieve his symptoms this time, he had restless and emotionally unstable. He was transferred to another hospital where he was diagnosed as DWS and hydrocephalus. The laboratory testing of CSF showed no abnormality (CSF protein test: negative; CSF bacteria culture: negative; autoimmune antibody: negative). The total protein level 0.3 g/L, and Glucose 3.99 mmol/L. Pr-surgery MRI + Diffusion Weighted Imaging showed enlarged cisterna magna and ventricle system. The abdominal CT showed a pelvic effusion. He underwent the VPS placement for the management of hydrocephalus. During the next 7 days, the patients experienced a seizure-free or psychotic symptoms-free along with a normal mental status period. However, when the CSF pressure was adjusted from 150 to 130 mm Hg by the physician, all his above mentioned symptoms recurred at the next day, he experienced the seizure attack (neurological examination: drowsiness; Glasgow Coma Scale: E4V4M5). The post-surgery MRI disclosed a DWM with hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis, cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle, enlarged posterior fossa and hydrocephalus; drainage tube image in the right ventricle. Then he was transferred to the mental health center and diagnosed with epilepsy, intellectual disability and organic delusional (schizophrenia-like) disorder on the basis of International Classification of Diseases, 10th edition criteria.
Physical and clinical examinations were unremarkable but had an abnormal gait. Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children confirmed mild intellectual disability (IQ-65). Blood gas analysis showed the results of PCO2 8 Kpa, Lac 1.7 mmol/L, Ca2 + 1.10 mmol/L, Na + 134 mmol/L, Glucose 6.8 mmol/L, AB 27.2 mmol/L, SB 26.8 mmol/L, SaO2 91% and PaO2/FiO2 = 286. No remarkable abnormality was showed in laboratory tests, including the blood coagulation, inflammatory markers, EEG and ECG.
Another brain MRI taken on July 8 showed a similar result . His mother’s physical condition was reported as normal during pregnancy. He was delivered by cesarean section and achieved normal developmental milestones. Neither family history of psychosis nor substance abuse was reported. He was distracted and showed a decreased emotional reaction during mental status examination. He did not cooperate with memory and intelligence check. He was initially treated with VPA 500 mg/bid and Olanzapine 5 mg/bid, which were increased to VPA 500 mg/tid and Olanzapine 10 mg/bid gradually, plus Lacosamide 50mg/tid, Clozapine 3 mg/qn. Besides, he received occupational therapy 5 times per week. After 3 weeks of treatment, his score in BPRS varied from 19 to 30, then dropped to 19. The treatment response was inadequate, the symptoms of seizures, unstable mood and repetitive bizarre behaviors still persisted. The whole course of the disease was showed in Figure .
The study protocol was approved by the ethics committee of Wuhan Mental Health Center. The patient gave informed consent for the publication of this case.