A 45-year-old woman was referred to our institution with a 3-month history of shortness of breath on exertion. The patient did not have significant past medical history. On physical exam, she was noted to have a palpable lymph node in the neck and axilla; skin pigmentation around the neck, chest, and back; significant peripheral oedema of the lower limbs; and clubbed fingers on both hands were noted . Electrocardiogram showed right axis deviation, P pulmonale in lead II, V1R, and strain pattern in lead V1–3 . Chest X-ray revealed significant cardiomegaly . Pulmonary function test (PFT) was normal with the exception of impaired diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO) at 30.4% (normal reference value: DLCO 80–120%) of predicted value. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed severe PH with an estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 80–85 mmHg, significant right atrium (RA) and right ventricular (RV) enlargement, and RV impairment with a tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) of 10.2 mm (normal reference value: TAPSE > 16 mm). Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) revealed mildly impaired RV function with right ventricular ejection fraction (RVEF) of 47% (normal reference value: RVEF 50–65%) . Moderate pericardial effusion was present . Ventilation perfusion scan indicated a low probability of pulmonary thromboembolism. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) did reveal significant dilatation of RA, RV, and pulmonary artery with no evidence of pulmonary thromboembolism. Bilateral pleural effusion, pericardial effusion, and ascites were present. In addition, hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy in bilateral neck, axilla, mediastinum, and para-aorta were present . Right heart catheterization (RHC) confirmed the presence of PAH .
To determine the aetiology of the patient’s PAH, further evaluation was performed. Blood test revealed mild thrombocytosis with a platelet count of 388 × 103 cells/μL (normal reference value: 150–350 × 103 cells/μL). Serum HIV-1 titre and the antibody titre related to autoimmune disease were completely negative. Low free T3 and free T4 levels with high thyroid-stimulating hormone suggested hypothyroidism. Total serum immunoglobulin was normal with normal protein electrophoresis and a negative test of Bence Jones protein. There was elevation of κ and λ free light chain levels (55.0 mg/L and 33.2 mg/L, respectively) (normal reference value: 3.3–19.4 mg/L, 5.7–26.3 mg/L) with an increased light chain ratio (1.66) (normal reference value: 0.26–1.65). Notably, serum vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF) level was significantly elevated. Computed tomography revealed multiple patchy osteosclerotic lesions in pelvic bone, vertebral body, costal bone, and sternal bone . Bilateral papilledema was present. In addition, although there was no clinical history suggestive of neuropathy, nerve conduction studies confirmed peripheral polyneuropathy involving the reduction in amplitude and velocity of sensory potentials and clear slowing of motor velocities with a decrease in amplitude in excess of 50%. All of these findings supported a diagnosis of POEMS syndrome according to the diagnostic criteria.
As symptoms and haemodynamics have not been improved with the initiation of tadalafil for PAH, our patient was started on immunomodulatory agent using thalidomide and dexamethasone. A year later, as a consequence, her symptoms of dyspnoea, pericardial effusion, pleural effusion, and ascites have completely disappeared with significant recovery of RV function . PFT was recovered with a DLCO of 66.6% of predicted value. Furthermore, her current RHC indicated no evidence of PAH .