A 36-year-old male presented to the outpatient department with a history of low backache for the past one year, associated with typical claudication symptoms, left-sided unilateral numbness, and paresthesia of the foot. He gave no history of radicular pain, but he complained of progressive reduction in claudication distance. He had experienced a sudden deterioration in gait along with urinary incontinence, following a trivial traumatic fall, one week before presentation. There was no history of constitutional features. On examination, he had a bilateral high-stepping gait due to foot drop. Symmetrical weakness of both the L4 and L5 roots (MRC grade 0/5) and partial weakness of the S1 root (MRC grade 3/5) was noted with nondermatomal sensory disturbances. Deep tendon reflexes of the lower limbs were absent bilaterally. Though anal tone was normal, saddle anesthesia was present. Postvoidal ultrasonogram of the urinary bladder revealed a residual urine volume of 250 ml, thus confirming a neurogenic bladder.
Plain radiography of the lumbar spine did not show any gross feature of instability and was inconclusive . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine revealed a solitary intraspinal posterior epidural lesion of 1.8 × 1.5 × 0.5 cm at the L2-L3 level with heterogeneous signal intensities and adjacent epidural fatty hypertrophy contributing to severe canal stenosis (3 mm). The cauda equina was severely compressed and was almost not visible . Owing to the heterogeneous signal intensities, computerized topography (CT) was performed which revealed the presence of an osseous lesion attached to the right L2 inferior articular process causing severe secondary canal stenosis . Considering the recent-onset neurological deficit, the patient was advised surgical decompression and excision biopsy at the earliest. The patient was positioned prone on a Relton Hall frame under general anesthesia. A standard midline posterior approach was employed and L2 and L3 lamina were exposed. The spinous process was removed and using a motorized burr, a rectangular trough was created surrounding the lesion. The lamina was thinned out using a burr to avoid further insult to the dural sac, and then using a Kerrison ronguer, laminectomy was completed all around the lesion under microscopic guidance . A small osteotome was used to remove the attachment on the right side which required partial removal of the facet joint. The lesion was then held, and the adherent soft tissues beneath the lesion were removed, resulting in en bloc removal and complete decompression of the cauda equina. Fusion was performed, as the procedure involved partial facet joint resection. The lesion was sent for histopathological examination. There were no adverse events or postoperative complications. The patient was mobilized with bilateral orthoses, and bladder training was initiated.
At 4 weeks, there was an improvement in his urinary symptoms, and by 12 weeks partial neurological recovery (MRC grade 3/5 motor power) in bilateral L4 and L5 was observed. The S1 root power increased by one grade (MRC grade 4/5). His gait improved thereafter, and he was able to return to his normal activities by 6 months with further neurological improvement by 1 grade in all roots.
The gross specimen measured 2 cm × 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm. It was greyish white in color and firm to hard in consistency . It had a well-defined capsule and had the feel of particulate materials on cut sections. Histopathological examination revealed the presence of bone, cartilage and ligamentous tissue, and zones abutting all these composed of mature adult-type encapsulated adipose tissue . This confirmed the diagnosis of benign osteolipoma.