In December 2011, a 73-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to our hospital with an elevated PSA of 8.59 ng/ml. His medical history consisted of cardiac stenting and pacemaker implantation. The finding of the digital rectal examination (DRE) was suspicious on the right base. His prostate volume on ultrasound was 37 ml, and his International Prostate Symptom Score was 6. Prostate biopsies showed a Gleason score of 3 + 3 = 6 prca of the right base and a Gleason score of 3 + 2 = 5 prca of the left apex. After negative staging with bone scintigraphy and CT of the abdomen, cT2aN0M0 prca was diagnosed. After a multidisciplinary discussion on the different therapeutic options, the patient decided to be treated with LDR-BT. Seventy-six seeds of 125I with a source activity of 0.373 mCi were implanted for a prescription dose of 145 Gy to the prostate. The first biochemical control after 4 months showed a significant drop of PSA to 0.75 ng/ml. Further oncological and clinical controls were reassuring, with a nadir PSA of 0.17 ng/ml .
In August 2019, the patient experienced symptoms of dysuria, polyuria, and nocturia. DRE revealed an induration on the base of the prostate. The patient’s PSA concentration was 0.58 ng/ml, and the results of urinary culture and cytology were negative. The finding of cystoscopy was reassuring, except for a confined urethral stricture, which was easily dilated. MRI of the prostate could not be performed, because the patient had a non-MRI-compatible pacemaker. Prostate biopsies were scheduled. Four weeks later, a new DRE showed a manifestly increased mass. Anatomopathological examination revealed SCCP in all of the biopsies. Because pure SCCP is rare, a metastasis of SCC of the lung or prostatic invasion of SCC of the bladder was taken into account. The finding of chest CT was negative, and relook cystoscopy with random bladder biopsies under general anesthesia was planned. The cystoscopy showed no abnormalities except for tumoral bulging of the bladder trigone. The patient underwent resection of the trigone and random biopsies. The random biopsies showed eosinophilic cystitis, whereas the resected trigone was diffusely infiltrated by SCC. Histological examination of the biopsies revealed a tumor forming sheets and nests of small epithelial cells with a high nuclear/ cytoplasmic ratio, prominent necrosis, and brisk mitotic activity. Crush artefact and nuclear molding typical of small cell cancer were present in all the biopsies. Immunohistochemistry showed expression of CgA and strong expression of CD56, nuclear expression of TTF-1, and dot-like expression of CKBR. The result of PSA staining was negative, and the finding of CK20 staining was negative, excluding Merkel cell carcinoma. CT of the abdomen showed multiple adenopathies in the iliac and obturator regions. Bone scintigraphy revealed multiple osteoblastic regions at the left ninth rib, sacrum, right ischiopubic region, and left os ilium . FDG-PET/CT confirmed the presence of a tumoral mass of the prostate with compression of the posterior bladder wall and positive lymph nodes in the iliac and obturator regions bilaterally . The bone metastases did not capture FDG. Because of extreme lethargy and nausea, the patient had to be hospitalized and was monitored in the intensive care unit. Biochemical investigation showed severe hyponatremia of 115 mmol/L, hypo-osmolality, and high urine osmolality. The patient was diagnosed with SIADH. His symptoms and laboratory test results recovered to normal with intravenous hypertonic saline infusion and fluid restriction.
The patient’s cT4N1M1b SCCP was discussed with a multidisciplinary tumor board. Chemotherapy consisting of carboplatin (area under the curve of 5mg/ml/min, day 1) and etoposide (100 mg/m2 on days 1–3) plus atezolizumab (1200 mg) was started for six cycles every 3 weeks. After three cycles, a partial response was seen that was maintained after six cycles. There was a clear and rapid clinical benefit after initiation of the therapy. Nevertheless, the patient had already developed progressive disease after the second course of maintenance atezolizumab.