An 11-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat was presented with three firm masses on the right temporal region, the left buccal region and on the third digit of the right thoracic limb. Each mass was 2–3 mm in diameter and cytology of the masses revealed the presence of mast cells suggestive of MCTs. Staging of the cat, a chemistry profile, complete blood count, thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasonography were performed. To complete staging, a fine-needle aspiration of the liver, spleen, and the left and right mandibular lymph nodes were submitted for cytological evaluation. The left and right mandibular lymph nodes showed reactive hyperplasia, the spleen was cytologically unremarkable and the aspiration of the liver was non-diagnostic. The aspiration of the liver was not repeated. No further abnormalities were detected.
Owing to the mildly enlarged mandibular node and low sensitivity of cytology to detect potential metastasis, lymphadenectomy was recommended. Real-time ICG-based NIR-L was offered to detect the draining patterns of the tumours and guide lymphadenectomy; the owners elected for this procedure to be performed.
Anaesthesia was induced and maintained by a board-certified anaesthetist (DECVAA). The cat was clipped and washed to allow visualisation of the suspected draining tracts and all primary surgical fields. This included the head, the entire cervical region and the right thoracic limb, as well as the pre-scapular and axillary area bilaterally. After positioning the patient, a total of 1.5 ml of ICG (Verdye 5 mg/ml; Diagnostic Green) was injected in four quadrants around each tumour (0.5 ml volume per tumour) under sterile conditions. Care was taken to aspirate each before withdrawing the needle after each skin injection to minimise skin contamination with the dye. Routine skin disinfection was completed thereafter and the cat was draped for surgery. Through manipulation of the skin during disinfection, ICG travelled within the lymphatics and was then visualised with an EleVision near-infrared camera system (Medtronic) at a predefined lymphography setting. To find the node of interest, the lymphatics were followed until the point at which where they were no longer visible in the skin. A skin incision was made at this point and the node was visualised by dissecting the subcutaneous tissue until the direct signal of the node became directly visible. Intraoperative pictures were taken with the NIR camera system.
The MCT of the left buccal region drained to a non-enlarged ipsilateral mandibular node, as well as the ipsilateral superficial cervical node . The MCT of the right temporal region drained to the ipsilateral superficial cervical node. The MCT at the right third digit of the thoracic limb drained to the right axillary lymph node . Lymphadenectomy of all positive nodes was performed under NIR guidance .The time from skin incision until complete lymph node excision, length of the incision required and size of each lymph node were recorded .
During the approach to the left mandibular node, a second non-enhancing node was also detected and resected. The wounds were routinely closed using polyglyconate 3-0 material (Monosyn; B Braun) and polyamid 4-0 material (Supramid; B Braun). After lymphadenectomy, the MCTs were excised. To reach margins, the third digit of the right thoracic limb was amputated at the base of the first phalanx. The MCT of the buccal region was excised en bloc, including the skin and oral mucosa. The MCT of the temporal region was excised using a simple elliptic incision with 5 mm margins and a deep fascia as deep margins. Routine wound closure was completed.
Margins were stained and the resected masses, as well as the lymph nodes, were sent for histopathological evaluation. The cat recovered uneventfully and was discharged the following day. Postoperative analgesia was obtained using buprenorphine (buprenorphine 0.025 mg/kg; Universitätsapotheke) 0.02 mg/kg PO for 5 days.
Pathohistological evaluation was carried out by a board-certified pathologist (FS). MCTs were graded according to the grading scheme of Sabattini and Bettini and came back as completely excised low-grade tumours . Owing to the absence of a grading scheme for lymph nodes in cats, the nodes were graded according to Weishaar et al (, ). All ICG-positive nodes came back graded as HN1 or HN2, while the non-enhancing node was graded HN0.
At recheck, 6 days postoperatively, an intraoral dehiscence was observed at the resection site of the buccal MCT, which was debrided intraorally, cleaned with saline and left to heal by second intention. All other sites were unremarkable and skin sutures were removed 10 days after surgery. No other complications were detected. Based on the results of surgery, no adjuvant treatment was started. At the time of writing, 5 months after surgery, the cat had no recurrence or progression of the disease.