A 27-year-old male patient with a past medical history of depression was admitted to the emergency department having ingested an unspecified number of cylindrical batteries in a suicidal attempt. The patient denied use of any recreational drugs within the last 14 days. Apart from slight epigastric pain, physical examination remained unremarkable. An electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed immediately upon arrival. The ECG revealed a biphasic, significantly prolonged repolarization period of the form (+/–) in leads I, avR, aVL, V1–V5 and of the form (–/+) in leads II, III and aVF. To apply standard ECG-nomenclature classifying these changes is difficult. If at all, ECG alterations resembled significantly pronounced biphasic T-waves. ST-segment elevation could be detected in leads I and aVR and prolongation of QT-interval (QTc 591 ms) was present in all chest- and limb leads.
Serum levels of potassium, calcium, phosphorous, and magnesium as well as Troponin-T-levels were within normal range. According to the clinical guideline of the European Society of Gastroenterology (ESGE), which generally recommends extraction of batteries from the stomach within 24 h mainly due to the risk of battery leakage inducing liquefaction necrosis, the patient underwent urgent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). The patient was transferred to the intermediate care unit and eight batteries (size AA) as well as a stainless-steel spoon handle were removed successfully from the gastric fundus . The batteries’ temperature was significantly elevated and gastric mucosa showed localized oedema and erythema, implicating local mucosal damage due to high electrical current flow. The follow-up ECG, acquired after the removal of batteries, demonstrated normal T-waves, insignificant ST-elevation in leads I, II, aVF and a physiological QT-interval (QTc 405 ms) . The ECG changes observed were interpreted as ECG-disturbances induced by the batteries’ electrical field and no further cardiac workup was performed. Abdominal radiographs obtained after removal of the batteries ruled out remaining foreign objects in the distal bowel segments which were not inspected by EGD. Showing no somatic disorders and no significant arrhythmias during continuous ECG-monitoring for 14 h after battery extraction the patient was transferred to a psychiatric clinic the next day. Since then, the patient has remained in a good physical state and has not been readmitted to our hospital.