A 61-year-old female patient with a body weight of 67 kg was admitted in our day care centre for bunion surgery. Her medical history included hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, a surgical history of appendicectomy and she smoked 5 cigarettes a day. She was compliant with her medication intake (amlodipine, simvastatin, prazosin, acetylsalicylic acid) and in a healthy condition. The patient had fixed dentures. Anaesthetic care was provided by an anaesthetist with a broad clinical experience of over 30 years. Anaesthesia was induced with 120 mg propolipid, 20 mcg sufentanyl and maintained with sevoflurane 2% in an oxygen-air mixture via spontaneous ventilation. A single use LMA size 3 (Solus®, intersurgical, Wokingham, Berkshire, United Kingdom) was successfully inserted after one attempt and the cuff was inflated with 20 ml of air. There was no documentation of difficult insertion, no complications during surgery and the duration of the procedure was 80 min.
The LMA was removed on recovery from general anaesthesia with the cuff deflated with evidence of a little blood on the LMA cuff. At discharge from day care centre the patient complained of a sore throat and a small amount of bloodstained sputum. This was not investigated any further and she was discharged with simple analgesics. The following day the pain in her throat became progressively worse and she presented to her general practitioner with fever, dysphagia and throat pain. Amoxicillin (500 mg (mg) 4x/day) and analgesics were prescribed as treatment for laryngitis. After three days symptoms persisted and the patient started to experience respiratory difficulty and worsening pain. The skin from the sternum bilaterally to both ears was swollen, red and warm and she was admitted to the emergency department.
A contrast-enhanced computer tomography (CECT) scan of the neck and upper chest showed a large collection in the visceral space, with a mass effect leading to a deviation of the trachea to the left.
The patient was referred to the ICU with dyspnoea. Oxygen therapy was started and the patient was initially treated with amoxicillin/clavulanate (1000 mg 4x/day) and vancomycin (1000 mg 4x/day) followed by surgical drainage under general anaesthesia 5 days later. After thorough examination by an otolaryngologist during surgery, a minor wound was found on the lateral pharyngeal wall. Microbiology showed 3 positive cultures of the anaerobe Prevotella denticola, resistant for penicillin and metronidazole, but sensitive for amoxicillin/clavulanate. After surgery, the patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged a few days later. The patient fully recovered following discharge. The time-line regarding the evolution of this case is found in Table .