A 71-year-old Caucasian man presented to the emergency department with 3 weeks of forgetfulness, word-finding difficulty, gait disturbance, and left-sided hemineglect. He had a history of a 3 cm × 2 cm T2N0M0 stage IIa MCC of the right lower eyelid and cheek which had been treated with local excision with negative margins, negative sentinel lymph node biopsy, and external beam radiation (45 Gray total) to the parotid and ipsilateral neck roughly 20 months earlier. No imaging of his brain was performed at that time. His past medical history was significant for hypertension and rheumatoid arthritis (RA), for which he was prescribed hydroxychloroquine. Upon presentation to the emergency department he had normal vital signs. His physical exam was notable for left-sided hemineglect as well as left-sided tactile extinction. His laboratory results were notable only for a small increase in his serum creatinine from 1.1 to 1.4. Due to a history of anaphylaxis to intravenous contrast, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain without contrast was performed, which showed a mass-like area of hypodensity with mass effect on the right lateral ventricle and 6 mm of right-to-left midline shift. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed a 6.3 cm heterogeneous cystic and solid mass with surrounding increased T2 signal in the right frontotemporal regions, with an additional 5 mm lesion in the middle of the right superior frontal gyrus 9 mm from the longitudinal fissure. A 3.9 mm right-to-left midline shift with trapping of the temporal horn of the right lateral ventricle was described.
Neurosurgery was consulted and the patient was started on dexamethasone and levetiracetam. He was taken to the operating room the following morning for awake craniotomy and resection of the tumor. The neurosurgical team performed a BrainLAB-guided right temporal craniotomy with physiologic monitoring. They removed the entire frontotemporal mass, but did not attempt excision of the 5 mm superior front gyrus lesion. Histological analysis of the tumor showed signs of neuroendocrine features consistent with MCC. Serologic analysis showed he was MCPyV-negative. The patient was discharged home and followed up with radiation oncology and medical oncology. His positron emission tomography (PET)-CT scan showed no evidence of metastatic disease within the chest, abdomen, or pelvis. In order to treat the residual 5 mm right frontal lesion and the resection cavity, he received stereotactic radiation surgery (SRS) to both areas 1 month after diagnosis. SRS was selected over whole brain radiation therapy (WBRT) to avoid the neurotoxic effects from WBRT. He was started on pembrolizumab 1 week after radiation. He experienced improvement in his gait, strength, mental status, and vision in the weeks following treatment. His hemineglect gradually improved over the course of the next 6 months without evidence of new disease . At 6 months from initiation, he had tolerated pembrolizumab without significant complication or worsening of his RA.