A 6-year-old Chinese boy was referred to the stomatology department of the Children’s Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, with a chief complaint of dental caries.
Dental caries were observed since the patient was 4-years-old and gradually became progressively larger.
The patient underwent intracranial decompression surgery at the age of 1 due to hydrocephalus. Posterior cranial vault distraction was performed when he was 2-years-old. The patient underwent a ventriculoperitoneal shunt operation for hydrocephalus at the age of 3. One year later, the patient had cranial vault remodeling as a result of craniofacial dysostosis.
His medical and developmental history showed that he was born at full-term by cesarean delivery after an uneventful pregnancy with a 48 cm height and 2.35 kg weight, along with his fraternal twin sister with a 48 cm height and 1.8 kg weight. The family history of going back for three generations was negative for similar conditions, and his fraternal twin sister had no medical issues.
Physical examination showed normal height (108 cm) and weight (20.4 kg) compared with that of children of the same age. Clinically normal hands and feet were found. Extraoral examination revealed a prominent forehead, eyelid ptosis, ocular proptosis, shallow eye sockets, hypertelorism, midface hypoplasia, and a retrusive upper lip and protrusive lower lip .
Intraoral examination showed that the patient was in early mixed dentition, with all deciduous canines and molar teeth present in the maxillary and mandibular arch. The chronology of eruption and eruption status was in accordance with the child’s age . The oral hygiene of the child was poor with scattered pigmentation on the teeth, and permanent teeth 36 and 46 and deciduous teeth 54, 55, 65, 74, 75, and 85 were mostly decayed. The eruptive permanent teeth, including 11, 21, 36, and 46, showed enamel hypomineralization. The maxillary arch was constricted, and the anterior cross bite and open bite are shown.
Sanger sequencing showed that the pathogenic variant c.1026C>G (p.Cys342Trp) was present on the FGFR2 gene for the patient. The mutation was not present in any of the family members.
The panoramic radiograph showed that there were no supernumerary teeth or normal permanent tooth germ development. Deciduous carious teeth 55, 64, 65, 75, and 85 had once been restored and displayed further second caries at the time of the study. Permanent teeth 36 and 46 and deciduous teeth 54 and 74 were decayed .
Based on the lateral cephalometric analysis, a severe skeletal Class III relationship was diagnosed with Sella-Nasion-A point angle: 63.8°, Sella-Nasion-B point angle: 71.6°, and A point-Nasion-B point angle: -7.8° . A hypodivergent facial pattern was shown with Sella-Nasion/Gonion-Gnathion: 35.1°. The cephalometric analysis also revealed the maxillary skeletal size (condylion to point A) was diminished. The upper central incisors leaned toward the lip (U1/Sella-Nasion: 112.8°).