A male in his 20s, a manual laborer by occupation, presented with severe pain around the left knee after a fall while walking. The pain was constant and increased with a slight movement of the limb. He was walking with the help of a pair of crutches, non-weight-bearing on the affected side. He had a history of distal femur megaprosthesis surgery 5 years ago for management of an infected open injury of the distal femur with extensive bone loss. However, the details of the procedure and images were not available to the patient.
Anterior-posterior and lateral radiographs of the knee revealed a broken distal femur megaprosthesis . The prosthesis was broken at the junction of the stem and shaft. Blood investigations revealed normal complete blood counts (TLC 8400/mm3), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (19 mm/h), and C-reactive protein (3 mg/dL). As there were no clinical signs of infection and the laboratory markers were normal, infection risk was excluded.
The patient was advised for revision of the distal femur megaprosthesis. However, the patient could not afford the cost of the prosthesis and expressed his desire to resume manual work. He revealed that his financial condition had deteriorated over the last 5 years after the prosthetic implantation as he was not able to perform physical labor.
As per his demand and financial condition, knee arthrodesis was planned. After due consent from the patient and a pre-anesthetic evaluation, we proceeded with the removal of the broken implant, followed by knee fusion. The previous midline scar was used as the line of incision, and a medial knee joint arthrotomy was performed. On flexing the knee joint, the broken distal end of the prosthesis was delivered. The cement mantle was removed with an osteotome. The proximal part of the prosthesis had to been pulled out using an extractor. We used 1.5 mm K-wire to drill around the component and break the prosthesis-cement bonding, and later, using multiple curettes and a fine osteotome, we removed the cement mantle. The tibial component was then removed using multiple stack osteotomes , and similarly, the cement was removed. As a backup, we were prepared to place a screw in the stem and use a slap hammer to extract. The patient was explained about creating a cortical window or corticotomy below or above the prosthesis, breaking the cement mantle, and pushing the component toward the joint in case the need arises. Accordingly, all-size implants were kept ready. The surrounding devitalized soft tissues were debrided. The bone surfaces were freshened up and approximated in near-anatomical positions. The apposed bony surfaces were provisionally fixed with K-wires in the desired position (neutral coronal and sagittal alignments with 15° external rotation), followed by definite fixation with two orthogonal limited contact dynamic compression plates contoured to the surface: one on the medial aspect (6-hole combi-hole locking plate) and the other on the anterior aspect (11-hole combi-hole locking plate) . The construct was found to be stable. A cancellous bone graft harvested from the iliac crest was applied at the fusion site to augment the process of healing. The tissue samples from the knee joint were sent for culture and a frozen section. A negative suction drain was placed, and the wound was closed in layers. The histopathology and culture reports did not reveal any signs of infection.
The post-operative period was uneventful. There were no distal neurovascular deficits; however, the limb was shortened by 3 cm. The postoperative radiographs were satisfactory. He was advised for an isometric quadriceps strengthening exercise, hip abductor muscle strengthening exercise, and ankle pump. The patient was mobilized with a walker on the next day of surgery, with non-weight bearing on the affected limb for 6 weeks. After that, toe touch weight bearing was started, and full weight bearing was allowed once complete osseous union was achieved at the fusion site (4 months).
The patient was followed up biweekly for the 1st month and once a month thereafter. At the end of 3 months, the patient started walking independently without complaining of pain. However, he had a short-limb gait, and it improved after the shoe raise. The patient was advised on limb lengthening, but he denied it. He was very happy to resume his daily work. At the end of 4 years, the X-ray showed solid union at the knee arthrodesis site without complaint of back pain or any other joint pain . He does not want a removal surgery at present.