A 16-year-old woman with a chief complaint of lower abdominal pain presented to another hospital and was suspected to suffer from a uterine malformation; she had a bicornuate uterus with left intrauterine hematoma. Hence, she was subsequently referred to our hospital for specialized treatment. The patient was suffering from severe lower abdominal pain that required absence from school every month since she was 15 years old. She had attained menarche at the age of 13 years, and her menstrual cycles had been regular since then.
Speculum examination revealed a single cervix with no vaginal septum. Transvaginal ultrasonography (US) revealed a normal form of the right and left uteri, which contained blood consistent with hematometra. Her bilateral kidneys were present and normal on transabdominal US. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed the right uterus and the left uterus with a 5 cm-sized hematometra in the uterine cavity, and confirmed an asymmetrical uterine septum between the left and right endometrial cavities. The left and right uterine fundus were clearly not separated with a normal uterine fundal contour . Hysteroscopy identified the ostium of the right fallopian tube, but did not confirm aby communication with the left uterus . Hysterosalpingography also showed no traffic to the left uterine cavity, only 3 mL of contrast medium filling the right uterine hemi-cavity with a compressed shape . Based on the above findings, a misdiagnosis of a right unicornuate uterus with a non-communicating left rudimentary horn was made, and laparoscopic surgery was performed.
Intra-abdominal findings showed a slightly enlarged uterine corpus on the left side due to the hematometra, but confirmed normal bilateral adnexa. The uterine fundus was slightly concave, but not divided into two horns . At this point, Robert’s uterus could not have been diagnosed because we had not noticed this anomaly. Had Robert’s uterus been diagnosed, hysteroscopic septal resection would have been performed, but laparoscopic resection of a functioning non-communicating left rudimentary horn and salpingectomy were performed instead. A hysteroscope was inserted into the right uterus, and only the right cavity was illuminated as the left cavity was obliterated due to an asymmetric uterine septum. The incision line of the uterus was determined by the hysteroscopic illumination of the uterine cavity . An incision was made longitudinally along the border between the hemi-uterus with the left blind cavity and the right unicornuate uterus, which was followed by the resection of the left uterus with hematometra . The muscular layer of the incision was then sutured, and uteroplasty was performed . Histopathological findings of the resected uterus revealed adenomyosis with a slightly atrophic endometrium.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and periodic menstruation started one month after the surgery; the severe lower abdominal pain was significantly relieved after the operation. After 3 years, a thick muscular layer, which appeared to be normal, was observed on the uterus during a follow-up MRI scan .