A 63 year-old man with a history of Crohn's disease for the past thirty years and hyperlipidemia presented with one week of abdominal pain, diarrhea and hematochezia. Abdominal pain was generalized, 6 by 10 in intensity on the pain scale, and dull in character. It was worsened by food intake and relieved by bowel movement. The abdominal pain was associated with fever, chills, nausea and vomiting. The patient also complained of painful rashes all over his body that had erupted suddenly about a week ago. The rashes were nonpruritic and had started on the dorsum of his hands and spread to involve his face, neck, chest and legs. He denied using any new creams, soaps, detergents or perfumes or any change in his bed sheets or clothing. He also denied contact with pets, recent travel, a similar rash in any other family member, or being bitten by an insect. He denied having had any similar rash in the past. He had a history of Crohn's disease for the past thirty years which had been in remission for several years, until the past few months when he began to have episodes of diarrhea and rectal bleeding. Colonoscopy two years ago had showed inflammatory bowel disease of segmental nature with rectal sparing and primarily involving the ascending and sigmoid colon. His medications included Asacol which he had been taking for past few months and azathioprine which was started two weeks prior to his admission. He had previously been on prednisone which was started two months earlier with his last dose being four days prior to admission. His vital signs on presentation were: Temperature 100.5°F, blood pressure 95/58 mmHg, heart rate 120/min and respiratory rate 21 b/min. On physical examination his abdomen was mildly distended with tenderness to palpation in the left lower quadrant. He also had a papular rash and plaques, with surrounding erythema, scattered over his face, neck, chest and legs. (See Figure ) These lesions were tender to palpation. Laboratory results showed an elevated white blood count (WBC) of 20.7 × 109 with 78% neutrophils and 14% bands. Comprehensive metabolic panel was significant for low sodium of 133 mEq/L and mildly elevated renal function with a blood urea nitrogen of 20 mg/dL and creatinine of 1.3 mg/dL and. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C reactive protein were also high at 49 mm/hr and 161.6 mg/L respectively. Blood cultures were negative. Other laboratory tests, which included fungal serology, potassium hydroxide mount, gram stain, acid fast bacilli smear, bacterial culture, fungal culture and an acid fast culture of the skin rash, were all negative. He was started empirically on intravenous vancomycin for possible Methicillin Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus folliculitis, pending the results of investigations. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen on admission showed inflammation involving the colon and gastric and duodenal regions. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the abdomen was negative for mesenteric artery occlusion. Colonoscopy and esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed pancolitis and gastroduodenitis consistent with Crohn's disease. Biopsy specimens taken from stomach, duodenum, ileum, ileocecal valve and colon revealed pancolitis, duodenitis and gastritis with no evidence of granuloma. The patient was diagnosed with an exacerbation of Crohn's disease and started on intravenous methylprednisolone 60 mg q 12 hrs, with continuation of azathioprine and Asacol. He was also given a dose of intravenous Infliximab. The rash showed no improvement after three days of antibiotics. A punch biopsy of one of the skin lesions revealed dense dermal infiltrate composed predominantly of neutrophils, with no evidence of vasculitis. This was consistent with the diagnosis of Sweet's syndrome. . Antibiotic treatment was stopped. The patient's symptoms and rash rapidly improved with systemic corticosteroid treatment.