A 48-year-old man was referred to our department due to recurrent urethral stricture. His history revealed an initial episode of difficulty in urinating 3 years prior to the presentation. He was diagnosed with bulbar urethral stricture, at another hospital, and was treated by four failed attempts of balloon dilation over this time period. He had been performing self-catheterization since the last balloon dilation to prevent recurrence. He had experienced urethral trauma in his 30s from a bamboo pick in an accident, which was suggestive of a traumatic stricture etiology.
We proceeded with the placement of a suprapubic catheter to eliminate the need for intermittent self-catheterization, with the aim of urethral rest for 3 months. Following this urethral rest period, we proceeded with urethroscopy and retrograde urethrography, which revealed a complicated 20-mm long stricture in the bulbar urethra, which had a particularly narrow segment . Initially, we planned to use a dorsal onlay procedure to treat this stricture, as per previous recommendations. This surgery was performed via a midline perineal incision. The bulbar urethra was strongly adherent to the adjacent tissue due to prior procedures. After the mobilization of the bulbar urethra, the stricture site was opened along its dorsal surface, which revealed complete obliteration of the urethral lumen over a distance of >30 mm . We altered our surgical plan at that point, focusing on the excision of the obliterated segment and reconstruction with augmented anastomotic urethroplasty . We completed a ventral anastomosis between the healthy mucosa of the proximal and distal urethra using 4-0 PDS interrupted sutures . An oral mucosa graft was harvested from the left inner cheek and spread and fixed to the corpora cavernosa , with the edge sutured to the opened urethral mucosa.
The postoperative course was uneventful. Retrograde urethrography, performed 3 weeks after the surgery, revealed minor leakage, and the urethral catheter was removed . Urethroscopy performed 4 months after surgery confirmed easy passage through the augmented lesion, with no recurrence of stricture .