A 54-year-old African-American woman with a past medical history of a deep vein thrombosis and remote provoked pulmonary embolism presented to the Emergency Department with complaints of fevers, progressive shortness of breath, and cough of >2 weeks duration. She had a history of provoked pulmonary embolism after a long aeroplane ride in 2012, and was anticoagulated with warfarin for 3 months afterwards. On initial presentation to the Emergency Department, the patient’s oxygen saturation was 99% on room air, blood pressure was 100/70 mmHg, with a heart rate of 75 b.p.m. The patient’s respiratory rate was measured at 30 breaths/min. Lab work was notable for an elevated D-dimer at 2.86 mg/L (0.00–0.056 mg/L), ferritin at 683.2 ng/mL (10.0–291.0 ng/mL), lactate dehydrogenase at 929 U/L (81–234 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) at 190 U/L (15–37 U/L), and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) at 131 U/L (14–59 U/L) with a decreased platelet count of 98 (150–450), white blood cell count of 3.9 (4.8–10.8), and absolute lymphocyte count of 0.59 (1.15–4.75). The patient’s initial labs were also notable for an elevated probrain natriuretic petide (BNP) of 2016 pg/mL (0–125 pg/mL) and an initial troponin elevation of 0.100 ng/mL (0.000–0.056 ng/mL), which trended down. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed evidence of right ventricular strain, and bedside transthoracic echocardiogram (echo) assessment revealed a dilated right ventricle with McConnell’s sign . The patient was subsequently sent for a computed tomography angiography of the chest, revealing a large pulmonary embolism in the right main pulmonary artery extending into the interlobar artery, right middle lobar, segmental, and subsegmental arteries. Additional smaller pulmonary emboli were noted in the left upper and lower lobe segmental and subsegmental pulmonary arteries . The computed tomography of the chest also demonstrated evidence of right heart strain, as well as multiple scattered ground-glass opacities with a rounded morphology present extending along the fissures and periphery of the lungs bilaterally .
In the Emergency Department, the patient’s oxygen saturation was 99%; however, on arrival to the intensive care unit (ICU) this was 84% on 4.5 L nasal cannula. On the initial physical exam in the ICU, the patient’s cardiovascular exam was normal with no cardiac thrill, a normal rate, regular rhythm, and no murmurs, gallops, or rubs auscultated. The patient’s lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally but appeared to be in mild respiratory distress with accessory muscle use. The remainder of the physical exam was unremarkable. Supplemental oxygen demands increased, requiring 10 L on a non-rebreather ventilation mask, but the patient still remained hypoxic. This prompted a discussion with the patient who consented to endotracheal intubation, which was performed without any complications. The patient was intubated for 14 days, managed by using volume control without the ARDS protocol. She oxygenated well with low positive end-expiratory pressure and minimal fraction of inspired oxygen, both of which varied throughout her time spent on the ventilator. The patient intermittently required norepinephrine to augment blood pressure during her intubation.
Transthoracic echocardiogram obtained in the ICU confirmed severe right ventricular dilatation with moderate pulmonary hypertension . Thrombus measuring 1.3 cm × 1.3 cm was appreciated in the right ventricle , with an echodensity present on the anterior tricuspid leaflet which was felt to represent thrombus (, Video S1). Additionally, a thrombus measuring 1.4 cm × 1.9 cm was visualized in the dilated inferior vena cava (2.50 cm) . On day 4 of admission, the patient tested positive for the COVID-19 virus via nasopharyngeal swab polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
The patient had a known history of unprovoked pulmonary embolism with hypoxic respiratory failure, giving us a high pre-test probability for pulmonary embolism. However, due to her recent history of fevers and shortness of breath, as well as being a local resident of a high exposure area, the suspicion of SARS-CoV-2 viral pneumonia was high. Therefore, COVID-19 PCR was sent via nasopharyngeal swab.
The patient was initially started on azithromycin 500 mg, on day 0 for 1 day, for possible pneumonia and for involvement of a possible COVID-19 viral pneumonia. After consulting with the infectious disease specialist, the patient was transitioned to doxycycline on day 1 and started on hydroxychloroquine due to fear of QT prolongation with the combination of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin. Hydroxychloroquine was given for 5 days, with the initial day administering a 400 mg twice a day loading dose followed by four subsequent days of a 200 mg twice a day regimen. Doxycycline 100 mg twice a day was also administered for 5 days.
The patient’s pulmonary emboli and right ventricular thrombus were treated with intravenous heparin, started on day 1 and transitioned to enoxaparin 80 mg twice a day following extubation on day 14 of hospitalization. Intervention with catheter-directed thrombolysis was discussed with the interventional cardiologist; however, intravenous anticoagulation was not pursued due to the risks of the COVID-19 outweighing the benefits of the procedure.
Following extubation, the patient remained in the ICU step-down unit for 3 days for increased oxygen demand. She was screened for thrombosis using Doppler imaging which revealed a right popliteal deep vein thrombosis. The patient was then weaned down to room air on the general medical floors and evaluated by physical medicine and rehabilitation for inpatient rehabilitation therapy. Following extubation and prior to discharge, the patient had no new complaints, other than a hoarse voice which improved daily. On the date of discharge, her D-dimer remained elevated at 2.35 mg/L (0.00–0.056 mg/L). She was discharged on the therapeutic dose of enoxaparin, due to high insurance cost of novel oral anticoagulants and the patient’s refusal of coumadin, due to a history of vaginal bleeding with coumadin. The patient was deemed an excellent candidate for inpatient rehabilitation and tolerated the therapy well without complications. Following rehabilitation, the patient was instructed to report to her primary care physician and primary cardiologist as an outpatient, but has not followed up to date.