This previously healthy 25-year-old woman initially presented with a 2-month history of cough, fever, night sweats, weight loss, and chest pain. On examination, she had an anterior chest wall mass protruding from the manubriosternal junction. Chest radiography revealed an enlarged right hilum adjacent to an anterior mediastinal mass. A biopsy of the mass , comprising lung and lymphoid tissue, showed numerous mononuclear Hodgkin and occasional Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells. Overall, the findings (refer to
) were interpreted as most consistent with cHL. As numerous bones and both lungs were involved, advanced stage disease (IV) was diagnosed. The patient achieved a partial remission (PR) after 2 cycles of ABVD; however, following the sixth cycle, a Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scan demonstrated persistent fluorodeoxyglucose-avid nodes in the mediastinum (Deauville 4), for which she received a radical course of localized external beam radiotherapy to the mediastinum (45 Gy). A repeat PET scan performed a month after radiation confirmed a reduction in the size of the mediastinal mass, but recurrent lung nodules were noted at the original site of disease. These nodules were deemed too risky to biopsy and she was treated with three cycles of gemcitabine, dexamethasone, and cisplatin (GDP), achieved a PR and proceeded with ASCT in January 2015. A PET scan post-ASCT was consistent with CR. However, eight months following ASCT, new cervical nodes and bone lesions appeared. A lymph node needle core biopsy showed numerous large atypical HRS cells in an inflammatory background, displaying a similar immunophenotype to the one observed in the initial biopsy (refer to
): these findings were consistent with relapsed cHL. She received radiation to a painful bone lesion at C7 and then enrolled in the KEYNOTE-087 trial, a phase 2 trial assessing the efficacy and safety of pembrolizumab in relapsed cHL. The patient achieved a CR after 5 cycles and discontinued after 21 cycles in continued CR in November 2016, as the protocol allowed to cease therapy following two successive scans demonstrating CR.
After 2 years of sustained CR off pembrolizumab, that is, in November 2018, the patient requested counseling regarding pregnancy. There was some evidence supporting the safety of pregnancy to patients and their babies in lymphoma survivors who had previously been treated with traditional chemotherapy, but not PD1 inhibitors. Two theoretical risks were identified. First, there was a risk of IUGR given this has been reported in pregnant melanoma patients treated with immunotherapy. The second was the risk of relapse given that her sustained remission was only achievable through PD1 blockade: pregnancy-induced suppression of the PD1/PDL1 axis could thus allow unabated growth of residual HRS cells.
Despite these risks, the patient became pregnant via natural conception a few months later. Her pregnancy was uneventful, with normal fetal growth and normal anatomic surveys being documented on routine ultrasounds. She eventually delivered a healthy newborn boy who weighed 3100 g, with normal APGARs of eight at 1 min, and nine at 5 min. The infant has been achieving his normal milestones as of one year of age. Repeat scans also demonstrate that the patient is still in CR, 4 years after her last dose of pembrolizumab.