A Caucasian 10-year, one-month-old girl presented to the College of Dentistry for an initial orthodontic work-up. A digital pantomograph and a standardized lateral cephalometric skull radiograph (Planmeca ProMax; Planmeca Oy, Helsinki, Finland) were made. The pantomograph showed impacted mandibular canines, both of which were inclined mesially in a nearly horizontal position and located in the region apical to the mandibular incisors. There was a well-defined radiolucent area evident around the crown of the right mandibular canine that was continuous with the cemento-enamel junction. The radiolucent area measured approximately 20mm in width and 11mm in height. The appearance was consistent with a dentigerous cyst encompassing the crown of the right mandibular canine . The follicle was not discernible around the crown of the left mandibular canine.
A cone-beam computed tomography scan was ordered and made one month later (iCAT Imaging Sciences, Hatfield, PA, USA) using a 17cm × 16cm × 17cm field of view to evaluate the position of the canines and the dentigerous cyst. The resultant data were reconstructed, and multi-planar and orthoradial views were examined. The coronal and axial slices revealed that the dentigerous cyst was larger than was apparent on the digital pantomograph. The cyst encompassed the crowns of both the right mandibular canine and the left mandibular canine. The border of the dentigerous cyst was continuous with the cemento-enamel junction of the impacted permanent mandibular canines . The appearance was suggestive of a single dentigerous cyst that crossed the midline and encompassed both impacted mandibular canine crowns.
Surgical exposure of the canines with an incisional biopsy of the surrounding dentigerous cyst was performed by a periodontist (JBP) three months after the initial appointment. It was noted that the dentigerous cyst border was continuous with the cemento-enamel junction of both impacted permanent mandibular canines . The incisional biopsy specimen was sent to the University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Dentistry Oral Pathology Biopsy Service for pathologic examination. Hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections of the specimen were prepared. The histopathologic sections showed a cyst lined by thin, non-keratinized, stratified squamous epithelium. The cyst wall consisted of uninflamed fibromyxomatous connective tissue. These findings were consistent with a diagnosis of a dentigerous cyst .
One year later peri-apical radiographs of the mandibular canines were made that showed no recurrence of the dentigerous cyst and partial orthodontic uprighting of the canines. At one year after surgery, there was no evidence of recurrence.