A 60-year-old male, physically active and part of workforce, sought medical attention due to night sweats and malaise throughout a month as well as increasing exertional dyspnoea throughout a week. No weight loss was reported. The patient had a history of prior aortoplasty due to congenital aortic stenosis (Age 17), mechanical aortic valve replacement (Age 35), and aortic stenting due to aortic dilatation (Age 58). He was taking Losartan and Marevan, and his self-monitored International Normalized Ratio levels had been fluctuating for the past 5 weeks with several measurements below 2 and above 5. Physical examination revealed dyspnoea while talking, a blood pressure of 92/66 mmHg, a holosystolic murmur in the second intercostal space on the left side of the sternum, bibasal pulmonary crackles, and mild peripheral oedemas.
Laboratory results showed a haemoglobin of 9.2 g/dL (normal range 13.4–16.9), lactate dehydrogenase of 260 U/L (normal range 105–205), and C-reactive protein of 129 mg/L (normal range <10). The electrocardiogram (see , ) showed normal sinus rhythm, left axis deviation, and poor R-wave progression. Chest X-ray (see , ) showed pulmonary congestion, Kerley B lines, and bilateral pleural effusion. A TTE showed a functional mitral stenosis due to large masses in the left atrium with a mean gradient of 13 mmHg; masses protruding into the left ventricle creating an outflow gradient of 130 mmHg across the aortic valve; a tricuspid regurgitation gradient of 50 mmHg; and no pericardial effusion. A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE; , ) showed massive masses in the left atrium and ventricle, seemingly perforating the mitral valve and extending into the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT), resulting in functional LVOT obstruction and functional mitral stenosis. Emergency CT of the chest and abdomen revealed a mass in the left atrium and left ventricle, pulmonary congestion, one pathologically enlarged lymph node in the mediastinum, and several suspicious mediastinal lymph nodes. The radiodensity of the mass was 50 Hounsfield units, indicating a thrombus. As the nature of the detected mass was still unclear, a PET/CT scan was performed, revealing masses suspicious for malignancy (due to strong tissue metabolic activity) in the left atrium, left ventricle, and septum. All lymph nodes in the mediastinum were without strong metabolic activity and thought to be benign.
After heart team discussion, it was decided to proceed with surgical treatment with subsequent tissue analysis and insertion of biological valve prostheses. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was not performed in this case as the final diagnosis had to be verified histologically, and surgery could not be postponed due to the physical state of the patient. In surgery, it was impossible to determine the origin of the tumour, as the tumour was firmly adherent to the left atrium, interatrial septum, mitral valve, ventricular septum, LVOT, and left ventricle. Apart from non-radical tumour resection , the surgery included patch implantation in the left atrium and left ventricle (Supple Peri-Guard, model number 60PC-0404SN), bioprosthetic mitral valve replacement (Epic Mitral 31 mm FlexFit valve, model number E100-31M), and a Freestyle 27 bioprosthesis (model number FR995-27) for the aortic root. Non-radical tumour resection was chosen in order for functional cardiac anatomy to be preserved, realizing that a radical resection was not feasible in this case. The removed tumour mass was sent for pathology assessment. The surgery was complicated by pulmonary oedema, and the patient was put on veno-venous ECMO. The postoperative course was complicated by kidney failure (treated by continuous renal replacement therapy), shock liver, gastroparesis, and postoperative atrial fibrillation. The patient came off ECMO 2 days after the surgery with subsequent closure of the sternum, was extubated 4 days after the surgery, and was moved out of the intensive care unit 6 days after the surgery. Postoperative TTE (9 days after the surgery; see , ) showed well-functioning bioprostheses, no visible residual tumour masses, and a normal left ventricular ejection fraction.
The pathology assessment revealed an intimal sarcoma with non-radically resected tumour borders . Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumour was positive for MDM2, FLI1, and INI1, and there was a heterogeneous expression of Calponine and Actine. There was no expression of CD34, ERG, CD31, S100, MYF4, Myoglobine, Desmine, Caldesmone, SMMS1, Beta-catenine, D2-40, or CK-AECAM. The case was discussed at a multidisciplinary conference, and it was concluded that there were no further surgical or medical curative treatment options. The patient was discharged and started palliative treatment. He developed dyspnoea, lost his appetite, experienced weight loss, and succumbed to his illness two and a half months after the surgery.