A 65-year-old female patient was referred to our hospital due to right hypochondralgia and weight loss. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 3.5 × 3.0 cm mass in the gallbladder that invaded the adjacent hepatic parenchyma. Further, pancreaticobiliary maljunction was confirmed via direct cholangiography . She underwent extended cholecystectomy with extrahepatic bile duct resection, and curative resection was achieved. The pathological diagnosis was T3N0M0 stage IIIA (TNM classification) papillary adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder with hepatic invasion . No adjuvant treatments were provided. Under our hospital policy, the patient was under continuous follow-up of functional outcomes and oncological surveillance for over 5 years. A diffuse hypovascular 2.0 × 1.5 cm mass in the pancreatic head was detected 6.2 years after the initial surgery . Hence, pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed. Histological examination revealed T3N0M0 stage IIA well-differentiated adenocarcinoma infiltrating into the posterior tissue of the pancreatic head with R0 resection . Marked acute and chronic inflammation was observed in the non-cancerous lesions of the pancreatic head parenchyma containing bile pigment within ductular lumens . The patient further received adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine for 12 months. After 12.5 years from the initial surgery, a 4.0 × 3.0 cm mass in the remnant pancreatic tail apart from the anastomotic site was detected . The patient subsequently underwent total pancreatectomy, and surgical curative resection was achieved. Histological examination revealed T3N1M0 stage IIB moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with lymph node metastases . Based on these findings, a definitive pathological diagnosis of metachronous triple adenocarcinomas in the pancreaticobiliary tract was made. The pathology suggests no precursor lesions such as PanIN and atypical flat lesions in the pancreatic specimens, but marked inflammatory change was observed in association with exocrine pancreatic gland loss in the non-cancerous pancreatic parenchyma. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine for another 6 months. Then, she developed multiple liver metastases, but remained alive 15.2 years after the initial surgery while receiving the best supportive care.