A 39-year-old Pakistani man had presented to our General Surgery clinic with a two-month history of a lump on the right side of his neck. There were no associated symptoms. There was no history of tobacco or irritant use. On physical examination a fixed mass, 4 cm in size, was palpated in right level III. It was not associated with any changes in the overlying skin. An examination of his upper aerodigestive tract was unremarkable. The mass was excised by a general surgeon. Histopathological analysis demonstrated spindle-shaped cells with no identifiable nuclear pleomorphism or mitotic activity. The cells stained positive for anti-smooth muscle actin (ASMA), favoring a smooth muscle origin.
The mass, however, recurred within a period of one month and continued to increase in size, limiting his neck movement to the right side. On presentation to our Head and Neck Surgery clinic, a hard, well demarcated, non-tender and non-mobile mass of about 5 × 8 cm was noticed in the posterior triangle.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of his neck showed a large soft tissue mass in his right posterior neck, measuring about 6.5 × 4.7 cm in its greatest dimension, involving both his anterior and posterior scalene muscles and closely abutting the right lobe of his thyroid gland. On the anterior side it extended up to his sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM). Splaying of his right internal jugular vein was also noted between the SCM and the mass. Multiple sub-centimeter lymph nodes were also noted at level II. Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) showed spindle shaped cells with elongated vesicular nuclei and pink cytoplasm admixed with pink fibrocollagenous material suggestive of fibromatosis. Our patient underwent a wide local excision with a right-sided neck dissection.
Histopathological analysis of the excised tissue showed spindle cells arranged in sheets and intersecting fascicles with variable collagen deposition. No cytological atypia was noted; however, infiltrative growth was noticed within the entrapped skeletal muscle at the periphery. The lesion showed evidence of vascular proliferation and peripheral lymphocytic infiltration. The above findings correlated with a tissue diagnosis of AF.
Our patient once again presented with local recurrence of the mass [Figure ], not associated with any pain or tenderness, but with complaints of suffocation when lying supine, due to a pressure effect generated by the mass [Figure ].
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a large contrast-enhancing mass, hypointense on T1 and hyperintense on T2, lying in the lower part of his neck to the right of the midline. It was deep to the SCM on the anterior side, abutting the larynx medially and the paravertebral muscles and space on the posterior side [Figure ]. A CT scan showed a large soft tissue density mass measuring about 9.3 × 5.9 × 12 cm, with central necrosis consistent with recurrent fibromatosis in the posterior triangle [Figure ].
The mass was resected and an extended right neck dissection was performed. Analysis of the excised tissue revealed spindle cells arranged in whorls and fascicles, with intervening thin walled vessels and extravasation of red blood cells. There was no evidence of atypical mitosis or necrosis; however, focal infiltration of adjacent muscle was noted, favoring benign fibromatosis [Figure ].
Our patient was followed in the out-patient clinic regularly for 22 months with no evidence of recurrence of disease. No further treatment was given.