A 27-year-old man was admitted to the General Hospital Chilaw, Sri Lanka, with acute onset severe epigastric pain and vomiting. There was no history suggestive of food poisoning or the consumption of poison. A few hours before admission, the patient had consumed boiled coriander tea, which is a traditional medicine in Sri Lanka . The tea was prepared for him by his sister-in-law as a treatment for common cold. The patient had developed symptoms about 2 h after drinking the coriander tea and he was rushed to the hospital. Other family members noticed that his sister-in-law was absent around the time of the admission and decided to examine the contents of the teapot. In addition to the coriander, they noticed that the pot also contained different seeds, which they correctly and promptly identified as Gloriosa seeds . Gloriosa seeds were known to be present in the house because the patient worked on a farm that cultivated Gloriosa, and occasionally brought the seeds home . Seeking confirmation, the wife of the victim tasted a small amount of the remaining tea and also developed nausea and vomiting. On admission to the hospital, the patient was having profuse watery diarrhea and complained of burning abdominal pain, reduced urine output, and dysuria. On examination, he was febrile with blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg and a heart rate of 100 bpm. The abdomen was diffusely tender and the respiratory rate was 20/min with oxygen saturation of 99 % on air. With prompt gastric lavage, the patient was started on intravenous ranitidine and metoclopramide and hydration with 0.9 % saline. On day two after poisoning, he complained of pleuritic-type chest pain and had tachypnea. His respiratory rate was 40/min with bilateral diffuse crepitation. Blood gas analysis revealed hypoxia with respiratory alkalosis and he was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for intubation and ventilation. Chest X-rays showed mild diffuse inflammatory shadows, and blood counts revealed a white blood cell count of 17,000/mm3 with neutrophil leukocytosis of 90 % and lymphocytic leukocytosis of 8 % with a platelet count of 135,000/mm3. His CRP was 96 and ESR was 60 mm/1st hour.
On day three after admission, the patient had thrombocytopenia with a low platelet count of 60,000/mm3 and the white blood cell count was 7800/mm3 (N 55 %, L 40 %). In addition, he had mild renal impairment with serum creatinine of 1.4 mg/dl and blood urea of 60 mg/dl. There were also mildly elevated with AST of 60 U/L and ALT of 90 U/L with normal PT and APTT and bilirubin. ECG and 2D echocardiogram were normal. In addition to ventilator support, he was treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics (cefotaxime and metronidazole), parenteral nutrition, proton pump inhibitors, and intravenous fluids. The patient required ventilator support for 3 days and required high-dependency care for a further 6 days. His total hospital stay was 15 days. He also developed generalized alopecia by day 10 of hospital admission. By that time, the patient had fully recovered from acute toxicity and was hemodynamically stable.
Without the patient background and assistance from the patient’s family, this case could have been easily misdiagnosed at the acute stage and managed as a severe case of food poisoning, leptospirosis, or dengue shock with atypical presentation, which are relatively common presentations in the area. Colchicine poisoning would not have been suspected until the patient developed generalized alopecia toward the recovery around day ten of the illness . Because there was reasonable suspicion of homicidal poisoning, the Judicial Medical Consultant and the hospital police post were informed to initiate medico legal investigation. The patient also admitted that he had taken Gloriosa seeds from his workplace where Gloriosa plants were grown for harvest and export of seeds. Toxicological analysis by the government analyst also confirmed the presence of colchicine in the gastric lavage samples.