A 64-year-old man was admitted to our department due to incidentally discovered RAAs. A previous enhanced CT scan of the local hospital showed two saccular RAAs in the right renal artery. The two aneurysms were located at primary bifurcations of renal artery, with a diameter of 1.8 cm and 1.2 cm, respectively, as shown in Fig. . The smaller one was located at the first bifurcation of the first segmental artery of the renal artery, while the other one is at the second bifurcation of the another segmental artery of the renal artery. The patient had no history of comorbidities other than a hepatitis B infection and partial hepatectomy, cholecystectomy and splenectomy due to hepatic carcinoma in 2002. Also, there were no typical clinical symptoms, such as flank pain, hematuria, or a sense of abdominal distension. His blood pressure was 106/56 mmHg at admission and the usual hypertension was absent.
Split renal function was evaluated through glomerular filtration rate (GFR) before surgery and then 2 months after surgery. We obtained the GFR using the camera-based Gate’s method to measure the renal uptake of 99mTechnetium (99mTc) diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA). The preoperatively estimated GFRs were 30.16 ml/min/1.69 m2 (right renal) and 36.09 ml/min/1.69 m2 (left renal). The class 2 classification was deemed according to the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA).
The patient was secured in the left lateral position. A Veress needle was used to establish a carbon dioxide (CO2) pneumoperitoneum of 12 mmHg lateral to the right rectus muscle at the level of the umbilicus, and then a 12-mm laparoscopic camera port was placed at the same position. A 30° lens was introduced to position the other ports under direct vision. A 12-mm port was placed 3 cm below the umbilicus position. Then, two ports of 8-mm were placed at 10 cm below the xiphoid at the ventral midline and below the 12th rib costochondral margin at the mid-clavicle. The 5-mm assistant port was inserted at 2 cm below the xiphoid at the ventral midline.
The renal hilum was completely dissected anteriorly and posteriorly, and the right renal artery and segmental arteries were isolated at the level of the renal hilum. The two RAAs were fully exposed and turned out to be saccular in accordance with the preoperative CT scan. The vascular bulldog clamp was used to clamp the inflow of renal artery. Then, the RAAs were resected from the proximal inflow to the distal outflow by cold monopolar shears, preserving the vascular back wall intact for the ensuing repair process. The bifurcations were then reconstructed with continuous suture using 5–0 Prolene (Ethicon US, LLC., Somerville, NJ, USA). Before the last suture, the vascular bulldog clamp was removed and then blood filled the entire renal artery to exclude intravascular air. Subsequently, intraoperative ultrasound was adopted for arterial perfusion and hemodynamic evaluation. The surgical procedure is depicted in Fig. . Finally, the Da Vinci device was undocked after removal of the resected RAAs by the Endocatch bag.
The warm ischemia time was 26 min. The total operative duration and estimated blood loss was 155 min and 150 ml, respectively. There was no perioperative complication. The serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen was stable within the reference range. On postoperative day 6 the patient was discharged home. The CT scan performed 2 months later, shown in Fig. , demonstrated resolution of the aneurysms without any recurrence or artery stenosis; the estimated GFR were 29.76 ml/min/1.69 m2 (right renal) and 34.03 ml/min/1.69 m2 (left renal).