A 30-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our emergency department on August 28, 2019 with diarrhea, vomiting, and anuria that had been lasting for one week.
One week before admission, the patient experienced diarrhea, vomiting, and oliguria, and the symptoms could not be alleviated. He did not cough or show any symptoms of dyspnea or hemoptysis.
A previous routine investigation showed normal renal function (serum creatinine 1 year prior: 76 µmol/L). There was no history of special medicine use, including analgesics, illicit drug use, or alcohol abuse.
Physical examination showed no significant abnormalities (there were no bilateral rales heard or peripheral edema). His blood pressure was 129/72 mmHg, his pulse was 101 beats per minute, his peripheral oxygen saturation was 95% in ambient air, and his temperature was 36.5 °C.
On admission, serum laboratory data revealed the following values: hemoglobin, 53 g/L; creatinine, 2560 µmol/L; blood urea nitrogen, 51.5 mmol/L; K, 6.4 mmol/L; and C-reactive protein, 78 mg/L. Additionally, arterial blood gas analysis suggested that the oxygen partial pressure was 76 mmH2O, while the coagulation test showed that the fibrinogen level was 9.22 g/L. There were neither schistocytes on peripheral smears nor negative Coombs test results. Liver function was normal.
A computer tomography scan of the chest revealed a sign of bilateral diffuse exudation .
The histological examination of the renal biopsy demonstrated 33 glomeruli, of which 5 were globally sclerotic and 28 were crescent, and there was no duplication of basement membranes. Immunohistology revealed positive linear deposition of IgG(3+) and C3(2+) along the GBM; IgA, IgM PLA2R, and C1q were negative. According to additional tests, IgG1(3+), IgG2(1+), IgG3(-), and IgG4(3+) were positive. Forty percent of the tubulointerstitial cells were damaged multifocally with infiltration of inflammatory cells. Electron microscopy showed the occlusion of the glomerular capillary loops, which exuded plasma-like substances, and the infiltration of inflammatory cells in the interstitial region .
Further diagnostic work-up illustrated high concentrations of anti-GBM antibody (> 500 AU/mL), negative anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, and normal C3 concentrations.