A 73-year-old woman presented to our emergency department with New York Heart Association functional Status III symptoms of exertional dyspnoea. In addition, the patient complained about fatigue and low resilience for the last few weeks. Usually, she was able to walk her dog for 20 min every day, but that has not been possible for a fortnight. At the moment she is not able to go to the second floor of her apartment. Physical examination revealed a systolic murmur over the aortic valve and in the basal area of the lungs, a reduction in breath sounds on both sides. In her past medical history, she had a stroke with no residuals, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, and was diagnosed with diabetes Type 2. Her premedication included anticoagulation with vitamin K antagonists, a beta-blocker, and a lipid-lowering agent. Electrocardiogram at admission showed atrial fibrillation with a frequency of 90/min. The chest X-ray revealed mild pulmonary congestion with little bilateral pleural effusion. Echocardiography revealed poor left ventricular function [ejection fraction (EF) 22% by Simpson method] and presence of LF/LGAS (maximum gradient 33 mmHg, mean gradient 21 mmHg, stroke volume 33 mL, stroke volume index 16 mL/m2, AVA 0.6 cm2) . The AVA was calculated with continuity equation and velocity-time integral (LVOT VTI 11.2 cm, AV VTI 59.6 cm, DVI 0.19). The dimensions of the left ventricle were measured as follows: LVEDd 69.9 mm, IVSd 11.4 mm, PWDd 13 mm. There was no evidence of LVOT obstruction.
The laboratory assessment showed highly elevated n-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (9701 ng/L) levels. Coronary angiography was without pathological findings. To evaluate the aortic valve stenosis further, a DSE was performed in line with the protocol recommended by the European Association for Echocardiography. Under dobutamine exposure, the stroke volume increased to 37 mL (SVI 19 mL/m2) and the EF to 26%. The mean gradient of the aortic valve just increased to 22 mmHg (peak gradient 36 mmHg) and the AVA was stable with 0.6 cm2 (LVOT VTI 8.83 cm, AV VTI 59.9, DVI 0.15). Furthermore, the blood pressure decreased under stress from 97/80 to 80/40 mmHg. This assessment revealed no relevant CR, as stroke volume increased of 12% only (CR defined as >20% of stroke volume improvement). A CCT showed massive calcification with an Agatston Score of 2500 units. Based on all these observations, the diagnosis of a severe low-flow/low-gradient aortic stenosis was confirmed. Surgical risk evaluation depicted an EuroSCORE II of 8.6% and STS Score of 5%.
Considering the clinical presentation, the echocardiography, the computed tomography, and the high surgical risk, the patient was scheduled for a transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI). The procedure was uneventful using a self-expandable valve prosthesis (Medtronic Evolut R, 34 mm) through transfemoral access. The post-procedural echocardiogram showed an excellent working prosthesis with a mean gradient of 7 mmHg and an effective orifice area of 2.26 cm2 (iEOA 1.14 cm2/m2). Left ventricular function remained stable with an EF of 26% and a stroke volume of 39 mL (SVI 19 mL). Finally, the patient was discharged on the 7th post-operative day. After 6 months, the patient presented to the outpatient clinic for a routine check-up. She reported much better resilience. Echocardiography showed stable LVEF (EF 29%) and unchanged prosthetic function (mean gradient 8 mmHg, iEOA 1.1214 cm2/m2).