A 65 year old man was admitted with fever, rigors and oliguric acute kidney injury. One month earlier the patient had undergone unilateral (right) pneumectomy due to a newly diagnosed non-small cell lung cancer (pT3N0M0). Twenty days after the operation the patient was discharged from the hospital with instructions to complete a two week treatment course with moxifloxacin (400 mg/d) due to a suspected pneumonia facilitated by pleural effusion. He did not receive any other drugs during this hospital stay. Four days after having stopped taking moxifloxacin and nearly one week before the current admission fever (40°C), a sensation of chilliness, watery diarrhoea and worsening oliguria occurred. His symptoms did not improve and he finally presented in the emergency department of our hospital. On admission his temperature was 38°C. The blood pressure was 120/60 mmHg, the pulse 80 per minute, the respiratory rate 25 breaths per minute and the oxygen saturation 98% while the patient was at rest breathing ambient air. On physical examination, there was no rash or lymphadenopathy and no petechiae were found. The jugular veins were not distended, the left lung was clear and the heart sounds were normal. His abdomen was soft, with normal bowel sounds and no tenderness or hepatosplenomegaly. There was no peripheral edema and the pulses at the hands and feet were palpable. Neurologic examination was unremarkable. The laboratory studies were notable for leukocytosis with no leftward shift and eosinophilia, mild anaemia and normal platelet count (WBC = 14000 μl, with 51% eosoinophils, hematocrit 32.6%, hemoglobin11.8 g/dl, PLT = 304.000/μl). His serum creatinine level had increased from 95 μmol/l at discharge one month earlier to 1204 μmol/l. The urine dipstick was ++ for protein, ++ for hemoglobin. The sediment contained 1-4 red cells, 5-10 white cells, and no casts or crystals. Eosinophiluria was not present in the phase contrast microscopy, though specific stains (such as Hansel's stain) were not performed.
Due to acute kidney injury dialysis therapy was initiated. A renal biopsy was also performed. The specimen contained 6 glomeruli none of which was sclerotic. The glomeruli appeared unremarkable but a severe interstitial inflammation with edema was observed. The infiltrates were composed nearly totally of eosinophils; Eosinophils were also seen invading the tubules beneath the tubular basement membrane as well as within the tubular lumen. Minimal interstitial fibrosis was accompanied by minimal tubular atrophy. Small arteries present in the biopsy specimen showed mild hyalinosis . Immunohistochemistry for IgA, IgM IgG, C3, C4, kappa and lambda chains was completely negative. Electron microscopy was not performed, due to the unambiguous diagnosis and the good clinical response. A course of oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) was commenced and rapidly tapered to zero within three weeks. The renal function improved, and the patient was discharged with a creatinine of 107 μmol/l .