A 26-year-old woman with a background of a non-syndromic BAV, severe AR, and preserved left ventricular (LV) systolic function presented to the emergency department with acute congestive heart failure. Examination revealed normal observations apart from a blood pressure of 102/65 mmHg and tachycardia at 92 b.p.m. Significant bipedal oedema was noted with systolic and diastolic murmurs and clear lung fields on auscultation.
An electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia. Chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly and pulmonary congestion. Laboratory tests showed normal electrolytes, renal function, and complete blood count. A clinical diagnosis of severe AR with decompensated heart failure was made and further imaging arranged.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) confirmed a type 1 BAV, severe AR, and preserved LV contractility with a 40 mm ascending aorta diameter. New RV dilatation was identified with a thickened appearance of TV leaflets and moderate–severe, central TR initially presumed functional ( and ). Abnormal, high-velocity, continuous forward flow through the TV was noted on colour flow mapping (CFM) resulting in bidirectional systolic TV flow in the context of TR (; , ).
Further assessment with transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) confirmed an abnormal TV–aortic interface with high-velocity flow on CFM throughout the cardiac cycle suggestive of a RSOVA ( and ; , ) Doppler assessment confirmed continuous forward flow through the region and the TV ( and ). 3D rendering further differentiated anterolaterally directed RSOVA flow from central, posteriorly directed moderate–severe TR (; , ). The degree of TR was felt to be disproportionate to the degree of RV dilatation. A small, high-velocity jet was additionally noted on the RV aspect of the tricuspid annulus concerning TV disruption, and further investigation was undertaken (; , ).
An agitated saline study conducted to delineate the intracardiac shunt from the right-sided flows demonstrated a large filling defect immediately superior to the TV in an otherwise bubble-filled RA without a deficit within the RV (see , ).
Computerized tomography angiography (CTA) demonstrated normal coronary ostia. Pan-cardiac enhancement due to the substantial shunt resulted in impaired visualization of tricuspid annular integrity, but the origin of a large non-coronary cusp defect was seen immediately basal to the septal TV leaflet insertion. Shunt course was similarly obscured, but RSOVA ‘windsock’ prolapse through the TV was observed .
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging confirmed RSOVA origin above the tricuspid annulus coursing along the anterior TV leaflet into the RV suggestive of a spared tricuspid annulus (; , ) alongside moderate–severe TR (regurgitant volume 66 mL, regurgitant fraction 31%).
On further review, ‘thickened appearance’ of the TV on TTE represented the RSOVA ‘windsock’ through which high-velocity flow is demonstrated ( and ; , ). Size and proximity of the ‘windsock’ result in prolapse into the TV with consequent malcoaptation and leaflet ‘flutter’ as they are further separated by high-velocity forward flow during systole resulting in significant TR in the context of mild annular dilatation (see , ).
The patient was diuresed and proceeded to surgical RSOVA repair with a CardioCel patch and aortic valve replacement. Perioperative findings confirmed a non-coronary RSOVA with a large ‘windsock’ in close proximity to the tricuspid septal-anterior commissure requiring repair and annuloplasty.
The patient had excellent recovery with no residual RSOVA, normalized RV size, trivial TR (see , ), and near-premorbid exercise tolerance.