A 27-year-old woman, who had recently migrated to the UK, was referred to our centre for management of severe CoA which was diagnosed incidentally when she presented with a subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) to her local hospital. The SAH was secondary to a left middle cerebral artery (MCA) aneurysm and was coiled successfully. An echocardiogram and subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan of the aorta confirmed severe CoA, and she was referred to our centre. She had a history of hypertension when she was 20 years old, and the patient was not investigated further. She subsequently had two successful pregnancies; the first delivery was a normal vaginal birth, and the second delivery was by Caesarean section, both complicated by hypertension and foetal growth restriction. Whilst awaiting percutaneous intervention, she became pregnant and declared this at 12 weeks gestation, despite being counselled to avoid pregnancy at her first consultation. The patient made an informed decision to continue with the pregnancy. At the time, the highest blood pressure in the right arm was 160/91 mmHg and 89/51 mmHg in the right leg. On examination, there was a loud coarse ejection systolic murmur and lower limb pulses were difficult to palpate. She was commenced on methyldopa 125 mg ter die sumendus (TDS) and aspirin 150 mg and continued amlodipine 10 mg which she was previously taking.
Full blood count, biochemistry assay, and urinary protein–creatinine ratio were all unremarkable. An aortic knuckle with rib notching was identified on a chest X-ray, and an echocardiogram showed moderate left ventricular hypertrophy with significant diastolic dysfunction, tri-leaflet aortic valve with subaortic acceleration without significant obstruction, and flow velocity in the descending aorta measuring 2.5 m/s . A cardiac CT showed severe CoA with a short segment, severe narrowing of the descending aorta distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery and ligamentum arteriosum, and collateral pathways . The aorta measured 4 mm in diameter at its maximum stenotic point compared with 18 mm in the proximal segment. There was collateralization to the distal segment through intercostal and vertebral arteries. At 20 weeks gestation, a foetal echocardiogram showed CoA, parachute mitral valve, and left ventricular/right ventricular (LV/RV) disproportion in keeping with Shone’s syndrome.
At 24 weeks gestation, now on amlodipine 10 mg o.d. and methyldopa 500 mg TDS, she remained significantly hypertensive. A multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting considered that with a recent SAH, uncontrolled hypertension, and a foetus with congenital heart defects, relief of the CoA was necessary during pregnancy for an optimal maternal and foetal outcome.
Cardiac catheterization was performed with the patient under general anaesthesia with lead shielding of the uterus. Distal aortic measurements confirmed significant narrowing and were as follows: pre-coarctation 11 mm, CoA site 4 mm, and post coarctation 14 mm. A 4.5 cm covered stent on a 14 mm × 5 cm delivery balloon was implanted. The pre-intervention invasive peak-to-peak pressure gradient was 32 mmHg which reduced to 5 mmHg after intervention . The total fluoroscopy time was 8 min and the patient received ∼2 mGy of radiation. Her immediate post-procedure course was complicated by a haematoma at the puncture site which was managed conservatively. The pregnancy continued without complications with almost near-normalization of her blood pressure and allowing to reduce the amlodipine to 5 mg and discontinue the methyldopa. Antenatal screening of the foetus after the intervention, at 38 weeks gestation, showed now adequate growth of cardiac structures, particularly the mitral valve, and improvement of the LV/RV disproportion. She underwent an elective Caesarean section at 38 weeks of gestation due to foetal growth restriction. Her post-delivery recovery was unremarkable, and at 1 year follow-up, the patient remained stable. A 2700 g male was delivered and transferred to a neonatal cardiac centre and had surgical intervention for his severe CoA .