A 60-year-old Japanese woman with a history of rheumatoid arthritis and NF1 was admitted to our hospital for the treatment of a tumor of a pancreas. She had no symptoms, but an abdominal ultrasonography screening examination had revealed a hypoechoic mass in the head of a pancreas. Laboratory data, including measurement of tumor markers, were within the normal ranges, and her insulin and glucagon levels were also within the normal ranges. However, the plasma gastrin level was elevated at 580 pg/mL (30 to 150 pg/mL). A computed tomography (CT) examination revealed a hypervascular tumor measuring 14 mm in diameter in the pancreas head . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also revealed a massive tumor in the head of the pancreas. A duodenal endoscopy revealed that the lumen of the patient's duodenum was not compressed by the extraluminal tumor, and findings on endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography showed that her main pancreatic duct was not stenosed or blocked. We diagnosed the patient as having a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor and planned to perform a tumoral enucleation from her pancreas.
A whitish elastic hard nodule was easily removed from the pancreatic parenchyma, but the tumor was connected to her duodenal wall via a stalk. Consequently, we performed a tumor resection with a duodenal wedge resection. As a small whitish nodule was also found in the patient's jejunum during the initial operation, a segmental jejunectomy was also performed. A histological examination of frozen sections of the patient's tumors revealed spindle cells with connective tissues. Thus, we diagnosed the patient as having multiple GISTs and did not perform a more radical resection.
Macroscopically, the resected specimens consisted of solid and hard masses that were connected to the patient's duodenal and jejunal walls but not to the parenchyma of the head of her pancreas. Microscopically, this neoplasm originated from the muscularis propria of the duodenum wall and consisted of spindle cells in a trabecular pattern without necrosis . Less than five mitoses per 50 high-power fields were observed.
On immunohistochemistry, both of the patient's tumors were diffusely positive for the type III receptor tyrosine kinase (TK) named KIT (Dako Cytomation, Copenhagen, Denmark; Figure ), whereas her duodenal tumor was focally positive and her jejunal tumor was diffusely positive for CD34 (Nichirei, Tokyo, Japan). Both of the patient's tumors were negative for smooth muscle actin (Dako Cytomation, Copenhagen, Denmark) and S-100 (Nichirei, Tokyo, Japan). We finally diagnosed the patient as having duodenal and jejunal GISTs of uncommitted type. Patients with these GISTs are regarded as being very low risk of recurrence according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines . The patient has remained healthy for two years without any recurrences after surgery.