A 59-year-old-male presented with a complaint of bloody stools. On physical examination, no mass was felt during palpation. Laboratory data on admission showed that the levels of tumor markers including CEA and CA19-9 were within normal ranges. Colonoscopy revealed a semi-circumscribed irregular elevated lesion in the sigmoid colon that was diagnosed as adenocarcinoma by biopsy . Abdominal enhanced CT scan revealed wall thickening of the sigmoid colon, and 3D-CT angiography showed that the IMA originated at 36 mm distal side from the SMA, which was the same level as the second lumbar vertebra, and the first jejunal artery bifurcated further distal side from the IMA origin . It also detected that the middle colic artery branched off from the SMA at 27 mm distal side from the IMA origin, and both the left colic artery and the sigmoid colic artery bifurcated from the IMA. No direct branches originating from the abdominal aorta were identified to supply the left-side colon. There were no anomalies or abnormalities detected except for the IMA. On PET-CT, paracolic lymph nodes were suspected of metastasis, but there was no abnormal FDG accumulation in the lymph nodes around the root of the IMA . Liver metastasis was also suspected by PET-CT and MRI . The patient was diagnosed with sigmoid colon cancer cT4aN2aM1a cStage IVA. Therefore, we planned treatment with laparoscopic low anterior resection followed by resection of the liver metastases to achieve radical resection.
Laparoscopically, we can found that the tumor was located in the sigmoid colon and involved the small intestine and the left seminal vesicle. The IMA was identified as running parallel to the abdominal aorta; meanwhile, the colonic autonomic nerve was supplied from the lumbar splanchnic nerve at the caudal side of the duodenum . Central lymph nodes around the colonic autonomic nerve were dissected en bloc with the regional lymph nodes, followed by resection of the IMA at the level of the lower duodenal border . The left seminal vesicle, the left pelvic plexus and the middle rectum were firmly adhered to the tumor, and thus we performed low anterior resection with combined resection of them . Indocyanine green fluorescence system was used for assessment of the blood supply to the colonic stump. Pathological radical resection including the regional lymph nodes metastases was achieved. Two months later, complete resection of the liver metastasis was performed. After adjuvant chemotherapy, no recurrence was observed during the 1.5 years since the liver resection was performed.