A 34-year-old Japanese man without a remarkable medical history was transferred to our hospital because of catecholamine-resistant hypotension with multiple organ failure, despite vigorous fluid loading, in early September 2017. He was admitted to another hospital complaining of fever 2 days previously. He attended a crowded fireworks event just before developing a fever. At presentation, he was in severe cardiovascular instability with severe hypotension. His initial blood temperature, pulse rate, blood pressure, and respiratory rate were 39.7°C, 157 b.p.m., 49/30 mmHg (he received noradrenaline at 0.1 μg/kg/min), and 40 breaths/min, respectively, along with oliguria and an altered mental status (Glasgow Coma Scale score, 13; E3V4M6). A laboratory examination showed multiple organ dysfunction in the liver, kidney, and lungs, and coagulation was confirmed in addition to cardiogenic dysfunction . A chest X-ray taken at a previous hospital did not show overt pulmonary involvement . However, this finding dramatically changed and showed pulmonary edema with cardiomegaly during a short period . An electrocardiogram showed tachycardia with extended ST elevation . He was admitted with suspected FM induced by influenza A infection because no obvious site infection could be identified and a rapid test for influenza A virus was positive.
The patient was intubated and transported to the intensive care unit because of refractory shock. High-dose vasopressor therapy (noradrenaline up to 0.4 μg/kg/min and vasopressin up to 2 units/h) was initiated, and renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was begun. Hydrocortisone (300 mg/day) was induced as adjunctive therapy. Antimicrobial therapy, including a neuraminidase inhibitor (peramivir 300 mg/day for 2 days) and empiric broad-spectrum antibiotics (meropenem 2 g/day with linezolid 1,200 mg/day), was given after appropriate cultures were obtained.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), which was carried out after admission, showed severe global LV systolic dysfunction (EF, 20%) and LV dilatation (LV end-systolic diameter, 66 mm). However, TTE did not show myocardial edema, unlike in typical cases of FM . Moreover, cardiac catheterization showed normal coronary arteries. However, a right heart catheter examination showed a cardiac output of 12.0 L/min (confidence interval, 6.16 L/min/m2) and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 17 mmHg, which was inconsistent with FM. Additionally, myocardial biopsy findings did not indicate FM .
The patient was considered to suffer from SC, which is characterized by LV dilatation and a depressed EF with preserved cardiac output., He was treated with fluid resuscitation (crystalloids and colloids), high-dose vasopressors, and CRRT according to global sepsis guidelines. The patient responded after 12 h and became increasingly stabilized. Vasopressors were tapered, and noradrenaline and vasopressin were discontinued in 72 and 60 h, respectively. Daily TTE was used to estimate the patient's cardiac function, and his EF gradually improved up to 38% in the first 5 days. Laboratory values showed marked improvement of inflammatory and cardiogenic markers. The clinical course during the first week is shown in Figure .
Blood, urine, sputum culture aspirated by bronchoscopy, and radiological studies failed to show any bacterial infection. Therefore, antibiotics were discontinued on the 10th hospitalized day. He was extubated, and CRRT was discontinued on the 12th hospitalized day. His low LV function was restored, and LV dilatation returned to almost normal in the following 2 weeks. He moved back to a previous hospital for subsequent management in 4 weeks and achieved full rehabilitation in 8 weeks. We finally diagnosed him with influenza-associated septic shock accompanied by SC.