A 55-year-old female presented to the Otolaryngology – Head & Neck Surgery clinic with a four-month history of a left-sided neck mass. The patient had a history of metastatic ileal NET with metastases to the liver, mesenteric nodes, and peritoneum. She underwent primary right hemicolectomy and small bowel resection in 2010. Pathology revealed two foci of well-differentiated malignant NET in the terminal ileum, with muscle and serosal invasion, and three of nine regional lymph nodes involved. There were two to three mitoses per ten high power fields (HPFs) with no necrosis and the Ki-67 index was 3%. Immunohistochemistry revealed positivity for synaptophysin and chromogranin. Pre-operative imaging revealed metastatic involvement of an aorto-caval node, thus the disease was staged as pT4(m)N1M1. Post-operatively, treatment began with long acting somatostatin analogue (SSA). Liver metastases were detected eleven months after her initial surgery. In 2014, she developed carcinoid syndrome leading to therapy with radiolabelled metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG). Subsequently she received telotristat etiprate due to progressive symptoms.
On presentation of the neck mass in 2015, she had no additional otorhinolaryngological symptoms. Examination of the neck revealed a smooth, mobile, painless, 2-cm mass located in the submandibular triangle. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable, including flexible nasopharyngoscopy which revealed no mucosal masses or lesions in the upper aerodigestive tract.
Fine needle aspiration (FNA) revealed malignant cells with mildly pleomorphic nuclei and salt and pepper chromatin. Immunohistochemistry was positive for chromogranin and synaptophysin, and consistent with metastatic NET. Computed tomography imaging of the mass revealed left submandibular gland enlargement and no cervical lymphadenopathy . The multidisciplinary head and neck tumor board, in conjunction with her primary medical oncologist, recommended resection of the tumor to improve local control due to the low morbidity of the surgery.
An uncomplicated left level 1b neck dissection was performed and there were no permanent post-operative sequelae. Gross pathology revealed a circumscribed tumor mass within the submandibular gland that measured 2.2 × 1.5 × 1.4 cm, and appeared as a firm, smooth nodule with a grayish white color. The tumor displayed focal abutment of the margin, but did not extend outside of the gland. Immunohistochemistry was again positive for chromogranin and synaptophysin, consistent with the previous FNA and was .
Unfortunately, the patient passed away one year later due to progressive disease in the mesentery and liver.