A 74-year old man, farmer, came to Ear Nose Throat Outpatient Department with a swelling in the neck on the right side, just below the lower jaw, since one month. It was insidious in onset and gradually progressive. There was no fever, pain over the swelling or change in the size of the swelling during the meals. The patient was a known case of coronary artery disease on a pacemaker.
The examination revealed a single 4×2.5 cm swelling in the neck below the right lower margin of the mandible extending anteriorly 3 cm from the midline to the right, posteriorly 3cm from the mastoid tip, superiorly till the lower margin of ramus of the mandible, and inferiorly 2 cm below the lower margin of the ramus of the mandible . The palpation of the swelling revealed a nontender and firm to hard mobile mass with no local rise in the temperature. The surface was smooth and the skin over the swelling was pinchable. The swelling was neither bimanually palpable nor ballotable.
The ultrasound showed an irregular heterogeneous hypoechoic lesion in the right submandibular space measuring 37×23 mm with mild internal vascularity. The submandibular gland appeared separate but compressed. Few small subcentimeter-sized right level II, level III, level V, left level II nodes, and likely reactive nodes were also noted. Fine needle aspiration was suggestive of spindle cell neoplasm. Lab parameters were within normal limits. The swelling was excised under general anesthesia. Intraoperatively, a 3.5×2.5 cm mobile swelling was identified in the right submandibular space, separate from the submandibular gland, superior and lateral to it, and suspected to be arising from a thin nerve lateral to mylohyoid .
No lymph nodes were identified. The specimen was removed in toto and sent for histopathological examination.Grossly, it was an unencapsulated lesion covered by adipose tissue .
Microscopy showed fascicles of spindle cells, scattered myofibroblastic cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and nucleoli against a background of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and scattered lymphoid follicles. In addition, brisk mitoses were observed in the spindle cells. Lack of zonation ruled out the diagnosis of nodular fasciitis. A differential diagnosis of spindle cell carcinoma was ruled out with immunohistochemistry (IHC).
A panel of IHC showed diffuse and strong immunoreactivity for vimentin in spindle cells and focal positivity for smooth muscle actin. The spindle cells were negative with anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), cytokeratin, desmin, S100, and CD117. Focal reactivity with cyclin D1 favored a diagnosis of inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT) . The case then received radiotherapy 60 Gray divided into 30 fractions over 6 weeks. The patient had no evidence of recurrence or residual disease six months post-surgery.