An 18-year-old female was born with congenital pseudoarthrosis (CPT) of the right tibia with neurofibromatosis. She underwent three unsuccessful surgeries before presenting to us as Type 1 infected non-union of tibia with shortening at the age of 18 years. She had neurofibromatic nodules all over the body including the face . The leg had multiple active draining sinuses, with evidence of healed sinuses and operating scars, adherent to the underlying bone . There was minimally painful abnormal mobility at the fracture site. The X-ray showed multiple diaphyseal sequestra with cavities, apparent fusion of the ankle joint and atrophic non-union at the distal third of tibia and fibula .
Prolonged morbidity made her socially isolated. She belonged to a poor family. Meeting her medical expenses became a great burden to the family. The guardians were true to their thinking that no modern science could salvage her limb. They started believing that amputation would be a viable option and with that feeling in mind, they approached us. The clinical setting was also conducive, in general for such an action. We knew that still a modern orthopedic technology called Ilizarov could settle down the morbidities in her favor. However, it was difficult to make them believe that a miracle might still be happening. After few sittings of counseling, they somehow agreed to give it a try.
After improving the general condition of the patient, extensive debridement was done. All dead tissues including bone, soft tissues, and sinuses were excised . An all-wire Ilizarov frame was mounted with two rings on the proximal fragment and one ring in the small distal fragment. Bone was so osteoporotic that wires could be put by pushing with hand only. The fibula was left untouched. The wound was kept open under massive dressing to heal by secondary intention. The immediate post-operative period was uneventful. A corticotomy was done in the proximal metaphyseal area when the wound appeared healthy after about 2 weeks. Distraction was started after a latency of 7 days and an X-ray on the 10th day of corticotomy showed normal distraction . Subsequent X-rays at 1 month interval showed hyporegenerate . Since the bone was grossly osteoporotic, instability was thought to be the cause of hyporegenerate. One more wire was added in each fragment and the apparatus was further reinforced with two long extension plates. Weight-bearing was encouraged with shoe raise. Two cycles of Accordion maneuver (AM) as per Baruah and Patowary protocol were done at the hyporegenerate site. The wires were tightened in each follow-up. The distraction rate was slowed down to half a millimeter a day in the initial period when bone failed to appear in the beginning.
Once the docking site was reached further distraction was continued to get few millimeters of invagination into distal fragment to improve stability at the docking site. Slowly the bone started showing in the regenerate in follow-up X-rays. After docking was achieved, further distraction was continued to gain the length of the limb by external bone transport. Apparatus was kept twice the period of distraction to consolidate the regenerate. It was removed when clinically there was no pain, abnormal mobility, and tenderness, and the X-ray showed three cortices . A walking patella tendon bearing cast was applied for 6 weeks to further consolidate the regenerate. She was allowed unaided full weight-bearing afterward .