A 43-year-old male patient injured the index, middle and ring fingers of his left hand on a machine turntable. The index and middle fingers were completely severed and severely contused and could not be replanted in situ, and the fingers were amputated at the distal 1/3 of the proximal phalanx.
The distal pulp of the ring finger was severed with extensive ecchymosis and could not be replanted. The insertion point of the flexor tendon and the distal phalanx of ring finger were exposed, and the defect area was approximately 1.8 cm*2.2 cm .
Microscopy showed that the ulnar digital artery and nerve were intact and continuous in the wound on the ring finger; the radial digital artery and nerve were severed at the level of the distal interphalangeal joint. A superficial subcutaneous vein was detected at the proximal volar side of the wound .
The distal radial digital artery of the index finger was proximal to the arterial arch with severe contusion and intravascular thrombosis. The ulnar digital artery was complete and continuous beyond the distal interphalangeal joint, a superficial subcutaneous vein was exposed at the dorsal skin edge of the finger, and the bilateral digital nerves were continuous.
The skin was incised along the radial midline of the distal end of the index finger, the volar and dorsal skin was completely excised along the bony surface of the distal phalanx, and the nail bed tissue was excised. The flap area was approximately 4.8 cm*2.5 cm.
The ulnar digital artery in the free index finger fillet flap was aligned with the radial digital artery of the ring finger. The radial digital nerve in the flap located on the dorsal side of the finger was preserved; as the flap was obviously bloated, it was excised when the flap was trimmed. The trimmed skin flap completely covered the wound, with an area of approximately 2.2 cm*2.5 cm . The ulnar digital artery and nerve of the index finger were anastomosed with the radial digital artery and nerve of the ring finger, the dorsal vein of the index finger was anastomosed with the palmar vein of the ring finger, and the ring finger defect wound was repaired .
The patient was placed on strict bed rest for 5 days after the operation, during which the flaps were clinically monitored every hour, and antibiotics (cefmetazole, 1 g every 24 h, 3 consecutive days after surgery) were given to prevent infection. Low-molecular-weight heparin was used for anticoagulation, papaverine was injected to prevent vasospasm, and heating of the affected limb with a lamp and oxygen inhalation were performed. The flap survived successfully after surgery.
The patient was hospitalized for 10 days and plaster immobilization was removed at 6 weeks. The patient was able to use the affected limb skillfully at 60 days after the operation and returned to his original life and work . At six months after the operation, the static two-point discrimination sense was 5 mm, the dynamic two-point discrimination sense was 4 mm, and there was good cold resistance and no tenderness. In addition, there was no significant difference in the range of motion between the injured and normal fingers. The patient was satisfied with the appearance and sensation of the repaired finger.