We present the case of a 41-year-old woman affected by acute myeloid leukemia who, 1 month after chemotherapy, was admitted to the hematology unit to perform a routine medical check-up. There, she suddenly developed a tension-type headache, vomiting, and lethargy. An urgent brain computed tomography (CT) scan showed a non-aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage associated with a tetraventricular non-communicating HC . Moreover, a brain angio-CT scan has excluded the presence of any aneurysmal or arteriovenous malformation.
Then, she urgently underwent an external ventricular drainage (EVD) placement. During the postoperative course, the patient improved with progressive neurological recovery, and a “shunt dependency” test was performed; after its failure, once CSF was clear and laboratory tests negative, the patient underwent VP shunt placement 1 month later and was transferred back to the Hematology Unit to continue proper therapy.
Two months later, she presented at the emergency department with a fever and severe abdominal pain. No increase in fluorosis indexes was detected at preliminary laboratory tests. A contrast-enhancement CT scan showed abscess collections and pseudocysts in the mesogastrium and in the pelvic cavity with diffuse peritoneal hyperattenuation. Ultrasound-guided aspiration of the intra-abdominal abscesses was rapidly performed, considering the advantage of a minimally invasive approach in an immunosuppressed patient.
No further complications were detected, and a post-procedural clinical improvement was first noticed without any sign of fever or abdominal pain. Nevertheless, after a few days, the patient developed nausea, drowsiness, headache, and progressive neurological impairment (Glasgow Coma Scale 11- E 2, V4, M 5). She underwent an urgent CT scan, which showed a tetraventricular HC. Laboratory test parameters showed a sudden increase of inflammatory markers (white blood cells [WBC] 9 10^3/µL, C-reactive protein [CRP] 276 mg/L, and monocyte distribution width [MDW] 25.9). Then, she underwent urgent surgery for removal of the VP system, followed by Bactiseal© EVD placement.
Subsequently, blood culture investigations isolated Candida albicans and Enterococcus faecium. No bacterial growth was shown at the CSF investigation, despite the catheter showing a bacterial colonization (i.e., E. faecium) as well. An intravenous administration of linezolid 600 mg/2 times a day, rifampicin 600 mg/day, and itraconazole 100 mg/day was started and lasted for 4 weeks. Due to the failure to improve inflammatory markers, meropenem/vaborbactam 2 g/2 g 4 times a day was added, with a progressive clinical and neurological improvement. Antibiotic therapy lasted for 6 weeks, and EVD was replaced twice.
After symptoms recovery, a decrease of WBC, CRP, and procalcitonin due to “shunt dependency,” a new surgical procedure was mandatory. Due to the high risk of post-infective peritoneal adherence and consequent impairment of CSF absorption, a ventriculoatrial (VA) shunt was considered the best option. VA shunt was finally performed after a careful risk-benefit assessment.
The postoperative course was uneventful, without any complications or new onset of neurological deficit. Then, she was transferred to the hematologic unit to continue proper therapy. A 6-month follow-up has assessed a good recovery, with a significant improvement in the patient’s quality of life.