A 68-year-old, right-handed male presented to his primary care physician with several months of gradually progressive cognitive changes, gait disturbance, and headache. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed a heterogenously enhancing lesion in the anteromesial right frontal lobe which was associated with significant edema [Figure and ]. The patient was immediately referred for neurosurgical evaluation.
The patient’s past medical history was considered closely. The patient was diagnosed with a plasmacytoma of the left frontal skull 8 years prior to this presentation and was initially treated with radiation therapy to this isolated lesion. This treatment took place at an outside institution and involved conventional external beam radiation using a 20 MeV electron beam. The initial radiation treatment was delivered with a 10 cm × 10 cm cone, at 100 SSD, with the beam positioned perpendicular to the left frontal scalp and with a 0.5 cm wet bolus. The patient received 2.5 Gy per fraction for 7 fractions, followed by decreased dose of 2.0 Gy per fraction for additional 11 fractions. The total cumulative dose to this treatment field was 39.5 Gy. The treatment field was then coned down to 6 cm × 6 cm, with three more fractions of radiation treatment at 2.0 Gy per fraction. The total accumulated dose to the boost field was thus 45.5 Gy.
Shortly after the conclusion of radiation therapy, the patient developed additional sites of systemic disease and underwent an autologous stem cell transplant for multiple myeloma. He remained disease-free since that time and was treated with chronic immunosuppressive agents to prevent rejection.
Upon neurosurgical evaluation, a radiographic differential diagnosis was formulated and included high-grade glioma, metastasis, abscess, radiation-induced malignancy, and radiation necrosis. Radiation necrosis was considered a relatively unlikely diagnosis due to the timing of the presentation. Additionally, the reported total radiation dose to the brain parenchyma was low and was divided into numerous small fractions and the plasmacytoma targeted with radiation was contralateral to the new intrinsic lesion. However, the detailed radiation plan from the original treating facility was destroyed, and without the ability to review this document, treatment error was considered possible. The use of additional imaging modalities such as MR spectroscopy or FDG-Positron Emission Topography (PET) was considered, but these results were considered unlikely to change the treatment recommendations. After a discussion with the patient and his family, the decision was made to proceed with a craniotomy for pathologic diagnosis and relief of mass effect without further preoperative workup.
Shortly after referral, the patient underwent a right frontal craniotomy for resection of the mass lesion. Frameless stereotaxy was used to localize the lesion which was resected with conventional microsurgical techniques. The lesion was noted to be firm and white and extended medially to the pial border of the interhemispheric fissure. A large central portion was delivered in its entirety and sent to neuropathology for frozen and permanent section. The frozen section was notable for hyalinized blood vessels, calcification, and an absence of gross cellular atypia. With a pathologic impression favoring radiation necrosis, the craniotomy was completed with a goal of internal debulking of the lesion for relief of mass effect.
The entire specimen, consisting of large fragments of tissue measuring approximately 4 cm in aggregate, was submitted for microscopic examination. This showed extensive bland, granular, coagulative necrosis, with smaller areas of viable, reactive brain tissue [Figure –]. Areas of necrosis contained hyalinized blood vessels and coarse calcium deposits . Few macrophages were present. Viable brain tissue was gliotic but only modestly hypercellular, with moderately atypical cells and benign, perivascular chronic inflammation. Focal capillary proliferation resembling a telangiectasia was present. There was no evidence of malignancy or infection. A diagnosis of radiation-induced necrosis was made.
Postoperatively, the patient returned to his neurologic baseline. A postoperative MRI demonstrated near-total resection of the lesion with some residual nodular enhancement. After a fall from standing, the patient developed a wound complication requiring exploration on postoperative day 2, in which a subgaleal hematoma was identified and evacuated. He subsequently recovered well and was discharged to a rehabilitation facility several days later.
Since his craniotomy and diagnosis, the patient has been followed for 18 months. Follow-up MRI studies have demonstrated continued evolution of this process with initial extension of edema to involve the bilateral frontal lobes . This correlated with increased symptoms of poor balance and cognitive difficulties and was managed with oral steroids. Alternative treatment strategies including anticoagulation were considered but not employed due to contraindications related to the patient’s systemic illness. At 1 year follow-up, imaging studies revealed stabilization of edema and decreased enhancement . The patient’s clinical status has continued to improve and he remains functionally independent.