A 26-year-old white male presented to the emergency department complaining of one month of persistent hematochezia, lower abdominal pain, and nonbloody emesis. He noted intermittent rectal bleeding for years but never continuously for 1 month. He denied any fevers, weight changes, sick contacts, antibiotic use, or previous colonoscopy. His past medical history included moderate Hemophilia A with factor activity between 1 and 5 percent. He had been prescribed Recombinant human factor VIII but had been noncompliant with visits. When his rectal bleeding increased he was told to take his Recombinant human factor VIII to 4000 units every 12 hours on days that he has heavy bleeding.
His examination was significant for tachycardia, tenderness to palpation to the lower abdomen, and positive fecal occult blood testing. Serum laboratory testing revealed a hemoglobin of 11 g/dL and PT/PTT/INR values within normal limits. His C reactive protein was elevated at 57.8 mg/L (normal ≤ 9.9), erythrocyte sedimentation rate 21 mm/hr (normal 0-15), and albumin 3.5 g/dL (normal 3.5-5.7).
CT imaging of the abdomen and pelvis revealed diffuse abnormal colonic thickening . After receiving Recombinant human factor VIII infusions without resolution of symptoms, a decision was made to perform colonoscopy and biopsies which confirmed chronic active ulcerative colitis . He was started on empiric therapy for inflammatory bowel disease and eventually required high-dose intravenous steroids before he showed clinical improvement. Intravenous methyl prednisolone 40 mg every six hours was given for the first six days followed by 60 mg daily intravenously until discharge. He was given budesonide 9 mg orally once daily for the first six days, mesalamine 800 mg orally three times a day for the first six days, and pantoprazole 40 mg orally for his entire 14-day inpatient stay. He also received metronidazole 500 mg intravenously once daily for the first six days and then orally every eight hours until discharge. Stool cultures showed the usual enteric flora and HIV was negative. His hospitalization was complicated by blood loss anemia, requiring multiple blood transfusions in addition to twice daily dosing of Recombinant human factor VIII. He was eventually discharged after 14 days on an oral steroid taper and, as an outpatient, was to be followed up for initiation of a biologic agent. After discharge the patient was lost to follow-up.