A 39-year-old man was admitted to the hospital for icterus and nausea on July 3, 2018.
Seven days before, he suffered from headache and vomiting and was deeply jaundiced.
Four months before admission, he started treatment with benzbromarone (100 mg/d) due to hyperuricemia, but he stopped taking the drug because of the recent jaundice. He had no history of liver disease or other diseases.
The patient has a history of drinking beer for 10 years and consumes approximately 28 g of alcohol per day. There was no family medical history of note.
Severe jaundice was found on the skin and sclera, and no signs of encephalopathy were found. The patient’s temperature was 36.8 °C, heart rate was 90 bpm, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 112/77 mmHg, and oxygen saturation was 98%. His body mass index was 23.7 kg/m2.
Laboratory indicators were as follows: Aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 170.6 U/L; alanine transaminase (ALT), 208.2 U/L; γ-glutamyltransferase (GGT), 76 U/L; alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 94.2 U/L; total bilirubin, 702.5 µmol/L; direct bilirubin, 362.5 µmol/L; albumin, 34.2 g/L; prothrombin time, 33.5 s; prothrombin time activity, 25%. Tests for viral hepatitis and human immunodeficiency virus were negative, and autoimmune antibody tests were negative. His blood ammonia level was 145 µmol/L (normal value: 9-47 µmol/L). Other laboratory data are provided in Table .
A computed tomography (CT) scan showed the following: The surface of the liver was irregular, the proportion of each part of the liver was not coordinated, the hilum and hepatic fissure were not wide, and the density of the liver parenchyma was slightly reduced; the intrahepatic bile duct was not dilated. Based on these findings, the patient was suspected of having liver cirrhosis .
The patient deteriorated quickly and developed grade II encephalopathy within a few days. We applied the RECUM criteria to evaluate the possibility of drug-induced liver injury (DILI). The RECUM score of this patient was 9, which strongly indicated DILI, and the R value was 5.78, which indicated that this was a case of hepatocellular-type DILI.