A 39-year-old female right handed teacher who presented with headache of progressive onset, phosphenes, rapid decline of visual acuity to blindness, vomiting, repeated generalized tonic-clonic seizures followed by altered consciousness and very high blood pressure (HBP) of 240/120, all of which started about 12 hours following a normal delivery. In her past obstetrical history, she is a mother of 7 living children with unremarkable events during her pregnancies except for similar severe headaches that occurred a few hours following her last delivery of twins in June 2010. Concerning her recent gestation, it is worth noting that follow up was irregularly and at the third trimester, she was diagnosed of moderate proteinuria and HBP. Hypertensive encephalopathy was presumed. A computerized tomographic (CT) scan of the brain was immediately requested which showed bilateral symmetric occipital hematoma with significant peripheral oedema . Chest X-ray and electrocardiogram showed no abnormality. Laboratory work-up among which complete blood count (CBC), prothrombin time (PT), liver enzymes, blood urea and creatinine, blood glucose level, serum electrolytes, Thyroid Stimulating Hormone were unremarkable. HIV 1&2 serology as well as malaria diagnostic tests were negative. Her 24 hours proteinuria was 0.4 g. She was admitted into the intensive care unit (ICU) and initial treatment comprised IV Nicardipine and magnesium sulfate. Evolution on this treatment was marked by a fall in Blood Pressure within 6 hours to 130/90 mmHg, subsidence of seizures and she was discharged from the ICU to the ward after 72 hours though on there was persistence of blindness, mental confusion and tetra-pyramidal syndrome.
The evolution was favorable with disappearance of headache, seizures, regain of visual acuity and mental status and she was discharge home 15 days after admission. No control CT scan was done due to financial constraints.
Nine months later, she presented on the night, flashing lights, colored and mobile spotlights, more frequent on the right side of her visual field, followed a few minutes later by a brief loss of consciousness and a secondary generalization with 3 episodes of tonic clonic seizures in one night. Ophthalmologic examination was reportedly normal. Due to the recurrence of partial occipital lobe seizures with secondary generalization few days later with the frequency of 2 to 3 seizures per week she was transferred to the neurology unit of the hospital.
On examination her blood pressure was 120/80 mm Hg with regular pulse at 65 beats per minute and a respiratory rate of 22 regular cycles per minute. Heart, pulmonary and abdominal examination showed no clinical abnormality and neurological examination was unremarkable. Lumbar puncture for cerebrospinal fluid analysis (CSF) was done and it showed no abnormality. Proteinuria and other biological tests like complete blood count, prothrombin time, liver enzymes, blood urea and creatinine, blood glucose level, serum electrolytes were normal. A CT scan was done (about 10 months after the first one) and it showed total regression of hematoma but marked bilateral posterior cortical atrophy predominantly on the right . An electroencephalogram (EEG) was performed immediately after a seizure and it showed generalized slow waves and spikes and a diagnosis of epilepsy secondary to PRES was made and she was placed on Carbamazepine 200 mg twice a day and after six months of treatment, the patient became seizure free and was able to resume her work.