An 8-year-old girl was admitted to the Paediatric Emergency Department (ED) of a suburban hospital with complaints of nausea, persistent vomiting and abdominal pain that had begun a few hours earlier, in the absence of other symptoms. Her past medical history was silent except for a recently appeared alopecia and for a familial predisposition for autoimmune thyroid disease. Particularly, her father is affected by Hashimoto’s thyroiditis while her mother was affected by Grave’s disease and underwent thyroidectomy. They are both taking levothyroxine treatment. Recently the patient’s twin sister developed an autoimmune thyroiditis with subclinical hypothyroidism that has never needed any replacing therapy. She was investigated for other autoimmune diseases, which resulted completely negative. She was born at term after an uneventful twin pregnancy from not-related parents; she had never shown any allergy nor any ongoing infection. In the ED, she appeared in poor general conditions, dehydrated and with a suntanned appearance, while the rest of her physical examination was unremarkable. Her blood analysis showed a severe hypoglycaemia (1.39 mmoL/L), hyponatremia (126 mmoL/L) and hyperkalaemia (6.1 mmoL/L), hence intravenous hydrocortisone and a 5% dextrose perfusion with a sodium chloride supplementation was promptly administered with a stabilisation of the clinical situation. Further blood analysis showed low cortisol (< 0.50 nmoL/L), normal renin (44.9 mU/L, normal values 5.5–80 mU/L), low aldosterone levels (26.9 pmoL/L, normal values 138–831 pmol/L) with high adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH > 278 pmoL/L), confirming the suspect of primary adrenal insufficiency. She therefore began a hydrocortisone treatment (15 mg/m2/day) and was taken in charge by the paediatric endocrinologists of the peripheral hospital, with little improvements. During the following months, she experienced many relapses of acute adrenal insufficiency that needed several admissions to the ED with clinical evidence of dehydration and dyselectrolytemia with hyponatremia and hyperkalemia. She was therefore brought to the attention of our Paediatric Endocrinology Department, where she underwent further investigations to understand the aetiology of the disease. Following the identification of significantly high renin level (631.2 mU/L, normal values 5.5–80 mU/L), we introduced a mineralocorticoid replacement therapy with fludrocortisone (0.1 mg/day), with a remarkable clinical improvement and without further relapses of symptoms related to acute adrenal insufficiency. Moreover, we identified high levels of 21-hydroxylase antibodies, which led us to the diagnosis of autoimmune Addison disease, while the remaining autoimmunity panels related to diabetes mellitus, thyroid disease, and atrophic gastritis were negative. Nevertheless, a subclinical hypothyroidism was pointed out, with TSH levels (6.64 mU/L) slightly above threshold.
During the follow-up, the hydrocortisone’s dosage was adjusted according to the patient’s needs, and she underwent constant auxological evaluations, which showed a decrease in height velocity and an increase of weight .
At the age of 11 we repeated all the autoimmunity panels and we found a positivity for thyroid peroxidase (65 kU/L) and thyroglobulin antibodies (72 UI/mL), with a thyroid ultrasound pattern described as dishomogeneous and pseudo nodular, leading us to the diagnosis of autoimmune thyroiditis. Her thyroid function always remained well-compensated and thus she never needed a substitutive treatment with levothyroxine.
During the subsequent follow-up, she attained menarche in August 2021 at the age of 12 years and 6 months, and, at a two years’ distance from menarche, reached a height of 152.3 cm (-1 standard deviations, [SD]), with an improved trend although still below her target height (163.5 cm; mother’s height 170 cm, father’s height 170 cm). Moreover, she had a considerable weight improvement, her body mass index (BMI) decreased from 95° to 82° centile, measured at the last evaluation in March 2023. Her adrenal function always remained well-compensated (cortisol 445 nmol/L, ACTH 9.89 pmol/L, renin 59.10 mU/L, aldosterone 41.61 pmol/L) and allowed us to progressively decrease the dose of hydrocortisone (up to 14.5 mg/m2/day), keeping the fludrocortisone dose stable.
The association between Addison’s disease and Hashimoto’s disease belongs to the so-called Schmidt syndrome or APS type 2, which is the definitive diagnosis for our patient.