A 24-year-old man patient presented with thoracic back pain radiating to his right shoulder. He complained about increased sweating in his right upper body, including his face, as well as the decreased sensation in his right chest. The symptoms progressed over 10 days.
The patient described right thoracic pain and gait disturbance, hemi-hypoesthesia, and hemi-hyperhidrosis. Hyperhidrosis can exist on its own or be a symptom of autonomic dysreflexia. Autonomic dysreflexia is a condition that can occur following a T6 or higher-level spinal cord injury. It’s primarily characterized by a sudden spike in blood pressure when areas below the level of injury are stimulated. The pathophysiology may be from local tissue damage causing hyperactivity of preganglionic sympathetic neurons or disinhibition of inhibitory local interneurons .
We observed a positive Babinski sign on the right side, increased reflexes of his right arm and leg, and ataxia with the posterior column as the culprit lesion without cranial nerve pathology, motor deficits, or meningism. Bladder dysfunction was intact.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine and brain was performed and identified a large intramedullary lesion from C5 to Th7 .
Contrast-enhancing lesions were identified periventricularly , at the craniocervical junction , as well as across the spinal cord . A heterogeneous signal of the vertebrae was suggestive of tumor metastases.
Thoracal and abdominal computed tomography staging showed diffuse osseous metastases of the spine and the sternum . No other tumorous organ lesions were found within the abdominal or chest cavity.
A lumbar puncture was performed after two days. Cytological analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed atypical cells, concerning a leptomeningeal spread. Unfortunately, the number of neoplastic cells was too low, and the fabrication of a cell block for immunohistochemistry could not be performed.
A stereotactic biopsy of the left frontal contrast-enhancing lesion was performed, revealing a malignant tumor, and predominantly small cells and round cells with mitoses and vascular proliferates were seen . Immunohistochemical analyses confirmed a glial origin (detection of MAP 2, Olig2, and GFAP positivity). Molecular analyses could not be conducted due to the small sample size.
An open biopsy was performed via a hemilaminectomy at L5. The histopathology revealed a glial tumor with a rhythmic growth pattern of moderately pleomorphic tumor cells . The mutation of histone 3 (H3K27M, Fig. C) with loss of trimethylated lysine (H3K27-m3, Fig. D) in that position was detected. ATRX was maintained. H3K27M-mutated tumor cells were detected in the bone sample . Molecular analyses detected the isolated loss of chromosome 1 without MGMT promoter methylation. The diagnosis of a H3 K27-altered diffuse midline glioma was made. Supplementary molecular analysis confirmed the results of the immunohistochemistry with the detection of a missense mutation of gene H3F3A (p.K27M and mutation of the FBXW7 gene (p.W486*)).
We opted for combined radiochemotherapy with concomitant temozolomide (75mg/m2KOF) following the standard STUPP scheme for malignant brain tumors . The radiation therapy of the complete neuro-axis included the vertebral metastases with a total dose of 36 Gy (fractions of 1.8 Gy). Temozolomide was discontinued after 2 weeks due to a decrease in platelets and white blood cells.
Boosts of intensified radiation were applied at the craniocervical junction and at T1-3 with a total dosage of 45 Gy.
The patient was examined after finishing the radiation therapy. He initially showed improved coordination and gait. A regression of the tumor lesions could be observed on MRI imaging, congruent with the clinical improvement .
Unfortunately, three months after initial presentation, the patient showed tumor progression with neurological deterioration, and palliative medical care was administered.