A 54-year-old female patient presented with gradually progressive painless lump in the left breast for 3 months. She had no specific family history or any other systemic symptoms. On clinical examination, there was a firm, mobile, nontender breast lump in upper inner quadrant of the left breast measuring approximately 2.5 × 2 cm with overlying skin being normal and no axillary lymphadenopathy or swelling in the contralateral breast. Mammogram showed ill-defined branching soft-tissue density with scattered areas of calcification with a query of dilated duct in upper inner quadrant of the left breast. Ultrasonography revealed a cyst in upper inner quadrant measuring 3 × 2 cm containing echogenic debris along with a hypoechoic solid appearing lesion seen in continuity with its wall measuring 2.6 × 1.5 cm. Final impression suggested possibility of malignancy (BIRADS 4C) with a suspicion of intraductal lesion.
Core needle biopsy was performed which showed fragmented cores composed of predominantly of fibrocollagenous tissue with benign ducts interspersed in the tissue. A separate small sheet of polygonal cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm was seen. A suspicion of malignancy was raised, and repeat biopsy from representative site was advised . On repeat core needle biopsy, again a small focus of atypical cells of above-mentioned morphology was seen. Some extracellular keratin could also be appreciated . Hence, a possibility of metaplastic carcinoma with squamous differentiation was considered.
Wide local excision was performed, the cut surface of which showed a cystic lesion filled with whitish material along with presence of a grey white well-defined firm area measuring 3 × 2.2 cm. Microscopic examination revealed a lesion filled centrally with keratinous debris and lined by atypical squamous cells, infiltrating the surrounding stroma as islands and clusters ). No other component was seen, and overlying skin was also not involved. Immunohistochemically, these tumor cells were negative for estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and her 2 neu with high-proliferation rate (Ki 67 index 60%, Figure ). An extensive workup ruled out possibility of other primary sites or metastasis.
The patient was later planned for radical mastectomy with no neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Histopathological evaluation of MRM specimen showed presence of a microinvasive focus. All the axillary lymph nodes were negative for any tumor deposits. The postoperative phase was uneventful, and the patient is in follow-up for last 1 year.