We discuss the case of a 65 years old man who presented with NSTE-ACS during the COVID-19 pandemic. The patient initially was transported by ambulance to the emergency department with severe dyspnoea and chest pain. His blood pressure was 140/80 mmHg, heart rate 116 b.p.m., and saturation 89% on 7 L of oxygen through an oxygen mask. On physical examination, faded breathing sounds were detected on the right side. Based on the clinical findings and chest X-ray imaging, bilateral pneumonia was confirmed and the patient was suspected of having a COVID-19-based infection. After intensive care unit consultation, endotracheal intubation was performed due to the respiratory failure and rapidly deteriorating vital parameters.
In laboratories negative procalcitonin (0.17 ng/mL), discrete C-reactive protein elevation (24.2 mg/L), leucocytosis (27.25 G/L), neutrophilia (94.2%), relevant CK (238 U/L)/CK-MB (50 U/L) elevations, and elevated troponin level (140 ng/L) had been seen. According to the initial complaints, electrocardiogram (ECG) changes , elevated levels of cardiac enzymes, and segmental wall motion abnormalities on bedside echocardiography, diagnostic coronary angiography ± intervention were planned.
Bedside echocardiography demonstrated decreased left ventricular function [ejection fraction (EF): 28%; left ventricular outflow tract velocity time integral (LVOT VTI): 7 cm], inferior wall hypokinesis and anterior wall akinesis with moderate mitral valve insufficiency (PISA radius 0.5 cm; vena contracta: 4 mm). The echocardiographic image suggested a low output syndrome formed on the ground of acute coronary syndrome.
The patient was known to have bilateral subclavian artery occlusions, internal carotid artery occlusion on the left side and previously he had a left external iliac artery percutaneous transluminal angioplasty. He had several comorbidities including hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, chronic alcohol abuse, and a previous cerebrovascular accident with right-sided paralysis. Chronic medication consisted of clopidogrel (75 mg once daily), vinpocetine (5 mg three times daily), pentoxifylline (400 mg twice daily), famotidine (20 mg twice daily), and rosuvastatin (20 mg once daily). Upon physical examination, the radial and femoral arteries were hardly palpable. Initial access through left femoral artery access failed due to the left external iliac artery occlusion. Right common femoral artery access was also unsuccessful due to the right external iliac artery occlusion.
Then, the left temporal scalp was shaved, sterile prepped and draped . The left STA was punctured under ultrasonography guidance, and a 5-Fr 7.5 cm radial sheath (Radiofocus, Terumo, Japan) was advanced into the common carotid artery. In addition to antiplatelet treatment, 5000 IU heparin sodium, and 250 mcg nitroglycerine were administered directly to the STA through the sheath.
Additional Na-Heparin was given until reaching 100 IU/kg. Routine activated clotting time (ACT) was not measured during the intervention. Diagnostic coronary angiography using left and right Judkins catheter (Impulse, Boston Sci, USA) revealed chronic total occlusion of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and a tight right coronary artery (RCA) lesion with feeding collaterals to the LAD . Urgent heart team consultation decided to treat the RCA as a culprit lesion. Based on bedside ultrasonography and ECG, the anterior wall was not viable. To treat the culprit lesion, the RCA was cannulated with a 5-Fr guiding catheter and a Balance Heavy Weight guidewire was advanced in the distal RCA (Abbot Co, CA, USA) . Another Balance Middle Weight guidewire was used as a buddy wire (Abbot Co, CA, USA). The RCA lesion was stented with a 3 mm × 38 mm Endeavor Resolute drug eluting stent (Medtronic Co, MN, USA). Post-procedural angiographic result showed thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) III flow and no residual stenosis. Post-dilatation was not needed due to adequate stent expansion.
The sheath was pulled out immediately and a StatSeal haemostatic patch (Biolife, USA) was used followed by a local compression and gaze covering. During procedure, staff remained protected with N95 masks and plastic protection (Blue Eagle, China) in a regular Cath lab room. Following the intervention, dual antiplatelet therapy was continued with aspirin and clopidogrel. Using prasugrel or ticagrelor was not considered as the patient was classified as at high risk of bleeding due to comorbidities and there was an absolute contraindication to prasugrel due to previous stroke. We also started combined antibiotic therapy (intravenous ceftriaxone plus clarithromycin) which resulted in a gradual healing of pneumonia. The temporal artery patency was checked using echosonography, which showed normal flow values without any vascular complications. Four days after initial presentation, the patient was extubated and intravenous vasopressor support was weaned. Pending results of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for COVID-19, the patient was isolated in the COVID-19 dedicated ward of our hospital. Since PCR results came back negative, the patient was transferred to regular cardiology ward.
During his inpatient stay, the patient’s medication regimen was optimized with an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (enalapril), beta-blocker (nebivolol), mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist (spironolactone), hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitor (atorvastatin), PPI (pantoprazole), and furosemide in addition to dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin and clopidogrel). No further complication occurred, and the patients was discharged from hospital on Day 12.
Based on the experience of the 3-month follow-up visit, the patient was compensated, free of angina, and feeling well. Echocardiography confirmed improved left ventricular function (EF 35%). To assess the myocardial viability of the LAD territories, stress echocardiography is planned further.