A 63-year-old Chinese woman presented to our department after the discovery of a mass in the hepatic portal entrance on a CT scan at a local hospital.
The patient initially visited the local hospital with complaints of chronic intermittent abdominal discomfort. A CT scan of the gallbladder, liver, pancreas, and spleen was consequently performed. A mass in the hepatic portal entrance was noted and the case was referred to our hospital for further investigation. Physical examination was unremarkable, preliminary blood tests and tumor markers were within normal limits. The patient had no known liver diseases. For additional work-up, the patient underwent CT with contrast, MRI, and CTA at our department.
Histopathological report concluded that the mass resected from the liver lobe consisted of thyroid and liver tissue as portrayed in Figure -. Immunohistochemical studies for thyroid transcription factor 1 and thyroglobulin were both positive as shown in Figure and .
A non-enhanced CT scan revealed a well-circumscribed, heterogeneous and high attenuation mass in comparison to the liver parenchyma with calcification. A contrast- enhanced CT scan of the abdomen and pelvic area revealed a group of high density (compared to the surrounding liver parenchyma) nodules with exhibition of well-defined borders in the hepatic entrance with calcification and an expansive size of 43 mm × 38 mm. The lesion was greatly enhanced in the arterial phase and there was prolonged enhancement in the venous phase with decreasing attenuation, as shown in Figure .
On CTA, in the hepatic entrance, a mass with low attenuation alongside calcification in the middle was observed. In the arterial phase, the mass was supplied by a blood vessel branching from the right hepatic artery as shown in Figure .
MRI of the upper abdomen demonstrated subsequent enhancement in the hepatic entrance with mixed signal intensity in the observed mass on both T1 and T2 weighted images. The mass was demarcated from the surface of the liver and there was diminished signal intensity in the arterial phase and in the venous phase, as shown in Figure .