A 52-year-old woman complained of cough and dyspnea for one month. There was no history of weight loss, hemoptysis, chest pain, smoking, or environmental and/or drug exposure. Physical and laboratory examination including spirometric analysis did not show any relevant abnormality. About 14 years prior, the patient was diagnosed with uterine leiomyoma and had undergone total hysterectomy.
Chest X-ray showed no definite lesions in either of the lung fields. However, high resolution CT showed multiple cystic nodules of variable size (1.0 cm to 1.4 cm in diameter) in both lungs . Some nodules were mixed with solid portions, but pure solid nodules were also observed. After reviewing the chest imaging, we performed several diagnostic tests to define possible etiologies for these multiple cystic lesions, including infection, malignancy, and immunologic diseases. There was no definitive endobronchial lesion on bronchoscopic examination, and bronchial washing cytology was negative for malignancy. Bronchoalveolar lavage cultures were negative for bacteria, mycobacterium, virus, and fungi. For pathologic diagnosis, we performed wedge resection of the pulmonary nodule in the right middle lobe. The surgical specimen contained a well-demarcated cystic nodule possessing a pale yellow-colored solid portion. Grossly, the nature of the nodule was firm with a size of 1.2 cm × 1.0 cm in diameter. Microscopic findings showed complex branching glandular structures lined by a single layer of simple cuboidal to columnar epithelium were surrounded by abundant spindle cells. There was no atypia or mitotic activity in either the epithelial or the spindle cell components . Immunohistochemically, the epithelial lining cells were positively stained for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and thyroid transcription factor (TTF)-1. In addition, the tumor cells contained smooth muscle actin (SMA). Desmin, estrogen receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PR) were also found in the cells of the nodule, while tumor cells were negative for HMB-45 and S100 . Based on these pathologic features, we diagnosed the pulmonary nodules as BML associated with uterine leiomyoma. We decided to monitor the patient’s pulmonary lesions without further treatment. She had no aggravation of BML for 6 years since diagnosis.