A 65-year-old man presented to a peripheral hospital with anaphylactic cardiovascular collapse after a hymenoptera bite. He was known to have hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and allergic reactions. The patient was successfully treated with intravenous fluids, oxygen support, corticosteroid, and antihistamines. Twenty-four hours later, he developed a severe epigastric pain with 1-mm ST-segment elevation in the inferior leads on the electrocardiogram (ECG) which required a transfer to our specialized cardiac catheterization centre .
On admission, he was haemodynamically stable. Physical exam was unremarkable for cardiopulmonary findings. Laboratory studies showed: WBC count of 11.4 g/l (4–10 g/L normal range), eosinophils count of 0.3 g/L (2.3%) (0.04–0.5 g/L normal range), haemoglobin 13.9 g/dL (13–17.5 g/dL normal range), creatinine clearance 64 mL/min, positive sensitive troponin 228 ng/L which raised to 425 ng/L (<14 ng/L normal value), and mild elevated IgE level (0.14 kUa/L) (<0.1 KUa/L normal value). Electrocardiogram revealed a regular sinus rhythm with Q waves on inferior leads and a regression of ST-segment elevation . Transthoracic echocardiography was normal, left ventricle ejection fraction was 60% without other relevant findings (, Videos S1 and S2). Coronary angiography, within 4 h following anginal symptoms, showed a significant stenosis of a hypoplastic right coronary artery (, Video S3, ) and a probable culprit distal occlusion on the left posterior descending (LPD) artery rising from the left circumflex artery (, Video S4, ). We could not perform intracoronary imaging due to distality of the lesion. Ventriculography revealed an akinesia of the infero-lateral wall (, Video S5).
In the absence of a significant lesion explaining the clinical findings and the possibility of an unidentified distal occlusion of the LPD artery, we decided to complete our workup with contrast enhanced cardiac MRI. FAT-SAT T2-weighted sequence showed an oedema (hypersignal) in the infero-septo-basal segment correlating with sub-endocardial myocardial infarction. Contrast enhancement showed acute transmural myocardial necrosis on the infero-median segment (, , Video S6), acute sub-endocardial necrosis on the infero-septo-basal segment (, , Video S6), and a normal left ventricular ejection fraction at 59% (, Video S7). Diagnosis of Kounis syndrome Type II was made based on the clinical context, coronary angiography, and cardiac MRI. The patient was discharged home with dual antiplatelets therapy (Aspirin and ticagrelor), statins, amlodipine, and subcutaneous adrenaline injection kit. A good clinical outcome was noted at 3 months of follow-up.