The 56-year-old female patient underwent left side ilio-inguinal CLND, following SLNB confirmation of lymph node metastasis from a thick homolateral-thigh malignant melanoma. The ilio-inguinal CLND procedure, performed in another hospital, involved inguinal ligament section for complete deep iliac space lymph-node dissection. The patient was subsequently referred to our Surgical Unit with post-operative persistent seroma, which was treated by percutaneous drainage for 3 weeks to reduce daily serous lymphatic fluid output to <80 ml and then by 4 ultrasonic guided aspirations, performed in the following 3 weeks. The patient also developed lymphoedema of the leg, which was treated by physiotherapy and compression garments. Five months following CLND, the patient developed a painful inguinal swelling, which was diagnosed by CT scan as a large incisional inguinal hernia . A laparoscopic trans-peritoneal hernia repair procedure was programmed and the patient, informed of the risks and advantages, provided full written consent.
The patient, who was melanoma disease-free at 1-year follow-up, was subjected to ventral hernia repair, 13 months following CLND. The surgeon, with adequate experience in laparoscopic repair of ventral and inguinal lesions , performed a 3 port laparoscopic procedure with the patient in Trendelenburg’s position. Briefly, a 10–12 mm camera port (also utilized for prosthetic mesh insertion) was positioned in the midline 2 cm above the umbilicus and two additional 5 mm ports inserted in the left flank and right iliac fossa. Adhesiolysis of small bowel loops and the hernial sac was very carefully performed by blunt dissection to avoid enterotomies. A large oval 18 × 14 cm defect was identified, the superior margins of which bordered the conjoint tendon, inserted laterally to the anterior superior iliac spine and medially to the tuberculum pubis, and inferior margins of which bordered the ileo-psoas muscle, femoral vessels and nerve (a). The hernial sac was not removed due to its tight adhesion to a cutaneous scar and was not closed (sutured) in order to avoid excessive tension at its margins. The 25 × 20 cm mesh (Ventralight™ ST Mesh, Bard) used for repair, guaranteed a minimum 3 cm overlap of lesion margins, was fixed to the abdominal wall at the superior and lateral margins with permanent fasteners (CapSure™ Permanent Fixation System, BARD) (b) and glued at the inferior lesion margin with cyanoacrylate glue (Glutack® 50, Glubran 2, GEM) in order to create a 5 cm overlap of femoral vessels and psoas muscle to prevent femoral vessel and/or nerve injury (c), and surgery was completed within 65 min. The post-operative course was uneventful, the patient discharged on day 3. At 8 months the patient did not exhibit any clinical or radiological signs of hernia recurrence and at 2 years follow-up remains melanoma-free.