A 49-year-old female patient came to our hospital for the treatment of esophageal high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia overlying subepithelial tumor, which was confirmed at another hospital 4 months ago . She complained of throat discomfort and mild dysphagia, which appeared after solid food, and without history of family malignancy and cigarette or alcohol use.
Physical examination findings were typically normal. Serological examination showed no obvious abnormality.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) demonstrated submucosal eminences in the right posterior wall and the left anterior wall of the esophagus, 18–25 cm away from the incisor teeth, with the widest diameter of about 1.5 cm. Multiple redness and shallow depressions were discovered on the right posterior wall surface additionally . We noticed the mucosa of the right wall with brown background color by using narrow-band imaging (NBI) . Meanwhile, the dilated and tortuous intrapapillary capillary loops with homogeneous distribution and increased density were displayed in the mucosa of the right wall under NBI-near focus . There was no other special finding, such as hiatus hernia, reflux esophagitis, and gastric submucosal lesion on her esophagogastroscopy.
We definite the origin and character of the lesion by endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS). We found that esophageal epithelial lesions are clearly stratified, while subepithelial lesion displayed as multiple uniform hypoechoic, irregularly shaped, and clear-boundary masses, which originated from the esophageal mucosal muscle layer and protruded to the cavity inside and outside. The largest one had an ultrasonic diameter of about 9.9×6.9 mm .
Enhanced chest CT showed that the wall of the upper and middle segments of the esophagus was slightly thickened and the lumen slightly narrowed .
Subsequently, the submucosal eminence of the right wall (18–25 cm away from the incisor) and the overlying mucosal lesion were removed together successfully by ESD without intraoperative complications such as bleeding and perforation, while the submucosal eminence of the left wall was not treated temporarily .
We observed the gross specimens after iodine staining and noticed unstained or lightly stained area located mainly at the top of the eminence , which may be related to long-term friction and chronic inflammation. Pathological examination demonstrated submucosal spindle cell tumor with focal squamous epithelium LGIN in the esophagus through hematoxylin–eosin (HE), and finally diagnosed as submucosal leiomyoma with focal LGIN by immunohistochemistry staining ( and ).
The patient was discharged 3 days later and arranged for follow-up 3 months after therapy. When she came back for follow-up, she represented that the symptoms of swallowing obstruction were relieved. Follow-up EGD noticed white scars on the right wall of the upper esophagus , while there was a longitudinal submucosal eminence (18–21 cm away from the incisor) at the left wall, which showed a light brown color change without confirmed demarcation line under NBI. Then, we made the biopsy of the left mucosal lesion, and pathobiology showed slight squamous epithelial hyperplasia in the esophagus . Then, we made a decision together that the left submucosal lesion can be resected on a selective-time operation, since the esophageal leiomyoma is a benign submucosal tumor and her symptoms have been relieved. We continue to follow up and arranged the next follow-up 1 year later.