A 45-year-old woman with no significant medical history or allergies was admitted to our hospital with severe microcytic anemia. Subsequent colonoscopy revealed a type 2 tumor in the sigmoid–descending junction, which was pathologically diagnosed as a papillary to well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. Combined with contrast-enhanced CT findings, a preoperative diagnosis of sigmoid colon cancer without metastasis (cT2N0M0, cStage I according to the Union for International Cancer Control TNM classification) was established, and laparoscopic left hemicolectomy with D2 lymph node dissection was performed. Surgical findings indicated no signs of metastatic disease, liver nodules, or peritoneal implants. First, the left colon was mobilized using a medial approach, scoring the mesentery between Gerota’s and Toldt’s fasciae. The inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) and superior rectal artery (SRA) were skeletonized by dissecting the lymphatic adipose tissue along them. The left colic artery (LCA) and the first sigmoid artery (S1) were then ligated with polymer Hem-O-Lok® clips (Teleflex), while the SRA was preserved . The inferior mesenteric vein (IMV) was ligated in the same manner at the level of the LCA. The colon was fully mobilized for transection at the splenic flexure and sigmoid colon. After the resection, extracorporeal functional end-to-end anastomosis was performed. Later, the pathological sample was reported to be a carcinoma with an adenoma component (pT1N0M0, pStage I). Of the total 20 #241 and #242 lymph nodes examined, none exhibited malignancy. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 7, and her tumor marker test at 3 months postoperatively was insignificant, with a carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level of 4.2 ng/mL. Subsequent monitoring every 3 months, including CT and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy, revealed no evidence of recurrence, except for a slightly elevated CEA of 6.7 ng/mL, likely due to smoking resumption.
A follow-up CT, 2 years postoperatively, revealed a 10 mm mass adjacent to the IMA . Although the CEA was 6.1 ng/mL with no elevation, a further positron emission tomography (PET)/CT was recommended considering the possibility of lymph node recurrence. It showed increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake, with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 10.6 . No anastomotic recurrence was detected on colonoscopy; however, a repeat CT scan 3 months later showed that the mass had grown to 15 mm , suspicious of recurrence. Considering the initial cancer’s pStage I status and slight decrease in CEA to 5.1 ng/mL during this period, a differential diagnosis of benign lesions such as a desmoid tumor was considered. Core needle biopsy was deemed impossible because of the location of the mass, leading to laparoscopic surgical resection for a definitive diagnosis. The decision for surgical resection was made with anticipation of potential infiltration into the duodenum, necessitating extensive resection, possibly including duodenectomy. Intraoperatively, a solid mass was identified within the mesocolon on the lateral side of the duodenum . The mass adhered to the surrounding tissue, making it difficult to determine its border. An extensive dissection was performed on the anterior surface of the abdominal aorta and around the IMA to expose the LCA root. The two polymer clips used in the initial surgery for LCA and IMV ligation were attached to the mass . Subsequently, new clips were applied to the root of the LCA and further centrally to the IMV, and the mass was excised together with the old clips . The surgery lasted for 161 min with minimal blood loss. The final pathology report confirmed that a foreign body granuloma had formed in reaction to the polymer clips and was composed of granulation tissue with numerous macrophages, lymphocytes, plasma cells, and multinucleated giant cells . No evidence of malignancy was found, and a desmoid tumor was excluded with negative results of β-catenin. Neither mycobacteria nor fungi were identified with Ziehl–Neelsen or periodic acid–Schiff staining. The patient had a favorable postoperative course, with no evidence of recurrence at the latest follow-up after 2 months. The patient was informed of the necessity of using clips or sutures for vessel ligation, despite the potential risk of inducing granulomatous reactions.