A 44 year-old Caucasian man with chronic hepatitis C infection and known, long-standing primary hypothyroidism presented with recent onset Graves' ophthalmopathy (GO). There was no other medical problem and the patient had otherwise been well. His hypothyroidism was diagnosed 10 years prior, approximately at the same time as his hepatitis C. At that time, the thyrotropin (TSH) was found to be 34 IU/L, free tetra-iodothyronine (fT4) 10.2 and free tri-iodothyronine (fT3) 3.2 pmol/L. He was started on thyroxine therapy with subsequent satisfactory control. No information on autoantibodies or imaging was available from this presentation.
Clinical examination showed a tattooed man in euthyroidism. His ophthalmopathy was graded as moderate-to-severe including >3 mm lid retraction and marked congestion with a clinical activity score (CAS) of 5/7 . Visual acuities were 6/6 bilaterally. No goitre, dermatopathy or acanthosis nigricans was detected. His liver span was normal at 11 cm and there was no evidence of chronic liver disease, ascites or portal hypertension. His thyroid ultrasound scan showed 2 small nodules but was otherwise normal in volume. His thyroid pertechnetate uptake scan was reduced at 1% (reference range (RR), 3-8%) whilst on 150 μg of thyroxine daily, at which time his TSH was 1.98 (RR, 0.4-4.0 mU/L) and fT4 21.5 (RR, 10.2-24.5 pmol/L). His antithyroperoxidase and antithyroglobulin antibodies were undetectable. The thyrotropin receptor antibody (TRAb) was 4.0 IU/L (reference interval, < 1.0 IU/L). Other routine laboratory tests were normal including aspartate and alanine aminotransferase activity. His baseline viral load was 6.08 log IU/mL. His ocular magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) supported the diagnosis of GO .
Due to the diametrically opposite clinical findings of hypothyroidism and GO, further bioassays were performed to assess antibodies affecting the function of the TSH receptors. The thyrotropin stimulating antibody (TSAb) was 192 (RR, <180%) and thyrotropin blocking antibody (TBAb) 124 (RR, <40%), suggesting that the mechanism for his hypothyroidism was immune mediated with TSH blocking activity.
Due to the presence of hypothyroidism and the potential additional effect of interferon on thyroid tissue, hepatitis C treatment was carefully started. Because of his hepatitis C genotype 2, liver biopsy was deemed unnecessary and thus was not performed . Treatment then included combination interferon-α and ribavirin for 24 weeks. The ophthalmopathy did not worsen and was managed conservatively with liquid film eye drops and protective glasses. The CAS remained unchanged. Both his eye and thyroid status was monitored and closely reviewed every month. On the 8th week, his TSH declined, necessitating a reduction in thyroxine dosage. At 16 week, he was found to be biochemically thyrotoxic with suppressed TSH, fT4 of 28.9 and fT3 of 6.9 pmol/L at which time his thyroxine was ceased. The TSH stimulating activity increased whilst blocking activity declined. His TSAb rose further whilst blocking activity declined. The evolution of the antibody profile is summarised in Figure . The thyroid uptake scan evolved to show a diffuse and increased in uptake at 12%. The potential and aggravating effects of elevated TSAb titres on the ophthalmopathy were duly considered but observation was continued (see below).
As the patient was asymptomatic, his thyroid condition was also observed closely. His serial fT4 and fT3 levels remained high but unaltered throughout the course of therapy . Four weeks after the completion of therapy, his TSH was 0.05 mIU/L, fT4 21.5 and fT3 4.9 pmol/L. At 12 weeks, his level had become progressively hypothyroid with TSH of 5.9 mIU/L and fT4 17.9 pmol/L. At the subsequent 6, 12, 24 and 36 months follow-ups, his TSH levels ranged between 5.3 and 6.4 mIU/L. His viral load was undetectable at the 6-month follow-up consistent with sustained virologic response.