A 78-year-old woman was referred to our hospital due to concentric left ventricular hypertrophy identified on echocardiography, prompting suspicions of cardiac amyloidosis. Her medical history encompassed a stroke, ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament, and lumbar spondylolisthesis. There was no family history of amyloidosis. Her medical therapy is azosemido at dose of 30 mg. During the physical examination, she presented with macroglossia, pronounced atrophy of the thenar muscles, peripheral pitting oedema, and manifestations of heart failure (classified as New York Heart Association functional grade III). Her blood pressure registered at 116/76 mmHg, with a pulse rate of 58 beats/min. A chest radiograph depicted mild cardiomegaly and signs of congestion, while electrocardiography unveiled a sinus rhythm accompanied by low voltage. Echocardiography revealed left ventricular wall thickening and brightness, coupled with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 67% and an E/A ratio of 2.3 . Laboratory assessments disclosed elevated serum brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels, heightened serum high-sensitivity troponin T levels, and a diminished serum kappa/lambda ratio. Serum immunofixation electrophoresis unveiled the presence of IgG lambda monoclonal protein . Bone marrow biopsy exhibited scattered plasma cells of 8.8%, which led to the diagnosis of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS). 99mTc-hydroxymethylene diphosphonate (99mTc-HMDP) scintigraphy confirmed mild cardiac uptake (Perugini score: grade 1). Cardiac magnetic resonance disclosed hypertrophy in the intertribal and interventricular septum, mid-wall late gadolinium enhancement and washout (dark blood pool) of the intracardiac contrast material ( and ). Based on these findings, AL cardiac amyloid was suspected, leading to the undertaking of a myocardial biopsy. This biopsy unveiled amyloid deposits that exhibited Congo red staining and manifested apple-green birefringence under polarized light. On immunostaining, there was diffuse kappa and lambda staining in different areas from amyloid deposition. Therefore, this staining was deemed non-specific. On the other hand, the area with amyloid deposits exhibited positive transthyretin (TTR) staining , subsequent genetic testing of TTR disclosed a V122I mutation, leading to the diagnosis of ATTRv. Given the absence of indication of treatment for MGUS, patisiran was commenced for ATTRv. While serum transthyretin levels reduced and neurological deficits exhibited marginal improvement under treatment, the patient’s clinical trajectory deviated from the anticipated course of ATTRv, including poor response to diuretics, aggravated congestion and pleural effusion observed on chest radiography, and compounded by worsening dyspnoea and macroglossia . The need for a re-evaluation of the amyloidosis type arose, the decision was to conduct biopsies of the tongue and abdominal wall fat. Subsequent analysis illuminated the presence of both transthyretin and lambda staining within the areas exhibiting amyloid deposition . Consequently, the diagnosis of coexisting ATTRv and AL amyloidosis was made. As a response, combination therapy with melphalan (6 mg orally for 4 days every 3 weeks) and dexamethasone (20 mg orally on the same day) was added. The condition of heart failure showed little improvement with any treatment, and her appetite gradually decreased. Patisiran was administered until shortly before her passing, but the treatment for AL was terminated 10 months after diagnosis due to deterioration of performance status. She passed away 24 months after her initial visit to our hospital. When the initial endomyocardial biopsy specimen underwent mass spectrometry as a post hoc analysis, both ATTR and AL amyloid were significantly detected.