A 69 years old female presented to our institution because of repeated episodes of chest tightness located over the area of the xiphoid process during exertion and at rest in the last week before presentation.Past medical history revealed erosive gastritis and no other chronic condition as hypertension, diabetes etc. The patient denies smoking or drinking habits. Under the current situation, her high sensitive troponin I (hs-TnI) level was 14.00pg/mL (normal value 0-17.5pg/mL), myoglobin level was 54.3ug/L (normal value < 70ug/L), Pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (Pro-BNP) level was 269.0pg/mL (normal value ≤ 300pg/mL) , total cholesterol (TC) level was 5.98mmol/L (normal value 2.9-5.5mmol/L), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) level was 3.85mmol/L (normal value 2.5-4.14mmol/L). The ECG showed sinus rhythm . Echocardiography revealed normal cardiac chamber size, the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 73%. On the fourth day after admission, coronary angiogram showed that the bifurcation between the middle part of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and the first diagonal branch (D1) of the LAD had a stenosis of about 80%. After accurate positioning, a 2.0 × 10 mm cutting balloon was used to dilate at 10 atmosphere (atm) pressure in the middle segment of the LAD, and a 2.5 × 15 mm hyperbaric balloon was used to dilate at 10–14 atm in lesions of the D1 bifurcation. Then, an Firebird 3.0 × 14 mm stent was implanted in the middle segment of the LAD. Then, a 2.0 × 15 mm hyperbaric balloon was delivered to the stent and post-dilated with 14–16 atm (avoid D1 bifurcation). There was no residual stenosis, no dissection or tear . TIMI III flow in Diagonal branch and the opening has improved compared to the basic state. The procedure went smoothly without signs of vascular entrapment, stent strut malapposition and tissue prolapse. The hs-Tnl value measured immediately after the intervention was 106.2pg/ml, and Tirofiban was continuously pumped in conjunction with oral antiplatelet drugs: 90 mg of Ticagrelor twice a day and 100 mg of Indobufen twice a day.
On the first day after intervention, the patient developed chest tightness, the hs-TnI value was 13045.50pg/mL, the Pro-BNP was 5255.0pg/mL , ECG showed sinus rhythm, ST segment elevation in leads V1-V5, T wave changes , emergency coronary angiogram showed stent shadow in the middle of LAD, and blood circulation in the stent was smooth. There is no obvious stenosis in the left circumflex coronary artery (LCX) and the right coronary artery (RCA) , and the blood flow in all three vessels is TIMI grade 3. LVO reveals that the middle and basal segments of the ventricular septum, the anterior wall of the left ventricle, and the ventricular wall of the apical segment become thinner, and the movement is hypokinesia with decreased perfusion, with LVEF of 51% . Subsequent CMR presented that middle and basal segments of the ventricular septum and the apex were severely hypokinesia .
Based on the patient’s medical history, symptoms, laboratory examination, imaging and other auxiliary examination results, the diagnosis is considered as (1) Takotsubo syndrome (TTS); (2) Coronary atherosclerotic heart disease. We initiated treatment with furosemide 60 mg/d、bisoprolol 2.5 mg/d as TTS pharmacological therapies. Simultaneously, as the patient had recently received a stent, she continued to be treated with dual antiplatelet drugs and statins. On the 4th day after coronary angioplasty, the ECG revealed inverted, broad, and deep T waves in leads V2~V4 was , and the levels of hs-TnI and Pro-BNP decreased significantly . On the seventh postoperative day, LVO revealed great improvement of the left ventricular wall motion, with good myocardial perfusion and a LVEF of 65% . The patient was discharged after receiving an additional 12.5 mg of sacubitril/valsartan twice day.
Two months later, the patient returned to the institution for follow up and she had a hs-cTnI level of 12.30pg/mL, a pro-BNP level of 324.00pg/mL, and no evidence of ST-T segment changes on ECG. LVO demonstrated no obvious motion abnormalities in the myocardial segments of each ventricular wall, and the perfusion was adequate, with LVEF of 59% . CMR demonstrated improvement in left ventricular systolic function compared to the previous examination . Changes of echocardiography was summarized in Table .