A 22-year-old African American male presented with reddish-purple atrophic plaques and erythematous patches on the scalp, with lesional hair loss. The clinical lesions were consistent with a presentation of discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE). He denied systemic symptoms of arthralgia, arthropathy, myalgia, fatigue, Raynaud's phenomenon and gastrointestinal complaints. Lesions were present on the head, mainly on the cheeks, but also on the trunk.. Laboratory data revealed a normal complete blood count, and a normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and liver function tests, as well as urinalysis and chest radiograms were within normal limits. The antiphospholipid, anti-Smith, anti-double stranded DNA, anti-histone, anti-ribonuclease-sensitive antigen, extractable nuclear antigen, small nuclear antigen, ribonucleoproteins, U1, U2, anti-SS-A and anti-SS-B antibodies were all negative. Complement was normal. Biopsies of the lesions were performed, with subsequent hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, multicolor direct immunofluorescence (DIF) and immunohistochemistry (IHC); these techniques were performed as previously described[–]. Selected IHC antibodies included 1) Zeta-chain-associated protein 70 (ZAP-70), which plays a critical role in the initiation of T-lymphocyte signaling, and 2) prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2, also known as cyclo-oxygenase-2 (COX-2).
We focused our studies on 1) several molecules involved in triggering the signaling cascade in response to T-cell receptor stimulation, 2) molecules expressed on antigen-presenting cells and 3) enzymes that play a role in biosynthesis of prostanoids.
Examination of the H&E tissue sections demonstrated mild epidermal hyperkeratosis with focal follicular plugging. A mild interface infiltrate of lymphocytes, histiocytes and plasma cells was noted. Rouleaux of erythrocytes were noted in multiple superficial dermal blood vessels . Within the dermis, a superficial and deep, perivascular and periadnexal infiltrate of lymphocytes, histiocytes and plasma cells were observed. Neutrophils and eosinophils were rare, and dermal mucin was not appreciated . The histologic features were consisted with discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE).
DIF displayed positive (+++) deposits of FITC conjugated IgG, present as pericytoplasmic and perinuclear staining within the stratum spinosum of the keratinocytes, and in a linear pattern along the basement membrane zone (BMZ). Additional antibody staining supported a diagnosis of discoid lupus, i.e., IgA (+, pericytoplasmic and perinuclear staining of stratum spinosum keratinocytes); IgM (-); IgE (-); complement/C1q (+, linear at the BMZ); complement/C3 (++, mild staining on dermal vascular walls); albumin (+++, pericytoplasmic and perinuclear staining of stratum spinosum keratinocytes, and mild linear staining along the BMZ) and fibrinogen (+++, linear pattern along the BMZ) .
The IHC staining revealed strong positivities to HLA-DPDQDR and ZAP-70 in most of the dermal inflammatory infiltrate, primarily around dermal blood vessels and within the extracellular matrix. The antibody to COX-2 was also overexpressed around the dermal vessels, and within the dermal extracellular matrix in focal areas surrounding inflammatory cells . To our surprise, the antibodies for linker for activation of T cells (LAT), CD34, BAX and CD35 displayed normal staining patterns, vis-à-vis their respective negative controls.