A 49 year-old female with non-specific symptoms such as fatigue, muscle weakness, weight loss, rise in body temperature, high blood pressure, elevated fasting blood glucose levels (up to 8–9 mmol/l managed with metformin 500 mg/d). The patient was admitted without a diagnosis and no prior medical evaluation. The patient was 168 cm tall, weighed 57 kg, asthenic constitution, with diffuse skin hyperpigmentation, “dirty elbows”, multiple petechial eruptions, acne vulgaris, and excessive hair growth of the upper lip, chin and cheeks. Poorly developed subcutaneous adipose tissue was centrally distributed. Striae were absent. The patient experienced difficulty in getting out of bed and ascending a staircase, had a history of high blood pressure (maximum of 220/100 mmHg), when taking Enalapril (20 mg/d) and Metoprolol (50 mg/d) blood pressure maintained below 140/90 mmHg in the absence of tachycardia. Laboratory screening showed low blood potassium levels (down to 2.3 mmol/l), which required urgent correction. Hormonal analysis showed elevated morning cortisol levels at 1488 nmol/l (normal range: 101.2–535.7 nmol/l), elevated night cortisol at 1672 nmol/l (normal range: 79.0–477.8 nmol/l), elevated morning ACTH – 178.7 pg/ml and night ACTH at 179.8 mg/ml (normal range: 7.2–63.3 pg/ml). High dose dexamethasone suppression test (8 mg) yielded cortisol levels of over 1750 nmol/l (negative: no decrease in blood cortisol). Neuroendocrine tumor markers were as follows: gastrin-17–56.0 pmol/l (normal range: 1–7 pmol/l), serotonin – 12.6 ng/ml (normal range: 50–220 ng/ml), chromogranin A - 69.3 U/l (normal range: under 18 U/l). The patient had increased daily excretion of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid at 6.3 mcmol/l (normal range 0–1.9 mcmol/l).
Brain MRI showed no evidence of pituitary microadenoma. Ectopic ACTH syndrome was diagnosed based on the rapidly developing clinical symptoms of severe hypercorticism, extremely high cortisol production, high arrhythmic ACTH secretion, history of hypokalemia, negative high-dose dexamethasone suppression test, and the absence of pituitary adenoma. The search for the source of ectopic ACTH secretion was undertaken by various methods of screening via computerized tomography of the lungs and mediastinum, abdominal cavity and retroperitoneal space, thyroid ultrasound imaging, esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), colonoscopy. These studies confirmed the presence of a mass in the left adrenal gland (2.7 × 3.0 × 4.6 cm, density 38 H) that was preliminarily regarded as the site of ectopic ACTH secretion. The right adrenal gland was unchanged. Daily urine samples contained high concentrations of methylated catecholamine derivatives: normetanephrine 830 mcg/24 h (normal range −30 to 445mcg/24 h), metanephrine -1481 mcg/24 h (normal range: 20–345 mcg/24 h), which allowed the adrenal tumor to be identified as a pheochromocytoma responsible for ectopic ACTH production.
Preparation for surgical intervention included treatment with alpha-adrenoblockers (Doxazosin 16 mg/d) for two weeks to prevent the development of uncontrollable hemodynamics during removal of the chromaffin-cell tumor. Ketoconazole was not used to reduce manifestations of hypercorticism taking into consideration the markedly enhanced activity of hepatic enzymes. Clinical manifestations of hypercorticism were moderated by daily intake of 400 mg Mifepristone. Left-sided laparoscopic adrenalectomy was performed under general anesthesia. The atrophic adrenal gland flattened over a 3 × 5 cm tissue mass was removed. In section, the tumor exhibited an area of grey-cherry color . On day 1 after surgery, the morning (8:00) ACTH level was 1 mg/ml. The signs of adrenal insufficiency were eliminated by glucocorticoids in the early postoperative period. The level of methylated catecholamine derivatives in daily urine and blood glucose levels returned to the normal values.
Histological examination of the tumor confirmed it as a pheochromocytoma without signs of invasive growth in combination with micronodular adrenal hyperplasia . The immunohistochemical study revealed positive expression of chromogranin A and synaptophysin , S100 and ACTH expression by solitary cells . CRF, multicytokeratin AE1/AE3 and Ki67 expression by tumor cells was absent. The patient was discharged from the clinic in a satisfactory condition with adrenal insufficiency compensated by daily intake of Hydrocortisone (30 mg), discontinued 6 months after surgery. The patient’s skin became lighter, hirsutism and facial hyperemia were markedly reduced. No signs of recurrence were noted upon frequent follow-up examinations.