A 12-year-old boy with a history of hypothyroidism presented with generalized petechiae and hematuria. The patient's white blood count at presentation was 446,750/microliter with mild anemia (hemoglobin 10.6 g/dl), severe thrombocytopenia (24,000/microliter) and 90% B-lymphoblasts in peripheral blood. Lumbar puncture (LP) revealed no blasts in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Cytogenetic analysis of bone marrow (BM) blasts revealed a normal karyotype, but fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis revealed a 93% positivity for CRLF2::P2RY8 rearrangement. The patient subsequently started therapy as per Children's Oncology Group AALL1131 chemotherapeutic regimen. Family history revealed a diagnosis of metastatic thyroid cancer in a maternal uncle at the age of 44 years who died at the age of 45 years .
Seven months after the diagnosis of B-ALL, he presented with a thyroid mass. Fine needle aspiration cytology was diagnostic of papillary thyroid cancer, staged at Bethesda Category V . Evaluation for metastatic disease was negative. The patient underwent a total thyroidectomy with central lymph node biopsy followed by radioactive iodine therapy. He was referred to Genetics due to concerns for a cancer predisposition syndrome given the development of multiple malignancies within a year. Genetic testing revealed a pathogenic heterozygous CHEK2 gene mutation (c.1100delC; p.Thr367Metfs*15). The genetic panel also identified three variants of unclear significance: CDKN2A (c.37 °C > T;p. Arg124Cys), FLCN (c.62G > A; p.Cys21Tyr) and SDHAF2 (c.139A > G; p.Met47Val). A whole-body MRI was negative for any other malignancies.
Fifteen months after his initial diagnosis, while on maintenance chemotherapy, the patient developed a frontotemporal headache. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain showed no intracranial involvement. Mild swelling of optic nerve head was noted on ophthalmologic examination. Increased intracranial pressure and central nervous system (CNS) disease was confirmed by lumbar puncture and magnetic resonance imaging of the brain. Cerebrospinal fluid studies revealed elevated WBC (48/microliter) with 75% lymphoid blasts. Bone marrow aspirate revealed 15% lymphoid blasts by flow cytometry with FISH positive for CRLF2::P2RY8 rearrangement suggesting relapse with the same leukemic clone that was found on initial diagnosis. Both BM and CSF lymphoid blasts were positive for CD19. He had no signs of any other extramedullary site involvement. He was started on bi-weekly triple intrathecal chemotherapy, in addition to systemic salvage chemotherapy consisting of vincristine, dexamethasone, and mitoxantrone for the next several weeks. The patient was eventually negative for CNS disease sixteen months after initial diagnosis.
In preparation for CAR-T therapy the patient underwent apheresis. The patient was then initiated on a bridging therapy with non-escalating Capizzi protocol prior to receiving tisagenlecleucel. Pre-CAR-T infusion BM and CSF evaluation (done prior to starting lymphodepletion) showed no blasts by flow cytometry. He subsequently received lymphocyte-depleting chemotherapy with fludarabine and cyclophosphamide prior to his infusion of tisagenlecleucel. Four days after CAR-T infusion, the patient developed grade 2 cytokine release syndrome (CRS) but did not develop any immune-effector cell associated neurotoxicity syndrome as per American Society for Transplantation and Cell Therapy Consensus Grading. The patient received tocilizumab and a short course anakinra (3 days). A CSF study was done on day 5 for severe headache in the setting of high-grade fever not responding to tocilizumab, which revealed 70 WBCs/uL with 72% lymphocytes (7% CD19 positive lymphoblasts along with atypical lymphocytes). Day 30 BM evaluation was negative for minimal residual disease by flow cytometry and confirmed by next generation sequencing (NGS) by clonoSEQ (Adaptive). CSF studies at the time showed increased lymphocytes but no blasts. Follow up LPs and BM aspirate/biopsies since then have been consistently negative for lymphoid blasts by flow cytometry. Of note, chromosomal analysis by karyotyping of the patient's bone marrow aspirate, taken 15 months post CAR-T, showed two abnormal clones in metaphase cells. The first clone revealed that 17% of cells had an unbalanced rearrangement of chromosome 7q, which resulted in a partial deletion of 7q, an anomaly frequently associated with primary and secondary myeloid disorders, including MDS. However, no morphologic evidence of myelodysplasia was noted on BM biopsy . The second clone revealed that 13% of cells had a balanced reciprocal translocation (1;19) (q23;p13.3), which results in a TCF3-PBX1 fusion. However, concurrent interphase FISH studies were negative for this fusion. Serial BM biopsies and cytogenetic testing continues to reveal intermittent partial deletion of the distal portion of 7q , while the findings of translocation (1;19)(q23;p13.3) have resolved. His B-ALL remains in remission with no abnormal clones identified on serial NGS testing or by immunophenotyping (flow cytometry) and has persistent B cell aplasia. Due to prior history of intensive chemotherapy, germline CHEK2 mutation and deletion 7q, we suspected a diagnosis of MDS but the follow up CBCs and BM examinations did not confirm our diagnosis due to following reasons. Firstly, the patient's complete blood count improved during the follow up and did not show any progression of cytopenia. Secondly, the chromosomal abnormality of deletion 7q was detected intermittently at a very low percentage that was only detected by karyotyping but not by FISH. Finally, this abnormality was not detected on the patient's most recent bone marrow examination (55 months after initial diagnosis of B-ALL), both on FISH and cytogenetics. We continue to follow this patient closely with serial (every 3- 6 month) CBCs and bone marrow examinations. A summary of the patient's clinical course can be found in .