A 63-year-old Caucasian woman with a 15-year history of hypertension presented to the emergency department with confusion and profuse sweating. She noted that her symptoms had first appeared mildly 5 years prior to admission. Both her parents had a history of hypertension and no history of any endocrinopathies. Physical examination revealed unremarkable findings, except a clouded consciousness. Her capillary blood glucose level was 45 mg/dL and a dextrose 5% infusion was started immediately. Within a short period of time, her consciousness was restored and capillary glucose level increased up to 110 mg/dL.
In the first hour after cessation of dextrose infusion, symptomatic hypoglycemia (plasma glucose: 31 mg/dL) developed and simultaneous insulin and C-peptide levels were found to be elevated, 41 μIU/ml (1.9–23 μIU/ml) and 12.7 ng/mL (0.9–7.1 ng/mL), respectively. The levels of antibodies to insulin were normal. Biochemical diagnosis of insulinoma was established and consequently, an abdominal CT was performed. No pathological findings were observed and an endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) was planned, however it could not be performed due to some technical issues. As a result, 68Ga-DOTATATE PET/CT was performed. It revealed two masses with increased tracer uptake located adjacent to the splenic hilum and inferior pole of the spleen with the diameter of 1.6 cm and 1.8 cm, respectively. The lesions were initially reported as two separate accessory spleens due to their close proximity to the spleen and significantly elevated maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) within the lesions (SUVmax: 75.3 and 40.3, respectively) . Then, 99mTc-labelled heat-denaturated red blood cell (99mTc-HDRBC) scintigraphy-single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)/CT was performed to distinguish a NET in the pancreatic tail from accessory spleen at the splenic hilum. Enhanced tracer uptake remained in the soft tissue lesion located in the inferior pole of the spleen, but not in the splenic hilum . The lesions were suggestive of insulinoma in the pancreatic tail and an accessory spleen adjacent to the inferior pole of the spleen.
A hemipancreatectomy was planned; however, due to some intraoperative complications, splenectomy was also performed in addition to hemipancreatectomy. The histopathological findings revealed a grade 1 pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor with a maximum diameter of 16 mm and a Ki-67 proliferative index of 1% together with unremarkable splenic and accessory splenic tissue. On the first postoperative day, dextrose infusion was stopped and her plasma glucose level maintained within normal range during the hospital stay.