A 78-year-old man with dyspnoea of 1-month duration was admitted to our hospital. His past medical history included hypertension and cerebral aneurysm. He did not have risk factors for PE such as recent air travel or major surgery. He was diagnosed with iodine allergy when he experienced an allergic skin reaction immediately after cerebral angiography. His vital signs at admission were as follows: blood pressure, 148/86 mmHg; heart rate, 63 beats/min; respiratory rate, 25 breaths/min; and peripheral oxygen saturation, 87%. His physical findings were normal, including the absence of lower extremity oedema or abnormal heart sounds.
Chest radiographs and electrocardiogram revealed normal findings. Blood tests revealed elevated D-dimer levels of 10.1 μg/mL (reference value: <1.0 μg/mL). Cardiac ultrasonography revealed a high peak tricuspid regurgitation pressure gradient (TRPG: 75 mmHg) with normal left ventricular function, dilated right ventricle, and decreased systolic function. Deep vein thrombosis was not detected on lower extremity ultrasonography.
Non-contrast CT revealed high-density lesions suspected to be thrombi in the pulmonary arteries ( and ). Contrast-enhanced CT with anti-histamine and/or corticosteroid premedication was recommended in a patient with contrast allergy; however, the patient did not consent to the recommendation because of fear of allergy recurrence. Therefore, we performed a video analysis using Radwisp (Paramevia Pte. Ltd, The central, Singapore), a novel fluoroscopic video analysis workstation, to visualize the pulmonary circulation with non-contrast cineradiography. Initially, the patient was placed in the supine position on a flat panel detector, and fluoroscopic images were obtained with a 5 s breath hold. Second, we analysed the pulmonary circulation via a Radwisp workstation comprising a fast Fourier transform filter and adjustment for heartbeats, using the phenomenon that pulmonary perfusion is slightly reflected on fluoroscopic images as radiographic density change signals. Finally, after a 10 min analysis, pulmonary circulation was displayed using a red-yellow-green colour scale. The absence of red colouring indicates poor pulmonary circulation, and areas with decreased perfusion are visualized as yellow in the right upper, right lower, and left lower fields ( and ; , ).
From these findings, we diagnosed the patient with PE and started anticoagulant therapy with rivaroxaban 15 mg twice daily on Day 1. The patient was initiated on oxygen at 4 L/min. Since 2 days are required to prepare nucleotides, we performed pulmonary perfusion scintigraphy on Day 3. Multiple segmental defects were observed , and this confirmed the diagnosis of PE.
Oxygen therapy was discontinued on Day 8, and the patient was discharged from our hospital on Day 9. Follow-up analysis using Radwisp on Day 13 revealed improvement in the peripheral pulmonary circulation (; , ). We decreased the dose of anticoagulant therapy with rivaroxaban to 15 mg once daily at the Japanese standard dose after Day 21. On Day 25, TRPG decreased to 24 mmHg, and his symptoms completely resolved. Further improvements in pulmonary circulation were observed (; , ). He continued to take rivaroxaban and had no symptoms at the last follow-up visit at 1 year after discharge.