An 80-year-old, community-dwelling, Caucasian male patient presented at the emergency department with confusion, irritability, word finding difficulties, impaired concentration, disruption of circadian rhythm and a mild tremor. The symptoms had appeared suddenly 1 month earlier and were fluctuating but progressive up until presentation to the hospital.
The patient’s medical history included arterial hypertension, ischemic cardiomyopathy, chronic kidney disease stage 3a, type 2 diabetes mellitus, chronic length-dependent sensorimotor polyneuropathy and MBL. This MBL consisted of an indolent clone of a non-Hodgkin phenotype, indicative for a marginal zone origin (80%) and a smaller CLL-like phenotype clone (7%). At time of diagnosis of MBL, almost 3 years before the actual admission, the patient had no B-symptoms, no nodal or extra-nodal involvement nor organomegaly, so a watchful waiting policy was adopted, according to the prevailing guidelines.
His chronic treatment consisted of low dose of aspirin, bisoprolol, simvastatin, lorazepam, lisinopril and metformin. No changes to the medication were made in the last months prior to his admission. There was no previous history of smoking or alcohol consumption. The patient had worked until the age of 71 years as a commercial agent. His wife denied pre-existing cognitive disturbances. The patient mentioned an increased stress level due to a family conflict. No other medical or socio-environmental problems were detected during the assessment.
At the time of admission to the geriatric medicine ward, the general physical examination revealed no abnormalities, but the neurological examination showed word finding difficulties, a mild action tremor of the upper limbs, more marked on the left side, and a subtle postural instability. No signs of meningeal irritation were present.
Cognitive assessment revealed a Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) score of 18/30, with decreased scores on orientation to time (2/5), orientation to place (4/5), memory recall (1/3), attention and calculation (3/5) and complex commands (3/5), where language and repetition testing (4/4) as well as immediate memory registration (3/3) were correct. He had a total score of 63/105 in the Cambridge Cognitive Examination (CAMCOG) neuropsychological battery, with subscale scores of 12/27 on memory, 24/30 on language, 5/12 on praxis, 5/7 on concentration, 4/8 on abstract thinking, 6/9 on perception, 1/2 on calculation and 6/10 on orientation testing.
Laboratory testing showed an increased total leucocyte cell count of 20.100/mm3 (reference range 3.600–9.600/mm3), with 13.507/mm3 (reference range 1.200–3.500/mm3) or 67.2% (reference range 19–44%) lymphocytes, compared to 17.000/mm3 or 59.5% leucocytes 1 year before. His hemoglobin level was normal at 13.7 g/dL, as well as the platelet count of 202.000/mm3. Kidney function was stable with a urea/creatinine ratio of 43/1.29. There were no signs of infectious or autoimmune disease, no liver dysfunction or electrolyte disorder.
Electroencephalogram (EEG), 24-h Holter monitoring and carotid duplex ultrasound were considered normal. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain did not reveal any acute pathology. Cerebral MRI showed periventricular and subcortical white matter lesions and a moderate corticosubcortical and cerebellar atrophy, but no recent lesions .
A non-traumatic lumbar puncture (LP) was performed; analysis of the CSF showed an elevated protein count of 1.010 mg/L (reference range 260–790 mg/L) and a leucocyte count of 144/mm3 (reference range 0–5/mm3) with 98% morphologically normal lymphocytes (reference range 40–80%). Glucose level was slightly lowered with a CSF-to-serum glucose ratio of 57% (normal CSF-to-serum glucose ratio of > 60%). Lactate level was at the cut-off of normality (1.7 mmol/L with reference value < 1.7 mmol/L). A normal cerebrospinal fluid biomarker profile (T-tau, Aβ1–42, P-tau181P and 14–3-3Y) was identified, as such not suggestive for Alzheimer’s disease or Creutzfeldt-Jakob’s disease. An auto-immune and infectious work-up, including syphilis serology and an extensive set of microbiological cultures, was negative.
A flow cytometry on CSF identified a voluminous monoclonal B-cell population with characteristics of the known marginal zone clone, confirming CNS invasion of this non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma . Staging by chest and abdominal CT showed mild splenomegaly, not described on a CT 3 years earlier. Thus, the primary diagnosis of MZL with leptomeningeal lymphomatosis and splenic invasion was established.
During the in-hospital observation phase of 2 weeks at the geriatric department, the patient showed a fluctuating cognitive status and hyperactive behavior. Main disturbances were a distractibility, nocturnal agitation and insomnia, orientation and memory loss, emotional dysregulation with episodes of abundant crying, frontal behavior with unpredictable verbal aggression toward his wife and the caregivers, slight delusions of intentional harm, depressive thoughts and a remarkable variability in cooperation. Confusion Assessment Method (CAM) and Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM)-V criteria for delirium were present, but the symptoms did not require an antipsychotic treatment. A proactive, non-pharmacological management of delirium was applied. This included, amongst others, early mobilization, avoidance of catheters or physical restraints, providence of orientation cues, behavioral therapy and frequent family visits. A therapeutic trial with mirtazapine was started in addition to psychological support for a mild depression. An attempt to reduce the dose of his chronic treatment with lorazepam was not successful. Despite these pharmacological and non-pharmacological measures, symptoms remained.
As diagnosis of stage IV MZL was made, cytoreductive therapy was initiated. The patient was treated with a short course of oral dexamethasone and four cycles of intrathecal chemotherapy consisting of methotrexate 15 mg plus six cycles of systemic chemotherapy R-COP (rituximab - cyclophosphamide - vincristine - prednisone). The patient’s general condition and age were considered as contraindications for systemic methotrexate therapy, splenectomy and autologous stem cell transplantation.
After 6 days of oral treatment with dexamethasone a subtle but clearly progressive improvement of the cognitive and behavioral status was seen, with normalization of the sleeping pattern, adequate orientation and a stabilization of the emotional regulation. Fourteen days after initiation of dexamethasone and 7 days after the first intrathecal chemotherapy, MMSE score had improved to 28/30 (memory recall score remaining 1/3). An important decrease of the CSF leucocyte count to less than 2/mm3 was documented two and a half months after initiation of therapy, suggestive for a good response on intrathecal chemotherapy. The therapy was well tolerated.
The patient’s mild tremor did not change significantly during hospitalization or afterwards, indicating that he probably suffered from an essential tremor. No follow-up on neurology was desired by the patient, as these symptoms were not experienced as disabling.
Currently, more than 2 years after initiating therapy, no clinical or biological signs of disease progression have been identified. Neither the patient, nor his family report a cognitive deterioration.