A 26-year-old male attended a local hospital because of left upper quadrant abdominal pain.
Laboratory examination revealed carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) 41.7 U/mL (normal range 0-37 U/mL), and computerized tomography (CT) examination suggested a mass in the pancreatic tail. The patient was then referred to our hospital for diagnosis and treatment.
There was no other significant medical history. There was no relevant history, including past interventions and outcomes.
The patient did not have a history of smoking or drinking alcohol. There was no relevant family history.
The patient’s vital signs were stable. The abdomen was soft and nondistended without evidence of a palpable mass.
Levels of the tumor markers CA19-9 were abnormal, 41.7 U/mL, 96.7 U/mL in the local hospital and our hospital, respectively. Tumor markers alpha-fetoprotein, CA125, and carcinoembryonic antigen were in the normal range. Other blood tests, fecal examinations, and coagulation function were normal.
On ultrasonography (US), a well-defined, inhomogeneous echoic mass with a size of 5.9 cm × 3.8 cm was seen growing from the tail of the pancreas with both hyperechoic solid and hypoechoic cystic parts, dominated by a solid part . Color Doppler flow imaging showed dotted blood flow signals in the mass . On CT imaging, a well-defined, 6.8 cm × 3.7 cm mass with cystic change was found growing from the tail of the pancreas. The mass was isointense relative to the normal splenic parenchyma on plain scanning . After enhancement, the enhancement of the parenchyma was similar to that of the spleen , and the mass was close to both the splenic artery and splenic vein . The mass was isointense on T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . On T2-weighted MRI, heterogeneous hyperintensity was found, and the signal in the middle of the tumor was higher . According to these results, an epidermoid cyst in a PAS was considered preoperatively. However, a malignant tumor cannot be ruled out.
On pathological examination of surgical specimen, two well-defined, homogeneous red-tan masses were found to be 4 × 3 and 4.5 × 1.5 in size. The former was cystically degenerated. Hemorrhage or necrosis was not found. On microscopical examination, the mass grew from the pancreas . It contained unorganized small slit-like vascular channels enclosing red blood cells and lined with plump endothelial cells. No area of cytologic atypia was identified. Focal lymphoid aggregates were found in the intravascular areas . White pulp or fibrosis was not observed. On immunohistochemical staining, CD8 was positive in the lining cells and scattered lymphocytes ; CD34 was positive in vascular lining cells .