A 52-year-old man with a past medical history of gastroesophageal reflux disease, chronic pancreatitis, chronic pain syndrome, hypertension, anxiety and depression presented to the ED for evaluation of worsening swelling in his upper and lower lips onset three hours prior to arrival. His symptoms began with spontaneous right lower lip swelling that quickly progressed to encompass both lips and caused mild voice changes. Review of systems was negative for difficulty breathing, difficulty swallowing, rashes, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain.
The patient denied personal and family history of angioedema reactions, prior red tide exposure, known food or drug allergies, seafood or nut intake, and new medication exposure. He reported no changes to his medication regimen and endorsed compliance with his bupropion, pantoprazole, and methadone. The patient had started taking vitamins B12 and D regularly two days prior and had taken these vitamins in the past without issue. He did not recall any insect bites or stings and had been desensitized to bee stings in childhood. The patient’s only notable exposure was to an outbreak of red tide algae at a Palm Beach County beach that morning just prior to symptom onset.
Vital signs showed that the patient was afebrile with a blood pressure of 163/119 millimeters mercury, heart rate of 68 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 15 breaths per minute, and pulse oximetry of 94% on room air. Physical exam was notable only for isolated, severe bilateral lip edema not involving the soft palate, tongue, and uvula.
The patient was placed on two liters per minute of oxygen via nasal cannula, which improved his oxygen saturation to 96%. Initial doses of diphenhydramine, methylprednisolone, and famotidine were administered with no improvement. While still in the ED, his edema progressed, and the patient began to experience difficulty swallowing. Intramuscular epinephrine was then administered with only mild improvement two hours later. He was diagnosed with angioedema of unclear etiology and admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for further management. Labs were significant for leukocytosis at a white blood cell count of 10.3 thousand cells per microliter (thousand/mcL) (reference range: 5.0–10.0 thousand/mcL) with increased neutrophils. Immunology/serology showed no abnormalities: C4 complement level of 37 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (16–38 mg/dL), C1q Qn of 12.3 mg/dL (11.8–23.8 mg/dL), C1 esterase inhibitor 39 mg/dL (8–40 mg/dL) and C1 ester inhibitor function of 111 (reference range: greater than 67).
In the ICU, the angioedema improved after additional doses of diphenhydramine, methylprednisolone, and famotidine. He did not require higher oxygen supplementation or intubation. Repeat complete blood count in the morning showed resolution of the leukocytosis. With the angioedema subsided, the patient had no difficulty breathing with an oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. He felt well enough the next day for discharge and did not experience symptom recurrence over two years.