A 26-year-old Caucasian man presented to the sleep unit of the General Hospital "G. Papanikolaou", Thessaloniki, Greece, with daytime somnolence, fatigue, and loud snoring. He had been involved in a near-fatal motor vehicle accident four years previously caused by sleepiness while driving. His mother reported the occurrence of apneic events during the night. He had a past medical history of a congenital hemangioma involving his left temporal region, and the left half of his face, oral cavity, tongue and pharynx. The hemangioma extended into the left side of his neck . In the preceding 10 years, the patient had undergone transarterial catheter embolization five times with no significant improvement.
A physical examination revealed that his body mass index was about 23.3 kg/m2 and his neck circumference was 44 cm. His Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) score was 17 and a otolaryngologic evaluation reported that the hemangioma involved the left half of his tongue, uvula, and soft palate and his left nasal concha, with a high Mallampati score (Class 4). In order to evaluate the extent of his lesion, magnetic resonance angiography was performed and a vascular mass that was fed from both the external carotid and middle cerebral arteries was found . The polysomnographic sleep study revealed that the patient had severe OSAS with an Apnea-Hypopnea Index (AHI) of 60 events/hour and a minimum oxygen saturation of 58% .
The following night, CPAP via a nasal mask was applied to the patient and titration of optimal pressure was determined at a second sleep study. At 10 cm of water pressure of nasal CPAP, the patient's snoring was eliminated, his AHI decreased considerably, and both his oxygen saturation and sleep efficiency improved . The application of CPAP was well tolerated by the patient and no complications were observed. Therefore, CPAP treatment was prescribed and the patient was followed up once a year for three years. At the one-year follow up, the patient noted significant improvement in his cognitive performance and daytime functions. His ESS score had declined to three. No symptoms, such as headache or swelling of the hemangioma, were reported. After three years, the patient compliantly uses the nasal CPAP treatment (mean use of more than four hours/night) and both his daytime alertness and sleep effectiveness are significantly improved. The status of his hemangioma remained unchanged.