A 55-year-old man of East African descent presented to our community hospital with a history of repeated falls, postural dizziness, progressive fatigue, generalized weakness and 30-lb weight loss over the course of three to six months. He is a vegetarian. His collateral history obtained from family members confirmed a significant behavioral change over the past year, during which they observed irritability and emotional lability, as well as difficulty with self-care, grooming and personal hygiene. He was high-functioning before the onset of his present illness. During a review of systems, he denied any sensory deficits, visual impairment or taste perversion, and he also denied any history of bleeding, bruising or recent infection. His past medical history was unremarkable. He was not taking any medications at the time of presentation. The patient denied smoking, alcohol consumption or illicit drug use. He had no significant family history of any illness.
The initial examination in the emergency department revealed a poorly groomed, disheveled thin man who appeared older than his stated age. He was irritable, paranoid, delusional and highly circumstantial and had grandiose thoughts and impaired insight. He denied any hallucinations. The patient’s blood pressure was 96/50mmHg without postural change, his pulse was 92 beats/min and his respiratory rate was 16 breaths/min. He was afebrile. His neurological examination was limited because he was uncooperative, but he was observed to have an unstable, wide-based, ataxic gait as well as difficulty in performing rapid, alternating hand movements. His proprioception, vibration sense and light-touch sensory modalities appeared grossly preserved. His reflexes were symmetric and normal. His cardiovascular, respiratory, abdominal and dermatological examination results were unremarkable. Of note, he did not have evidence of splenomegaly, oral ulcers, nail changes or vitiligo. The patient was subsequently admitted to the hospital for further evaluation.
A complete blood count revealed hemoglobin 61g/L (mean corpuscular volume 99fL), thrombocytopenia 96×109 and leukopenia 2.7×109. The patient’s reticulocytes were decreased at 14×109/L (0.8%). A peripheral blood smear demonstrated hypersegmented neutrophils and schistocytes. His serum vitamin B12 level was decreased at 22pmol/L (reference range 155pmol/L to 700pmol/L), his serum haptoglobin was undetectable and his serum lactate dehydrogenase was elevated at 1135U/L. The patient’s iron studies, folate, thyroid-stimulating hormone, liver enzymes, fibrinogen, serum protein electrophoresis, anti–tissue transglutaminase antibodies, hemoglobin A1c, coagulation panel, electrolytes and serum creatinine were all within normal limits. Viral studies for parvovirus B19, cytomegalovirus and human immunodeficiency virus were unremarkable. However, anti–intrinsic factor antibodies were detected. His blood type was B+. Of note, all blood work was performed prior to commencing any medical treatment or blood transfusions.
Computed tomography of the head revealed mild cerebral atrophy. Magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the presence of mild cerebral atrophy with increased signal intensity throughout the dorsal aspect of the cervical and thoracic spine, consistent with vitamin B12 myelopathy . Chest radiography and computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis were unremarkable. The patient did not consent to undergo diagnostic endoscopy. The patient was also unwilling to undergo electromyography with nerve conduction studies.
The diagnosis of severe vitamin B12 deficiency secondary to pernicious anemia was established on the basis of an unequivocally low serum vitamin B12 level and the presence of anti–intrinsic factor antibodies. The patient’s long-standing vegetarian diet may also have been a contributor to his vitamin B12 deficiency. Other causes of pancytopenia which may be characterized by a hypoproliferative, megaloblastic, macrocytic anemia—such as folate deficiency, hypothyroidism, viral illness and exposure to potential offending medications—were ruled out. The patient’s formal neurological and psychiatric evaluations were also consistent with central demyelinating disease and megaloblastic madness with prominent depressive features, after potential confounding metabolic and anatomical causes were excluded.
Because of the profound symptomatic anemia at presentation, the patient was initially given a transfusion of 2U of packed red blood cells upon admission. He was then initiated on daily subcutaneous injections of vitamin B12 at 1000μg for one week, followed by weekly injections for the next four weeks, and he was subsequently prescribed monthly injections to be continued indefinitely. Within the first week of treatment, the patient’s pancytopenia had nearly resolved. His neuropsychiatric symptoms and cognition had also improved significantly by the time of hospital discharge. At follow-up three months later, the patient’s neuropsychiatric impairment had completely resolved. He denied any psychiatric disturbance, demonstrated a normal gait and had normal reflexes upon follow-up.