We reported a 30 years-old female patient with BD-II, who began with depressive episodes in her previous 12 years history. During the course of antidepressant treatment, she showed hypomanic manifestations such as high mood, increased speech, and subsequently adjusted her medication several times in the outpatient clinic. This time, she was hospitalized for hypomania again after drug withdrawal because of her pregnancy. No abnormalities were found in her physical examination at admission, and the blood sampling results were also normal. Only RELSLES was found in MRI, and it was alleviated after treatment with lithium carbonate and quetiapine until achieving remission.
This patient with a psychiatric history of recurrent depressive episodes since the early 4 years of her whole course of the disease (12 years), with the typical melancholic presentation, has a first hypomanic episode at 22 years old, under treatment with Venlafaxine while discontinued magnesium valproate. During this period, the patient exhibited prominent clinical symptoms including elevated mood, increased activity, heightened self-confidence, decreased need for sleep, excessive spending on unnecessary items, engaging in a new romantic relationship and engaging in sexual activity with the new partner despite already being in a committed relationship. The phases lasted almost 2 months. After that, she was diagnosed with bipolar disorder and received magnesium valproate and quetiapine for treatment. In the second half of the same year, the patient was admitted to the outpatient hospital unit repeatedly for modifying pharmaco-therapy after repeated suicide attempts by overdose, slitting her wrists with a knife, electrocuting, etc. During this period, the patient’s mood gradually stabilized. After 8 years, the patient was admitted to our hospital for a second hypomanic episode due to drug withdrawal while she was pregnant.
During the hospitalization, her physical examination showed no abnormality and the psychiatric evaluation showed hypomanic presentation such as increased language volume and speech rate, faster thinking, decreased need for sleep, irritability, mood swings, excessive energy. This patient denied any related family history. Laboratory blood examination findings were normal. The patient scored 4 points on the young mania rating scale (YMRS) and 21 points on the hypomania symptom checklist (HCL-32). The MRI revealed an isolated, well-circumscribed lesion in the splenium of the corpus callosum. The lesion appeared hyperintense on T2 weighted image (T2WI) and T2 FLAIR sequence, isointense to slightly hypointense on T1weighted image (T1WI) (–). After 2 weeks of treatment with lithium carbonate and quetiapine, her mood was gradually stable, and clinical and functional symptom got improved.
Two months after discharge, she was in clinical remission of BD and the followed-up MRI showed that the abnormal signals in the splenium of the corpus callosum had completely disappeared (–).