A 75-year-old woman presented with a right pulmonary nodule. She was 151 cm tall, weighed 61 kg with a body mass index as 27.6. Her medical history included hypertension, hyperlipidemia, a fatty liver, and a left kidney stone. The pulmonary function test yielded normal results with a vital capacity of 2.55 L (118.6% predicted value) and forced expiratory volume over 1 s of 2.03 L (113.4% predicted value). A transbronchial biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma, and she was diagnosed with stage IA2 right lung cancer. A right lower lobectomy was planned. Anesthesia was successfully induced with propofol, remifentanil, rocuronium bromide, and desflurane. A 37 French left-sided double-lumen tube (COOPDECH Endobronchial Blocker Tube, DAIKEN MEDICAL CO. LTD, Japan) was placed by an attending anesthesiologist during the initial attempt. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy verified the proper tube placement. With the patient in a left-lateral decubitus position, an exploratory thoracoscopy revealed a normal lung appearance . While placing the access port, she developed severe hypoxia with an oxygen saturation of 80% and elevated peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) of 25 cm H2O. The surgery was temporarily suspended and the bronchial tube tip was found to be placed too deep and obstructing the left upper lobe branch. Fixing the tube to the proper depth insertion improved the oxygenation with a normalized PIP. After achieving one-lung ventilation, a repeated thoracoscopy revealed subpleural emphysema along the lung surface up to the interlobar fissure followed by subcutaneous emphysema in the anterior neck. Suspecting a tracheal injury, we aborted the surgery. The DLT was extubated and substituted with a laryngeal mask airway. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy revealed a longitudinal laceration on the membranous part of the distal trachea without an esophageal involvement . It was consistent with a level II tracheal injury from the DLT intubation accompanied by subcutaneous emphysema . Conservative management was chosen because of the limited extent of the superficial injury without any respiratory impairment.
The laryngeal mask airway was removed in the operating room to avoid any further deterioration of the tracheal wall by positive air way pressure. Postoperative computed tomography (CT) showed extensive mediastinal and subcutaneous emphysema without any tracheal injury noted . That emphysema regressed spontaneously and she was discharged on the 2nd postoperative day.