The patient we report is a 29-year-old Sri Lankan female who is a mother of three, a housewife from a suburban area in Sri Lanka. She was referred to psychiatric services by the maternity hospital, where she was admitted for delivery of her third child. She divulged the fact that she has been sniffing and ingesting mothballs to the intern house-officer who was taking history related to her dietary habits. Although the patient mentioned this fact nonchalantly, the house-officer had immediately noted the importance of it and decided to refer her to psychiatric services. This was her first contact with psychiatric services, and we assessed her on the third day following delivery.
Our patient was referred to psychiatric services as she had a strong desire to smell mothballs (naphthalene) which lasted throughout her pregnancy. She developed a desire to smell mothballs in the early part of the first trimester of current pregnancy. The desire progressively worsened as the pregnancy advanced with buying mothballs and keeping approximately 10 to 20 mothballs in a cloth bag, which she smelled and carried throughout the day. By the third trimester, she started grinding mothballs and inhaling the powder to obtain a stronger smell.
A few weeks before delivery, she had begun to ingest a pinch of powdered mothballs once or twice a day. However, she had not developed any physical symptoms of naphthalene intoxication following ingestion. The patient continued to inhale and ingest mothballs despite knowing that they may be harmful to her and she became irritable when she had no access to mothballs. She was verbally aggressive towards her husband and two older children. She had no control over the inhalation of mothballs, particularly during the third trimester. On a typical day, she would start smelling the mothball bag while having morning tea and repeating inhalation three to four times a day, each episode lasting about ten to fifteen minutes.
She was admitted to the maternity hospital for delivery at term. Her baby was delivered by normal vaginal delivery, weighed 2.8 kg and was healthy. The baby did not show any withdrawal or toxicity features and there were not any NICU admissions. Lactation was established well, and our patient did not have difficulty in bonding with her baby or any postpartum complications. She did not have access to her mothballs after admission to the maternity hospital. The last mothball inhalation was four days before the first assessment, the day before delivery. Our patient reported that her craving for mothballs resolved the day after delivery, and she was confident that she would not use naphthalene again following delivery.
The patient revealed that she developed a similar craving for mothballs in the latter part of her second pregnancy. However, this has been occasional, and she did not resort to ingesting mothballs. Identical to the current episode, her craving for mothballs had entirely resolved following delivery. She had not used alcohol or any other psychoactive substances, and she did not have any depressive, manic, or psychotic episodes in the past. She did not have pica or any other abnormal eating habits in the past. She had never engaged in self-harm or contemplated suicide.
There was no family history of substance use or mental illness. Our patient was educated up to General Certificate of Education (G.C.E.), ordinary level examination and did not have any evidence of a learning disability. She could attend to household activities, caring for her two older children, aged five and three years. Her two older daughters were healthy, and she received good support from her husband, a boutique owner. Her medical history was unremarkable, and she did not have any nutritional deficiencies. Her haemoglobin level had been within the normal range for a pregnant woman throughout the pregnancy. Her premorbid personality did not suggest any abnormal personality traits, and her coping strategies included venting her emotions to a friend or a relative.
On physical and mental status examination, she was a petite female dressed in maternity clothes and willingly engaged in conversation. She did not have any tremors or features suggestive of a physiological withdrawal syndrome. It was easy to build up rapport with her. Her speech was normal in rate, volume, and amount, and it was coherent and rational. She was euthymic and did not have any thought or perceptual abnormality. Her cognitive functions were intact, with no evidence of a learning disability. The patient had good insight regarding her naphthalene dependence and was in the contemplative stage with regards to abstinence. The physical examination of the patient was unremarkable with no signs of naphthalene toxicity.