An 8-year-old girl fell off a table, landed on the ground, and twisted her right forearm with her right elbow extended in hyperpronation. Clinical presentation of the elbow was swelling, pain and a severe functional limitation, but there were no signs of neurologic or vascular injury. X-ray, and a CT scan was carried out to identify any associated fractures. An isolated radio-capitellar dislocation was identified at the emergency room where an unsuccessful closed reduction attempt was carried out . The day after the trauma, on examination under anesthesia, forearm rotation and flexion-extension were examined . The patient presented a limited extension-flexion arc of motion (0°- 90°) and the prono-supination during general anesthesia showed “a sling effect” with an elastic return from maximal pronation (+ 55°) and maximal supination (+ 90°) to neutral position of forearm . The radial head dislocation was impossible to reduce with the elbow fully flexed and supinated; no elbow instability to varus or valgus stress was assessed under fluoroscopic examination. After attempting an unsuccessful closed reduction of the radial head subluxation under general anesthesia, an open reduction was carried out using postero-lateral Kocher approach. The surgical exposure of the joint using Kocher approach, revealed an anterior dislocation of the radial head button-holed through the anterior capsule . The lateral soft tissues were severely disrupted and the annular ligament was not identifiable. The radial head was dislocated anteriorly, with elbow in extension and pushed anteromedial by the lateral border of the joint capsule . Only by cutting a bundle of the capsule without violating the annular and collateral ligament was it possible to reduce the radial head in the anatomical position, with accurate blunt dissection the radial nerve was identified and a complete flexion-extension arc of motion was obtained; 80° of pronation and 85° of supination have been reached. The elbow was stable throughout the entire range of movement. The patient’s arm was set in a plaster cast and immobilized in 90° of flexion for 3 weeks. Postoperatively, radiographs demonstrated anatomic radio-capitellar alignment. Six months post-injury, her right elbow showed a complete (ROM), no residual instability and the X-rays also showed an anatomical congruence of radio-capitellar joint.
At 50 moths followup, patient presented a complete ROM, complete functionality and no discomfort during sport activities.