Our case is a previously healthy 42 year-old Caucasian female with biopsy proven idiopathic membranous nephropathy (MGN) who was being treated with FK506 and prednisone for nephrotic syndrome. She was a never smoker and did not have a prior history of hypertension or diabetes. She tested negative for ANA, ANCA vasculitis, HIV, hepatitis B and C. Her kidney biopsy showed typical features of membranous glomerulonephritis in addition to positive staining with the anti-phospholiapse A2 receptor antibody which identifies idiopathic MGN with 97 % specificity . Serum Tacrolimus levels were maintained between 6 and 8 ng/mL. She responded favorably to treatment and her initial urine protein/creatinine ratio of 8 gm/gm declined to less than 1 gm/gm within the initial 2 weeks of therapy. Her serum albumin level of 2 gm/dL prior to initiation of therapy improved to 3.3 gm/dL after 3 weeks of initiation of treatment . The patient also developed hypertension as a side effect of calcineurin inhibitor therapy and was treated with Losartan 100 mg PO daily. Her blood pressure remained well controlled throughout the treatment period and hypertension resolved once therapy was discontinued. After 3 months of therapy she presented with diplopia. She was in complete remission at this time and her serum albumin had normalized to 4 gm/dL. Her clinical course is depicted in Fig. . The diplopia was gradual in onset, binocular and vertical and more prominent in the later part of the day. The patient was seen for an ophthalmologic evaluation. Her visual acuity was 20/20. Pupils were equal and reactive to light and accommodation. No nystagmus or ptosis was observed. Visual fields and color vision was also normal in both eyes. Assay for acetylcholine receptor antibody done to rule out myasthenia gravis was negative. A CT scan of the brain done to rule out an infarct was normal. The diplopia persisted for over 4 weeks while the patient remained compliant with her medications despite the side effects. The symptoms persisted even when her tacrolimus dose was reduced and repeat levels were between 4 and 5 ng/mL. 3 weeks after onset of diplopia she was switched to low dose CyA in anticipation that similar side effects may not be observed. Trough CyA levels were 44 ng/mL and 59 ng/mL on two occasions but her symptoms did not resolve. A consultation with neuro-ophthalmology was sought and the patient was instructed to discontinue CyA. The symptoms completely resolved 6 days after stopping CyA. Her nephrotic syndrome remains in remission till date.