The patient was a 70-year-old male patient with a history of hypertension who was transferred to the emergency department of our hospital on 5 April 2022 (the 13th day after vaccination, denoted as “D13”) due to neck and shoulder pain accompanied by numbness and fatigue for 12 days. He was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) of our hospital on 9 April. The patient had the cold symptoms of nasal stuffiness and discharge, sneezing, sore throat, and cough before vaccination, and nasal congestion symptoms on the day of vaccination, but no other symptoms. The patient suddenly developed severe neck and shoulder pain 12 days after receiving the third dose of COVID-19 vaccine while cold symptoms were not completely gone on 23 March 2022. He went to a local hospital and was diagnosed with “periarthritis of shoulder”. In the evening, he began to develop weakness and numbness of limbs, accompanied by mobility disorder and inability to walk, accompanied by headache and dizziness, without nausea and vomiting. Symptomatic treatment was given, but the symptoms did not alleviate significantly and became progressively worse, so he was transferred to a local superior hospital. Laboratory blood samples taken on 29 March 2022 (6 days after vaccination, similarly denoted as “D6”) showed amounts of white blood cells (WBC) at 12.1 × 109/L, neutrophil count percent (NEUT%) at 89.2%, procalcitonin (PCT) at 0.45 ng/mL, C-reactive protein (CRP) at 100.0 mg/L, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) at 53 mm/h . Cervical X-ray at 6 days after vaccination (D6) showed straightening of cervical curvature and hyperosteogeny (a). Plain CT scan of cervical spine showed hyperosteogeny of cervical spine and slight herniation of C3/4, C4/5, and C5/6 intervertebral discs (b). Cervical MRI plain scan showed cervical instability, spinal cord degeneration at C3 to C6 vertebral body level, backward disc herniation at C3/4, C4/5, C5/6, and C6/7, and spinal canal stenosis at C6/7 level (c). During the hospitalization, the weakness of the limbs gradually worsened, and the patient developed paralysis of the lower extremities and hypoesthesia on 1 April 2022 (D9). Fever occurred once, with a body temperature of 38.6 ℃ accompanied by chills, and there was no fever since then. The diagnosis of the local hospital considered the possibility of cervical vertebra infection, and meropenem and vancomycin were combined to fight infection, but the symptoms were not significantly relieved. For further treatment, the patient was transferred to the emergency department of our hospital. The patient developed spontaneous illness with poor energy, appetite, and sleep. Physical examination: low breath sound in both lungs, no obvious subcutaneous mass in neck, and no sinus or ulceration in skin. The physiological lordosis of the cervical spine disappeared and the movement was significantly limited. There was obvious tenderness in spinous processes and paraspinal muscles from C3 to C6, radiating pain in both upper arms, shoulders and back. The sensation below the line plane of both nipples decreased significantly. Muscle strength: left upper limb is grade 1, right upper limb is grade 1+, lower limb is grade 0. Muscle tension: both upper limbs decreased significantly, both lower limbs disappeared. Bilateral Chaddock signs were positive, but both cervical resistance and bilateral Babinski signs were negative. Laboratory blood samples taken on 5 April 2022 (D13) showed amounts of WBC at 14.1 × 109/L, NEUT% at 85.5%, PCT at 0.16 ng/mL, and ESR at 67 mm/h . Imaging examination: Cervical X-ray films at 15 days after vaccination (D15) in our hospital suggested possible intervertebral lesions of C5/6 and C6/7 (d). Plain CT scan of the cervical spine and lung revealed increased density in the right margin of the C5 and C6 vertebrae: nature undetermined, C2/3 and C3/4 discs slightly protruded backwards (e). MRI plain scan of cervical spine reveals abnormal signals in the spinal cord at the level of C3 to C6 vertebrae, compressive changes, and abnormal signals in C5 vertebrae, abnormal signals and flattening in C5/6 intervertebral discs: infectious lesions? (f). Cervical abscess, cervical spinal cord injury, and paraplegia were considered for cervical CT and MRI examination. The patient had cervical abscess compression on the spinal cord and was indicated for surgery. He was temporarily given anti-infection treatment of imipenem, cilastatin, and levofloxacin, and was transferred to ICU for intensive care and waiting for surgery. Laboratory test results on 9 April 2022 (D17) showed amounts of WBC at 7.8 × 109/L, NEUT% at 74.9%, PCT at 0.30 ng/mL, and CRP at 93.3 mg/L . The patient did not have symptoms such as low fever and night sweats, and all indicators related to tuberculosis infection were negative, so the possibility of tuberculosis infection was considered to be low. The COVID-19 nucleic acid tests were negative before the third vaccination and during hospitalization. Combined with the patient’s symptoms, signs, and auxiliary examination results, the possibility of suppurative infection is considered to be high for cervical bone destruction at present.
Imaging suggested cervical vertebra infection, and inflammatory indicators such as WBC, PCT, CRP, and ESR were all high. Levofloxacin and linezolid were given preoperatively to fight infection. On 11 April 2022 (D19), the patient was treated by anterior debridement, decompression, bone grafting, fusion, and instrumentation under general anesthesia. During the operation, the prevertebral fascia was incised, which found hyperplasia, thickening, edema, and adhesion to the anterior longitudinal ligament. Intraoperative intervertebral disc damage was observed at C3/4, C4/5, and C5/6, and organic abscess tissues in the anterior cervical vertebra, C5/6 intervertebral space and posterior spinal canal. The lesions were carefully removed and sent for pathological examination, culture and metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS). Anti-infection regimen of levofloxacin and linezolid was continued after surgery. Staphylococcus aureus detected by mNGS (sequence number 206). No bacteria were found in anaerobic and aerobic culture of bone tissue after operation. Pathological findings suggested chronic suppuration of C5/6 intervertebral disc with dead bone formation . At present, cervical Staphylococcus aureus infection has been confirmed. In order to find the source of pathogen, sputum smear, and culture were performed again, but no Staphylococcus aureus was found. On 12 April 2022 (1st postoperative day, marked as “S1”), the re-examination index showed amounts of WBC at 8.3 × 109/L, NEUT% at 90.4%, ESR at 41 mm/h, CRP at 49.2 mg/L, and PCT at 0.14 ng/mL . Re-examination of X-ray and CT showed that the internal fixation device was in good position without loosening, fracture, prolapse, or displacement (g,h).
The patient was treated in the ICU of our hospital for 4 days after surgery, and his general condition improved, neck and shoulder pain relieved, with no fever. On 15 April 2022 (the fourth day after surgery, similarly marked as “S4”), the re-examination index showed amounts of WBC at 7.4 × 109/L, NEUT% at 75.6%, CRP at 35.3 mg/L, and PCT was normal . The patient was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital for further rehabilitation and anti-infective treatment.