The 42-year-old male patient was admitted to the department of urology on 25th December 2021 with persistent painless gross hematuria for more than 10 days without the presentation of hypertension. The patient had the history of diabetes mellitus treated by Dimethylbiguanide for more than 2 years. Clinical laboratory tests including blood routine examination, serum electrolytes, liver function, blood lipid profile, and renal function were normal. Routine urine examination of red blood cells was 7738.9/HPF (normal range ≤ 3/HPF). The computed tomography urography (CTU) scan indicated a space occupying lesion (6.0 cm×5.0 cm) in the left posterior wall of the bladder with heterogeneous enhancement in the excretory phase . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also indicated bladder tumor with slightly equal signal integrity (SI) on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and mixed high SI on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) (6.0 cm×5.1cm×3.5cm) in the left posterior wall of the bladder . The preoperative diagnosis was huge bladder tumor.
After adequate preoperative preparation, the patient received EBRBT on December 28th, 2021.The patient was placed in lithotomy position under general anesthesia. The 1470 nm diode laser system used 100 W for cutting and 30 W for coagulation. The diode laser energy with a wavelength of 1470 nm was delivered by a 600 µm fiber through a 26 F continuous-flow cystoscopy (Batch no.DQH-111, Hawk, Hangzhou, China). Firstly, we performed a thorough cystoscopic examination of the bladder and located an about 6.0×5.0cm polypoid tumor in the left posterior wall of bladder . Then, the circumferential margin was marked about 2cm away from the gross margin of the tumor. The revealed sub-mucosal blood veins were then precoagulated. The circumferential margin was incised down to the detrusor muscle layer, causing the entire tumor to retract towards the center upon releasing the mucosa and submucosa. . Subsequently, the tumor base can be accessed using both antegrade and retrograde approaches, employing a combination of sharp and blunt dissection techniques. The space between the layers of muscle was dissected sharply by laser. The tumor base was pushed and cut by laser till the submucosa and the connective tissue layers were exposed by the tip of the laser resectoscope sheath. The muscle fiber was separated by laser from the tumor’s base at the visible anatomical level until the whole tumor was en bloc resected . The enucleated tumor was removed by the morcellator system . The wound surface was examined carefully to ensure no bleeding. During the operation procedure, there were no significant complications, such as massive bleeding, bladder perforation and obturator nerve reflex. The patient received continuous bladder irrigation for 2 days and pirarubicin intravesical infusion therapy on postoperative day 1 and 7. Postoperative pathological examination revealed bladder IMT , with immunohistochemistry (IHC) positive for Ki-67 (15-20%), cytokeratin AE1/AE3 (CK AE1/AE3), smooth muscle actin (SMA), and Desmin of bladder IMT and negative for anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) of bladder IMT as well as fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) negative for ALK gene rearrangement (, ).
Due to the potential recurrent risk of bladder IMT for the high expression of Ki-67 (15-20%) and negative ALK in both IHC staining and FISH, second TUR was performed with 1470 nm diode laser within 6 weeks on February 8th, 2022. The procedure of second TUR was similar to the first en bloc resection of bladder IMT. Intraoperative cystoscopic examination showed that the surgical scar and inflammatory edema area were visible on the left posterior wall of the bladder . Then, the circumferential margin was marked about 2cm from the scar and inflammatory edema area and incised initially to reach the detrusor muscle layer. The muscle fiber was cut until the entire scar and inflammatory edema area were enucleated . The second postoperative pathology report showed chronic inflammation concomitant with edema of the bladder mucosa without bladder IMT, furthermore no tumor was observed in muscularis propria layer of bladder .
During the 24-month period of follow-up after the following second TUR, the patient was performed MRI regularly combined with flexible cystoscopy every 3 months after the first EBRBT over 1 year. On postoperative month 14, the result of MRI showed no recurrence or distal metastasis of bladder IMT . And flexible cystoscopy also showed no recurrence until February 1st, 2024. The flowchart of the timeline for the diagnosis and treatment schedule is shown in .