A 48-year-old white woman presented at the Emergency Department of our hospital complaining of the acute onset of severe pain in her right shoulder. She clearly reported no trauma or strenuous physical activity and denied any previous shoulder pain or functional impairment. She had been diagnosed with a multinodular goiter 10 years previously and had been treated with near-total thyroidectomy and subsequent replacement therapy with levothyroxine. Annual follow-up tests were performed by her endocrinologist and she stated that her thyroid function tests had been within the normal range during her most recent examination 3 months earlier. She was otherwise healthy and reported taking no other medication prior to the incident; in particular, she was not taking any steroids, statins, Ferrum (folic acid) or fluoroquinolone-based drugs.
A physical examination of her right shoulder revealed a nearly normal range of motion and muscle strength but she had positive results from impingement tests. An anteroposterior X-ray of her shoulder was normal apart from a mild proximal elevation of the head and moderate arthritis in her acromioclavicular joint . No evidence of calcified tendinitis was detected.
She was managed conservatively with cryotherapy, sling immobilization of her shoulder and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). However, within a week she again attended our Emergency Department, presenting with extreme pain in her shoulder, fever up to 38.5 °C and mild symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection (nonproductive cough and nose dripping). She described a sudden sharp pain and an audible pop in her right shoulder while using her personal computer (PC). A physical examination revealed positive Neer, Hawkins and Yergason’s signs and a positive Jobe’s test. After orthopedic consultation she was admitted to our Internal Medicine Department for further evaluation. Laboratory analysis revealed significantly elevated thyrotropin (TSH) levels (>100 μIU/ml) and very low levels of both T3 (0.17 ng/ml) and free T4 (0.18 ng/dl). Of interest, her creatine phosphokinase (CPK) levels were found to be within the normal range. Two inflammation markers were also within the normal range: erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP). Chest radiography, urine analysis and urine and blood cultures were negative. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of her right shoulder revealed a complete rupture of the long head of her biceps tendon .
She was switched to a different thyroxin regimen with a progressive dosage increment. She was re-evaluated by our Out-patient Department 3 weeks after the hormone replacement treatment was started to discuss the possible surgical re-anchorage of her ruptured biceps tendon. She had significantly improved, having positive impingement tests only in the extremes of motion. Despite the discreet Popeye sign, the overall strength of her biceps tendon was satisfactory and she consequently decided against any surgical treatment. This prevented a proper histopathological examination during surgery and thus the confirmation of our clinical findings. After 2 months, she was re-evaluated by her endocrinologist and she was found clinically euthyroid, with tests showing normal thyroid function (TSH 2.95 μIU/mL, free T4 1.07 ng/dl).
At her last follow-up visit, 1 year post-injury, she reported nearly normal shoulder function in her daily activities and had a constant shoulder score of 93 points.