A 3-year-old boy without any medical history presented with a headache and vomiting and was referred to our institute. Computed tomography (CT) images, which had incidentally been taken 2 years before at a local neurosurgical clinic for the assessment of a minor head injury, were available and showed no significant abnormality . The patient had no neurological deficit on admission. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed enlargement of all ventricular systems associated with the dilatation of the foramina of Magendie and Luschka, with no obstructive organic lesions (such as brain tumors) on contrast enhanced MRI . The patient underwent emergent ventricular drainage through the anterior horn of the right lateral ventricle to relieve his symptoms. We had initially considered this case might be a communicating hydrocephalus because the fourth ventricle outlets appeared to be patent on MRI. However, the highly expanded fourth ventricle and its outlets were inconsistent with communicating hydrocephalus. We thus conducted CT ventriculo-cisternography on the fifth day post-surgery by injecting contrast medium (Isovist®) via a ventricular catheter . On serial CT images, contrast medium was accumulated in the foramina of Magendie and Luschka 1 h after injection, with limited diffusion to the adjacent cisterns at 3 h after injection. These findings suggested a mechanical obstruction at the outlets of the fourth ventricle. We therefore diagnosed the patient with FVOO and chose to perform an ETV using a flexible neuro-endoscope (VEF-V, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The endoscope was inserted into the fourth ventricle through the dilated cerebral aqueduct and encountered the suspected cause of obstructive hydrocephalus—a thickened, arachnoid, membranous structure that enveloped the foramina of Magendie and Luschka . A standard third ventriculostomy in the tuber cinereum was performed without any additional surgical intervention to the membranous structures in the fourth ventricle outlets. On endoscopic observation of the lateral ventricle and pre-pontine cistern, no abnormalities suggestive of previous meningitis or intraventricular hemorrhage were found. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful with no signs of neurological deficit. MR images obtained 1 month post-surgery revealed significant resolution of the hydrocephalus . However, after 1 year, the patient again presented with vomiting, and it was noted that the hydrocephalus had recurred . Re-exploration with the endoscope revealed severe stenosis of the fenestration site from the first surgical procedure and a second ETV was subsequently performed. Postoperative MRI confirmed that the hydrocephalus was resolved . The patient has remained in good condition without recurrence of hydrocephalus, as identified by MRI, since undergoing the second ETV for 20 months.