A 56-year-old man experienced chest tightness for hours, which gradually worsened for a day. Chest discomfort was more severe at the peak of inhalation. The tenderness was located at the central and upper chest wall, which radiated to the back. No cold sweating or compression was observed. He visited our emergency department for advanced evaluation and treatment. Electrocardiography showed normal pacemaker rhythm and no ST-T segment changes. Cardiac biomarker levels were normal, but a high D-dimer level (6.57 mg/L; normal range: < 0.5 mg/L) was noted. Emergency chest computed tomography (CT) revealed no pulmonary embolism but presented a filling defect in the right internal jugular vein and superior vena cava, which was highly suspected lead thrombosis . Due to persistent symptoms, we did not suspect flow artefact or laminal effects.
The patient had a medical history of transient ischemic attack 7 years earlier. He also experienced dizziness and was diagnosed with PAf and sick sinus syndrome with long pauses (> 3 s) 2 years ago. After being diagnosed with PAf, he received standard-dose edoxaban (60 mg) daily for stroke prevention and received a transvenous permanent pacemaker for symptomatic bradycardia. CrCl estimated by the Cockcroft-Gault formula was supernormal to normal (98.6–102.1 mL/min). The burden of PAf was approximately 0.2–1% in pacemaker records after pacemaker implantation and the use of antiarrhythmic agents (amiodarone 100 mg daily). Intracardiac electrogram did not detect any atrial high rate in the last 3 months but noted protein S deficiency (22.8%; normal range: 55–130%). He did not receive p-glycoprotein or CYP3A4 inducers but did receive low-dose atorvastatin (10 mg daily). Then, 150 mg dabigatran twice daily was administered to resolve the thrombus and secondary prevention of thromboembolic events. Three months later, chest CT also showed no filling defect and no residual lead thrombus . The patient denied recurrent chest discomfort during the half-year follow-up period. His medical history is listed in Fig. and his biological characteristics are listed in Table .