A 35-year-old male drywall installer presented with 2 years of progressive left upper extremity weakness, numbness, and hand clumsiness. Neurologic examination demonstrated 4-/5 strength of the left hand intrinsic muscles, decreased sensation to light touch in the left hand, and hyperreflexia of the left upper extremity. Electromyography and nerve conduction testing demonstrated only mild incidental bilateral ulnar neuropathy across the elbow. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine demonstrated cervical spinal cord expansion with T2 hyperintensity at C4-C5. There was an associated defect of the bony posterior elements with projection of the neural elements into the dorsal subcutaneous soft tissue . At this point, he was referred to our institution where only upon detailed questioning did he mention that he had neck surgery just after birth, but he did not know what was done. This additional history allowed the diagnosis of retethering of a cervical myelomeningocele. A cervical detethering operation was recommended.
He then also reported that he routinely shaved a patch of lower back hair, but denied bowel, bladder, or lower extremity dysfunction. This prompted an MRI of the lumbar spine which demonstrated underlying diastematomyelia with a low-lying conus . His lower extremity and sacral examination were normal. Because the diastematomyelia was asymptomatic in this adult patient at final height, observation was recommended.
After satisfactory induction of general endotracheal anesthesia, the patient was positioned prone on gel rolls, and his head was fixed in Mayfield pins in neutral position. Neuromonitoring with somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP), motor evoked potentials, and electromyography was established. The prior curvilinear midline incision was marked and slightly extended superiorly and inferiorly.
The superior portion of the incision over the last rostral intact lamina was opened sharply and carried down to the fascia using blunt dissection. Progressing along the fascia from superior to inferior, the overlying soft tissue was opened. The myelomeningocele sac was identified and dissected circumferentially as it passed through the fascia. The sac was then separated from the overlying soft tissue .
The fascia was opened rostral and caudal to the myelomeningocele sac. The rostral (bifid) and caudal (hemi) dysplastic spinal lamina were removed using Kerrison rongeurs. The exposed native dura was contiguous with the myelomeningocele sac [ and ]. Intraoperative ultrasound was used to confirm adequate bony exposure and identify dorsal subarachnoid space for dural opening.
Under microscopic magnification, the spinal cord dura was incised rostral to the myelomeningocele. Progressing caudally, the dorsal spinal cord was found to be tethered to the dura by thick arachnoid bands. These were divided as they were encountered. The dural opening eventually extended into the myelomeningocele sac. In the sac was a dorsal projection of the cervical spinal cord approximately the same size as the cervical spinal cord. It was freed circumferentially from its dural attachments. The dorsal projection terminated in dysplastic spinal cord that fused with the overlying dural sac . At the transition to dysplastic spinal cord, electrical stimulation did not result in a response in the neuromonitoring. The dorsal projection was sectioned at this location and the pial closed . The detethering was then continued inferiorly to the native spinal cord. Eventually the point of last attachment was sectioned, and the cord was free and lax.
The remaining stump of dorsal projection still needed to be addressed. Sectioning the dorsal projection closer to the native spinal cord was avoided due to fear of transiting neural tracts within the projection. Left alone, the stalk came to a resting position along the dorsal surface of the rostral spinal cord . In this position, there was sufficient redundant dura to close without compressing the projection or the native spinal cord. This was verified with the ultrasound before and after the dura was closed; there was ample subarachnoid space surrounding the neural elements.
The dura and overlying soft tissue were closed primarily in a watertight fashion. The neuromonitoring signals at the end of the operation were stable compared to the beginning. In fact, the left arm SSEP was mildly improved. There was no significant neuromonitoring signal change throughout the surgery.
The dysplastic portion of the dorsal projection along with its fused overlying dura was examined . Hematoxylin and eosin stained sections showed band-like collections of neuroglial tissue and meninges within a background of fibrosis, collagen fiber bundles, and disorganized smooth muscle. Scattered dermal appendages were also identified.
On postoperative day 1, the patient reported improvement in his left upper extremity weakness and numbness. At 1 month follow-up, he reported continued improvement in his symptoms. He had some residual altered sensorium of the left hand, but improvement in his intrinsic hand muscle strength and no further pain, paresthesia, or clumsiness. He had returned to work without special accommodation. At 4 months follow-up, he had regained full strength in his left hand, and MRI showed a successful detethering without neural compression . The diastematomyelia remained asymptomatic and is being observed.