An 11-year-old boy, with a past medical history of asthma and allergic oculorhinitis, performed skin prick tests which showed a positive reaction to grass mix (Dactylis glomerata, Festuca elatior, Lolium multiflorum, Phleum pratense, Poa pratensis) (4 mm diameter), bermuda grass (4 mm), ragweed (4 mm) and alternaria (6 mm). The specific IgE against molecular Alt a1 identified Alternaria as the main allergen (M229 84.90 kU/L). Therefore, treatment with a daily oral allergen extract of Alternaria by sublingual administration (SUBLIVAC® HAL Allergy—Leiden, The Netherlands) was initiated (drops placed under the tongue for 2 min and then swallowed).
Fifteen months later, the patient was admitted to our pediatric emergency department for dysphagia, vomiting, drooling, and chest pain appeared while eating meat. His physical examination and vital signs were normal. The complete blood cell count showed mild peripheral eosinophilia (0.59 × 103 /μl). Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed linear furrowing of the mucosa of the middle and proximal esophagus. Five esophageal biopsy specimens (2 from the distal third, 1 from the middle third, and 2 from the proximal third) were obtained. Histopathologic examination revealed severe eosinophilic predominant inflammation with infiltration of about 100 eos/HPF in nearly all biopsies, consistent with the diagnosis of EoE .
Therapy with omeprazole 1 mg/kg/day was prescribed for 8 weeks, with symptomatic relief. After 7 weeks of treatment, the patient underwent a second upper gastrointestinal endoscopy that revealed the persistence of linear furrowing and eosinophilic infiltration (>100 eos/HPF) . Thus, a new treatment with topical corticosteroids was started (swallowed Fluticasone Propionate 250 μg, 1 puff/4 times/day). Eight weeks later, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed an unchanged macroscopic aspect and the persistence of eosinophilic infiltration (>100 eos/HPF) . In the empirical attempt to address an elimination diet, trying to avoid an extensive elimination approach, which would be hardly accepted by the patient, we performed PATCH tests which were negative for the most common food allergens (milk, egg, soy, cereals, fish, peanuts). Before starting an extensive elimination diet, we decided to try to discontinue SLIT and to switch to injective subcutaneous immunotherapy (SCIT) for Alternaria. One month after SLIT discontinuation, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed a normal esophageal mucosa with a diffuse decrease of eosinophilic infiltration (5–10 eos/HPF), and only one specimen still consistent with EoE diagnosis (21 eos/HPF) . During a follow-up of 15 months, the patient remained free of any esophageal symptoms and his family refused further endoscopic control .