A 12-year-old African Ethiopian girl presented with bilateral neck swelling with purulent discharge and skin ulceration of 3 months’ duration. She had dry cough, low-grade fever, decreased appetite, and drenching night sweats, and she had lost a significant amount of weight. She had a global throbbing type of headache with occasional projectile vomiting of ingested matter starting 6 days before her visit. She had never been vaccinated and had no known contact with any person diagnosed with TB or with any chronic cougher. She had not received any treatment for the complaints prior to her current visit. She had no known medical problem, and her family and psychosocial history were unremarkable.
Her physical examination revealed a conscious, emaciated, and wasted child. Her admission vital signs were pulse rate 80 beats/min, respiratory rate 20 breaths/min, blood pressure 90/60 mmHg, and axillary temperature 37.3 °C. Matted bilateral anterior cervical and postauricular lymphadenopathy with pus-draining sinus was noted. Crepitation over the anterior and posterior lower right chest, multiple skin ulcers with purulent drainage over the left lateral neck, anterior left chest, and left axilla were documented (see Figs. and ). Nuchal rigidity was positive, but no neurologic deficit was present.
The results of complete blood count, urinalysis, and biochemical analysis were normal, except for mild anemia (see Table ). The result of an antibody test for human immunodeficiency virus was negative. The patient’s erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 65 mm/hr in the first hour. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed 105 cells with 65 lymphocytes, and no organism was detected on Gram stain and acid-fast bacilli stain. Right upper and middle lobe ill-defined air space opacity was noted on a chest x-ray (see Fig. ). Discharge analysis from the skin revealed gram-positive diplococci in chain, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis was detected using the Xpert MTB/RIF assay (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Fine-needle aspiration cytology showed only caseous necrosis and no granuloma, and smears from ulcerated lesions showed mixed inflammatory cells, predominantly polymorphs. Tuberculous scrofuloderma was diagnosed on the basis of skin biopsy with a section showing mature squamous cell-lined skin tissue composed of epithelioid cell granuloma, multinucleated giant cells, caseous necrosis, and mixed inflammatory cells (see Figs. and ). Brain computed tomographic scans showed multiple precontrast hyperdense randomly distributed supra- and infratentorial lesions with mild perilesional edema. Rim enhancement on postcontrast images (caseating granulomas) on some lesions and a solid pattern of enhancement (noncaseating granulomas) were evident on other lesions. Dense basal cistern exudate seen on precontrast images with avid postcontrast basal leptomeningeal enhancement was observed. Severe bilateral lateral third- and fourth-ventricle dilation was noted (see Figs. , and , Table ). A tuberculin skin test (TST) could not be done, owing to unavailability of the service.
Routine care and medical treatment was provided as per World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines for severe acute malnutrition. Antituberculosis therapy with rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol as per weight (four tabs per day), prednisolone 2 mg/kg/day, and pyridoxine 25 mg/day was started. Wound care was also given. After a 1-month hospital stay, the patient was discharged for outpatient directly observed antituberculosis therapy in a nearby health center after acute complications were treated and once the skin lesion had started to dry or heal. She received antituberculosis therapy for 12 months. No drug-related side effects were seen or reported during admission or follow-up. Follow-up visits (including 6 months after completion of therapy) demonstrated a patient who had recovered well with no major neurologic problems and with healed skin lesions.