A 67-year-old man presented with long-term occasional heartburn, without any previous examination or treatments. A week before his visit, he started noticing difficulty eating, postprandial epigastric pain, and vomiting. His symptoms persisted, and he consulted his physician. The patient had no history of trauma. Chest radiography showed air in the left thoracic cavity; therefore, a hiatal hernia was suspected. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed outflow stenosis. Therefore, he was diagnosed with a hiatal hernia with gastric volvulus and was transferred to our hospital for treatment.
His vital signs on the first visit were the following: body temperature, 36.6 ℃; blood pressure, 127/73 mmHg; and heart rate, 90 beats/min. Physical examination revealed tenderness in the epigastric area with a flat abdomen. Laboratory findings, which suggested mild inflammation and acute kidney injury (AKI) due to hypovolemia, were as follows: white blood cell count, 9470/mm3; aspartate aminotransferase, 45 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 31 U/L; blood urea nitrogen, 76.7 mg/dL; creatinine, 1.87 mg/dL; amylase, 536 U/L; and C-reactive protein, 0.36 mg/dL. A chest radiograph showed air above the left diaphragm, just behind the cardiac shadow, and a hiatal hernia was suspected . CT was performed without contrast enhancement because of the severe AKI and revealed no deviation or reduction of the mediastinal part of the esophagus, and the cardia was located in the abdominal cavity instead of sliding into the thoracic cavity. In contrast, the body of the stomach presented a torsion and was sliding toward the left thoracic cavity . Although the chest radiography suggested a hiatal hernia, the CT findings revealed no characteristic signs of a sliding-type hiatal hernia. Moreover, only the body of the stomach was involved in the volvulus and slid into the left thoracic cavity. Therefore, we suspected a paraesophageal hiatal hernia or a diaphragmatic hernia. On the second day after admission, we performed an EGD to reduce the volvulus. The EG junction was almost normal. A whirl sign of a fold was present at the fundus of the stomach, suggesting a gastric volvulus. The gastric volvulus was estimated to be a mixed type, about 90° in both short and long axes . We attempted to reduce the volvulus endoscopically but failed. No signs of ischemia or necrosis were identified in the stomach; however, the patient’s symptoms persisted. Laparoscopic surgery was performed on the third day after admission. We did not measure the esophageal pressure or monitor the pH because of the patient’s desire for early treatment.
During the operation under general anesthesia, we used a trocar setting similar to that of usual laparoscopic gastrectomies (i.e., five-port setting). We reduced the prolapsed body of the stomach and detected a hernial orifice on the left side of the left crus of the diaphragm . The stomach was not adherent to the hernial sac and the prolapsed portion was reduced easily. Therefore, a definite diagnosis of a parahiatal hernia, rather than paraesophageal, was made. The diameter of the hernial orifice was approximately 3 cm, and the hernial sac was thickened. Therefore, we closed the hernial orifice by direct simple closure using 2-0 non-absorbable threads. Adhesiolysis around the esophageal hiatus caused mild dilation of the angle of his and esophageal hiatus. Therefore, we sutured the esophageal hiatus using two 2-0 non-absorbable threads. The esophagus and fundus of the stomach were sutured to the crus of the diaphragm using three 3-0 absorbable threads. The EG junction was restored with these procedures . The operative duration was 2 h 3 min and the bleeding volume was 10 mL.
On postoperative day 5, we performed an esophago-gastrography with contrast media (Gastrografin®; BAYER, Osaka, Japan) and confirmed the absence of abnormal findings. Food intake after surgery was also high. The patient’s postoperative recovery was reasonable, and he was discharged on postoperative day 12. After being discharged from the hospital, the patient did not report any symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). We evaluated his gastrointestinal system again approximately 2 months after the operation at our outpatient clinic and verified that the status was normal without disruption of the angle of his or gastroesophageal reflux .