A 75-year-old man presented with a 50 mm saccular thoracic aortic aneurysm without any complaint. He had a history of long-standing persistent atrial fibrillation, functional tricuspid regurgitation, hypertension, and dyslipidaemia. His height, weight, and body mass index were 163 cm, 77 kg, and 29 kg/m2, respectively. We performed total arch replacement with an open stent graft (Frozenix, Life Science, Tokyo, Japan), tricuspid ring annuloplasty with a 28 mm semi-rigid ring (Contour 3D, Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland), and LA maze, LA plication, and LAA closure using an LAA clip (AtriClip, AtriCure, West Chester, OH, USA).
After pericardial closure, he suddenly exhibited high pulmonary pressure (50/40/35 mmHg), requiring adrenaline administration. We inserted an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), which temporarily improved his vital signs. If the patient had become haemodynamically unstable after IABP insertion, we would have reopened his chest in the operating room. Diffuse biventricular systolic dysfunction was observed on transoesophageal echocardiography, where the right ventricular wall motion and left ventricular inferior wall motion appeared particularly poor. Coronary complications were suspected, and coronary angiography (CAG) was planned. Right coronary artery contrast showed insignificant stenosis . Angiography confirmed 90% stenosis at the origin of the LMT (see , ). Since the AtriClip was close to the stenosis, it was suspected to have compressed the LMT from outside.
Intravascular ultrasound examination findings of the LMT lesion confirmed flat compression at its origin . Thus, dissection at the aortic cannulation site leading to LMT injury was suspected. According to the ultrasound images, compression from external pressure was considered the most likely aetiology. The patient had a short LMT (7 mm) with a φ5 mm lumen. Therefore, a 4.0 × 8 mm drug-eluting stent (XIENCE Skypoint™ Stent, Abbott, Chicago, IL, USA) was placed in the LMT.
The patient’s haemodynamics stabilized. After 2 days, the IABP was removed. Post-operative CT showed LMT compression by the AtriClip . The patient was successfully discharged. He was followed up for 6 months without any coronary events.