A 39-year-old Caucasian man was referred to our emergency department due to a sudden loss of hot and cold sensation when taking a shower, followed by a progressive instability and weakness of his lower extremities. Our patient also complained of diplopia, dim vision and circumoral numbness. Our patient reported an upper respiratory tract infection for which he was being treated with an antibiotic (macrolide). Neurologic symptomatology began a few days later. His medical history was unremarkable apart from seasonal asthma. He used to smoke 20 cigarettes per day and drink alcohol only on social occasions. He was the father of two children. No high-risk sexual behavior was reported.
On physical examination, he had hot and cold temperature sensory disturbance under the T4 vertebrae level, symmetrically diminished muscle power mainly to his lower limbs, blurred vision and a loss of taste. Further neurological examination revealed paresis and diminished reflexes of his lower limbs; mainly the jerk ankle and patellar reflex. Cerebral pathology results following an MRI scan were negative. However, our patient reported a loss of balance, a failure to stand or walk and numbness. In summary, our patient showed progressive weakness of his lower limbs due to neuropathy, areflexia, sensory involvement and cerebella ataxia, and with the duration of the disease being less than four weeks, the required and some of the supportive diagnostic criteria for GBS were met. Other physical examinations were normal.
Two lumbar punctures were performed, the first on admittance and the second 14 days following commencement of the symptoms . The diagnostic tests are summarized chronologically in Table . Serology tests for neurotropic viruses were requested for differential diagnosis purposes. Hepatitis, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and varicella zoster virus (VZV) test results were negative, as were results for West Nile virus (WNV) with indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) immunoglobulin G (IgG) and M antibody capture (MAC)-ELISA (IgM). However, CMV, herpes simplex virus (HSV) and EBV IgM antibody test results were positive. Blood CMV antigen and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests for CMV were negative, as was the PCR test for CMV from the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Blood, urine and CSF cultures were sterile. A tuberculin skin test and CSF culture for tuberculosis (TBC) were negative. Serology tests were repeated one month after hospital admittance and at a six month follow-up appointment. The comparative results are summarized in Table .
Results of a chest X-ray were negative. A brain MRI scan showed no abnormalities of the cerebral parenchyma, but a slight inflammation of the ethmoid and right mastoid sinus was noted. In view of the neurological findings, his jugular and lumbar spinal column were scanned. No abnormalities except degenerative lesions and slightly slipped disks were noted, but these findings were irrelevant to the clinical symptoms. Brain, lung and abdominal computed tomography showed no abnormalities.
Electromyography gave a mildly diminished activity of the examined muscles; the palpebra sphincter (right and left), first inter-osseus dorsalis muscle (right) and anterior tibialis (right). After infra-orbital nerve stimulation, no R1 responses were received bilaterally. Retarded R2 responses were received, while the R2 response of the left side was significantly lower. Electroneurography indicated absence of an f wave when his right median, ulnar and peroneal nerves were stimulated. Absence of an f wave was also observed when his left tibial nerve was stimulated, indicating a mixed demyelinative polyneuropathy with a conduction blockade in multiple nerves and mild axial damage.
Our patient received 40 g intravenous Immunoglobulin for a duration of five days based on clinical suspicion. Notably, the CSF albumin became elevated (1 g/dL) only after the second lumbar puncture was performed two weeks after the onset of symptoms. Our patient received an additional 40 g of intravenous Immunoglobulin a few days later, for a duration of three days, in an attempt to ameliorate the final clinical outcome. Relapse can occur in patients who are treated early in the course of GBS and improve, and brief retreatment with the original therapy is usually effective in these cases [,]. On presentation with positive CMV IgM antibody test results, we applied an anti-CMV regime with ganciclovir intravenously 500 mg twice daily. The decision was taken to try to ameliorate our patient's neurological condition, which required him to remain resting in bed as any change in position caused inconvenience and a sense of falling. Intense physiotherapy was applied soon after diagnosis. Our patient markedly improved within two weeks. At that time, while still under anti-CMV treatment, he was able to sit up in bed and on a chair. Later on he was able to stand with support and also progressively take a few steps. After improvement of his clinical condition, our patient was discharged with appropriate follow-up.