A 56-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for surgical treatment of a T3N0M0 primary adenosquamous carcinoma measuring 35 × 28 mm in the anterior segment (segment 3) of the left upper lobe without mediastinal lymph node swelling in preoperative computed tomography. The ppo VC and ppo FEV1 were 2.68 L and 2.22 L, respectively. The preoperative computed tomography scan revealed that the tumour had invaded the anterior mediastinal fat tissue and phrenic nerve .
The patient was placed in a lateral position on the operating table under general anaesthesia with selective lung ventilation. Two thoracoport trocars (15 mm) were placed in the sixth intercostal space (ICS) at the anterior axillary line and in the seventh ICS at the posterior axillary line. An anterolateral mini-thoracotomy (35 mm) was performed in the fourth ICS for left upper lobectomy . We resected the phrenic nerve and pericardial fat with an optimal surgical margin and then performed left upper lobectomy and lymph node dissection. Thoracoscopic diaphragmatic plication was performed with 3–0 Prolene sutures running from the dorsolateral to ventromedial diaphragm in order to oversew the diaphragmatic tendon pars and imbricate the muscle part . Dacron pledgets were only used for the first suture and the suture was retracted to the cranial side during needle stitch . The thoracoscope was placed through the thoracoport trocar in the seventh ICS at the posterior axillary line and the plication was performed through the thoracoport trocar in the sixth ICS at the anterior axillary line with an endoscopic needle holder.
The pathological diagnosis was a T3N2M0 primary adenosquamous carcinoma invading the phrenic nerve with negative surgical margins. The patient’s postoperative course was favourable without any complications. No clinical symptoms were observed during the follow-up. Pulmonary function testing performed 1 year after the surgery revealed VC and FEV1 values of 2.36 L and 2.08 L, respectively. The representative chest radiographs of the left hemidiaphragm showed a normal position preoperatively and only mild elevation postoperatively .