We report the case of a 58-year-old Caucasian male with a previous medical history of maintenance hemodialysis for 5 years due to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) secondary to a histologically confirmed diabetic nephropathy. The patient had a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes requiring insulin, with 30 years of evolution and several subsequent microvascular and macrovascular complications, including retinopathy (treated with laser photocoagulation), ischemic heart disease (with three episodes of acute myocardial infarction), nephropathy, and peripheral artery disease (PAD; which led to bilateral lower limb amputation). Other antecedents included hypertension, obesity, a previous history of smoking, and a diagnosis of major depression. Usual medication included anti-platelet with acetylsalicylic acid and clopidogrel, apixaban, pantoprazole, amiodarone, losartan, atorvastatin, sevelamer, insulin, and escitalopram. Only apixaban was introduced in the 45 days prior to the consultation. Despite regular dialysis treatments, and without evidence of major intradialytic complications, an adequate kt/V was not reached. An angiography of the vascular access – a brachiobasilic arteriovenous fistula (AVF) on the left arm – was performed, showing no alterations.
Day 1: The patient presented with a 1-week history of painful, pruritic, umbilicated papules and some punctiform necrotic lesions in the left forearm and hand, right hand, and both amputation stumps (A, B). Radial pulses and extremity temperature were normal, although the patient presented with pale fingers and prolonged capillary refill time. This patient presented with severe PAD; furthermore, a recent angiography of the vascular access was normal.
Day 19: Despite a short initial course of topical corticosteroid, the lesions – after a short desquamative phase – evolved into larger and coalescent necrotic injuries (C).
In this context, three primary diagnostic hypotheses were considered: calciphylaxis, even though there was no dysregulated calcium-phosphorous metabolism or warfarin therapy present; vasculitis; and APD, given the visual aspect, severe pain, pruritis, and past medical history.
Day 22: The patient rapidly progressed and reported aggravated pain, while intense left-hand skin peeling and appearance (D) of similar lesions on the trunk were evident. The patient was admitted to the hospital 3 weeks after initial presentation. The case was readily discussed with Dermatology specialists, who agreed with the hypothesis of APD. A skin biopsy of a trunk lesion was performed; while waiting for the result, treatment with topical sodium fusidate, betamethasone, and intradialytic sodium thiosulfate were initiated, with partial results. Histopathology findings were compatible with APD, while also excluding findings suggestive of calciphylaxis or vasculitis. The Koebner phenomenon was also evident (i.e., the appearance of new skin lesions at sites of minor trauma in otherwise healthy skin ).
The histology findings of the skin biopsy revealed a central plug with parakeratotic debris and degenerate collagen, associated with inflammatory cells. The epidermis deep to the plug was thinned and traversed focally by vertically oriented collagen fibers . These findings are consistent with APD.
Although CKD and diabetes mellitus are clearly associated with APD, other potential causes were excluded – namely HIV, tuberculosis, hypothyroidism, liver disease, and hyperparathyroidism.
Complications experienced in response to the skin biopsy procedure, including minor hemorrhage and inflammatory signs without evidence of infection, required a prolonged hospital stay until the patient requested to be discharged against medical advice on day 26 of hospitalization. The patient presented with modest improvements on implementation of topical therapy. Outpatient follow-up was requested with the Dermatology clinic upon discharge. Wound care was performed at community health center and at the dialysis center.
Day 85: The patient maintained regular dialysis treatments at the dialysis center, but at 1.5 months later, he presented with left-hand erythema, edema, and warmth, suggestive of cellulitis. Vancomycin and gentamicin were empirically prescribed with slow response (F); as such, flucloxacillin was initiated (G, day 95).
Day 113: Despite this, the patient presented to the emergency room with extensive tissue necrosis of the dorsum of the left hand and associated phlegmon/bullous lesions (H). Computed tomography (CT) scan showed possible osteomyelitis, thickening, and densification of much of the subcutaneous tissue of the left hand and forearm, as well as important vascular calcifications at the radial and cubital levels. Antibiotic therapy with piperacillin-tazobactam was initiated at the hospital (adjusted based on renal function) and Vascular Surgery was contacted. The surgical department assumed access steal syndrome, as the vascular access was ipsilateral and the other lesions had evolved well, so an AVF ligation was performed, as was debridement of the phlegmon.
Day 133: The patient evolved unfavorably with an extensive area of tendon exposure and devitalized tissues in the forearm, acute ischemia of the left index finger, difficult-to-treat cellulitis of the left hand, and severe pain (I). Medical therapy was attempted by Plastic Surgery, which included topical therapy with povidone iodine for skin disinfection and wet compresses with Dakin solution, as well as maintenance of the antibiotic, with no success. Given the severity of the injuries and the patient’s comorbidity, a reconstructive solution was disregarded. The case was discussed with Orthopedic Surgery, where it was concluded that amputation was the most viable solution. The patient agreed, in a conscious and informed way, with the amputation of the left hand and forearm. During the procedure, purulent drainage from the extensor tendons of the patient’s fingers was sent for microbial culture, where it was revealed that Serratia marcescens, which is sensitive to gentamicin, was the causative organism. Blood cultures were negative.