A 35-year-old woman, who underwent mechanical mitral valve replacement (31-mm St. Jude mechanical valve; ATS Medical Inc.) for sever valve regurgitation on 15th of July 2005. She took warfarin therapy with routine International Normalized Ratio (INR) check. In 29th of October 2008, she was admitted in Boo Ali Sina Teaching Hospital with neurological symptoms compatible with encephalitis. Complete blood count (CBC) showed hemoglobin level of 8.2 g/dL, WBC count of 5.9×109 cells/L (80% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, 18% lymphocytes, and 2% monocytes), raised Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP 3+). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed no evidence of endocarditis. She was treated with ceftriaxone, metronidazole for a week and discharged in good health condition.
Thirty-five days later, she was readmitted to Razi Teaching Hospital with high temperature, malaise, cough, dyspnea, and hypotension. TTE showed arterial fibrillation with fast ventricular response and increased transprosthetic mitral valve gradient. Ceftriaxone, Vancomycin, Cefazolin, Gentamycin, and Warfarin were administered. She was then transferred to Mazandaran Heart Center for further evaluation. Transesophageal echocardiography showed a large and mobile prosthetic valve vegetation. She underwent mitral valve surgery on December 1, 2008. Under general anesthesia the chest was opened via median sternotomy. On cardio-pulmonary bypass left atrium was opened, white and creamy vegetations were all over and under the prosthetic valve. She underwent mitral valve replacement with 29-mm St. Jude mechanical valve. The explanted valve and vegetation were sent to laboratory for further evaluations.
Direct microscopy (KOH 20%) and staining of vegetation showed lots of budding yeasts. Yeast colonies were yielded on Sabouraud Dextrose Agar (SDA; Oxoid, Wesel, Germany), after a 24-hour incubation at 27ºC. Using physiological and biochemical methods such as germ tube formation in horse serum, chlamydospore formation in CMA-Tween 80, colored colony on CHROMagar Candida medium (CHROMagar Company, France), API 20C Aux ( bioMerieux, France) strain was identified. The isolated microorganism was identified as C. parapsilosis. Amphotericin B and broad spectrum antibiotic were administered via peripherally inserted venous catheter. Prothrombin time (40s) and serum creatinine level (560 mg/d) were increased. The patient died two days after her surgery due to sepsis probably related to the candidemia. The patient was not clinically suspected to fungal PVE and the infection was diagnosed after surgery.