A 9-year-old girl developed right hemiparesis and was admitted to our department at approximately 8 h after onset. She did not have medical history, operation history, and prescribed medication. And she also did neither complain headache or transient ischemic symptom. On arrival, vital signs were normal. Initial diffusion-weighted (DWI) magnetic resonance imaging showed acute infarction in the basal ganglia in the lenticulostriate artery territory . MRA showed mild stenosis from the distal ICA to the middle cerebral artery (MCA) and anterior cerebral artery (ACA) , and 3D-SPACE showed mild shrinkage of the outer diameter with the same internal caliber as that found on MRA . At 7 days after admission, DSA of the left ICA indicated mild irregular stenosis with a banding pattern from the distal ICA to MCA and occlusion of the ACA .
After admission, examinations were performed to investigate the cause of cerebral arteriopathy. Serum levels of sodium, potassium, chloride, albumin, and the lipid profile were within normal limits. The complete cell count was also normal. The homocysteine level in blood was also within normal limit. Autoimmune tests including antinuclear antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-single and anti-double-stranded DNA IgG antibody, rheumatoid factor, and anticardiolipin antibody were all negative or within normal limits. High-sensitivity C-reactive protein was not measured, but the C-reactive protein level was normal. Serum virus antibodies, including those for herpes simplex virus, varicella zoster virus, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and human immunodeficiency virus, were also within normal limits. The cardiac evaluations including 12-lead electrocardiography, echocardiography, 24-hrs Holter monitoring electroencephalography showed no abnormal findings. Moreover, cervical MRA or DSA showed no evidence such as Takayasu’s arteritis or carotid dissection. After admission, intravenous injection of unfractionated heparin (100 IU/kg/day) was started for 8 days. Although mild stenosis remained, right hemiparesis gradually improved, and the patient was discharged without neurological deficits after 15 days. However, 29 days after onset, right hemiparesis transiently developed again. DWI showed no acute infarction, but MRA showed progressive stenosis from the distal ICA to the MCA in left cerebral hemisphere . Moreover, 3D-SPACE showed worsening of arterial shrinkage of the outer diameter in parallel with the change in luminal stenosis on MRA . In this study, 3D-SPACE was performed with a 3.0-Tesla (Magnetom Skyra; Siemens AG, Germany) instruments and was acquired with the following parameters: repetition time, 1,500; echo time, 203 msec; flip angle, 120º; matrix size, 384 × 384; slice interval, 0.6 mm; field of view, 180 mm; voxel size, 0.5 × 0.5 × 0.6 mm; Average, 2; and acquisition time, 4 min 53 s.
Aspirin was started at 100 mg/day, and there was no subsequent recurrence of ischemic symptoms or progressive arteriopathy for 12 months. At 12 months after onset, MRA showed improvement of luminal stenosis from the ICA to MCA and ACA in left cerebral hemisphere , and 3D-SPACE also showed improvement of corresponding shrinkage of the outer diameter . Because the course of arteriopathy met the diagnostic criteria for TCA, she was diagnosed with FCA-i, which includes TCA .