A 47 year-old female presented to the emergency department with the complain of foul smelling feculent discharge from right lower abdomen for 2 weeks. It was insidious in onset and was associated with fever, nausea, and reduced appetite. She did not have jaundice nor hematemesis. However, she gave a history of intermittent constipation with occasional per rectal bleeding, abdominal discomfort and sense of incomplete evacuation after defecation for the past six months. She also complained of significant weight loss for the past three months. There was no significant medical and surgical history. There was no family history of colon cancer, colonic polyp or endometrial carcinoma. She does not consume alcohol and is a non-smoker.
On her general examination, she was in acute distress due to pain and was malnourished. Her vital parameters on admission showed she was afebrile, tachycardic and tachypneic. On physical examination, there was oedema of the skin in the right lower abdomen with marked erythema and spontaneous feculent drainage through two anterolateral opening on the anterior abdominal wall . The rest of the abdomen was soft and nontender. On rectal examination, there was a normal tone and the examination finger was stained with stool with no palpable mass. The laboratory investigation revealed an elevated white blood cell count of 14 × 103 per L (normal range 4.0–10.8 × 103 per L) with neutrophilia, hemoglobin was below normal limit at 11 mg/dL (normal range 12–16 g/dL) and albumin 3.1 g/dL (normal range 3.4–4.8 g/dL).
After resuscitation with intravenous fluids, administration of broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics and intravenous analgesics, a contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) scan was done to further characterize the lesion. The CECT abdomen showed ascending colon mass extending from the subcutaneous and intermuscular planes over the right iliac fossa and breaching the peritoneum. It showed heterogeneous wall thickening of the proximal part of the ascending colon with loss of mural stratification and causing luminal narrowing, measuring 6.1 × 3.4 × 5.6 cm with surrounding inflammatory changes with presence of a colocutaneous fistula, communicating with the involved section of the ascending colon . The level of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 7.6 ng/mL.
The procedure was conducted by a team of experienced surgeons. Colonoscopy was planned for the patient but she showed features of bowel obstruction so surgery was performed without bowel preparation. Exploratory laparotomy was performed and a right sided ascending colonic mass approximately 4 × 6 cm in diameter was found adherent to the anterior abdominal wall, with extension through a fistulous tract into the subcutaneous tissue. No distant metastasis was noted intraoperatively.
Intraoperative finding showed ascending colonic cancer complicated by colocutaneous fistula. En bloc resection of ascending colon, including the tumor of 4 cm in diameter, was carried out along with the mesocolon and colocutaneous fistula, and the involved anterior abdominal wall around it, according to the standard oncological principles . This was followed by right hemicolectomy and a total of 15 lymph nodes were harvested from the mesocolon. It was followed by en-bloc resection of the involved part in the lateral abdominal wall using a closure technique. The defect was closed primarily and no advancement flap technique was used during the procedure.
Peritoneal lavage was done and the abdomen was closed with placement of left pelvic drain. Resected specimen showed a whitish circumferential proliferative tumor in the mid-portion of ascending colon .
Histopathology of the resected specimen revealed adenocarcinoma with presence of well-differentiated tumor cells extending into the wall of the fistula and surrounding skin and metastasis in one regional lymph node, classifying it as pT4bN1aM0 .
All respected margins (proximal/distal/radial) of the specimen were free of adenocarcinoma, making it a R0 resection. The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery. The patient was discharged on the 14th postoperative day with a healthy wound. The patient was referred to the Department of Medical Oncology for further adjuvant therapy. Six cycles of FOLFOX regimen were used during the adjuvant therapy.