We present the case of an 80-year-old woman, previously healthy, that presented in our emergency department with sudden onset dysarthria and right-side hemiparesis that had over 24 h of evolution. She was admitted with the diagnosis of ischaemic stroke in the territory of the left posterior cerebral artery, as confirmed by head computed tomography (CT) scan. Her 12-lead electrocardiogram on admission was in sinus rhythm, and the transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed no significant structural changes besides septal hypertrophy of 17 mm. On the 19th day of hospital stay, she started complaining of positional dyspnoea that appeared whenever she sat up and reverted when on recumbent position, associated with arterial oxygen desaturation refractory to oxygen supplementation .
She then performed an Angio-CT scan of her lungs that showed no signs of PE and excluded lung disease. The ventilation/perfusion scan showed several small peripheral emboli in the pulmonary vascular bed. In another TTE, no significant changes were identified. According to the previous findings, suspecting POS, a transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) was performed, which showed an interatrial septum with an exuberant hyperdynamic movement, with abundant passage of contrast from the right atrium to the left, even without performing the Valsalva manoeuvre, compatible with an important PFO . When Valsalva manoeuvre was performed, the patient became breathless and peripheral oxygen saturation dipped to 85%, which recovered after termination of the manoeuvre.
The patient was then referred to a tertiary centre for percutaneous closure of the PFO, in order to both treat the right-left shunt and improve symptoms and also to minimize the risk of paradoxical embolism, which was assumed to be the cause of her stroke. The device used was an AmplatzerTM PFO Occluder, size 18 mm. The day after the procedure, patient was able to stand-up with no symptoms and with 95% peripheral oxygen saturation. Upon discharge, the patient was medicated with apixaban 5 mg, atorvastatin 40 mg, and ramipril 5 mg. At 1-month follow-up after the procedure, patient remained symptom-free, with a peripheral saturation of 94% while sitting and with no oxygen supplementation. She performed a follow-up TOE, confirming the presence of the closing device in the right position, without any passage of contrast from the right to the left atrium . Patient still had some neurologic deficits (right side hemiparesis) but was autonomous and was still in physical rehabilitation.