A 57-year-old male presented with sudden right postauricular tingling for 3 d (onset June 10th).
A 57-year-old male presented with sudden right postauricular tingling for 3 d (onset June 10th). The patient experienced discharge-like pain in the right postauricular region for a few minutes each time, lasting several seconds at a time. The pain was intense and severely affected the patient’s life. No obvious nausea, vomiting, cough, diarrhea, limb weakness, or fever was observed.
There was no special history of past illness.
No special personal and family history.
Physical examination results were normal. Nervous system examination showed that the right postauricular occipital nerve distribution area had acupuncture-induced hypersensitivity, whereas the rest of the nervous system examination showed no abnormalities.
Routine blood analysis showed (June 13th) that the percentage of neutrophils was 84.6%, and the other blood biochemical indicators were generally normal: Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 25 mm/h, sodium: 131.0 mmol/L. Coagulation tests, thyroid function tests (FT3, FT4, TSH, TG-Ab, and TPO-Ab), and liver and kidney function tests were normal. Antistreptolysin O (ASO), rapid detection of infectious diseases, and urine analysis showed no abnormalities. Stool analysis, glycosylated hemoglobin, and serum homocysteine levels were normal. The current perception threshold (CPT) indicated that the right lesser occipital nerve was hypersensitive (with small fibers involved, Table ). See Tables - for Biochemical parameters of blood results, blood coagulation function results and Aterial blood gases results of patient. The patient had two chest X-ray examinations, the results were shown in Figure . The nucleic acid polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for influenza H7N9 virus in sputum specimens was positive at Chaoyang Hospital on the same day. The specimens sent to the Beijing Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Chinese National Influenza Center (CNIC) tested positive for H7N9 virus.
Head magnetic resonance imaging is normal. Fever occurred in the afternoon of the same day after admission. The patient had a temperature of 39.2 °C and cough that night. Pulmonary computed tomography (CT) (June 14th) showed inflammation in the right lower lung, fine moist rales in the right lower lung, and normal oxygen saturation. The patient’s condition changed rapidly, and high fever, unexpected respiratory failure, and multiple organ failure. Chest X-ray re-examination showed that bilateral lung infection was significantly worse than yesterday’s chest film .