A male patient, 37 years old, homosexual, English teacher, was referred to the Specialized Care Service of Infectious Diseases at Dr. Miguel Riet Correa University Hospital, Rio Grande, Brazil on September 8, 2020. He reported fever, enlarged cervical nodes, asthenia, adynamia, and anorexia for 30 days, and moderate-intensity headache that had worsened in the last 10 days. He had several medical visits to external professionals in the preceding 30 days with the same complaints. He had received only symptomatic treatment (dipyrone 500 mg q 6 h) and only investigated for SARS-CoV-2 by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and serological tests. It should be mentioned that the results of both tests had been negative.
On physical examination at Dr. Miguel Riet Correa University Hospital, an ulcerated lesion (2×1 cm) was noted on the face, specifically on the forehead
and close to the scalp with irregular borders and fibrinous background that had evolved over 10 days . Other findings included cervical and
submandibular adenopathy with nodes of 1.5-2 cm without oral lesions or other systemic findings. The ensuing workup included blood count; serology for
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C virus, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and toxoplasmosis; venereal
disease research laboratory test; computed tomography of the brain; and a chest radiograph.
Antibodies to HIV were present and other serologic tests were negative. The computed tomography of the brain and the chest radiograph showed no abnormalities. The values of hematocrit, hemoglobin,
leukocyte count, segmented neutrophils, and platelets were 36%, 12.7 g/dL, 10,340, 82%, and 367,000, respectively,
with preserved renal and liver function. Since the patient had a history of a scratch by a domestic cat with sporotrichosis hyperendemic in the region , a sample of the skin lesion was sent for mycological examination.
Numerous large and spherical blastoconidia suggestive of Cryptococcus species were detected in the skin lesion sample, which also resulted
in a pure growth of numerous yeast colonies after 48 h of incubation on Sabouraud dextrose agar . C. neoformans was identified by subculture on niger agar and
canavanine-glycine-bromothymol agar and confirmed by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry with >99% identity. shows the ulcerated lesion close to the face of the
patient, on the forehead, and close to the scalp that had progressed over 10 days. illustrates the mycological examination with silver (Grocott-Gomori)
stain showing spherical blastoconidia in swab material from the skin lesion of the patient, 40X magnification. shows the yeast-like colony, white to cream,
mucoid and shiny, identified as C. neoformans, isolated from the skin lesion of the patient.
On September 10, he had an episode of loss of consciousness and was referred for hospitalization. On admission, the patient was somnolent, with normal pupils, systemic
blood pressure of 150/90 mm Hg, heart rate of 60 beats per min, respiratory rate of 19, oxygen saturation of 99%, and no signs of meningeal irritation.
The serum cryptococcal antigen titer was 1:1024 at this time. A lumbar puncture was performed, and an India ink test of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed yeasts
with morphology characteristic of Cryptococcus species . Moreover, polyomavirus BK virus was detected by real-time polymerase chain reaction.
A CSF sample showed an opalescent white aspect with decreased glucose values (17 mg/dL) and increased protein (72 mg/dL) red blood cells (200/mm3), and leukocytes
(250/mm3; 95% segmented, 5% lymphocytes). The CSF cryptococcal antigen was also positive (titer>1:1024). According to WHO guidelines and considering
the unavailability of flucystosine in Brazil, antifungal therapy started with intravenous amphotericin B (Amb) deoxycholate 50 mg/d and oral fluconazole (Flu) 800 mg/d .
Microscopy examination of blood culture and CSF showed encapsulated yeasts suggestive of Cryptococcus species, confirmed by the growth of
C. neoformans on culture, proving the diagnosis of disseminated cryptococcosis. The isolate showed no resistance in vitro to Amb or Flu by microdilution technique (minimum inhibitory concentration
of Amb: 1 µg/mL, the minimum inhibitory concentration of Flu: 4 µg/mL). shows a spherical encapsulated blastoconidia observed in microscopy with India Ink, visualized in the
CSF sample of the patient with 40X magnification. illustrates a large, spherical blastoconidium in direct examination of blood culture (Grocott-Gomori stain) with 40X magnification.
Over the next 24 h, his course evolved with disorientation, left deviation of the mouth and palpebral ptosis with heart rate, respiratory rate, and systemic blood pressure of 117, 22, and 90/ 60 mm Hg,
respectively. Finally, he was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit.
On September 12, the patient was vomiting and consequently aspirated gastric contents. He had anisocoria with left mydriasis and sensorium lowering that progressed to a comatose state
rated 3 on the Glasgow scale. A new CT scan of the brain was requested, revealing generalized edema, diffuse ablation of cerebral sulci and fissures, and slightly hyperdense dural
sinuses, possibly related to cerebral venous thrombosis. Nodular thickening of the skin and subcutaneous tissue in the right frontal region was seen, corresponding to the area of the
skin lesion. The patient required orotracheal intubation and treatment was started with cefepime 1 g/8h IV and clindamycin 600 mg/8h IV for aspiration pneumonia. It should be mentioned that aspiration material was not collected for analysis.
The patient died within 48 h after admission to the Intensive Care Unit, on September 13. The HIV viral load tests and CD4+ count were requested but their results were
inconclusive. No other test was performed due to his rapid deterioration (6 days between hospitalization and death) . Figure 3 shows a timeline of case progression, from the onset of symptoms to death.