We present an usual case of ovarian adenosquamous carcinoma. A primary hospital referred a 57-year-old Japanese woman (gravida 0, para 0) to our hospital because a pelvic tumor was suspected. At the primary hospital, the woman had complained of abdominal fullness.
A cervical pap smear was negative for both intraepithelial lesions and malignancy. Digital examination revealed a mildly tender, mobile mass occupying most of the lower abdomen. Magnetic resonance imaging conducted at the primary hospital and transvaginal ultrasound revealed a pelvic tumor 14 cm in diameter arising from the left adnexa. In addition, a papillary nodule 4 cm in size was detected on the tumor wall, which was suggestive of malignancy . There was no clinical evidence of ascites. The tumor marker profile was as follows: CA125, 42.6 U/mL; CA19-9, 134.1 U/mL; CEA, 0.9 ng/mL; and SCC, 1.6 ng/mL. We therefore suspected ovarian cancer and performed laparotomy.
During longitudinal laparotomy, we detected a left ovarian tumor 14 cm in size and a small amount of yellow transparent ascitic fluid in the abdominal cavity. Fluid samples were submitted for cytology, left salpingo-oophorectomy was performed, and biopsy samples were obtained and frozen. The cytology of the ascitic fluid suggested squamous cell carcinoma, while the biopsy indicated adenosquamous carcinoma. Ovarian cancer was diagnosed, and the patient underwent total abdominal hysterectomy, right salpingo-oophorectomy, pelvic lymph node dissection, para-aortic lymph node biopsy, and total omentectomy.
Pathological examination revealed endometrioid adenocarcinoma with squamous differentiation. Grossly, the excised specimen was unilocular and thin-walled and contained a serous, yellow transparent fluid. There was a papillary nodule in the wall of the left adnexa and multiple uterine myomas . However, the gross findings showed no evidence of malignancy in the right adnexa , omentum, or lymph nodes. There were no concomitant teratomas or any features suggestive of endometriosis.
Histologically, the endometrioid adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma components of the tumor were intermixed, with each comprising approximately half of the tumor. Differentiation from endometrioid adenocarcinoma to squamous cell adenocarcinoma was also observed . Cytological examination of the ascitic fluid revealed malignant squamous cells but no adenocarcinoma cells. The uterus, right adnexa, omentum, and lymph nodes had no malignant components (24 pelvic lymph nodes and 11 para-aortic lymph nodes were examined). There was no evidence of a teratoma or endometriosis in the excised tissue. The surgical stage was International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage Ic (2).
The postoperative recovery was unremarkable. The levels of all tumor markers were within the normal range immediately after surgery. The patient received 6 cycles of paclitaxel (175 mg/m2) and carboplatin (area under the curve, 6 mg/mL per min) every 3 weeks. In the five and a half years since chemotherapy, she has remained recurrence-free.