A 31-year-old male with no past medical or family history of disease presented with intermittent abdominal pain lasting almost 2 months, and he was admitted to the local hospital on February 28, 2017. Positron emission tomography (PET) showed isolated high metabolic nodules during the pancreatic uncinate process that were likely to represent malignant disease .
The patient then underwent radical pancreaticoduodenectomy on March 9, 2017. Pathological examination after radical excision showed poorly differentiated ductal adenocarcinoma associated with UC-OGC at the head of the pancreas . Immunohistochemistry staining revealed that the cells were positive for CD68 and CK7, whereas the cells were negative for vimentin and S-100 . The tumor was measured to be 3 × 3 × 2 cm in size and exhibited invasion of the nerves, nearby pancreatic tissues, duodenum and the lower part of the common bile duct. The surgical margins were negative, and there was no discovery of lymph node metastasis. The surgical-pathological staging of the tumor was IIA (T3N0M0) according to the 7th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC)/Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) TNM staging system.
Adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine and albumin-bound paclitaxel was administered starting on April 10, 2017 for six cycles, and the toxicity was acceptable. However, the patient developed a backache 2 months after the termination of adjuvant chemotherapy. The contrasted computed tomography (CT) scan performed on November 27, 2017 showed multiple lymph node metastases in the mesenteric region and peritoneum with a serum CA199 level > 900 U/ml. Exploratory laparotomy was performed on November 29, 2017, and affirmed peritoneal metastasis was confirmed by peritoneal biopsy. The patient afterwards received systemic chemotherapy with the FOLFIRINOX regimen (combination of oxaliplatin, irinotecan, fluorouracil and leucovorin) for two cycles. Unfortunately, the serum tumor marker CA199 level was elevated to 1595 U/ml after two treatment cycles, and the patient’s condition deteriorated due to obvious myelosuppression and digestive tract toxicity caused by the chemotherapeutic drugs. Finally, he had to suspend chemotherapy and was admitted to our hospital on January 11, 2018.
WES analysis was performed, and the KRAS p. G12D (c. 35G > A) and somatic BRCA2 p. R2896C (c. 8686C > T) mutations were detected in both surgical formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor tissues and plasma ctDNA samples. Additionally, WES indicated that the tumor did not show microsatellite instability (MSI) and did not present a high tumor mutational burden (TMB). Considering the poor condition of the patient and the fact that the polyadenosine diphosphate-ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitor olaparib was not available, we administered apatinib combined with tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil potassium capsules (S-1) for his disease. However, the patient’s condition worsened rapidly with the occurrence of fever, jaundice and vomiting after 1 month of treatment with this regimen, and eventually he died on March 12, 2018. The disease-free survival (DFS), which was defined as the time from radical surgery to disease recurrence, was just 7.4 months. The overall survival (OS), which was defined as the time between the primary diagnosis of UC-OGC and death, was only 12.6 months.