A 70 year old female with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) on home oxygen with no history of previous surgeries presented with lower abdominal pain for a year which has become constant and severe for 2 days. She had nausea, vomiting and was not passing flatus for 3 days. On physical exam vital signs were within normal limits. Abdomen was mildly tender in the suprapubic region with no peritoneal signs. There are no palpable hernial swellings or lymph nodes. On adduction and medial rotation of left thigh, patient complained of increased pain in her medial left leg. Laboratory test showed increased lactic acid level. Abdominal CT scan was done which showed dilated small bowel loops and findings suspicious for incarcerated small bowel containing left obturator hernia. Patient refused nasogastric tube gastric decompression. Patient was taken to the operating room for surgical management of the incarcerated hernia. In the operating room, after achieving penumoperitoneum, a 5 mm 30 ° laparoscope was introduced and dilated small bowel was noted with free peritoneal fluid. Two 5 mm port was placed on each side of the abdomen. After displacing distended small bowel loops, a loop of small bowel herniating into the left obturator canal was observed. Attempt to reduce left obturator hernia by gentle traction was successful . A Richter’s type (partial enterocele with protrusion or strangulation of only part of the circumference of the intestine's anti mesenteric border) of Obturator hernia was noted and gangrenous portion of approximately 3 cm of small bowel was noted.
A small transverse pfannensteil incision (5 cm) was made just above the pubic symphysis and the loop of gangrenous small bowel was delivered out and resected with a GIA stapler. After that peritoneum and the fascia was closed and pneumoperitoneum recreated. Subsequently a Vicryl woven mesh cut to appropriate size was tacked around the left obturator canal to buttress the hernial defect. The neurovascular bundle and the obturator foramen was clearly visible laparoscopically and was protected. No entrapment of bowel or omentum was observed at the end. Pneumoperitoneum was desufflated and ports were removed. Post operatively patient made an uneventful recovery.