Three-month-old monozygotic male twins (Twin-A and Twin-B) arrived at the Pediatric Ophthalmology Department of the Anna Meyer Children’s Hospital for a follow-up examination due to mild prematurity and bilateral esodeviation of the eye-globes. They were born at 34 weeks and their weight was 2300 and 2400 g respectively. Family history was negative for ocular diseases.
On examination, the anterior segment was unremarkable. In Twin-A fundus examination of the right eye revealed a severe schisis reaching the posterior pole and preventing visualization of the fovea , while in the left eye the inferior schisis was complicated by an intra-retinal haemorrhage . Twin-B showed in the right eye a severe bullous peripheral schisis with pre-retinal and intra-retinal haemorrhages ; the left eye showed a schisis from the inferior quadrant shrouding to the posterior pole. Fundus pictures were acquired using the RetCam (Clarity Medical Systems Inc., Pleasanton, CA) and optical coherent tomography (OCT) scans were then obtained using the I-Vue Hand Held Spectral Domain - OCT (Optovue Fremont, CA). In the right eye of Twin-A the size of the bullous elevated schisis prevented foveal visualization and OCT investigation. In the remaining 3 eyes OCT scans revealed macular schisis with intraretinal separation in different retinal layers (intraretinal cysts could be seen in the inner nuclear, outer plexiform and outer nuclear layer), extending beyond the foveal area. In Fig. we have shown OCT scans from the right and left eyes of Twin-B. The patients were examined under general anaesthesia after obtaining informed consent from the parents.
Finally the Electroretinogram (ERG; Retimax CSO Firenze Italy) was recorded according to the International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision (ISCEV) standard . In all the 4 eyes ERG showed the typical absence of the b-wave and a nearly normal a-wave (negative ERG) .
Molecular genetic analysis of the RS1 was performed because diagnostic criteria for XLRS was present. It detected in both patients the c.288G > A (p.Trp96Ter) mutation.