A 12-year-old boy who appeared to be healthy developed chest and back pain. His symptoms improved after treatment with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) at a local hospital. however, his condition, gradually worsened within 6 months. One day ago, he was transferred to our hospital for sudden incomplete paralysis of both lower limbs, and urinary incontinence. He had no history of any trauma or cerebrovascular accident. On examination, he was conscious with normal higher mental functions. Motor system examination showed that the strength of the upper limbs was MRC grade 5/5, and the strength of the lower limbs was only MRC grade 1/5. The tone of the muscles of the upper limbs was normal, but the tone of the muscles of the lower limbs was decreased. The skin sensation below the T3 plane was decreased. The deep tendon reflexes of the patella and Achilles tendon were impaired, and the Babinski sign was positive on both sides. The JOA score was 8 points. Preoperative transverse and sagittal CT showed no bone destruction in the cervicothoracic junction, and CT of the lungs showed no significant abnormalities. MRI showed a long soft tissue mass at the cervicothoracic junction (C7-T3) with the spinal cord compressed and shifted to the right. It was isointense on T1W and hyperintense on T2W images. MRI showed that the tumor in the cervicothoracic spinal canal was approximately 8 mm × 15 mm × 63 mm .
Due to the sudden onset of symptoms of bilateral lower limb incomplete paralysis, preoperative biopsy and chemotherapy were not performed. After ruling out contraindications to surgery, an emergency C7-T3 laminectomy was performed. Pedicle screws were placed on both sides of C7 and T3, the right side of T1 and the left side of T2 to fix the unstable cervical spine.C7 and T3, the right side of T1 and the left side of T2 to fix the unstable cervical spine . Intraoperatively, a flesh-like tumor with soft texture and rich blood supply was found in the epidural space. It filled the entire vertebral cavity of C7-T3 and extruded the dura mater to the ventral side. The tumor was completely separated out and excised along the envelope under microscopic manipulation, the dura mater was intact and pulsatile, and the lesion was biopsied . Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for Ki67, strong positivity for Vimentin, Cyclin D1, and CD99, and negativity for CD56, EMA, CKpan, Desmin, LCA, CD34, NKX2.2 and Syn. The histopathological report showed malignant small round blue tumors, which is consistent with Ewing's sarcoma/PNET . The patient's family decided not to perform next-generation sequencing (NGS) due to the high cost of the test.
Postoperative motor system examination showed that the strength of the right lower limbs was MRC grade 3/5, and the strength of the left lower limbs was MRC grade 1/5. The JOA score was11 points. After discussion with the oncologist two weeks after the surgery, it was decided to give him chemoradiotherapy. First-line palliative chemotherapy with vincristine (VCR), doxorubicin (DOX), and cyclophosphamide (CPA) was initiated in June 2019. We planned 1.5 mg/m2 of VCR per week, 30 mg/m2 of DOX per day and 1.2 mg/m2 of CPA per day. After two cycles we implemented ifosfamide and etoposide as alternative treatment. We planned 1,800 mg/m2 of ifosfamide per day and 100 mg/m2 of etoposide per day for five days. Pulmonary metastases occurred after 6 months of follow-up with no local recurrence . Motor system examination showed MRC grade 3/5 strength in the right lower extremity and MRC grade 2/5 strength in the left lower extremity. The treatment group discussed the treatment plan with the patient's family, the patient's family decided not to pursue additional treatment, and he died 8 months after surgery. The course of the disease diagnosis and treatment is shown in the timeline.
Timeline: NSAIDs: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs