A 13-year-old boy sustained a penetrating injury involving the perineum. While skating, he fell and bruised his perineum with another person’s ice skate blade. He developed a RUF with pneumaturia and urine leakage through the rectum. Minimally invasive management with UD using an indwelling urinary catheter and transanal simple suture closure of the fistula failed. Six months after the injury, he was referred to the Hiroshima University Hospital. Laboratory data showed no inflammation. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a fistula connecting the posterior membranous urethra and the low anterior rectum . Three months after fecal diversion with loop colostomy, radical repair surgery was performed.
The patient was placed in a high lithotomy position following induction of general anesthesia. A guidewire (Sensor™ PTFE-Nitinol Guidewire with hydrophilic tip; Boston Scientific Corporation, Marlborough, MA, USA) was inserted using a cystoscope from the urethral meatus, passed through the fistula, and derived from the anus. A 6-cm transverse incision was made at the perineum 2-cm above the anal verge. Using electrocautery, the depth of the incision was increased in the posterior urogenital diaphragm region. Upon fistula incision, a guidewire, passing through the fistula, was encountered .
Following complete fistula division, debridement was performed on the unhealthy and scarred tissues around the rectal and urethral openings. A simple interrupted suturing technique was performed in each layer to close the rectal and urethral openings using absorbable sutures [4-0 Vicryl; Ethicon, Johnson & Johnson, Somerville, NJ, USA , 4-0 PDS; Ethicon, Johnson & Johnson, Somerville, NJ, USA ]. A triangle-shaped local tissue flap was designed at the left lower buttock, which contains sufficiently thick and firm adipose tissue , and the epidermis of the flap was sharply incised . The flap was fully mobilized to allow rotation and then interposed between the urethra and rectum . A closed suction drain (Blake® silicone drain, 10Fr, round, with J-VAC® suction reservoir; Ethicon, Ethicon, Johnson & Johnson, Somerville, NJ, USA) was placed below the wound. The surgical field was irrigated and closed with interrupted absorbable sutures (4-0 Vicryl) over the flap . Finally, a suprapubic catheter was inserted because of the need for long-term UD. There were no complications after the surgery, and the patient was discharged 2 weeks postoperatively.
One month after the procedure, urethrography showed no signs of anastomotic leakage and stricture. The suprapubic catheter was then removed. The patient had mild urinary incontinence, which improved in a few months. Additionally, urinary stream improved with no residual urine. Three months after the surgery, follow-up pelvic MRI showed a triangle-shaped local flap located between the urethra and rectum without any gaps. Two months later, a repeat MRI revealed no flap atrophy . There was also no deformity or dysfunction of the buttocks .
After confirming no RUF relapse by urethrography, the fecal diversions were reverted 6 months after the RUF repair. Postoperatively, his fecal appearance and frequency were normal with no incontinence. At present, there has been no recurrence of the RUF for more than 5 years since the surgery.