A 78-year-old Caucasian male was diagnosed with a well differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the skin over the left ear. This was initially excised and treated with adjuvant radiation treatment using 12 MeV electrons between January and March 2008. An initial dose of 50 Gy was delivered to the external ear and the adjacent lymph node region, followed by a 10 Gy boost to the expanded GTV, and completed with an additional 6 Gy to a residual nodular area on the posterior surface of the ear. He later underwent excision of this nodular area with placement of a skin graft derived from the left supraclavicular area.
In Dec 2008, seven months following completion of his definitive therapy, the patient presented with a palpable swelling in the left upper neck which had been gradually increasing in size for two months (this was in the region that had received 5,000 cGy during the previous course of radiation). A fine needle aspiration biopsy revealed cells consistent with recurrent SCC. Computed tomography (CT) performed for staging showed a solitary 3.1 cm enhancing mass in the left post-auricular region, with infiltration of the left sternocleidomastoid muscle. No other disease was apparent.
Following evaluations in both medical and radiation oncology, the clinical consensus was to proceed with re-irradiation with concurrent Cetuximab. He was therefore treated with 6 MV photons using an intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) technique. Cetuximab was administered in standard fashion concurrently with his radiation therapy.
Approximately two weeks into his treatment, he developed the anticipated papulo-pustular skin lesions on his neck. Surprisingly, however, there was no such skin reaction in the previously irradiated field which shared considerable overlap with the current re-irradiation field . During follow up appointments the Cetuximab-induced rash seen elsewhere gradually resolved but slight erythema persisted in the area previously covered by the rash.
In May 2009, approximately five months after his radiation treatment, he was found to have a second recurrence in the left neck, corresponding to a level Va lymph node, and he underwent resection of the involved node. In December 2009, he was diagnosed with dermal metastasis involving the left neck, recurrent lymph node involvement corresponding to the area of previous surgical resection in neck, as well as the development of a new node in the left parotid gland. At this point, he was deemed unresectable and was offered palliative chemotherapy.