A 35-year-old French soldier was deployed to Djibouti. He had no medical history, no recent trips except a return to France during summer holidays and intermittent observance of doxycycline (100 mg/day) malaria prophylaxis. He presented with fever, headaches, and diarrhoea for 4 days with paracetamol self-medication. His weight was 104 kg. His blood pressure was 143/78 mmHg, and his pulse rate was 84 bpm. A rapid diagnostic test (RDT) for malaria was positive for P. falciparum (Core Malaria™ pan/pv/pf, Fumouze diagnostics). Therefore, he was referred to a military hospital. Laboratory tests revealed a few abnormalities: lymphopenia (0.6 × 109/l lymphocyte count) and thrombocytopenia (30 × 109/l platelet count) without anaemia and moderate elevation in hepatic enzymes (ASAT 125 UI/l and ALAT 147 UI/l) and in bilirubin (30 µmol/l). Parasite detection in blood using quantitative buffy coat (QBC) was positive, and examination of thin blood smear stained by the May-Grünwald-Giemsa method confirmed the diagnosis of P. falciparum infection with parasitaemia <0.01 %. Blood and faecal culture were negative, as were dengue serology and NS1 antigen detection. He met none of the clinical or biological WHO criteria for severe P. falciparum malaria and was admitted to hospital for supervision of oral treatment with DP [40 mg dihydroartemisinin (DHA) plus 320 mg piperaquine tetraphosphate (PPQ); Eurartesim©; Sigma-Tau laboratory] at the maximal dosage of four pills once daily between meals for 3 days, recommended by the Sigma-Tau laboratory in absence of data on which to base a dose recommendation in patients weighing above 100 kg. He was discharged at the third day with no more fever and a negative QBC test. He took the correct doxycycline prophylaxis and used a bed-net. He was asymptomatic at day 12 with a negative QBC test. At day 20, he complained of fever (38.9 °C) and diarrhoea. Laboratory examination revealed recurrence of P. falciparum with 0.5 % parasitaemia and the absence of co-infection. A thin blood smear found late-stage trophozoites without gametocytes. He was successfully cured by the standard oral therapeutic course of a fixed atovaquone–proguanil combination [atovaquone (250 mg) plus proguanil hydrochloride (100 mg), Malarone®], four pills during meals once daily for 3 days. Clinical and parasitological follow-up were completed at day 22, 27, and 48 without recurrence.
Though ACT failure is infrequent in Africa, the genome of the recurrent P. falciparum isolate was sequenced and searched for polymorphisms involved in antimalarial drug resistance. The k13 gene was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with the nested PCR method previously described . The following primers were used for PCR: 3′ GGG AAT CTG GTG GTA ACA GC 5′ and 3′ CGG AGT GAC CAA ATC TGG GA 5′; 3′ GCC TTG TTG AAA GAA GCA GA 5′ and 3′ GCC AAG CTG CCA TTC ATT TG 5′. The K13 propeller gene was successfully sequenced, and the result was compared to the reference 3D7 strain. No mutation was identified in the propeller domain of the k13 gene. Two fragments of the pfmdr1 gene (P. falciparum multidrug resistance 1) were also amplified according to the description by Wurtz et al., revealing N86, 184F, S1034 and N1042 alleles . The pfcrt gene (P. falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter) was also sequenced, as previously described , and the 72–76 haplotype found was CVIET. Finally, the copy number of the two genes pfmdt and pftetQ, which in vitro reduced susceptibility to doxycycline in Africa, was determined by finding one copy of pfmdt and two copies of pftetQ [–].