A 34-year-old, unmarried, previously healthy Sri Lankan Tamil man was transferred from a private hospital with a two-week history of slow-resolving pneumonia of the right mid and lower zones. He had recently returned to Sri Lanka after working abroad. He complained of malaise, loss of appetite and significant loss of weight. On physical examination he was found to have generalized tender lymphadenopathy, and panniculitic type tender, hard skin nodules were scattered all over his body with background livedo reticularis and a few ulcers . A respiratory system examination showed right mid and lower zone bronchial breathing.
A chest X-ray showed a resolving right-sided mid and lower zone consolidation. His hemoglobin level was 10.6g/dL with a total leukocyte count of 4.89×109 cells/L and platelet count of 172×109 cells/L. Renal function test results were within normal limits. His liver profile showed an aspartate aminotransferase level of 71U/L, alanine aminotransferase level of 23U/L and serum albumin level of 2.8g/dL. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 88mm in the first hour and C-reactive protein level was 32.8mg/dL (normal <0.8mg/dL). Ultrasound of our patient’s abdomen showed hepatosplenomegaly.
Hepatitis serology was performed and he was found to be positive for hepatitis C antibodies (anti-HCV). Initial HCV polymerase chain reaction tests showed 6000 viral copies/mL. He was tested negative for hepatitis B surface antigen and anti-HIV. Tests for rheumatoid factor and serum cryoglobulin were negative, but a test for perinuclear antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody (pANCA) was positive. His serum complement levels were reduced with C3=56mg/dL (normal 83 to 111) and C4=3mg/dL (normal 12 to 36).
While in the ward our patient developed a lower motor neuron type, left-sided, painful weakness in both upper and lower limbs. Nerve conduction tests confirmed a left-sided radiculopathy. He underwent skin biopsy for the panniculitis, and histology results showed a perivascular lymphocytic and neutrophilic infiltration with fibrinoid necrosis of the vessel wall with leukocytoclasia and red cell extravasations. The features were suggestive of a small and medium vessel vasculitis compatible with polyarteritis nodosa .
Our patient was discharged with a plan to readmit in one week to start antiviral treatment for hepatitis C. During his second admission he complained of a left-sided ischemic type chest pain with autonomic symptoms, and was found to have high blood pressure of 210/160mmHg. His electrocardiogram showed acute anterolateral ischemia. A troponin I test was negative, but a two-dimensional echocardiogram showed global hypokinesia with dilated cardiomyopathy. Considering his young age and in the absence of coronary artery disease risk factors except for smoking, the possibility that the acute coronary event was related to the vasculitis process was considered.
Our patient was diagnosed as having classic polyarteritis nodosa (cPAN) associated with hepatitis C infection. He fulfilled the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) criteria and the Chapel Hill Consensus Conference (CHCC) nomenclature of systemic vasculitis for the diagnosis of classic polyarteritis nodosa with cardiac, neurological and cutaneous involvement [,].
After being treated for the acute coronary event he was started on treatment for the underlying conditions. His hepatitis C infection was treated with polyethylene glycol-interferon 2α 180μg weekly combined with oral ribavirin 400mg three times a day. Simultaneously, he was started on prednisolone 10mg twice a day and oral cyclophosphamide 25mg once a day for classic polyarteritis nodosa.
He was reviewed after six weeks and was found to have made a good recovery with healed skin lesions and improvement of motor weakness. His blood pressure was 110/70mmHg and his ESR was normal at 12mm in the first hour. We have now been following him up in our clinic for nearly six months without any relapse.