In September 2006, a 64-year-old woman was hospitalized for a left adrenal mass which was detected by a follow up visit. Ultrasonography showed a 5.4 × 7.0 cm mass on the left adrenal gland, which was confirmed by unenhanced CT scan a size of 5.4 × 7.0 cm well-shaped, homogenous, and low-density (27 HU) tumor . The patient was asymptomatic, and had a medical history of right breast cancer, which had been treated two years prior by a modified radical mastectomy at another hospital. Postoperative histopathological examination (confirmed by the department of pathology of this institute) revealed an original grade II invasive ductal carcinoma with a size of 5.0 × 3.0 × 3.0 cm. The axillary lymph node were 1/16 positive. Immunohistochemical stain of the cancer cells was negative for estradiol, progesterone receptors, and positive for C-erbB-2. According to the classification of TNM, the disease was stage IIB(T2N1M0). Due to the poor compliance, the patient only accepted two cycles of chemotherapy after the right modified radical mastectomy (CEF: cyclophosphamide 500 mg/m2 day 1, epirubicin60 mg/m2 day 1 and fluorouracil 500 mg/m2 day 1), and refused any other adjuvant therapies.
On further examination, patient's arterial blood pressure was found normal, as were laboratory measurements including tumor mark CA15-3 (21 U/ml; normal range: 0.0 U/ml-28.0 U/ml). The plasma ACTH was within a normal range (at 0800 h 8.2 pmol/liter; normal range: 1.1 pmol/liter-11.0 pmol/liter; at 1600 h 4.0 pmol/liter, normal range: 0.5 pmol/liter-5.5 pmol/liter). Extensive imaging evaluations including cranial magnetic resonance imaging(MRI), thoracic CT scan, pelvic ultrasonography, and isotope bone scanning (ECT) revealed an isolated disease in the left adrenal gland. We suspected a relapse of the disease. Left adrenalectomy was performed in September 2006. Histopathological examinations confirmed a metastasis event from IDC of the breast as same characteristics of the tumor cells were observed . Immunohistochemical staining on metastasized adrenal tumor showed negative for estradiol, progesterone receptors and P53, but positive for C-erbB-2 , gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 (GCDFP-15) and mammaglobin . E-cadherin and CK were also positive. After the adrenalectomy, no further adjuvant therapies were performed due to the patient's refusal. The patient is currently in good condition and being followed up at the outpatient clinic without further evidence of recurrence. She has survived for more than three years since the left adrenalectomy for isolated adrenal metastasis from IDC of her right breast.