We report the case of a 60-year-old Moroccan man admitted for the surgical management of a high rectal adenocarcinoma. He had no past history of cardiovascular or pulmonary disease, with no recent surgery, and was classified according to the American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) as ASA II. He was scheduled to undergo a second colonoscopy by an expert endoscopist to eliminate a second colonic tumor before an anterior resection. Preoperative anesthesia investigations, including all blood tests, a chest X-ray and an electrocardiogram, were unremarkable.
On the day of the colonoscopy, our patient's blood pressure was 120/90 mmHg, his heart rate was 75 beats/minute, his respiratory rate was 12 breaths/minute, his body temperature was 37°C and he had a blood oxygen saturation level of 99% at ambient air.
Our patient had the procedure under conscious sedation with the presence of an anesthetist nurse. During the first five minutes of the procedure, the endoscopist reported some difficulties, but no signs of perforation, that caused a little discomfort and pain to our patient, which was managed with two 1 mg intravenous bolus injections of midazolam. This allowed our patient to remain awake and follow the endoscopist's instructions.
At that time his vital signs were unchanged except of a rise in his heart rate. At the end of the examination of his ascending colon, our patient developed progressive bradycardia. The endoscopist noticed a significant abdominal distension followed by respiratory distress that rapidly progressed to cardiac arrest. The procedure was immediately stopped and cardiopulmonary resuscitation begun. The reanimation team was called for intubation while closed chest cardiac massage was initiated by the endoscopic and surgical team.
Our patient was intubated and manually ventilated with 100% oxygen and epinephrine was administered. Despite these measures, the cyanosis worsened and his pulse was still not palpable.
After five minutes, a 14-gauge needle was used to decompress the abdominal tension as a last procedure to avoid a salvage thoracotomy . His pulse was then detected, and his blood pressure started to rise, returning to the preoperative state. Our patient stabilized and was transferred to the intensive care unit.
A diagnosis of AACS due to iatrogenic colonic perforation was made and our patient managed accordingly. However, while he was in the intensive care unit, no intra-abdominal pressure measure was realized. Three hours later, our patient underwent a laparotomy and a sigmoid perforation was found just 3 cm upstream of the tumor. We decided to perform an anterior resection, including the perforation site in his sigmoid colon, with primary colorectal anastomosis protected by an ileostomy.
Our patient had no postoperative complications and was discharged on the tenth day. He returned after two months for the closure of the ileostomy and remains free of disease three years later.