A 47-year-old male attended our surgery outpatient department of All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Gorakhpur, India, with a history of right-sided colicky pain over the previous two months. Analgesics were able to provide relief, and there was neither fever nor blood in the urine. The pain began abruptly, was only moderately severe at first, gradually increased, began in the groin, and was referred to the loin. During the general examination, neither pallor nor edema nor lymphadenopathy was present. During the systemic examination, the patient’s abdomen was non-tender, soft, and devoid of any palpable lump. Both renal angles on either side were apparent. The pulse rate was 80 beats per minute, the blood pressure was 134/86 mmHg, the respiratory rate was 14 breaths per minute, and the temperature was 36.7°C. His bowel and bladder habits were normal, and there was no history of chronic medical disease or operative intervention. As the patient was having pain, he was hospitalized with analgesics and broad-spectrum antibiotics. Various investigations were done to establish the cause of the pain. An ultrasound examination of the kidneys, ureters, and bladder (USS KUB) uncovered a massive SC that measured 8 × 4 cm at its greatest width and was in the right renal pelvis and extending to the upper ureter and calyxes. There was an additional calculus of a lesser size in the lower calyx. These observations were corroborated by a plain X-ray of the KUB . A non-contrast computed tomography (NCCT) of the abdomen was carried out to define the anatomical structures more precisely for preoperative planning . His preoperative investigations were within normal limits. Serum urea was measured at 28 mg/dl, and creatinine was measured at 1.1 mg/dl. Urinalysis revealed a moderate increase in specific gravity (1.030), significant hematuria (3+), and a trace of protein. The urine culture was sterile.
Open pyelolithotomy was decided to be performed, and detailed informed consent for the same was obtained from the patient. The SC and the smaller calculi were extracted unfragmented . The patient was advised for a regular follow-up after 15 days, one month post-operatively, and every month thereafter for one year. The patient exhibited no symptoms, and an ultrasound examination revealed no signs of any leftover calculi. After taking written informed consent for publication from the patient, we prepare the case report for publication.