We report the case of a 59-year-old male patient who suffered a car accident, which caused pain in his left thigh, resulting in unconsciousness. After treatment at a local hospital, radiography revealed multiple fractures of the right ribs, mandible fracture, and brain contusions. The patient was transferred to the bone and joint trauma ward of our hospital for further treatment. A radiographic examination at our hospital revealed that the continuity of the left femoral cortex was interrupted, and there was displacement. After a partial examination, including tests for coagulation (prothrombin time,14s; activated partial thromboplastin time, 32.40 s; fibrinogen, 4.930 g/L) and D-dimer level (5.29 mg/L), the surgeon prepared the patient for internal fixation of the fractured femur. Because this patient and his family wanted the operation to be performed as soon as possible, no examination for deep venous thrombosis of the lower extremity was performed. In addition, the surgeon did not perform interventions such as anticoagulation.
The patient had no previous history of deep vein thrombosis, family history of sudden cardiac death, or cancer. He also had no comorbidities and was in a healthy state before the accident took place. Ever since the patient had been hospitalized, he had been bedridden. Owing to the pain caused by the fracture, the patient did not perform any lower limb movement in his bedridden condition.
The patient’s anesthesia risk classification was American Society of Anesthesiologists grade III, cardiac function grade 2. In the operating room, arterial and internal jugular vein catheterizations were performed, and the arterial blood pressure (BP) was 140/80 mmHg. Sufentanil, etomidate, propofol, and cisatracurium were administered for routine anesthesia induction, which was performed smoothly, and tracheal intubation was successful. Propofol, remifentanil, and sevoflurane were used to maintain the depth of anesthesia, and the dosage was adjusted according to the vital signs. The surgeon then posed and sterilized the site and spread a sterile surgical towel. By the time the surgeon was ready to open the skin, the patient’s BP had suddenly dropped to 45/25 mmHg, approximately 1 h after the last induction time. When he was administered a short-order treatment with ephedrine and norepinephrine, his BP did not rise but tended to decrease. At this point, end-tidal carbon dioxide (PETCO2) on the anesthesia monitor decreased significantly. An arterial blood gas analysis revealed a high partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the artery (PaCO2). BP continued to decrease, and the heart quickly stopped beating. Immediately after chest compressions, electrical defibrillation, and continuous high-dose epinephrine administration, the patient’s BP increased to approximately 105/65 mmHg, and the heart rate was 105 beats per minute. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed twice, and BP was maintained at 110/65 mmHg and heart rate at 135 beats/min. During this period, the lowest end-tidal carbon dioxide was 12 mmHg, and the highest PaCO2 was 111 mmHg. Partial arterial oxygen pressure (PaO2) was 162 mmHg, the pH value was 6.99, and the lactate level was 11.7 mmol/L. Lead electrocardiography (ECG) revealed a complete right bundle branch block (RBBB), I-lead deep S wave (S1), III-lead Q wave (Q3), and T-wave negative (T3), which is called S1Q3T3. shows the ECG results. Computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) showed multiple embolisms in the two main pulmonary arteries and bilateral pulmonary artery branches . Blood gas analyses within 5 h after onset are presented in . Because of the urgency of the situation, an Echo-fast examination for quickly assessing the heart chambers was not performed after ECG and resuscitation.
The patient underwent inferior vena cava filter implantation and thrombolysis, for which the pulmonary artery catheter was used, followed by thrombolysis for several days in the intensive care unit. The patient’s vital signs gradually stabilized; follow-up on days 2, 3, and 4 showed that the patient responded correctly to their own name and simple instructions, and a gradual improvement in blood gas analysis results . The relevant datasheet from the episode of care is given in . Unfortunately, the patient’s family sought discontinuation of treatment, following which the patient was voluntarily discharged.