A 19-year-old male baseball pitcher repeatedly sought medical attention due to left calf muscle tension and foot numbness for nearly a year. His symptoms were especially aggravated after exercising and with left knee joint extension. Although the patient repeatedly visited the clinic, none of the symptoms were improved. Therefore, the patient was referred from the clinic to our hospital. The physical examination revealed no limitation on left knee joint mobility, no specific discomfort, no weakness in the left lower extremity, and no atrophy or hypertrophy of the muscles. However, paresthesia was reported in the left calf and foot. There was tenderness in the left knee popliteal fossa and medial gastrocnemius muscle. For the appearance, there was no swelling or redness or local heat, but the left toes were colder than the right ones. The imaging studies showed no abnormality in the knee X-ray. However, further musculoskeletal ultrasonography’s transverse view of popliteal space of the posterior knee discovered the left popliteal artery was compressed by popliteus muscle and medial gastrocnemius muscle and an occlusion at the popliteal artery (as shown in ). Therefore, the patient was scheduled for knee MRI. The result showed that the origin of the medial head of gastrocnemius muscle was abnormally inclined to the lateral side, and the popliteal artery was located in the medial side of the medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle (which is rarely observed) and formed an aneurysm (as shown in –). As a symptom and result of imaging studies, the patient was diagnosed with popliteal artery entrapment syndrome, type 2.
Due to the worsening symptoms, the patient was referred to the division of Vascular Surgery for surgical treatment. The pre-operative ultrasonography revealed a persistent occlusion at the P2 segment of the popliteal artery. During the surgery, it was found that the medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle was not located at the normal anatomical location, and the origin was inclined to the lateral side to compress the popliteal artery, which formed an aneurysm. Therefore, a decompression surgery was performed to surgically remove the partial tendon of the medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle and abnormal left popliteal artery. The left small saphenous vein transplantation surgery was further performed to replace the removed abnormal left popliteal artery. After the operation, the symptoms were completely relieved. Although the muscle strength of the left lower leg was slightly weakened, the patient quickly returned to the stadium to pitch baseball. The patient had signed a written informed consent form to have the case details and any accompanying images published and the manuscript was approved by the Ethics committee of Taichung Hospital, Ministry of Health and Welfare (Taichung, Taiwan) to have the case details published.