The case involves a 61-year-old male with a nine-month history of stage IV (T2aN2M1) NSCLC with mediastinal lymphadenopathy, extensive left pleural involvement, and erosion into the left posterior rib. Lung cancer was originally diagnosed following three months of progressive left lower rib pain, initially attributed to a muscle strain. Due to the increasing intensity of the patient’s pain, he presented to the emergency room, where computed tomography (CT) of the thorax revealed a 3 cm left upper lobe nodule and destruction of the left posterior ninth rib . The patient was referred to medical oncology and radiation oncology and was discharged after fine-needle aspiration of the primary lesion confirmed squamous cell carcinoma. He then underwent 17 fractions of stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) to the left posterior ribs. The patient subsequently developed worsening dyspnea on exertion prior to receiving systemic therapy and was readmitted for left pleural effusion and was eventually discharged after placement of a flexible drainage catheter (PleurX™), with drainage fluid confirming malignant effusion. The patient was then consented and scheduled for induction chemoimmunotherapy with carboplatin, paclitaxel, and pembrolizumab with zoledronic acid infusions to control hypercalcemia . Prior to initiation of therapy, the platelet level was 165,000/µL. The patient completed five cycles of chemoimmunotherapy without any high-grade adverse events and restaging imaging revealed a mixed response with significant tumor burden reduction on CT . The patient was then put on maintenance therapy with pembrolizumab 200 mg every three weeks, but only completed two cycles due to the development of anorexia, unexplained weight loss of 10 lbs, and diminishing function in activities of daily living. After an extended discussion on his goals of care, the patient elected to discontinue immunotherapy and manage with surveillance imaging. However, he was subsequently found to have a T6-7 growing mass on MRI that was managed with five fractions of SBRT.
Approximately two weeks after completing SBRT, and approximately five weeks after his last dose of pembrolizumab, the patient presented to the emergency department with gross hematuria, acute on chronic thrombocytopenia, and acute on chronic normocytic anemia. On physical examination, presenting vital signs were stable without fever and there was no bruising or neurological dysfunction; however, jaundice, scleral icterus, and costovertebral tenderness were noted. The patient’s only other medications were daily ferrous sulfate and a daily multivitamin supplement. In the emergency department, the hematology service was urgently consulted and initial labs revealed normal serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, international normalized ratio (INR), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), and fibrinogen, with a low platelet count of 8,000/µL, low hemoglobin of 7.2 g/dL, high mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 98.5 fL, high corrected reticulocyte count of 5.0%, high lactose dehydrogenase (LDH) of 615 IU/dL, low haptoglobin of <30 mg/dL, and high total and indirect bilirubin of 4.2 mg/dL and 3.3 mg/dL, respectively . Peripheral blood smear revealed near absent platelets, without evidence of clumping, and many schistocytes, with >8 per high-powered field . Imaging by CT of the abdomen and pelvis showed no evidence of hepatosplenomegaly or retroperitoneal hemorrhage and did not visualize the primary tumor site . Based on these findings, a PLASMIC score was calculated to be 5 points out of 7, indicating intermediate risk for TTP. Due to access at our facility, on the date of admission, we were able to confirm the severe ADAMTS13 deficiency and diagnosis of TTP with an ADAMTS13 enzyme activity of 10-12%.
Following the diagnosis of TTP, the patient was admitted to the oncology service and emergent plasmapheresis (TPE) was initiated overnight. After the first TPE treatment, the patient became hypotensive and his anemia worsened to a hemoglobin level of 5.5 g/dL; therefore, he was transferred to the intensive care unit. At this point, additional testing revealed an ADAMTS13 inhibitor level of 70% and an antibody titer of 1.8 Bethesda units. He received TPE for a total of five consecutive days with concurrent intravenous methylprednisolone for three days followed by daily oral prednisone of 1 mg/kg. He remained hemodynamically stable throughout the remainder of the treatment course. The patient's platelet count significantly recovered to 82,000/µL following treatment . However, he ultimately chose to leave the hospital under the care of home hospice due to further decline in function. He did not receive further treatment for TTP or NSCLC, except for the continuation of prednisone to delay TTP relapse for as long as possible. The patient died at home approximately one month after being discharged.