A young lady aged 28 years old was admitted to our hospital for a cervical mass on September 20, 2016.
Ultrasonography showed multiple enlarged lymph nodes bilaterally around the cervical blood vessels. Cervical lymph node biopsy showed that normal structure of the lymph nodes disappeared and giant cells grew diffusely. Immunohistochemistry of the biopsy showed positive CD20, CD79a, PAX5, LCA, BOB-1, OCT-2, and MUM-1, partially positive Bcl-6 and CD30, 50% positive Bcl-2, 40% positive c-myc, 70% positive Ki-67, and negative CD3, CD5, CD10, CD21, CD15, cyclin D1 and EBER. These results suggested a DLBCL of non-germinal center B-cell origin. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) showed negative myc, Bcl-2, and Bcl-6 rearrangements. Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET/CT) showed multiple lymphadenopathies, beneath the right sternocleidomastoid muscle, in the right clavicle, the mediastinal thoracic entrance and the left anterior superior mediastinum, and adjacent to the aortic arch, with the maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) of 22 . In addition, focal spleen and bone marrow SUVs were abnormally increased. Considering the above test results, the patient was diagnosed with stage IVA DLBCL of non-germinal center B-cell origin according to the Ann Arbor stage system and with an age-adjusted international prognostic index of 1.
The patient received 4 courses of rituximab-cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone chemotherapy (R-CHOP-21) starting on September 24, 2016. The mid-term PET scan after the 4 R-CHOP-21 courses showed that the mediastinal mass adjacent to the aortic arch still existed with the SUV value reduced from the maximum of 22 to 2.6 (hepatic blood pool SUV = 2.2). Given the condition, the patient was subsequently given another 4 courses of R-CHOP-21. At the end of the 6th course of chemotherapy, peripheral blood stem cells were collected following 7.5 μg/kg granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) mobilization, and 5.4 × 106/kg hematopoietic stem cells in total were collected. After completion of 8 courses of the chemotherapy, CT scan showed that thickened soft tissue could be seen in the original lesion of the anterior mediastinum , while another PET/CT scan showed that the soft tissue inside the left anterior mediastinum and the anterior superior mediastinum was slightly thickened, with slightly increased local density and mild elevation of fludeoxyglucose (FDG) metabolism (SUV = 2.3, hepatic blood pool SUV = 1.9). Tumor activity was therefore could not be ruled out. After discussing the situation with the patient and her family, an autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (ASCT) was performed on July 24, 2017. The treatment regimens included 300 mg/m2 carmustine (BCNU) (day − 6), 100 mg/m2 etoposide (VP16) (day − 5 to day − 2), 200 mg/m2 cytarabine (Ara-c) (day − 5 to day − 2), and 140 mg/m2 melphalan (day − 1).
Further CT scan showed that the thickened soft tissue in the anterior mediastinum almost disappeared 3 months after ASCT , while an anterior mediastinal mass was detected again 6 months after ASCT , suggesting a potential recurrence of the original lesion. On January 31, 2018, a multi-disciplinary team (MDT), composed of specialists from the Imaging Department (including the specialists from the PET center), Thoracic Surgery Department and the Hematology, was built to make a discussion regarding the condition of the patient. They thought the anterior mediastinal mass was unknown and might be thymus tissue or tumor tissue, and a further observation or a biopsy was required to define. Following another discussion regarding the condition, a video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery was performed for biopsy of the soft tissue of the anterior mediastinum for pathological examination and the result showed thymus tissue . Final chest CT scan 12 months after ASCT showed an anterior mediastinal mass similar to that on the previous chest CT image . The patient has achieved disease-free survival so far. The timeline of the patient is shown in Additional file .
We analyzed the peripheral blood thymic output of the patient 6 months after ASCT As shown in Fig. , the number of total T cells (CD3+ T cells) in the peripheral blood was 997/μL, the absolute values of the CD4 RTE, CD8 RTE cells in the peripheral blood were 161/μL and 409/μL respectively.