A 34-year-old male presented with a 6-month history of decreased visual acuity in the right eye characterized as red, painless, and progressive. The patient was diagnosed with "non-infectious uveitis" in another clinic and was subconjunctival injected with methylprednisolone six times, after which the condition gradually aggravated. The patient worked as a slaughterman and had five dogs.
On the first examination, his best corrected visual acuity was 20/800 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure was 18 mmHg in the right eye and 19 mmHg in the left eye. No inflammation in the anterior segment was observed. Fundus examination revealed vitreous inflammatory opacity. Optos fundus photograph showed optic disc elevation with granuloma, and proliferative membrane starting from the optic disc and running towards the superior temporal retina. The late-phase fundus fluorescein angiography showed a hyperfluorescent optic disc and two dye leakages at two corresponding lesions. Results of investigations revealed a negative tuberculin skin test (5 × 5 mm), negative treponema pallidum hemagglutination assay and Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test, and negative tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, hepatitis B surface antigen, and anti-hepatitis C antibody test. Based on clinical signs and occupational history, the diagnosis of OT was considered. To treat it and identify the diagnosis, the diagnostic pars plana was performed. Most of the proliferative membrane was stripped in operation, yet a small part of the proliferative membrane in the superior temporal region could not be removed due to the close adhesion to the retina . Since intraocular Anti-Toxocara IgG was 45·53U (< 3, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)), and the Goldmann-Witmer coefficient ((Toxocara IgG in vitreous fluid/Toxocara IgG in serum)/ (Total IgG in vitreous fluid/Total IgG in serum)) is 8·55, the diagnosis of intraocular Toxocara infection was made. After this operation, visual acuity improved to 20/250. However, vitreous opacity worsened again, and the residual proliferative membrane in the superior temporal region expanded three weeks after the operation . During the second operation(supplementary video), a ring-like Toxocara larva about 300 µm to 400 µm in diameter was observed in the superior temporal region(Additional file ), which is a Toxocara larva. The recurrence might be due to the undiscovered larva in the eye. After the second surgery, vitreous opacity disappeared, and the retina was stable . The patient was started on oral corticosteroids (0.5 – 1 mg/kg/day oral prednisone). There was a remarkable improvement in the inflammation over the next few days. And the vision acuity recovered to 20/200 two months after the procedure. The inner retinal layers show severe distortion and structural damage has not completely resolved in the optical coherence tomography (OCT). There is the presence of hyper-reflective foci in the inner retinal layers with posterior shadowing, and photoreceptor disruption in the macular area . No vitreous opacity occurred and stable visual acuity (20/200) at seven months follow-up.