A 5-year-old boy, previously healthy, with no significant past medical or surgical history, presented to the walk-in clinic with gradually worsening abdominal distension associated with occasional abdominal pain, gross hematuria, and lethargy for 4 months.
The parents reported that for the last 2–3 months, the child had been pale, lethargic, and constipated, with a decrease in appetite along with mild abdominal pain. Furthermore, they observed that while he remained lean, his clothes fit more tightly over the abdomen.
On examination, his height and weight were below the 50th percentile. Moreover, he had pallor, and his vitals showed tachypnoea (36 breaths/min, with oxygen saturation of 95% on room air), tachycardia (121 beats/min), normal blood pressure, and temperature.
Further examination showed bilateral equal air entry on chest auscultation and an asymmetrically distended abdomen with a bulge on the left side. It was a firm, fixed mass, approximately 18 × 14 cm, with vague borders. There were no other significant findings.
After the initial examination, the child was admitted for workup and optimization, and his blood work and imaging were performed. He was found to have a hemoglobin level of 10.2 g/dL, 557 platelets, and a white count of 11.92 × 109/L. The renal function tests were within normal limits, and a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed a 12 × 13.5 × 18 cm left renal mass partially encasing the aorta and pushing abdominal vasculature, and bowel loops medially, adherent to the tail of the pancreas and splenic vasculature . Furthermore, there were bilateral multiple pleuropulmonary soft tissue density nodules (the largest measuring 4.7 mm).
It was planned to initiate neoadjuvant chemotherapy (combined vincristine, actinomycin D, and doxorubicin) based on the SIOP-RTSG UMBRELLA protocol in 2016. Following the first cycle of chemotherapy, the child presented to the emergency room with Class III hemorrhagic shock and a 4-g drop in hemoglobin. After stabilization and resuscitation, he underwent a CT-scan of the abdomen angiogram, which showed active bleeding and extravasation of contrast from a lower pole branch of the left renal artery. Since the tumor was adherent to the pancreas and spleen and the child was in a decompensated phase, a multidisciplinary decision was taken, and the child underwent selective angioembolization of the bleeding vessel.
The child responded well and stabilized. He then underwent chemotherapy as per the protocol . The selective nature of angioembolization allowed continued chemotherapy via the left renal artery (main). At the end of 4 weeks of chemotherapy (combined vincristine, actinomycin D, and doxorubicin), on day 5, he developed an acute worsening of abdominal distension. He was brought to the emergency room, where he was found to have a Class II hemorrhagic shock. He was resuscitated and underwent another CT-scan of his chest and abdomen with an angiogram. This showed resolution of the pulmonary nodules, an interval decrease in size and necrosis in the left renal mass (now measuring 10.6 × 11.7 × 15.1 cm), and now visible planes visible between the aorta and splenic vessels, along with an active bleed from the left renal artery adjacent to the previously coiled branch. He underwent angioembolization of the left main renal artery with a good response to resuscitation efforts . Once stabilized, he underwent an emergent left radical nephrectomy with aortocaval lymph node sampling (40 h after the angioembolization).
Intraoperatively, he was found to have a 15 × 12 cm left renal mass densely adherent to the diaphragm and the left mesocolon, overlying the aorta and inferior vena cava. The surgery team was able to resect it en bloc. Following surgery, he remained well, followed a routine postoperative course, and was discharged in stable condition on the 3rd postoperative day.
Histopathology showed a 15 × 10 cm mass (870 mg) Residual Wilms’ tumor with 50% viable epithelial component, mixed type (45%, blastemal 40% and mesenchymal 15%), intermediate risk. The viable tumor involved renal sinus and perirenal fat. It was labeled SIOP Stage-II. The ureteric, vascular margins and left adrenal gland are free of tumor.
He then received the remaining two protocol-based preoperative chemotherapy doses in a postoperative setting (7th postoperative day), followed by the completion of postoperative chemotherapy based on staging and histopathology (AV 1 AVD 150 mg/m2/day as per SIOP-RTSG Umbrella Protocol 2016; combined vincristine, actinomycin D, and doxorubicin). Six months following the completion of treatment, the child is stable, disease-free, and school-going.