A 60-year old female patient, with no relevant comorbidities or family history of melanoma, underwent an excision of an infrascapular skin lesion of the back in July 2012. Histologic examination revealed a superficial spread of melanoma (Breslow 3.46 mm, Clark IV, number of mitosis: 13 mitosis/mm3, ulceration absent, negative margins).
In August 2012, an enlargement of surgical margins and sentinel lymph node research were performed; one right and one left axillary lymph node were removed, and were negative for melanoma metastases. Stadiative radiological examination was also negative for metastatic disease, and a follow-up program was started, in accordance with the patient’s decision not to undergo adjuvant interferon treatment. Molecular analysis of the primary tumor was positive for the K601E BRAF mutation (nucleotide substitution c. 1801 A > G).
During follow-up in March 2013, ultrasonographic examination evidenced right axillary lymphadenopathy. A computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast showed right axillary lymph node metastases and liver lesions, and a full-body fluorodexoyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan confirmed the presence of metastases in the right axillary lymph node and hepatic segment V; metastases in left axillary, rear left scapular, right retroperitoneal, skeletal D8–D9, and vertebral L1 regions were also observed .
Due to the absence of the BRAF V600 mutation, no targeted therapies were available at that time, and there were no clinical trials enrolling patients with BRAF K601E-mutated melanoma in our centers. Considering the extent and rapid spread of the disease, the patient was a candidate for chemotherapy. From May 2013 to July 2013, the patient received first-line chemotherapy according to the following schedule: cisplatin 75 mg/m2 i.v. day 1 plus dacarbazine 800 mg/m2 i.v. day 1, administered every 21 days.
After the fourth cycle, in July 2013, a total-body CT scan with contrast showed disease progression. The previous lesions were confirmed, and the scan additionally revealed an increased number of lymphadenopathies in the right axillary region (maximum diameter 65 mm), a millimetric lesion in the right hepatic lobe, two new metastatic lesions in the precharinal and right lung ilus (maximum diameter 16 mm), and new bone metastases in the left rib IX and right acetabulum .
In consideration of the patient’s disease stage, previous treatment, and the BRAF K601E mutational status for which treatment with BRAF inhibitors was not approved, compassionate treatment with continuous oral trametinib 2 mg once daily was required. However, while waiting for the delivery of trametinib, the patient’s general condition deteriorated and second-line chemotherapy was started with paclitaxel 80 mg/m2 i.v. weekly; this was administered for 4 weeks until 21 August 2013. In September 2013, the patient started continuous treatment with trametinib.
Due to persistent low back pain, radiotherapy in the D8 vertebra was administered from 14 to 24 September 2013 (total dose 30 Gy; 10 fractions of 3 Gy), with resolution of pain.
In November 2013, the patient reported trametinib-related grade 3 erythema with pruritus that extended to the upper part of the body and required discontinuation of trametinib and symptomatic therapy with local corticosteroid and antihistamines. Ten days after treatment discontinuation, following resolution of the skin toxicity, continuous oral trametinib was restarted at a lower dosage (1.5 mg/day).
In December 2013, a CT scan showed partial response, with reduction of the right axillary lesion (to 34 mm diameter), precarinal lesion (to 9 mm diameter), and subcutaneous retroscapular lesion (to 9 mm diameter) .
From 22 January 2014 to 5 March 2014, trametinib administration was interrupted due to a new episode of grade 3 skin toxicity that persisted for more than 2 weeks and slowly resolved with corticosteroids and antihistamines. Continuous trametinib therapy was then restarted at a reduced dosage of 1 mg/day. In March 2014, a CT scan confirmed response to treatment, with no evidence of metastases in the liver or bones and disappearance of the precarinal and subcutaneous retroscapular lesions; the only remaining lesion was the right axillary lymphadenopathy. In a CT scan performed in June 2014, the response was maintained.
Due to grade 1 asthenia, articular pain in the ankles, knees, and wrists, and the earlier grade 3 skin toxicities, the patient received symptomatic treatment and the schedule of trametinib therapy was modified to an on/off regimen: 2 weeks of trametinib 1 mg/day, followed by 1 week of no trametinib administration. With this new schedule, the patient experienced no adverse effects and was able to continue treatment with trametinib.
Subsequent CT scans (performed every 3–4 months) showed maintenance of complete response in all known lesions, with the exception of the increasing lymphadenopathy in the right axilla . Also, in May 2015, an FDG-PET scan showed complete response in every metastatic site, with the exception of the right axillary lymphadenopathy. In October 2015, the patient underwent excision of the right axillary lymphadenopathy, and histologic examination revealed a large melanoma metastasis. BRAF and NRAS mutational analysis of the lymphadenopathy metastasis revealed BRAF K601E mutation and NRAS wild-type status.
In December 2015, a new CT scan confirmed complete response, with no evaluable lesions . The patient continued trametinib treatment at the same dose. These findings were confirmed in the last CT scan performed in September 2016. The patient continues to receive trametinib with a personalized on/off schedule.