A 40-year-old woman with severe aortic valve regurgitation, increased fatigue, and dyspnea (NYHA IIb) was scheduled for open minimally invasive aortic valve replacement. Her medical history was significant for hypertension, epileptic seizures, and spontaneous mucocutaneous hemorrhages of the moderate entity since childhood, with no familial background of hematological disorders. Preoperative standard laboratory tests were normal and revealed a white blood cell count of 6.7 × 109/L, red blood cells 4.37 × 1012/L, hemoglobin 12.1 g/dL, hematocrit of 43.7%, and platelets (PLT) 210 × 109/L. Basic hemostasis tests, including prothrombin time (PT), International Normalized Ratio (INR), partial thromboplastin time (PTT)-LA screen, PT-LA mixing studies, and antithrombin III (ATIII) activity levels, were in range as well.
Preoperative platelet function was further tested with a Multiplate® (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) analyzer in light of the patient’s reported long history of bleeding diathesis in the absence of pathological results for both standard laboratory and coagulation tests. It revealed normal platelet response to thrombin-activated peptide-6 (TRAP) and arachidonic acid (ASPI) (a,b) and reduced platelet aggregation induced using high concentration (20 μL) of ADP. The ADP showed an area under the curve (AUC) of 23 U (c).
The cardiac surgery procedure was managed as per routine hospital protocol, which encompassed a ROTEM-enhanced transfusion protocol proved to reduce the need for intraoperative transfusion of allogenic blood products and administration of lower doses of protamine to minimize potential paradox bleeding from protamine overdose [,].
Prior to the establishment of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), the patient was administered 3.3 mg/Kg of unfractionated heparin (UFH), subsequently reverted after CPB discontinuation with 150 mg of protamine as per hemostasis management system (HMS Plus).
After protamine administration, Multiplate analysis showed an overall worsened platelet function (a–c).
For the management of microvascular bleeding subsequent to separation from CPB and administration of protamine, an infusion of desmopressin at a dose of 0.3 μg/kg body weight in 50 cc saline was administered over a 30-minute period. Platelet transfusion was held in reserve solely as a therapeutic option in the event of refractory bleeding .
The Multiplate analysis performed after desmopressin administration showed a significant improvement in the TRAP, ASPI, and ADP tests AUC that were 166U, 84U, and 27U, respectively (a–c).
Once a satisfactory hemostasis was achieved, the sternum was closed, and the surgical procedure concluded without further complications. The patient was extubated after 6 h in the intensive care unit (ICU). Overall drainage output was 400 mL without the need for transfusions. Additionally, no adverse effects attributable to the known desmopressin antidiuretic and vasomotor activity were recorded. She was discharged from the ICU on post-operative day 3 and from the hospital on day 8.