A 58-year-old woman underwent living unrelated ABO-i kidney transplantation. Her medical history revealed hypertension and autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease, for which she had been on peritoneal dialysis. She had never been pregnant and never received any blood products.
The donor kidney came from her 59-year-old husband and the HLA mismatch was 1-2-2 on A, B and DR loci respectively. She had no current or historical panel reactive antibodies. The donor blood group was A1 and recipient’s O. ABO desensitization treatment consisted of rituximab 375 mg/m2 4 weeks before transplantation; tacrolimus 0.1 mg/kg BID, mycophenolate mofetil 1000 mg BID; prednisone 20 mg once daily starting two weeks before transplantation and immunoglobulines 0.5 mg/kg one day preoperatively. Five plasmapheresis sessions, followed by adsorption of anti-A antibodies with the Glycosorb® device coated with synthetically derived blood group A antigen, were performed in the week before transplantation. Her anti-A titer was 64 (IgM) and 32 (IgG) before treatment and decreased to 2 at the day before kidney transplantation. The surgical procedure was complicated by peri-transplant hematoma, for which erythrocyte concentrate and platelet transfusions were given (of blood group O donors). Immunosuppressive therapy after transplantation consisted of tacrolimus 4 mg BID, mycophenolate mofetil 1000 mg BID and prednisone 20 mg once daily. Valgancyclovir for cytomegolovirus (CMV) prophylaxis was started post-transplantation. Direct graft function was noted.
During admission, our patient experienced transient diarrhea and was treated for urinary tract infection with ciprofloxacin. Urine cultured Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Serratia (S.) marcescens (both > 105 colony forming units (cfu)). Before discharge, a routine biopsy on day 14 revealed normal renal parenchyma, with no signs of rejection. Staining for C4d on endothelial cells was positive, which is often seen after ABO-i kidney transplantation and by itself does not indicate rejection. Anti-A titers remained low: one day post-operative the IgG titer was 2 and the IgM titer 8; at discharge, IgM titers were 1 and IgG titers were < 2. Renal function improved to a serum creatinine of 113 μmol/l at time of hospital discharge.
Seven weeks post-transplantation, patient was readmitted for fever and loose stools. She had developed new onset diabetes mellitus, for which intravenous insulin was started. Abdominal ultrasound revealed a swollen transplant with signs of pyelonephritis with multiple micro-abscesses. A 10-day course of ceftazidime and ciprofloxacin was started for suspected pyelonephritis as the urine culture identified various uropathogens, not further specified.
Eleven weeks post transplantation, patient returned to our emergency department with fever, tachycardia and pain over the renal allograft. Serum creatinine had risen to 115 umol/l with a C-reactive protein of 163 mg/l. Ultrasonography of the transplant kidney showed no gross abnormalities with normal renal vascular flow. Cultures of blood, urine and sputum were drawn and imipenem/cilastatine therapy was initiated. Only the blood culture became positive for S. marcescens sensitive to imipenem. In the next 5 days, serum creatinine increased further to 275 umol/l in combination with severe fluid retention. A newly obtained transplant ultrasound disclosed non-measurable diastolic blood flow. On the clinical suspicion of rejection, a three-day-course of methylprednisolone 1000 milligram intravenous was initiated and a transplant biopsy was performed. The kidney biopsy revealed AMR type 3 Banff ’09, with extended hemorrhagic infarction and positive C4d staining . The anti-A IgM titer was >5000 and anti-A IgG titer 512. Transplantectomy was performed as a renal scintigraphy showed no perfusion. A swollen and hemorrhagic kidney transplant was removed and chronic intermittent hemodialysis was initiated. A repeated anti-A titer one month later was 256 for IgM and 32 for IgG .
We hypothesized that the (overwhelming) presence in the blood of S. marcescens stimulated anti-A antibody formation, as S. marcescens might share epitopes with blood group A antigen. We chose to perform a hemagglutination inhibition assay instead of direct (serum) agglutination with bacteria, as the latter could occur because of possible aspecific clotting. S. marcescens obtained from the blood of our patient was frozen and stored until use. The thawed sample was plated on a (blood group free) Trypticase Soy agar (Becton Dickinson, USA) and grown at 37°C overnight. Cultures were suspended in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and the concentration of bacteria in suspension was assessed using McFarland standards and plate counting the following day. Bacterial suspensions with concentrations ranging from 105 cfu/ml to 108 cfu/ml PBS and a PBS control were then either kept at 4 degrees Celsius, boiled, or sonicated. Subsequently, these different S. marcescens suspensions were incubated with anti-A plasma for 30 minutes at 37°C. Next, blood group A erythrocytes 4% (Sanquin blood supply, The Netherlands) were added and subsequently incubated for 15 minutes at room temperature. A PBS control was added to confirm visual agglutination after addition of A erythrocytes. We hypothesized that preincubation with a certain ‘threshold’ amount of bacteria would prevent hemagglutination. We extrapolated this experimental design from the methods of Springer et al. who demonstrated interaction between Gram-negative bacteria and anti-ABO antibodies in 1961 (see Discussion for more details). Antibody titer changes were investigated as well: after centrifugation the supernatant was stored at 4°C and anti-A titers were measured the following day by adding A erythrocytes in serial plasma dilutions and compared to the original titer. Titers were described as the highest dilution at which hemagglutination was still visible.
We also performed experiments of bacterial incubation with human serum without addition of A erythrocytes, before measuring a possible change in titer the following day. In a parallel experiment, incubation with anti-A plasma took place for 2 hours at room temperature (for IgM binding).