An 11-year-old girl fell off a swing 1.8 m high and injured her left forearm. On examination she had a severe dorsal angular deformity of the wrist and the ipsilateral elbow was also very swollen. There was no neurovascular deficit.
Radiographs of the elbow and wrist revealed a complete fracture of the olecranon with a fracture of the radial neck , and a Salter-Harris type II fracture of the distal radius and ulna with complete displacement . The arm was immobilised in an above-elbow slab and the patient was taken to the operating theatre the following day.
Under general anaesthesia using a dorsolateral approach, the ulna was reduced and fixed using a six-hole dynamic compression plate (DCP); see Figure . The radial neck was reduced under direct vision. The wrist fracture was manipulated under image intensifier control and a satisfactory reduction was achieved. The arm was immobilised in an above-elbow slab in 90° of flexion in a mid-prone position.
Postoperatively she developed symptoms of median nerve compression, complaining of tingling and numbness in the index and middle finger. After a 12-hour period of observation, with the limb elevated in a Bradford sling, the symptoms did not resolve. We considered the options: a further period of observation or surgical intervention (performing a carpal tunnel decompression). The latter was favoured on clinical grounds, electrophysiological studies were not performed. She underwent urgent carpal tunnel decompression followed by manipulation and Kirschner (K)-wire stabilisation of the wrist. The median nerve symptoms resolved after surgery. She made a satisfactory postoperative recovery and was discharged the following day.
At a follow-up 6 weeks later, the fracture had united both clinically and radiologically. She had a good range of motion in all fingers and sensation had returned to the index and middle finger. The plaster and wire were removed and physiotherapy commenced. At 3 months, the metalwork from the elbow was removed . The range of motion at the elbow was 30° to 110°. At 4 months, the range of motion had further improved to 5° to 120° and had achieved full pronation and supination. At 7 months, she had recovered complete range of motion in both elbow and wrist.