A 35-year-old woman was referred to our department for a palpable mass in the left cervical area. On admission, she suffered from heart palpitations for the past year. Moreover, she was diagnosed with idiopathic arrhythmia from her electrocardiogram (ECG) examination without any positive findings from her cardiac ultrasound scan. She had no other histories of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, or cerebral infarction. On examination, there was a soft, smooth-surfaced mass in the left middle cervical region, measuring 3 cm × 2 cm, without color changes in the skin. Her cardiac discomforts worsened as a result of palpating the mass. Further investigation, including common carotid artery computed tomography angiography (CTA) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), revealed a solid mass located in the left common carotid artery (LCCA) bifurcation without abundant vascularity . Based on the results of CTA and MRI, we had an in-depth discussion with the radiologist and concluded that the mass was a shwannoma. Since the mass affected the heart, we communicated with the patient and decided to surgically remove it. The patient was informed of the various risks associated with surgery, mainly complications from nerve damage. Her preoperative ECG presented a sinus rhythm with frequent premature ventricular beats as a duality, and her heart rate was around 70 bpm . Under general anesthesia, mass resection surgery was performed. Intraoperative arrhythmia was evident and was resistant to lidocaine administration. There were markedly tumid lymph nodes surrounding LCCA with dilated left internal jugular vein. The mass was exposed posterior to LCCA bifurcation and adjacent to the vagal nerve . Due to the strange dark color of this mass, we punctured it with a syringe needle and discovered that it contained hematoma. We then cut this mass with a longitudinal incision to drain around a 3 mL hematoma . In perfect coordination with the anaesthetist, the vagal schwannoma (VS) mass was totally peeled off from the underlying nerve fibers, leaving the vagal nerve was intact . Unexpectedly, her arrhythmia was noticeably alleviated post-decompression. Postoperatively, the fresh mass was heterogeneous .
Her heart rate increased to approximately 95 bpm immediately following surgery. Her postoperative ECG revealed a sinus rhythm with occasional premature ventricular beats , and her palpitation symptom was clearly relieved. The pathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of schwannoma and the spindle cells were arranged in small bundles . Furthermore, abundant S100 (+), SOX 10 (+) cells, and partial Ki67 positive cells (positive index: 5%) were observed in immunohistochemical staining (data not shown). She was discharged 5 days after surgery without experiencing any symptoms or complications. There was no sign of recurrence at the 1 year follow-up.