A 60-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital in December 2022 for surgical treatment of a tumor in the left renal region. The patient reported periodic abdominal pain, general weakness, and no other complaints for about half a year. A follow-up abdominal ultrasound (USG) revealed a tumor in the left renal region. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen, pelvis, and chest was added to the diagnostic work-up. A CT scan revealed a 56 mm heterogeneous mass in the region of the left renal hilum with an equivocal exit point .
Other examinations showed no abnormalities in the patient. No pathological lesions were observed in the lungs. No pathologically changed lymph nodes were visualized. Because of the typical clinical presentation, the patient was qualified for laparoscopic renal tumor removal with preservation or complete removal of the kidney, depending on the intraoperative findings. Intraoperatively, a tumor was visualized that was not directly related to the kidney. It was located near the renal hilum and was closely related to the renal vessels. The lesion could be removed radically with a minimally invasive technique during laparoscopic evaluation. The location of the tumor made resection with a margin of healthy tissue impossible. Achieving a resection margin would require removal of the kidney. The lesion was completely dissected macroscopically from the renal vessels and surrounding tissues with preservation of the capsule ( and ).
The mass was removed with all the rules of oncological cleanliness in an endoscopic bag. The surgical treatment was uneventful. The patient was discharged home after 5 days of observation.
As a result of macroscopic histopathologic examination, the surgical material was described as a solid, polycyclic, cream-colored tumor, partly with a cyst. The cystic part was filled with yellow fluid. In addition, hemorrhagic changes and massive calcifications were observed within the tumor. Histopathologic examination described cytologic atypia as high grade with mitotic activity: 10/1734 mm2 and no signs of necrosis. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) results were: MDM2 (+/−) focal, CDK4 (+/−), desmin (−), myogenin (−), caldesmon (−). Numerous multinucleated giant cells with osteoclast morphology were mainly located around the hemorrhage and ossification. Amplification of the MDM2 gene was detected via fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The final diagnosis was described as dedifferentiated liposarcoma FNCLCC (Fédération Nationale de Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer), G2 (Grade 2) with osteosarcomatous differentiation, pT2 N0 (, and ) .
The histopathological result showed no margin of healthy tissue surrounding the removed tumor, but its capsule was preserved .
The patient continues to be followed on an outpatient basis. Follow-up examinations (CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis) performed 1.5 years after surgery showed no evidence of local or distant recurrence. The patient is in good general condition without any complaints.