A 61-year-old male patient presented to our clinic with several weeks of episodic vertigo, diplopia, and right trigeminal (CN V2) hypoesthesia. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination showed an extra-axial lobulated mass, measuring 22 × 25 × 35 mm, in the right CPA, causing significant pressure on the adjacent cerebellar lobe and brainstem, although, without hydrocephalus. The lesion demonstrated characteristic radiological features consistent with an EC, including hypointensity on T1-weighted image (T1WI), hyperintensity on T2-weighted image (T2WI) with some T2 hypointensities areas in the anterior-medial periphery, correlating with keratin, and restriction on diffusion-weighted image (DWI). A small enhancing region was present on the medial side of the lesion . Due to typical and characteristic location and radiological features, with only small partial patchy enhancement, the differential diagnoses of infective lesion or other cellular malignancy were possible, although small, and the probability of EC with MT was high on the differential diagnosis list.
A right retrosigmoid suboccipital craniotomy was done with electrophysiological monitoring including electromyography of CN 5, 7, as well as brainstem auditory-evoked response, in addition to transcranial motor-evoked potential monitoring and somatosensory-evoked potentials. During surgery, two different tissue pathologies were observed, one consistent with a typical epidermoid tumor, for which a near gross total resection (GTR) was achieved, which could be evident on a postoperative MRI. In addition, a different tissue with firm consistency was recognized that was adherent to the brainstem, preventing GTR, leaving the small enhancing region on the medial side of the lesion as seen on the postoperative MRI.
The pathological evaluation confirmed the presence of two separate histologies. The first specimen demonstrated areas of simple squamous epithelial cyst with mounds of layered keratin, typical of EC . The other specimen contained thickened, proliferating squamous epithelium creating finger-like projections, and containing dyskeratotic and acantholytic cells and foci of necrosis, compatible with SCC . Beta-catenin and BRAF V600E were negative, ruling out a craniopharyngioma.
The patient was recommended radiotherapy, yet for unknown reasons, he never showed up for treatment. Eleven months following surgical resection, a follow-up MRI showed a local massive recurrence of the enhancing lesion . After a multidisciplinary discussion, and understanding that the tumor was not amendable for GTR without significant morbidity, the patient was re-referred to radiation therapy. An MRI scan done 2 months after radiation therapy showed a decrease in the size of the recurring lesion . At present, he is being followed up and is expected to continue periodical clinical and radiological investigations.