A 33-year-old married white woman from a rural area with a history of suspected endometriomas on serial ultrasound underwent an ovarian function study in 2012. The patient and her partner have a medium–high educational and economic status. At that time, a contrast radiography of the uterine tubes and uterus (hysterosalpingography) revealed bilateral obstruction of the proximal fallopian tubes. Laparoscopic surgery was performed one year later, and findings included endometriosis stage 2 with greater involvement of the left tube. The foci of the endometriosis were cauterized, and drug treatment (leuprorelin acetate 3.75 mg IM) every 28 days for 4 months was used to eradicate the endometriotic foci and improve the tube peritoneal function. She sought care at a private clinic to start treatment and achieve a pregnancy due to a 2-year history of infertility secondary to bilateral tubal affection. In 2014, pharmacological treatment began, and four failed attempts were registered during four months of treatment with clomiphene citrate (100–200 mg/day for 5 days) and letrozole (5.0–7.5 mg/day for 5 days). Programmed intercourse achieving pregnancy but with consequent chemical abortion. Artificial insemination employed in 2015 using follitropin alfa 75 IU (5.5 μg Gonal-F) and choriogonadotropin alfa 250 μg/0.5 mL (Ovidrel) achieves 5 follicles in the left ovary and one mature ovum in the right ovary. One month later, a semen sample was trained with the swim up technique and the first successful pregnancy was achieved with normal prenatal controls. Prenatal controls mainly comprise a complete medical history, periodic clinical examinations, tetanus vaccination, perinatal risk assessment, gynecological-obstetric examination, delivery plan, etc. The delivery was made by caesarean section for pelvic presentation and a female newborn was delivered without perinatal complications.
In 2018, the patient returned with the aim of conceiving again. Hysterosalpingography and hormonal profiles were within normal parameters. Low-complexity oral pharmacological treatment was started using programmed intercourse plus the implementation of clomiphene (100–200 mg/day for 5 days), and three cycles were applied for 3 months. Despite reaching a dosage of clomiphene citrate 200 mg, only an ovarian follicle was obtained.
The patient was consulted, and because of the success achieved three years previously, it was decided to proceed again with artificial insemination. Ovarian stimulation was started on January 18, 2018, with 150 IU follitropin alfa (11.0 μg Gonal-F). The dose was doubled compared to the first pregnancy due to the patient’s older age and the lack of development with clomiphene and letrozole. Using this approach, three follicles on the right and five follicles on the left of acceptable size were achieved and the dose of follitropin alfa was decreased to 75 IU. On January 28, the patient had four 16-mm ovarian follicles on each side; two days later, a dominant 24 mm follicle accompanied by two 18 mm follicles were noted on the left side in addition to two 18-mm follicles on the right side. The five follicles were mature and of suitable condition for ovulation; therefore, a single dose of choriogonadotropin alfa 250 μg/0.5 mL (Ovidrel) was indicated.
Artificial insemination was performed on January 30, a good-quality sperm sample was obtained from the couple and was trained again by the swim-up technique. The insemination proceeded without complications: a fine cannula was inserted under ultrasound guidance into the uterine cervix 5 mm from the uterine fundus, a sperm sample was injected, and the patient rested for one hour. Luteal support with 200 mg of micronized progesterone daily for 13 weeks was prescribed. At three weeks post-insemination, the patient underwent qualitative β-Hcg confirmation of the successful pregnancy by insemination.
At the sixth week of pregnancy, the beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) level was 137,000 mIU/mL (suggestive of multiple pregnancy), and an obstetric ultrasound revealed quadri-amniotic gestation with 3–5 mm yolk sacs with good chorionic reaction, located in the uterine fundus. No areas of detachment or decidual hemorrhage were observed, and the measurements corresponded to a 22 mm sacs and 3 mm embryos at six weeks and five days of gestation with a probable due date of October 24, 2019 . The pregnancy progressed without relevant fetal or maternal complications, maternal anemia, urinary tract infections, respiratory infections, fetal chromosomal disorders, maternal obesity, pre-eclampsia, edema, or uterine hypotonia. Quality maternal nutrition, optimal physical conditioning, and patient age have considerable influence.
Morphological ultrasounds performed at gestational weeks 13 and 24 by a perinatologist revealed normal organ development without evidence of anatomical alterations in any of the fetuses. At 30 weeks, lung maturation inducers betamethasone 12 mg IM for two days were prescribed. The patient attended a total of 13 prenatal check-ups, monthly until week 24, every 15 days until week 31, and then weekly until the end of the pregnancy. The last patient check-up was at 36.3 gestation weeks (GW), presenting a blood pressure of 130/85 mmHg, slightly elevated compared to maternal parameters in previous evaluations. An obstetric ultrasound involved significant difficulty differentiating between the fetal heartbeats. The patient reported feeling discomfort, dyspnea, inability to fall asleep, walking difficulties, and excessive weight gain. Thus, delivery was scheduled.
The patient underwent surgery 1 week later on October 5 upon reaching 37.2 GW, with a weight of 206 lb between her and the fetuses (154 lb initial maternal weight). She was transferred to a private clinic for maternal and fetal well-being and the care and monitoring of the future newborns.
Cesarean section was performed without maternal or fetal complications, accompanied by a multidisciplinary team of specialists (two gynecologists, two pediatricians, neonatologists, anesthesiologists, and nursing staff) and incubators prepared to avoid or substantially minimize perinatal complications. Four children were born, two girls and two boys, with normal APGAR scores and good fetal status, weighing: 2600 g, 2740 g, 2380 g, and 1700 g. The newborns did not require ventilatory support, oxygen therapy, antibiotics, or any prophylactic intervention, and no expected perinatal complications occurred. A multidisciplinary team was ready to resolve the possible eventuality of uterine atony, but no intervention was necessary . The uterus acquired hypertonia physiologically after evacuation. The patient was discharged on the second postpartum day with the four newborns, during which time she presented ataxic gait complications, making it difficult to maintain her balance without the weight of the pregnancy, but this resolved completely after 15 days.
The four children are currently in good health and have shown no alterations in subsequent evaluations . This case represents an achievement in the obstetric field and in the development of ART given the difficulty and risk posed by this type of multiple pregnancy and the arduous task of achieving a successful full-term multiple pregnancy. The patient did not want to be sterilized, but agreed to underwent tubal ligation during delivery.