A 44-year-old woman presented to another centre complaining of right epiphora for the past 12 months. There was no history of dacryocystitis or fluctuating symptoms. Nasolacrimal duct obstruction was diagnosed and an uneventful dacryocystorhinostomy performed. Six months later, a hypertrophic scar at the dacryocystorhinostomy incision site had formed and was excised. However, no tissue was sent for histological examination. When, after a further 6 months, the hypertrophic swelling around the medial canthal tendon had reformed and a further intervention was being planned, a second opinion was sought and she was referred to our unit. She was now again symptomatic with epiphora and mucous discharge. A right medial canthal lump extending above the tendon was noted with the absence of cellulitis . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the orbit and paranasal sinuses showed an area of marked scarring in the site of the previous osteotomy .
She underwent an exploratory external dacryocystorhinostomy with excision of an excessive amount of scar tissue in the area of the lacrimal sac. The canaliculus was re-canalised to the nasal cavity through the previous osteotomy. Histology demonstrated a high-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma close to the surgical margin. Subsequent MRI showed probable metastasis to the cervical lymph nodes without orbit, paranasal or cavernous sinus involvement. A localised extensive excision of the lacrimal sac, nasolacrimal duct, paranasal sinuses, and the adjacent skin and a radical neck dissection were performed including parotidectomy. She had an uneventful postoperative recovery.
However, she presented with a horizontal diplopia 6 months later due to right abducens and trochlear cranial nerve palsies. Repeat magnetic resonance neuroimaging demonstrated a gadolinium-enhancing infiltrate in the right cavernous sinus surrounding and compressing the carotid artery . Neurosurgical review suggested that this was an inoperable location. We therefore sought fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy (Gamma Knife) to the cavernous sinus at a national centre to provide high-dose radiation for local control of the disease. This was delivered by 55 Gy over 33 sessions. Fortunately, MRI scan 6 months later showed a significant reduction of cavernous sinus infiltrate. After almost 4 years, she is fit and well and – to our surprise – her most recent MRI shows complete resolution of the tumour on a macroscopic level. However, she remains under observation and her overall prognosis must still be considered guarded.