A 14-year-old female presented to ophthalmology clinic as a referral for JXG involving the bilateral eyelids and sinus passages. The skin lesions were first noted around age eight and increased in size until age ten. She had previously undergone surgical debulking for extensive JXG infiltration of the sinonasal mucosa. On examination, her Snellen visual acuity was 20/20 bilaterally. Intraocular pressure and extraocular motility were normal. She had numerous protuberant lesions on the upper and lower eyelids bilaterally [Figures 1 & 2A]. Full dilated examination ruled out ocular involvement.
Per patient preference, the periocular skin lesions were observed for a year after presentation to ophthalmology department. When no spontaneous lesion regression occurred during that time, the patient agreed to proceed with serial lesion excision with skin grafting, one eyelid at a time, each separated by a two-week interval. Full-thickness skin autografts were obtained from retro-auricular skin for the bilateral lower eyelids and upper inner arm skin for the upper eyelids. Intralesional injections of triamcinolone acetonide (40 mg/mL) were given in the upper eyelids at two-week intervals prior to lesion excision (at four and two weeks preoperatively in the right upper lid; and six, four, and two weeks preoperatively in the left upper lid). Silicone scar gel was utilized postoperatively to help with scar modulation of the skin grafts on all four eyelids, starting postoperative week three and continuing through postoperative month three. The patient healed well without excessive trichiasis or other recurrence of lesions [Figure 2B]. At postoperative month three, the patient had persistent lesions along the outer perimeter of her skin graft sites. She underwent serial treatments of CO laser resurfacing (four total treatments, given at two-to-three-month intervals), utilizing the Lumens UltraPulse CO laser (Lumenis, Yokne'am Illit, Israel). For each treatment, the SCAAR-Fx setting (5% density, 80 mJ, 200 Hz) was applied to the preseptal region and DeepFx setting (10% density, 15 mJ, 250 Hz) was applied to the entire periocular zone. Immediately after the laser application, topical triamcinolone acetonide (40 mg/mL) was massaged into the treated skin, which allows for laser-assisted drug delivery.[ The patient demonstrated further improvement after CO laser resurfacing [Figure 2C].
At the most recent follow-up 39 months after lesion excision, examination revealed lesion regrowth on the superonasal upper lids [Figure 2D]. The involved areas were small, and the patient was not bothered by them functionally or cosmetically. Her exam otherwise demonstrated well-healed skin grafts and an overall acceptable outcome. Further treatment with intra-lesional steroids was offered, but the patient deferred them in pursuit of naturopathic treatments.