A 77-year-old Vietnamese woman presented to the hospital with right flank pain without fever or hematuria. On physical examination, the patient did not have a palpable flank mass or tenderness to palpation. Her vital signs were normal, and there was no evidence of paraneoplastic syndrome. The patient is considered healthy with no history of chronic medical disease or prior abdominal surgical operations. Her computed tomography (CT) showed a horseshoe kidney with a hilar tumor (55 × 50 mm) arising from the upper pole of the right moiety kidney with a RENAL score of 9p . Additionally, the image revealed parenchyma fusion of the lower poles. A preoperative CT imaging is shown in Fig. . The computed tomography angiography showed two arteries feeding the right moiety and three arteries feeding the left moiety . Each moiety had one large draining vein. On presentation, her serum creatinine was 0.86 mg/dL, and glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was 65.2 mL/minute/1.73 m2. According to her scintigraphy, GFRs of the right segment and left segment of the horseshoe kidney were 35.5 mL/min and 24.2 mL/min, respectively. After consultation, the patient opted for laparoscopy retroperitoneal heminephrectomy in the right moiety tumor of the horseshoe kidney. The patient was considered at clinical T1bN0M0.
The patient was placed in a flank position. Initial access was obtained through a 1.5 cm incision below the tip of the twelfth rib. We used Gaur's balloon to create the retroperitoneal working space, and three more trocar ports were planned for operation. The port placement is shown in Fig. . Regarding the CO2 insufflation, we used a consistent pressure of 12 mmHg throughout the procedure. The kidney was retracted anteromedially, and we identified the horizontal psoas muscle as the key anatomic landmark. Three arteries were dissected, including two arteries feeding the right moiety, one artery feeding the isthmus, and one vein, which was clipped and divided by Hem-o-lok . The isthmus connected to the lower poles was exposed, and the isthmusectomy was performed with an Endostapler (Covidien Endo GIA 60 mm with Tri-staple Technology) . Consequently, the ureter was clipped with a Hem-o-lok clip and divided. Finally, the whole right segment of the horseshoe kidney was mobilized. After the right segment of the horseshoe kidney was mobilized and freed from its attachments, it was carefully placed within a sterile, retrieval bag. This bag was then introduced through one of the laparoscopic ports, and the bag with the specimen inside was exteriorized through the 8 cm skin crease incision, which was created by widening one of the ports.
The total operative time was 250 min. The estimated blood loss for the heminephrectomy was 200 mL. Serum creatinine of the patient after surgery was 1.08 mg/dL and eGFR was 49.47 mL/minute/1.73 m2. The patient was discharged on postoperative day #4. Final pathologic examination of the tumor specimen revealed Fuhrman grade II clear cell renal cell carcinoma with negative surgical margins. After a three-month follow-up, the renal function was stable, with serum creatinine was 0.95 mg/dL, and eGFR was 57.7 mL/minute/1.73 m2, with a decrease of about 12% in renal function compared to the preoperative result. Local recurrence or metastasis was not detected by CT imaging at eight months follow-up.