A 60-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital with a one-week headache that worsened for two days. She had a past medical history of hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus, and no other abnormalities were found during physical examination. Brain CT showed bilateral ischemic foci in the basal ganglia region. After admission, the patient was given clopidogrel bisulfate tablets for antiplatelet aggregation, atorvastatin calcium tablets for lipid regulation and plaque stabilization, butylphthalide sodium chloride injection to improve cerebral metabolism, kerlikon to promote the establishment of collateral circulation, neurontopin for neurological nourishment, pantoprazole for prevention of stress ulcers, and monitoring of blood pressure and blood glucose, as well as symptomatic and supportive treatment.
The patient had a sudden onset of chills and high fever with a temperature of 39.8 °C after 3 days. Laboratory studies were as follows: white blood cell count 6.55 × 109 /L with 81.7% neutrophils, red blood cell count 3.94 × 1012/L, hemoglobin 126 g/L, platelet count 207 × 109 /L, Procalcitonin > 2ng/mL, C-reactive protein 394 µg/mL, CSF red blood cell count 20/µL, CSF white blood cell count 150/µL (neutrophils, 70%; lymphocytes, 30%), CSF glucose at 5.93mmol/L, chloride 120.6mmol/L, and protein at 54.51 mg/dL. CSF cryptococcus, acid-fast staining, and gram staining were all negative. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple ischemic lesions in the bilateral basal ganglia, bilateral central half oval area, bilateral frontoparietal area, and left temporal occipital junction area. Ceftriaxone and ganciclovir were given empirically for anti-infective treatment. After 4 days of empirical anti-infective treatment with ceftriaxone and ganciclovir, the patient still had a low-grade fever. To further clarify the infection, blood was drawn for culture and lumbar puncture was performed for CSF metagenome next generation sequencing (mNGS). Nucleic acid extraction was performed using the Universal DNA/RNA Extraction Kit and quality monitoring was performed using Qubit 4.0. Library construction was performed using the KS619-DNAmN48 Pathogenic Microorganisms Metagenomic DNA Detection Kit (Reversible End-Termination Sequencing Method). The monitored libraries were up-sequenced using an Illumina NextSeq550 sequencer and compared with the macro system for database comparison.
Based on the sequencing results, P. gingivalis and HSV-1 were detected, and F. nucleatum was detected in blood by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of fight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) . The anti-infective regimen was adjusted to ceftriaxone (2.0 iv Q12H) in combination with metronidazole (0.5 iv Q8H) and antiviral therapy with acyclovir (10 mg/kg iv Q8H), and the patient was free of significant headache and fever after 5 days. Re-examination of CSF and blood culture were negative, and a one-month telephone follow-up after discharge revealed no significant discomfort.