A 10-year-old female Miniature Dachshund weighing 6.46 kg presented with a 2-month history of progressive thoracic and pelvic limb paresis. The dog underwent three surgical procedures to reposition an inguinal hernia, resect a mammary gland tumour and spay the animal, and resect a mass that was on the surface of the face and not diagnosed by pathological examination by ablation. Administration of prednisolone 1 mg/kg (Nippon Zenyaku Kogyo) daily and stabilization of the neck with a neck collar temporarily resolved the animal’s ataxia, although the paresis continued to progress.
The neurological exam revealed a decrease in the right thoracic limb postural reaction and normal or slightly slow left thoracic limb and bilateral pelvic limb postural reactions. Right thoracic limb spinal reflexes were absent, and left thoracic limb spinal reflexes were decreased. Pelvic limb spinal reflexes were present or exaggerated. Neck pain was also identified without palpation.
A complete blood cell count and serum biochemistry revealed mild increase in serum alanine aminotransferase, a moderate increase in serum alkaline phosphatase, and a mild increase in serum γ-glutamyl transferase. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging (0.3-T AIRIS Vento, HITACHI, Inc.; Tokyo, Japan) revealed a mass in the dorsal spinal cord at the fourth cervical vertebral (C4) level and a large, hyperintense T2-weighted imaging (WI) lesion from C2 to C6. The mass was hypointense on T2-WI, isointense on T1-WI, hypo- to isointense on fluid attenuated inversion recovery imaging, and strongly and homogenously enhanced on T1-WI postcontrast imaging following intravenous administration of a paramagnetic contrast agent (gadoteric acid; Magnevist, Bayer Yakuhin Ltd., Japan) . Moreover, postcontrast T1-WI imaging of the lesion showed a dural tail sign.
A C3 to C5 dorsal laminectomy, durotomy, and mass resection were performed under a surgical microscope. Intraoperatively, the mass appeared to be located inside the dura mater . The surrounding cerebrospinal fluid was transparent. The mass was reddish, angiogenic, and slightly harder than the surrounding normal spinal cord tissue. Intraoperative ultrasonic inspection was thus used to reveal the boundaries of the mass . The mass was clearly demarcated and slightly hyperechogenic compared with the normal spinal cord. However, the boundaries between the mass and the healthy spinal cord were unclear, when viewed with the surgical microscope. The body of the mass was easily separated from the normal spinal cord, but the cranial and caudal portions of the mass, which had exhibited the dural tail sign in MR imaging, had poor margins.
After recovery from anaesthesia, the animal exhibited laboured breathing and decreased oxygen saturation for 36 h post-surgery. The dyspnoea was caused by damage to C5-C6, which comprises the phrenic nerve roots and were affected by the surgery [–]. A daily dose of prednisolone 1 mg/kg was prescribed after surgery. The animal’s neck pain had apparently improved, and the neurological signs remained unchanged until 1 month postoperatively, at which point the neck pain recurred; laboured breathing and dysuria were also observed at this time. Upper motor neuron paresis was diagnosed as the cause of the dysuria, and the dog could not urinate by itself. Urination was possible by applying pressure to the bladder, which was painful. The laboured breathing gradually worsened. Finally, the dog died at home 42 days postoperatively. The cause of death was thought to be respiratory failure. However, this could not be confirmed because the owner did not permit post-mortem examination.
Histopathologic examination of the mass revealed glial cells with infiltration of neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes . The surgical margin of the excised mass was intralesional such that mixed inflammatory cells were located at the periphery of the mass. The mass was located deep in the pia mater, and S-100- (a marker for neuroectodermal origin) and GFAP (a marker for astrocytes)-positive cells were observed in the mass by immunohistochemistry (IHC) , suggesting that the lesion was located within the spinal cord. Furthermore, the surface of the lesion was covered by pia mater. However, most of the pre-existing spinal tissue, including the pia mater, showed signs of inflammation and some haemorrhage . Moreover, numerous Iba-1-positive cells (macrophages/microglia) and CD3- and CD79α-positive cells (T and B lymphocytes, respectively) were observed on IHC . These cells were positive for Ki-67, a proliferative cell marker . Periodic acid-Schiff and Gram and Grocott staining were used to detect the presence of pathogens within the lesion. However, no pathogens were found.