A 55-year-old Egyptian man reported to our department with a large cystic mass occupying his entire right abdominal quadrants, detected by abdominal US during a routine check-up. The features of the mass on US were consistent with HD and it was diagnosed as three cysts - hepatic, renal and retroperitoneal. Our patient had no history of liver or kidney disease or pain in his right abdominal quadrants. Serologic and immunologic studies (indirect hemagglutination, enzyme immunoassays) performed during his hospitalization confirmed the HD diagnosis and a surgical approach was the first choice because of the large dimension of the mass. However, on the basis of US images alone, it was difficult to understand the origin of the cysts and to determine if there were three cysts or just a single giant cyst.
Our patient underwent unenhanced MRI to determine preoperatively the extent of the disease. The MRI scans showed a huge single 30×18×16cm cystic multiloculated mass, misdiagnosed as three single cysts, hepatic and renal, during the US investigation . The cyst was strongly adhered to his right hepatic lobe and to his right kidney. The intestinal loops were shifted to the left and his kidney was rotated and displaced down and anteriorly with partial compression of his inferior vena cava.
Our patient was then scheduled for surgery. A week before surgery, oral therapy with albendazole was started and continued until one month after surgery. A laparotomy was performed via a bisubcostal incision with extension to the xiphoid. The mass was freed from its adhesions with his stomach and small bowel. His inferior vena cava, suprahepatic region and the space between his right and middle hepatic veins was dissected to perform the Belghiti liver hanging maneuver . A tape was then passed between his liver and the anterior surface of his inferior vena cava. We performed a right hepatectomy, with associated en bloc hydatid mass resection with an anterior approach, leaving his liver with the mass in place during hepatic transection . Intermittent clamping of the hepatic pedicle was used during transection to minimize bleeding from the cut surface of his liver. His postoperative course was uneventful and our patient was discharged on the seventh day after the surgery.