A 78-year-old woman presented to the emergency department complaining of paresthesias in her upper limbs and inability to open her hands over the last four hours. The patient experienced weight loss of about 14 kg over the previous 2 months, loss of appetite, and two to three liquid stools per day over the last 3 days.
Her medical history revealed a long history of hypertension, osteoporosis. Family history was noncontributory. Her current medications included bisoprolol 2.5 mg daily, calcium/vitamin D3 supplementation, and denosumab 60 mg every 6 months. Initial evaluation in the emergency department revealed marked hypocalcemia with a total calcium 6.0 mg/dL (normal 8.2 to 10.50 mg/dL) and ionic calcium 0.97 mmol/L (normal 1.15 to 1.35 mmol/L), hypomagnesemia (0.56 mg/dL), and normal phosphorus, renal function, white blood count, and hemoglobin. The chest x-ray and the electrocardiogram were normal. She was transferred to the Department of Internal Medicine. On physical exam, the patient looked ill. Blood pressure, heart rate, and oxygen saturation were normal.
The cardiorespiratory system examination was normal, as well as the abdominal exam. Neurological exam was normal but she complained of paresthesias. The patient’s laboratory testing revealed no other electrolyte disorders, normal liver function, and normal blood gases. Her folic acid, vitamin D, and serum iron levels were low: 2.7 ug/L (normal: 5 to 15 µg/l), 14 ng/mL (normal: 30 to 50 ng/mL) and 18 ug/mL (normal: 25 to 150 ng/mL), respectively. A normochromic normocytic anemia was found. Albumin and total proteins were also low. Parathormone (PTH) was 452 pg/mL (normal: 0.00 to 68.2 pg/mL). Her thyroid function, lipid panel, and vitamin B12 levels were normal, and sedimentation rate was within the normal range. Autoimmune panel revealed positivity for anti-gliadin IgG antibodies and negativity for anti-transglutaminase and anti-endomysium antibodies. Anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies (ASCA) antibodies were negative. The genetic studies revealed positivity for DR3DQ2 and DR4DQ8 haplotypes. Fecal chymotrypsin, calprotectin, and antitrypsin had increased.
The patient underwent an upper endoscopy revealing the presence of villous atrophy in the proximal and middle small intestine without ulcers, findings that were consistent with celiac disease. The first abdominal computed tomography (CT) was read as negative. The patient was started on a gluten-free diet and intravenous calcium and magnesium supplementation with good clinical response. One week after admission the patient developed upper right quadrant pain and fever consistent with acute cholecystitis, confirmed by ultrasound, and she was started on intravenous antibiotics. Five days later, she developed edema in the left lower limb and a positive D-dimer. Venous doppler ultrasound and computed tomography of the chest confirmed the presence of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary thromboembolism. Anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin was initiated. There was no evidence of right ventricular dysfunction on the echocardiogram.
On day 27 of admission the patient complained of acute abdominal pain. The abdominal computed tomography was consistent with intestinal perforation of uncertain location. The computed tomography also revealed the presence of abdominal adenopathy. She underwent resection of the distal jejunum and ileum. The anatomical and pathological study of the intestinal tissue showed transmural and multifocal infiltration (three lesions of about 3.2 cm in maximum diameter) with intestinal T-cell lymphoma with histopathological features compatible with T-cell lymphoma-associated with enteropathy.
There were also signs of fibrinopurulent peritonitis. After surgery, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for the management of septic shock. She received 13 days of intravenous antibiotics with good clinical response. She was readmitted to the internal medicine department. The immunophenotype showed positivity for CD3, CD7, and CD30, partial positivity for CD2, CD4, and TIA1, and negativity for CD20, CD5, CD8, and CD56. Ki-67 was elevated consistently with a high proliferative index. Intravenous calcium and magnesium supplementation were eventually switched to oral supplementation and oral feeding was started. The patient refused oral anticoagulation and treatment for the lymphoma. She was discharged from the hospital 3 months after admission.