A 64-year-old Japanese man who presented with a bilocular radiolucent lesion in his left mandible was referred by a dental clinic to our department of oral and maxillofacial surgery. He had no subjective symptoms. His medical history included coronary vasospastic angina, diabetes mellitus, and hyperlipidemia.
Orthopantomography and computed tomography (CT) revealed an 18 mm × 15 mm lesion with well-defined bilocular radiolucency in the left mandible expanding from the distal side of the canine tooth to the bottom of the 2nd premolar. The roots of the 1st and 2nd premolars were included in the lesion. Knife-edge root resorption was observed in the 2nd premolar . Although the 1st premolar was nonvital, the 2nd premolar was found to be a vital tooth.
As a differential diagnosis, radicular cyst, ameloblastoma, odontogenic keratocyst, ameloblastic fibroma, odontogenic fibroma, odontogenic myxoma, jawbone central hemangioma, schwannoma, giant cell granuloma pseudocysts (simple bone cyst, aneurysmal bone cyst, and latent bone cyst), and hybrid lesions were considered.
A biopsy was performed for the lesion under local anesthesia, because the knife-edge root resorption observed in the 2nd premolar suggested the possibility of ameloblastoma. When an ameloblastoma was identified in the biopsy, an adequate margin of safety was necessary for the resection. Based on the biopsy results, the lesion was diagnosed as a radicular cyst with a fibrous cystic wall and nonkeratinized squamous epithelium lining. However, there was a possibility that the incision biopsy did not reflect the entire lesion. We performed a total resection of the bilocular lesion with extraction of the 1st premolar under general anesthesia . The inner surface of the entire lesion was covered by acanthotic squamous epithelium showing elongation of rete ridges. There was no clear border between the proximal and distal parts of the lesion.
The infiltration of inflammatory cells, plasma cells, and lymphocytes was extensive. Epithelial shedding as an effect of the inflammation was also observed . Interestingly, tooth structure components with lamellar structures of cementum were found irregularly at the inner surface of the proximal part of the lesion . The distal part showed severe inflammation without tooth structure components .