This female patient , currently 5 years 6 months old, was born to unrelated Caucasian parents following a pregnancy that was uneventful until 36 weeks gestation, when acute oligohydramnios and late presenting breech were diagnosed. Cesarean section was performed without complication and no neonatal resuscitation was required. Birth weight was on the 50th centile, length on the 10th and head circumference on the 97th centile. Neonatal metabolic and hearing screenings were normal. At 2 months old, she developed paroxysms of irritability that evolved into a persistently irritable state with inconsolable crying, opisthotonic posturing, feeding difficulties, and failure to thrive. At presentation, she had severe axial hypotonia with poor head control, spasticity of extremities and severely impaired visual tracking; there were no noticeable dysmorphic features. At 7 months old, she was already developmentally delayed prior to the onset of infantile spasms, which showed prompt clinical resolution with medication, although electrical abnormalities persisted on the electroencephalogram. She gained eye contact and social smile, but has never been able to sit independently and has not acquired verbal language skills. She has developed a spastic-dystonic tetraparesis with dystonic movements affecting her face, particularly her mouth.
After excluding perinatal metabolic and infectious causes, further investigation confirmed persistently elevated lactate levels in blood (maximum 4.87 mmol/L; normal range 0.77–2.44 mmol/L) and cerebral spinal fluid (CSF; 4.79 mmol/L; normal range 1.11–2.22 mmol/L), along with elevated blood pyruvate (maximum 0.15 mmol/L; normal range 0.03–0.10 mmol/L) and alanine (maximum 742 umol/L; normal range 226–416 umol/L). There was no hepatic dysfunction. The remaining blood, CSF and urine analysis were unremarkable.
Brain magnetic resonance revealed widened subarachnoid spaces, Sylvian sulcus and ventricular system; diffuse and non-specific alteration of white matter signal and thinning of the corpus callosum . These findings were only slowly progressive and apparently unchanged on repeat cranial MR imaging at 16 and 29 months old. Spectroscopy showed no significant changes for age, including lactate. However, repeat MRI performed at 5 years 6 months old did show some further ventricular enlargement and abnormal signal change in the posterolateral putamen .
Electroencephalography showed a poorly formed background with multifocal polyspike paroxysms. Visual evoked potentials revealed delayed conduction and brainstem auditory evoked potentials indicated bilateral vestibulocochlear nerve involvement. Electromyography demonstrated discrete involvement of the lower limb motor axons without demyelination. Muscle and skin biopsies were performed to investigate a likely mitochondrial disorder.