A 67-year-old man with a 10-year history of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) was admitted to our hospital for emerging facial edema and dry cough within the past 1 mo. No reduced activity tolerance, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, or orthopnea was shown. Initial electrocardiogram (ECG) and myocardial enzymes were normal. To evaluate the progression of lung lesions, the patient accepted bronchoalveolar lavage, brushing, and transbronchial lung biopsy with a bronchoscope and endobronchial ultrasonography. Routine pre-medications (atropine, 0.6 mg, oral; 2% lidocaine aerosol inhalation) were given before the procedure. During this procedure, he complained of left chest pain, nausea, and vomiting. Electrocardiograph monitoring showed hypertension (180/94 mmHg). ECG showed sinus bradycardia with ST-segment elevation in I, AVL, and V4 to V6 leads. Troponin T level rose to 0.138 ng/mL (reference range < 0.06 ng/mL) within 1 h after operation, whereas it rose to 12.299 ng/mL 6 h later. Considering symptoms and laboratory results, the patient underwent emergency coronary angiography, but only mild stenosis in the right coronary artery was observed. Echocardiography showed hypokinesis of LV apices with compensatory hyperkinesis of the LV basal region.
The patient’s medical history was NSCLC and bronchiectasia. There was no other history of illness.
The patient was diagnosed with NSCLC (pT1N1M0) 10 years ago. After pulmonary resection, he successively received chemotherapy. Then he took gefitinib as the only treatment for 6 years. One month ago, he presented facial edema and dry cough. Computed tomography at a local hospital showed mild enlargement of tumor size in the right lower lobe as compared to former records. No cardiomyopathy, coronary heart disease, or arrhythmia was recorded before this hospitalization.
The patient was a retired worker and had no family history of any major diseases.
Before the bronchoscopic operation, the patient’s blood pressure was 141/75 mmHg with a heart rate of 59 bpm. He breathed on room air smoothly with lower right lung breath sound. His heart examination was normal, and no murmurs or gallops were detected.
Shortly after bronchoalveolar lavage and lung biopsy, his blood pressure rose to 180/94 mmHg. He was anxious and his breath was rapid. His heart rate dropped to 48 bpm and improved rapidly after suspending the examination. On auscultation, no murmur, gallop, or wheeze was detected.
Baseline troponin T and other myocardial enzymes were normal. As shown in Figure , the level of troponin T elevated at 0.138 ng/mL (normal range 0-0.06) 1 h later and rapidly elevated at 12.299 ng/mL 6 h later. The levels of creatine kinase, creatine kinase-MB, and hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase mildly elevated 6 h later and lactic dehydrogenase elevated 12 h later .
The initial 12-lead ECG revealed a normal sinus rhythm with an appropriate rate (77 bpm). With the appearance of symptoms, the ECG showed an extensive elevation of ST-segment in I, AVL, and V4 to V6 leads .
In sum, the working hypothesis of ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) was considered. This patient underwent emergency coronary angiography (CA), which revealed mild stenosis in the middle segment of the right coronary artery.
Previous echocardiogram results were normal. A transthoracic echocardiogram (ECHO) was made 24 h after the initial symptoms . The results showed significant hypokinesis of LV apices with compensatory hyperkinesis of the LV basal region. LV ejection fraction (LVEF) was 49%. No abnormality was found in the chamber size or valvular. To assess his LV function, LV global myocardial work index (LVGWI), global myocardial work efficiency (LVGWE), global constructive myocardial work (LVGCW), global wasted myocardial work (LVGWW), and global longitudinal strain (LVGLS) derived from pressure-strain analysis and noninvasive blood pressure measurements were evaluated further . The LVGWI level was 729 mmHg%, the LVGWE level was 72%, the LVGCW level was 895 mmHg%, the LVGWW level was 284 mmHg%, and the LVGLS was 8%. The apical-to-basal strain ratio of the LV was 0.34, and the apical-to-basal work ratio was 0.42 .