A 22-year-old man presented to our emergency clinic with a long-standing (5 h) sustained painful erection. He had no history of previous illnesses, trauma, drug intake or previous similar attacks. He reported having a stable heterosexual relationship and that his sustained erection had started outside a sexual encounter. When he was asked if this was the first episode, he mentioned that he had noticed, approximately over the last 18 months, an increase in number and duration of his spontaneous erections; however, given the absence of significant pain, such events were not considered relevant.
On examination, the penis was fully erected with a soft glans. Intracavernous blood sampling was suggestive for hypoxic, low-flow priapism (Ph 7.06; PCO2 14, arterial ref.: 4.5–6.1 kPa; PO2 2.6, arterial ref.: 10–13.5 kPa). Moreover, penile and perineal duplex ultrasound ruled out an arteriovenous fistula. He therefore underwent intracavernous injection (ICI) of etilefrine 5 mg followed by corporeal irrigation/aspiration and again (ICI) of etilefrine 5 mg followed by corporeal irrigation/aspiration; this procedure, however, did not lead to penile detumescence. Meanwhile, peripheral blood analysis ruled out hematological disorders. He was admitted with the diagnosis of low-flow idiopathic priapism and scheduled immediate Winter’s shunting. The procedure was carried out under spinal anesthesia using a 16-G automatic spring-loaded tru-cut needle and led to complete detumescence.
The following morning, the penis was flaccid but the patient reported having had a spontaneous morning erection. He was discharged home but, 2 days later, he presented to our emergency clinic with a long-lasting (4 h) sustained painful erection outside a sexual encounter. Again, intracavernous blood sampling was suggestive for hypoxic, low-flow priapism (Ph 7.00, PCO2 13, PO2 2.4) and again ICI of etilefrine 5 mg and corporeal irrigation/aspiration done twice did not lead to penile detumescence. Therefore, he was admitted and scheduled for multiple (two for each corpus cavernosum) Winter’s shunts resulting in complete detumescence. The urethral catheter, left in place at the end of the procedure, was removed on second postoperative day. Persisting complete penile detumescence and absence of spontaneous erections, the patient was discharged on fourth post-operative day with the advice of avoiding sexual encounter.
At one-week follow-up, the penis was fully detumescent but the patient reported a few episodes of spontaneous tumescence. Therefore, he was allowed to start sexual encounters. At one-month follow-up, he reported several episodes of spontaneous tumescence never reaching rigidity and of prolonged (> 3 h) good tumescence but no penile rigidity during sexual encounters, scoring 12 on International Index of Erectile Function [IIEF-5] questionnaire. Following extensive discussion and a written informed consent, he was given tadalafil, 5 mg daily. At 3-month follow-up, he reported progressive improvement of his erections, both spontaneous and sexually-induced, with an IIEF-5 score of 18. At 6-month follow-up, the IIEF-5 score had reached 22; daily tadalafil was stopped and substituted with tadalafil 10 mg on-demand. At 9-months follow-up, the patient reported having resumed normal spontaneous and sexually-induced erections, with no episodes of prolonged erection nor of tadalafil use; did IIEF-5 score remain at 22. Therefore, he was stopped any treatment. To date, at 24-month follow-up he has normal spontaneous and sexually-induced erections without any drugs; IIEF-5 score remains 22.