A 35-year-old Chinese woman, gravida 4 para 0, was referred to our hospital for unilateral enlarged fetal kidney at 23 weeks of gestation. Her three previous pregnancies were all biochemical pregnancies. Her past medical and family history was otherwise uneventful. She denied consanguineous marriage to her 35-year-old husband or any exposure to teratogens.
Prenatal healthcare of the present pregnancy was initially undertaken at a local hospital, and surveillance before 23 weeks was uneventful. An enlarged hyperechogenic fetal kidney on the left side was confirmed at our hospital at 26 weeks. The fetus was closely monitored with serial US examinations. Multiple avascular masses with well-defined margins in the skin and muscle of the forehead, chest, abdomen, and paraspinal region, with a maximum size of 1.9 1.5 mm, were found at 28 weeks . The masses were hypoechogenic or moderately echogenic, and some were anechogenic or hyperechogenic inside. Other new findings were hyperechogenic fetal bowel and mild ascites. The differential diagnosis included soft tissue tumors such as myofibromatosis, neurofibromatosis, and hemangioma.
The parent was provided with pretest counseling, and amniocentesis was performed to detect the potential cause of the fetal ultrasound abnormality. Aneuploidy and copy number variations (CNVs) were excluded by low-pass CNV sequencing, which yielded negative results. Trio whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed simultaneously. The extracted DNA was captured by an Agilent SureSelectXT Human All Exon V6 capture kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and sequenced on a NovaSeq 6000 (Illumina, San Diego, CA) platform with 150-bp paired-end sequencing. A heterozygous variant, namely, c.1681C > T, in exon 12 of the PDGFRB gene (MIM 173410; RefSeq accession Number NM_002609.4) was inherited from the father . Sanger sequencing of the variant c.1681C > T in PDGFRB was consistent with the exome sequencing, indicating that the proband and the father both carried this variant, but the mother’s gene was normal . It was a missense mutation leading to the amnio acid substitution p.Arg561Cys. The variant is classified as pathogenic according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology (PS2_VeryStrong, PS3, PS4, PP1_Strong, PM2_Supporting, PP3) . This variant was also predicted to be pathogenic by the Varsome search engine with 13 points, including PP5_Very Strong (8pts), PM1_Moderate (2pts), PP3_Moderate (2pts) and PM2_Supporting (1pts). Further collection of the father’s medical history revealed a solitary skin nodule that regressed spontaneously. Of note, his mother, his uncle and he all had a skin nodule.
US examination at 30 weeks showed that the fetal masses increased in size, along with bilateral enlarged hyperechogenic kidneys and an increased ratio of cardiac to thoracic circumference and oligohydramnios. The parents were consulted and decided to terminate the pregnancy. However, fetal hydrops with pleural effusion and skin edema developed quickly and resulted in fetal demise at 31 weeks. Labor was induced, and a male fetus weighing 2010 g was delivered vaginally.
On autopsy, generalized masses in the skin and muscle of the fetal head, neck, trunk, extremities, and retroperitoneal soft tissue were noted . These mixed solid and cystic masses were ovoid, measuring from 1 to 3 cm. Microscopic examination of the masses showed multifocal hyperplastic nodules of spindle-shaped cells. Hyaline degeneration and calcification were encountered . Immunohistological staining demonstrated positivity for smooth muscle actin . Visceral involvement was confirmed in the heart and kidneys. The pathological results were consistent with the diagnosis of DFIM.
The parent was provided with genetic counseling for future pregnancy. Since the fetus inherited the mutation from the father in an autosomal dominant mode, the risk of IM in each of the offspring was 50%. Preimplantation or prenatal genetic diagnosis could be considered in the next pregnancy.
We identified 16 cases of prenatally detected IM through a literature review. The clinical characteristics and outcomes of all the published cases, as well as our case, are summarized in Table [, –]. Most cases (15/17, 88%) were detected by US in the third trimester at a mean gestational age of 32 weeks, ranging from 13 to 38 weeks. SFIM was the most common type (8/17, 47%), followed by DFIM (6/17, 35%) and MFIM (3/17, 18%). Visceral involvement accounted for more than half of the cases (9/17, 53%). The involved visceral organs included the lung (3), liver (3), heart (2), spleen (1), intestine (1), and kidney (1). Ten patients (59%) underwent surgery after birth. Three patients (18%) underwent chemotherapy alone or in combination with surgery or imatinib. Twelve patients (71%) recovered well at the time of the last follow-up. Three patients (18%) died within one month after birth due to severe visceral involvement. One pregnancy with a large fetal paraspinal tumor was terminated at the request of the parent. Although the overall fetal mortality rate was 29% (5/17), it increased to 67% (4/6) for cases with DFIM.