A 62-year-old female presented with 4 weeks of right-sided watery rhinorrhea. She reported spontaneous clear, salty nasal drainage without a history of trauma. Two weeks later, she developed a frequent dry cough caused by postnasal drip and gradually worsened especially when lying down, which prevented her from falling asleep. The patient underwent nasal cavity examination and computed tomography (CT) scan of sinuses after visiting department of otolaryngology, and we found a continuous flow of clear fluid to posterior pharyngeal wall and sinus CT showed the lesion tissue extending from the right middle cranial fossa into sphenoid sinus through a local bone defect in the lateral wall of the right sphenoid sinus . Combined with measurement of glucose level in nasal secretions (4.4 mmol/L), the patient was initially diagnosed with spontaneous sphenoid sinus meningoencephalocele accompanied by CSF rhinorrhea, and she was admitted to department of otolaryngology -head and neck surgery on June 29, 2020.
Chest computed tomography (CT) scan was performed and showed multiple flocculent ground glass density shadows in both lungs after consultation with a respiratory physician, which could not be ruled out as viral pneumonitis. The patient had no epidemiological history related to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). COVID-19 was ruled out after the results of both oropharyngeal swabs and serum IgM/IgG for COVID-19 were negative. Meanwhile, test results of TORCH (TOX, RV, CMV, HSV), EB virus nucleic acid, and nine respiratory pathogens were all negative and the possibility of the patient suffering from viral pneumonitis was excluded. Meanwhile, she underwent a pulmonary function test that showed normal pulmonary ventilation, and the serum allergen-specific IgE test showed no seasonal allergy. Therefore, we considered preliminarily that pulmonary inflammation might result from chronic aspiration of CSF. The patient underwent endoscopic resection of meningoencephalocele and repair of skull base defect on July 10, 2020. We found a 4 * 5 mm2 bone defect in the lateral wall of the right sphenoid sinus , and a free mucosal flap of nasal floor was used to repair the defect. The patient’s dry cough disappeared on the first day after surgery. Pathological diagnosis revealed the resected lesion was brain tissue. Nasal endoscopy showed that the repaired area of the skull base defect healed well 2 months after surgery . Compared to preoperative imaging , pneumonitis seemed to be still in progressive stage with characteristics of the consolidation lesion with a mini cavity in the right lung 1 week after surgery although parts of multiple flocculent ground glass density shadows were gone . The lesion disappeared completely 2 months after surgery . Infection-related inflammatory indexes, such as c-reactive protein (CRP), white blood cells (WBC), and neutrophils were completely improved 1 week after surgery .