A 22-year-old Black male with a past medical history of asthma and migraines presented to the emergency department (ED) with diffuse weakness and vision changes. Paramedics reported that they were called to the patient’s home by his mother due to profound weakness. The patient’s history was limited by his somnolence, but he noted progressive weakness, intermittent headaches, and blurred vision in his left eye over the prior three weeks. The patient denied drug or alcohol use or recent head trauma, and reported his immunizations were up to date. He denied a fever, neck pain or stiffness, recent sick contacts, urinary incontinence, saddle anesthesia, or numbness/paresthesia. His mother also reported significant anorexia and weight loss. She stated he had been living in a home with possible black mold. The patient delayed seeking medical attention due to the current SARS-CoV-2 pandemic but agreed to be evaluated after he lost the ability to ambulate.
Vital signs were as follows: blood pressure of 111/75 millimeters of mercury; heart rate of 74 beats per minute; temperature of 97.5°F, respiratory rate of 10 breaths per minute; and oxygen saturation of 99%. Physical examination was notable for left ocular strabismus and anisocoria, with the left pupil measuring 3 millimeters (mm) and the right pupil measuring 5 mm, both reactive to light. He had normal extraocular movements. The patient was symmetrically weak with notable bradykinesia; otherwise the neurologic exam was without abnormality. The remainder of the physical exam was noted to have no significant external findings of head trauma, conjunctivae were clear, Brudzinski’s sign was not present, and there was no nuchal rigidity or photosensitivity. He had no rashes on his exposed skin.
Initial laboratory analysis including a complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, lactate, magnesium, thyroid stimulating hormone, ethanol level, and urinalysis was without abnormality. A chest radiograph and non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the head showed no abnormalities. Polymerase chain reaction was positive for SARS-CoV-2.
Due to the patient’s profound weakness and abnormal ocular findings raising concerns for possible underlying demyelinating disease, malignancy, stroke, or infection, the decision was made by the emergency physician to obtain a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . With the exception of worsening drowsiness, the patient’s clinical status was unchanged during his ED course.
Upon further questioning, the patient reported recurrent oral and genital ulcers, headaches, and vision problems. He denied any respiratory symptoms and his vital signs remained stable in the setting of SARS-CoV-2 infection. He was subsequently admitted to the hospital.
The differential diagnosis included neurosyphilis or other sexually transmitted infection, human immunodeficiency virus, central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma, sarcoidosis, lupus, other autoimmune disease, infectious etiology (toxoplasmosis, Lyme disease, Whipple disease, tuberculosis, neurocysticercosis, cryptococcus, blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, abscess, and SARS-CoV-2), and paraneoplastic process. Per the radiology report, the lesions did not appear to be consistent with multiple sclerosis.
During the patient’s admission to the hospital, consultations with rheumatology, infectious disease, and neurology were obtained. Additional history obtained during his admission included a report that he had been previously worked up for Crohn’s disease, but no formal diagnosis had been made. Additionally, the patient had previously been diagnosed with uveitis. His mother denied any family history of autoimmune or neurologic disorders. A CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was performed, which did not reveal malignancy or abnormality. A CT cerebral venography was negative for thrombosis. A testicular ultrasound was normal. A lumbar puncture was performed and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was significant for neutrophilic leukocytosis with elevated protein, but was otherwise negative for viral, bacterial, fungal, parasitic, or malignant etiologies. Neurosurgery did not recommend biopsy of the lesions due to the location.
After ruling out other etiologies, a diagnosis of BD and NBD was made, using the International Clinical Criteria for Behçet’s Disease (ICCBD) (the condition is clinically diagnosed rather than serologically) and the International Consensus Recommendation (ICR) criteria for NBD diagnosis, respectively . Per the ICCBD, the patient must have recurrent oral ulcerations as well as two of the following: recurrent genital ulcerations; eye lesions; or skin lesion to make the diagnosis of BD. The patient received points for recurrent oral and genital ulcerations and uveitis. According to the ICR, he met criteria for NBD due to neuroimaging findings, CSF analysis, and the lack of a better explanation for the neurological symptoms.