A 56-year-old Caucasian male patient with a goiter, situated in an endemic goiter region, had a 40-year history of thyroid gland enlargement. He presented to the department of surgery with a large goiter and symptoms of hyperthyroidism.
A physical examination, blood chemistry for thyroid-stimulating hormone and free thyroxin, ultrasound imaging and thyroid nuclear scanning established the diagnosis of toxic multi-nodular goiter. Thyroid hyperfunction was normalized with anti-thyroid medication.
Our patient was treated with a total thyroidectomy. The weight of the fresh thyroid specimen was 404 g. The inferior thyroid arteries were identified, isolated, and a loop of silk suture was placed around the artery for traction. His ILN was identified below the artery and fully isolated on the left side after freeing and medially mobilizing the thyroid gland. His right ILN was not found at the usual position.
An exploration was made for his right ILN at the anticipated crossing point of the nerve and the artery. His right RLN was found not to follow the usual course of the nerve in the tracheaesophageal groove. The dissection was advanced in an upward direction through the Berry ligament. A non-recurrent laryngeal nerve was identified and exposed near the Berry ligament. The non-recurrent nerve had a course parallel to that of his inferior thyroid artery. The nerve had extra-laryngeal terminal division, as anterior and posterior branches . The laryngeal entry point of the non-recurrent nerve was the same as the RLN. The two branches entered the larynx separately.
After isolation of his left inferior thyroid artery, his left RLN was explored at the anticipated neurovascular crossing point. The main trunk of his left RLN was first identified caudal to the artery. His left RLN was dissected in an upward direction to the laryngeal entry point, for full exposure of the nerve. During surgical dissection, the left RLN was found to have extra-laryngeal branching at the neurovascular crossing point where the nerve medially passes the inferior thyroid artery. Anterior and posterior branches of his left RLN entered the larynx separately. During routine exploration, we incidentally found an anastomotic nerve branch with a horizontal course on the posterior branch of the left RLN before laryngeal entry .