Autumn 2017. This 39-year-old otherwise healthy woman began to note abdominal bloating and occasional vaginal bleeding. This occurred soon after the placement of an intrauterine device. On 12/1/2017, she went back to her gynecologist to check for placement of the intrauterine device. Although the IUD placement was satisfactory a pelvic mass was noted and the patient was sent immediately for an abdominal and pelvic CT scan. The patient was told that she had a grapefruit-size mass within the pelvis.
December 15, 2017. The patient was taken to the operating room with a preoperative diagnosis of ovarian cancer. A hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy were performed. The patient was told that 99 % of the tumor had been removed. The pathology report was interpreted as high-grade ovarian malignancy.
December 26, 2017. Two weeks later in the postoperative period, the patient developed a fever to 103.7 °F, vomiting, and shortness of breath. The patient was taken back to the operating room for evacuation of purulent material from her pelvis. She was released from the hospital after one week.
January 11. 2018 and February 1, 2018. The patient was treated with two cycles of systemic chemotherapy with a diagnosis of ovarian cancer with paclitaxel and carboplatin. The chemotherapy treatments were poorly tolerated and resulted in a 24-pound weight loss.
February 12, 2018. CT scan was performed which showed recurrence of tumors in the pelvis.
February 27, 2018. PET-CT was performed that showed progression of the disease within the pelvis. A decision was made that the systemic chemotherapy for presumed ovarian malignancy was ineffective.
February 28, 2018. Referral to MD Anderson Cancer Center brought about a review of the pathology slides from the original surgery. Also, a repeat CT-guided percutaneous biopsy was performed. The revised diagnosis was biphasic malignant peritoneal mesothelioma involving ovaries, para-ovarian tissue, and uterine serosa. The final immunostains were positive for WT-1, D2–40, thrombomodulin, CK5/6, B72.3, and calretinin. MOC-31, BER-EP4, CD15, CEA, PAX-8, GATA3, and ER.BAP1 showed absence of staining. FISH studies showed homozygous deletion of P16. Final diagnosis was biphasic mesothelioma with cartilaginous metaplasia. There was a predominant sarcomatoid histology.
March 15, 2018. The patient was started on Nivolumab 240 mg intravenously every 2 weeks . The molecular treatments were continued until October 17, 2018. Initially, there was a response with partial shrinkage of abdominal and pelvic tumor masses. Tumor expression of PD-1 or PD-L1 within the tumor was undetermined.
October 29, 2018. A repeat CT scan was performed and multiple cuts are reproduced as . Filling defects in the right retrohepatic space, nodules associated with the small bowel and its mesentery, diffuse calcification of nodules especially within the pelvis and obstruction of the rectosigmoid colon by masses of mesothelioma was demonstrated by the CT.
November 5, 2018. The patient noted difficulty in passing stool. She required morphine for pain. Large bowel obstruction was partially relieved by coffee enemas performed on a daily basis.
November 12, 2018. Tumor markers CEA = 1.0 μg/ml, CA125 = 20.4 units/ml, CA19–9 = 14.0 units/ml, and CA15–3 = 16.3 units/ml.
November 13, 2018. The patient underwent a 12-hour cytoreductive surgical procedure with bidirectional HIPEC and the placement of a permanent intraperitoneal port for NIPEC long-term [,,]. Ureteral stents were placed at the initiation of the surgery. A complete stripping of the pelvic peritoneum, descending colon, rectosigmoid colon, and rectal resection was necessary. A resection of the apex of the vagina was required to remove disease infiltrating this structure. A cholecystectomy, appendectomy, greater omentectomy, wedge resection of a liver mass from the surface of segment 7 of the liver, small bowel resection with anastomosis, and suture repair of the bladder were performed. The suture repair of the bladder was required because the prior hysterectomy had resulted in a loss of bladder musculature on the visceral surfaces of this structure. HIPEC with 80 mg of cisplatin and 24 mg of doxorubicin into the peritoneal space were delivered at 41.5–42.5 °C in the whole abdomen. Ifosfamide 2080 mg was given by continuous infusion over these 90 min. Mesna 416 mg was given 15 min prior to HIPEC and then 4 h and 8 h after completion of the ifosfamide infusion . A permanent end-colostomy was constructed in the left lower quadrant. A permanent intraperitoneal port was positioned in the left epigastrium.
The patient received 500 mg of pemetrexed in 1 l of 1.5 % dextrose peritoneal dialysis solution once a month for 5 months. The intraperitoneal pemetrexed was supplemented with 75 mg/m2 of intravenous cisplatin. The patient was maintained on folic acid 1 mg/day and vitamin B12 1000 units every 2 months. The patient tolerated the 5 cycles of NIPEC chemotherapy well and her intraperitoneal port was removed without incident .
Patient has been followed with CT scans of chest, abdomen and pelvis on a six-monthly basis since the completion of her treatments. As of April 1, 2023, five years after her diagnosis and 4 years after her cytoreductive surgery, the patient remains free of disease, without disability, and eating a regular diet. No additional treatments were administered after the NIPEC treatments.
The pathology report from the cytoreductive surgery showed a heterogeneous response to the Nivolumab. A peritoneal cytology including a cell block was negative for mesothelioma. Two nodules from the small bowel showed “fibrotic tissue with calcification, negative for tumor.” One of these nodules was cystic. The mass from the right retrohepatic space in abdominopelvic region 1 showed a fibrotic nodule with focal calcification. No viable tumor cells were seen. A portion of the jejunum showed a fibrotic mass that was negative for metastatic tumor. All of the adhesions that were resected showed foreign body giant cell reaction with acute and chronic inflammation. No tumor was seen. The pelvic mass on the left side of the pelvis showed a high-grade malignant neoplasm compatible with a sarcomatoid peritoneal mesothelioma. The specimen from the pelvis included the complete pelvic peritoneum, rectosigmoid colon and rectum, apex of the vagina, and portion of the descending colon. A single nodule from the mass in the left paracolic sulcus measuring 1 cm in greatest diameter was positive by frozen section for malignant sarcomatoid type of mesothelioma. The pathology report was interpreted as a heterogeneous response. The small nodules were devoid of viable cancer cells with larger masses up to 10 cm in diameter showing viable sarcomatoid type of mesothelioma .