A 63-year-old male farmer was admitted to our hospital with a 5-day history of weakness and numbness in both his upper limbs. Five days prior to admission, he accidentally slipped from a height of 2 m when going uphill to cut firewood. After a short rest, he went home by himself. However, his symptoms gradually worsened, where he had weakness, numbness and discomfort in both upper limbs for which he sought acupuncture for both hands. After admission, his physical examination revealed that the muscle strength of both upper limbs was 3/5, the two-hand grip strength was 2/5, and the superficial sensation of both upper limbs were disordered. Hoffman’s sign was negative. After a week of hormonal treatment, the patient’s symptoms did not improve significantly. Cervical X-ray showed his anterior space slightly stretched at the C4/5 stage . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed anterior vertebral high signal and spinal cord signal changes at the C4/5 level , indicating anterior longitudinal ligament injury combined with instability. The patient then underwent ACDF at the C4–5 stage, which was performed unremarkably. Postoperative X-ray of his cervical spine showed that the position and length of the plate and screws were satisfactory . The symptoms of weakness and numbness in both his upper limbs gradually recovered. The patient had no fever, hoarseness, throat discomfort and dysphagia following surgery. Outpatient review of his cervical X-ray at one month and three months illustrated that the position of the plate and vertebral fusion cage did not change.
Five months following surgery, the patient was admitted at our emergency department of Otolaryngology due to dysphagia. Both the patient himself and the medical records denied that the patient had medical history of laryngopharyngitis or other pharyngeal and laryngeal diseases before the operation. Cervical X-ray and computer tomography (CT) illustrated that his plate and cage were in the original position without looseness or displacement. Laryngoscopy revealed edema and whiteness in the throat tissue without obstruction , and cervical MRI demonstrated extensive high signal in the throat tissue . The patient had a low-grade fever, and lab work showed an increased C-reactive protein (CRP) of 13.48 mg/L. After treatment with antibiotics and hormones, his symptoms improved and he was discharged.
Our team later discovered that the patient did not recover after his initial symptoms of dysphagia. However, he did not return to the orthopedic clinic in our hospital. He returned two and a half years after the operation, where further laryngoscopy was done at 30 months , 34 months , 36 months , and 41 months after ACDF. The patient had visited many other hospitals on suspicion of esophageal fistula for which he was recommended surgery, though he refused. The patient eventually was unable to swallow, drink liquids, and suffered from respiratory issues. These symptoms were very critical and endangered his life. As shown in Fig. d, his larynx was completely blocked and his epiglottis could not close. He had to undergo tracheotomy with an indwelling gastric tube. Cervical MRI also revealed a high-signal mass that completely blocked the throat .
After discussing with an otolaryngologist, a surgical plan was made in order to relieve the obstruction through the resection of the blockage in his throat while cleaning the larynx to explore the presence of an esophageal fistula, remove the internal fixation and prepare for direct primary closure. After a long period of low nutrition, the patient was very thin and was ventilated via tracheal intubation . A neck dissection was then performed by the otolaryngologist. When cutting the laryngeal knot, a smooth lump emerged and completely occupied the throat, blocking the entrance of the esophagus and trachea . Unexpectedly, when the lump was removed, no esophageal leakage was found. The posterior wall of the throat was unbroken, without sinuses or purulent fluid . Through the incision of the posterior wall of the throat, the internal fixation was removed. There were no signs of looseness or infection, and the surrounding tissue around the plate was notably edematous . The pathological diagnosis of the resected specimen was polyp formation . After a month’s rest, the incision healed , and the patient’s respiration and diet returned to normal. Furthermore, laryngoscopy showed no recurrence of polyps.