A 30-year-old woman underwent a left oophorectomy, after which she was diagnosed with atypical carcinoid of the ovary. Two years following this diagnosis, she underwent a caesarean section, and an atypical carcinoid in the contralateral ovary was incidentally found. After the atypical carcinoid was pathologically diagnosed, she remained disease-free for another two years. Subsequently, the patient was admitted to our hospital with complaints of chest discomfort resulting from pericardial fluid accumulation. The results of chest computed tomography (CT) showed massive pericardial fluid accumulation, pleural effusion, and an osteolytic lesion in the second rib on the left . Contrast-enhanced CT images of the upper abdomen showed multivisceral spread of the neuroendocrine tumors and metastases to the bones and liver . A whole-body bone scan showed increased uptake in multiple bones, including the skull, ribs, humerus, pelvis, as well as the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar vertebrae . Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) demonstrated hypermetabolic areas in the parathyroid gland, thymus, lung, pancreas, and adrenal glands with multiple metastatic foci in the bones, liver, and several lymph nodes .
For diagnostic purposes, the patient underwent a needle biopsy of the second rib. Microscopic examination revealed that the tumor had invaded the bone and consisted of cellular nests of small, round epithelial cells. The tumor had a distinct and identifiable neuroendocrine growth pattern which consisted of various architectural types. Most tumor cells were positive for synaptophysin and the Ki-67 nuclear labeling index was + 1% . The histological diagnosis was metastases from a neuroendocrine tumor to the rib. To confirm the primary tumor, her left oophorectomy records indicating a trabecular carcinoid diagnosis made at an outside institute were retrieved and reviewed. Microscopically, the main part of this previous tumor had a trabecular pattern, however, an insular pattern was also observed in some sections. A few sections showed a higher number of atypical nuclei, a higher mitotic rate, and focal necrosis of tumor cells. Most tumor cells were positive for synaptophysin and Ki-67 was approximately 15% . The tumor cells were negative for TTF-1, PAX-8, CDX-2, CD99, inhibin-α, and calretinin. The morphological appearance, positive neuroendocrine markers, and intermediate Ki-67 index all suggested a neuroendocrine tumor of the atypical carcinoid subtype. Notably, her original diagnosis was a trabecular carcinoid following her first surgery. Two years after the initial diagnosis, metastasis to the contralateral ovary was observed as an incidental finding during a caesarean section.
Laboratory evaluation revealed a calcium level of 2.17 mmol/L (range: 2.11–2.52 mg/dl). Her presenting parathyroid hormone (iPTH) levels were 33.90 pg/ml (range: 12–88 pg/ml). Serum thyroid hormone levels were normal. Based on parathyroid, thymic, pancreatic, and adrenal gland tumor involvement, the patient was diagnosed with MEN1. She began treatment with everolimus, and octreotide therapy was planned.