A 40-year-old man was incidentally pointed out to have a right intrascrotal mass measuring approximately 10 cm on computed tomography taken to follow up on bilateral hydronephrosis . A year ago, he was diagnosed with mild bilateral hydronephrosis with unexplained obstruction of the distal ureter. Magnetic resonance imaging performed at that time revealed a thickening and poor dilation of the bladder wall from the neck to the trigone, suggesting a congenital anomaly. There was no reported abnormality in the right testis .
Scrotal ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic solid mass . Testicular tumor markers (HCG, AFP, and LDH) were within normal limits. Based on the location and size of the tumor, malignant testicular tumor was suspected. The patient underwent right radical orchiectomy. At the same time, a left ureteral stent insertion was performed because bilateral hydronephrosis and renal dysfunction gradually progressed. A right ureteral stent insertion was also attempted, but was unsuccessful due to the severe flexion of the ureter. Renal function of the patients did not improve postoperatively .
Macroscopically, the tumor was a solid, elastic, yellow-grayish, hard mass measuring 12 × 7×5 cm and continuous with the testicular tunica albuginea but not with the testis . Microscopically, the tumor showed expansive growth without a fibrous capsule. Spindle cells were sparsely arranged, and collagen deposits were apparent in the stroma . There was no invasion of the lymphovascular system, tunica vaginalis, or spermatic cord. Mitosis was very rare, with <1 per 50 high-power fields. Immunohistochemistry showed positive staining for vimentin and BCL2, weak staining for SMA, and negative staining for inhibin-α, calretinin, CK AE1/AE3, STAT6, KIT, Melan-A, S-100, desmin, and CD34 expressions. The Ki-67 index was <1%. These findings suggested a diagnosis of a tumor in the fibroma–thecoma group. There were no malignant findings, and the margins were negative. The patient has no recurrence 8 months after surgery.