A 40-year-old male was involved in an industrial accident. He fell backwards with his back landing onto a metal bar, while another person landed on his thighs which caused a hyperextension moment across his lumbar spine. He experienced immediate pain over the lower back with numbness in bilateral legs.
Physical examination upon arrival showed weakness of both lower extremities. The hip flexion (L2) and knee extension (L3) were Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 2/5 on both sides, and ankle dorsiflexors (L4), long toe extensors (L5) and ankle plantar flexors (S1) were grade 0/5 on both sides. There was absent of sensation by light touch and pin prick over L5 to S1 dermatomes on both sides. The lower limb reflexes were absent. Per-rectal examination showed absence of deep anal pressure, peri-anal sensation and voluntary grip. Clinically, the patient had cauda equina syndrome. There was a horizontal patch of bruising over the thoracolumbar region of the back, resulting from the collision with a metal bar .
X-ray and Computed tomography showed grade II traumatic spondylolisthesis of L4 on L5, fracture dislocation of facet joints, and fractures of left transverse processes from L1 through L4, left L4 pedicle, L4 spinous process and the posterior inferior L4 vertebral body . There was retropulsion of a L4 vertebral body fragment, causing > 50% spinal canal narrowing. .
Emergency surgery was performed within 6 h of injury. There was spontaneous reduction of the L4-5 dislocation upon prone position , the supraspinous ligament was not disrupted from L3 to S1, and the facet capsules of L2–3 and L5-S1 were preserved. Pedicle screws were inserted to bilateral L3, right L4 and bilateral L5. Laminectomy was performed from L3 to L5 for decompression . Posterolateral fusion was performed with autogenous bone graft and tricalcium phosphate. .
Post-operative magnetic resonance imaging did not show any disruption of disc or anterior longitudinal ligaments, and the central canal was well decompressed. At 9 months post-injury, he had regained sphincter control and was able to walk with frame with full neurological recovery over the right side. However, his distal muscle groups over the left side remained weak with grade 2/5 ankle dorsiflexors, long toe extensors and ankle plantarflexors.