A 47-year-old Iranian woman of Azeri ethnicity with a history of benign breast cysts and hypothyroidism was referred to our endocrinology clinic for further evaluation of her new onset galactorrhea. She also complained of occasional headaches and nausea. She did not report any menstrual irregularities, hirsutism, visual complaints, diplopia, polyuria and polydipsia or seizures. She was a housewife with no history of occupational exposure and her familial history was unremarkable. She had never smoked tobacco or consumed alcohol. At admission, her blood pressure was 110/75 mmHg, pulse rate was 85 beats per minute, and temperature was 36.8 °C orally. A physical examination did not reveal any visual field defects and on fundoscopy both eyes were normal with sharp optic disc margins. Her visual acuity was 10/10 bilaterally. Other neurological examinations including cranial nerves were unremarkable. Her initial laboratory work-up showed a moderately elevated serum prolactin level . A hormonal assay did not show any impairments in other pituitary axes and her renal function was normal . She was not taking any medications other than levothyroxine 100 mcg daily at that time.
She underwent a dynamic 1.5 T magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and hypophysis with images obtained every 28 seconds after injecting contrast material. The MRI showed a pituitary macroadenoma measuring 16 × 11 mm extending to the suprasellar cistern causing mild mass effect on optic chiasm . She was started on cabergoline 0.5 mg weekly and after 1 month her serum prolactin was lowered to 1.7 ng/mL, and her galactorrhea was resolved. Her thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) were rechecked and found to be normal again. Despite her laboratory data, our patient continued to complain of headaches and nausea. A perimetric examination did not show any significant visual field defects. A repeated MRI approximately 3 months after her initial one showed no decrease in size of the macroadenoma. She was referred to a neurosurgeon who deemed her persistent symptoms and macroadenoma reason enough for performing TSS. Prednisolone and levothyroxine were prescribed and the mass was removed and reported twice by expert pathologists as chronic granulomatous hypophysitis with negative acid-fast and periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) stains for tubercle bacilli and fungal elements. No eosinophils or features of Langerhans cell histiocytosis were reported.
Tuberculosis was ruled out in our patient by a negative tuberculin skin test, chest X-ray (CXR), and polymerase chain reaction of cerebrospinal fluid and hypophysis specimen. She did not complain of any pulmonary symptoms and a normal CXR and angiotensin-converting enzyme levels ruled out sarcoidosis as well. Serologic studies for Wegener’s granulomatosis and syphilis came back as negative. Therefore, our patient was diagnosed as having IGH. She was closely followed up postoperatively under the care of her neurosurgeon and endocrinologist with periodic office visits and laboratory tests of pituitary axes and a postoperative dynamic MRI of the sella turcica region. At 9 months of follow-up, serum levels of TSH, thyroxine (T4), gonadotropins, prolactin, cortisol, IGF1, and ACTH were normal. Moreover, her MRI did not reveal any abnormal growth or mass and she was free of headache. Fortunately, our patient’s condition was not complicated by hypopituitarism and she was symptom free 9 months after TSS.