A 57-year-old female was diagnosed at an outside institution 3 years previously with PTC with invasion into the recurrent laryngeal nerve, strap muscle, esophagus, and trachea, as well as multiple lymphadenopathy (T4aN1bM0). The patient was obese (body mass index: 35.0) and had diabetes. Her performance status was 0 according to the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group system, and she did not smoke or drink.
The patient was referred to our department for treatment. She underwent total thyroidectomy and paratracheal and selective neck dissections (D2a), with resectional management of the recurrent laryngeal nerve, trachea, and esophagus. She also underwent concurrent reconstruction of the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Three months later, her tracheostomy stoma was closed with a local flap, and radioiodine treatment was performed. After that, she received follow-up care at another institution. Three years after her initial treatment of PTC, fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography demonstrated multiple foci of increased fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the left RPN and upper mediastinal lymph nodes . The patient was referred to our department for treatment of lymph node metastases. She complained of no symptoms associated with the retropharyngeal or upper mediastinal lymph nodes. Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging of the neck showed lymph node enlargement (18 × 14 mm) in the poststyloid component of the parapharyngeal space without invasion of the carotid artery, as well as in the upper mediastinum up to the innominate artery without invasion of the adjacent tissue . Cytology of the upper mediastinal lymph nodes revealed papillary adenocarcinoma. No cranial nerve deficits were observed. The patient was diagnosed with left retropharyngeal and upper mediastinal lymph node metastases from PTC. She underwent upper mediastinal dissection and left retropharyngeal dissection concurrently. The upper mediastinal nodes were resected successfully through the cervical approach with partial resection of the clavicle, though it was difficult to extend the neck due to a previous postoperative neck scar, severe obesity, and short neck. The retropharyngeal mass was then resected transorally.
Transoral videolaryngoscopic surgery was performed according to the procedure reported by Tomifuji et al. . The patient was intubated orotracheally with supine positioning. An FK-WO TORS Laryngo-Pharyngoscope Retractor (Olympus, Tokyo) was positioned so as to provide sufficient working space for RPN dissection. The retractor was then suspended with a holder. A flexible endoscope capable of angulation in 4 directions (Visera LTF-type VP, Olympus) was inserted through the oral cavity while an assistant held and manipulated the endoscope for viewing the surgical field.
To identify RPN, we performed intraoperative ultrasonography with the Aloca Arietta 70 (Hitachi, Tokyo), a flexible laparoscopic transducer manipulated with forceps. We confirmed that the RPN was located in the deep portion of the posterior palatine arch, lateral to the constrictor muscle. The RPN was sharply marginated. Ultrasound showed that the carotid artery was located adjacent to RPN . Transoral ultrasound helped determine the mobility of RPN relative to the carotid artery, through differential application of pressure to the retropharyngeal mass.
We cut the pharyngeal mucosa and submucosa away from posterior palatine arch and could visualize the constrictor muscle. After severing this muscle, the RPN was visible . During our procedure, we used ultrasound continually to confirm that the surgical approach to the tumor was appropriate. The transducer is compact in size, and its cable is thin and flexible. Therefore, even in a narrow working space such as the intraoral cavity, we could perform the intraoperative ultrasonography without the need to undock it.
The operator employed a single-use electrosurgical knife with radiofrequency alternating current (KD-600, Olympus) to resect the tumor by transoral videolaryngoscopic surgery. This knife has several characteristics, as follows: a disposable needle, malleable shaft, and adjustable needle length from 2 to 4 mm. We used the Swift mode (output power 30, effect 4) of the high-frequency surgical system (ERVE VIO300D). This procedure could be completed without the need for intraoperative conversion to an open surgery procedure. The transoral videolaryngoscopy surgery lasted 2 h, with little blood loss and no need for blood transfusion, and no tracheostomy was performed either pre- or postoperatively.
No serious hemorrhage or emergent airway compromise was observed during the patient's hospital stay. There were no serious adverse events that required further intervention. The patient began eating food with a paste-like consistency on postoperative day 2, and resumed a regular diet on postoperative day 5. The nasogastric tube was removed on postoperative day 2. Postoperative swallowing function was normal with a functional outcome swallowing scale (FOSS) of grade 0. A postoperative videofluoroscopic swallowing study (VFSS) showed no aspiration or penetration. The retropharyngeal tumor in this case was diagnosed pathologically as papillary adenocarcinoma without extranodal spread.
The patient underwent 131I therapy postoperatively. She is alive and has remained disease free 20 months after treatment.