A 46-year-old caucasian, female patient, BMI 26.5 kg/cm2, was referred to our Ultrasonographic Gynecological Center on April 2022, suffering from secondary amenorrhea from September 2021 and nonspecific intermittent pelvic pain associated with constipation. An early menopause was excluded after consulting the following hormonal exams: follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) 5.84 UI/L; luteinizing hormone (LH) 2.5 UI/L; prolactine (PRL) 17.2 ng/mL, progesteron 0.15 ng/dl, 17-b-estradiol 65 ng/l; thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) 1.25 µU/ml. Her clinical history included menarche at age of 16-year-old, regular menstruation, one cesarean section and an appendicectomy. Last gynecological visit with Pap smear test was performed in September 2021. No comorbidities were reported.
At our center, an ultrasonographic systematic transvaginal examination was performed. Firstly, the anterior compartment was evaluated with a normal bladder and ureters. Regarding the evaluation of the uterus an endometrial homogeneous hyperechoic echostructure thickening of 15 mm was observed, incompatible with her secondary amenorrhea. A present posterior sliding sign, and absent anterior one was observed, probably due to the cesarean section. Bilaterally, ovaries resulted mobile with poor follicular activity, compatible with the age of the patient. On the left ovary, a follicular unilocular thin-walled cyst with anechoic contents of 30 mm was observed. Finally, during the evaluation of the posterior compartment, at the sigmoid-rectal level we observed an intraluminal solid mass, with increased peripheral and central vascularity of 12x11 mm . Our first hypothesis was a rectal polyp or a neuroendocrine tumor (NET) and an urgent colonoscopy was prescribed.
At colonoscopy, performed on May, a submucosal mass covered by normal mucosa sized about 1 cm in the sigmoid colon was confirmed. Transanal endosonography was performed, confirming the presence of a 12x12mm ovalar hypoechoic lesion, originating from the submucosa, in contact with the muscularis propria . Therefore, endoscopic submucosal dissection was performed with en-bloc resection. The specimen was pinned on corkboard and fixed in 10% formalin. At macroscopic examination, a well-demarcated lesion without encapsulation was observed . At histology, hematoxylin and eosin stain showed that the tumor was composed of spindle cells with low nuclear atypia and low proliferation index Ki 67 1%. The resection margins were free from tumor. On immunohistochemical analysis, the tumor cells illustrate strong immunoreactivity to S100 protein; otherwise, CD 117 (C-KIT), CD34, and Smooth Muscle Actin (SMA) were negative . Finally, the diagnosis was a benign schwannoma of the sigmoid colon. The patient was discharged after 3 days without postoperative complications. After oncological consultation, no postoperative adjuvant therapy was reputed to be needed.
The patient has signed a consent form.