On 1 November 2016, a 27-year-old Thai woman was referred to our hospital from a local hospital with progressive jaundice, abdominal pain, and intermittent fever with chills. She had initially been treated with antibiotics, and she had seemed to recover for a few days, but the symptoms returned, and she was referred to our hospital. She was unemployed and had no history of comorbid disease, blood transfusions, intravenous drug use, or family history of viral hepatitis or liver disease. On physical examination, she appeared unwell with a high-grade fever and moderate icteric sclera. Her abdomen was soft with significant abdominal distention and mild tenderness at the epigastrium with a negative Murphy’s sign; liver 10 cm with a firm consistency, smooth surface, and blunt edge; was shifting dullness-negative; and had no cutaneous signs of chronic liver stigmata.
Results of the patient’s liver function tests were abnormal: total bilirubin 8.11 mg/dL (normal range 0.2–1.2 mg/dL), direct bilirubin 7.06 mg/dL (normal range 0–0.2 mg/dL), aspartate aminotransferase 169 U/L (normal range 0–32 U/L), alanine aminotransferase 182 U/L (normal range 0–33 U/L), and alkaline phosphatase 992 U/L (normal range 39–117 U/L). The patient’s viral hepatitis B and C profiles were negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) of her abdomen had been performed at a local hospital before her referral. These images showed dilation of the left intrahepatic and common hepatic ducts with the presence of an enhancing oval-shaped filling defect 3 × 5 cm in size at the common hepatic duct, which was initially suspected to be a common hepatic duct stone. She was referred to our hospital, where she underwent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) for removal of the stone, which was found to be a large oval-shaped filling defect in the common hepatic duct with left intrahepatic duct dilation. The stone could not be removed. A biliary double-pigtail plastic stent was successfully placed above the filling defect for biliary drainage. A second ERCP was performed for stone removal, but the lesion was fixed and could not be removed. Intraductal ultrasound was used to identify the lesion after removal failure. These images showed hypoechoic content in a large filling defect with internal septation . Intraductal brushing and biopsy were done, and the results were negative for malignancy.
The advanced endoscopy team thought that this lesion might be a cystic tumor, so endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) was performed, which demonstrated dilation of the intrahepatic bile duct and a thin-walled, multiseptated cystic lesion in the common hepatic duct with anechoic intracystic fluid content and without mural nodules or papillary projections . Cystic fluid aspiration was done, which revealed a fluid carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level of 26.41 ng/ml. The EUS features supported a diagnosis of cystic tumor of the bile duct.
Previous MRI with MRCP that showed an enhancing wall, multiloculated, and septated cystic lesion about 5.6 × 2.3 cm in size in the common hepatic duct, which was not communicating with the bile duct , was reviewed again with our abdominal radiologist.
After receiving a complete course of intravenous antibiotics and biliary drainage, the patient was clinically well with improved jaundice and fever. At her 2-week follow up, she was anorexic with abdominal distention.
The definitive treatment was complete tumor resection and left hepatectomy. Gross examination of the surgical specimen demonstrated a large, oval, thin-walled cyst in the common hepatic duct extending to the left proximal intrahepatic duct causing biliary dilation . The cystic content was clear yellowish fluid with multiseptation. Histopathology was done to confirm the diagnosis .
At her 6-month follow-up after complete tumor resection, the patient was doing well, with normal liver function tests and without evidence of recurrence.