A 55-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for a mass in the upper abdominal wall after surgery for UGC 10 years ago.
The patient underwent LC at a community hospital due to acute cholecystitis and gallstones 10 years ago. Histological analysis revealed unexpected papillary adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder with gallstones, which indicated that the tumor had spread to the muscular space (pT1b). Radical resection of gallbladder carcinoma was performed 10 d later. During the operation, abdominal wall tissue (2 cm) around the trocar hole was not removed. The patient recovered well and followed up every 3 mo in the 1st year after surgery, and then every 6 mo or 1 yr with abdominal computed tomography (CT) and tests of cancer-associated tumor markers, such as serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and serum cancer antigen 19-9 (CA19-9). During the follow-up period, the patient experienced no obvious discomfort. The patient visited our hospital 1 d after a mixed mass was found in the upper abdominal wall by ultrasound. He then was admitted to our hospital for further treatment. Enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the upper abdomen showed a space-occupying mass in the anterior wall of the upper abdomen.
The patient denied a history of hypertension, diabetes, and other relevant illnesses. No other surgery was performed during this period.
The patient did not have a family history of cancer.
Old surgical scars of 20 cm were seen on the abdomen, and a hard mass was felt under the xiphoid process. No other abnormalities were found in the physical examination.
Blood analysis revealed that complete blood count, blood biochemistry, and CEA, alpha fetoprotein, CA19-9, CA125, and CA153 were within normal limits, except for CA724, which was 7.98 U/mL (normal range 0-6.9 U/mL).
Ultrasound and enhanced MRI of the upper abdomen showed a space-occupying mass in the anterior wall of the upper abdomen . No recurrence was found in other parts of the body by positron emission tomography (PET)/CT.
Postoperative pathology showed that a gray-red mass had partial cystic degeneration, and hard calcification of the cyst wall. Microscopic examination showed atypical ethmoid hyperplasia protruding to the cystic cavity with massive necrosis and hemorrhage and interstitial ossification around multifocal carcinoma with infiltration into the fibrous stroma . There was no neurovascular invasion, and several foci of cancer cells produced a bone-like matrix . Partial cyst wall thickening and fibrosis with previous hemorrhage with hemosiderin deposition and interstitial fibrous bone were observed . Pathological diagnosis was metastatic or invasive, moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma in the fibrous tissue with massive ossification. After consultation with the Department of Radiotherapy and Chemotherapy in our hospital, immunohistochemical staining was recommended to determine whether the metastasis originated from the gallbladder. Immunohistochemistry showed cytokeratin (CK) 7 (+++), CK20 (++), CEA (+), villin (+++), p53 (-), Ki-67 (+) 40%, CK19 (+++), HBME1 (-), and Wilms tumor (-).