A 57-year-old woman was acutely admitted to the emergency ward after acute onset of pain in her left arm accompanied by chest discomfort, dyspnoea, and palpitations during sedentary work. At her general practitioner, her blood pressure had been elevated to 190/100 mmHg. Nitroglycerine had been administrated, which had decreased the pain and chest discomfort. She had no previous medical history other than the use of propranolol for tremor. With regards to cardiac risk factors, only prior smoking was noted.
At the emergency ward, the ECG showed sinus rhythm with T-wave inversions in lead I, aVL, and V2 . The first troponin I (TnI) was 2910 ng/L (ref. level: normal < 15). Anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapy was prescribed as acetylsalicylic acid 300 mg, ticagrelor 180 mg, and subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin (Fondaparinux) 2.5 mg. She was started in atorvastatin 80 mg and administrated morphine and nitroglycerine as needed. Her pain remitted completely shortly after hospitalization. Second TnI was 3940 ng/L, and an additional ECG showed progression of the T-wave inversions in lead V1–V6 . Echocardiography was performed and showed mid-apical akinesia and apical ballooning. The estimated left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 40%. Strain analysis was performed and global longitudinal strain score (GLS) was found decreased at −13.2% . Due to the abnormalities found on the echocardiography takotsubo cardiomyopathy was suspected and, for further assessment, she was transferred to a cardiac invasive centre for subacute CAG.
At the invasive centre, ECG showed extensive T-wave inversions in V2–V6, I, II, and aVL with QTc prolongation to 657 ms. . Third round of TnI had decreased to 920 ng/L. Due to enrolment in a current clinical trial, very early computed tomography (CT), a CT-CAG was performed which showed an Agatston-score of 0, suspicion of a long 90% stenosis of the mid-left anterior descending artery (LAD), and suspicion of stenosis in the distal LAD . Coronary angiography was performed which showed a ‘step-down’ of the diameter of the mid-LAD lumen. . An optical coherence tomography (OCT) was therefore performed to visualize and diagnose the flow-limitation further. The OCT showed an extensive coronary artery dissection beginning in the mid-LAD, with a near-complete intimal tear, without any suspicion of bleeding entering from the true coronary lumen. No obstructions of side branches from the LAD were seen . The CAG was, otherwise, without atherosclerosis. The patient was therefore diagnosed with SCAD type 2b according to the Saw et al. classification. According to current guidelines, a conservative strategy was chosen and dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) treatment was continued. Because of LVEF of 40%, heart-failure medication with ACE-inhibitor (Ramipril 1.25 mg × 2) and beta-blocker (metoprolol succinate 25 mg × 1) was initiated and planned up titrated in the heart-failure outpatient clinic. Approximately 3 days after hospitalization, the T-wave inversions decreased and QTc prolongation was reduced to 476 ms; however, the ECG was still with remaining T-wave inversions in I, II, aVL, and V1–V6 .
Two months after, repeated echocardiography showed a normalized LV function with LVEF of 60% and a normalized GLS-score at −17.9% . Three months after a repeated CAG was performed which showed normal coronary arteries with no stenosis in the LAD. Optical coherence tomography was performed and showed the dissection in the LAD to be completely healed without any false lumen . The ECG was also normalized without any T-wave inversions. After the repeated CAG, atorvastatin, metoprolol succinate, and DAPT treatment was discontinued.