A 60-year-old woman (height 154 cm, weight 35 kg) was transported to our hospital by ambulance with chest pain and dyspnea. After evaluation, she was diagnosed with left pneumothorax . She had a history of muscular dystrophy, dilated cardiomyopathy, and atrial fibrillation. She had been receiving ASV therapy for 2 years because of type 2 respiratory failure. Before admission, she was classified as Hugh-Jones level 5 with the oxygen flow rate, IPAP, and EPAP set to 1 L/min, 7–16 cm H2O, and 4 cm H2O, respectively. Prehospital respiratory function test and transthoracic echocardiography results are presented in Table . Despite chest tube drainage and pleurodesis, the air leak persisted. Thus, VATS bullectomy was scheduled. It was thought that the operation would not take much time because of the substernal location of the bulla suspected as the cause of the pneumothorax. Moreover, she had severe respiratory dysfunction and refused tracheal intubation due to the risk of tracheal intubation, and she also considered that initiation of mechanical ventilation would make it difficult to wean from mechanical ventilation. Therefore, VATS without tracheal intubation was chosen.
Standard monitoring included electrocardiogram, arterial blood pressure, and pulse oximetry. She was kept on ASV performed with a full face mask in the operating room. The settings were oxygen flow rate, 4 L/min; IPAP, 7–16 cm H2O; and EPAP, 4 cm H2O. After peripheral arterial cannulation, an epidural catheter was placed at the thoracic 5–6 level, and 3 ml of 0.5% ropivacaine were injected through the epidural catheter following 2 ml of 1% mepivacaine as a test dose. Then, an infusion of 1 μg/kg/h dexmedetomidine was started. Before she was turned to the right lateral position, it was confirmed that the extent of epidural anesthesia was from thoracic 2 to 8. Local anesthesia was not performed. A 5-cm skin incision was made in the third intercostal space. When surgical pneumothorax was created by incision of the pleura, her respiratory status remained stable. In addition, lung collapse was obtained with ease at operation while she was on ASV, a form of NPPV. In the middle of the operation, the dosage of dexmedetomidine was reduced to 0.6 μg/kg/h to maintain the Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale around − 2. The leaking bulla was easily identified, and bullectomy was performed. After a negative air leak test, a chest tube was inserted. The operation time was 56 min, and the anesthesia time was 116 min. During surgery, although her arterial blood gas analysis showed respiratory acidosis , oxygen saturation was maintained higher than 90%. In addition, she continued spontaneous breathing and did not complain of pain or discomfort. She was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) with ASV. The chest tube was removed on postoperative day (POD) 1, and she was transferred out of the ICU on POD 2. She was discharged on POD 12 with no respiratory complications.