In January 2021, a 52-year-old female was admitted to the Medical Oncology Department at Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital for dull abdominal pain. The patient was previously healthy, denying hypertension, diabetes and other diseases. Physical examination found obvious pain under xiphoid process, no tenderness or rebound pain in other parts. CT enhancement of the abdomen showed peripancreatic lesions below the caudate lobe of the liver. The enlarged lymph nodes in the posterior peritoneum were suspected of malignancy. Peripheral blood tumor markers indicated normal AFP, CA199, CEA, and CA125 levels. There was only a slight increase in CA72-4 at initial diagnosis, and the baseline result was 13.96 U/ml (reference, <6.90 U/ml). Gastroenteroscopy did not reveal gastrointestinal space occupying lesions. Further endoscopic ultrasound was performed to puncture the hypoechoic mass in the hepatopancreatic space and the pathology indicated poorly differentiated carcinoma . Immunohistochemical results on hepatopancreatic lesions by endoscopic ultrasound biopsy were CK-pan (+), CK7 (partial+), CK20 (-), P63 (-), P40 (-), CgA (-) and Syn (-).
To help identify the primary lesion, the patient underwent a positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) examination . The results showed that there were soft tissue mass shadows in the hepatic hilar region and pancreas head, with a maximum cross section of 35 mm x 34 mm, accompanied by increased FDG metabolism and SUVmax of 17.5. The local boundary with the pancreas neck is not clear. It also found multiple retroperitoneal lymph node enlargements with increased FDG metabolism, with SUVmax of 21.4, and the larger one with a short diameter of about 18 mm. These changes were considered to be associated with malignancy, pancreatic origin, or at least involvement.
As the immunohistochemistry (IHC) results on hepatopancreatic lesions by endoscopic ultrasound biopsy were unable to determine the origin of this CUP case, this patient underwent MDT consultation and was recommended for minimally invasive laparoscopic surgical exploration and biopsy. General anesthesia with endotracheal intubation was performed in the supine position. After disinfection, an inverted L-shaped incision was made in the upper right abdomen, and the abdominal adhesion was separated layer by layer. There was slight adhesion in the abdominal cavity. The right paracolic sulci was opened, the right retroperitoneal space and hepatoduodenal ligament were separated, and masses in the portal vena cava space and beside the left renal vein, approximately 4cm x 4cm and 3cm x 2cm in size, were exposed. They were hard in texture and the lesion boundaries were unclear. No obvious abnormality was found in other organs of abdominal cavity. Pathological immunohistochemical series results based on surgical biopsies were positive for CK-pan, CK7, SALL4 and Villin. In addition, CK20, CK5/6, CgA, Syn, CD56, PAX-8, Calretinin, TTF-1, GATA-3, Oct-4 and AFP were negative. As summarized in , the final pathological diagnosis was a metastatic poorly differentiated carcinoma, combined with an immunohistochemical predisposition to digestive system origin.
Total RNA was isolated from FFPE tissue sections using an FFPE Total RNA Isolation Kit (Canhelp Genomics, Hangzhou, China). The 90-gene expression assay yielded a similarity score for each of the 20 tumor types based on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded cancer tissues. The top three predictions were gastric/esophagus cancer (62.5), colorectal cancer (9.4), and ovarian cancer (6.3), which indicated the most likely site was gastric/esophagus cancer (62.5, ). The Dako PD-L1 22C3 assay immunohistochemistry assay for PD-L1 expression revealed a tumor proportion score of 35% . NGS revealed MSS and high tumor mutation burden (TMB) as 19.3mutations/Mb. Besides, hot spot exon regions and some intron regions of more than 600 genes related to tumorigenesis and cancer development were sequenced by Illumina high-throughput sequencing platform. No druggable driver genes were found. The summary results are listed in .
To understand the pathways and biological functions involved, we further analyzed gene ontology (GO) and KEGG pathways. Finally, we identified the top 9 enriched GO terms as shown in . These findings indicated that gene expression profiling (GEP) results from this CUP may involve cell cycle regulation, protein tyrosine kinase activity, and homologous recombination.
Given the presence of negative predictive biomarkers for immunotherapy, including adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) c.646C>T mutation at exon 7 and janus kinase 1 (JAK1) c.425del mutation at exon5, the patient is at risk of disease hyper-progression if given immunotherapy alone . Therefore, she received nivolumab 200mg intravenously combined with albumin-bound nanoparticle paclitaxel 400mg intravenously and carboplatin 550mg intravenously, every 21 days, followed by regular nivolumab 200mg intravenously every 21 days for 2 years. Clinical and laboratory evaluations were required weekly during first treatment cycle then within 3days of each subsequent cycle. After six cycles of combination therapy, CT imaging indicated complete remission . Baseline elevated CA72-4 returned to normal after four cycles of treatment. With the addition of early supportive treatment, the patient’s chemotherapy-related nausea and vomiting and myelosuppression were satisfactorily controlled. Only mild nausea, fatigue, and grade 1 anemia occurred during combination therapy. The patients were satisfied with the therapeutic effect and showed good compliance. There were no significant adverse events during nivolumab maintenance, and regular follow-up CT scans showed that baseline lesions maintained complete remission within 2 years, without any previously unappreciated gastroesophageal lesions found.