A 3 day-old newborn girl was brought to our center because of poor feeding along with episodes of a generalized myoclonic activity in extremities, cyanosis and upward gaze. The attacks were repeated 4-5 times a day and lasted for 2-3 minutes each time.
Our patient was the first child of non-consanguineous parents. She was born near term (37-38 weeks) for mother's early spotting. Natural vaginal delivery was the birth route, with Apgar score of 9/10. She had normal birth weight (3200 grams).
An increased vertical length of the right ear compared to the left one, with a normal head circumference was present; and an extensive port-wine staining was seen on her feet up to the waist. The foot deformities were seen as wide foot, and wide cleft between fingers in both lower extremities .
There was a non-pitting edema with normal arterial pulses in both feet. Investigations for metabolic concerns were negative. Brain MRI revealed a hemimegalancephaly and a germinal matrix hemorrhage at the right cerebellum . Cervical arteries and those of the lower limbs were of normal flow in color Doppler ultrasonography. The diagnosis of Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber Syndrome was established based on these findings.
Anticonvulsant therapy with oral Phenobarbital 15 mg daily controlled primarily the seizure attacks. However, the attacks relapsed again about 3 weeks later with this regimen. Oral phenytoin drops with the dose of 15 mg twice daily was added to the treatment protocol. The patient was seizure-free with this combination during about one month of follow up.
Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome is characterized by a triad of port-wine stain, varicose veins, and bony and soft tissue hypertrophy involving an extremity. The exact cause of KTWS remains to be elucidated, although several theories exist. Bliznak and Staple suggested intrauterine damage to the and Staple suggested intrauterine damage to the sympathetic ganglia or intermediolateral tract leading to dilated microscopic arteriovenous anastomoses as the cause. Servelle believes that deep vein abnormalities with resultant obstruction of venous flow lead to venous hypertension, the development of varices, and limb hypertrophy. Baskerville et al contend that a mesodermal defect during fetal development causes maintenance of microscopic arteriovenous communications. Finally, McGrory and Amadio believe that an underlying mixed mesodermal and ectodermal dysplasia is likely responsible for the development of KTWS.
Most cases are sporadic, although a few cases in the literature are report as an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. A case report of KTWS in a monozygotic twin with an unaffected twin advances the theory of a paradominant inheritance pattern. This theory suggests that KTWS is produced by a single gene defect lethal in individuals who are homozygous for this gene. Heterozygotes carry the gene but are unaffected. The disease manifests in individuals who demonstrate loss of heterozygosity from a somatic mutation during embryogenesis. In these individuals, only the skin region harboring this cell population demonstrates the KTWS mutation.
Hemimegalencephaly is a rare but unique malformation characterized by enlargement of all or parts of a cerebral hemisphere. The affected hemisphere may have focal or diffuse neuronal migration defects, with areas of polymicrogyria, pachygyria, and heterotopias. MR imaging is the imaging technique of choice for diagnosis of this condition. HME was first described by Sims in 1835 after reviewing 253 autopsies. Although the cause is unknown, it is postulated that it occurs due to insults during the second trimester of pregnancy, or as early as the 3rd week of gestation, as a genetically programmed developmental disorder related to cellular lineage and establishment of symmetry. HME may also be considered a primary disorder of proliferation wherein the neurons that are unable to form synaptic connections are not eliminated and are thus accumulated. Syndromic hemimegal-encephaly is a type that associates with other diseases and may occur as HME of part or all of the ipsilateral body. Males and females are equally affected. However, almost all cases of KTWS already reported with HME were females. summarizes the case reports already published in the literature regarding their sex, age, main problem and associated signs and symptoms.