A 38-year-old woman who presented to the hospital with 1–2 days of fever and
nausea was admitted to our inpatient cardiology service with severe sepsis and
methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) bacteraemia from
an infection of her right-sided cardiac resynchronization therapy with defibrillator
(CRT-D) device. Four months prior to this admission, the patient was admitted for
left-sided CRT-D pocket infection with MSSA bacteraemia requiring device extraction
and re-implantation onto the right side. Her past medical history was also notable
for permanent atrial fibrillation (AF) status post-atrioventricular junction (AVJ)
ablation, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction [nadir left ventricular (LV)
ejection fraction of 15%, which recovered to 35% after ablation]
secondary to non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy (presumed peripartum cardiomyopathy after
the birth of her son 21 years prior), Type 2 diabetes, obesity, and hyperlipidaemia.
Her outpatient medications included lisinopril 2.5 mg daily, metformin
1000 mg twice daily, metoprolol succinate 12.5 mg daily, rivaroxaban
20 mg daily, spironolactone 25 mg daily, and torsemide 150 mg
daily.
On admission, the patient was empirically treated with vancomycin and
piperacillin-tazobactam, subsequently narrowed to cefazolin monotherapy based on
culture susceptibilities. Transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) did not reveal any
vegetations. Cardiovascular thoracic surgery (CVTS) extracted the device generator
and it leads and debrided the infected pocket. Cultures of the device generator and
both ventricular leads grew MSSA. Given that this was her second admission for
device infection with MSSA bacteraemia, we decided to treat for suspected
endocarditis despite the absence of vegetations seen on TEE.
After device removal, the patient remained normotensive and asymptomatic in AF with
complete heart block and a junctional escape rhythm generating heart rates ranging
40–60 beats per minute. Bridge therapy with temporary transvenous pacing was
deferred given her ongoing bacteraemia and haemodynamic stability. She awaited CRT-D
re-implantation in the intensive care unit with transcutaneous pacer pads in place
and dopamine readily available should her clinical status deteriorate.
Blood cultures cleared with no growth on Day 9 of antibiotic treatment. After
confirming that blood cultures had remained negative for more than 72 h, a
replacement device generator was eventually placed into a new subxiphoid pocket. A
subxiphoid pocket with biventricular epicardial leads was utilized instead of
transvenous leads due to the lack of vascular access resulting from prior pocket
infections in the chest wall bilaterally. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE)
performed after device re-implantation showed a trivial (not haemodynamically
significant) pericardial effusion.
On the morning of planned discharge (post-operative Day 7), the patient acutely
developed nausea, dizziness, diaphoresis, and malaise. Though she could not
characterize her symptoms precisely, she emphasized that she felt as though she was
going to die. She was afebrile with a blood pressure of 79/47 mmHg, paced
heart rate of 60 beats/min (pacemaker-dependent in permanent AF status
post-AVJ ablation), respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation
of 98% on 2 L/min of supplemental oxygen. She appeared ill and in
acute distress. Her lungs had clear breath sounds on auscultation bilaterally.
Jugular venous pressure was elevated from baseline without evident Kussmaul’s
sign. Her heart rate was regular with distant heart sounds with no appreciable rubs
or murmurs. She had a trace pedal and pretibial pitting oedema bilaterally. The
remainder of the exam was unremarkable.
Initial laboratory workup was significant for an elevated, up-trending leucocyte
count (19.08 × 109/L from
10.33 × 109/L the day prior) and stable
haemoglobin (10.3 g/dL from 9.7 g/dL the day prior). High-sensitivity
troponin T demonstrated a flat trend upon serial measurement (9 and 11 ng/L).
Inflammatory markers were elevated with a C-reactive protein of 12.1 mg/dL
[reference range (RR): 0.0–0.5 mg/dL] and an erythrocyte sedimentation
rate of 32 mm/h (RR: 0–20 mm/h). Anti-nuclear antibody, C3
complement, C4 complement, and thyroid-stimulating hormone levels were within normal
limits. Electrocardiography revealed AF with complete heart block and 100%
ventricular pacing at 60 beats/min. Chest radiograph showed marked
enlargement of the cardiac silhouette, which was unchanged from prior (see , ). Immediate point-of-care ultrasound revealed a large
pericardial effusion with right ventricular (RV) collapse. Emergent TTE demonstrated
an LVEF of 30–35% and confirmed a moderate to large (1.8 cm
posteriorly) circumferential pericardial effusion with diastolic RV collapse and
systolic right atrial (RA) collapse concerning tamponade ( and Video 1).
The patient received a 1 L bolus infusion of lactated ringer’s and the
cardiac catheterization lab was activated for emergent pericardiocentesis.
Approximately 1 L of serous fluid was removed and a pericardial drain was
left in place. Her blood pressure immediately normalized to 117/76 mmHg and
her symptoms resolved. Analysis of the pericardial fluid showed a normal nucleated
cell count (1075/µL; RR: ≤1999/µL) with a neutrophilic
predominance (51%; RR: 25–36%). Pericardial fluid protein was
5.6 g/dL, while serum protein was 5.5 g/dL. Cultures of the
pericardial fluid did not grow bacteria or fungi. In hopes of preventing further
pericardial fluid accumulation, the patient was started on twice daily colchicine
(1.2 mg). Because a large pericardial effusion could cause lead dislodgement,
we obtained a computed tomography scan of the chest, which confirmed the appropriate
position of five epicardial electrodes: one bipolar/bifurcated lead and one unipolar
back-up lead remained secured to the LV, and one bipolar/bifurcated lead remained
secured to the RV.
Three days after pericardiocentesis, output from the pericardial drain ceased and the
drain was removed. Unfortunately, later that night the patient again became nauseous
and hypotensive with a blood pressure of 85/59 mmHg. Emergent TTE demonstrated
re-accumulation of the pericardial effusion with early systolic RA invagination and
late diastolic RV collapse, suggestive of elevated intracardiac filling pressures
and impending tamponade ( and Video 2). Another emergent pericardiocentesis was performed
with removal of ∼1.5 L of serous fluid and placement of a pericardial
drain. Her symptoms and hypotension again resolved immediately during the procedure.
Because the effusion continued to re-accumulate on colchicine monotherapy, we added
prednisone (60 mg daily) and ibuprofen (600 mg daily) to the
patient’s medical regimen.
Transthoracic echocardiogram performed on the next day showed an interval increase in
the size of the pericardial effusion but no signs of tamponade. Given the continuous
re-accumulation of pericardial fluid and recurrent episodes of tamponade, CVTS
created a transthoracic pleuro-pericardial window and placed a small-bore chest tube
into the pericardial and left pleural spaces. Drainage from the chest tube gradually
declined over the following week. Transthoracic echocardiogram performed the day
before discharge did not show a significant pericardial effusion (Video 3). The patient
was discharged home in stable condition with instructions to evacuate fluid from her
chest tube every other day. Her medications at discharge included a 3-month course
of colchicine (1.2 mg twice daily), a 1-month course of ibuprofen
(60 mg daily), and a prednisone taper. Intravenous cefazolin was continued at
home until 6 weeks after blood cultures were first negative.
At 1-month follow-up in CVTS clinic, the patient was stable, asymptomatic, and was
tolerating her chest tube, which had minimal drainage (<25 mL per
week). She reflected on how frightening her experience in the hospital had been and
expressed gratitude that her acute illness had largely resolved. At 2-month
follow-up appointment, repeat TTE did not show effusion recurrence, and the chest
tube was removed. At 4-month follow-up, the patient reported feeling well and
surveillance TTE was again negative for pericardial effusion recurrence (see , and ). Epicardial lead settings were kept the same,
with RV and LV amplitudes set to 3 V.