An 18-year-old female presented with left knee pain.
She presented to another hospital with a month history of left knee pain and was referred to our department with a suspected bone tumor of the left proximal tibia.
She was the product of a normal pregnancy and delivery, but incomplete extension of her knee joints was noted. She also had ichthyosis-like skin and occipital dysplasia. A chromosome abnormality was not detected and a diagnosis was not established. She was diagnosed with HGPS at 5 years of age with typical features, such as bird-like facies, lack of subcutaneous fat, aged-appearing skin, short stature, and low weight for height. She also had Perthes disease of the hip joints bilaterally and lamellar cataracts.
She had no significant personal or family history.
Her first physical findings at our clinic were as follows: Height, 137 cm; weight, 23 kg; and body mass index, 12.3 kg/m2. She had ichthyosis-like skin, bird-like facies, lack of subcutaneous fat, hair loss, occipital dysplasia, contractures of the extremities, marked flexion contractures of the fingers, and sloping shoulders . Intelligence was normal and she walked without support and she did not use any medications. A hard bony mass was palpable in the left proximal tibia with mild tenderness that was painful when she walked.
Initial laboratory examination was largely insignificant with normal hemoglobin, white blood cell count, platelets, liver function, renal function, and electrolytes. Only thyroglobulin level was elevated (138.4 ng/mL, normal level 1.4-78).
Based on systemic X-rays, the occipital bone was dysplastic, the DIP and PIP joints in the hands bilaterally had flexion contractures, and heterotopic ossifications were seen . The lumbar spine showed marked lordosis and vertebral deformities. The hip joints had post-Perthes disease deformities and the ankle joints had distal tibiofibular synostosis. Bilateral tibial X-rays revealed shafts that were morphologically small in diameter and narrow in the medullary cavities . In the proximal part of the diaphysis, an irregular osteolytic lesion was noted on the anteroposterior view, and posterior cortical destruction and extraosseous calcified lesions were observed on the lateral view . Magnetic resonance imaging of the tibia showed intra- and extra-osseous lesions with homogenous low intensity on T1-weighted images, low-to-high intensity on T2-weighted images, and enhanced inhomogeneity by gadolinium . Bone scintigraphy showed accumulation in the proximal tibia, but no other bone lesions were detected . Thallium scintigraphy showed high accumulation at the tumor site in the tibia in both early and delay phase . Computed tomography showed left tracheal deviation, and a thyroid tumor and multiple small nodules in the lungs were also detected . Metabolic disorders, hypertension, arteriosclerosis, and cerebrovascular disorders were not detected.
Open biopsy of the tibial bone tumor revealed that the tumor cells produced eosinophilic immature osteoids and varied in size with nuclear atypia. Both low- and high-grade variants were included, but the final diagnosis was a conventional fibroblastic osteosarcoma . A fine needle aspiration biopsy was also obtained from the thyroid tumor that was diagnosed as papillary carcinoma.