A healthy 15-year-old boy reported a 4-year history of persistent spontaneous tinnitus in both ears. The tinnitus consisted of constant “clicks” at an irregular frequency, heard on both sides, independent of heart rate, present throughout the day but not during sleep. Clicks were not associated with other facial, cranial or body movements. There was no history of head trauma. No specific psychological trigger was identified. Neither the patient nor his family had any history of tics. The patient denied any urge or relief produced by the movements, and there was no waxing or waning. The patient reported the ability to willingly stop the tinnitus for a few seconds, especially by performing Valsalva maneuver. He denied any hearing or balance problem and had no history of neurological or otological disorder.
On clinical exam, audible irregular “clicks” were perceived on both sides of the patient’s head. Otoscopy revealed normal tympanic membranes without any visible movement . Posterior rhinoscopy confirmed a normal anatomy of the Eustachian tubes. Rhythmic contractions at about 1.2 Hz of both Eustachian tubes, synchronous with the audible clicks, were observed, without any abnormal movement of the soft palate. The patient was able to voluntarily modulate the frequency of the audible clicks and could even transiently stop them . Furthermore, when the patient was asked to open and close his hand at different speeds imposed by the examiner (averaging 1 Hz for the slow pace and 1.7 Hz for the fast pace), the pace of the audible clicks entrained to the imposed frequency. The same synchronous adaptation could be transiently elicited by setting an audible metronome rhythm at 0.75, 1.5 and 2.5 Hz, with progressive but transient matching of frequency with the metronome. This was best achieved at 1.5 Hz .
Pure tone audiometry, tympanometry and stapedial reflexes were normal. Full brain MRI with thin cuts was normal. A trial with Clonazepam 0,5 mg bid for a few weeks didn’t change the symptomatology and was stopped by the patient.