A 44-year-old man with no specific medical or family history underwent curative sigmoidectomy for proximal sigmoid colon cancer with tubular adenocarcinoma. We performed standard regional lymph node dissection with high ligation of the inferior mesenteric artery and functional end-to-end anastomosis. The pathological diagnosis was T3N0M0, Stage IIA, according to the 8th Union for International Cancer Control classification. Moderate venous invasion was observed; however, lymphatic invasion was unnoted. Sufficient proximal and distal margins from the tumor were maintained . Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels became normal after the surgery (from 11.0 to 3.3 ng/mL). No adjuvant chemotherapy was administered.
After 12 months, the CEA level increased to 9.0 ng/mL, although no recurrence was detected on computed tomography (CT) and colonoscopy. After another 3 months, the CEA level further increased to 17.2 ng/mL. We performed positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT), and abnormal fluorodeoxyglucose uptake was detected in the rectum. Repeat colonoscopy revealed a submucosal tumor (SMT)-like lesion in the upper rectum (10–15 cm from the anal verge), and biopsy revealed tubular adenocarcinoma . Lymph node and distant metastases were not identified on CT and PET-CT. We performed curative low anterior resection (LAR) with double-stapled anastomosis under the differential diagnosis of an atypical primary cancer or a rare case of intramural recurrence. We chose tumor-specific mesorectal excision (TSME) with a distal margin of 3 cm from the tumor. The postoperative course was uneventful. The SMT-like tumor was located approximately 20 cm from the initial sigmoid colon anastomosis in the specimen (i.e., at least 20 cm distal from the initial sigmoid colon cancer) . Pathological findings revealed cancer cells with the same features as the initial sigmoid colon cancer, only in the intestinal wall but not in the mucosa and extramural tissue . These findings were unlikely of primary cancer or lymph node recurrence, and likely of an intramural recurrence. Therefore, we determined that the lesion was an intramural recurrence from the initial sigmoid colon cancer. Severe venous invasion was also observed; however, lymphatic invasion was not observed. All resection margins were negative, and the CEA level became normal again (4.3 ng/mL). The RAS and BRAF statuses were both wild-type.
We planned adjuvant chemotherapy with eight courses of capecitabine plus oxaliplatin (CapeOX). However, after three courses, the CEA levels increased again, and a single lung recurrence was detected; this lung lesion was resected and CapeOX therapy was not used. Twelve months after pneumonectomy, another lung recurrence and a local recurrence, which may have been related to recurrence in the lymph node in the preserved mesorectum after TSME at the bottom of the pelvis, were detected on CT and PET-CT . We initiated FOLFIRI (5-fluorouracil, l-leucovorin, and irinotecan) plus panitumumab for unresectable recurrent colorectal cancer. Stable disease was maintained after 14 courses (51 months from the initial sigmoidectomy and 36 months from the secondary LAR).