A 41-year-old female patient developed epileptic seizures in 2008. Further investigation with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a glioma-suspect tumor within the boundaries of the left frontal lobe as well as multiple supratentorial MS-like lesions scattered in both hemispheres. The routine cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-analysis showed evidence of MS-activity, while the complementary MR spectroscopy (MRS) study suggested the presence of a concurrent oligodendroglioma. The ensuing needle biopsy on the left frontal lobe lesion showed solely inflammatory signs of demyelination, suggesting an evolving tumefactive MS-plaque [ and ]. Despite anti-MS therapy (Natalizumab), the patient gradually developed clinical signs of mass-effect during the course of 2010; the subsequent radiology further strengthened the suspicion of a concurrent low-grade glioma. The patient underwent microsurgery twice followed by prophylactic radiation therapy to the surgical cavity shortly after [ and ]; the corresponding histopathologic evaluation suggested the presence of an oligodendroglioma, WHO Grade 2–3. During the next 5 years, the patient underwent systemic treatment due to a series of tumor-/MS- relapses. A follow-up MRI in April 2017 showed a tumor regrowth next to the surgical site deemed not suitable for microsurgery. The contrast enhancing part of the recurrence was treated in October 2017 using gamma knife radiosurgery (GKRS), applying 18Gy at the 50% isodose line . A histopathologic revaluation of the previously collected samples pre-GKRS demonstrated the presence of an anaplastic astrocytoma (AA) [, and ]. MRI-examinations post-GKRS (up to the last follow-up) showed gradual regression of the treated lesion without evidence of adverse radiation effects. At the time of paper submission, the patient was suffering from right foot palsy from her second surgical resection as well as fatigue due to chemotherapy. Her general condition and neurological status remained otherwise stable up to this stage (Karnofsky Performance Status 70). illustrates the post-biopsy timeline relevant to this case (2010–2018).