An 83-year-old woman presented to our department after dislodgement of her dental bridge whilst eating. The patient was suffering from dementia due to Alzeimer’s disease, and had been admitted to a hospital for long-term care. A doctor at that hospital tried to remove the dentures, but failed.
The patient was not cyanotic, and did not complain of dyspnea, but was able to communicate with whispers. Her oxygen saturation was 95%. On physical examination, there was no stridor or suprasternal retraction. Flexible laryngoscopy revealed a foreign body in the pharyngolarynx, almost entirely covering of the supraglottic region other than the epiglottis. It was not possible to visualize portion of the vocal cords . Plain cervical spine radiographs showed the missing dental bridge, projecting from the epipharynx downward to the larynx . The foreign body seemed not easily removable with Magill forceps, because the clasps of the partial denture had pierced the pharyngeal mucosa.
She was, thus, transported to the operating room for removal of the foreign body under general anesthesia. Before surgery, the first author consulted with the anesthesiologists regarding the findings of physical examination of the airway, and several airway management strategies were prepared, including tube exchangers, fiberscopic intubation, and direct laryngoscopes. We also kep a tracheostomy kit ready, in case of failure to intubate. After preoxygenation via a face mask, topical lidocaine was administered into the oropharynx. Following awake video-assisted laryngoscopy with a Macintosh type blade (GlideScope®, Verathon Medical Inc., Canada) revealed the epiglottis, a tracheal tube introducer (15 French, size; Portex) was introduced into the trachea, followed by successfully endotratrachial intubation (endotracheal tube; I.D. 6.5 mm), achieved by railroading the tube over the bougie. General anesthesia was thereafter induced.After insertion of a self-retaining mouth gag for the use of tonsillectomy, the pharynx was observed using an operating microscope. The upper part of the clasp of the removal dentures was seen to be attached to the posterior wall of the soft palate, while the lower clasp had pierced the mesopharyngeal mucosa . By detaching the piercing clasp from the mucosa, the denture, comprising two unit bridges, was extracted via the oral cavity .
Postoperative chest and neck X-rays revealed no dentures or pneumonia. Consultation with a dentist revealed that the offending dentures were probably too loose for her lower gingiva, and hence, replacement with new dentures was recommended. The patient had no further problems, recovering uneventfully without dyspnea or dysphagia, and was transferred back to the previous long-term care hospital.