A 43-year-old Japanese woman had had bronchial asthma since age 3 years, atopic dermatitis since age 13, and allergic rhinitis since age 1. She experienced asthma exacerbations several times a year and had been treated with only short-acting -stimulants as needed from age 20 onward. She had not had severe exacerbations that required hospitalization or intensive care unit admission. At age 29, the woman had developed a persistent slight fever of 37.8 °C, general malaise, headache, abdominal pain, diarrhea, orbital pain, dyspnea, and chest pain. Two months later, she experienced paralysis and numbness in the right hand and both lower limbs and discomfort in the left fingertips. Laboratory tests at the time of onset of these additional symptoms revealed leukocytosis (6790/µL, of which 20.2% were eosinophils) and a positive myeloperoxidase-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (MPO-ANCA) test (21 U/mL, normal: 3.5 IU/mL or less). The serum total IgE level was 91.4 IU/mL (normal: 173 IU/mL or less). Antigen-specific serum IgE to mites was detected at 32.70 UA/mL. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed no abnormalities in the lung field, but transbronchial lung biopsy showed interstitial pneumonia with eosinophil infiltration, and bronchoalveolar lavage yielded 27.7% eosinophils. On disease diagnosis a small rash was found only on the left thigh; it was not palpable. Skin biopsy showed perivascular eosinophil infiltration. Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed dark red signs in the stomach and duodenum, but no endoscopic abnormalities were present in the lower gastrointestinal tract. Biopsy revealed submucosal infiltration of eosinophils in the stomach, duodenum, appendix, and descending colon. Echocardiography showed an ejection fraction of 56.5%, pericardial effusion, pericardial thickening, and diastolic dysfunction. Cardiac scintigraphy with iodine-123-labeled MIBG (metaiodobenzylguanidine) revealed cardiac involvement, appearing as spotty accumulation of MIBG in the anterior wall region and the interventricular septum. The patient was diagnosed according to the Japanese diagnostic criteria for AGA/CSS (allergic granulomatous angiitis/Churg-Strauss syndrome) as having EGPA . The patient had normal lung function at diagnosis when not experiencing asthma attacks, including a VC (vital capacity) of 3.07 L; %VC of 111.6%; FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 s) of 2.87 L; %FEV1 of 99.9%; V50 (maximum expiratory flow rate at 50% of forced vital capacity) of 3.75 L; and %V50 of 93.7%. She underwent bronchial provocation testing with acetylcholine and histamine. Bronchial sensitivity was expressed as the PC20, defined as the provocative concentration of agonist in the inhaled aerosol (acetylcholine at up to 20 mg/mL or histamine at up to 10 mg/mL) leading to a 20% decrease in FEV1. The results were positive: PC20-acetylcholine was 18.907 mg/mL and PC20-histamine was 1.806 mg/mL.
After treatment with pulsed methylprednisolone (1000 mg intravenously daily for 3 consecutive days), followed by 50 mg/day orally of prednisolone and daily treatment with 800 μg inhaled fluticasone propionate without long-acting beta agonist or leukotriene receptor antagonist for asthma, the patient’s mononeuritis multiplex, as represented by paresthesia in both lower limbs and numbness in the right hand, and the cardiac involvement, as indicated by general malaise, chest pain, and dyspnea, gradually improved. Because the patient planned to become pregnant, we initially did not treat her with additional immunosuppressants such as IVCY. She remained in remission for 5 years on prednisolone 7.5 mg, with an eosinophil count ranging from 340 to 620/µL (leukocyte count 6690 to 8840/µL). However, 6 years after diagnosis the patient relapsed, with chest pain, abdominal pain, and paralysis and numbness in the right hand and numbness in both lower limbs. The eosinophil count was 320µL (leukocyte count 8980/µL, of which 3.5% were eosinophils). We were unable to continue administration of 50 mg cyclosporine due to side effects of headache. We increased the daily prednisolone dose to 20 mg and added 50 mg of azathioprine increasing to 100 mg, as well as several cycles of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) (400 mg/kg for 5 consecutive days) at a 3- or 4-month interval, but the woman’s vasculitis, heart and gastrointestinal symptoms, and peripheral neuropathy did not improve, and she sometimes had asthma exacerbations. Eight years after diagnosis we increased the daily dose of inhaled corticosteroid to 1600 mg of fluticasone propionate. We defined asthma exacerbation as the presence of paroxysmal dyspnea and wheezing. Ten years after diagnosis, the patient’s daily dose of prednisolone was increased to 30 mg, the azathioprine treatment was switched to IVCY (600 mg/m2) every 3 to 4 weeks, and once monthly IVIG at the abovementioned dose and monthly mepolizumab at 100 mg increasing to 300 mg were added. However, the vasculitis symptoms did not improve and the patient developed heart failure, requiring oxygen at 5–7 L/min . Twelve years after diagnosis we confirmed the presence of thrombi in both pulmonary arteries and the left common femoral vein on contrast-enhanced CT , as well as multiple regional decreased blood flow in both lungs, predominantly on the right side, on lung perfusion scintigraphy . The number of eosinophils did not increase (leukocyte count 11,080/µL, of which 0% were eosinophils). The patient did not have any risk factors for thrombosis, and we examined protein C (50%, normal: 64–146%), protein S (121%, normal: 60–150%), lupus anticoagulant (1.0, normal: < 1.2), anti-beta2 glycoprotein (< 1.2, normal: < 3.5) or anti-cardiolipin antibodies (< 1.2, normal: < 3.5) in the serum. We were unable to test for mutation in the prothrombin gene and factor V Leiden. The patient’s IVCY was replaced with rituximab 500 mg once a week for 4 weeks 12 years after diagnosis , in addition to 3 mg/day of warfarin potassium and continued treatment with prednisolone 30 mg/day and IVIG every 1–2 months. Mepolizumab 300 mg/month was added 10 years after diagnosis. The heart failure began to improve 2 weeks after the initiation of rituximab the patient’s oxygen demand had decreased from 7 L/min to 3 L/min . However, her symptoms of cardiac involvement and peripheral neuropathy and her gastrointestinal symptoms remained. She received 6 courses of rituximab (once weekly for 4 weeks every 6 months), but her heart failure did not improve and she continued to need inhaled oxygen at 1 L/min 14 years after diagnosis; asthma exacerbations occurred frequently despite the administration of mepolizumab, and there was no overall improvement in the vasculitis symptoms. At 14 years after diagnosis the number eosinophils had not increased (leukocyte count 8700 to 11,800/µL, of which 0.4% to 0.9% were eosinophils). The patient had obstructive impairment of lung function (%FEV1, 76.2%) and high level of 40 ppb in fractional exhaled NO, which we had not measured at the time of diagnosis. The serum total IgE level was greatly reduced at < 5 IU/mL, and no antigen-specific serum IgE to mite allergen was detected.
Fourteen years after diagnosis we changed the patient’s treatment with mepolizumab 300 mg/month to dupilumab 300 mg every 2 weeks to treat the asthma exacerbation. Not only did she have no asthma attacks immediately after switching to dupilumab, but also her vasculitis symptoms, including residual abdominal pain, dyspnea on effort, and leg edema, numbness, and paralysis, improved. The patient received additional treatment with methotrexate for only two months after the first course of rituximab for relapse of heart failure.
Oxygen therapy was discontinued, as by 5 months after the patient had started the dupilumab her heart failure had improved. She was able to reduce her daily dose of prednisolone to 25 mg . The number of eosinophils did not increase (leukocyte count 8700 to 11,800/µL, of which 0.4% to 0.9% were eosinophils) 1–6 months after the start of the dupilumab. The serum total IgE level did not change after administration of dupilumab. One month after the start of the dupilumab, the %FEV1 had improved to 85.9% and the fractional exhaled NO had decreased to 23 ppb.
The thrombi in both pulmonary arteries and the left common femoral vein had improved by 1 month after rituximab initiation , and the thrombus in the left common femoral vein had disappeared by 3 months after rituximab initiation . The thrombus in the right pulmonary artery had disappeared by 1 year after rituximab initiation , and the thrombus in the left pulmonary artery had disappeared by 2 years and 2 months after the start of rituximab (4 months after the change from mepolizumab to dupilumab) . However, some multiple regional decreased blood flow on lung perfusion scintigraphy remained 2 years and 2 months after rituximab initiation .