A previously healthy 19-month-old female child was hospitalized due to fever and diarrhea, which manifested a day after eating oranges. The child’s maximum recorded body temperature was 39.0°C. She presented with green watery stools devoid of mucus or pus and experienced moderate stool volumes exceeding 10 times a day. No symptoms of chills, convulsions or vomiting were observed. Physical examination revealed that the child had a body temperature of 37.8°C, a heart rate of 120 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 30 breaths per minute, moderate nutritional status, an anemic appearance, an absence of rash and foveal depression, clear bilateral breath sounds, a soft abdomen without tenderness, active bowel sounds, and no other discernible abnormalities. The results of routine blood test indicated a white blood cell count was 14.21×109/L, a neutrophil rate was 62.9% and a lymphocyte rate was 29.6%. A routine stool test indicated 5–6 white cells/HP and 2–3 red blood cells/HP. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 32mm/h, and the C-reactive protein count was 22.8mg/L. The levels of IgA, IgE, IgM, IgG, ASO and RF were normal.
Gram staining of fecal smear showed gram-positive slender bacilli with non-uniform color . The acid-fast staining results for the fecal smears were negative, while weak acid-fast staining yielded positive results . The fecal sample was cultured on Columbia blood, MacConkey and Salmonella-Shigella agar (SS) plates for 48h. After this incubation period, there was no bacterial growth on MacConkey and SS plates; however, small, dry, non-hemolytic colonies were detected on Columbia blood plates . The bacteria, identified as N. farcinica by MALDI-TOF MS (bioMérieux, Marcy-l’Étoile, France), were gram-positive rod-shaped organisms growing in a branch formation and exhibiting positive weak acid-fast staining. This bacterium was susceptible to linezolid, amikacin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX), doxycycline, minocycline, imipenem, amoxicillin-clavulanate, ciprofloxacin, and moxifloxacin and resistant to ceftriaxone, clarithromycin, and tobramycin, as determined by the Sensititre Rapmyco Susceptibility Test (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
The treatment regimen consisted of intravenous administration of amoxicillin-clavulanate at a dosage of 30 mg/kg every 12 hours for 5 days. After this treatment period, the child’s fever and diarrhea subsided, and both the blood white cell count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate returned to normal levels. Fecal white cell counts and cultures yielded negative results. Consequently, the child’s condition improved significantly, leading to an uncomplicated discharge.
The pathogenic genes were analyzed through whole genome sequencing which was performed by Personal Biotechnology Company (Shanghai, China) using the Nanopore PromrthION48 platform/Pacific Biosciences platform (Oxford, UK) and the Illumina Novaseq platform 6000 System (San Diego, CA, USA). Within the N. farcinica chromosome, numerous potential virulence-related genes were identified, including the mce operon, and the heat shock protein transcriptional repressor HspR, both recognized as virulence factors of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Additionally, Catalases (KatG), superoxide dis mutases (SodA), and alkylhydroperoxidase (AhpD) were also identified, likely playing a role in the protection of the bacteria against reactive oxygen species produced by phagocytes. The strain was noted to carry six plasmids, with pNF1 (184,027 bp) and pNF2 (87,093 bp) encoding 160 and 90 kDa proteins, respectively. The remaining four smaller plasmids may have originated from Escherichia coli O157:H7 or Salmonella enterica subsp. However, it is unclear whether these plasmids are related to the observed diarrhea. The accession number of the sequences was CP133580, CP133581, and CP133582.