Our case is that of a two-month-old Saudi female . The family has a history of two early infantile deaths from undiagnosed recurrent chest infections associated with generalized skin erythema. Pregnancy and delivery were uncomplicated. Birth weight was 3500 g. At the age of 2 weeks, the infant presented with generalized scaly erythroderma associated with persistent fever and later developed pneumonia. There was no lymphadenopathy and no hepatosplenomegaly. Subsequently, she developed protracted diarrhea and failure to thrive. The patient had elevated numbers of circulating white blood cells and low hemoglobin (Hb). Flow cytometry showed a critically low (absent) B-cell count with a predominance of T cells (82%) that showed high memory (CD45RO) and activation (CD25) expression. There were normal levels of natural killer cells with normal expression of gamma/delta TCR cells, but no detectable CD19+ or CD20+ B-cells. Both CD4 and CD8 T cells were significantly suppressed; only 21% of CD4 and 33% of CD8 were activated in response to phytohemaglutinine (PHA). Humoral immunity was also abnormal, with elevated serum IgE levels. The nature of the T cells and the remarkable absence of the circulating B cells raised the possibility of a defect in immunoglobulin gene recombination. The histopathological finding of the skin biopsy revealed atypical lymphoid cells that are occasionally noted in the dermal infiltrate. The immunostaining showed that most of the lymphoid cells infiltrating the dermis were of T cell type. The staining of S-100 (polyclonal) was negative in the target cell, suggesting an absence of normal follicles. RAG mutation analysis of our patient revealed a homozygous missense mutation (c.1299G>A) in the RAG1 gene leading to replacement of the normal Arginine (R) amino acid to Histidine (H) at the 396 codon position (R396H) of the resultant normal protein.
This is the first report in the literature showing a homozygous R396H mutation in the RAG1 gene presenting itself with features of Omenn’s syndrome. Our patient presented with some of the typical clinical manifestations of Omenn’s syndrome that are characterized by a generalized early-onset of exfoliative erythroderma, persistent infection, alopecia, elevated IgE level and elevated white blood count due to lymphocytosis. Skin biopsy showed autologous T-cell infiltration and the absence of a germinal center, which is consistent with histopathological findings in Omenn’s syndrome .
The patient had no B cells, and the majority of her WBCs were T cells that had a very high expression of the CD45RO memory marker and IL-2R (CD25). Both CD4 and CD8 T cells showed significantly reduced capacity to respond to PHA stimulation. Villa et al. (2001) and Corneo et al. (2001) described patients who showed a nearly complete absence of B cells, reduced number of T cells, and normal NK.
The RAG mutation analysis in our patient revealed a homozygous missense mutation (c.1299G>A) in the RAG1 gene, which led to the replacement of the normal Arginine amino acid to Histidine at the 396 codon position of the resultant normal protein. This mutation has been previously reported in association with Omenn’s syndrome in which this missense mutation (c.1299G>A) was detectable in a patient who was heterozygous for the allele; the mutation was associated with a protein-truncating mutation [,].
The location of this missense mutation (i.e., R396H) is within the RAG1 homeodomain region, which is responsible for the recognition of and binding to the nonamer motif of the recombination signal sequence (RSS) . Biochemical analysis performed on classic Omenn’s syndrome cases that are harboring a one-allele missense mutation in their RAG1 gene maintained partial V(D)J recombination activity, which accounted for the generation of detectable numbers of activated, anergic, oligoclonal T-lymphocytes . In our case, the lack of circulating B cells, together with oligoclonal expansion of T cells, raised the possibility of RAG deficiency despite the clinical presentation. We suspect that the presence of a homozygous R396H mutation in our patient likely destroyed the function of the RAG1 protein and hence impaired the recombination activity that may be associated directly or indirectly with impairment in B cell immunity. The result of this may be an increased occurrence of life-threatening infections, and, without proper treatment, the condition may lead to death within the first year of life. This explains the death of our patient's two sisters who presented with symptoms consistent with Omenn’s syndrome during their few months of life.