A 9-year-old boy was referred to our emergency department for acute and invalidant right lower quadrant abdominal pain. Family and physiological history were unremarkable. Because of the presence of lower gastrointestinal bleeding at 6 months of age, he started dietetic therapy with extensively hydrolyzed formula with good results until 18 months when he started a free diet. He had no history of fever, poor appetite, weight loss or constipation and diarrhea. Physical examination and vital parameters were normal, no lymphadenopathy or organomegaly. His abdomen was tender but he presented diffuse pain on abdominal palpation. For this reason, an abdominal ultrasonography was performed and it showed, in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen, edema of mesenteric tissues and of the last ileal loop, which was collapsed. Moreover, it revealed, an hypoechoic cecal polypoid lesion (41.8 mm by 35 mm) with intralesional vascularization .
He was admitted to the pediatric gastroenterology unit where performed blood tests (red blood cell, white blood cell, hemoglobin level, platelet counts, electrolytes, alanine and aspartate transaminases, total and conjugate bilirubin, serum creatinine, urea, triglycerides, LDL and HDL cholesterol, blood glucose, inflammatory markers and all were in normal range), fecal occult blood tests (positive for blood), fecal calprotectin (200 μg/g) and an abdomen TC and colonoscopy were performed.
The abdomen TC revealed an hypodense formation of the last ileal loop, of about 5 cm in transverse diameter, in the right hypochondrium that apparently invaginated in the caecum. This formation presented inhomogeneous enhancement after contrast medium, highlighting numerous vascular poles. Inhomogeneous thickening of the contiguous loose cells was associated. The CT finding appeared suggestive of an expansive polypoid-like lesion on an invaginated loop .
Colonoscopy showed in the cecum an invaginated polypoid lesion of the terminal ileal loop . Laparoscopy with resection of the polypoid lesion was performed. Macroscopic examination showed a large neoplasm in the terminal ileum wall, partially involving the ileocecal valve.
Microscopic examination revealed a transmural vaguely nodular proliferation, poorly demarcated, made of confluent mature ganglion cells and spindle cells with schwannian features. No mitosis were observed. Immunohistochemistry showed a strong staining of the ganglion cells for GFAP and S-100 and of spindle cells for S100. The neoplastic proliferation affected all layers from mucosa to muscularis propria effacing intestinal wall architecture. In the mucosa it caused expansion of lamina propria among crypts and was associated with focal pseudopyloric metaplasia. There wasn’t ulceration. Interspersed among neoplastic cells there were several eosinophils. . According to WHO 2019 a diagnosis of diffuse ganglioneuromatosis was made.
Specific systemic disorders associated with diffuse ganglioneuromatosis presenting characteristic clinical stigmata such as, mucosal neuromas and marfanoid habitus in MEN2B, cafe’-au-lait spots and cutaneous neurofibromas in NF1, or trichilemmomas and “cobblestone” tongue lesions as in Cowden syndrome, were absent in the present case. However, we referred the patient for genetic analysis of NF1, RET and PTEN genes and all resulted negative for specific mutations. At the last follow-up after one year, the patient appeared in good general condition. General physical examinations, blood tests, fecal occult blood test, esophagogastroduodenoscopy, colonoscopy and MR-enterography were negative.