A 55 year old male was referred from the oncology department with epiphora. His medical history included type 2, Insulin treated, Diabetes Mellitus of 10-years duration and controlled hypertension. He smoked between 20–40 cigarettes per day. One year prior to presentation he had undergone a total rhinectomy with a 4 week course of post-operative radiotherapy for an aggressive sqaumous cell carcinoma of the nose (see figure ). He received a total of 5250 rad (52.5 gray) to the tumour (1312.5 rad/13.12 gray per week, 262.5 rad/2.62 gray per session). Since treatment there had been no evidence of tumour recurrence. He underwent diabetic eye screening through his optometrist and a diabetic retinal check in April 2005 was recorded as showing no diabetic eye disease. There was no other ocular history of note.
On examination the visual acuity was noted to be 6/36 left eye and 6/9 right eye. He had bilateral medial lower lid ectropion accounting for the epiphora. Anterior segment examination and intraocular pressures were normal. Posterior segment examination revealed marked retinal ischaemia present in the posterior pole and macular region of both eyes. Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) confirmed an ischaemic retina. There were no signs of neovascularization (see figure ). The distribution of the retinal changes with severe ischaemic changes in the posterior retina more than in the anterior retina, the relative lack of microaneurysms compared to the high numbers of cotton wool spots and blot haemorrhages and the rapid nature in which the retinopathy developed made the diagnosis of radiation retinopathy likely. Additionally the temporal onset of the retinopathy in relation to the radiotherapy (1 year post treatment) and the dose delivered further supported this diagnosis. Over the next four months the vision in both eyes rapidly deteriorated to 3/60 left eye and 1/60 right eye. Clinical examination revealed bilateral vitreous haemorrhage. FFA confirmed bilateral disc neovascularisation and evidence of a grossly ischaemic retina with little residual viable retina (see figure ). Bilateral pan retinal photocoagulation was considered to be appropriate treatment at this stage as it was thought that the minimal remaining, highly ischaemic, retina close to the arcades may be responsible for the disc neovascularisation. The total area of treatment in RE was 2595 mm2 and in the LE 1825 mm2. At review in September 2006 the visual acuities were counting fingers in the RE and 6/60 aided in the LE. The retinopathy is stable.