A 73 years old African American female presented to the emergency department with sudden onset shortness of breath with no associated chest pain. She was emergently intubated due to impending respiratory failure.
Her medical history was notable for congestive heart failure, atrial fibrillation, primary hyperparathyroidism, carpal tunnel syndrome and spinal stenosis.
She had a longstanding history of heart failure first diagnosed in January 2010 with echocardiogram (ECHO) demonstrating a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 40%. A cardiac catheterization in February 2014 revealed non-obstructive coronary artery disease; hence, the cardiomyopathy was labelled non-ischemic. Due to non-recovery of systolic function and persistent left bundle branch block (LBBB), she had a biventricular cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) implanted in March 2014.
Her pre admission medications included apixaban 5 mg twice a day, sacubitril-valsartan (24-26 mg) twice a day, furosemide 20 mg twice a day, metoprolol succinate 25 mg daily and sotalol 80 mg twice a day.
On initial physical examination, she had a blood pressure of 80/54 mmHg with pulse rate of 75 beats per minute (bpm). Her jugular venous pressure was not elevated. She had clear lungs and normal heart sounds with no murmurs or gallops on auscultation. Her lower extremities were cool to touch with mild pitting edema bilaterally.
Laboratory testing was significant for N-terminal pro b-type natriuretic peptide (NT-ProBNP) elevation at 12914 pg/mL (Normal < 125 pg/mL). Complete blood count and comprehensive metabolic panel were within normal limits.
Serum protein electrophoresis obtained to evaluate for an underlying gammopathy (seen in light chain amyloidosis) demonstrated moderate hypoproteinemia and hypoalbuminemia with no monoclonal spike (M spike). The serum free kappa to lambda light chain ratio was within normal limits and urine immunofixation was negative for immunoglobulin light chain ruling out a gammopathy.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed LBBB and low voltages in the limb leads while the chest radiograph demonstrated bilateral patchy opacities consistent with pulmonary edema.
Transthoracic ECHO revealed a borderline dilated left ventricle (LV) with severe left ventricular hypertrophy and reduced LVEF of 30%-35% .
Due to the discordance between the degree of LV thickness on ECHO and QRS voltage on ECG, cardiac amyloidosis was considered as a possible etiology of the cardiomyopathy.
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) could not be obtained as her ICD was not MRI compatible. A 99Technetium pyrophosphate (99mTc-PYP) planar scintigraphy was subsequently done . Quantitative analysis of heart retention patterns showed a heart to contralateral (H/Cl) ratio of 1.8, strongly suggestive of transthyretin amyloid deposition. An abdominal fat pad biopsy was also done which had no evidence of amyloid deposition on pathologic examination.
A pulmonary artery catheter was placed on admission which showed a central venous pressure of 3 mmHg with cardiac output (CO) of 2.06 L/min and cardiac index of 1.12 L/min/m2. An assessment of cardiogenic shock was made and inotrope therapy with intravenous dobutamine was initiated.
With improvement in her hemodynamic status, she was able to be weaned off the inotrope support and was eventually extubated. Her hospital course was complicated by multiple episodes of flash pulmonary edema. This was attributed to the narrow window between high and low filling pressures which made accurate assessment of fluid status and diuretic requirements tedious. She progressed well with addition of isosorbide dinitrate/hydralazine (40-75 mg) twice a day to her medication regimen prior to discharge home.
Post discharge, an endomyocardial biopsy was done which confirmed Transthyretin Amyloidosis – wild type.