A 28-year-old primigravida (spontaneous conception) at 34 weeks' gestation with no relevant comorbidities and an uneventful pregnancy presented to the obstetrics department with a 2-day history of periumbilical pain. The patient had a subfebrile temperature (37,8 °C) and signs of peritonitis (defensive tension). There were no nausea or vomiting. The obstetric ultrasound revealed unremarkable. The infection parameters were increased (leucocytosis:16,000/µL; CRP-levels:11 mg/dL; range:0–0.5 mg/dL). The performed ultrasound and MRI presented no abnormalities and showed no evidence of appendicitis. The started antibiotic therapy led to an improvement in the symptoms, with only discrete pain being detectable and no fever at all. In the following days there was no more fever, the pain was marginal. The re-examination by ultrasound and MRI the following day did not reveal any clear evidence of appendicitis, but sigmoid diverticulitis was suspected due to an enlarged sigmoid wall. The antibiotic treatment was kept. 36 h after starting antibiotic treatment, laboratory results improved and expectant management was maintained. 72 h (3 days later) after presentation, the patient had diarrhea and a flare-up of pain with severe symptoms with acute abdomen, while the laboratory and clinical parameters remained stable (leukocytes 10 160/µg, CRP 6.86 mg/dL and temperature 37.7 °C).
The fetal cardiotocography showed also a tachycardia. MRI revealed a sigmoid suspicious for diverticulitis with diffuse wall thickening and extensive inflammatory changes including a small abscess formation . Therefore, an exploratory laparotomy with C-section was performed. A eutrophic male preterm infant was born at 34 weeks gestation with a good outcome (pHart:7.32; APGAR:9/10/10). The appendix was inconspicuous intraoperatively. A 10 × 10 cm sized conglomerate tumour of the sigmoid colon and left adnexa with abscessing process was detected. A sigmoid perforation with the presence of a tumorous intestinal segment over 5–6 cm was noted. A partial sigmoid resection with side-to-side anastomosis was performed . There were no other typical or atypical endometriotic lesions in the abdominal cavity. Two red cell concentrates were required to compensate the blood loss of the C-section and diffuse bleeding from the conglomerate tumour. The total blood loss was about 1000 ml. The histological report revealed a large deep endometriotic lesion (4–5 cm) with pronounced abscessing inflammation. The adjacent colonic mucosa was also focally ulcerated . The patient recovered quickly and had no previous surgeries, denied any symptoms of endometriosis, and had no prior evidence of bowel irregularities.
A progestin-based drug therapy is recommended after surgery with complete resection of DIE to avoid recurrence.