A previously healthy 11-year-old girl with alternating confusion and agitation was admitted to the emergency department. She had a three day history of headaches, nausea, and sleepiness, 12 days prior to presentation at the hospital. Behavioral changes included low school performance, reduced food intake, troubled sleep, excessive and unintelligible speech referring mainly to her clothes, and panic possibly due to visual hallucinations, which intensified the day before admission. One week earlier, cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at another hospital was normal and she was diagnosed with an acute psychotic episode and prescribed olanzapine.
Neurological examination on admission noted stupor with agitation, fluctuation in consciousness with loss of ability to speak or make eye contact, limb dyskinesias, urinary incontinence, and self-harming behaviour (biting lips, knocking her head and her arms on the bed) . The first days of hospitalization featured short periods of appropriate communication interrupted by behaviour indicating visual and auditory hallucinations. More frequent and intense episodes of agitation were followed by extrapyramidal signs and symptoms, including dystonia of the left leg and lower jaw movements, rhythmic tongue thrusting, chewing movements, teeth grinding, and lip biting. Seizures, mainly focal right or left sided convulsions were noted. Some of these episodes featured a truncal urticaria-like rash that receded in a few minutes and mild pyrexia (37 to 37.7oC). She was hemodynamically stable, with normal respiratory function.
Extensive investigations for metabolic, infectious, toxic, autoimmune, central nervous system and psychiatric disorders were performed. An electroencephalogram (EEG) demonstrated right-side slowing without epileptiform discharges. Cranial MRI was normal. Her cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination was normal including polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for herpes simplex viruses (HSV-1,2) and negative serology for viruses (adenovirus, enterovirus, cytomegalovirus, measles and rubella), toxoplasma, and mycoplasma, but oligoclonal bands were demonstrated. Toxicology tests on blood and urine were negative. No evidence was found for possible metabolic causes, including Wilson’s disease and porphyria. Thyroid function was normal. Negative anti-nuclear antibodies, antiphospholipid antibody, normal titer of anti-deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) antibody to native DNA and absence of antibody to Sm nuclear antigen excluded systemic lupus erythematosus. Serum immunoglobulin M (IgM) for human herpes virus 1, 2, 6, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, enterovirus, adenovirus, measles, mumps, rubella, chickenpox, parvovirus B19, borrelia, mycoplasma and toxoplasma was negative. Anti-NMDAR antibodies were revealed on immunohistochemistry in her serum and CSF. The association of anti-NMDAR antibodies with ovarian teratoma and other abdominal and thoracic tumors prompted pelvic ultrasonography, abdominal MRI and thoracic X-ray computed tomography (CT), all of which were normal. Testing for related tumor markers (alpha-fetal protein [α-FP], and human chorionic gonadotropin [β-hCG]) was negative.
Initial intervention was mostly symptomatic treatment of acute psychosis including diazepam (5–7.5mg/day IV), fluoxetine (10mg/day orally), risperidone (0.5mg orally 3 times per day) and biperiden (2mg orally 1 to 2 times per day). During severe episodes of agitation, she received midazolam (0.1mg/kg/dose IV).
Anti-NMDAR encephalitis was diagnosed 16 days after admission, and intravenous immunoglobulin (0.4g/kg every 24 hours for five days) and pulses of methylprednisolone (30mg/kg for five doses) were administered followed by oral prednisolone with progressive tapering of the dose. She also received three pulses of cyclophosphamide (750mg/m2), the first pulse 32 days after admission, and then at monthly intervals.
Symptoms improved following immunotherapy with steroids and intravenous immunoglobulin, and the frequency and duration of episodes of agitation and dystonia declined. The need for sedation medication (midazolam intravenous) was substantially reduced and discontinued after the last episode of agitation, on day 33. Fluoxetine was discontinued after the diagnosis of anti-NMDAR encephalitis; risperidone and diazepam were gradually withdrawn four weeks later. Communication and mobility improved 15 days after the administration of the first pulse of cyclophosphamide, and she was discharged on day 71 with mild dystonic gait and significant psychiatric manifestations; her verbal communication was poor, she had recent memory deficits, but she was able to read and make simple calculations. She demonstrated progressive improvement of cognitive and motor neurological functions over the next six months. She recovered fully and returned to school without apparent cognitive or behavioral problems after one year. Repeat testing for anti-NMDAR antibodies in her blood, five months after diagnosis, was negative and the EEG results were normal.