A middle-aged 44-year-old man presented with a 6-month history of progressive cough accompanied by white sputum and hemoptysis.
Six months prior, a chest CT scan at a local hospital in Shanxi Province revealed a solid nodule in the middle lobe of the right lung, along with multiple thin-walled cavities and nodules in both lungs. Tumor or inflammation was suspected initially. The patient symptoms, including cough, expectoration, and hemoptysis, did not improve after an 8-day course of oral moxifloxacin 0.4 g (administered from October 3 to October 10, 2020).
Five months before his presentation at our clinic, a transbronchial lung biopsy and alveolar lavage were performed at a large, class A tertiary hospital in Beijing. Pathological evaluation revealed chronic inflammation in lung tissue and focal alveolar epithelial hyperplasia. Metagenomic next-generation sequencing of the alveolar lavage fluid identified Streptococcus pneumoniae (sequence number 1257), Pneumocystis jirovecii (sequence number 62), and Aspergillus flavus (sequence number 1). The diagnosis was pneumocystis pneumonia, and the patient was started on oral sulfamethoxazole (three tablets, 3 times daily for 3 weeks).
A follow-up chest CT scan showed no improvement in the diffuse thin-wall cavities and nodules in either lung. Subsequently, a positron emission tomography/CT at a large, class A tertiary hospital in Shanghai revealed multiple scattered void-like nodules and vacuolar, patchy shadows in both lungs. Increased fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism suggested inflammatory lesions in hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes, as well as posttraumatic changes in cortical discontinuities in the right sixth to ninth ribs.
The patient received oral moxifloxacin 0.4 g qd for 14 days (administered from December 5 to 19, 2020), followed by cefixime 0.1 g plus azithromycin 0.5 g qd for 10 days (administered from February 11 to 20, 2021). However, his cough, sputum, and hemoptysis progressively worsened, and a chest CT scan revealed a progressive increase in the lung lesions.
Finally, the patient was admitted to our clinic (The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University) on March 1, 2021, for further evaluation and treatment. The treatment timeline is provided in Table and Figure .
The patient had an unremarkable medical history prior to the development of his current symptoms.
The patient had no history of smoking or drinking. There was no known family history of disease.
Upon physical examination, the patient heart rate was 110 beats per minute with a steady rhythm, his respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute, his blood pressure was 122/82 mm Hg, and his oxygen saturation (SpO2) in ambient air was 95%. No rash or joint deformity was observed. Rales were not detected in either lung, and no heart murmur or positive signs were found on abdominal examination.
Several anomalous results were discovered in the laboratory. The rheumatoid factor level was high at 26.2 IU/mL (normal range: 0–20 IU/mL). Tumor markers were also increased, including cytokeratin-19-fragment at 6.6 ng/mL (normal range: 0–3.3 ng/mL), gastrin-releasing peptide precursor at 85.0 pg/mL (normal range: 25.3–77.8 pg/mL), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 at 439.6 U/mL (normal range: 0–27 U/mL), carcino-embryonic antigen at 10.5 ng/mL (normal range: 0.2–10 ng/mL), and neuron-specific enolase at 20.7 ng/mL (normal range: 0–16.3 ng/mL). Additionally, the anti-ro-52 antibody was positive.
However, other laboratory parameters including C-reactive protein, serum white cell count, procalcitonin, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, antinuclear antibody, anti-double stranded DNA antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, and anticardiolipin antibody were within normal ranges. Repeated chest high-resolution CT revealed exacerbation with diffuse pulmonary cystic lesions, nodules, and patchy shadow, prompting suspicion of infection or interstitial lung disease.
Genomic analysis using an Illumina NextSeq 500/550 NGS platform identified an EML4-ALK E13:A20 gene rearrangement.
A multidisciplinary team considered lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia caused by Sjogren syndrome as a possible diagnosis based on typical imaging manifestations. To obtain a larger tissue sample for improved diagnostic value, a procedure called rEBUS transbronchial lung biopsy (rEBUS-TBLB) was arranged. Pathological evaluation of the biopsy sample revealed adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical assays showed positivity for napsin A, cytokeratin 7, and thyroid transcription factor 1, consistent with a primary lung site .
The final diagnosis for the patient is stage IV lung adenocarcinoma with intrapulmonary metastasis (T4NxM1).
After the diagnosis of stage IV lung adenocarcinoma with intrapulmonary metastasis, the patient was transferred to a local hospital for oral targeted drug therapy. Alectinib was prescribed at a dose of 600 mg twice daily.
A telephone follow-up has been carried out, resulting in notable advancements in the patient symptoms. The patient cough, expectoration, and hemoptysis have shown improvement, accompanied by a distinct reduction in the diffuse cystic lesions and small nodules detected in both lungs. As of now, significant progress has been made. .