The patient was a 60-year-old right-handed man who initially presented with 5 months of progressive loss of sense of smell, right-sided epistaxis, and excessive tearing of the right eye. Magnetic resonance imaging showed evidence of Kadish C disease [ and ]. Gross total resection of the tumor through a combined endoscopic endonasal and transfrontal sinus craniectomy was performed [ and ]. A combination of pericranium flap, duraplasty, fat graft, and mesh cranioplasty was utilized for closure. A nasoseptal flap was elevated but was resected due to tumor involvement on biopsy. Pathology confirmed negative margins and Hyams Grade II. Traditionally, the modified Kadish system and Hyams histological grades are used for classification.
Following resection, the patient received fractionated proton beam radiotherapy at an outside institution and concomitant cisplatin. The patient experienced anosmia and a partial right sixth cranial nerve palsy. Five years later, the patient developed meningeal metastases. He received GKRS for a total of 12 dural-based metastases [ and ]. This included a margin dose of 13 Gy to the foramen magnum tumor and 14 Gy to the remainder of lesion. Interval follow-up imaging after GKRS showing treatment response and decreased in tumor volume on sagittal and coronal sequences, which concurred with previous findings on prognostication for low-grade Hyams Grade I/II tumors.
Six months post-treatment, the patient returned with headache and personality changes. There were radiographic findings of radiation necrosis and pericranium flap breakdown [ and ]. Operative debridement was performed. During superficial debridement of the frontal lobes, brisk bleeding was encountered. The source was identified as a friable right pericallosal artery pseudoaneurysm that ruptured. Given the caliber and quality of the vessel in the setting of multiple previous radiation treatments, it was controlled intraoperatively with sacrifice of the vessel, as seen on diagnostic angiogram (DSA) immediately postoperatively . There were also irregularities of the left distal branches of A2 and A3 segments likely consistent with postradiation changes DSA .
For the reconstruction of the anterior cranial fossa, the plastic surgery team harvested vastus lateralis muscle free flap for anastomosis with superficial temporal artery. An external ventricular drain was placed. The vastus lateralis flap demonstrated good vascular supply and appeared healthy on follow-up endoscopy. The patient had postoperative left leg weakness that improved significantly with rehabilitation. Following debridement, the patient received two more treatments of GKRS for new dural metastases on surveillance imaging. The first treatment occurred 9 months later, to six tumors located in the left sigmoid, left tentorium, left lateral temporal, right lateral temporal, left parietal, and left posterior parietal. A margin dose of 14 Gy ranging in 50–80% isodose was given. Five months later, a new lesion involving the left jugular tubercle was detected and GKRS was performed using a margin dose of 15 Gy. Aside from intermittent cognitive complaints, the patient remained functionally independent and active with no new metastases 24-months following the last treatment of GKRS.