A 56-year-old Japanese man with UC (pancolitis type) was admitted to our hospital for exacerbated UC associated with abdominal pain, diarrhea, and bloody stools that had lasted for a month. His past medical history was remarkable for hypertension, dyslipidemia, and Sweet’s syndrome. He had no specific family history or obvious history of infection, surgery, and psychosocial background. He smoked 10 cigarettes daily until his 30s and was an occasional drinker. He was diagnosed with UC approximately 10 months before hospital admission, and treatment with mesalamine (4800 mg once daily) and prednisolone (PSL, 30 mg/day) was started orally for UC at that time. Following the recovery of the patient, the PSL dose was tapered off (tapered by 5 mg/day every 2 weeks up to 10 mg/day and then by 2.5 mg/day), whereas oral mesalamine was continued (4800 mg once daily). At 3 months following UC diagnosis, after reducing the PSL dose from 10 mg/day to 7.5 mg/day, the patient developed pyrexia and skin rashes and was diagnosed with Sweet’s syndrome. The PSL dose was subsequently increased to 30 mg/day, after which the patient recovered, and the PSL dose was further tapered off gradually. Oral mesalamine was discontinued owing to mesalamine intolerance; thus, azathioprine (50 mg/day) was introduced to maintain the clinical remission of UC. Upon admission, the patient was taking PSL (3 mg/day) and azathioprine (75 mg/day). On examination, his body temperature, heart rate, and blood pressure level were 36.8 °C, 80 beats per minute, and 103/73 mmHg, respectively. Further, he presented with tenderness on the left side of the abdomen. His blood test results revealed slightly elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) levels and erythrocyte sedimentation rates . Colonoscopy findings revealed diffuse mucosal inflammation extending from the lower rectum to transverse colon as well as several ulcerations in the descending and sigmoid colon . Stool culture results revealed no abnormal findings.
The patient was diagnosed with moderately exacerbated UC, and PSL was initiated with an increasing dose up to 30 mg/day. Pathological biopsy samples obtained from colonic ulcers were found to be positive for cytomegalovirus (CMV) immunohistochemistry (IHC) and blood cytomegalovirus-antigenemia (CMV-Ag) using the HRP-C7 method; further, 16/50,000 white blood cells and a few inclusion bodies were detected, indicating CMV infection (reactivation). However, the patient exhibited mild improvement after the administration of increasing doses of PSL. Furthermore, a previous study reported that PSL treatment alone can resolve UC-associated CMV reactivation during immunosuppressive therapy without the need for antiviral drugs ; therefore, we continued PSL treatment in combination with granulocyte and monocyte adsorption apheresis (GMA) without antiviral drugs such as ganciclovir.
Subsequently, his condition improved, and he was discharged from the hospital. His PSL dose was further tapered off. However, when the PSL dose reached 15 mg/day, his condition gradually worsened again with symptoms such as diarrhea, abdominal pain, and gradual elevation of serum CRP levels. At 41 days after the administration of increased doses of PSL (when the PSL dose reached 10 mg/day), chest computed tomography (CT) revealed infiltrative and granular shadows in the left lung . An additional laboratory test revealed that the patient was positive for serum cryptococcal antigen. Consequently, he was diagnosed with cryptococcal pneumonia and started receiving fluconazole. Colonoscopy performed on the same day as chest CT revealed that his colitis had not improved and CMV IHC of the colonic mucosa remained positive, although blood CMV-Ag was already negative. The PSL dose was then tapered off the next week; however, fever and bloody stools appeared after PSL discontinuation. Colonoscopy at 19 days after PSL discontinuation indicated worsening of the condition, with ulcers in the descending and sigmoid colon , although CMV IHC of the colonic mucosa became negative. No pneumonia exacerbation was observed on chest CT. On the basis of these findings, we considered that these colonoscopy findings were due to exacerbated UC, not CMV. As VDZ is a gut-selective antibody against α4β7 integrin with relatively fewer side effects , we used it as an additional treatment for UC. This is because the treatment for cryptococcal pneumonia was started at that time and CMV infection had been cured.
Subsequently, VDZ (300 mg/body) combined with fluconazole was initiated, and GMA was restarted after 2 weeks of VDZ administration. Consequently, his symptoms, such as frequent episodes of fever, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and elevated serum CRP levels, were alleviated. Colonoscopy performed 4 months after VDZ administration revealed a clear improvement in colonic and rectal inflammation, with residual slight ulcers and erosions in the colon. No pneumonia exacerbation was observed on chest X-ray and CT. Fluconazole was continued for 6 months, and the treatment course was completed after confirming no exacerbation of pneumonia. Colonoscopy performed 17 months after VDZ administration revealed mucosal healing . Currently, the patient is receiving VDZ every 8 weeks and has maintained clinical remission ; he could continue his treatment without facing any difficulty in his daily life.