A 14-year-old boy with a painless mandibular mass on the right side was referred to our hospital in March 2019. The mass developed approximately 4 months prior to referral and gradually enlarged in size. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a lobulated mass (largest diameter, 12 cm) on the right side of the masticator space. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed iso signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images in most areas of the mass. A non-uniform contrast effect was noted inside the mass , and fat signals were partially detected inside the mass. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography with CT (18F-FDG PET/CT) demonstrated a lobulated mass on the right side of the masticator space with minimal FDG activity (maximum standardized uptake value: SUVmax = 2.14) . No other lesions were detected on contrast-enhanced CT and 18F-FDG PET/CT. Subsequently, we performed biopsy of the right mandibular mass.
Histologically, hematoxylin–eosin staining showed proliferation of atypical spindle-shaped cells with fibro-collagenous stroma. Pleomorphic tumor cells and adipocytes with minimal atypia were also observed. Immunohistochemically, atypical spindle-shaped cells stained positive for MDM2 and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) , and negative for epithelial membrane antigen, mucin 4, alpha-smooth muscle actin, S100 protein, and myogenin. MDM2 gene amplification was detected using FISH . The tumor was histologically categorized as Grade 2 according to the Fédération Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer (FNCLCC) system, and the stage was classified as Stage IIIB based on the American Joint Committee on Cancer staging system. Despite the absence of a WDLPS component, the patient was diagnosed with DDLPS owing to MDM2 gene amplification. Because the biopsy specimen was a small portion of the entire tumor, a WDLPS component might have been present in the remaining area.
Complete surgical resection was the best treatment; however, it was difficult because the tumor occupied the masticator space. Additionally, we considered that surgical margins might be positive even if macroscopic complete surgical resection was possible. Therefore, we decided to administer postoperative radiotherapy if there was microscopic residual disease. Although the effect of chemotherapy might be limited, we administered chemotherapy to shrink the tumor as much as possible before surgery. Chemotherapy was administered using doxorubicin (25 mg/m2/day on days 1 and 2) and ifosfamide (2 g/m2/day on days 1–5). The tumor did not shrink after three courses of chemotherapy. Moreover, no change was observed in the FDG activity (SUVmax = 1.92) as per 18F-FDG PET/CT . Although chemotherapy was not effective, we performed complete surgical resection of the tumor.
Macroscopic examination revealed a lobulated whitish-yellow mass measuring 14.5 × 13.5 × 7 cm . On microscopic examination, the completely resected specimen showed no evidence of a WDLPS component, and most tumor cells were viable. Although the lobulated mass was covered with a thin fibrous capsule, tumor cells infiltrated the surrounding fatty tissue outside the capsule in some areas . Following the 2013 World Health Organization (WHO) classification of tumors, the tumor was not DDLPS due to the absence of a WDLPS component. However, as per the suggestion of a French group, we diagnosed the patient with DDLPS owing to the MDM2 gene amplification for treatment.
Although macroscopic examination showed complete resection of the tumor, the surgical margin was positive. Therefore, postoperative proton-beam radiotherapy (50.4 Gy; 1.8 Gy/day) was performed against the microscopic residual disease. 3 years following therapy completion, the patient did not show any sign of recurrence . Currently, the patient chews on the left side and has good oral intake. The patient is a member of his high school softball team and has a Karnofsky performance status score of 100.