This 79-year-old Chinese male presented with a one-day history of lower abdominal pain and pyrexia.
The pain initially presented at the peri-umbilical region and later migrated to his right lower quadrant. He reported no associated dysuria, nausea, vomiting, hematemesis or melena and has a known past medical history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus and hyperlipidaemia. He was recently admitted for bronchoscopy and biopsy of a left bronchial mass a week prior to this episode. This was later found to be a bronchial carcinoid tumour.
On examination, he had generalized lower abdominal tenderness with maximal tenderness around the periumbilical and right lower quadrant. His abdomen was otherwise soft with mild guarding, active bowel sounds and no rigidity. His vitals were slightly deranged, with a tachycardia (heart rate 110 beats/min), tachypnea (respiratory rate 22 times/min), mild hypertension (132/78 mmHg) and pyrexia (38.4 °C) Otherwise, his oxygen saturations remained normal (96%) on room air and he had no acute confusion or neurological deficit.
He had a raised white cell count of 16.98 × 103/mm3 with raised neutrophils. C-reactive protein (0.98 mg/L) and other parameters were within the normal range. CT of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast excluded any renal calculi and revealed the presence of a dilated tubular structure with mild fat stranding with increased enhancement . This structure and the associated inflammatory changes were presumed to be an inflamed appendix. As the symptoms and radiological evidence fit, a preliminary diagnosis of acute appendicitis was made.
The patient underwent a laparoscopic appendectomy the following day. An intact and mildly erythematous appendix was resected and some clear ascitic fluid was drained from within the peritoneum.
During the immediate postoperative phase, the patient suffered an acute deterioration and had increasing oxygen requirements. There were also concomitant acute changes of consolidation seen on his chest radiograph. These prompted concerns of possible unresolved sepsis. A further review of his CT scans revealed an additional finding of a fine fishbone of 1.4 cm in length. This had caused a microperforation at the inferior border of the 3rd segment of the duodenum, resulting in the formation of an abscess and associated fat stranding along the right pararenal fascia .