A three and a half year-old girl presented to a Base Hospital in Sri Lanka, with fever, jaundice and dark yellow coloured urine of 10 days duration. She was treated with an Ayurvedic Medicine (a form of alternative medicine practised in South Asian countries) for the same complaint few weeks prior to this episode which improved the symptoms transiently. All previous episodes of mild jaundice and febrile illnesses had resolved spontaneously and did not raise any particular parental concern.
The girl was born to non-consanguineous parents and had a healthy elder sister. Her maternal grandmother has history of intermittent jaundice and passage of dark urine. There is no other known history of similar condition in the family. She was born by normal vaginal delivery and her birth weight was 3.92 kg. There were no antenatal or perinatal complications, and no record of neonatal jaundice. Also, there is no history of blood or blood product transfusion and no history of prolonged intake of any medication.
On physical examination, she was not pale but moderately icteric with the liver palpable 4 cm below the right costal margin and the spleen palpable 2 cm below the left costal margin. There were no peripheral stigmata of chronic liver disease. Also, there was no evidence of Kayser–Fleischer rings indicating that hepatolenticular degeneration (Wilson’s disease) is unlikely. The ultrasound scan of abdomen revealed evidence of hepatomegaly with a smooth organ outline and a normal hepatic echo texture. Hepatic and portal veins were normal. Hepatobiliary-iminodiacetic-acid cholescintigraphy (HIDA) scan did not visualise the intra- or extra-hepatic bile ducts, thus indicating the possibility of presence of DJS.
Laboratory data during the acute episode showed total bilirubin (TBIL) of 102 µmol/L (3–20) with direct fraction (DBIL) of 67 µmol/L (<3), that is, DBIL/TBIL at 67% . Alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate transaminase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) were 58 U/L (10–40), 87 U/L (9–48), 218 U/L (80–480) and 11 U/L (2–30) respectively. Coagulation profile was normal. White blood cell count was normal and the Haemoglobin was 10.5 g/dL (11.0–13.5). There was no evidence of active haemolysis in the blood picture. Bilirubin was detected in urine. The serology was negative for viral hepatitis A, B and Epstein–Barr virus. Anti-nuclear antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody and anti-mitochondrial antibody were negative. 24-h urinary copper excretion after pencillamine challenge was normal.
Under the light microscope the liver biopsy revealed enlarged hepatocytes with coarse brown pigments in the cytoplasm. Hepatocytes stained positive with melanin resulting in an insoluble black precipitate and with Periodic acid-Schiff stain (PAS) depicting brown granular pigments from glycogen, mucin and basement membrane . The liver tissue stained negative with Perls Prussian blue, indicating absence of hepatic iron overload. Also, there was no chelation of tissue’s parenchymal substance with Rubeanic acid, thus ruling against the presence of copper deposition and confirming our clinical observation of absent Kayser–Fleischer rings. Her urine porphyrin:creatinine ratio was 61 nmol/mmol (<40) with coproporphyrin isomer I of 81% of total urinary coproporphyrin excretion.
Genetic studies revealed that she is homozygous for the ABCC2/MRP2 gene , resulting from missense mutation variant p.Trp709Arg (exon 17, c.2125T>C). The genomic DNA was prepared from peripheral blood using standard methods (Puregene Kit, QIAGEN France SAS, 3 avenue du Canada, LP 809, 91974 COURTABOEUF CEDEX). Primers’ sequences and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products were designed as follows:
ABCC2_ 17F 5′TGGGGCTTTTAATGGTGAAG3′. ABCC2_17R 5′GTGTAGTTCTTCACCACCATC3′. ABCB11_ 13F 5′ACTTCTTGGTCATGGCTCTCAG3′. ABCB11_ 13R 5′AGCGTGTCCCATCAATTCAG3′.
The whole ABCC2/MRP2 gene sequencing has been previously described . The girl had no significant mutation in the following canalicular transport genes : ABCB11/BSEP, the gene deficiency identified for progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis 2 (PFIC2) and benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis type 2 (BRIC2); the phosphatidylcholine transporter ATP binding cassette Subfamily B Member 4 (ABCB4) encoding the multidrug resistance 3 protein (MDR3), that causes progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3 (PFIC3); the phospholipid-flippase ATPase phospholipid transporting, class 1, type 8B, member 1 (ATP8B1/F1C1), that encodes a member of the P-type cation transport ATPase family, resulting in the progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 1 (PFIC1) and biallelic mutations in the benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis type 1 (BRIC1).
Child’s mother (28 years old) was mildly jaundiced but did not have hepatosplenomegaly. There was no history of cholestasis during pregnancy, and it is uncertain whether she had pruritus and or raised bile acids and hepatic transaminases during pregnancy. Mother’s TBIL was 37 µmol/L (5–21), DBIL 6 µmol/L (<3.4) and DBIL/TBIL at 16%. Other liver function tests were normal. Her urine porphyrin:creatinine ratio was 11 nmol/mmol (<40) and coproporphyrin isomer I of 39% of total coproporphyrin. Genetic studies revealed the mother to be heterozygous for the ABCC2/MRP2 gene, due to missense mutation variant p.Trp709Arg. Moreover, an additional well known missense variant p.Val444Ala in the gene ABCB11/BSEP was found in the homozygous state . It is considered p.Trp709Arg is a harmful and disease causing variant, located in the intracytoplasmic loop 6 (IC6) of MRP2 protein, within Walker A motif of the nucleotide-binding domain 1 (NBD1) . Similarly, p.Val444Ala variant gives susceptibility to hormonal cholestasis or ICP . In the mother, no significant mutation was detected in genes ABCB4/MDR3, and ATP8B1/FIC1.
The young girl remains well with intermittent jaundice precipitated by febrile illnesses. The child’s sister is clinically well and her investigations did not reveal any clinical or biochemical abnormality. For social reasons, we could not clinically investigate the father.