A 64 year-old man of weight 70 kg and height 1.65 m underwent a total hip arthroplasty (THA) in January 2003, due to severe osteoarthritis of his left hip following avascular osteonecrosis . The patient was active and performed strenuous manual labour that required him to ascend and descend stairs frequently. A SEM3 type (Science et Médecine, Montrouge, France) cementless forged Ti 6Al V4 alloy, with femoral stem size (12) coated with hydroxyapatite on the proximal third, with a metallic head of a diameter 28 mm, and an ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) insert (liner) with a metal acetabular cup (50 mm) was inserted. Four years after his original operation (in January 2007), the patient experienced severe pain in the left hip while walking. He was admitted to hospital some days after this episode, with pain in the left hip and inability to bear weight. There was no history of trauma. Radiographic examination revealed a neck fracture of the femoral component without bone loss in the proximal femur . For the extraction of the fractured femoral stem a specially designed extractor (patent pending) was invented. Six days after his admission, the patient underwent a revision THA. The elapsed time was needed for the construction of the extractor. At retrieval an extensive amount of bone was adherent to the device, and the fractured implant was well fixed. At revision the same stem design and the same size (12) of the femoral stem was inserted. The metal acetabular cup was not revised but only a new UHMWPE insert was applied because it exhibited areas of attrition due to friction of the fractured stem. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was mobilized on crutches for 6 weeks. At follow-up examination, seven months postoperatively the patient remains independently mobile and pain free with a good range of motion. The fractured stem and the neck carrying the head were sent off for stereomicroscope examination with magnifications up to ×40. Images were captured through digital camera (Nikon Coolpix 5400 5 M Pixels or Sony DCR TRV80E 2 M Pixels) and further investigation with scanning electron microscope was decided. The head-side of the neck was thus examined with scanning electron microscope (Quanta 200, FEI Company) and images were taken at magnifications from ×10 to ×110.
The examination of the stem and neck shows that this model has a neck machined for a better range of motion and impingement avoidance, with material removed mainly on the medial side, but machining extends also to the posterior and anterior aspects. Apparently, the fracture occurred at the smallest section of the neck, where the diameter is reduced to approximately 9.8 mm, corresponding to a surface area of 75 mm2. The laser etched markings lie on the anterior aspect of the stem, when used in a left hip. Additional laser etched markings are made on the neck, giving the indication relative to the characteristics of the cone (SEM 8. 00' and SpD2 = 12,45). These markings lie also on the anterior aspect, when the stem is implanted on a left hip. Scanning electron microscope figures of the fracture surface of the part supporting the head clearly show that the fracture has ended on the posterior side. Typical beach marks can be seen in the middle of the surface (arrows on figure ). This beach marks are characteristic of the beginning of intergranular fracture, after a first stage of fatigue crack propagation. The second stage of the fracture consists in an intergranular fracture, located in the region marked a on figure , and shown more clearly in figure . The very last stage consists in a shear lip (marked region b in figure and figure ), oriented to 45° relative to the plane of intergranular fracture, and characteristic of the very end of the fracture due to shear stresses. Except for the intergranular fracture, which is very clear, the other fracture surfaces are smeared and polished from abrasive contact in vivo as enhanced by biological lubrication (see fragment contact in figure ). Examination of the edges of the surface with a stereomicroscope reveals marks of tools, probably iatrogenically caused during retrieval of the implant. Unfortunately, these marks lie on the anterior aspect just in the vicinity of the laser markings, and interfere with possible other marks of fracture. Scanning electron microscope examination of the edge of the surface near the laser markings cannot show any clear evidence of initiation of fatigue fracture, mainly because of the tool marks and of the abraded surface in this region . No typical striations could be found near the edge of the surface. The marks shown in figure (near the "O") are more probably due to attrition because there are several such marks in this region, with different orientations.