A 74-year-old Japanese man underwent an ultrasound examination for the evaluation of cervical atherosclerosis during which an incidental thyroid tumor was discovered. He had had a cerebral infarction eight years previously, which had been treated conservatively without major complication. There were no familial histories of thyroid disease or immune disorder claimed. Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNA) of the thyroid tumor revealed clusters of many large atypical cells varying in size, and poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma was suspected. He was, then, referred to our institute for further treatment.
On admission, he did not present with rapid enlargement of the tumor, dysphagia, hoarseness, or compression symptoms. The right lobe of the thyroid was diffusely swollen with a smooth surface and normal consistency. No local inflammatory reaction, such as redness and edema on the skin or tenderness, was recognized. No cervical lymphadenopathy was palpable. There were no abnormal findings in his blood count, blood chemistry, and thyroid function. The serum levels of calcitonin, carcinoembrionic antigen, and thyroglobulin were within the normal limits (Table ). An ultrasonographic examination demonstrated swelling of the right lobe of the thyroid. Several irregular-shaped lesions were found in the right lobe with a maximal diameter of 21mm. Each lesion showed similar appearance; a well-demarcated lobular low-echoic lesion with diffuse short linear high-echoic spots inside (Figure ). A similar irregular-shaped mass was revealed by contrast-enhanced computed tomography. No abnormal nodule in the mediastinum or the lung was found. Several reactive lymph node swellings were found along with right juglar chain. Repeated FNA revealed normal thyroid follicular cells with abundant lymphatic cells in the background. However, there was no evidence of tumor cells. Right lobectomy was conducted intending to clarify the pathological diagnosis with the suspicions of lymphoma, or poorly differentiated cancer of the thyroid according to the information of the primary physician.
During the operation, the lesion could not be found on the surface of the thyroid. Several small lymph nodes around the right lobe were recognized. On the cut surface, the tumor was lobular and milky white in color, irregularly but clearly demarcated from the surrounding thyroid gland (Figure ). A frozen section demonstrated marked lymphoid proliferation suggestive of lymphoma. However, immunostaining for a correct final diagnosis was advised. A pathological investigation of the operative specimen revealed several nodular tumors, leaving normal thyroid tissues between the nodules. Marked lymphatic infiltrations were found within the thyroid gland forming various nodules of lymphatic proliferations. A mixture of small and large lymphocytes with irregular nuclear borders was shown on high-power field. Tingible body macrophage, or mitosis were also recognized. There was no tendency for differentiation to the plasma cell, or no site to show the lymphoepithelial lesion (Figure ). On immunohistochemical study, both the lymph follicle and the mantle zone were positive for B-cell marker (CD-20: Figure a). A diffuse positive nuclear stain of cells within the follicle was shown for follicular origin B-cell marker (bcl-6, CD-10: Figure b), but no cells between follicles showed a positive stain for these markers. Various degrees of T-cell marker (CD-3)-positive cell infiltration was found within or around the follicles (Figure c). Bcl-2-positive cells were found only at the marginal zone of the follicle. No bcl-2-positive B cell was found in the germ center (Figure d). Dendric cells within the follicle were stained positively by follicular-dendric cell marker (CD-35), and demonstrated the preservation of a dense network-like appearance (Figure e). Positive reactivity for both κ and λ light chain immunoglobulin (Ig) was found by in situ hybridization (Figure f, g, h). Furthermore, multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis showed no rearrangement of IgH, indicating polyclonal proliferation of the lymphoid cells (data not shown). A final diagnosis of reactive lymphoid hyperplasia of the thyroid was made according to these pathological findings.
There was no particular event during the initial period of the postoperative course. No abnormal accumulation was found by whole-body Ga schintigraphy. Two months after the operation, our patient began to feel finger stiffness and knee pain. Progressive hypothyroidism became obvious with edema in his lower extremities, and 50μg of levothyroxine was supplemented, but his arthralgia progressed. On additional examination, systemic immune disorders as well as autoimmune reaction to the thyroid gland were demonstrated, and he was revealed to have systemic rheumatic arthritis (Table ). Two hundred milligrams of bucillamine was initiated and his arthralgia relieved within a month. Postoperative ultrasonography demonstrated diffuse decrease in echogenesity without any tumorous lesion in the residual left lobe of the thyroid gland. Additional impairment of thyroid function was noted. These were consistent with the typical findings of chronic autoimmune thyroiditis. He is well without severe symptoms at 36 months from surgery, with the administration of 100μg of levothyroxine, and 200mg of bucillamine.