A 51-year-old male patient presented to the Cardiovascular Surgery Department with a complaint of moderate to severe mitral stenosis combined with mild to moderate regurgitation on echocardiography for 1 mo.
The patient presented to a local hospital 1 mo ago with chest tightness and was diagnosed with “atrial fibrillation”. Echocardiography showed combined valvular disease including moderate to severe mitral stenosis combined with mild to moderate regurgitation, mild aortic valve insufficiency, mild tricuspid valve insufficiency, decreased left ventricular function, and a small amount of pericardial effusion. The patient was admitted to our hospital for mitral valve replacement (MVR).
The patient had a history of atrial fibrillation. Prior to admission to our hospital, he had a short bout of diarrhoea lasting approximately 3 d, which improved with the use of "anti-diarrhoea medication" (not specified).
The patient had no personal and family history.
The patient had a temperature of 36.5°C, heart rate of 91 beats per minute (bpm), respiratory rate of 15 cycles per minute (cpm), and blood pressure of 131/79 mmHg on admission. Cardiac auscultation revealed a severe diastolic murmur in the mitral region and a systolic murmur in the tricuspid valve. Cardiac percussion showed enlargement of the cardiac border to both sides.
Blood analysis, blood biochemistries, prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times, D-dimers, as well as arterial blood gas were normal.
The echocardiogram of the patient at our hospital showed severe mitral stenosis with mild mitral regurgitation, mild and moderate tricuspid regurgitation, mild aortic regurgitation, and mild pulmonary hypertension. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed an enlarged cardiac shadow and a small amount of pericardial effusion. The electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation.
On the second day of admission, the patient was found to have slurred speech, a shallow left nasolabial fold, and grade 4 muscle strength in the left limb.
Cranial CT showed acute cerebral infarction in the right frontotemporal occipital lobe with a small amount of post-infarct blood leakage. Considering the patient's sudden acute cerebral infarction complicated by cerebral haemorrhage, we discussed and decided to postpone the surgical treatment.
On the 9th day of hospitalization, the patient developed a sudden high fever with a temperature of 38.6°C. The examination showed a heart rate of 170 bpm, blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 25 cpm. The patient was transferred to the Cardiac Intensive Care Unit (CICU) for further treatment.
After admission to the CICU, blood count analysis showed a white blood cell count of 7010/mm3 (85.6% neutrophils), and blood gas analysis showed a lactate level of 2.8 mmol/L and a calcitonin level of 0.98 Pg/L. Bedside echocardiogram showed a vegetation attaching to the anterior leaflet of mitral valve .
The initial diagnosis was severe mitral stenosis with mild regurgitation, moderate tricuspid regurgitation, mild aortic regurgitation, mild pulmonary hypertension, pericardial effusion, atrial fibrillation, acute cerebral infarction, acute cerebral haemorrhage, shock, and acute IE.
Appropriate microbiological analysis was performed to determine the etiology and susceptibility to antibiotics in this patient with acute IE. Gram staining, antacid bacillus staining, and culture for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria were performed on blood and intraoperatively resected valve vegetation. Samples were first enriched in thioglycolic acid broth, incubated overnight, and then inoculated on blood agar plates, McConkey agar plates, Sabouraud agar plates, anaerobic growth media, and Lö wenstein-Jensen medium. Blood cultures and superfluous cultures were suggestive of positive Gram-negative bacilli and L. adecarboxylata infection. The organism was sensitive to a variety of antibiotics, including ampicillin, amikacin, aztreonam, ciprofloxacin, cefazolin, cefepime, cefotaxime, gentamicin, imipenem, meropenem, and piperacillin.