A 56-year-old Malaysian woman with a past medical history of anemia presented with lower extremity swelling, early satiety, and abdominal discomfort of 1 month’s duration. She reported worsening of leg edema upon standing for short periods of time. She denied chest pain or shortness of breath. She had emigrated from Malaysia approximately 10 years before presentation. She had been taking oral iron supplementation and omeprazole. A colonoscopy had been performed 1 year before presentation to assess for gastrointestinal bleeding, and the results were normal. Her Helicobacter pylori breath test result was positive, and she was started on triple therapy with two antibiotics plus a proton pump inhibitor. An endoscopic examination was done, and the result was suggestive of a mass, though the diagnosis was not definitive. Her family history was not significant. Her social history was significant for frequent consumption of fish in Malaysia and was negative for alcohol, cigarette, or drug use.
Upon her admission to Stanford University Hospital, she reported a 10-lb weight gain. The weight gain was caused by edema, though she felt a sensation that she was becoming thinner. She reported that she was unable to stand for more than 15 minutes owing to accumulation of fluid in her legs. She reported that her mobility was thus limited. Her vital signs were stable, with a body temperature of 37°C, blood pressure of 134/78mmHg, pulse of 79 beats per minute, and respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute. Her O2 saturation was 100%. Her physical examination revealed a grade 3/6 systolic ejection murmur heard best at the left lower sternal border. Her abdomen was non-tender to palpation, and her bowel sounds were normoactive. Examination of the extremities revealed 2+ non-pitting edema extending to her thighs bilaterally. She had no palpable peri-umbilical or supraclavicular nodes. She had no other palpable lymphadenopathy. Her skin examination was normal. Laboratory values showed hemoglobin of 8.5g/dl with mean corpuscular volume of 71.2fl. Her reticulocyte count was 4.36%. An iron panel revealed ferritin of 32ng/ml, transferrin of 403μg/dl, transferrin saturation of 3%, and iron level of 13μg/dl. Her platelet count was 519,000/μl, and her white blood cell count was normal. Her metabolic panel was significant for sodium of 134mmol/L. Her liver function tests were significant for aspartate aminotransferase of 122U/L, alkaline phosphatase of 478U/L, and albumin of 2.3g/dl. Her electrocardiogram showed T-wave inversions in leads V1–V4 and an S1Q3T3 pattern.
The differential diagnosis included pulmonary embolism and myocardial injury or ischemia. Her troponin level was negative. An ultrasound of the lower extremities showed no deep vein thrombosis. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed severe intrahepatic narrowing of the IVC due to mass effect and an ill-defined 3cm×2.9cm mass involving the antrum of the stomach . The CT scans were also notable for omental implants and nodular extension of the gastric tumor posteriorly into the lesser sac. She had a small amount of ascites. The gastric mass was biopsied during endoscopy (initially at an outside hospital). The histologic sections of the gastric antrum mass biopsy revealed an invasive, moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of intestinal type, with formation of glands and nests . The biopsy had a pancytokeratin-positive neoplasm. The patient was started on chemotherapy with capecitabine 1500mg by mouth twice daily and oxaliplatin 130mg/m2. The interventional radiology team evaluated the patient for possible IVC stent placement at a later time with the goal of alleviating venous obstruction. IVC stent placement was deferred while the patient was an inpatient because this procedure was typically reserved as palliative treatment for patients in whom chemotherapy has limited utility or for patients who have a poor response to chemotherapy.
She was followed in the outpatient oncology clinic and was scheduled for a total of six cycles of capecitabine with oxaliplatin. Her course was complicated by gastrointestinal bleeding from the gastric tumor after the fourth cycle of chemotherapy . Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed a tumor that was unamenable to endoscopic therapy. She then recovered from gastrointestinal bleeding. Her HER2 test result was positive before the continuation of additional cycles of capecitabine and oxaliplatin, and she was thus started on trastuzumab 8mg/kg and paclitaxel 175mg/m2. She reported improvement in her appetite and energy level at her follow-up visits, though she continued to have abdominal bloating. At the time this writing, she was in cycle 5 of paclitaxel and trastuzumab.