Our patient was an otherwise healthy 46-year-old Japanese woman who was referred to our institution because a cystic lesion in the pancreatic tail was detected by ultrasonography during a health examination. Her past medical history and family medical history were unremarkable. She was not taking any medication. She did not have a smoking habit; however, she occasionally drank alcohol. Blood tests revealed no abnormality. Levels of tumor markers were not elevated . She had no physical abnormalities at admission.
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a thick cystic lesion of the septum with a clearly defined boundary of approximately 40 mm in the pancreatic tail; however, computed tomography revealed no invasion into the stomach wall . Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed no obvious abnormality. Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed that the tumor appeared smooth with a marginal edge and was characterized by echo with high homogeneity, and the presence of viscous mucus was suspected. The preoperative diagnosis was mucinous cystic neoplasm, and surgery was performed accordingly.
During laparoscopic surgery, a soft tumor whose surface was smooth, like the serosa of the stomach wall, was found in the pancreatic tail . There was no continuity between the tumor and stomach wall, and no adhesion was observed. When the tumor was peeled off the pancreatic tail, we determined that the tumor did not arise from the pancreas. Peeling the tumor off the splenic hilum was difficult because the adhesions between the two were strong; therefore, we excised the spleen along with the tumor. The cyst was retrieved in a bag and transected 4 cm above the pubic bone. The operative time was 129 min, and the bleeding volume was 50 ml. The resected specimen was a smooth surface tumor, and it comprised mucus .
Histopathological study revealed that the mucosa was covered with crypt epithelium, muscularis mucosae, intrinsic muscularis, and serosa and that the tumor’s wall had a structure very similar to that of the stomach wall. The mucosa was partially drained by intrinsic gastric glands, but most of them were denucleated. No pancreatic tissue was present, and the tumor had no continuity with the spleen. These findings indicated a diagnosis of GDC that had no continuity with the stomach wall.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 6 days after surgery.
The patient’s subsequent clinical course was unremarkable, and she visits our institution on an outpatient basis every 6 months.