A 35-year old male, with no relevant past medical history, presented to the emergency room with local swelling, fever of 39.4 °C (103 °F) and pain in the right hemiscrotum. It started mildly a week earlier and he was started on ciprofloxacin 500 mg since 4 days. There was no history of trauma and no recent disease signs. A scrotal ultrasound was performed on admission showing an enlargement of the epididymis on the right side with septal hydrocoele . By using scrotal color doppler ultrasound scanning an increased signal was seen in the right testis . Blood results initially showed C-reactive protein (CRP) of 69 mg/L with a leucocytosis of 20,000/mm3 and left shift.
The diagnosis of epidymo-orchitis was made with a prompt start of IV antibiotics (ceftriaxone 2 g 1x/day with amikacin 1 g/day). On repeated bloods the next day, the CRP rose to 230 and 320 mg/L one and 2 days after presentation respectively with remaining leucocytosis of 29,000/mm3 and 22,000/mm3. Initial urine culture showed the presence of an extended spectrum beta lactamase E. coli, sensitive to ceftriaxone and temocillin, resistant to Fluoroquinolones. After knowledge of the antibiogram, the patient was put on temocillin.
Two days after the initial presentation, the symptomatology did not improve notably. A re-assessment with ultrasonography and blood results was done. This showed a stable hypervascularisation and swelling in the epididymis. The septal hydrocele enlarged in 2 days’ time with an appearance of heterogeneity in the hydrocele collection. Upon second ultrasound evaluation, no residual color Doppler signal was found in the testis .
Due to the evolving ultrasonographic findings and the loss of doppler signal an orchiectomy was performed. The testis was removed together with the epididymis and the existing pyocele. The operation field was thoroughly cleaned. Postoperative blood analysis showed a CRP level of 210 mg/L with a leucocytosis of 18,000/mm3.
On anatomopathological review these structures were primarily typed of hemorrhagic substrate with mixed inflammatory cells . The spermatic cord in this resection is also taint in a similar process. No signs of malignancy are seen in the resection specimen. A microbiological examination of the orchiectomy specimen could confirm the presence of E Coli in the resection specimen, therefore providing additional evidence for an epidydimo-orchitis, yet this was not performed.
The patient went home with outpatient parenteral antimicrobial therapy of Temocillin for 7 days. The blood abnormalities gradually decreased with a reassuring clinical picture. The patient remained asymptomatic and afebrile since.