A 64-year old Caucasian woman presented in March 2014 to the emergency department with severe pain and swelling of her right foot. She also noticed small, dark lesions on the sole of her right foot. She denied fever but reported chills for several days (timeline see Fig. ). No other symptoms were present. She had a history of plaque psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis since 2010. In the past she had received etanercept (stopped in 2010), adalimumab (stopped 2011), cyclosporine (stopped February 2013) and golimumab (stopped Oktober 2013) without significant clinical improvement. She was started on ustekinumab (45 mg subcutanously) in March 2014, received the second dose in April and the third dose three days before hospitalisation. One day before presentation, she had received a steroid injection in the right sacroiliac joint because of aggravation of pain in the lumbosacral region. Her medical history was remarkable for an alcohol induced liver cirrhosis (Child-Pugh stage B), arterial hypertension and breast cancer (stage pT1c, pN1a, M0; resection and radiation in 2006, since then in remission). On admission, the patient was afebrile (36.8 °C) and the vital signs were within normal ranges (blood pressure 140/80 mmHg, pulse 87/min). The clinical examination revealed swelling of her right ankle and multiple non-elevated dark maculae on the sole of her right foot resembling Janeway lesions. All joints were tender on palpation with particular pain in the right sacroiliac joint. Multiple psoriatic lesions were present. Laboratory analysis revealed a leukocytosis of 23 × 10 cells/L, a reduced platelet count of 66 × 10 cells/L, a C-reactive protein level of 154 mg/L [<5 mg/L], a procalcitonin of 4.67 ng/mL [<0.5 ng/mL], a blood urea nitrogen of 93 mg/dl, a serum creatinine of 1.16 mg/dl and an INR 1.35. A CT scan on the day of admission showed no signs of arthritis, joint effusion or empyema in the right ankle joint. However, edema and thickening of the aortic/right common iliac artery wall at the aortic bifurcation, consistent with an inflammatory vascular lesion, was noted . Without an unambiguous focus (and prior to the CT scan) the patient had been started on an empiric antibiotic therapy with intravenous piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g every 8 h) and oral clarithromycin (500 mg/d). The next day, the patient’s condition improved. Blood cultures yielded growth of S. aureus (susceptible to methicillin, fluoroquinolones, clindamycin and rifampicin). Antibiotic treatment was modified to intravenous flucloxacillin (4 g every 8 h). Transesophageal echocardiography revealed no evidence for infective endocarditis. Rheumatoid factor was negative and the urine analysis did not show signs of proteinuria or hematuria. A follow-up CT scan 12 days later confirmed arterial wall thickening at the aortic bifurcation with a soft tissue cuff above the right common iliac artery with no evidence for progression. An additional FDG-PET/CT scan demonstrated increased metabolism in this vessel segment . Apart from moderate inflammatory activity in the right sacroiliac joint no other hypermetabolic foci were detected.
The patient was treated for four weeks with intravenous flucloxacillin and was discharged with an oral regime consisting of levofloxacin (500 mg/d) and rifampicin (450 mg twice daily) for another four weeks. One month after completion of the antibiotic therapy the patient was well with no signs of active infection or recurrence. A report was filed with the Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices (BfArm).