A 37-month-old male infant from Guangxi Province, China, with recurrent pneumonia since infancy exhibited recurrent pain in the right abdomen and fevers for 3 months. The abdominal pain was related to eating food, but not to physical activity and position. His maximum temperature was 40 °C. Physical examination revealed lymphadenopathy in the left neck and hepatomegaly. His abdomen was soft with normal bowel sounds; however, the liver and spleen were palpable 4 cm below his costal margins. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable. Routine blood tests revealed 16.9 × 109/L leucocytes, 9.5 × 109/L neutrophils, 4.4 × 109/L lymphocytes, 0.22 × 109/L eosinophils, and 90 g/L hemoglobin. Blood was observed in his stool. The serum albumin and C-reactive protein levels were 29.0 g/L (40–60 g/L) and > 192 mg/L (< 10 mg/L), respectively. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 28 mm/h (≤15 mm/h). Serum aspergillus galactomannan antigen was 0.826 (normal<0.5). His CD4+ T-cell count was 1078 cells/μL (normal: 410–1590 cells/μL), while the percentage of his natural killer cells was 18.10% (normal: 9–15%). Serum immunoglobulin (Ig) M was slightly elevated, while IgG and IgA were normal. Serum aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and creatinine levels, as indicated by the blood test, were all normal. Anti-nuclear and anti-HIV antibodies and INF-γ autoantibody were all negative. Blood and stool cultures were negative. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed disseminated patchy exudates throughout the left upper and lower lobes of the right lung. Contrast-enhanced CT of the whole abdomen showed hepatomegaly, intestinal wall thickening in the ascending colon, and mesenteric lymphadenopathy in the cecum with . Colonoscopy showed a cobblestone pattern (non-ulcerated mucosa separated by ulcers) with erosion, ulcer, polypoid lesions, and lumen deformation from the colon to the cecum . Crohn’s disease and intestinal tuberculosis were also considered based on the presence of multiple ulcers on colonoscopy and on the clinical manifestations. Therefore, the patient was treated with mesalazine and thalidomide for 1 week but without clinical improvement. After 5 days, the colon biopsy revealed mucosal ulceration and ulcers in the colon and massive infiltration of the mucosa and submucosa by the engorged macrophages. A large number of fungal spores were observed in the interstitial space and the macrophages . Subsequently, the patient underwent ultrasound-guided liver biopsy. Histopathological examination of the liver tissue revealed granulomatous inflammation , while periodic acid-Schiff staining revealed aggregates of macrophages engorged with numerous yeast-like organisms 2–4 μm in diameter. These yeast-like organisms were spherical to oval and had a transverse septum . After 2 weeks, the bone marrow culture confirmed T. marneffei, and the diagnosis of disseminated Talaromycosis involving the liver, colon, lymph nodes, and bone marrow was made. Intravenous voriconazole (12 mg/kg every 12 h) was administered for 4 weeks. Subsequently, the liver size reduced and was palpable 1 cm below the costal margin. Voriconazole was then administered orally (7 mg/kg twice a day). Unfortunately, 1 month later, his abdominal pain and fever recurred, and he presented with reduced urine output. Abdominal radiograph showed bowel perforation, pneumoperitoneum, and intestinal obstruction . Hence, an emergency exploratory laparotomy with intestinal resection, anastomosis, and a colostomy was performed. During the surgery, we observed the pebble sign with erosion in the ileocecal intestinal cavity. The lesion segment was approximately 8 cm long. The ileocolic junction was narrow and obstructed, and the adjacent intestinal ducts were edematous and thickened. Postoperative pathology indicated the presence of T. marneffei. Whole-exome sequencing was performed using the patient’s and his parents’ peripheral blood. A heterozygous missense mutation in exon 17 of the STAT3 gene (c.1673G>A, p.G558D) was found in the patient but not in his parents , indicating that the mutations were de novo.
The patient’s condition improved after the administration of intravenous voriconazole and antibiotics for 10 days and oral voriconazole for 7 months. Seven months after the surgery, repeat colonoscopy showed good recovery of the stoma located at the ileocecum, within 35 cm from the anal verge . No relapse was observed during the 18-month period of antifungal treatment.