An 11-year-old boy (weight, 35 kg; height, 154 cm) was admitted to our Hybrid ER with a history of blunt chest trauma after being run over by a truck. He was previously healthy, with no co-morbidities. During transport, the ambulance service administered oxygen at 10 L/min with a non-rebreather mask. The primary survey upon arrival to the emergency department: Airway (A) patent. Breathing (B) bilateral subcutaneous emphysema, right tension pneumothorax, tachypnea with a respiratory rate of 42/min and oxygen saturation of 66% on 10 L of oxygen by non-rebreather mask. Circulation (C) hemodynamically unstable with a pulse rate of 162/min and a blood pressure of 112/94 mmHg. Disability (D) Glasgow Coma Scale of 11/15. He was intubated with a single-lumen endotracheal tube, and intercostal drains were inserted on both sides of his chest for emergency pneumothorax. Arterial blood gas analysis performed under mechanical ventilation with a fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 1.0 showed a pH of 6.897, PaCO2 of 96.4 mmHg, PaO2 of 96.8 mmHg, BE of − 13.6 mmol/L, and lactate level of 74 mg/dL. After we perform these procedures, early CT examination was performed using the sliding CT scanner on the same trauma table without relocating him 20 min later from arrival. CT revealed the following injuries: bilateral hemopneumothorax, bilateral lung contusion, and left multiple rib fractures. Because the right chest tube revealed massive air leakage, we performed CT image processing by minimum intensity projection. As a result, we diagnosed right bronchus intermedius injury that required emergency thoracotomy .
His oxygenation at this point was severely low with PaO2/FiO2 ratio (P/F) of 109. Considering the bilateral lung injury, he was at very high risk of low oxygenation during transport to the operating room and changing to left lung ventilation. We therefore decided to perform emergency thoracotomy under left lung ventilation in the operating room after our trauma team first stabilised his oxygenation with VV ECMO support in the Hybrid ER. Under moveable C-arm fluoroscopy and ultrasonography in the Hybrid ER, with percutaneous technique, a drainage cannula was placed in his right femoral vein and a return venous cannula was placed in his right internal jugular vein with the tips of both cannulae positioned in the right atrium . Subsequently, the patient’s P/F ratio improved to more than 250, and he was transported to the operating room under VV ECMO. Anaesthesia was induced, and left lung ventilation was performed. Under VV ECMO support (ECMO flow of about 2 L/min; FiO2: 0.8), his oxygen saturation was maintained at over 98%. We did not use anticoagulants for the first 7 h. We started with a right lateral thoracotomy and found that there was a complete tear of the right bronchus intermedius . To shorten the operating time, we performed middle lobe and lower lobe resection and sutured the stump of the right bronchus intermedius. To protect the ligated intermedius bronchus, we covered it with an intercostal muscle flap. During the operation for the tracheobronchial injury, left hemorrhagic pleural effusion increased at a rate of 200 ml in 1 h. Sequentially, we performed left anterolateral thoracotomy and performed surgical bleeding control for intercostal artery injury caused by the multiple left rib fractures. The operation required the transfusion of 12 units of blood and 6 units of fresh frozen plasma. After the surgical repair, the patient’s respiratory function recovered, and VV ECMO was removed on postoperative day 5. His Injury Severity Score was 26, Revised Trauma Score was 3.8, and the probability of survival by the Trauma and Injury Severity Score method was 59.45. Because of flail chest resulting from the multiple rib fractures, positive pressure ventilation was required for 3 weeks. He was completely weaned off mechanical ventilation on postoperative day 31. After in-patient rehabilitation, he was discharged home on postoperative day 68 without sequelae.