A 55-year-old female farmer by occupation presented to us with excruciating back pain radiating to her bilateral lower limbs along with the constitutional symptoms of anorexia, low-grade fever, and weight loss. The patient was investigated and found to have an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and leukocytosis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed pre-paravertebral and anterior epidural collections extending from the L2/L3 to L4/L5 intervertebral disc causing spinal canal and bilateral foramina narrowing. Paravertebral collections extended up to the bilateral psoas muscles more so on the right side . Fine-needle aspiration cytology stain was positive for acid-fast bacilli. Hence, the diagnosis of tuberculosis was made and anti-tuberculosis treatment (ATT) was started. A medical history revealed that the patient was managed at other hospital. She complained of pain in her lower back radiating to her left leg from the past 3 years. She was diagnosed with prolapsed intervertebral disc diseases at the level of L3/L4 and L4/L5 with the left radiculopathy . Initially, she was managed with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and on other conservative modalities for 3 years. However, the patient did not respond satisfactorily to all these therapies. Hence, the patient underwent percutaneous instillation of 30% ozone (20 ml) along with 40 mg of Depo-Medrol a long-acting steroid into the L3/L4 and L4/L5 disc spaces. Immediate post-operative period was uneventful and the patient was discharged from the hospital on the same day. The patient was partially relieved of the symptoms but 10 days later after the operation, she complained of pain at the lower back along with left-sided radiculopathy. The patient was again put on medical therapy. As the symptoms did not resolve on the conservative treatment for 3 months and were progressive, the patient decided to take opinion at our tertiary center. The patient was put on ATT following a clinical-radiological examination and is responding well with marked improvement clinically. Repeat MRI after 6 months of starting ATT revealed partially healed lesion with decrease in active infection and reduction in the bilateral psoas abscess . The patient is under close follow-up to monitor the response of antitubercular drugs both clinically and radiologically. The patient was put on ATT following a clinical-radiological examination and is responding well with marked improvement clinically. Repeat MRI after 6 months of starting ATT revealed partially healed lesion with decrease in active infection and reduction in the bilateral psoas abscess . The patient is under close follow-up to monitor the response of antitubercular drugs both clinically and radiologically.