A 6-year-old girl from neighboring country consulted a local physician with a major complaint of left knee pain lasting for 3 months. There was neither fever nor biological inflammatory syndrome. On radiographs, there was a large multilocular and well-demarcated osteolytic lesion in the distal dia-metaphysis of the femur with sclerotic margins, endosteal scalloping, and no periosteal reaction . On lateral radiographs, there was a transverse fracture with soft callus formation .
This lesion was initially interpreted as simple bone cyst and on follow-up as sub-acute osteomyelitis. The girl was then operated without further imaging.
By operating the patient through a lateral approach, the surgeon found tumor tissue which he biopsied. The histological diagnosis was conventional OS and the patient was referred to our institute.
Magnetic resonance imaging showed a well-circumscribed intra-compartmental and osteolytic tumor tending to expand the bone without any associated periostal reaction or extra-osseous extension . Furthermore, there was a slight crossing of the growth plate by the tumor. Pulmonary CT scan and bone scintigraphy did not show metastases.
The patient underwent surgery and tumor resection after neoadjuvant chemotherapy including cisplatin, doxorubicin, and high-dose methotrexate. She was operated in a two stages procedure within the induced membrane technique . Initially, en-bloc interclaray resection was performed through lateral approach with epiphyseal preservation. The distal femoral osteotomy was trans-epiphyseal and 2 mm from the epiphyseal invasion (, ).
Polymethyl methacrylate spacer was used for bone reconstruction and initial stabilization was obtained using a 95-angled blade plate . The length of the bone defect after resection was 14 cm.
Histological study of the resected specimen showed a cystic tumor with safe surgical margins and good response to chemotherapy (3% viable cells). Furthermore, it confirmed the diagnosis of high-grade conventional OS. Final diagnosis was pseudocystic OS.
One year later after postoperative chemotherapy, a non-vascularized autograft (two fibulas and cancellous iliac graft) was done (, ).
Bone union was achieved 9 months later without complications and the patient had recovered a good function. At 3 years of follow-up, the patient was alive without disease. A lower limb length discrepancy of 3 cm was observed with knee mobility from zero to 90°. According to the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society functional scoring system , she had a score of 27 points. On radiographs, the bone graft had completely healed .