A 33-year-old Iranian man was referred to our hospital because of fever, pruritus, jaundice, fatigue, dark urine, and pale stool for 3 months. He had no history of allergic disorder or recent travel. Medical history was unremarkable for gastrointestinal, liver, hematologic, or infectious disease. He had not used any medication. He was single and had no history of any high-risk sexual behavior. Family history was negative. On physical examination, sclera was icteric, and skin lesion, hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, and ascites were not detected. The rest of the examinations were normal. In our hospital, laboratory data demonstrated a pattern of hypereosinophilia and hepatocellular liver injury: alanine transaminase (ALT) 710 IU/L (normal 10–40 IU/L), aspartate transaminase (AST) 389 IU/L (normal 5–40 IU/L), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 677 IU/L (40 130 IU/L), gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) 167 U/L (8–61 U/L), total bilirubin 3.45 mg/dl (0.3–1.2 mg/dl), direct bilirubin 2.79 mg/dl (0–0.3 mg/dl), prothrombin time (PT) 12.6 seconds, international normalized ratio (INR) 1.27 (0.8–1.2). The complete blood count included: white blood cells (WBC) 15,630/mm3, hemoglobin 15.5 g/dl, platelets 152,000/mm3, eosinophils 53%, with absolute eosinophil count of 8283/mm3. Serum IgG level was 2200 mg/dl (700–1400 mg/dl). Serum IgG4 level was normal, and serum protein electrophoresis and immune fixation revealed polyclonal gammopathy. Infectious diseases were excluded by negative results for viral markers [hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C virus antibody, hepatitis A virus antibody (IgM), and anti-human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody], serum antibodies to helminthic parasites, serologic test for Fasciola hepatica, and stool examinations for parasites and protozoa were all negative. Also, the workup for autoimmune hepatitis [antinuclear antibodies (ANA), smooth muscle antibody (SMA), anti-liver kidney microsomal type 1 (anti-LKM antibody 1) and anti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA)] was negative. Myeloproliferative diseases-related eosinophilia was excluded based on negative results for BCR-ABL P210 and P190 fusion transcript, JAK2 V617F mutation, Del (q12q12)/FIP1L1PDGFRA, and PDGFRB/TEL. Bone marrow biopsy showed normal marrow hematopoiesis with increased morphologically normal eosinophils (account for 30% of all nucleated cells in bone marrow). Flow cytometry was normal as well. Abdominal ultrasonography and computed tomography scan of the abdomen and chest were unremarkable. Colonoscopy of the patient was normal. MRCP showed irregularity in the common hepatic duct (CHD) and common bile duct (CBD) walls with multiple narrowing. Also, fine irregularity in the intrahepatic bile ducts with multiple strictures, beaded appearance, and some prominent lymph nodes in porta hepatis measuring up to 32 × 13 mm size were seen. Liver biopsy was done for the patient and revealed moderate infiltration of lymphocytes, plasma cell, and eosinophils in the portal area leading to interface hepatitis and multiple focal and confluent necrosis. Bile duct proliferation was not seen. Mild fibrosis around bile ducts in onion-skin-like pattern was noted, but cholestasis and steatosis were not seen .
The diagnosis of AIH-PSC overlap syndrome was made, and prednisolone 30 mg/day, azathioprine 50 mg/day, and ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) 300 mg three times per day was commenced. Prednisolone was gradually tapered to 5 mg during 2 months. His jaundice and peripheral blood eosinophilia resolved after 2 weeks, and he became completely asymptomatic. Table presents laboratory data of the patient at the time of diagnosis and 1, 6, and 12 months after initiation of treatment. MRCP of the patient after 6 months showed intrahepatic bile ducts, CHD, and CBD luminal irregularity without dilation .