The patient was a 65-year-old woman. Her chief complaints were dizziness, numbness in the right hand and weakness for 6 mo.
Dizziness occurred > 6 mo ago without obvious inducement, lasted for 30 min, without fainting, chest tightness, chest pain and abdominal pain. The patient was treated in a community hospital for pain and other discomfort and was considered to have a history of hypertension. Two months ago, the blood pressure difference between the two upper arms was > 40 mmHg. In the outpatient department of the hospital, the relevant examination was completed to confirm severe stenosis of the subclavian artery. When she was admitted to the hospital, recent mood, diet, sleep pattern and urine test were normal, and body weight showed no significant changes.
She had a history of hypertension for > 10 yr and chronic hepatitis B for > 40 yr. She denied history of hepatitis, tuberculosis, typhoid fever and other infectious diseases, blood transfusion, trauma, poisoning and surgery.
No other members of her family had a similar medical history. She denied a family history of hereditary diseases, cancer, liver disease, infectious diseases and inflammatory diseases.
The patient came to our hospital for treatment for dizziness and numbness and weakness of the right hand for 6 mo. Physical examination and blood pressure measurement showed a blood pressure difference of 40 mmHg between the upper arms on both sides. It was significantly lower in the right upper arm.
Laboratory examination results were: N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide 135.1 pg/mL (reference range 0-125 pg/mL); uric acid 378 μmol/L (reference range 142-339 μmol/L); endogenous creatinine clearance rate 66 mL/min × 1.73 m2 (reference range 80-120 mL/min × 1.73m2).
Ultrasound showed anomalous origin of the right subclavian artery and type II right subclavian steal syndrome. The blood flow in the right vertebral artery showed a weak positive contractile peak in early systole, followed by a large contractile wave in late systole below baseline and the diastolic blood flow disappeared . She had right vertebral artery dysplasia . The initial segment of the right subclavian artery showed 80%–99% stenosis. The blood flow velocity at the area of stenosis was up to 289 cm/s and was reduced at the distal segment of the stenosis, presenting as a single-phase wave change . The right axillary artery and the following arteries showed blood deficiency compared with the healthy left side, and the flow velocity of the right axillary artery was significantly reduced and showed unidirectional changes . Echocardiography showed calcification of the posterior mitral valve ring and mild regurgitation of the mitral and tricuspid valves .
In order to confirm and treat the right subclavian steal syndrome, digital subtraction angiography was performed. However, after successful puncture of the right radial artery, the direction of the catheter guide wire was different from that in normal patients and combined with severe right subclavian artery stenosis, it displayed as arterial occlusion . If the direction of the catheter guide wire was blindly adjusted only according to experience, the blood vessel might be damaged, so the doctors discontinued the continuous angiography. Considering the surgical risks, the patient refused the aberrant right subclavian artery stent implantation and was discharged.
Ten days later, the patient underwent enhanced CT and CTA examination, which showed that the common trunk of the bilateral common carotid artery arose from the aortic arch and aberrant right subclavian artery . A large number of calcified plaques were found at the beginning of the aberrant right subclavian artery and the common trunk of the bilateral common carotid artery . The right vertebral artery was slender . All cardiologists met to discuss the patient, analyzed the causes of cerebral angiography failure and lessons learnt from it.