A 30-year-old woman was admitted at the emergency room with a wound in her upper right limb after a cat bite. Physical examination showed good general conditions with a 2 cm diameter wound, accompanied by pain and purulent discharge. As part of the management scheme, ampicillin/sulbactam was formulated. After 5 days of antibiotic treatment, the patient reported diarrhea which persisted for a week. The patient returned to a consultation where the clinical picture was attributed to a parasitic infection, and was subsequently treated with metronidazole for 7 days. The diarrhea worsened presenting abundant feces with mucus and macroscopic blood. Coproscopic examination was performed with the following results: negative for intestinal parasites, pH: 5.0, leukocytes: positive, 40–50 red blood cells per field, reducing sugars: negative. The patient remained with diarrhea for 20 days, with mucus and blood. Therefore, it was suspected that it could be related to the use of antibiotics. Then, a stool sample was collected to evaluate the presence of CDI.
The stool sample was subjected to two CDI detection methods, following the methodology implemented in a previous study by our group (Munoz et al. unpublished data). The first strategy was via molecular diagnosis, for which an aliquot of 300 μL of the stool sample was subjected to DNA extraction using the Stool DNA Isolation Kit (Norgen Biotek Corporation, Ontario, Canada), according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. An aliquot of 30 ng of the extracted DNA was used to conduct two conventional polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests: one targeting 16S ribosomal RNA and the other targeting gene encodes Glutamate dehydrogenase enzyme (gdh) . The second strategy to detect CDI was through in vitro culture; for this purpose, an initial portion of the diarrheic stool specimen was extended by streaking method on selective chromogenic medium [(SCM; chromID C. difficile agar CDIF (bioMérieux SA, Craponne, France)], followed by 48 h of incubation at 37 °C under anaerobic conditions. The two tests implemented were positive whereby was defined as CDI. Because the patient had not been hospitalized during the 12 weeks prior to the presentation of diarrhea, she was defined as a community-acquired CDI .
All colonies identified on SCM were subjected to verification by colony screening through their recovery on Trypticase ™ I Agar (TSA) with 5% Sheep Blood (Becton–Dickinson, New Jersey, United States), followed by confirmation of their microscopic morphology by Gram staining (gram positive bacillus, occasionally sporulated). A total of seven colonies were verified and subsequently used for establishing isolates, increasing the biomass on TSA, followed by recovery for two purposes: (i) cryopreservation through recovery in 500 μL of Oxoid Nutrient Broth (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, United States) with 20% (v/v) Glycerol (Thermo Fisher Scientific) until reaching an optical density (OD 600) of 4 × 107 cells per mL and subsequent storage at − 80 °C, and ii) as a source of DNA for molecular analyses, by recovering a similar amount of cells in 300 μL sterile phosphate buffered saline (PBS) 1×, which was then subjected to extraction using the commercial UltraClean® BloodSpin® DNA Isolation Kit (MoBio Laboratories, Carlsbad, United States), following the manufacturer’s instructions. All isolates established for this patient were analyzed, due to the possible coexistence of different CD genotypes .
From the DNA extracted from the seven isolates, the following molecular tests and analyzes were performed:MLST typing: Regions of the seven housekeeping genes included in the MLST scheme proposed by Griffiths et al. , were amplified independently and sequenced by the Sanger method. The sequences obtained for each isolate were compared against the previously reported profiles, using the ‘locus/sequence definitions database’ tool available on the MLST database (CD-MLST-db; ). The results indicated that all isolates belonged to the ST-1 (clade 2), which has previously been associated with the hypervirulent strain 027/BI/NAP1 . Phylogenetic relationships of ST-1 with other STs belonging to C2 (n: 60) and 3 STs representatives from each other clades (included for comparative purposes), were evaluated. Then, the concatenated sequences of the seven housekeeping genes of the STs reported on CD-MLST-db were aligned using multiple sequence comparison by log-expectation (MUSCLE) and later used for the inference of phylogenetic reconstructions using the maximum-likelihood method, considering Jukes-Cantor as the model of nucleotide evolution. Node robustness was evaluated using the Bootstrap (BT) method with 1000 replicates. A cluster was defined from the nodes with BT results > 80%. The graph visualization of the phylogenetic trees was done in the web-based tool Interactive Tree Of Life V3 . The concatenated sequences of homologous genes in Clostridium perfringens were included as outgroup. The results showed that the concatenated sequences of the seven housekeeping genes allowed clade discrimination, in agreement with previous reports [, ]. In the case of C2, it could be identified that 60 STs are grouped in 30 clusters (BT ≥ 80), and that it is closely related to C1 . The selection criteria of the representatives of the other clades and the information of the complete set of STs used in phylogenetic reconstructions is described in Additional file . In addition, analysis of the population genetic structure based on the application of the eBURST algorithm on the total of STs reported for CD, allowed us to confirm that this ST belongs to the clonal complex 1 (CC1), which includes 245 STs of the 454 reported according with the last update of the CD-MLST-db sequence database (2017-09-29). For this CC1, the predicted founding genotype is ST-3, and in the case of ST-1 it is identified as a founding subgroup for STs: 197, 371, 417 and 418 . Determining the toxigenic profile through the identification of PaLoc and CdtLoc regions: The scheme for describing the toxigenic profile proposed by Griffiths et al. was implemented, which targets the identification of genes encoding the major toxins (tcdA and tcdB), and their negative regulator (tcdC). The results showed that only two of the isolates (Gcol.49 and Gcol.91) were positive for the tcdA and tcdB genes, and the negative tcdC regulator . In addition, this scheme includes the set of lok1/3 primers, that anneal in the cdd1/cdu1 genes flanking the PaLoc (as an indicator of PaLoc absence). Interestingly, in the case of Gcol.49, a positive PCR result was also identified with the lok1/3 primers, although their amplification size was ~ 300 base pairs (bp), less than half the expected size (769 bp). The presence of an amplicon of this size was considered positive as this was confirmed by Sanger sequencing corresponding to CD (Additional file ). In addition to the toxigenic profile description, primers targeting genes encoding the binary toxin (cdtA/cdtB) subunits, located within the CdtLoc were used . We found that all isolates were positive for the cdtB region, whereas only two (Gcol.51 and Gcol.52) were positive for cdtA . Identification of molecular markers of antibiotic resistance: An initial approach was aimed at identifying polymorphisms in the gyrA and gyrB genes, determinants of quinolone resistance. Then, regions of such genes were amplified and sequenced following a previously proposed methodology . The sequences obtained were compared with CD-MLST-db, with all isolates corresponding to the 65 alleles for gyrA and 50 for gyrB. Phylogenetic reconstructions were obtained from the complete set of alleles reported for each gene (118 and 98 for gryA and gyrB, respectively), under the parameters previously described. This approach identified 18 clades for gyrA , while 16 were identified for gyrB . These findings could be related to the high identity of these housekeeping genes. A second approach at the level of antibiotic resistance markers was aimed at evaluating the presence/absence of cassettes, through the amplification of: ermB, related to resistance to erythromycin and clindamycin, tetM, conferring resistance to tetracycline, and the tndX and Int regions as indicators of the presence of Tn5397 and Tn916-like elements. The results showed that there is no circulation of Tn5397 type elements in these isolates. However, the other markers were found in all isolates except Gcol.52. The other isolates showed different profiles of positivity for the markers. These are described in Fig. c. DNA extracted from the strains: ATCC BAA-1870 (tcdA, tcdB and cdt presence confirmed by PCR) and ATCC 700057 (toxinotype tcdA-, tcdB- and binary toxin gene cdtB not amplified by PCR) was included as controls for all tests implemented. The information of the primers employed for the different molecular tests is described in Additional file .
Finally, after the identification and characterization of the CDI, nutritional management was performed with food intake rich in probiotics. This strategy led to the improvement of the clinical picture of the patient.