A 46-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our institution in November 2009 with L3 and L4 vertebrae metastases of PEH. Previous thoracopulmonary investigations had revealed multiple disseminated pleuropulmonary nodules followed by pulmonary wedge resection, confirming the typical clinical PEH immunoreactivity for CD31, factor VIII, Fli-1 and vimentin. She had also undergone lumbar computed tomography (CT), which showed structural changes in the third and fourth lumbar vertebrae (L3-L4) combined with a partially collapsed L4 and L3-L4 disc protrusion. Her abdominal CT scan had shown a small, common iliac vein thrombosis and a small caval thrombosis immediately above the iliac venous confluence. All of these findings together led to initiation of therapy with polyethylene glycol and interferon α at a dosage of 1μg to 2μg once every 7 days. A CT scan performed 4 months after initiation of treatment revealed stable lung disease but new hypodense splenic lesions. A lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging scan showed exacerbation of bone disease with worsening L3 and L4 collapse and further L4-L5 disc protrusion. Therefore, she underwent kyphoplasty. The bone biopsy performed during the operation confirmed the diagnosis of L4 vertebral body EHE.
When the patient presented to our institution, she complained of back pain that did not go away after taking common anti-inflammatory drugs and treatment with lumbar vertebrae acupressure. The pain was absent in other areas. On the basis of the scarce available literature on patients with this presentation, we delivered symptomatic RT into the L3-L5 vertebral tract using a 3,000cGy total target dose in 200cGy daily fractions 5 days/wk. At the end of the treatment, the patient’s lumbar pain had disappeared and she experienced no detectable side effects. In 2010, we observed negative percussion of the vertebral spine and no radiological progression of bone disease. The patient underwent ifosfamide and epirubicin chemotherapy and surgical removal of EHE spleen lesions soon after her follow-up examination at our institution. She died in October 2010 as a result of PEH progression.