A 12-year-old girl was admitted with noticeable palor and dyspnea on exertion for the past two weeks. No specific medicine or family histories were reported. She visited local clinics and her hemogram showed a low hemoglobin value. Physical examination showed a palor and mild tachycardia (110 bpm). Laboratory data taken in our hospital showed a hemoglobin level of 5.9 g/dL; mean corpuscular volume of 75.4 fl; C-reactive protein level of 1.02 mg/L; serum ferritin of 2.9 ng/mL; serum iron level of 9 μg/dL; and total iron binding capacity at 458.2 μg/dL. She denied bloody stool or abdominal discomfort history. Iron tablet (100 mg bid) was prescribed. Stool examination showed a mild hemoccult-positive (1+). 13C urea breath test was a positive finding. Therefore, upper GI endoscopy was arranged.
However, 8 h prior to scheduled exams, patient complained of sudden onset of severe tenderness with involuntary guarding and rebounding pain involving the entire abdomen. Interpretation of standing view and left lateral decubitus abdominal film detected free intraperitoneal air, and peritonitis was confirmed. Because of the abnormal image findings, surgical intervention was advised and in light of hemodynamic stability, a laparoscopic approach was performed. After initial exploration of the peritoneal cavity, a burst perforation, approximately 1 cm in diameter, was noted over lower gastric body . The edge of the perforation was excised, and simple closure was performed. The resected specimen was sent for pathological examination.
Histology confirmed the diagnosis of extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of MALT type. Section showed diffuse infiltration of small lymphocytes without residual normal architecture. The aggregation of tumor cells were composed of monocytoid cells with plasmacytoid and centrocyte-like cell differentiation . Immunohistochemically, these cells were positive for B-lymphocyte antigen cluster of differentiation (CD) 20, CD79a, and paired box protein Pax-5, but negative for CD3, CD5, CD10, B-cell lymphoma 2, CD30, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase, CD1a, c-Myc, and S100 . Light-chain restriction for infiltrating plasma cells was not identified. Both Epstein-Barr encoding region in situ hybridization and cytomegalovirus were negative. The B-cell clonality exhibited monoclonality .
Subsequently, a systemic workup for clinical staging, including lactate dehydrogenase (161 IU/L), β2-microglobulin (148.0 μg/dL), hepatitis B virus (nonreactive), hepatitis C virus (negative), and human immunodeficiency virus (negative), was performed. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose in the same area. CT, bone scan, and bone marrow biopsy were also performed, and no metastatic lesion was detected. The Lugano staging system was considered to be Stage IE.
After resuming an oral diet, a 2-weeks course of oral antibacterial treatment (clarithromycin 500 mg plus amoxicillin 500 mg twice a day for 7 days followed by metronidazole 500 mg twice a day for another 7 days) plus 4 weeks esomeprazole (40 mg daily) were prescribed for Helicobacter pylori infection eradication. Endoscopy was scheduled 4 weeks after operation and showed a deep and large ulcer over anterior wall of the body with convergence of thickened mucosal folds . Biopsy samples were again obtained and consistent with extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of MALT. Therefore, involved field radiation therapy was delivered to the stomach (30 Gy in 20 fractions given over 4 weeks). There were no gastrointestinal side effects noted during and after radiotherapy.
A follow-up endoscopy was performed at 4 months after operation, and showed a broad-based healed scar with rugae interruption . The histological evaluation of biopsy specimen showed absent plasma cells and small lymphoid cells and complete histological remission was achieved at 2 months after radiotherapy. During a 1-year follow-up at our outpatient clinic, she has remained free of symptoms and without relapse. The timeline was shown in Additional file .