A 52-year-old male without a history of hypertension and diabetes, from Huizhou, Guangdong, was referred to Huizhou Central People’s Hospital in June 2016 with symptoms of fever for 1 week. He worked on a farm with poor hygiene management and was responsible for breeding. Before admission, he was treated with flu in the local community clinic, but respiratory infection, CNS infection, septicemia, and hepatic dysfunction were suspected when he was admitted to the Central People’s Hospital.
During physical examination, he had fever (38.1°C) and headache with normal blood pressure (100/80 mmHg). All respiratory, cardiovascular and neurological examinations were normal. There was no evident sign of neck stiffness, initial unilateral limb weakness or flaccid paraparesis. Hepatosplenomegaly and peripheral edema were also not observed.
The initial laboratory investigation displayed high white blood cell (WBC) count of 10.2 × 10^9/L with predominant 88.4% neutrophil, normal hemoglobin and platelet count. The liver profile showed elevated total bilirubin (TBIL) 39.7umol/L, direct bilirubin(DBIL)19.9umol/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT)75 U/L, and aspartate transaminase(AST)46 U/L; renal function was normal. The chest computed tomography showed slight bilateral fiber tissue hyperplasia. These examinations strongly suggested typical infection by bacteria with a variety of clinical manifestations.
A lumbar puncture was conducted, and a CSF biochemical test was subsequently performed. The WBC count was 72.0 × 10^6/L, showing predominantly mononuclear cells, and the cerebrospinal fluid pressure (CSFP) was 220 mmH2O. The C-reactive protein was 139.87 mg/L. The level of protein in CSF was elevated, while that of glucose was normal. To confirm the pathogen leading to infection, both the blood and CSF were cultured for further characterization, as described below. Moreover, bilateral brain parenchymal enhancement of lesions with an obvious enhancement of left lateral pterygoid and temporalis were observed in the following brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). The Magnetic Resonance Angiography (MRA) of the cerebral arteries was normal. Furthermore, testing was all negative for tuberculosis, autoimmune disease, acid-fast bacilli, Cryptococcus, and Hepatitis B virus. Combined with the above results, the patient was diagnosed with neurological melioidosis . It took a week to diagnose this patient in the hospital.
Despite the patient being treated with intravenous injection of ceftazidime at a dose of 2 g 12-hourly, The patient became agitated, and an intermittently persistent fever was observed during treatment of this patient. Samples of the patient’s blood and CSF were sent to the Guangdong provincial CDC (No.160 Qunxian Road, Panyu District, Guangzhou, Guangdong province, China) for further identification of CNS infection. The culture results coincided with those in hospital, excluding other bacterial and fungal infections. Both sample were cultured on blood plate. After incubating the blood and CSF specimens at 35°C on blood agar for 48 h, a single grey wheel-shaped isolates morphology was observed . This culture was tested with biochemical and molecular diagnostic method to identify the pathogen. The isolates were tested utilizing the Automatic microbiological analysis system(VITEK 2 Systems, Biomerieux, France), the biochemical results details listing in the Fig. , and B. pseudomallei was identified with 99% probability. The DNA of the isolates, CFS and blood were extracted (QiAamp DNA kit) and real-time PCR (B. pseudomallei real-time PCR kit, shanghai ZJ bio-tech, China) results were positive for B. pseudomallei, confirming the original clinical diagnosis of neurological melioidosis. The presence of IgM antibodies specific to JEV were detected using ELISA(JE Detect IgM ELISA, InBios, America) and were confirmed as positive, revealing the B. pseudomallei and JEV co-infection in this patient. Considering the possibility of cross-reacting with DENV, the serum sample was detected for specific antibodies against DENV and result showed negative(DENGUE DUO CASSETTE, Panbio, Australia). Furthermore, the detection was negative for screening viruses including enterovirus, influenza virus, adenovirus, and poliovirus by ELISA. The patient received symptomatic management with ceftazidime (2 g 12-hourly), oxiracetam (6 g per day) and dipyridamole (150 mg per day). After 22 days of treatment, he was discharged on eradication therapy with oral 960 mg trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160 mg trimethoprim and 800 mg sulfamethoxazole) per 12 h for 2 months. At follow-up 3 months after initial admission, the patient had recovered well without fever or headache. There was no growth of B. pseudomallei on CSF culture in physical review from Aug.