A 44-year-old female with a main complaint of “progressive dysphagia” for over 1 month was admitted to our hospital and diagnosed with esophageal adenocarcinoma by gastroscopic biopsy .Chest CT indicates that the tumor is located in the lower segment of the esophagus, 34 cm from the incisor teeth .A combined radical esophagectomy and stapled esophagogastric anastomosis were performed through a left thoracotomy approach on August 9, 2019. No obvious anastomotic leakage was found in the upper gastrointestinal angiography 1-week after exploratory thoracotomy. Dynamic blood test indicates that WBC is slightly higher than normal, with a maximum of approximately 11.37 × 109/L, Procalcitonin and CRP are within the normal range. However, a small amount of turbid fluid was continuously drained from the mediastinal drainage tube. Computed tomographic (CT) scans of the chest showed bilateral pleural effusion and atelectasis. Esophageal content of pink-tinged fluids was obtained through the nasal tube. We suspected an AEF developed due to the esophagectomy and performed pleural puncture and closed thoracic drainage with 400 ml of fluids drained on the 8th postoperative day. And on the 19th postoperative day, the patient suddenly vomited about 600 ml of blood and blood clot and was transferred to thoracic surgery intensive care units (ICU). The complete computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the whole aorta in the emergency department showed that the pleural effusion on both sides increased than before, with no obvious abnormalities in the total trunk of the head arm trunk and the left neck . Gastroscopy showed a large amount of blood and blood clots in the feeding tube, and the mediastinal drainage tube protruded into the lumen. After a series of conservative treatments including blood transfusion, hemostasis, anti-infection, stomach protection, fasting, and rehydration, the patient showed no significant improvement, with continuously declining hemoglobin and hematocrit.
On the 22nd postoperative day, the patient vomited 600 ml of blood, together with the stomach tube and duodenal nutrition tube. We decided to perform emergency surgery and a laparotomy under general anesthesia was initiated on the 23rd day. The surgery included the removal of the mediastinal abscess, left lower pulmonary wedge resection, and TEVAR. During the surgery, an encapsulated purulent cavity was observed that was formed by the close adhesion of the left lower lung, pericardium, diaphragmatic muscle, and aorta. A 4 * 4 * 3 cm pus cavity was also observed in the basal segment of the left lower lung. After removal of mediastinal pus and old blood clots, a large amount of bright red blood spurted out from the level of the thoracic aortic septum, confirming our previous suspected diagnosis of AEF. Due to the heavy adhesion among the aorta, the tubular stomach, and the mediastinum, we cannot continue the repair of the aortic fistula but performed TEVAR. However, after consultation with the vascular surgical group, a femoral artery puncture was performed and a covered stent was used to successfully repair the aortic fistula. The surgery went successful: the bleeding stopped, the left lower lung abscess was removed, and the thoracic cavity was washed repeatedly with iodine and normal saline . After the surgery, the patient was given supportive treatment including anti-infection, fasting, enteral nutrition, and intravenous fluid infusion, and recovered smoothly . The patient was followed up for 1 year after discharge and showed good recovery with unobstructed semi-fluid intake and good stent position and function. No mediastinal infection, pleural effusion, anastomotic stoma, thoracic gastric fistula, or aortic fistula was reported since then .