A 27-year-old Caucasian man presented to the ophthalmology outpatient clinic with mild pain and swelling of his left eye. He had initially presented 18 months previously to the emergency department with an episode of left eye urticaria and spontaneous periorbital bruising, which responded well to topical antihistamine eye drops and lubricants. In addition, for the preceding 6 months the individual had noticed a dark flat lesion on the temporal aspect of his left eye conjunctiva, which was causing a pressure sensation. He had no other significant past medical, surgical or medication history.
On examination, an area of grey/blue discoloration associated with swelling was evident at the lateral aspect of left bulbar conjunctiva . Visual acuity was normal, the individual had a full range of extraocular movements and there was no proptosis. Dilated fundus examination was normal. An orbital Computed Tomography (CT) scan revealed a 29 mm extraconal left orbital mass involving the lacrimal gland and lateral rectus muscle. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the brain and orbits showed a left lateral episcleral orbital tumour, with extension to the lateral rectus muscle, displacing the lacrimal gland . Positron Emission Tomography (PET)/CT scan showed no evidence of an 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid regional or distant metastasis.
A biopsy of the lesion located within the lateral rectus muscle was performed via a conjunctival approach. The histopathologic examination showed parts of a malignant melanocytic tumour characterised by compacted sheet-like to fascicular growth of spindled to epithelioid melanocytes showing enlarged pleomorphic nuclei, inconspicuous nucleoli, and moderate eosinophilic cytoplasm. Mitotic figures were easily identified. The tumour was identified as invading the underlying skeletal muscle tissue . In addition, at the periphery of this biopsy, there was a distinctly different zone characterised by a component of less atypical melanocytes forming short fascicles and nests of bland appearing oval to spindle to dendritic cells with slightly elongated nuclei, no nucleoli and scant to moderate amount of cytoplasm with focal pigmentation . The latter component was suggestive of a pre-existing melanocytic proliferation with histopathological features of a blue naevus family of melanocytic tumours. By immunohistochemistry, the lesional cells demonstrated diffuse positive staining with melanocytic markers including SOX10, Melan-A, S100 and HMB-45. Ki67 proliferation index was estimated to be 5%. There was an abnormal loss of P16 throughout the tumour. BAP1 was retained in tumour cell nuclei.
Molecular testing using Next-Generation sequencing (TruSight 26 gene panel, Illumina, USA) demonstrated a somatic GNAQ mutation [c.626A > T, p.(Gln209Leu)], with wild type BRAF and NRAS. Array comparative genomic hybridisation (aCGH; 60 K array, Agilent, Australia) showed whole chromosome 6, 7, 8 and 20 gains. Fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) testing including Melanoma Four-Colour FISH probe (Vysis, Abbott Molecular, USA) was abnormal, showing absolute and relative gain of RREB1.
The overall immunomorphological, molecular and clinical/imaging findings were in keeping with a “primary orbital malignant melanoma arising from a pre-existing blue naevus-like melanocytic proliferation”.
The patient subsequently underwent lid skin-sparing total left orbital exenteration. Histopathological examination of the specimen confirmed a malignant melanoma arising in a pre-existing blue naevus-like diffuse melanocytosis. The latter was found to circumferentially involve the sub-epithelial soft tissue of the bulbar conjunctiva as well as episcleral soft tissue toward the temporal aspect of the orbit. The pre-existing lesion was histopathologically characterised by an interrupted rim of clusters and nests of spindle to epithelioid melanocytes with patchy pigmentation, mild to moderate cytologic atypia and low-level mitotic activity . There was an abrupt transition to an expansile tumour (melanoma) showing compacted sheet-like to fascicular growth of atypical plump melanocytes with frequent mitoses (up to 3–4 mitoses per square millimeter), an area of necrosis and extensive infiltration of the lateral rectus muscle. The immunohistochemical profile of the tumour was identical to the prior incisional biopsy . The lacrimal gland was intact. The internal orbital structures, including the anterior and posterior uvea as well as the optic nerve, were intact with no evidence of a melanocytic proliferation in the iris, ciliary body or choroid. The histopathological findings in the exenteration specimen confirmed the initial diagnosis of malignant melanoma arising in a pre-existing atypical diffuse plaque-like blue naevus/melanocytosis.
The patient declined post-operative radiotherapy and opted for close surveillance with regular PET and MRI scans every 3 months. As of 26 months’ follow-up, no recurrence or metastasis has been detected thus far.