A 58-year-old previously well Sri Lankan man was admitted to our general medical unit with two episodes of gross hematuria with no frothy urine, dysuria, colicky abdominal pain or reduction in urine output. He had no preceding history of illness, fever, any other bleeding diathesis, or any history suggestive of a connective tissue disease. Our patient was mildly pale with mild splenomegaly and an elevated blood pressure of 150/90mmHg, but rest of the physical examination was normal. Initial laboratory investigations revealed an elevated serum creatinine of 2.9mg/dL (normal range: 0.7 to 1.3mg/dL). A urinary microscopic examination was significant with 100 to 120 red cells per high power field: 30% of cells were dysmorphic and his protein level was 600mg/dL. His blood leucocyte count was 5800/μL (normal range: 4000 to 11,000/μL), hemoglobin was 8.6g/dL (normal range: 11 to 16g/dL), and platelet count was 124,000/μL (normal range: 150,000 to 450,000/μL). His erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 20mm/h, his level of C-reactive protein was 1.1mg/L (normal range: 0 to 5mg/L), and serum albumin was 3.3g/dL (normal range: 3.6 to 5.5g/dL).
An ultrasound examination of our patient’s abdomen revealed normal-sized kidneys with increased echogenicity with mild splenomegaly.Blood film was reported as suggestive of anaemia of chronic disorder. In view of the bicytopenia and mild splenomegaly with significant hematuria, we performed a renal biopsy and a bone marrow biopsy. Results from the bone marrow biopsy showed no evidence of marrow infiltration by leukemia, lymphoma, myeloma or secondary deposits. The specimen from the renal biopsy had 14 glomeruli, seen on the formalin-fixed paraffin sections. The glomeruli showed a mild diffuse increase in mesangial cells and matrix, and occasional tuft adhesions. Occasional foci of endocapillary proliferation were seen. The capillary basement membranes were normal. There were no crescents. We found focal infiltrates of lymphocytes in the interstitium. There were red cell and granular casts. We also noted occasional foci with tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis, and periglomerular sclerosis.
Eight glomeruli were seen on frozen sections for immunofluorescence studies. Direct immunofluorescence staining showed fine granular deposits of immunoglobulin (Ig) G (3+) and complement 3 (4+) in capillaries in all glomeruli, and IgM (2+) in the capillaries and mesangium in two glomeruli segmentally. There was no positive staining for IgA . We did not perform electron microscopy because it was not available at our institution. Overall, this renal histology was consistent with immune complex-mediated acute glomerular nephritis.
Following this initial presentation our patient defaulted on follow-up. Three months later, he presented with bilateral ankle edema with periorbital swelling. He also complained of loss of appetite but had no other constitutional symptoms. An examination revealed mild pallor, a left-side discrete axillary lymph node, and moderate splenomegaly.
Investigations demonstrated worsening of his renal function, with serum creatinine of 3.18mg/dL and a urine protein to creatinine ratio of 1432mg/g. A urinary microscopic examination revealed 180 to 200 red blood cells per high power field, of which 40% were dysmorphic, along with red cell casts and coarse granular casts. An ultrasound examination of his kidneys revealed normal-sized kidneys (left 13.1cm; right 11.1cm) with increased echogenicity. His blood leucocyte count was 2900/μL, hemoglobin was 8.8g/dL, and his platelet count was 104,000/μL. Serologic test results for hepatitis B and C, and human immunodeficiency virus were negative, as was a Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test. Tests for antinuclear antibody and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody were negative. His complement levels for both C3 and C4 were normal, with a C3 level of 115.2mg/dL (normal range: 90 to 180mg/dL) and a C4 level of 27mg/dL (normal range: 10 to 40mg/dL). Serum cryoglobulins were not detected. Serum protein electrophoresis did not show evidence of a monoclonal gammopathy and myeloma screening was negative. His lactate dehydrogenase level was 404.9U/L.
We performed an axillary lymph node biopsy, which showed sections of his lymph node with an effaced architecture, diffusely infiltrated by a monotonous population of small lymphoid cells . These cells showed strong membrane staining with CD20. Cyclin D1 was strongly expressed in >90% of the tumor cells . His Ki67 index was 10%. A CD23 stain highlighted nodular aggregates of follicular dendritic cells . The tumor cells were negative for CD23. These findings led to a diagnosis of B-cell NHL MCL.
Therefore a final diagnosis of NHL with immune complex-mediated glomerulonephritis was made and our patient referred for further oncological management.
His oncological management involved a regimen of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone (R-CHOP). Follow-up at three months showed complete normalization of his renal function to a serum creatinine of 1.2mg/dL (normal range: 0.7 to 1.3mg/dL) and a normal urine full report (protein - trace; red cells - nil). One year after chemotherapy, his renal function remained normal (serum creatinine 1.0mg/dL) with a normal full blood count (white cell count 6100/μL, hemoglobin 13.2g/dL, platelet count 234,000/μL) and a serum albumin level of 3.9g/dL.