A 62-year-old man presented with a 5-year history of gradually worsening hoarseness. He was referred to our department, because magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a mass lesion in his clivus. His medical history included diabetes mellitus and hyperlipidemia, and he had no remarkable family history. Neurological examination revealed dysphagia and atrophy of the left tongue, trapezius muscle, and sternocleidomastoid muscle. There were no abnormal laboratory findings, including blood counts or alkaline phosphatase levels. Laryngoscopy revealed paresis of the left vocal cord. MRI showed that the tumor was of moderately high intensity, accompanied by cystic components on T2-weighted images and heterogeneous enhancement mainly in the peripheral area with gadolinium (Gd) on T1-weighted images [ and ]. The tumor was mainly located in the clivus and it extended down to the left jugular tubercle and occipital condyle, partially protruding toward the medulla oblongata from the hypoglossal canal . A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed an osteolytic lesion that destructed the hypoglossal canal and expanded the clivus while preserving the bony cortex [-]. Our preoperative diagnosis was chordoma, schwannoma, or chondrosarcoma; however, the diagnosis was inconclusive due to the atypical MRI findings.
To define the histological diagnosis, treat the patient’s symptoms, and decompress his brain stem, EES was performed using intraoperative MRI. A rapid pathological diagnosis was planned to determine the radicality of resection depending on the tumor malignancy. Nerve integrity monitoring (NIM, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was used to localize the lower cranial nerves (IX, XI, and XII). After dissection of the nasal septal mucosa and wide sphenoidotomy with drilling of the anterior wall, septum, and inferior wall of the sphenoid sinus, the upper part of the tumor was exposed. The tumor seemed to have no typical feature of chordoma or chondrosarcoma, rather of schwannoma. Rapid pathology of a specimen from this part of the tumor revealed no malignant findings and features of typical schwannoma. Considering the intraoperative findings and pathological result, not radical but maximum safe resection was intended. Subsequently, a left transmaxillary-transpterygoid approach with dissection of the nasopharyngeal mucosa was performed to expand the surgical field laterally and caudally. The left Vidian nerve and artery were cauterized and cut, and the contents of the left pterygopalatine fossa were lateralized to facilitate resection of the left medial pterygoid plate. The nasopharyngeal mucosa was incised in an inverted U-shape, dissected, and caudally reflected with a monopolar electrocautery to expose the lower clivus. The bone overlying the left paraclival carotid artery was removed, and the fibrocartilaginous tissue attached to the internal carotid artery (ICA) and Eustachian tube around the foramen lacerum was disconnected to enable mobility of these structures . The tumor in the jugular tubercle and occipital condyle behind the ICA and Eustachian tube were resected. The cortical bone in the clivus was thinned, and the cancellous bone was replaced by the tumor . The tumor was tanned and gray-yellowish, soft and fragile in most parts, and easily dissected from the clival dura. The left cranial nerve IX, X, or XI was observed at the rostral margin of the tumor around the jugular foramen during tumor removal . After resecting most of the tumor, we performed an intraoperative MRI scan, which showed a residual tumor lateral to the left occipital condyle and a small intradural tumor adjacent to the medulla oblongata. These tumors were additionally excised, except for the most lateral part. Subsequently, the arachnoid membrane appeared to be bulging from the dural defect and cerebrospinal fluid leak was repaired with Gelfoam (Pfizer, New York, NY, USA) and DuraGen (Integra LifeSciences, Princeton, NJ, USA). Finally, the surgical field was covered with the nasopharyngeal mucosa and harvested sphenoid sinus mucosal flap .
The histopathological findings revealed typical schwannoma, which showed spindle cells arranged in a palisading pattern with Verocay bodies (Antoni A) and a small number of tumor cells dispersed in edematous stroma (Antoni B). The tumor cells were positive for S100 protein, and the prevalence of Ki-67 positive cells was <1%. Based on the histology, preoperative MRI, and intraoperative findings, the tumor was considered an intraosseous schwannoma in the clivus.
Postoperative MRI showed subtotal resection of the tumor with successful decompression of the brain stem with a small residual tumor lateral to the occipital condyle [ and ]. Nine days after the surgery, the patient was discharged without complications, including new neurological deficits. The preoperative IX, X, XI, and XII cranial nerve palsies remained unchanged. The residual tumor showed no growth as observed through MRI 1 year after the surgery.