A 59-year-old man with a history of hospitalization due to COVID-19 infection was referred to our ward three days after discharge on account of mild hemoptysis. He was a known hypertensive who underwent coronary artery bypass graft 3 years ago and was on aspirin, metoprolol, and losartan at the time of admission. He mentioned that he had had one episode of hemoptysis and coughed blood-streaked sputum a few times. The patient had an occupational history of working in a leather shoe factory for 32 years.
As mentioned earlier, the patient had been previously hospitalized for one month due to COVID-19 infection confirmed by positive nasopharyngeal polymerase chain reaction.
During the aforementioned hospitalization, his chest computerized tomography (CT) scan (performed on the first day of admission) had revealed ground-glass opacity and consolidation
involving more than 40% of the pulmonary field . Besides, there had been a cavitary lesion measured 20 mm in diameter with intracavitary soft tissue density in the left lung.
It is noteworthy that the results of his HIV and tuberculosis screening had been negative.
He had been treated with sofosbuvir/daclatasvir (for 10 days), interferon beta-1-a (five doses), and low-dose dexamethasone (8 mg/day for 5 days followed by 4 mg/day for 2 weeks).
In the third week of the disease, he had had one episode of hemoptysis, and a repeat chest CT had revealed evidence of necrotizing pneumonia with a widening of the cavitary lesion to about 30 mm. Therefore, he had received broad-spectrum antibiotics and the corticosteroid had been discontinued.
The conditions of the patient had remarkably improved and he had been discharged at the end of the fourth week.
On the current admission, his condition was stable, his blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg, his respiratory rate was 18/min, and his SpO2 in room air was 90%.
His laboratory findings were anemia (Hb=11.7 gr/dL), mild leukocytosis (13200/mL, polymorphonuclear leukocytes=71.7%, lymphocyte=24.1%), and elevated inflammatory markers
(erythrocyte sedimentation rate=34 mm/h, c-reactive protein=61 mg/L, lactic acid dehydrogenase=558 U/L). Results of other tests, including platelet count, coagulation test,
liver, and renal function tests were within the normal range. It must also be mentioned that the SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction test was negative.
Another chest CT scan showed two cavitary lesions in both of his lungs; the larger lesion measured 50×80 mm, was located at the site of the previous lesion with a thick wall, and contained soft dense material ( and ).
A suspicion of fungal infection was raised and the patient underwent a trans-thoracic biopsy of the cavitary lesion. Supposedly, the direct examination of the biopsy material revealed
septal and branching hyphae, and a fungal culture grew Aspergillus species.
Fungal DNA was extracted using a DNA extraction kit (Gene All DNA extraction kit; Gene All, Germany) according to the instructions of the manufacturer.
The beta-tubulin region was sequenced to confirm the identification of Aspergillus species. The yielded sequence was subjected to the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST)
program . The DNA sequence of the beta-tubulin region matched that of Aspergillus tubingensis species, showing 99% similarity
with the ex-type strain of the species. However, a histologic assessment revealed marked infiltration of a mixed population of inflammatory cells, including
lymphoplasma cells, macrophages, and neutrophils .
Moreover, large fragments of necrotic tissue containing degenerated forms of hyaline fungal elements were noted, which were more characterized in special Grocott's methenamine
silver stain . The patient was treated with oral voriconazole (800 mg/day for 5 days followed by 400 mg/day).
After starting the treatment, hemoptysis was stopped and a CT scan was performed two weeks later. The results showed that the bigger cavity was slightly larger
while its wall was thinner and the mass was smaller. It was also found that the other cavity was changed into a small boll.