A 64-year-old right-handed Nigerian female was
admitted on account of sudden onset of involuntary
movement of the right upper limb a week prior to
presentation. She described involuntary movement of
the right upper extremity with associated abnormal
posturing. The abnormal movement was precipitated
by attempts to use the hand, starting as abnormal
twisting involving the wrist and then jerky movements
of the forearm, resolving spontaneously within five
minutes. Symptoms occurred during the day and she
had no preceding numbness and paresthesias. She had
no prior history of similar symptoms, involvement
of other body parts, limb weakness or gait
abnormality. There was no loss of consciousness
during episodes, alteration in sensorium or personality
change. She had received a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus at a private health facility two weeks before
presentation following a month’s history of increased
urination and thirst. She had no known family history
of DM. She had been commenced on tabs metformin
500mg three times daily and glibenclamide 5 mg daily
to which she was not compliant.
Vital signs were normal on admission. Other than
moderate dehydration and choreo-dystonic
hyperkinetic movement involving the right hand, the
other aspects of the physical findings were
unremarkable. Admitting fasting blood glucose was
400mg/dl. The Hemoglobin A1c was 14.5%. The
complete blood count was normal. Assessment was
acute focal choreo-dystonia from severe hyperglycemia
to exclude a stroke and focal-onset seizure disorder.
An axial section of the computed tomography (CT)
scan of the brain showed hyperdense signals within
the Globus pallidi, the falx and choroid plexus in
keeping with calcification (likely age-related) figure .
A brain MRI was not done due to financial constraints,
the electroencephalogram (EEG) was otherwise not
remarkable. Serum electrolytes, calcium, magnesium
as well as albumin were essentially normal. Dipstick
urinalysis showed 1+ ketonuria, 2+ glycosuria and trace
leucocytes. The serum osmolality was 343mosm/l.
She was placed on intravenous fluids normal saline
(one litre every 8 hours), basal-bolus insulin regimen
(soluble insulin 8 units 30 minutes before meals and
Glargine 14 units at night) and tabs levetiracetam
(Keppra) 500 mg daily. She was managed by the
endocrinology and neurology teams while on
admission. Following control of the hyperglycemia, the abnormal movements completely resolved on day
five of in-patient care. She was discharged home 9
days after admission. Medications at discharge were
to tabs gliclazide 30mg daily, sitagliptin 50mg daily,
metformin 1000 mg twice daily, glargine insulin 14
units at bed time and levetiracetam 500 mg twice daily.
She was followed up at the clinic 2 weeks, 1 month, 3
months and 6 months post-discharge and had no
repeat dystonia. The glycemic control remained
satisfactory. Blood pressure remained normal, fasting
plasma glucose ranged between 111-141 mg/dl, 2
hours post prandial ranged between 119-148mg/dl.
Levetiracetam was discontinued and there was still no
recurrence of the abnormal movements. She continued
to do well on anti-diabetic medications till date. In
one of her clinic sessions, she was thankful that the
diagnosis was not stroke and particularly glad that her
symptoms had resolved without any neurologic
sequalae or disability.