A 78-year-old Afro-Caribbean woman was hospitalized for ADHF as a consequence of a stroke. She had a history of hypertension, chronic HFrEF, aortic and mitral insufficiency, and chronic kidney disease (glomerular filtration rate: 45 mL/min/1.73 m2). Her last echocardiography, 2 years prior to presentation, found a left ventricular end-diastolic diameter (LVEDD) at 65 mm, left ventricular ejection function (LVEF) at 35%, restrictive diastolic dysfunction, pulmonary blood pressure (BP) at 55 mmHg, and an aortic and mitral insufficiency grade 2. BNP before Sacubitril/Valsartan—i.e. 3 month before her current admission—was ∼200 pg/mL. During the last year, she had three episodes of acute dyspnoea due to hypertension that required unplanned visits to her cardiologist without hospitalization. At the last visit, her cardiologist introduced Sacubitril/Valsartan. The introduction of Sacubitril/Valsartan occurred 3 months before her hospitalization for stroke, with an improvement in symptoms and without alteration of renal function. At the time of hospitalization, treatment was: Sacubitril/Valsartan 24/26 mg in the morning, Furosemide 40 mg per day, Bisoprolol 5 mg b.i.d., Allopurinol 100 mg b.i.d.
The patient was admitted for a right hemiplegia caused by a stroke, which provoked an abrupt rise in BP (systolic BP: 180 mmHg, diastolic BP: 110 mmHg) leading to a concomitant acute pulmonary oedema (APE). She had hypoxaemic respiratory distress (dyspnoea, polypnoea, and crackles), and electrocardiogram showed a regular sinus rhythm without ischaemic sign confirmed by normal plasma level of high-sensitivity troponin T [9 ng/L (normal <14 ng/L)]. Chest X-ray showed bilateral alveolo-interstitial syndrome. Echocardiography showed a 25% LVEF, increased filling pressures (E/A 2.4 and E/E′ 17), known aortic and mitral insufficiency, and a LVEDD of 63 mm. At admission, measurements of immunoreactive BNP and NT-proBNP were 4208 pg/mL (normal <100 pg/mL) and 8240 pg/mL (normal <300 pg/mL), respectively. Other biological results at admission showed limited cholestasis [alkaline phosphatase: 189 UI/L (normal: 35–104 UI/L), γ-glutamyltransferase: 124 UI/L (normal 5–36 UI/L)] and worsened renal function [creatinine: 135 µmol/L (normal: 44–80 µmol/L)], reflecting moderate right heart congestion. Clinical, biological, and echocardiographic parameters led to a diagnostic of non-ischaemic ADHF, secondary to the sympathetic surge provoked by the stroke. Faced with respiratory distress, the patient received urgent APE treatment: intravenous (IV) bolus of Furosemide (80 mg) and Urapidil continuous infusion (30 mg/h) for 2 days, followed by oral intake afterwards (40 mg Furosemide once a day and 60 mg Urapidil three times a day). Dyspnoea was relieved within 2 h, allowing cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to be performed. Cerebral MRI showed a left middle cerebral artery stroke with thrombus in this artery which was successfully treated by thrombectomy followed by treatment with acetylsalicylic acid (75 mg o.d.). Cardiac clinical symptoms improved and biology returned to baseline values, allowing discharge from intensive care unit at 6 days. Importantly, Sacubitril/Valsartan treatment was continued during hospitalization, the patient receiving 24/26 mg Sacubitril/Valsartan every morning after blood work. BNP, NT-proBNP, and circulating neprilysin (cNEP) activity were measured from samples collected every morning prior the intake of Sacubitril/Valsartan during hospitalization . Both BNP and NT-proBNP were high at admission and showed paralleled decrease up to discharge. Circulating neprilysin activity remained constant and low throughout the hospitalization.
The patient was then transferred to the neurology and rehabilitation department where she stayed 2 months. She was not specifically subjected to a cardiology follow-up but did not suffer from any cardiovascular event. As her neurological condition improved, she was released and follow-up stopped at this time.