We report a case of a female patient with drug-resistant epilepsy that initiated at seven years old with frequent motor (focal to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures) and non-motor (impaired awareness seizures) focal onset seizures (12–16 daily seizures), diagnosed, and managed as temporal epilepsy in a pediatric center with no previous medical, family, psychosocial history, surgeries, or any other risks factors. Psycho-affective (fear and anxiety) and visual auras with no oroalimentary or gestural automatisms were also identified during childhood.
In 2006, at the age of 16 years, the patient was admitted to our center for evaluation. Drug-resistant epilepsy was confirmed (valproate 60 mg/kg/day, levetiracetam 3 g/day, lamotrigine 200 mg/day, and clonazepam 4 mg/day). Examination demonstrated no neurological deficits. Neuropsychological evaluation revealed no memory impairment. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed left hippocampal atrophy and no structural lesion. Initial interictal electroencephalogram presented with bilateral frontotemporal activity. Video electroencephalogram (vEEG) revealed ictal left temporal epileptiform discharges and generalized interictal slow theta-alpha activity. Given that a consistent elementary visual phenomena (phosphenes) aura was identified during childhood, an invasive intracranial recording was offered to rule out a posterior extratemporal origin. The proposed invasive vEEG with subdural grid implantation to identify an ictal onset zone was not consented to by the family and the patient. For that reason, the patient was considered to be treated as a left temporal refractory epilepsy and a left trans-Sylvian selective amygdalohippocampectomy was offered, but the patient and her family stated the preference for a minimally invasive procedure.
She underwent a stereotactic frame-based insertion (F.L. Fischer, Freiburg, Germany) of a 3387 wide-spaced four contacts deep electrode (DBS Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) throughout the major axis of the hippocampus using a posterior longitudinal trajectory in February 2006 . The Target Point coordinates according to the Talairach-Tournoux coplanar Stereotaxic Atlas of the Human Brain were x = 30 mm, y = 8 mm in front of the PC line, and z = 16 mm below the AC-PC line. As a routine protocol, in our center, electrodes are implanted and maintained switched off for four weeks. No modification in seizure frequency was obtained immediately after surgery. A reduction of seizure frequency noticed during the 4th week after surgical implantation (from 12–16 daily seizures to 3–4 daily seizures) was noticed. Posterior migration of the electrode was identified at Posterior Sylvian Junction (PSJ) by postoperative MRI 1 month after surgery . Given that a reduction of seizure frequency occurred during the 4th week after surgical implantation, the decision to initiate DBS-PSJ stimulation was taken (2v-120 uS-145 Hz, contacts 0–3 negative, casing positive), and a consistent reduction in seizure frequency (some seizures after surgery, but seizure-free for at least 2 years). In the last follow-up an Engel IC score was obtained. DBS parameters were not modified from 2006 to 2019.
Both clinicians and the patient noticed a maintained seizure reduction during a long-term follow-up. In 2019, an invasive recording with SEEG implantation to change and optimize electrode position was proposed to confirm or rule out a temporal or posterior quadrant origin of seizures. However, further invasive evaluation was not consented by the patient and family due to favorable clinical results obtained with the previous PSJ stimulation. From 2019 to 2021, parameters were modified to improve seizure control. Nevertheless, the most favorable outcome (Engel IC) was obtained with original parameters (2v-120 uS-145 Hz, contacts 0–3 negative, casing positive) and maintained to this day [ and ].