A 42-year-old right-handed and previously healthy man presented to the emergency department with a fever of 39°C, blurred vision, confusion and headache. On examination, he had decreased right-sided corneal reflex, a right-sided central facial paresis, bilateral absent gag reflex and marked bilateral cerebellar ataxia. After a lumbar puncture was performed, treatment with ceftriaxone was initiated. However, the patient became septic and was subsequently intubated, put on mechanical ventilation and transferred to the ICU due to bilateral vocal cord paralysis and airway obstruction. Gentamicin was also added to his therapeutic regimen due to the rapidly developed sepsis.
Upon admission, brain CT scans revealed multiple hypodense areas frontally and slight hydrocephalus . CSF findings included pleocytosis of 4200 cells/μL (77% neutrophils, 22% lymphocytes and 1% monocytes), protein of 114 mg/dL and normal glucose. Based upon the above clinical, laboratory and imaging findings, a listerial infection was suspected; hence ampicillin was added to the initial therapeutic regimen. At that time, CSF cultures were negative for Listeria as well as other bacterial, viral and fungal microorganisms. The spinal fluid Veneral Disease Research Laboratory test and the results of tests for Lyme disease antibody, toxoplasmosis titers and cryptococcal antigen were all negative. Results of a serum human immunodeficiency virus test were also negative, and further laboratory investigations failed to confirm any immunological abnormalities.
The patient's clinical condition in the ICU deteriorated in the first 48 hours following admission, despite the aggressive administration of fluids and vasopressors. He developed cardiac tachyarrhythmia and was hemodynamically unstable. Continuous neuromonitoring was performed by means of TCD and optic nerve sonography, as previously described -. We utilized an HDI 3500 ultrasound device (ATL, Philips, Bothell, USA) and a Philips XD11 XE ultrasound device (Philips, Bothell, US), both equipped with a 7.5 MHz linear transducer as well as with 1.5 MHz to 3.6 MHz wide-angle, phased-array transducers. TCD revealed progressively decreased diastolic flow velocities and increased pulsatility index of cerebral blood flow in the middle cerebral artery bilaterally, while the optic nerve sheath diameter was repeatedly found to be increased .
The above data gave the impression of severe brain damage and consequently of cerebral edema. Indeed, increased pulsatility index and increased optic nerve sheath diameter correspond to the diagnosis of brain damage -. Furthermore, the above findings were confirmed by a brain CT scan that was performed 3 days after admission and revealed diffuse brain damage and cerebral edema. Hence, dexamethasone and mannitol were added in the therapeutic regimen. At that time, another CSF analysis revealed pleocytosis of 6800 cells/μL (85% neutrophils, 13% lymphocytes and 2% monocytes), protein of 322 mg/dL and glucose of 2 mg/dL. Unfortunately, brain death was diagnosed by pertinent clinical tests 7 days after the patient's admission to the ICU. Interestingly, the TCD revealed a reversal of the diastolic cerebral blood flow . While on color mode, systolic and diastolic flow coexisted in the same time unit, resulting in a pulsating flash akin to the beacon of a lighthouse, as previously described [see also . Three days after the diagnosis of brain death was established, the patient died. Blood- and post-mortem brain tissue cultures grew L. monocytogenes, while the histopathology result showed numerous intracellular and extracellular bacilli in the areas of the brain stem and cerebellar white matter.