A 62-year-old male presented abdominal tear-like pain and acute ischemia of the right lower extremity during the endovascular treatment of celiac trunk aneurysms. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed abdominal aortic type B dissection with acute ischemia of the right lower extremity preoperatively , and the primary entry tear was localized below the renal artery. The left iliac artery was originated from the true lumen, while the false lumen supplied the right iliac artery but could not be observed on imaging due to significant compression of the false lumen.
This patient provided prior informed consent to this intervention, as well as the publication of the relevant data. Anticoagulation therapy [low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), enoxaparin, 40 mg, SI, bid] was prescribed before the patient underwent the procedure. The endovascular repair of abdominal aortic dissection was performed under general anesthesia. The orientation of the puncture was guided by fluoroscopy. The percutaneous access of both femoral arteries was created by placing a 6 F short sheath (Terumo). The gooseneck snare was introduced into the false lumen of the lower abdominal aorta from the left femoral artery under the guidance of the path map. A 0.035-inch guidewire (Terumo) was introduced into the false lumen from the right femoral artery and captured by the gooseneck snare, an additional movie file shows this in more detail (see Additional file ). After the through-and-through guidewire was controlled, a 55 cm 7 F (COOK) sheath was advanced up to the level of bifurcation of the abdominal aorta through the left guidewire. Subsequently, an 0.018-inch V-18 guidewire (Boston Scientific Co.) was inserted via the right sheath and guided to the left femoral artery. Then, a 0.035-inch Lunderquist guidewire (COOK) was advanced into the thoracic aorta from the long sheath of the left femoral artery. Two 0.018-inch V-18 guidewires (Boston Scientific Co.) were used in the left sheath.
A gentle upward bilateral pull was maneuvered using a ‘‘cheese wire’’ technique to shear the flap of the mid-abdominal aorta from the distal tear of the left common iliac artery dissection up to the proximal end . This operation was performed cautiously under the guidance of fluoroscopy to ensure that the extension of the intimal dissection did not occur. Next, angiography confirmed the formation of a suitable fenestration hole that provided access to the right femoral artery graft to enter the true lumen of the abdominal aorta (Additional file ). A 28–30-mm cuff (Aortic Extender Endoprosthesis PLA280300, W. L. Gore & Associates Inc., Flagstaff, AZ, USA) was deployed at the proximal tear below the level of the renal artery to establish a normal landing zone and repair the proximal tear. A Hercules™ bifurcated stent graft system (Hercules™ HBB26-14-160; Microport, Shanghai) was introduced into the true lumen from the left femoral artery. An extender limb (Hercules™ HBL16-14-120) was placed from the right femoral artery. The coda balloon was used to expand the proximal end of the main stent and the stent-graft junction (Additional file 2).
Angiography confirmed the patency of the bilateral common iliac arteries and adequate visceral perfusion with no evidence of endoleak or arterial rupture . The patient continued to take dual antiplatelets (such as aspirin, 100 mg, qd and clopidogrel, 75 mg, qd) for 12 months after this intervention. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on day 4 after the operation. At 6-months follow-up, no complaints of the lower limb ischemia were presented. Postoperative CTA demonstrated good stent-graft expansion and abdominal aortic dissection, excluding the patent perfusion of bilateral common iliac arteries; also, no endoleak was detected.