A 43-year-old female was admitted for perirectal abscess. Her comorbid conditions included hypertension, obstructive sleep apnea, type 2 diabetes, atrial fibrillation, morbid obesity, and rheumatoid arthritis (treated with chronic steroid therapy). The patient’s current presentation began with 1 month of reddish drainage from the right buttock. She reported no trauma, fever, or other systemic symptoms. On physical examination, she had a large perirectal abscess sized 12.24 × 8.56 cm with overlying necrosis and extensive erythema up to the lower back with discharge of brown-red material. Her creatinine was 3.7 mg/dL, which increased from her baseline of 0.8 mg/dL. She was started on intravenous cefoxitin and clindamycin. The findings revealed 10 – 12 cm of necrosis and left perirectal abscess involving the ischiorectal fossa but not extending to the rectum. Postoperatively, she was transferred to the ICU as she was hypotensive, requiring vasopressor infusion. The patient was taken to the operating room multiple times for debridement and split-thickness skin grafts from her left posterior thigh. Her condition continued to improve, and she was able to be moved out of the ICU. Her creatinine came back to 1 mg/dL.
On hospital day 17, she developed areas of numerous severely sharp, painful erythematous lesions with central dusky necrosis and subsequently ulcerated lesions ranging in size from 1 to 5 cm on the bilateral lower extremities . Punch biopsy from these lesions was done. The final pathologic diagnosis was small-vessel vasculitis. It was thought that the lesions were pyoderma gangrenosum related to her underlying rheumatoid arthritis. Her steroid dose was increased to prednisone 30 mg daily for lesion treatment. The labs were sent off for the genetic hypercoagulable panel, including protein C, protein S, cryofibrinogen, reptilase time, DRVVT screen ratio, prothrombin G20210A mutation, lupus anticoagulant, and antithrombin III, which were all negative. The patient was discharged to a short-term rehab facility as her condition had improved. Three days later, she was readmitted again for sepsis syndrome due to infected ulcers on the bilateral lower extremities. She developed fever up to 38.2 °C and was hypotensive. Broad-spectrum antibiotic, vancomycin, and piperacillin-tazobactam were initiated again. Since the patient had numerous non-healing bilateral lesions on her lower extremities, which did not respond to steroids, skin biopsy of the same lesion was performed again and sent to a pathology laboratory in a tertiary facility. Final pathology showed extensive fat necrosis and lymphohistiocytic inflammatory cell infiltrate. Medial calcification of vessel walls was seen focally, and some pockets of neutrophils were visible. These findings were consistent with calciphylaxis. On review of the record, the patient also had secondary hyperparathyroidism due to vitamin D deficiency . Her calcium and phosphorus were in the normal range. The intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) was mildly elevated at 88 pg/mL (14 – 72 pg/mL). Total vitamin D level was 11 ng/mL (31 – 100 ng/mL). Consequently, she was started on treatment with 15 L of oxygen by facemask for 2 hours a day, sodium thiosulfate 25 g intravenously 5 days per week, and sodium thiosulfate intralesional injections every 7 days. Daily prednisone 30 mg was maintained for rheumatoid arthritis treatment. Oxycodone, oral morphine, gabapentin, and acetaminophen were used to control the ulcer pain. Vitamin D level was repleted with cholecalciferol 1,000 µg per day.
On 6-month follow-up, the ulcerated lesions had satisfactorily improved . Two out of four ulcer regions on her lower extremities were healed. The two remaining were in the process of healing. She has made good improvement in physical function.