A 41-year-old woman presented to our department with cyanosis, dyspnea and plethora. The patient suffered from chronic kidney disease (CKD) and ToF, for which she was treated palliatively in the past. On admission, her oxygen saturations were 66.6% on room air. Blood tests revealed a red blood cell count of 7.54 × 1012/L, hemoglobin 21.8 g/dL and hematocrit as high as 71%. Ferritin level was 73 ng/mL. Liver function tests revealed bilirubin levels to be 0.9 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 50 U/L and alanine aminotransferase 43 U/L. A creatinine level of 3.5 mg/dL and urea 171 mL/dL indicated ESRD. A total calcium amount of 8.2 mg/dL, inorganic phosphates 6.5 mg/dL and parathyroid hormone level of 748.7 pg/mL were suggestive of secondary hyperparathyroidism. Metabolic acidosis was recognized with a pH of 7.196 and bicarbonates at 13.6 mmol/L. An ultrasound scan showed horseshoe kidney and liver with increased echogenicity.
Dysmorphic facial features were also observed, which included a prominent forehead, deep set eyes, pointed and small chin and hypertelorism . These characteristics, combined with horseshoe kidney, were highly suggestive of an undefined genetic syndrome, prompting further clinical investigation and genetic testing. Imaging revealed thoracic scoliosis and a deformed thoracic cage with decreased anterioposterior diameter. Skeletal anomalies typical of ALGS, such as butterfly vertebrae, were not observed. Ophthalmologic examination showed grade 3 hypertensive retinopathy and dry eye syndrome. It is worth mentioning that the patient had no family history of any genetic disease.
The patient’s physical development was impaired and, as a consequence, intellectual abilities were also diminished. A complex medical history resulting in social isolation, together with low socioeconomic status, likely impeded the patient’s learning and development potential.
Before admission to our department, the patient had already had an extensive past medical history. Some of her first symptoms, including cyanosis, were present at birth, however, neonatal jaundice was not reported. The diagnosis of ToF was made at the age of 12. Due to severe hypoplasia of the pulmonary vascular bed, a Blalock-Taussig shunt (a shunt between the right subclavian artery and right pulmonary artery) was performed on the right side. After a short period of observation, the shunt became occluded, and thus at the age of 14, a Blalock-Taussig shunt was applied on the left. When the patient was 33, she underwent multiple venesections due to grossly elevated hemoglobin levels (25.0 g/dL) and a hematocrit of 73.5%. However, phlebotomies had little effect on these parameters and were soon discontinued. Five years later, due to narrowing of the left shunt to 3 mm, stent implantation was performed. The intervention resulted in shunt flow with a maximal gradient of 124 mmHg. SaO2 increased from 68 to 82%. In contrast, the decreases in hemoglobin and hematocrit were deemed insignificant. Computed tomography (CT) of the heart performed at that time revealed ventricular septal defect of 10 mm in the membranous part of the septum, an overriding aorta with tricuspid aortal valve, very pronounced hyperplasia of the right ventricle, pulmonary stenosis, hypoplasia of the pulmonary trunk and extrapulmonary parts of the pulmonary arteries and an enlarged right atrium. When the patient was 41 years old, restenosis of the left shunt began to occur, likely due to pronounced polycythemia. In the following years, balloon angioplasty was performed twice. However, neither shunt flow nor the patient’s clinical condition improved significantly. The hemoglobin and hematocrit levels did not decrease and remained stable at 22 g/dL and 70%, respectively. Minimal flow through the left shunt was preserved. Lastly, echocardiography that the patient had at the age of 44 confirmed hyperplasia of the right ventricle (thickness of 12 mm) with preserved, good contractility (TAPSE of 23 mm). Very slight tricuspid regurgitation was visible together with signs of pulmonary hypertension (S’tr 8 cm/s).
Due to central cyanosis, the patient was suffering from repeated episodes of loss of consciousness and vertigo. She also had hypothyroidism. Moreover, the patient had suffered from hypertension since her late twenties. At the beginning, a combination of an ACE inhibitor, beta blocker and diuretic was used, but shortly after the initiation of treatment, the ACE inhibitor and diuretic were discontinued due to hyperkalemia. Her medication was limited to the beta blocker. This was sufficient until the age of 36, when the patient’s renal function started deteriorating. The patient and her mother claimed that values of blood pressure at home would fall below 140/90, but measurements at our department varied between 130/65 and 180/73 mmHg. They were performed on the patient’s leg due to the patient’s slim arms. At that time, treatment was limited to furosemide, bisoprolol and clonidine. Hepatitis and HIV screens were negative, although the patient had a record of HCV infection in the past.
With respect to the liver, bilirubin levels always remained within normal range during the 4 years of treatment at our department. Aspartate and alanine aminotransferase, though slightly elevated on admission, also remained within normal range most of the time. However, on several occasions, alkaline phosphatase was elevated, reaching values as high as 754 U/L during episodes of peritonitis.
Over time, progression to ESRD was observed. Proteinuria was not very pronounced with levels ranging between 100 and 500 mg/dL, while residual diuresis was 500 mL. Renal biopsy was never performed because the patient did not consent to it. When the patient was admitted to our department at the age of 41, renal replacement therapy was introduced. Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) was chosen. After the introduction of CAPD, diuresis decreased to 200 mL. The mother was taught to successfully assist with CAPD. Acidosis was not compensated despite CAPD. The patient had regular appointments at the dialysis station. At the age of 44, two episodes of peritoneal dialysis-related peritonitis occurred, with the second episode being complicated by an ischemic stroke of the left hemisphere. Although it was successfully managed with conservative treatment, in the next 2 months, the overall condition of the patient gradually deteriorated. Both the patient and her family refused further hospitalizations. She died at the age of 45 and an autopsy was not performed.