A 30-year-old female patient visited our hospital in May 2021, complaining of a nontender anterior neck mass rapidly increasing in size over the last month. The patient had no fever, night sweats, or weight loss. She lived a regular life and had no family history of malignant tumors. Physical examination revealed multiple swollen lymph nodes on the neck, which were firm, fixed, and nontender.
18F-FDG-PET showed the presence of fluorodeoxyglucose avid uptake in multiple parts, including several lymph nodes around the right carotid sheath with a maximum diameter of 3.4 cm and the standard uptake volume (SUVmax) of 33.3; an enlarged right tonsil with a SUVmax of 17.5; and a nodule in the soft tissue of upper segment of the left thigh with a length of 1.3 cm and a SUVmax of 6.3. No bone marrow infiltration was found by cytology, flow cytometry, and bone marrow biopsy.
The pathologic biopsy and immunohistochemistry (IHC) of neck lymph nodes revealed DLBCL, a nongerminal center B-cell-like (non-GCB) subtype, and overexpression of MYC (50%) and BCL2 (50%). The MYC, BCL2, and BCL6 rearrangements detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) of the tumor tissue were negative.
Secondary gene detection was performed, and mutation analysis of the DLBCL-43 gene was performed using capture-based next-generation sequencing (NGS) testing: ATM exon 27 p. C1366* missense mutation, abundance 38.1%; and CD58 exon p.I185fs frameshift mutation, abundance 16.4%. No mutations were detected in TP53.
Diagnosis of DLBCL (non-GCB subtype) was made based on her clinical presentation, morphology, and immunohistochemistry evaluation of lymph node specimens. She was in stage III, according to the Ann Arbor system. DLBCL (non-GCB subtype, DEL, stage III, group A, aaIPI 1) was confirmed by a multidisciplinary team composed of a pathologist, a radiologist, and an oncologist. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board and carried out in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Our study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Shandong Cancer Hospital and Institute (Ethics No.: 2020-129-02). Informed consent was obtained from this patient.
The patient achieved a partial response (PR) after two cycles of ZR-CHOP (rituximab 375 mg/m2, d1; cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m2, d2; doxorubicin 50 mg/m2, d2; vincristine 1.4 mg/m2, d2 (to a maximum of 2 mg total dose); prednisolone 100 mg, d2-6; and zanubrutinib 160 mg, bid, d1-21). The patient remained PR after four cycles of ZR-CHOP, while the disease progressed after six cycles of ZR-CHOP. 18F-FDG-PET imaging demonstrated enlarged lymph nodes in the right neck area and an enlarged right tonsil with much higher FDG uptake (SUVmax = 32.6) compared to the liver (SUVmax = 3.0). A repeated biopsy of neck lymph nodes was performed and diagnosed with DLBCL, still with overexpression of MYC (50%~70%) and BCL2 (80%). The IHC showed CD20 (−), CD79a (little+), CD19 (−), PAX5 (+), CD3 (−), CD10 (+), MUM-1 (+), P53 (+, 80%, wild type), CD30 (−), CD5 (−), CyclinD1 (−), CD21 (−), Ki-67 (+, 80%), and EBER (−).
Due to the clinical situation and unfavorable prognosis, all therapeutic options were discussed with the patient. In addition to the current standard of second-line treatment options and clinical trials, the possibility of individual healing under the guidance of an in vitro high-throughput drug sensitivity test (DST) was discussed. The patient was informed in detail about the experimental nature of such treatment as well as the possible risks, and she actively agreed to receive the treatment under the guidance of DST.
In vitro high-throughput drug sensitivity testing is a method for determining the sensitivity of tumor-fresh viable cells to agents (as many as several hundred) . This patient’s biopsy specimen of neck lymph nodes was used for DST. Primary cancer cells were obtained and amplified in vitro. Live cells were seeded and cultured in 384-well plates with drugs. Except for platinum drugs (oxaliplatin, cisplatin, carboplatin), all drugs were dissolved and diluted using dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The concentrations were those used in clinical practice, which met the international drug standard. The control group was treated with DMSO. A dose (0.1 μl/well) was performed using a JANUS automated workstation. After incubation, cell viability was measured by the CellCounting-Lite 2.0 Luminescent Cell Viability Assay. The sensitivity of each treatment is listed in . The primary tumor cells showed moderate sensitivity to bortezomib, thalidomide, gemcitabine as a single agent, and bortezomib, thalidomide, and dexamethasone (VTD) as a combined regimen. Gemcitabine is one of the routine drugs for relapsed/refractory DLBCL, while VTD is rarely reported for lymphoma treatment. The patient was treated with a VTD regimen, as that used in myeloma (bortezomib 1.3 mg/m2, d1, 4, 8, 11; thalidomide 100 mg, d1-21; dexamethasone 20 mg, d1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 9, 11, and 12). After two cycles of therapy, PR was obtained with only a small lesion left. Another two cycles of VTD plus gemcitabine were then administered, and the patient achieved a complete response (CR). No adverse events, such as peripheral neuropathy, pneumonia, liver and kidney function damage, and digestive tract discomfort, were detected during treatment. Stem cells were mobilized, and autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation was carried out afterward. The patients remained CR for more than 5 months after transplantation .