A 36-year-old man, right-handed, non-smoker, sportive, manual worker, and without any medical background, presented with a stab wound of the left index in palmar zone 2 International Federation of Societies for Surgery of the Hand Classification . Surgical procedure reported an opening of the flexor sheath without tendon injury and a continuous digital radial collateral artery with no active bleeding.
After 13-day interval, the patient presented with scar swelling for 2 days. On clinical examination, vital signs were normal, without fever. There was a hypoesthesia of the radial fingertip. Palpation showed a non-compressible, pulseless but inflammatory mass. We hypothesized a surgical site infection with abscessed collection. An ultrasound assessment was performed and reported a cystic mass without any sign of blood flow inside.
A surgical revision was performed. An aneurysm of the digital radial collateral artery with compression of the radial collateral nerve was identified . A clamping test was performed using a clamp on the digital radial collateral artery. The finger remained vascularized on the digital ulnar collateral artery. A ligation-excision of the aneurysm was performed. Anatomopathological analysis concluded to a false aneurysm. Bacteriological examination was negative. Sensitivity of the radial fingertip was recovered immediately after surgery.
After a 15-day interval, the patient presented with intense pain (visual analog scale [VAS] 8/10) in the finger with anesthesia of the radial fingertip and reappearance of a mass at the level of the scar in less than a day. An upper limb computed tomography (CT) angio was performed in emergency and showed the presence of an aneurysm below the previous ligation excision . VAS was suddenly at 10/10. Clinical examination revealed acute ischemia of the finger. An emergency revision was performed.
We noticed a ruptured aneurysm extending to the origin of the digital radial collateral artery from the common digital artery 1–2. Evacuation of the hematoma allowed immediate revascularization of the finger. The aneurysm was excised, and ligation was made. Sensory recovery was immediate postoperatively.
Due to the recurrence, the patient was referred to the department of hematology and vascular medicine.
The imaging assessment (CT angio) did not show any other aneurysmal lesions. The patient had no previous bleeding history. There was no family history of bleeding or thrombosis. The bleeding assessment tool (BAT comprises 14 categories for assessing bleeding symptoms retrospectively and it has been shown that a high bleeding score is associated with the presence of an inherited bleeding disorder) score was 4 (A score ≥4 is considered “abnormal”) and the partial thromboplastin time (PTT) ratio was 1.46 (corresponding to an intrinsic coagulation pathway defect, and thus elevated PTT). Endogenous factors were investigated and a minor factor VIII (FVIII) deficiency of 20% was found. The diagnosis of minor hemophilia A was made.
A protocol of supplementation was performed: Immediately 3000 IU of FVIII and then 2000 IU every 8 h until FVIII value correction. Supplementation of FVIII deficiency and the specialized management allowed hemostasis and avoidance of early aneurysm recurrence.
The patient recovered full hand function at 2 weeks postoperatively. At 1 year, we did not observe any aneurysm recurrence.