A 26-year-old Caucasian woman suffering from congenital absolute UFI underwent a deceased donor UTx. In the first year of the post-transplant period, 4 episodes of mild acute cellular rejection were diagnosed by cervical biopsy. They were treated with pulses of glucocorticoids and the addition of azathioprine to a maintenance immunosuppressive regimen of tacrolimus. In the further course, the patient developed secondary neutropenia, which was addressed by withdrawal of azathioprine and administration of several pulses of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor.
Apart from congenital uterine agenesis which was treated with UTx, the patient was healthy with no history of further operations. Family history was negative for inherent diseases.
Five months after the UTx, the patient’s compliance was suboptimal. She decided to go on vacation to Egypt despite clear physician recommendation not to do so considering the high risk of acquisition of infectious gastroenteritis.
After her return from Egypt, the patient presented with nausea, abdominal discomfort, and diarrhoea. She was hospitalized to receive rehydration therapy and to run necessary tests.
Upon admission, there were no signs of acute abdomen. The abdomen was mildly tender in all quadrants; there were no signs of peritoneal inflammation.
Upon admission, her abdominal ultrasound (US) was normal, although the appendix was not differentiated on baseline US. There was no suspicion of acute abdomen, and thrombosis of the uterine graft was excluded using Doppler ultrasound .
C-reactive protein was 27 mg/L on day 0; the level of leukocytes was within the normal range. However, tests proved to be positive for Clostridium difficile colitis. Due to lack of signs of acute abdomen and verified colitis, we felt it was not necessary to run computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen. A therapy of perorally administered vancomycin 125 mg 4 times a day was started. Viral and parasitic colitis were excluded. Additionally, cytomegalovirus (CMV) polymerase chain reaction was negative. In the course of the next few days, there was a steady progressive elevation of the level of C-reactive protein up to 83 mg/L on day 4. Although the differential blood count showed a normal level of leukocytes, it was considered pathologic because the patient had been leukopenic chronically and there was a new finding of neutrophilia. On day 4, the abdominal discomfort changed to pain and became localized to the right hypogastrium.