A 51-year-old woman who presented with diarrhoea containing mucus and blood had initially been diagnosed with acute severe ulcerative pan-colitis and backwash ileitis at the age of 49 years at Peking Union Medical College Hospital (PUMCH) in December 2014. She had poliomyelitis when she was very young, and there was nothing special regarding her family or psychosocial history. Serology was positive for perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (pANCA) and negative for anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibody (ASCA). Her condition was refractory to steroids and complicated by Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection. Ultimately, she underwent sub-total colectomy and ileostomy in February 2015. Pathological examination of the resection specimen showed diffuse pan-colitis consistent with UC and no indications of Crohn’s disease . She did well in the following 11 months; prednisone was tapered and stopped within 2 months, and she gained 5 kg of weight after the ileostomy. In January 2016, a scheduled restorative ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA) with proximal neo-ileostomy was performed.
From one month after the IPAA, her 24-h stool collection slowly increased to 1.5–2 L. Next, she noticed decreased urine output since April. In early May 2016, she presented to our emergency room with repeated unconsciousness over the course of 10 days. Her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure (BP), 74/50 mmHg; heart rate (HR), 90 bpm; additionally, she exhibited a poor nutritional status (160 cm; 39 kg). On physical examination, active bowel sounds were noticed to occur approximately 7–9 times per minute. Her serum creatinine level was 183 μmol/L, indicating acute kidney injury. Treatment with fluid replacement and noradrenaline maintained her BP at 80–90/50–60 mmHg and gradually normalized her creatinine level. However, her 24-h watery stool collection persisted, and she developed fever and vomiting. While many leukocytes were found in stool collected from the diverted ileostomy, repeated stool cultures and tests for Clostridium difficile toxins were negative. Tests for CMV-DNA, CMV-pp65 and EBV-DNA were performed and were all negative. The patient was not on any medications, including NSAIDs, upon verification. Her treatment with steroids was stopped before the end of April 2015. Empirical treatment with antibiotics, including ceftazidime, metronidazole and oral vancomycin, was administered with no response. Due to her reliance on noradrenaline, relative adrenal insufficiency was suspected, and hydrocortisone was initiated at 50 mg q6 h intravenously. Her stool volume decreased to less than 500 ml per day quickly, by which time the treatment with noradrenaline was successfully stopped. The levels of D-lactate, endotoxin and diamine oxidase indicated that the barrier function of the intestine was compromised and that bacterial translocation may have occurred. Oedematous inflamed mucosa with patchy superficial ulcers was observed in the diverted pouch by pouchoscopy. Although an upper endoscopy and an endoscopy through a stoma revealed a normal gross appearance in the stomach, duodenum and pre-stomal ileum , the histological examination of tissue biopsies of both the duodenum and pre-stomal ileum revealed enteritis, as indicated by moderate villous atrophy, cryptitis, decreased goblet cells, and severe active inflammation with neutrophil infiltration in the lamina propria, as well as negativity for intraepithelial lymphocytosis . From these lines of evidence of histological enteritis presenting in the duodenum, pre-stomal ileum and diverted pouch, we considered pan-enteritis to be present, and we diagnosed the patient with post-colectomy enteritis. The patient was treated with methylprednisolone at 30 mg intravenously once a day with tapering by 5 mg every 7 to 10 days; however, her stool volume from the ileostomy still gradually increased to 3–4 L. After a multidisciplinary team discussion, ileostomy closure was debated as the final rescue treatment and was performed in August 2016. Two months later, her stool volume decreased to less than 1 L per day, and she gained 2.5 kg of weight. Azathioprine at 50 mg/d was prescribed during the tapering of prednisone. Until the last follow-up in March 2018, she performed well, with an increase in body weight to 50 kg, and daily defecation approximately 5–6 times at less than 1 L/day, sometimes with form (Additional file ). Gastroduodenal endoscopy and pouchoscopy were repeated annually and showed normal villi in the descending duodenum and neo-ileum in March 2018 . Gradually, the histology changed, showing recovery of the villous atrophy, cryptitis and inflammation in the lamina propria to normal .