A 65-year-old woman presented with 6-year history of subcutaneous nodule in the vulvar region and recently the mass obviously increased creating personal discomfort. She was then admitted to our hospital for treatment. Computed tomography (CT) of the pelvis showed a cystic solid mass (diameter 50 mm) in the perianal region, suggesting a benign leiomyoma. The patient had no prior history of malignancy. Then, the patient underwent wide excision. On surgery, one nodule was found to be located in the vulvar muscle space, measuring approximately 45 mm in maximum diameter. The tumor was well-defined without obvious capsule. No sign of local recurrence or metastatic disease was observed after the initial excision during an eight-months follow-up.
Grossly, the lesion was a well-circumscribed , solid mass, with areas of translucent quality. On cut section, there was a solid white to gray lobulated nodule, measuring 5.5 × 4.0 × 3.5 cm in size. Histologically, at low magnification, the tumor was well circumscribed, focally encapsulated, and lobulated. The tumor stroma was relatively hypervascular and comprised a mixture of myxoid and nonmyxoid components, myxoid areas accounted for 20% of the tumor volume. At high magnification, the lesion was composed of spindle-shaped to epithelioid cells with abundant amphophilic cytoplasm, consisting of vesicular nuclei and small nucleoli. In nonmyxoid area, the tumors cells arranged in storiform pattern and some areas of tumor stroma was predominantly hyalinized or fibrous . In myxoid areas, tumors cells grew singly or in a loosely cohesive manner with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm resembling rhabdomyoblasts . Rhabdomyoblasts-like cells accounted for approximately 80% of the total cells in the myxoid areas. The nuclear atypia was mild to moderate and mitotic figures were low (up to five mitosis per 50 high-power fields).
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were diffusely positive for Vimentin, and partially positive for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) with at least moderate intensity, which was mainly expressed in epithelioid cells . Estrogen receptor (ER) was weakly expressed in some tumor cells . Calponin (clone: CALP and EP63) was positive for both the nucleus and the cytoplasm of the tumor cells . Focal expression for Bcl-2 and CD99 was observed. The tumor was negative for S100 protein , cytokeratin (CK), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), CK7, SOX10, CD31, CD34 , desmin, MyoD1, myogenin, smooth muscle actin (SMA), CD117, β-catenin and MUC4. Loss of INI1 protein expression was also confirmed . The Ki67 index was about 10%. The results of immunochemical staining were summarized in Table .
Using formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded 4-mm-thick tumor samples, dual-color break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was used to investigate EWSR1 and FUS1 gene rearrangements. Break-apart probes for EWSR1 (Abbott Molecular Inc., USA) and FUS1 (Abbott Molecular Inc., USA) were used, and no split signals were observed with either probe .