A 37-year-old man was admitted to our intensive care unit (ICU) with a 3-day history of fever, cough, and respiratory distress and complaints of pain in the right side of the neck, numbness in the right upper limbs, and reduced pain sensation below the wrist of more than 6 months’ duration. He had no other significant medical history.
On admission, the patient had a body mass index of 24.6 kg/m2. He presented with acute respiratory failure (85% oxygen saturation on 5 L/min oxygen via mask), a temperature of 39.0 °C, blood pressure of 155/85 mmHg, pulse rate of 122 beats/minute, and respiratory rate of 35 breaths/minute. As hypoxemia persisted despite noninvasive ventilation (high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy), he was immediately intubated and ventilated. During intubation, his blood pressure and heart rate decreased, and epinephrine (1 mg single intravenous dose) and norepinephrine (0.7 μg/kg/min) were administered.
An arterial blood gas analysis revealed hypoxemia and hypocapnia (pH, 7.34; pCO2, 24.6 mmHg; pO2, 56 mmHg; HCO3, 12.8 mmol/L; base excess, − 11.1 mmol/L; lactate, 0.9 mmol/L on 5 L/min oxygen via mask). Chest computed tomography revealed extensive bilateral ground-glass opacities and consolidations . A chest X-ray examination showed bilateral diffuse interstitial infiltrates .
The following laboratory data were determined on admission: white blood cell count, 11,141 cells/μL (neutrophils, 87.9%; lymphocytes, 8.54%; and eosinophils, 1.3%); hemoglobin, 12.3 g/dL; platelet count, 264,000 cells/μL; international normalized ratio of prothrombin time, 1.51; aspartate aminotransferase, 120.5 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 53.6 IU/L; total bilirubin, 6.0 mg/dL; direct bilirubin, 2.6 mg/dL; total protein, 6.85 g/dL; albumin, 38.3 g/dL; urea nitrogen, 15.20 mmol/L; creatinine 124.7 μmol/L; C-reactive protein, 13.28 mg/dL; and procalcitonin, 8.16 ng/mL. A reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis of nasopharyngeal swab specimens collected in the emergency room on admission confirmed the patient had developed an influenza A (H3) infection.
Cefoperazone, sulbactam, moxifloxacin, and oseltamivir were administered for 8 days and methylprednisolone (40 mg bid) was given for 3 days. Eight days after admission to the ICU, the patient exhibited the following arterial blood gas findings: pH, 7.49; pCO2, 42.2 mmHg; pO2, 94 mmHg; HCO3, 31.5 mmol/L; base excess, 7.5 mmol/L; and lactate, 1.0 mmol/L (FiO2, 40%). Despite radiologically demonstrated improvements in his clinical condition and chest lesions , the patient experienced difficulty weaning. He remained conscious but had a poor spontaneous cough with sputum production and weak limb muscle strength (grade 2–3). His cough reflex was absent during bronchoscopic sputum suction, and he used abdominal breathing during the T-tube test. Two hours after the T-tube test, an arterial blood gas analysis revealed hypercapnia with a pH of 7.25, pCO2 of 94.2 mmHg, pO2 of 81 mmHg, and base excess of 10.3 mmol/L. These signs could not be easily attributed to the common causes of weaning difficulties (e.g., diaphragmatic dysfunction, ICU-acquired myasthenia). We therefore suspected a dysfunction in the respiratory center of the brain stem (e.g., brain stem infarct) and performed a CT examination of the brain. However, no anomalies were found.
Given the patient’s weaning difficulty, a tracheotomy was performed, and sputum was drained under fiberoptic bronchoscopy at least twice per day. The patient was also administered early comprehensive rehabilitation, including psychological counseling. He successfully weaned from the ventilator at 20 days after admission to the ICU. Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging revealed a tonsillar herniation to the first cervical vertebra with a posterior dislocation of the odontoid process and syringomyelia, as well as compression and deformation of the medulla and high cervical cord .
After weaning from the ventilator, the patient’s clinical condition rapidly improved. He was eventually discharged without undergoing surgery for the Arnold–Chiari malformation and posterior dislocation of the odontoid process. He had not experienced a recurrence of pneumonia, dysphagia, or respiratory failure after 2 months of follow-up. Although his cough and expectoration abilities were good, significant changes in his neurological symptoms and signs were apparent when compared with his status before pneumonia. For example, the patient occasionally experienced dizziness and visual rotation with postural changes and could not perform fine movements of the right hand, such as clasping and writing. Additionally, he continued to experience weak muscle strength in the right limbs (grade 4), numbness in the right upper limbs, and a reduced sensation of pain and temperature below the right wrist. The patient refused further surgical treatment for the Arnold–Chiari malformation and posterior dislocation of the odontoid process.