A 48-year-old woman was admitted to Shaanxi TB Hospital with the chief complaint of skin pigmentation for 1 year.
The patient experienced depressed mood, fatigue, decreased appetite, and hyperpigmentation of the skin, nails, mouth, and mucous membranes of the lips , which started 1 year prior to the consultation.
The patient experienced skin pigmentation for 1 year. She was also diagnosed with depression according to ICD-10 at other hospitals and was prescribed duloxetine hydrochloride 60 mg once daily and clonazepam 0.25 mg once daily. However, her depressive symptoms did not improve after 1 mo of treatment. She presented with a skin ulcer on her back, and pathological biopsy of the dorsal skin lesions showed hyperkeratosis and tuberculoid granulomatous inflammation .
The patient denied having any genetic and she did not have a history of smoking or pulmonary TB.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature of 37.4 ℃, blood pressure of 63/40 mmHg, heart rate of 114 bpm, and respiratory rate of 21 breaths per min. There was hyperpigmentation of the skin, nails, mouth, and mucous membranes of the lips, which persisted after pressing and wiping. Two skin lesions were found on the left back, with no secretions .
Laboratory tests showed elevated inflammatory parameters (erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 42 mm/h, C-reactive protein: 52.2 mg/L, and procalcitonin: 0.65 ng/mL). The patient also had hyperkalemia (5.6 mmol/L), hyponatremia (111.8 mmol/L), and hypochloremia (81.1 mmol/L). Persistent hypotension (80/40 mmHg) was observed. T cell spot test of TB (T-SPOT.TB) was positive.
Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed infectious lesions in both lungs . Fiberoptic bronchoscopy was recommended, but the patient did not consent.
Refractory hyperkalemia and hyponatremia alongside persistent hypotension of 80/40 mmHg were observed. The patient’s condition did not improve despite electrolyte correction, rehydration, and use of vasoactive drugs. Thus, adrenal hormone secretion deficiency was considered based on her symptoms and laboratory tests. Further workup revealed cortisol < 1.31 μg/dL and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) > 2000 pg/mL. Adrenal CT revealed bilateral calcification and giant masses in the adrenal glands .