The clinical course was presented in Fig. . A 39-year-old Chinese man presented with swelling abdomen and a high level of CEA: 465 ng/ml. Electronic gastroscopy and biopsy confirmed poorly-differentiated adenocarcinoma, mixed with ring cell carcinoma, in the distal stomach. Further workup with positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET/CT) scan demonstrated widely metastatic disease throughout his skeleton . On 2015–4-13, he was initially treated with docetaxel (150 mg, d1, q2w), S1 (orally 60 mg, Bid, d1–10, q2w), and Endostatin (15 mg, d1–7, q2w) for two cycles, followed by docetaxel (240 mg, d1, q3w), S1 (orally 60 mg, Bid, d1–10, q3w) for one cycle (2015–5-20). During the third cycle of therapy, he complained positional headache, nausea, and vomiting. He stated that the headache was located in the back side of head and was associated with standing up from a lying or sitting position. The above symptoms would relieve once he returned to a supine position. He denied vision changes, gait difficulties from weakness or ataxia, memory problems, sensory abnormalities. Physical examination revealed stable vital signs with nuchal rigidity. There was no evidence of other neurologic deficits. The patient underwent MRI of the brain and the scan revealed vermis cerebelli meningeal metastasis and edema in the vermis cerebelli . The initial lumbar puncture demonstrated a high intracranial pressure (data unknown) and found adenocarcinoma cells. HER2 testing of these tumor cells was positive by fluorescent in-situ hybridization (FISH) . Therefore, the patient was diagnosed as metastatic leptomeningeal carcinomatosis. Leptomeningeal carcinomatosis is often found in advanced gastric cancer of signet cell pathology, as in this case. On 2015–6-19, his treatment was switched to S1 and Herceptin. 2 days later, he developed vision changes and lethargy. After discussion at multi-disciplinary tumor board, on 2015–7-1, his treatment was switched to capecitabine, trastuzumab, and lapatinib. A month later, the general condition of this patient improved dramatically, and CEA in the plasma decreased notably . Intrathecal injection of methotrexate and dexamethasone was administrated for 4 times (2015–8-3, 8–10, 8–21, and 9–10). The pressure of CSF continuously decreased when intrathecal injection was given, CEA in CSF was stable during this period . He tolerated well and headache gradually relieved.
Along with the treatment, the whole condition of this patient turned well, intracranial pressure decreased , nuchal rigidity dismissed, and headache relieved. Unfortunately, on October 1, he suddenly developed severe gait difficulties from ataxia, followed by unrelieved headache with vomiting, diplopia, and difficulty with speech. MRI brain revealed extremely swelling vermis cerebelli . He was taken to the emergency room and the neurosurgeon suggested surgical intervention. Given the poor outcome of this disease, the patient’s family refused surgical intervention and suggested drugs to palliate his symptoms. However, the patient’s performance status deteriorated progressively and died soon.
During the process of the treatment, we monitored the concentrations of 5-Fu, capecitabine, and lapatinib in the blood and cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF). Figure showed that the levels of 5-Fu and capecitabine reached a peak 2 h after administration and declined to normal level at 10 h, while lapatinib maintained a high level in peripheral blood. Importantly, the concentrations of capecitabine and lapatinib both maintained a relatively high level in the CSF when these drugs were administrated .