A 14-year-old right-handed boy with CRUS of the bilateral forearm and a fragility fracture of both bones of the forearm in a fall presented to the Department of Orthopedics of our hospital.
In another hospital, open reduction and internal fixation were performed, while the ulna was fixed with a Kirschner wire, maintaining neutral forearm position in a plaster cast for 8 wk before rehabilitation was initiated. At 3 mo after surgery, since the location of the reduced ulna was lost and the fracture was nonunion, the patient came to our hospital and asked for further treatment.
The boy had two previous fractures, including one distal radius fracture and one tibiofibular fracture.
There was a possible hereditary history in his family, where his mother and younger brother had a similar elbow deformity.
On physical examination, a hard but painless lump was found in the posterolateral region of the bilateral elbow, and it could not be reduced in flexion-extension or in pronation-supination. A deficiency in active motion was present at the left forearm . Right forearm function was slightly limited for the compensation of the ipsilateral shoulder, and the patient had no flexion and extension dysfunction on both sides of the forearm.
Bone mineral density (BMD) was measured by Dual Energy X-ray Absorptiometry. BMD of the hip and lumbar spine was 0.687 g/cm2 and 0.705 g/cm2, respectively, and the Z-score for both was -2.1. The 2013 International Society for Clinical Densitometry recommended a BMD Z-score threshold (−2.0 or worse) in children to denote childhood osteoporosis, provided such children also have a clinically significant fracture history, defined as ≥ 2 long bone fractures by age 10 and ≥ 3 long bone fractures by age 18. According to the recommendation, the patient was identified as childhood osteoporosis with an increased fracture risk. Serum collagen type I cross-linked C-telopeptide (a marker of bone resorption) and serum procollagen I N-terminal propeptide (a marker of bone formation) of the patient were 1832 ng/mL and 347 ng/mL, respectively. These two bone turnover markers are recommended by the International Osteoporosis Foundation and the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine for the assessment of bone health.
Plain radiography showed a fracture of both bones of the left forearm and pathologic fusions between the proximal diaphysis of radius and ulna, with a small bone diameter .