A 37-year-old female, native of Romania, was referred to our centre for evaluation of persistent albuminuria (1 g per day) after an otherwise uncomplicated first pregnancy, with normal kidney function (serum creatinine 65 μmol/L, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 94 mL/min/1.73 m2 with the CKD-Epi formula).
Kidney biopsy showed mild mesangial IgA deposits (+) in immunofluorescence, without mesangial proliferation, as well as extensive vacuolisation of the podocytes and tubular epithelial cells, suggestive of FD . In electron microscopy, cytoplasmic vacuoles were observed in the podocytes and tubules, with discrete pseudomyelinic figures .
The patient’s medical history was as follows: chronic gastritis, chronic hand pain, a posteriori characterized as neuropathic (acroparesthesia). A detailed skin examination revealed an angiokeratoma confirmed by biopsy. There was no obvious family history of kidney disease or FD, but the family could not be thoroughly explored.
Further investigations did not reveal any other organ involvement of FD: normal sudation, normal ophthalmologic examination, normal cardiac explorations (ECG, echocardiography, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)), and normal cerebral MRI.
There was no leukocyte enzyme deficiency (AGAL-A was 70% of female normal controls, reference range: 104–236 nmol/h/mg protein), but an elevated level of lyso-Globotriaosylsphingosine (lyso-Gb3) was detected by tandem mass spectrometry on dried blood (10 ng/mL, normal 0–3.5).
Sanger sequencing based on the analysis of the seven GLA exons including exon-intron junctions revealed a heterozygous variant within exon 4 of the GLA gene (reference sequence: NM_000169.2): c.610 T > C or p.(Trp204Arg) (Supplementary Figure ). This variant can be considered as likely pathogenic (class 4) according to the ACMG variant classification: PS3 (functional studies performed by Lukas et al.) , PM2 (absent in population databases), PP3 (multiple lines of computational evidence supporting a deleterious effect). X-inactivation study was not performed (not routinely done in our country).
Since the clinical presentation was not severe, with normal enzyme level and proteinuria rapidly decreasing with an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor, the patient was offered two therapeutic options: early enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), or regular monitoring. She chose monitoring.
After a 5-year follow-up, the patient’s kidney function remained normal (serum creatinine 70 μmol/L, eGFR 87 ml/min/1.73m2) with normal blood pressure and mild proteinuria (urinary protein/creatinine ratio 0.3 g/g). Annual echocardiography shows no myocardial hypertrophy. The patient’s 5-year-old son, who is asymptomatic, without proteinuria, has not yet been tested for enzyme activity or genetic explorations and is monitored by paediatricians.