We present the case of a 45 year old woman who requested a follow-up in our center for a second opinión after discovery of injuries that could relate to a peritoneal carcinomatosis in other center.
She was examined in another center given her clinic of difuse abdominal pain of long evolution without association with any other clinical manifestation, identifying in a computed tomography (CT) a “nodular isodense image, at omental level, adyacent to the anterior right abdominal wall, without discarding infiltration of the anterior right abdominal rectum. Increase in density and trabeculation of the mesenteric fat and inespecific micronodular images, findings which could relate to a peritoneal carcinomatosis”.
She has a history of venous insuficiency and cronic gastritis, cesarean and adenoidectomy. She denied family history of malignant tumours.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.8°C; blood pressure, 121/70 mmHg; heart rate, 89 beats per min; respiratory rate: 17 breaths per min. Furthermore, the patient did not have abdominal pain, but minimal ascitites in flanks was found.
Levels of serum tumour markers were normal [carcinoembryonic antigen < 0.5 ng/mL (0.0-3.0), carbohydrate antigen (CA) 125 14.0 U/mL (0.0-35.0), CA 19-9 5.0 U/mL (0.0-40.0), CA 15-3 14.9 U/mL (0.0-28.0)]. No abnormality was found in routine blood analyses.
A gastroscopy is requested evidencing a gastric submucous injury of 1 cm in lesser curvature and a biopsy is performed. The anatomopatological diagnosis was superficial cronic gastritis not observing an intestinal metaplasia.
Subsequently, a positron emission tomography CT is performed with the following results: “Decrease in the size of the nodular image in greater omentum, with a mild affinity for FDG. Improvement of the ascitis and the trabeculation of the omental and mesenteric fat. Hepatic injury without metabolic translation”.
A core needle biopsy is performed of the omental injury observing fibrous tissue with no tumoral infiltration and tumor markers are requested, which come out negative.
The control CT evidences “resolution of previous peritoneal affectation with persistence and stability of a left subdiafragmatic nodulary injury on the anterior surface of the fundus /gastric body” . A gastric Ecoendoscopy is requested identifying a solid perigastric injury of 12 mm with indeterminate endosonographic appearance. A biopsy is performed on 3 occasions, without obtaining a representative sample.