A 48-year-old male presented with a slow-growing right scrotal mass for the past 2 years. This clearly-demarcated nodular mass was located over the middle-to-right side of the scrotum. The tumor had rapidly increased in size over the past 3 months, but there was no obvious pain or other symptoms. Physical examination revealed a 4.7 × 8.5 cm lobulated tumor mass located between his testicles, non adherent to the scrotum. It was freely movable with elastic consistency on palpation. The penis and testicles were normal in appearance. Testis tumor markers were all normal [alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) = 2.87 ng/mL, beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin (β-HCG) < 0.6 mIU/mL].
Scrotal ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic extra-testicular mass with clear contours and rich blood flow. Computed tomography (CT) showed a hypervascularized lobulated mass (4.7 × 8.5 cm) with contrast media enhancement in the midline of the scrotum . He then underwent tumor excision via scrotal approach since the tumor did not seem originated from testicular or spermatic cord and the location of the tumor was superficial. A midline raphe incision was made and carry down to the tunica vaginalis. The tumor mass was not adherent to the surrounding tissues or testicles, it was a separated mass with clear margin that could be easily dissected with blunt dissection method. The tumor was completely excised after ligating the main feeding vessels.
The resected specimen consisted of three lobulated and contiguous firm tumors, measuring 7.5 × 6.3 × 3.8 cm in size and weighing 76.5 g in total . Cut section of the tumor showed a well-defined, lobulated, whitish and firm tumor with some mucinous components . Microscopically, it was a hyper-cellular tumor with a vaguely fascicular growth pattern forming a patternless growth architecture with minimal nulcear atypia rate and a mitotic count < 4 per 10 high power field. A few thin-walled, branching “staghorn appearance” vessels were also present in the tumor . The tumor cells had an ovoid to short spindle shape with indistinct borders and dispersed chromatin within vesicular nuclei. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for STAT-6 (nuclear expression) and CD34 , and negative for actin, desmin, CD117 and DOG-1. Based on the morphology and immunohistochemical studies, the diagnosis of SFT was made. The patient was alive without tumor recurrence or distant metastasis during ongoing follow-up for 9 months post-operatively with semi-annual CTs.