A 49-year-old Asian man with no significant medical history presented to our hospital with a chief complaint of dyspnoea on exertion that had appeared approximately 10 days before presentation. Vital signs were normal, except tachycardia; further, S3 heart sounds were heard upon auscultation, and his lower legs were warm with mild oedema. Blood test results indicated mild anaemia, elevated creatinine level, and elevated brain natriuretic peptide level (195.5 pg/mL; normal range 0.0–18.4 pg/mL) , and radiography showed mild cardiomegaly and bilateral pleural effusions. An electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with a heart rate of 100 b.p.m., and echocardiography revealed left ventricular hyperkinesis (ejection fraction 73%) and enlargement of the inferior vena cava (IVC), but without evidence of diastolic dysfunction or structural abnormalities (Video 1). Diuretics were started on suspicion of heart failure. On the 19th day after symptom onset, he was admitted to our hospital because of worsening heart failure despite increased urine output.
Right heart catheterization performed on the day of admission showed a marked increase in cardiac output (cardiac index: 9.7 L/min/min) and a marked decrease in systemic vascular resistance (6.4 WU) . The patient was diagnosed with HOHF. Oxygen saturation test showed no evidence of intracardiac shunting. However, blood oxygen saturation in both the superior vena cava and IVC was high (85.8% and 84.8%, respectively). No findings of hyperthyroidism, severe anaemia, sepsis, vitamin B1 deficiency, or obesity were observed on investigating the cause of the high-output state. Although diuretics were administered, heart failure and organ damage continued to progress, and systemic vascular resistance measured by Swan–Ganz catheter continued to decrease despite the administration of noradrenaline and vasopressin. Arteriography and blood gas tests of the iliac region were performed to investigate the presence of extracardiac shunts. Immediately after applying the contrast agent (iopamidol) from the iliac artery onwards, the ilium, sacrum, pubis, femoral neck, and femur on the same side absorbed it, and the iliac vein and IVC were immediately perfused with iopamidol (Video 2). In addition, there was a significant O2 step-up between the common femoral vein and common iliac vein on both sides .
Atypical lymphocytes were detected in the peripheral blood for the first time on the day after admission (Day 20), and their count continued to increase thereafter . After additional tests, including bone marrow biopsy and flow cytometry, 4 weeks after symptom onset, the patient’s condition was diagnosed as pPCL. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvic lesion showed extensive bone involvement of tumour cells . Therefore, we considered that the diffuse bone involvement of pPCL caused the formation of giant arteriovenous shunts, which led to a hyperdynamic state due to decreased systemic vascular resistance.
After transfer to a specialized hospital for pPCL treatment, chemotherapy with bortezomib, adriamycin, and dexamethasone was administered. After one cycle of chemotherapy, the patient revealed a complete response, and heart failure symptoms and organ failure improved markedly . He was treated with further chemotherapy, autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation, and maintenance therapy and had no recurrence of pPCL or heart failure for 1 year to date.