A 43-year-old man was referred to our institute after computed tomography (CT) performed for lower abdominal pain and postprandial fullness at a local hospital revealed a heterogeneous mass comprising mixed cystic and solid components and measuring 20.0 × 12.0 × 8.0 cm. Lymph node involvement or metastasis was not detected. Abdominal ultrasound confirmed the findings by revealing a heterogeneous mass in the same location. The patient gave no history of bowel habit changes, fever, chills, nausea, trauma, past surgeries or family history of malignancy.
Physical examination revealed slight abdominal distension and tenderness. Palpation revealed a large, nonpulsatile, fixed, moderately tender abdominal mass. The results of tests for examining blood, stool and serum tumor markers (CA-19-9, CA-125 and CEA) were unremarkable, as were chest X-ray and rectal examination findings.
Laparotomy revealed a large, brownish mass adherent to the colon, bladder and abdominal wall. These findings in addition to difficult hemostasis prevented resection of the mass. A biopsy sample obtained during the laparotomy procedure revealed inflammatory granulomas and necrosis. Fine needle aspiration cytology suggested the tumor to be a sarcoma with indeterminate subclassification. On the basis of the above findings, the patient was administered three cycles (every 28 days) of intravenous neoadjuvant chemotherapy with 40 mg/m2 epirubicin, 500 mg/m2 cyclophosphamide and 15 mg hydroxycamptothecin in a day. Subsequent CT revealed the mass to have diminished in size, now measuring 6.5 × 5.0 × 5.0 cm (Figure ). This enabled en bloc resection of the mass. The gross specimen was a lobulated, grayish-white soft tissue mass measuring 6.5 × 5.0 × 4.5 cm. Histopathological examination revealed atypical spindle cells in a whorled and paliform array. The average mitotic count was 3 mitoses per 50 high power fields (HPFs). Immunohistochemical staining was diffusely and strongly positive for CD117, CD34 and Ki-67 (>10%) (Figure ); weakly positive for S-100; and negative for desmin and smooth muscle actin (SMA). Three cycles of chemotherapy identical to those administered as neoadjuvant chemotherapy were administered after surgery. The patient exhibited five-year disease-free survival without any symptoms (Figure ).