A 3 year and 8 month old Chinese girl born at term to healthy, non-consanguineous parents by normal vaginal delivery had no family history of liver disease. At the age of 2 years and 11 months, the patient presented recurrent fever with cough, vomiting, decreased activity, and lethargy agitated for 3 weeks upon admission to our hospital. She had severe jaundice without hepatomegaly, however the rest of the physical examinations (growth and development, skeletal system, nervous system and motor ability, integument and facial profile) were normal. Laboratory evaluations indicated extreme damage to liver functions and severe coagulopathy . Serum creatinine (Cre) and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) were normal. Creatine kinase (CK) and cardiac troponin I (cTnI) were mildly elevated at 149 U/L (normal range: 30–135) and 0.055μg/L (normal range: 0–0.034) respectively, suggesting myocardial injury. The white blood cell (WBC) count was significantly increased (15.8*109/L, normal range:3.6–13) and neutrophils accounted for 81% (12.77*109/L, normal range:0.72–4.80). C-reactive protein (CRP) was also elevated (39 mg/L, normal range:0–8). The patient was diagnosed with ALF and managed with antipyretics, plasmapheresis, hepatoprotectives (e.g., Polyene Phosphatidyl Choline and Ademetionine Butanedisulfonate) and intravenous infusion of glucose and potassium chloride. Following treatment, the liver function of the patient was restored completely.
Eight months later, at the age of 3 years and 7 months, the patient was readmitted during a second episode of liver crisis following an upper respiratory tract infection with fever (up to 39 °C) and cough. Physical examinations revealed mild jaundice with an enlarged liver (palpable 2.5 cm below the costal margin). Laboratory data indicated a recurrence of significant damage of liver function and severe coagulopathy . The value of CK, cTnI, Cre and BUN were normal during this episode and the trends of WBC and CRP were similar to those of the first episode. Again, after treatment including antipyretics, antibiotics, hepatoprotectives and intravenous glucose and potassium chloride, the patient fully recovered.
At the age of 3 years and 8 months, the patient was once again re-admitted with ALF after a 12 h persistence of fever (maximum temperature: 39.3 °C) and vomiting. Physical examination revealed hepatomegaly (palpable 1.5 cm below the costal margin), a few bleeding spots in her chest, and herpes in her right soft palate along with an ulcer (3*3 mm) in the right isthmus of fauces. No jaundice was observed. The clinical features and elevation of liver enzymes with coagulopathy were similar to previous episodes . Coxsackievirus A16 nucleic acid detection was positive. Other laboratory results presented similar changes to those observed during the second episode. Complete recovery of the patient was achieved with a similar treatment plan to the previous admission.
During the three admissions, metabolic evaluations indicated hyperammonemia (40.0 umol/L; Normal range:9–30) and hypoglycemia (3.77 mmol/L; Normal range:4.1–5.9). Lactate, ceruloplasmin, alpha-fetoprotein and pyruvate values were all normal. However, there was a remarkable elevation of β-hydroxybutyrate (1.81 mmol/L; Normal range:0–0.27). Serum amino acid test presented elevations of pipecolic acid (551.318 μM; normal range: 100–438) and the ratio of leucine to alanine (1.359; normal range:0.06–1.00). The values of acyl carnitines were normal in the plasma. Metabolic biomarkers in the urine showed that the value of ketone bodies, methionine, adenine and adenosine were all increased. The immunological indicators including complement C3 and C4 levels, serum immunoglobulin levels and the count of T lymphocyte, B lymphocyte, natural killer cells, and helper T cells were all unremarkable. Further, a panel of serology tests for infectious agents including HIV virus, treponema pallidum, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, Epstein-Barr virus, toxoplasma, rubella virus and herpes simplex virus were all negative. No Pelger–Huët anomaly of granulocytes was found in either of multiple blood smears. A percutaneous liver biopsy was undertaken at the third admission. This showed nonspecific, mild acute hepatitis with hydropic degeneration of hepatic cells and small foci of lobular necrosis. There were a small number of lymphocytes, monocytes and plasma cells infiltrating in the portal area. Foot and Masson stain showed fibroplasia and the enlargement of some portal areas. Berlin blue, rhodanine, rubeanic acid, Periodic Acid-Schiff and diastase peniodic acid-Sehiff stain were normal. In order to identify the cause for recurrent ALF, whole exome sequencing was performed in the patient and her parents. Three rare heterozygous mutations in the NBAS gene were detected: c.3386C > T (p.Ser1129Phe), c.1A > C (p.Met1Leu) and c.875G > A (p.Gly292Glu), the latter of which have not been previously reported. Parental genotyping showed that the c.3386C > T (p.Ser1129Phe) and c.875G > A (p.Gly292Glu) mutation occurred in a heterozygous state in the mother and the c.1A > C (p.Met1Leu) mutation in a heterozygous state in the father, presenting compound heterozygosity of the NBAS variants in the girl. According to the guidelines of The American College of Medical Genetics Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG), the pathogenicity of the c.1A > C (p.Met1Leu) mutation was greater than 90%. The pathogenicity of the other two mutations, however, was uncertain. Prediction of protein biological function was carried out with software including SIFT, MutationTaster and GERP++, which indicated that two of the mutations (c.3386C > T (p.Ser1129Phe) and c.1A > C (p.Met1Leu)) were pathogenic while the c.875G > A (p.Gly292Glu) mutation was nonpathogenic. Specifically, for the mutation of c.3386C > T (p.Ser1129Phe), the score and prediction of SIFT, MutationTaster and GERP++ were (0.001, damaging), (1, disease causing) and (5.74, conserved) respectively. Regarding the mutation of c.1A > C (p.Met1Leu), the score and prediction of SIFT, MutationTaster and GERP++ were (0, damaging), (1,disease causeing) and (5.2, conserved) respectively. For the mutation of c.875G > A (p.Gly292Glu), these values were (1, tolerated), (1, polymorphism) and (− 3.5, nonconseved) respectively.