A 59-year-old male with no past medical history presented to the ED with cough, fevers, and shortness of breath. He was found to be hypoxic requiring 15 liters of oxygen on a non-rebreather mask to maintain an oxygen saturation above 90% on pulse oximetry. Computed tomography (CT) angiogram of the chest performed in the ED found pulmonary emboli within the segmental branches of the right upper and both lower lobe pulmonary arteries along with patchy areas of ground-glass opacities and consolidation. Polymerase chain reaction tests of nasal and pharyngeal swabs and sputum performed in the ED were positive for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 RNA. He was started on a therapeutic dose of enoxaparin and then admitted to the medicine floor for further treatment.
His respiratory status improved and he was eventually weaned to one liter of oxygen via nasal cannula by day 10 of hospitalization. On day 11 of hospitalization the patient had a sudden desaturation to 60% on pulse oximetry. The rapid response team was called, and a portable chest radiograph (CXR) was performed, which found a large pneumothorax .
Emergent needle decompression of the tension pneumothorax with an 18-gauge needle and subsequent 10 French chest tube placement were immediately performed. The patient had rapid clinical improvement after needle decompression with improvement of his oxygen saturation to 100% while on 15 liters of oxygen through a non-rebreather mask and re-expansion of his lung on CXR .
On day 18 of hospitalization the patient’s hemoglobin dropped from 9.1 grams (g) per deciliter (dL) to 7.2 g/dL. Repeat CT was subsequently performed and showed bilateral loculated hemopneumothoraces. The patient was started on vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam due to concern for necrotizing pneumonia as the underlying cause of the new lung changes, and his anticoagulation was switched from therapeutic enoxaparin injections to a heparin infusion. He continued to clinically improve, and the chest tube was removed. He was eventually discharged from the hospital on apixaban, doxycycline hyclate, and amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium.