A 64-year-old African American woman with no significant past medical history presented to the West Los Angeles Veterans Affairs (VA) Medical Center with tachycardia in August 2018. Chest X-ray showed a right lung mass, and follow-up computed tomography (CT) of the chest demonstrated a right lung nodular opacity 25 × 10 mm in size. Additionally, she was found to have mediastinal lymph node conglomerates approximately 15 mm in largest diameter, and right chest wall lymph nodes measuring 10 mm in the largest dimension. Endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS)-guided biopsy of the mediastinal lymph node demonstrated adenocarcinoma, with an EGFR mutation (exon 19 deletion). Positron emission tomography/CT (PET/CT) was remarkable for the same lesions previously visualized on chest CT which were fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed no evidence of central nervous system (CNS) involvement, making her malignancy consistent with stage IIIA (T1cN2M0) disease.
After multidisciplinary discussion at the tumor board, it was recommended that the patient undergo neoadjuvant treatment with chemotherapy and radiation, given N2 disease. The patient declined chemotherapy due to fear of side effects; however, she was amenable to immunotherapy or targeted therapy. Osimertinib 80 mg daily was eventually approved off label through the VA Pharmacy Benefits Management (PBM) program, which the patient began taking December 2018 for a total of 12 weeks of therapy, along with concurrent intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) with 200 cGy for 30 fractions, total of 6000 cGy (given during the last 6 weeks of osimertinib), which was tolerated well without adverse effects. PET/CT performed at 8 weeks into osimertinib therapy showed favorable treatment response, with a decrease in the right lower lobe lesion from 17 × 15 mm to 15 × 13 mm, decrease in FDG activity, and resolution of the 13 mm paratracheal lymph node initially seen on baseline PET/CT . Additional CT chest imaging was performed following completion of 12 weeks of osimertinib and 6 weeks of concurrent IMRT, which showed a further decrease in the size of the right lower lobe lesion to 12 mm in the largest dimension. Two weeks thereafter, the patient underwent robotic-assisted video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) right lower lobe lobectomy, thoracic lymphadenectomy, which on pathology showed microscopic foci of residual adenocarcinoma spanning an area of 3 mm in the greatest dimension, without lymphovascular or visceral pleural invasion, 0/12 lymph nodes with tumor involvement. Most recent surveillance imaging with PET/CT approximately 10 months after presentation, and 4 months after surgical resection, showed no evidence of recurrent malignancy . Adjuvant therapy with osimertinib was discussed with the patient, who declined in favor of continued surveillance and re-initiation if her disease recurred.