A 24-year-old, right handed, Hispanic woman, presented for evaluation of a 6-month history of episodic axial and appendicular dystonia, causing severe opisthotonus and twisted postures in the upper and lower limbs of variable duration lasting from few seconds to 3–4 hours, the episodes were sometimes preceded by stereotypic finger movements and sometimes accompanied by hand tremor and severe stuttering. These episodes started suddenly after a minor car accident and presented several times a day. The presence of marked suggestibility, distractibility, prominent stuttering associated with the dystonic episodes ; sudden onset of abnormal movements with periods of unexplained improvement; lack of family history of dystonia and normal brain magnetic resonance imaging were consistent with FMDs. No abnormalities in cranial nerves, muscle strength, deep tendon reflexes, sensation and gait were documented in this patient. She underwent a video-EEG (VEEG) examination awake (6 h) showing multiple spells of abnormal dystonic movements with lack of electroencephalographic correlation.
The patient’s parents noted similar dystonic movements while the patient was sleeping almost every night. They denied similar movements during sleep before the onset of FMDs. There was no personal or family history of parasomnias such as sleepwalking, night terrors, or confusional arousals. The patient complained of fragmented sleep, as the movements wake her up 2 to 3 times per night causing fatigue and excessive daytime sleepiness. She scored 20 out of 24 points in the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS). There were no complains of snoring, nocturia or myoclonic movements during the sleep time. The patient denied drinking coffee, tea or soft drinks before going to sleep. Sleep habits included a consistent bedtime at 11:30 p.m. and awakening at 7.30 a.m., daily naps of 2 hours during the afternoon were also endorsed by the patient.
The patient underwent 2 overnight polysomnographs (PSG) (Alice 5 type 1, Respironics Inc., Murrysville, Penn. USA), according to the guidelines of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine . In the first PSG study, there was a delayed rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, with a latency of 248 minutes; there were 2 episodes of mild distal upper and lower limb spasms during non-REM sleep stage 2, lasting 37 and 40.5 seconds respectively , the first episode was related to awakening, in the second episode the patient remained in stage 1; a third episode with similar features presented during non-REM sleep stage 1 lasting 18 seconds. The patient remained in stage 1 after the movements subsided. A fourth episode of upper limb and axial dystonia lasting 30 seconds was observed during REM sleep, followed by awakening . There were no other sleep-related breathing or movement disorders . In a second PSG carried out two weeks later, two episodes of mild distal dystonic movements presented during non-REM sleep stage 1 followed by arousal and severe generalized dystonia (see ). All episodes observed during PSG were clinically similar to those observed during video-EEG and none of them was related to electroencephalographic evidence of epileptic activity.
An initial trial of high doses of antiepileptic drugs was provided elsewhere including levetiracetam 1500 mg twice a day, phenytoin 100 mg three times a day and valproate 600 mg three times a day for two weeks each, without any benefit and they were discontinued. At the initial evaluation by us, the patient was receiving treatment with escitalopram oxalate 20 mg per day without any benefit in her abnormal movements.
However, treatment with physiotherapy, psychotherapy plus alprazolam 1 mg per night then substituted by clonazepam up-to 4 mg per night and mirtazapine from 7.5 to 22.5 mg per night, provided marked improvement with disappearance of sleep fragmentation, dystonic movements during sleep and excessive daytime sleepiness within the first 3 months after starting multidisciplinary treatment, whereas movements awake had a slower but progressive improvement within the next 10 months. The patient has been without mirtazapine and benzodiazepines within the last 5 to 6 months without recurrence of sleep and awake movements.