A 34-year-old Chinese woman presented to the gastrointestinal surgery clinic with a complaint of respiratory distress for 5 d.
A 34-year-old Chinese female patient presented with chest tightness and shortness of breath for 5 d with no nausea, vomiting, sour regurgitation, belching, dysphagia, melena, or weight loss.
She had a history of psoriasis.
Her father died of lymphoma. In addition, the patient denied any family history of other malignancies.
Her abdomen was smooth and flat, and there was no gastrointestinal type or mild upper abdominal tenderness without rebound pain or an overt mass. The bowel sounds were normal.
No abnormalities were found in routine blood or urine analyses or liver or kidney function tests.
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) revealed a 65 mm × 40 mm single cyst. The images also showed that the cyst was located at the bottom of the gastric wall. Anechoic masses were detected between the spleen, left kidney, and gastric fundus with punctate hyperechogenicity. Elastography revealed a soft texture. These findings suggested the presence of a cyst within the stomach . Additionally, an enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a cystic mass measuring 101 mm × 61 mm in size. There was no contrast enhancement, and the mass was located within the posterior wall of the gastric fundus, spleen and left kidney with regular and smooth outlines. The mass appeared to have a slightly high and uniform density with a small, calcified shadow in the posterior gastric region. No septation was observed. It also showed an extraluminal growth pattern with an obvious border, and the gastric wall was affected by pressure . Moreover, no significant enlargement of lymph nodes was observed in the vicinity of the stomach or retroperitoneal region. Before surgery, an EUS examination was performed to determine which layer of the gastric wall the cyst had originated from. However, because the cyst wall was evaluated by CT, because there was calcification on the cyst wall, and because the contents of the cyst were mainly liquid components according to the density, there was concern that fine needle aspiration (FNA) may cause rupture of the cyst before surgery and would increase the risk of infection. Second, we suspected that the patient's chest tightness was caused by compression of the diaphragm muscle by the large cyst. To eliminate the patient's symptoms and because the patient strongly desired surgery, after consultation and discussion with many experts, we decided to prudently remove the cyst and obtain a complete pathological specimen so that a safe postoperative examination could be performed to obtain the most accurate diagnosis. Based on these two points, we did not use preoperative FNA.