A 54-year-old Japanese woman who had a 4-year history of BD suffered abdominal pain, hemorrhagic stool and diarrhea. BD was diagnosed based on the presence of oral and genital ulcers and erythema nodosum, and carriage of human leukocyte antigens (HLA)-B51. She started taking prednisolone at 20 mg/day and colchicine, resulting in disease remission. Prednisolone was tapered down and discontinued in a year, while colchicine had been continued for maintenance therapy. She was admitted to our department for examination and treatment for abdominal symptoms.
Physical examination revealed strong tenderness in the entire abdomen. Laboratory test results showed elevated levels of white blood cell counts (WBC; 32,080 /μL) and C-reactive protein (CRP; 26.7 mg/dL), while decreased levels of serum albumin (2.9 g/dL). The interferon-gamma release assay was negative. A computed tomography scan revealed edematous intestinal wall thickening with ascites. Blood cultures from separate sampling showed no microbial growth, and stool culture did not result in the growth of any specific bacteria that cause enteritis such as enteropathogenic Escherichia coli or Campylobacter. Based on the findings of physical examination, laboratory test results and imaging studies, she was suspected to have developed panperitonitis with acute enterocolitis. Therefore, we started her treatment with an antibacterial agent (Meropenem) under bowel rest, and required analgesics (Acetaminophen) for 1 week. Her abdominal pain and hemorrhagic stool gradually improved, however, diarrhea and high levels of CRP persisted. The antibacterial agent was discontinued on day 18. Colonoscopy on day 24 revealed discontinuous abnormal mucosal vascular patterns and ulcerations in the cecum, ascending colon, transverse colon, descending colon and sigmoid colon . Histological analyses of the intestine showed transmural mucosal infiltration of inflammatory cells including lymphocytes and neutrophils, without the findings of epithelioid granuloma or amyloid deposition . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with entero BD.
Meanwhile, pedal edema had appeared and had been exacerbated from day 7. Urinalyses showed high levels of proteinuria (7.42 urine protein to urine creatinine ratio) that was consistent with nephrotic syndrome . Given the concurrent development of proteinuria and entero-BD and no abnormal findings from the immunoserological test , we suspected BD-associated glomerulonephritis and thus performed a renal biopsy. Light microscopy showed no obvious glomerular or interstitial abnormalities, whereas electron microscopy revealed foot process effacement without immune complex deposition or fibrillary structure , compatible with MCD. Only with conservative therapy, her proteinuria turned to decrease and her pedal edema gradually improved. After 3 weeks from the onset of pedal edema, the patient had achieved complete remission without any additional treatment.
The coincident episode of MCD was finally diagnosed as renal BD that paralleled disease activity to entero BD. In order to manage the activity of BD and maintain the remission of renal BD, she was administered adalimumab (initial doses of 120 mg and 80 mg on days 32 and 46, respectively, followed by 40 mg every other week), resulting in the further improvement of diarrhea and the serum levels of CRP. Both entero and renal BD maintained in remission during a 3-month follow-up .