A 75-year-old man presented to our hospital 3°years ago complained about pain in the left THA for approximately 6°months . Five years prior, he had undergone primary THA due to a femoral neck fracture, and post-surgery, he was diagnosed with periprosthetic joint infection (PJI) based on serological tests and synovial fluid culture. A two-stage reconstruction approach was selected, and the patient received antibacterial-loaded bone cement treatment for 3 months before undergoing revision surgery. One year after the revision surgery, the patient complained of groin pain. Bone scans showed no abnormal uptake in the left THA, while X-rays and serological results (WBC: 5.39 109/L, CRP: 1.81 mg/dl, ESR: 10°mm/h, IL-6: 1.5°pg/ml) indicated no apparent abnormalities.
To further confirm the diagnosis, 68Ga-FAPI PET/CT scan was conducted (this test was approved by the Ethics Committee of our hospital and registered at the Chinese Trial Registry: ChiCTR2000041204, and written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the purpose of scientific research). 68Ga-FAPI was synthesized as previously outlined . Imaging involved partial body scans from the pelvis to the knee, using a time-of-flight PET/CT scanner (uMI510; United Imaging Healthcare, Shanghai, China). Patients underwent scans 1 h after injection radiopharmaceuticals. Each bed position had a 4-minute acquisition time. Low-dose CT (120 kV, 30–50 mA) provided anatomical localization and attenuation correction. The reconstruction employed a standard ordered-subset expectation–maximization algorithm. Two junior nuclear medicine physicians independently calculated the SUVmax and it was considered feasible that the results of the SUVmax were consistent.
68Ga-FAPI PET/CT revealed increased uptake in the right scapular spine (, red arrow, SUVmax: 4.9), and multiple calcified lymph nodes with enhanced uptake in the lung hilum and mediastinum (, yellow arrow, SUVmax: 4.5). Additionally, increased uptake was observed along the iliopsoas around the left hip joint, with an SUVmax of 6.3 . During the physical examination, the patient was positioned supine and tested for hip flexion, demonstrating a muscle strength of grade 4 on the left side. Subsequently, with the patient placed prone, overextension of the hip joint induced significant pain and restricted range of motion (less than 10 degrees). Drawing on existing literature regarding FAP’s role in fibrosis and extracellular matrix (, ), the diagnosis of iliopsoas fibrosis was made for this case. Considering the softening and dispersing effect of ultrasound therapy on fibrous tissue, ultrasound therapy combined with dynamic stretching was employed for this patient. In the follow-up at 6 months, the patient reported no pain, and the strength of the hip flexors had reached a level of 5 (normal range), with a hip extension angle of 15 degrees.