A 64-year-old man with a medical history of Type II diabetes, hypothyroidism, hyperlipidaemia, and obesity (body mass index 35 kg/m2) and family history of ischaemic heart disease presented to the emergency department during the first nation-wide UK lockdown with intermittent central chest pain radiating to back and neck, increasing on deep inspiration. The intermittent pain had lasted for a week and was previously treated as musculoskeletal, but tended to worsen and became severe overnight prior to the admission day despite paracetamol. Physical examination was unremarkable apart from fine left-sided crackles. Haematological and biochemical analyses revealed thrombocythemia (430 × 109/L, normal range 150–400 × 109/L) and increased blood urea nitrogen levels (8.8 mmol/L, normal range 2.5–7.8 mmol/L), creatine kinase myocardial band was normal (4 μg/L, normal value <5 μg/L). Electrocardiography (ECG) showed sinus rhythm and ST elevation in II, III, V5, and V6 leads , suggestive of lateral MI. Chest radiograph revealed a prominent left cardiac silhouette . In view of worsening chest pain, severe for <48 h and associated with ST elevation typical of MI, primary percutaneous coronary intervention was indicated and performed. This showed occlusion of the left circumflex (LCx) artery; a drug-eluting stent was inserted (Videos 1 and 2). Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging was performed to assess the LV function and to characterize the myocardium. This revealed moderate to severe LV systolic dysfunction (LVSD) with an ejection fraction of 42% due to a subacute full-thickness infarct of the lateral wall with microvascular obstruction and oedema of the infarcted region. Epicardial contour of the basal lateral wall was slightly altered, suggesting a healed contained rupture with adherent parietal pericardium; there were features of pericardial inflammation with suspicion of early constriction (, Video 3, and Supplementary material online, S1). A diagnosis of late presentation posterolateral ST-elevation myocardial infarction complicated by contained LV rupture and pseudoaneurysm with secondary pericardial inflammation was made. The patient was treated conservatively. Two months later, the patient returned to the hospital with severe chest pain, ECG showed evidence of previous lateral MI ( online, S1) and echocardiogram showed significant interval progression of the pseudoaneurysm. An ECG-gated cardiac computed tomography (CT) study was performed to define the pseudoaneurysm and to assess the patency of the stent. This revealed a large pseudoaneurysm (8.7 cm × 4.8 cm with a neck measuring 5.5 cm × 6.2 cm in diameters) due to the contained rupture of the LV inferolateral wall between the papillary muscles; the LCx stent was patent with only a trivial run-off distal to the stent due to MI in the corresponding territory . Aneurysmectomy was performed 9 weeks after the first admission. A week after the surgery, an echocardiogram showed mildly reduced LV function. The patient denied any chest pain or breathlessness during recovery and was discharged. Follow-up CMR study 4 months after the initial admission revealed a chronic lateral MI, repaired LV aneurysm with a small amount of retained thrombus at the site of the repair, mild LVSD, and mild to moderate mitral regurgitation ( online, and ). The LV systolic function had improved since the first CMR study from 42% to 55%, and the patient reported no further symptoms.