A 37-year-old married male with a history of smoking 3-5 beedis/day for the 20 years was referred to the Stomatology Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, on November 30th, 2020. His chief complaint was the isolated slow-growing exophytic growth on the anterior gums for over 10 years, and he reported lightening of the lesions after supragingival scaling the previous week. The patient denied significant medical or family history, although he mentioned a history of ablative therapy for a single, non-recurring genital wart. Unfortunately, relevant medical records or pathological evidence were not available to confirm the diagnosis.
Clinical examination revealed multiple demarcated, exophytic, pedunculated, soft, pale papules on the labial and lingual interdental papilla areas of the anterior and molar teeth. The lesions ranged in size from 1 to 5 mm and were coalescent. There was also significant accumulation of plaque and subgingival calculus . Extraoral examination showed no abnormalities and none of his family had similar lesions. Laboratory test results were unexceptional including normal complete blood counts and coagulation profile, negative serology for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), syphilis, hepatitis B virus (HBV), and hepatitis C virus (HCV).
The provisional diagnosis was multifocal squamous papilloma, with differential diagnoses of condyloma acuminatum, MEH and verruciform xanthoma. Two large lesions in the right posterior buccal gingiva were excised, specimen was processed for histopathological examination and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis using consensus primers GP5 + /6 + and MY09/11, and type-specific primers for HPV16, 18, 13, and 32 (details of methods are submitted in ). Cells from the lesions were collected for the PCR-reverse dot blot (RDB) HPV (6、11、16、18、26、31、33、35、39、40、42、43、44、45、51、52、53、56、58、59、66、68、73、81、83) genotyping assay.
Histological analysis showed hyperplastic squamous epithelium with papillomatosis, acanthosis, hyperkeratosis, and parakeratosis. Elongated rete ridges anastomosed horizontally and koilocytosis were noted within the upper layers of the epithelium with a perinuclear halo, with rare mitosoid bodies . The tissue was negative for HPV DNA on RDB genotyping and PCR with universal primers. Although HPV 13 and 16 were detected by PCR subtyping (Supplementary materials, Fig. S), subsequent Sanger sequencing of the purified PCR products and BLAST analysis revealed the sequences were human genes and so no HPV was detected in this case.
Clinical and histopathological features were consistent with a diagnosis of MEH. Scaling and root planning (SRP) was prescribed along with oral hygiene instructions . Topical application of imiquimod was also prescribed, however, the patient was not willing to quit smoking or comply with the use of imiquimod due to inconvenience and discomfort . No recurrence of the previously excised lesions in the right posterior buccal gingiva or changes of the remaining lesions were seen at 3-month and 11-month follow-up (Supplementary materials Figs. S, S). The remaining papules were excised with an Er: YAG laser, the excision sites healed without complication and there was no recurrence over a period of 6 month (Supplementary materials Figs. S, S, S) [, ].