A 22 year-old woman presented to the emergency department with generalized feelings of weakness, vomiting, abdominal pain, constipation, a 40-lb weight loss, and 2 days of intermittent, severe headache. She had undergone a prior workup over the previous 3 months for self-reported syncopal episodes, abdominal pain, vomiting and chronic constipation. In the 2 weeks leading up to her hospitalization, her mother also reported a history of episodic right sided weakness and right-sided facial droop. Initial non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a left sided temporal cyst. An MRI obtained at the time demonstrated that this cyst had a component of diffusion restriction. In addition, there were subtle FLAIR hyperintensities in the bilateral parietal and occipital lobes that thought to be secondary to leptomeningeal enhancement . No cerebral edema was visualized on CT imaging. While in the emergency room, she had a witnessed tonic-clonic seizure aborted by diazepam, followed by a prolonged post-ictal period of ~4 h. She developed a temperature of 38.9 degrees Celsius and became increasingly encephalopathic after the seizure, prompting a lumbar puncture and empiric meningitis treatment. Her opening pressure was >55 cm H2O with an initial CSF profile of glucose 80 mg/dl, protein 10, WBC 10 × 109/L, RBC 525 × 109/L. Her neurological exam at the time of lumbar puncture did not reveal any focal deficits. Given her recent imaging, exam, and CSF profile, she was started on empiric treatment and workup for encephalitis.
Approximately 18 h after her lumbar puncture, the patient became anisocoric. She reported a severe headache but demonstrated intact motor strength and sensation of bilateral upper and lower extremities. A second emergent CT scan of the head was obtained, demonstrating downward cerebral tonsillar herniation and global edema . Following 3% hypertonic saline bolus and admission to the neuro-intensive care unit (NICU), an external ventricular drain (EVD) was placed successfully, with an opening pressure of 58 mm Hg. The patient was subsequently intubated for airway protection as the patient was increasingly unable to clear secretions. ICP management was initiated with sedation (propofol, fentanyl), hypertonic therapy, acetazolamide 1 gm BID, and dexamethasone. Midazolam was added due to intermittent ICP spikes into the 30 s. Extensive testing for autoimmune and infectious sources of her presentation were initiated and unrevealing. It was later endorsed by a patient's family member that the patient had been taking “supplements” for months leading up to admission; the toxicology team was consulted. As part of the workup, abdominal x-ray was obtained which showed evidence of radio-opaque material , which prompted workup for heavy metal poisoning.
The following day, a peripheral blood smear demonstrated basophilic stippling, and thus the patient was empirically started on dual lead chelation therapy with oral Succimer 10 mg/kg TID and intramuscular Dimercaprol (BAL: British Anti-Lewisite) 4 mg/kg QID. The patient was also placed on hematin therapy due to a potential diagnosis of acute intermittent porphyria; this was later discontinued to lead being the likely etiology of her elevated urinary porphyrins. Calcium disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (CaNa2EDTA), typically used in combination with BAL to treat lead encephalopathy, was not available due to a nationwide shortage. We initiated aggressive whole bowel irrigation to remove potential further lead exposure from her intestines . Her serum lead concentration resulted at 87 mg/dl; other heavy metals (arsenic, antimony, selenium, mercury, thallium) were undetectable.
The patient experienced multiple ICP spikes following initiation of BAL chelation therapy secondary to the painful nature of the injections. Due to sustained ICPs > 35 mmHg, the patient was started on a cisatracurium drip. A pain protocol of lidocaine 2% intramuscularly at the injection site prior to BAL administration followed by intravenous hydromorphone (2 mg) after injection reduced the severity of ICP spikes over time . The patient developed mild transaminitis and hypertriglyceridemia mildly concerning for propofol infusion syndrome. Propofol was weaned off and we maintained the same level of sedation with fentanyl and midazolam (as per EEG) while on concomitant paralytic therapy. Due to the patient's concurrent lead-induced porphyria, pentobarbital therapy was deferred.
The patient underwent a total of 19 days of chelation therapy combined with both whole bowel irrigation and endoscopic washout with gastroenterology. Her ICPs stabilized and serum lead concentrations continued to decrease. Repeat surveillance imaging was obtained at 12 days post-EVD insertion, which demonstrated marked improvement in her cerebral edema. The EVD was then removed at 13 days post-insertion . Serum lead concentration was 14 mcg/dl at 5 days post-EVD removal. She was extubated and ultimately failed the trial due to issues with clearing secretions. She underwent tracheostomy placement and was subsequently transferred to a pulmonary special care unit. Despite improvements in her mentation, she had an increase in her measured blood lead level to 44 mcg/dl—likely secondary to redistribution of chronic store of lead in the bony matrix . She was restarted on chelation therapy. Upon discharge, she was decannulated from her tracheostomy and had a non-focal neurological exam. She is continuing an aggressive bowel regimen and lead chelation therapy with Succimer 10 mg/kg BID as an outpatient. Her most recent blood lead level upon discharge was 26 mcg/dl.