A ten-year-old female initially presented to our Emergency Department as a transfer from an outside hospital with a suspected left hand abscess. Three days prior to presentation, the patient cited 9/10 pain and itching on her left palm that had subsequently progressed to an overlying erythematous lesion . Oral Tylenol and topical hydrocortisone cream provided no relief at home, and thus they presented to their local community hospital for treatment. On presentation at the outside hospital, she had a white blood count of 8900/mm3 with differential (64.5% neutrophils, 19.5% lymphocyte, 12.1% monocytes, 3.1% eosinophil, 0.8% basophil). She was started on intravenous clindamycin and transferred to our hospital. There was no history of recent trauma to her left palm, but her mother did note that she would sometimes suck and bite on the base of her palm. There was no history of oral, fingertip or toe lesions. She had no significant medical history, no current medications, no known allergies, no developmental delay, and no family history of methicillin-resistant or susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA, MSSA) skin infections or herpetic lesions. Four years prior to presentation, she had experienced a similar lesion on the same palmar location that was treated surgically with incision and drainage followed by an unknown course of antibiotics.
After transfer to our institution, the patient was initially evaluated by Orthopedic Surgery, who described an erythematous, edematous, tender left palmar abscess with associated erythematous streaking up her forearm. There was no numbness, tingling, fever, cough, dyspnea, abdominal pain, nausea or vomiting. She was afebrile, hemodynamically stable with normal mental status. Her left upper extremity had full range of motion and appropriate strength, with no lymphadenopathy, and radial pulses intact. Based upon these findings, no additional laboratory tests were performed. X-rays of the left forearm and hand showed soft tissue edema with no acute osseous abnormalities. The lesion was surgically managed with an incision and drainage, during which “minimal drainage” was noted. Wound cultures were also obtained. After admission to the General Pediatrics hospitalist service, the lesion was noted to appear vesicular from photos taken prior to surgical management . Thus, HSV infection was suspected and PCR samples were obtained from an unroofed left palmar vesicle. These samples confirmed the presence of HSV type 1, resulting in her diagnosis of herpetic whitlow. The initial wound cultures had no growth after 5 days, further confirming that the palmar lesion was not due to a bacterial infection. However, the associated erythematous streaking up her forearm was identified as lymphangitis, indicating a possible bacterial infection secondary to HSV . Although the absence of fever reduced suspicion for bacterial infection, she was discharged on a 7 day course of oral clindamycin. A secondary bacterial infection could not be conclusively excluded as she had improvement in the lymphangitis while on clindamycin. She was advised to follow-up with her pediatrician within 1–2 days of discharge and discuss the option of acyclovir prophylaxis to prevent recurrence if the lesions occur more frequently moving forward. At that time, it was not recommended that the patient consider prophylaxis, as the two documented occurrences happened 4 years apart. As of 1 year post discharge, she has not returned to our institution for related conditions.