A 27-year-old patient, who lived in the Adriatic coastal area, was admitted to the regional hospital after being injured in a motorbike accident, in which he acquired a blunt abdominal trauma to the right hemiabdomen, a clavicular fracture, serial rib fractures and fractures of the metacarpal bones. His medical history was unremarkable. He did not have any chronic viral infections, and the serology for HIV was negative.
Upon admission, the patient was haemodynamically stable. The initial laboratory results revealed anaemia (haemoglobin 98 g/L), hepatic injury (aspartate transaminase 968 U/L, alanine transaminase 1520 U/L) and kidney injury (creatinine 147 µmol/L). The computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a right kidney and right liver lobe rupture, with a subcapsular liver haematoma .
Two days later his physical state deteriorated, with dyspnoea, tachycardia and hypotension. Laboratory tests represented a sepsis: a leukocyte count of 5.200/mm3 with 30% of non-segmented polymorphonuclear leukocytes, haemoglobin 89 g/L, platelet count 123/mm3, C-reactive protein 184 mg/L, aspartate transaminase 1165 U/L, alanine transaminase 1809 U/L, creatinine 155 µmol/L, serum procalcitonine 26.24 ng/mL and lactate 4.1 mmol/L. There were no other serum abnormalities. Intravenous meropenem 3x1 g (Meronem, AstraZeneca Limited; Cheshire, United Kingdom) and vancomycin 2x1 g (Edicin, Lek farmacevtska druzba d.d.; Ljubljana, Slovenia) were administered. A control CT scan revealed gas inside the huge lesion of the right liver lobe, i.e. it revealed a newly formed liver abscess.
Because of the physical deterioration, the patient was sent to a tertiary-care clinic for further medical care.
On admission to our clinic for surgery, the patient was haemodynamically stable with a noradrenaline (Arterenol, Sanofi-Aventis; Frankfurt/Main, Germany) support. On physical examination there was a diminished breath sound in the basal part of the right lung lobe. A contrast-enhanced CT scan of the thorax, abdomen and pelvic region was obtained. It confirmed a huge eight-centimetre abscess . Despite the antibiotic treatment, the patient was continuously febrile. C-reactive protein was repeatedly elevated, up to 299 mg/L . Blood cultures revealed S. enterica serovar Enteritidis. The bacterium was isolated using Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry, while antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed by disc diffusion according to the European Committee on Antimicrobial Sensitivity Testing breakpoints . The isolate was sensitive to amoxicillin, ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacine and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, so the antibiotic therapy was switched to ciprofloxacine, 2x400 mg (Ciprinol, Krka d.d.; Novo Mesto, Slovenia) intravenously daily. Ultrasound-guided percutaneous abscess drainage was performed with only a small quantity of the material obtained.
In light of the constant elevation of inflammatory markers and not entirely successful percutaneous liver drainage, an operation was indicated. It began as a laparoscopic procedure, but following CO2 insufflation, the patient became tachycardic, and the operation was converted to midline laparotomy extended to the right subcostal area.
A liver bisegmentectomy of the sixth and seventh segment was performed, in addition to cholecystectomy and appendectomy. An intraoperative swab from the liver abscess was positive for S. enterica serovar Enteritidis.
The post-operative course was uneventful. The patient continued with intravenous ciprofloxacine treatment (Ciprinol, Krka d.d.; Novo Mesto, Slovenia), 2x400 mg daily. Two weeks later, the patient was febrile again, with a body temperature of 39 °C, with chills and cold sweats. After a thorough examination, we noticed a skin wound and took a swab - it was positive for a Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, sensitive to vancomycin. The ciprofloxacine treatment was changed after 16 days to intravenous vancomycin 2x1 g (Edicin, Lek farmacevtska druzba d.d.; Ljubljana, Slovenia) and piperacillin/tazobactam 3x4.5 g (Tazocin, Wyeth Lederle S.p.A.; Catania, Italy) daily, according to the recommendation of the clinical pharmacologist. The rest of the post-operative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged home four weeks after the operation. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient.