A 71-year-old man with active neovascular AMD in the left eye returned to the clinic owing to a significantly decreased vision in the left eye (OS). The patient was systemically healthy and did not report a history of diabetes or hypertension. Surgical history was significant only for cataract extraction with a posterior chamber intraocular lens in OS. He had been treated with six intravitreal ranibizumab injections and 25 intravitreal aflibercept injections since 2014 for typical AMD in OS. There was persistent subretinal fluid (SRF) despite multiple injections of ranibizumab and aflibercept. He had never experienced any IOI with either medication. The decision to switch to brolucizumab was made given the persistent SRF in the OS.
On examination before brolucizumab injection, his BCVA was 20/20 in the right eye (OD) and 20/100 in the OS. Fundus examination revealed choroidal neovascularization (CNV) with serous detachment in the OS . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed foveal SRF with pigment epithelial detachment (PED) . The swept-source OCTA device (PLEX Elite 9000; Carl Zeiss Meditec, Inc., Dublin, CA) was used to evaluate the neovascular networks in terms of their location, shape, size, and extent. OCTA revealed no specific vascular network changes at the level of both the superficial and deep capillary plexus and detects CNV by the presence of an abnormal pattern of vascular flow in the outer retina to the choriocapillaris (ORCC) slab . Two weeks after the first brolucizumab injection, BCVA was 20/125 and intraocular pressure (IOP) was within normal limits in OS. Slit-lamp examination was normal, and ultra-widefield fundus photography revealed nonspecific findings .
Six weeks after the brolucizumab injection, the patient experienced visual deterioration, which started 3 days back. On clinical examination, his BCVA was counting fingers, and the IOP was 13 mmHg in OS. Slit-lamp examination showed anterior chamber cells (1 +) with fine keratic precipitates and vitreous cells (2 +); however, no hypopyon. Fundus examination showed vitreous haze, retinal whitening, cotton-wool patches, and vascular sheathing involving the major retinal arteries, all of which were suggestive of IOI . On OCT imaging, SRF and PED were decreased; however, inner retinal edema was observed . OCTA showed extensive non-perfusion areas in the superficial capillary plexus, as well as diffuse capillary network attenuation and disorganization in the deep capillary plexus . Ultra-widefield fundus photography revealed vitreous opacity, vascular sheathing, and retinal whitening, particularly in the superotemporal, superonasal, and inferotemporal quadrants . Ultra-widefield fluorescein angiography (FA) showed filling defects in the larger retinal arteries and veins proximal to the optic nerve, which remained until late-phase FA, as well as optic disc staining .
Based on the clinical features and history of brolucizumab, a diagnosis of brolucizumab-associated IOI and retinal occlusive vasculitis was made. The patient was treated with oral prednisolone 30 mg daily and topical prednisolone acetate 1.0% (Pred-forte®) every 2 h. Four days later, he was administered an additional sub-Tenon triamcinolone acetonide injection. One week after the diagnosis of retinal occlusive vasculitis, his BCVA was 20/400 and IOP was 14 mmHg in OS. Slit-lamp examination showed anterior chamber cells (trace) and vitreous cells (1 +); however, no keratic precipitates. Fundus examination showed decreased vitreous haze , and OCT revealed decreased inner retinal edema . OCTA demonstrated a slight improvement in areas of capillary nonperfusion in both superficial and deep capillary plexuses and no obvious changes in CNV in the ORCC slab . Aspirin 100 mg/day and clopidogrel 75 mg/day were additionally prescribed for the patient.
Three weeks after the diagnosis of retinal occlusive vasculitis, his BCVA was 20/200, and the IOP was 14 mmHg. Slit-lamp examination revealed anterior chamber cells (trace) and vitreous cells (trace). Fundus examination revealed that vitreous haze, cotton-wool patches, and retinal whitening decreased more; however, vascular sheathing involving the retinal arteries remained and optic disc pallor was noted . On OCT imaging, inner retinal edema decreased further, and there was no recurrence of SRF; however, PED gradually increased . OCTA showed gradual improvement in capillary dropout in both superficial and deep capillary plexuses and no obvious changes in CNV in the ORCC slab . However, the perifoveal areas revealed no apparent reperfusion and limited improvement throughout the follow-up period. The dose of oral prednisolone was tapered gradually by 2.5–5 mg every 1–2 weeks. Thereafter, the patient received an additional intravitreal aflibercept injection.