A 77-year-old woman presented to our ED complaining of non-radiating epigastric abdominal pain starting the previous day and becoming severe approximately 2 h before coming to the hospital. She had some associated non-bloody emesis. Her past medical history was significant for hypertension, peripheral vascular disease, coronary artery disease, chronic kidney disease, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with an extensive history of smoking. She was taking warfarin for protein S deficiency complicated by previous deep venous thromboses. She had a known infrarenal AAA measuring 4.4 cm in diameter seen on computed tomography (CT) 3 months earlier. The AAA had not changed in size over the previous 4 years. On arrival she appeared uncomfortable, though in no apparent distress. Her blood pressure was 142/113 mmHg, heart rate 60 bpm, respiratory rate 15 bpm, temperature 35.8 degrees Celsius, and pulse oximetry 97% on room air. She was noted to be tender to palpation in the epigastrium without guarding, and no masses were appreciated in her abdomen.
A point-of-care ultrasound was performed revealing an AAA measuring approximately 6 cm in diameter . There was an inhomogeneous appearance of the luminal thrombus of the aneurysm. A hypoechoic area was identified which caused a discontinuity of the aneurysm’s luminal thrombus and outer wall and extended into the para-aortic space, suggestive of aneurysmal rupture. Laboratory values were significant for creatinine 2.0 mg/dL, international normalized ratio 1.4, and hemoglobin 10.6 g/L. A review of her previous laboratory values noted her hemoglobin had been 13.0 g/L approximately 2 months prior. CT of the abdomen and pelvis was performed confirming the presence of an infrarenal AAA measuring 6.4 cm in diameter . The CT also revealed a large right retroperitoneal hematoma adjacent to the AAA with attenuation suggesting subacute hemorrhage.
A transfusion of 2 units of packed red blood cells was started in the ED, and the vascular surgery service was consulted. The patient was taken emergently to the operating room where the ruptured AAA was repaired using a polyester graft. After a difficult postoperative course, the patient was eventually discharged to a rehabilitation facility 5 weeks later.