A 52-year-old male from southwest China presented with obstructive jaundice for 3 years, melena for 5 months and hematemesis for 10 days. The patient had been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus for 4 years, which was treated with metformin. The patient was a chronic tobacco (10 cigarettes per day) and alcohol consumer over the previous 20 years but had quit smoking and drinking for the past 3 years. Three years prior to admission to our hospital, he developed obstructive jaundice, which was investigated with abdominal computed tomography (CT) and revealed multiple hypodense lesions in the liver and pancreatic head mass. He underwent cholecystectomy, choledochojejunostomy and biopsies from the liver and pancreatic lesions. Histopathology revealed chronic cholecystitis with lymphocytic, plasmacytic and eosinophilic infiltration of the gallbladder, liver and pancreatic parenchyma.
The physical examination was unremarkable (height − 165 cm, weight – 50 kg). Laboratory tests revealed hemoglobin levels of 75 g/L, a platelet count of 80 × 109/L, 30.0 g/L albumin levels, and serum potassium levels of 3.20 mmol/L . The fecal occult blood was positive.
On the day of admission, the patient developed repeated painless hematemesis of about 2100 mL, which was associated with hypotension and tachycardia. He was resuscitated with intravenous, blood and norepinephrine infusions. Laboratory tests revealed hemoglobin levels of 47.5 g/L, platelet count levels of 38 × 109 L and serum albumin 25.8 g /L. The day after admission, the patient again developed hematemesis of about 500 mL, for which he was treated with somatostatin, terlipressin and pantoprazole infusion. Sengstaken-Blakemore tube were placed to hemostasis by compression and tube feeding hemostatic medicine. After 4 days of medical intervention, the patient’s gastrointestinal bleeding gradually stopped. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed a duodenal ulcer (A1 stage) with active bleeding, gastric mucosal erosions and esophageal varices (mild). Contrast enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen with three-dimensional reconstruction exposed multiple nodular dense shadows with dilatation of the main pancreatic duct in the tail region . Images of the liver showed numerous hypodense nodules with mild contrast enhancement, ascites and intrahepatic bile duct dilatation . Additionally, there were multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the hepatoduodenal ligament around the abdominal aorta and mesenteric lymph nodes with bilateral pleural effusion . In view of the liver disease with portal hypertension and esophagogastric varices, a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) procedure was performed under local anesthesia and regional portal hypertension, splenic vein and portal vein obstruction were detected. Subsequently, the patient re-bleed both 14 days and 20 days after admission, about 600 mL and 400 mL, respectively. The patient was treated with somatostatin, pantoprazole infusion and blood transfusion. Gastroscopy identified an ulcer (1.5 cm × 1.2 cm) in the anterior wall of the duodenal bulb that was not actively bleeding . Pathological examination of the ulcer biopsy verified a moderate degree of chronic mucosal inflammation.
When investigating the recurrent bleeds, serum IgG4(0.035–1.500 g/L)and IgG(8~ 15.5 g/L)were found to be 29.200 g/L and 24.50 g/ L respectively and IgG4 disease was suspected . The patient’s prior surgical pathology specimens were retrieved for IgG4 immunohistochemical examination. Immunohistochemical staining revealed increased IgG-positive and IgG4-positive plasma cells in the liver lesions (IgG4 positive cells 30–60/ high power field (HPF); Fig. ), pancreas (IgG4 positive cells 30–80/HPF; Fig. ) and gallbladder (IgG4 positive cells 30–80/HPF; Fig. ). Staining of the duodenum ulcer biopsy also showed more than 100 IgG4-positive cells per HPF . Based on these findings, a definitive diagnosis of IgG4-RD was made.
The patient was administered 40 mg/d prednisone intravenously for 7 days without any side effects followed by oral prednisolone 40 mg/d for 1 week. Laboratory tests indicated a reduction in the serum IgG4 levels 8 days after initiating prednisone but the liver function continued to be impaired . As the patient improved symptomatically, he was discharged on a regime of prednisolone and mycophenolate mofetil.
Since discharge until the time of writing, during the 11 monthly visits since starting steroid therapy, laboratory tests indicate significant improvements in the patient’s serum IgG4 subtype, liver function and hemogram tests .