The subject, an 11 year old boy, sustained an AIS affecting the right middle cerebral artery territory diagnosed radiologically during the perinatal period. Perinatal MR imaging had previously been obtained on a 1.5-Tesla General Electric LX Echospeed system (version 9.0). Transverse T1 fast spin echo (TR/TE 1400/10, ETL 2, BW +/− 20 kHz, FOV 20 cm, slice thickness 3.5 mm; 256 × 224 matrix, 2 averages) and transverse fast spin echo T2 (TR/TE 3600/16, ETL 18, BW +/− 20.83 kHz, FOV 18 cm, slice thickness 3.0 mm, 256 × 224 matrix, 3 averages), epi-DWI (3-directions, b = 1 ms/μm2, TR/TE 10000/104, BW +/− 100 kHz, FOV 25 cm, slice thickness 4.0 mm,192 × 128 matrix, 2 averages) were obtained.). Ethics approval for the current study was obtained. Clinical evaluation was undertaken by an experienced paediatric occupational therapist (AG) and included the Bruininks-Oseretsky Test of Motor Proficiency 2 (BOT2) , Assisting Hand Assessment (v4.1) (AHA) and Pediatric Stroke Outcome Measure (PSOM) . The BOT2 provides standard scores for overall motor function based on age-matched peers (mean 100, sd 15). The AHA enables calculation of the effectiveness of use of the assisting hand and arm in bimanual activities and scores are expressed as percentage score out of maximum of 100. The PSOM is a standardised neurological examination expressing neurological impairment across domains as a total on a scale of 1–10. Motor abilities were further classified using the Manual Ability Classification System (MACS) and Gross Motor Functional Classification System (Expanded & Revised) (GMFCS) both 5 point scales of motor function. Motor outcome measures were scored in relation to normative data (BOT2) or reported descriptively.
The imaging protocol undertaken included T1-weighted imaging of the whole brain (3D high resolution (3D MPRAGE)) and T2-weighted imaging (turbo spin echo and T2 FLAIR imaging). DWI was obtained with 60 directions (b-value = 3000 s/mm2, 2.3 × 2.3 × 2.3 mm3 voxel size). fMRI consisted of multi-slice 2D echo planar imaging, with a whole-hand ball squeezing task in a block design with five epochs. Five cycles of task (hand squeeze) and rest (no movement) were performed per epoch. fMRI data were processed using Statistical Parametric Mapping (v5) . The realignment was processed using FLIRT, and mean fMRI co-registered to the b = 0 s/mm2 image using the default metric. Peak activation coordinates were transformed to the DWI space by applying the transform to the native coordinates. Data was smoothed to 11 mm, and statistics were family-wise error corrected at p < 0.05. Areas of peak activation for each hand were identified by coordinates, which were then used to seed diffusion weighted tractography (DWT) of the corticospinal tracts, comparing left and right hands. The DWT was undertaken using a probabilistic streamlines approach capable of tracking through crossing fibre regions [-] as implemented in the MRtrix software package . Tracking was from a 3 mm radius sphere centered on peak fMRI activation (more on that below) for each side, down to a 10 mm radius sphere centered on the medulla oblongata, located immediately inferior to the pons on the sagittal image. The tracks generated were then resampled at 2 mm intervals in the inferior-superior direction.
The subject presented with a MACS level 2 and GMFCS level 2 left hemiparesis, and a PSOM score of 1. He was able to achieve an inferior pincer grip but not reliably, with his left (affected) hand. The left arm and hand were used to assist in bilateral activities by holding with a restricted repertoire of movements. Consistent with this functional picture, his AHA score was 65 % and BOT2 total composite standard score was 33 (below average).
On structural MRI, the site of the brain injury was identified in the right perisylvian region with cystic leukoencephalomalacia involving posterior right frontal, right parietal pre- and post-central gyri and superior temporal lobe. Comparison of cortical activation between left and right hemispheres using fMRI demonstrated that movement of the affected left hand resulted in activation in the ipsi-lesional hemisphere only, anterior to the lesion within the motor cortex. In comparison, movement of the right hand resulted in expected activation of the motor cortex. DWT revealed pathways in the right (lesioned) hemisphere tracked perilesionally to the cortical area identified by fMRI. The right hand motor task resulted in expected and more robust motor cortical activation with the expected contralateral hemisphere and corticospinal tracts when compared to left (see Figures , ). DWT was seeded from areas of maximal fMRI activation to the pons . Sampling of FA values sequentially along the corticospinal tracts shows reduced FA in the ipsilesional tracts when compared to the contralesional side.