Patient is a 62-year-old female with history of relapsed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (initially diagnosed 4 years ago s/p 6 cycles of R-CHOP followed by remission, with relapse 4 months ago s/p 3 cycles of RICE) who had recently underwent peripheral blood autologous stem cell transplant after BEAM conditioning (BiCNU, etoposide, Ara-c, melphalan). This was complicated by a neutropenic fever and hypotension, requiring Intensive Care Unit observation. An infectious work-up was negative, and the patient was discharged on day +11 with evidence of peripheral count engraftment.
On day +15, she began to exhibit worsening fatigue, generalized weakness, and fever up to 100.9F. She was evaluated in the emergency department (ED), where subsequent chest X-ray, blood cultures, and urinalysis did not show any evidence of infection. Symptoms progressed to nausea, emesis, somnolence, confusion, and frontal headaches over the next few days. On day +18, the patient returned to the ED. The patient denied changes with vision, slurred speech, focal weakness, paresthesias, photo/phonophobia, or neck stiffness. A computed tomography (CT) head showed ill-defined hypodense areas with surrounding vasogenic edema in the right frontal lobe with subtle mass effect and effacement of the right frontal horn with similar ill-defined hypoattenuation in the left peri-atrial region and right temporal horn . Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain with or without contrast was performed revealing multiple ill-defined lesions concerning for infectious etiology, inflammatory reaction, fungal disease, or neoplasm [Figure –]. Cerebrospinal fluid was remarkable for the markedly elevated white blood cell count with neutrophil predominance, high protein, and normal glucose.
The patient was started on broad antibiotics, antifungals, and seizure prophylaxis. Evaluation for bacterial, fungal, mycobacterial, and viral etiologies was fruitless. Her mental status progressively deteriorated, but she was able to follow simple commands with effort. On day +22, she exhibited severe lethargy followed by pulseless electrical activity arrest, requiring chest compressions. The episode lasted <2 min and her pulse was restored. Two hours later, she exhibited seizure-like activity, which ultimately required emergent intubation for airway protection. A repeat CT head was stable . Given the dramatic clinical decline and the possibility of elevated intracranial pressures, an external ventricular drain was placed and the opening pressure was 7 cm of water. Subsequently, she was taken to the operating room for brain biopsy, where a postoperative CT head demonstrates persistent edema . Postoperatively, her right pupil began to dilate compared to the left; she demonstrated extensor posturing in her upper extremities and withdrawal in her lower extremities. Repeat CT head revealed increased edema from the right frontal and temporal lesions . Given poor prognosis and poor neurological exam, the family opted for withdrawal of care. Final pathology revealed a damaged vessel within necrotic brain parenchyma with occasional amebic organisms identified among polymorphonuclear leukocytes [Figure and ] consistent with GAE. Samples submitted to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention were positive for Acanthamoeba on indirect immunofluorescence and real-time polymerase chain reaction.