A 40- year-old male, a farmer by occupation, was referred to our centre from a state medical college for progressive cellulitis of the lower limbs. He had presented to emergency in an ambulatory state with complaints of intense pain and swelling in both lower limbs for 2 days. The pain was acute in onset, diffuse over both lower limbs, non-radiating, and not relieved by analgesics. The swelling was diffuse in nature involving both lower limbs, with the presence of tense and glossy skin. He did not have history of fever, shortness of breath, cough, trauma, insect or animal bite. Two years previously, he had been diagnosed with alcoholic cirrhosis with variceal bleeding and managed by endoscopic variceal ligation in our institute.
In the present episode with a diagnosis of cellulitis with doubtful sepsis, he was managed initially at the state medical college with analgesics along with amoxicillin–clavulanic acid. He was tachycardic with a pulse rate of 130 beats min−1 and normotensive. His initial laboratory investigations showed haemoglobin of 7 g dl−1 (normal range: 12–16 g dl−1), severe leukopenia [total leukocyte count (TLC): 900 cells µl−1; normal range: 4500–11000 cells µl−1) and thrombocytopenia (31 000 µl−1, normal range: 150 000 to 450 000 µl−1). He was referred to our institute within 24 h of his stay.
During his stay in our centre, he developed blackish discolouration of the right lower limb, progressing to fluid-filled blebs . Following this, the patient also developed blackish colouration and blebs over the left lower limb. Within a few hours, he developed similar features over his right shoulder, although there was no previous oedema over this area. Lesions over the lower limbs quickly progressed to involve the groin and lower abdominal region. In view of worsening respiratory distress, he was intubated. His repeat laboratory investigations at our centre showed haemoglobin of 6.8 g dl−1, TLC of 2800 cells µl−1 and a platelet count of 25 000 cells µl−1, and a differential leukocyte count (DLC) revealed a predominantly neutrophilic picture (80.5 % neutrophils). Coagulation studies revealed prolonged prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin clotting time. Renal function (creatinine 2.56 mg dl−1) and liver function were deranged, with hyperbilirubinemia and transaminitis. Fluid draining from the blebs was sent to the emergency microbiology laboratory for Gram stain and culture. Gram stain showed Gram-negative bacilli with minimal neutrophilic reaction. The patient was empirically started on intravenous imipenem 1 g 12 hourly and clindamycin 600 mg 8 hourly along with analgesics. However, he developed refractory septic shock and succumbed to his illness within 12 h of admission.
The sample was inoculated on two blood agar plates (aerobic and anaerobic), MacConkey agar and Robertson cooked meat broth (RCM). After overnight aerobic incubation at 37 °C, the blood agar plate showed pure growth of large, smooth, haemolytic, oxidase-positive colonies. The MacConkey agar showed growth of non-lactose-fermenting colonies. No growth of any obligate anaerobe was seen. The isolate was identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) (bioMérieux) as with a confidence value of 99.9 %. The isolate was subjected to antimicrobial susceptibility testing by VITEK 2 and reported as sensitive to amikacin, ceftazidime, meropenem, ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin, intermediately sensitive to cefoperazone–sulbactam and resistant to cefotaxime, cefepime, imipenem, piperacillin–tazobactam, tobramycin and aztreonam.