A 39-year-old man who is a light-smoker was referred to our hospital in June 2009 because of an abnormal shadow in the left upper field on chest X-ray . Physical examination revealed no significant abnormalities. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed a 40 mm tumor in the left S1+2 with multiple lung and bone metastases (cT4N3M1b). We conducted trans-bronchial lung biopsy (TBLB). The pathological diagnosis of the TBLB specimen was acinar adenocarcinoma . In immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining, transcription factor-1 protein was positive. Laboratory findings were within normal range, except for the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level of 4.7 ng/mL (normal range, 0 to 4.3 ng/mL) in the serum. We made a diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma and treated the patient with the first line chemotherapy including cisplatin (80 mg/m2) and docetaxel (60 mg/m2) every three weeks up to three cycles. However, no remarkable response was observed. Therefore, the second line chemotherapy was conducted by pemetrexed (PEM) (500 mg/m2) therapy. PEM therapy was effective, and fifteen courses of PEM were administered to the patient. Thereafter new bone metastatic lesions were appeared. The patient had progressive disease (PD). We conducted re-biopsy to the patient to check EGFR mutation analysis by cycleave polymerase chain reaction technique (cycleave-PCR). L858R point mutation (in which leucine at amino acid 858 is replaced by arginine) was detected in the tumor cell . Therefore we treated the patient with erlotinib (150mg) therapy once a day. However, he had disease progression after 30 days . We conducted the second re-biopsy to examine whether the patient had ALK fusion gene. ALK fusion gene was detected by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method . Additionally, IHC assay using a mouse monoclonal antibody for ALK antibody (Novocastra, Clone 5A4) revealed positive staining . ALK inhibitor could not be used to the patient because ALK inhibitor was not approved in Japan at that time. The patient was treated fourth line chemotherapy three cycles, the other metastases emerged in his liver, and performance status became 3, therefore, palliative care was administered to the patient in December 2011.