A 25-year-old male from a central Anatolian village was admitted to the Urology Department with pain and swelling in his scrotum for five days .
Three years before, he had complaints of fatigue, weakness, and weight loss (approximately 30 k), as well as persistent sweating and cough. However, he did not admit to any hospital until a right axillary painful lymphadenopathy (LAP), of approximately 4 × 5 cm, had appeared. Nonspecific antibiotic treatment was begun immediately after drainage (performed twice) and the LAP regressed.
He was free of symptoms for two and a half years. Thereafter, he began to complain of abdominal pain, which over time became severe. Two months ago, he admitted to the emergency department with severe abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, and abdominal distention, and was operated on an emergency basis. During the operation, the spleen was found to be enlarged with multiple abscesses of varying size, one of which ruptured. Mesenteric material also showed nodular lesions. Splenectomy was performed. Histopathological examination obtained two weeks later revealed a granulomatous reaction with caseous necrosis .
A short time following discharge from the hospital, a painful swelling appeared in his right scrotum and he was hospitalized with scrotal abscess in the urology clinic. His temperature on admission was 37.2°C and did not increase during the follow-up. The patient was slim in appearance without sweating, cough, or sputum. His physical examination revealed right axillary LAP of 1 cm and multiple minimal inguinal LAPs. The incision site of the previous abdominal operation was still draining. His genitourinary examination showed a painful, soft, fluctuant and erythematous mass of 4 × 5 cm, suggestive of a scrotal abscess. Complete blood count revealed: white blood cells (12,500/mm3), hemoglobin (12.6 g/dL) and platelets (901/ mm3). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein showed an increase at 75 mm/hr and 66.8 mg/dL, respectively. Urine analyses revealed microscopic hematuria and pyuria.
There were no associated systemic disorders, and HIV infection was not detected. Purified protein derivative of tuberculin test (PPD) was anergic. Chest radiography showed occluded right costophrenic sinus with minimal pleural thickening in the right apex. Computed tomography scan of the lungs revealed 2-3 subpleural nodules (largest: 1.5 × 2 cm) in the right upper lobe with apicoposterior localization. These findings were not definitive for active disease, but indicated past disease. In ultrasonographic examination, testes were bilaterally normal, although the right epididymis was enlarged in size and in vascularity, suggestive of epididymitis. Minimal ascites was also detected on abdominal examination.
After drainage of the scrotal abscess (approximately 10-20 cc), specific and non-specific cultures were taken. Direct staining of the drainage material showed acid fast bacilli (AFB) . Conventional culture method using Lowenstein-Jensen medium also yielded the mycobacterium several days later. A treatment with standard 4-drug regimen of DOT (directly observed treatment) was initiated as isoniazid 300 mg, rifampin 600 mg, ethambutol 1500 mg and pyrazinamide 2000 mg for two months, followed by a 2-drug regimen for 10 months. One month later, the scrotal abscess had gradually subsided and the patient was discharged. After 12 months, he was completely healthy with bilaterally normal testes and a weight gain of approximately 20 kg.