A 36-year-old brown-skinned woman (mixed Brazilian race) was admitted to our institution with jaundice, nausea, mild right upper abdominal pain, choluria, and acholia of 1 week’s duration. She had been diagnosed with CML 1 year before (during her 22nd week of pregnancy). Treatment with standard dose (400 mg/day) imatinib (Gleevec; Novartis, Basel, Switzerland) had been started after delivery and was continued for 6 months, with no adverse effects until 45 days prior to admission, when a mild elevation in liver enzymes was observed (aspartate transaminase [AST] 229 IU/L, alanine transaminase [ALT] 111 IU/L).
Imatinib was discontinued, but the patient presented on admission with ALT 1422 IU/L, AST 1690 IU/L, total bilirubin 13.08 mg/dl, prothrombin time > 50 (international normalized ratio 2.38), fibrinogen < 50 mg/dl, and factor V Leiden 11%. An abdominal ultrasound revealed no abnormalities. The results of viral screening were negative for hepatitis B (hepatitis B surface antigen, anti-hepatitis B core antibody), hepatitis C (anti-hepatitis C virus), human immunodeficiency virus (anti-HIV-I/II), cytomegalovirus (immunoglobulin G [IgG]-positive and IgM-negative), and Epstein-Barr virus. The results were also negative for autoimmune hepatitis (antimitochondrial antibody, anti-LKM1 antibody to liver kidney microsome type 1, and antinuclear antibody). The patient’s copper serum levels were normal (39 μg/dl). The laboratory findings associated with hyperammonemia and clinical manifestation of grade II/III encephalopathy led to the diagnosis of ALF.
The patient met the King’s College (O’Grady) and Clichy criteria and then underwent urgent orthotopic LT the next day. The graft weighed 0.930 kg. Total ischemic time and warm ischemic time were 6.9 hours and 35 minutes, respectively. The donor was a 40-year-old woman with brain death resulting from a ruptured brain aneurysm. The donor presented the following extended criteria: vasoactive drug use (noradrenalin 0.05 μg/kg/minute and vasopressin 0.1 μg/kg/minute), infection (nosocomial pneumonia, use of piperacillin/tazobactam for 3 days), and long intensive care unit stay (17 days). The postoperative transaminase peaks were ALT and AST of 668 IU/L and 760 IU/L, respectively. The immunosuppressive regimen featured steroids (STs) and calcineurin inhibitors as well as tacrolimus (Libbs, São Paulo, Brazil). This regimen was administered as a ST bolus during the anhepatic phase (methylprednisolone 500 mg) and was decreased to 20 mg/day and tapered to a complete stop within 6 months of LT. Tacrolimus was orally administered and maintained (0.10–0.15 mg/kg/day administered orally twice per day every 12 hours).
The patient had a good evolution during the postoperative period and was tracheally extubated on the second day. However, on the fourth postoperative day, she underwent a laparotomy day because of hemodynamic instability, coagulopathy, increased drainage through abdominal drains, and serum hemoglobin decrease after hemotransfusion without major bleeding. On the sixth postoperative day, the patient presented acute dyspnea and pulmonary congestion. Further investigation with pulmonary angiographic computed tomography ruled out pulmonary embolism. An echocardiogram showed an ejection fraction of 35% (previously 65%) without ischemic cardiac or coronary abnormalities. These symptoms were attributed to myocardiopathy secondary to systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). We excluded all other causes of cardiomyopathy (vascular, muscular, or infectious involvement, including sepsis). The patient presented a satisfactory evolution with low doses of diuretics and beta-blockers (carvedilol). She was discharged on the 25th postoperative day.
The histopathological report revealed severe acute hepatitis with submassive hepatic necrosis, which is compatible with the patient’s subacute hepatic failure. Upon gross examination, the liver weighed 436 g, and the Glisson’s capsule was focally wrinkled. Histological examination showed that the more preserved parenchyma had a green to tan appearance in contrast to some irregular reddish-brown zones representing extensive necrotic areas. The left lobe was more severely damaged than the right.
Microscopically, areas of panacinar and multiacinar necrosis were intermixed with large areas of less affected parenchyma exhibiting confluent and bridging necrosis. The inflammatory infiltrate in portal tracts varied in intensity, usually with a predominance of mononuclear cells. Other findings included remarkable ductular reaction, collapsed reticulin framework, significant cholestasis, mild steatosis, hepatic enzyme induction, acidophilic bodies, and regeneration of hepatocytes. Plasma cells were not prominent. Neither granuloma formation nor eosinophil-rich infiltrate was detected. No components or any evidence of CML was found in the liver explant.
The patient remained asymptomatic for CML; nevertheless, her BCR-ABL transcript rose to 148% 4 months after LT. It was 0.41% prior to imatinib withdrawal. Dasatinib (Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, NY, USA) was then introduced at 60 mg/day because of the patient’s prior history of myocardiopathy related to SIRS. No adverse effects were observed, and the patient’s BCR-ABL transcript reduced to 10.64% after 2 months.
At follow-up, the patient’s liver function laboratory tests (total bilirubin, transaminase levels, and coagulation profile), as well as her vascular and biliary tract (ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging), remained normal 10 months after the LT. The patient returned to her daily routine.
This study was approved by the institutional review board of our institution and fulfilled all of the requirements for studies in humans. It adhered to the guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki.