A 65-year-old woman with anorexia, weight loss, and black stools visited her primary care physician. She was referred to our hospital for assessment of malignancy because of a high carcinoembryonic antigen level (659.2 ng/mL) and abdominal ultrasonography revealing a dilated common bile duct and multiple liver masses. She had a history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, and smoking (0.5 pack-years). Blood test results revealed anemia (hemoglobin, 8.2 g/dL) and increased coagulation/fibrinolysis (fibrin degradation products, 60.3 μg/mL; D-dimer, 21.7 μg/mL), although liver function tests were normal. Carcinoembryonic antigen (458.0 ng/mL), sialyl Lewis-x antigen (170.0 U/mL), cytokeratin 19 fragment (4.8 ng/mL), gastrin-releasing peptide (proGRP, 138.0 pg/mL), and nerve-specific enolase (24 ng/mL) levels were high; however, squamous cell carcinoma-associated antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 levels were within normal limits.
Thoracic and abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a 34-mm spiculated lesion in the lower S6 lobe of the right lung, an irregular mass with pleural depression, suspected multiple metastases in the bilateral lungs, multiple lymph node metastases in the contralateral mediastinum and upper abdomen, multiple liver metastases, and bilateral adrenal metastases. Additional CT findings included right pulmonary artery involvement due to right hilar lymph node metastasis and multiple peripheral pulmonary artery thrombi showing poor contrast (shown in a, b). Duodenal papillary swelling, a dilated common bile duct, and an enlarged gallbladder were also observed (shown in a). Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of the head showed multiple brain metastases. Therefore, the condition was diagnosed as lung cancer cT4N3M1c, stage IVB. Anticoagulation with calcium heparin was initiated to treat the pulmonary artery thrombi.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy (GIF-H290T; Olympus Medical Systems, Tokyo, Japan) performed to investigate anemia and melena revealed a mass lesion with fresh blood in the duodenal papilla. Side-viewing duodenoscopy (TJF-Q290V; Olympus Medical Systems, Tokyo, Japan) showed exudative bleeding on the cranial side of the ulceration (shown in b), which was endoscopically treated using clipping (SureClip; MC Medical, Tokyo, Japan) and application of PuraStat® (3D Matrix, Tokyo, Japan) (shown in c). Due to concerns about rebleeding from the duodenal papillary tumors, heparin calcium was discontinued.
Unfortunately, melena was observed again 3 days after the endoscopic hemostasis was achieved. Blood test results showed no worsening of anemia, but white blood cell count, total bilirubin, and aspartate transaminase/alanine transaminase levels were 16,500/μL, 3.8 mg/dL, and 385/258 IU/L, respectively, indicating obstructive jaundice and moderate acute cholangitis according to the Tokyo Guidelines 2018 criteria . Endoscopic assessment using duodenoscopy revealed exudative bleeding on the inferior side of the ulcer at the duodenal papilla (different from the site of the previous bleeding), which was treated with clipping. Subsequently, endoscopic treatment of the obstructive jaundice and acute cholangitis was attempted, but transpapillary bile duct cannulation was unsuccessful because the mass obstructed the bile duct orifice. Thereafter, bile duct cannulation was achieved by precut fistulotomy performed using a needle knife, and a fully covered biliary stent (10 mm diameter, 6 cm long, BONASTENT; Medico’s Hirata, Osaka, Japan) was successfully placed for bile drainage (shown in d, e), thus improving obstructive jaundice and acute cholangitis.
Meanwhile, the patient tested positive for the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutation (exon 19 deletion) on plasma EGFR gene mutation analysis. Based on this information, we considered that the ulcerated lesion in the duodenal papilla was due to metastasis from non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with the EGFR exon 19 deletion and that administration of systemic therapy for NSCLC could result in hemostasis. Hence, osimertinib, a third-generation EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), was initiated 4 days after the initial hemostasis by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, despite the lack of a histopathological diagnosis.
After confirming that the clinical symptoms had stabilized on day 7 since starting EGFR TKI, endoscopic ultrasonography-guided transbronchial needle aspiration (BF-UC290F; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) was performed on the mediastinal lymph nodes. The analysis revealed adenocarcinoma by hematoxylin and eosin staining, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), and napsin A positivity by immunohistochemistry (shown in a–c); this confirmed the diagnosis of primary lung adenocarcinoma.
After confirming the absence of rebleeding on day 9 since EGFR TKI initiation, a biopsy was performed on the duodenal papillary tumors (shown in f). The biopsy results showed adenocarcinoma by hematoxylin and eosin staining and TTF-1 and AE1/AE3 positivity by immunohistochemistry (shown in d–f). The final diagnosis was duodenal papillary metastasis from primary lung adenocarcinoma.
Twenty-one months after initiating EGFR TKI, no rebleeding from the duodenal papillary metastasis was observed. Both primary tumor and metastases had radiological responses on CT, the right peripheral pulmonary artery thrombi were absent on sequential imaging indicating treatment response, and the patient was still receiving EGFR TKI for lung adenocarcinoma. The CARE Checklist has been completed for this case report and attached as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).