It was a 43-year-old male working at a gas station as an attendant. He had a history of chickenpox which occurred on 06 April 2022, and was treated with paracetamol (1 g three times daily in case of fever) and skin antiseptic (Chlorhexidine gluconate). He was admitted to Bogodogo University Hospital's Neurology Department (Burkina-Faso) on 20 April 2022, for weakness of all four limbs, associated with dysphagia, dysphonia, and oculomotor disorders.
The onset of symptoms on 16 April 2022, was characterized by balance and gait disorders associated with a sensation of dizziness upon awakening. Two days later, the evolution was marked by swallowing disorders, a change in the timbre of the voice, and binocular diplopia. On the 5th day, the patient noted a weakness in the four limbs with tingling in the hands and feet.
At the admission, our examination found a normal consciousness, a proximal–distal weakness of the four limbs (2/5 proximally and distally according to MRC scale), a diffuse osteotendinous areflexia, involvement of the cranial nerves III, IX, and X, marked by vertical ophthalmoparesis (more noticeable on the left) and bilateral ptosis (III), dysphonia and abolition of nauseated reflex (IX) and dysphagia (X) without the respiratory disorder. The examination of gait, balance, and coordination was impossible due to the limb's weakness. No sphincter disturbance was noted. A dermatological analysis revealed chickenpox scar lesions that predominated on the face and the thorax. The patient had no history of chickenpox in childhood and was not vaccinated against chickenpox.
At this stage, GBS, Miller-fisher syndrome (MFS) and acute rhombencephalitis were considered. The usual biological assessment (blood count, C-reactive protein, complete blood ionogram, renal and hepatic function) came back normal. CSF analysis performed seven days after the onset of symptoms found normal proteinorachia and glycorrhachia without cells and germ. The search for anti-ganglioside antibodies (GM1, GM2, GM3, GM4, GD1a, GD1b, GD2 GD3, GT1a, GT1b, GQ1b) was negative for both IgM and IgG. VZV serology was positive for IgM and IgG, VZV testing in the CSF was not done (no technical facilities). The electroneuromyography (ENMG) performed 15 days after the onset of symptoms found increased latencies, reduced Compound Muscle Action Potentials (CMAP) amplitude, and reduced motor conduction velocities in all four limbs. Sensory nerves conduction study noted a reduction of Sensory Nerve Action Potentials (SNAP) amplitude more marked in lower limbs, with normal sensory conduction velocities . The Brain MRI was normal .
Based on the normality of the Brain MRI with gadolinium, we eliminate the hypothesis of rhombencephalitis. However, concerning GBS and MFS, the clinical presentation and ancillary exams, did not allow us to eliminate any of them. Thus, we retained the Miller Fisher/Guillain-Barré overlap syndrome diagnosis.
The patient received corticosteroid therapy at a dose of 500 mg/day of methylprednisolone for five days.
The evolution was positive with the total regression of dysphagia, dysphonia, and ophthalmoplegia with an improvement in motricity two weeks after the onset of symptoms (3/5 proximally and 4/5 distally according to MRC scale). We then transferred the patient to the rehabilitation unit. The patient, seen four weeks after admission to the rehabilitation unit, had recovered his motricity entirely, the examination of the cranial nerves was normal, and he was no longer presenting any complaints.