A 70-year-old Asian man presented to the out-patient department complaining of pain in the upper portion of his abdomen. The pain, which started seven months previously, had worsened, and our patient complained of fever and chills with the pain. However, he was never hospitalized and did not recall any prior medical evaluation for this problem. The patient denied any other systemic symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, jaundice, and weight loss. He had no significant medical history and was not taking any medication.
On physical examination, our patient's temperature was 38.3°C with a blood pressure of 129/67 mmHg, a heart rate of 89 beats per minute and a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute. The abdominal examination revealed localized tenderness to palpation in the right upper quadrant but no guarding, rebound, or percussion tenderness. The rest of the physical findings were unremarkable.
Laboratory investigation showed the following results: white blood cell count 16.4 × 109/L with a predominance of neutrophils, aspartate aminotransferase 72 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase 137 IU/L, total bilirubin 0.7 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 0.5 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase 405 IU/L, and gamma glutamyl transpeptidase 155 IU/L. The carbohydrate antigen 19-9 level was slightly elevated (49.1 U/mL) and the carcinoembryonic antigen level was within the normal range.
Ultrasound (US) was performed first. This showed a distended gallbladder with sludge in it and dilated intra-hepatic bile ducts (IHBD). Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) showed that the right IHBD normally filled with the contrast medium, but the left IHBD could not be differentiated from the confluence. We assumed that the left hepatic duct was compressed by something or that there was a stricture at this site; perhaps caused by a tumor near the hepatic hilum. An abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed to confirm the findings. However, no abnormality was detected except for the dilated left hepatic bile ducts on the CT scans . An intra-operative US failed to gain any further information beyond that obtained through the pre-operative US.
We performed a left hepatectomy on July 11, 2007 because we could not exclude a malignancy of the left hepatic duct. There were mild adhesive changes around the liver that might have been caused by cholangitis. No tumor lesions were found around the bile duct. Only a small hepatic cyst (1.5 × 2.0 cm size) was present, in segment four according to Couinaud's classification at the level of the transverse fissure, compressing the left hepatic duct . It was confirmed as a solitary benign non-parasitic cyst lined by a single layer of cuboidal epithelium on histological examination . Our patient made an uneventful recovery and at the five-month follow-up, he was asymptomatic and all laboratory findings had normalized.