A 43-year-old white man presented with a newly found splenic mass 4 years ago to our Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Diabetology. The splenic lesion was found by his general practitioner in a routine ultrasound examination of his abdomen which was conducted 8 weeks before he presented to our Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Diabetology. He was diagnosed as having a superficial spreading malignant melanoma localized at his left instep 7 years ago and was successfully treated with radical local resection (pT1a, Clark-level II, 0.2 mm thickness, R0). He was concerned about a possible relapse of the above-mentioned malignant disease and agreed to further diagnostic procedures and treatment. Anamnesis of current ailments and physical examination were inconspicuous. His family and psychosocial history had no abnormalities. There were no abnormal laboratory values. In the following 3 weeks, diagnostic procedures such as esophagogastroduodenoscopy, ultrasound, contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS; SonoVue®), computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), bone scintigraphy, and ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (FNA) were performed to rule out metastasis. The esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed a discrete chronic type-C-gastritis, which was treated accordingly with proton pump inhibitors. Ultrasound showed a hypoechoic lesion in the inferior pole of his spleen with a diameter of 2 cm, blurred boundaries, and inhomogeneous interior pattern. CEUS (SonoVue®) was inconclusive and showed only discrete contrast enhancement of the lesion with accentuated nodule-like enrichment of the boundaries in the arterial phase (see Fig. ). A contrast-enhanced CT scan showed two hypodense lesions of 2.3 cm and 3.5 cm in diameter, which were highly suspicious of metastasis. Contrast-enhanced MRI of his upper abdomen also revealed two suspicious lesions of 2.5 cm and 4.0 cm in diameter, which were hyperintense in T1 and inhomogeneous and hypointense in T2 (see Fig. ). MRI of his head was inconspicuous. Bone scintigraphy showed no abnormal results. The first FNA was inconspicuous. The second one contained atypical, hyperchromatic, and polymorphic cells and therefore was highly suspicious of malignoma. Immunohistochemical analysis of the specimen revealed overexpression of HMB45, S100, and vimentin, strongly indicating metastasis of the above-mentioned malignoma. The case was presented and discussed at our local tumor board. A splenectomy was recommended. Two weeks prior to surgery, he was vaccinated against Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Neisseria meningitidis according to national recommendations of the Robert Koch Institute. We conducted a laparoscopic splenectomy approximately 6 weeks after his initial presentation. His intraoperative and postoperative course were uneventful. He recovered well from surgery and was discharged from our hospital 5 days after the procedure. The obtained spleen was examined by our Institute of Pathology. In contrast to the result of the second FNA, the presence of metastasis of melanoma could not be confirmed. The spleen contained two suspicious lesions of 3.5 cm and 1.7 cm in diameter. Histological analysis revealed a nodule-like arrangement of fibroblasts with low cell density and a predominance of dilated capillaries, indicating SANT of the spleen (see Fig. ). The histological specimen was sent to a reference pathologist (Prof. Rosenwald, University of Würzburg, Germany) for further immunohistochemical staining and validation of our diagnosis. The following immunohistochemical analysis showed positive expression of CD31 and CD34 in capillaries with no expression of CD8, CD20, and Ki67. The diagnosis of SANT of the spleen was verified. Follow-up care is carried out by our Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Diabetology. Until now, no further abnormalities could be detected. For an overview of the medical history timeline, see Table .