A 26-year-old woman presented to the emergency department immediately after a bicycle accident in which she fell on the ground with an outstretched hand. She complained of pain at her right wrist and elbow, especially when she rotated the forearm. On physical examination, the forearm was held in supination with the elbow in 90° flexion and the wrist in the neutral position. A superficial abrasion was first noted on the palmar surface of the right wrist. Tenderness was triggered with direct palpation on the distal radio-ulnar joint (DRUJ), as well as the lateral and medial side of the elbow. No tenderness was detected with palpation on the middle portion of the forearm. The active range of motion of elbow joint was flexion 110°/extension 180°, and rotation of forearm was supination 80°/pronation 40°. She had a normal movement of the fingers and intact sensation in the right hand.
Radiographs of both forearms were taken for comparison, revealing volar dislocation of the radial head and dorsal dislocation of the distal radius without associated fracture on the injured side, which formed a criss-cross appearance on the lateral radiograph . Computed Tomography (CT) scan was also applied to rule out associated fractures. To further evaluate the soft tissue injuries, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the forearm was taken, revealing partial rupture of the proximal IOM from its dorsal attachment and no impairment of the middle portion of the IOM, as well as partial rupture of the medial collateral ligament (MCL) . Aside from ligamentous injuries, bone contusion was also detected on the capitellum of the humerus and the proximal ulna on MRI images.
The patient was first diagnosed as “Simultaneous dislocation of the radial head and distal radio-ulnar joint without fracture”. We inclined not to diagnose this injury as an Essex-Lopresti injury because the central part of IOM seemed intact. Conservative treatment was firstly tried with closed reduction in the emergency room without anesthesia. With the elbow in 90° flexion, the forearm was successively immobilized in either supination, pronation or neutral rotation with a long-arm cast. In each position, CT scan of the whole forearm was taken . However, the radiocapitellar joint and the DRUJ could not be simultaneously reduced in either position.
The patient was then introduced to an expert in elbow surgery and advised to undergo surgical exploration. Before the surgery started, the stability of the elbow and the DRUJ were respectively tested under general anesthesia. During the Valgus Elbow Stress Test, the laxity of the elbow was increased and the radial head seemed to shift forward under a valgus force, indicating that the medial collateral ligament of the elbow and the annular ligament might be injured. The Ballottement Test also showed a positive result, revealing an unstable DRUJ.
After the examination, the surgery was performed, aiming to explore the lateral side of the elbow and repair the potentially injured annular ligament. A lateral approach of the elbow was performed. After dividing the subcutaneous tissues, the lateral collateral ligament revealed itself to be intact. Then, a longitudinal incision was made on the lateral collateral ligament to expose the annular ligament and the humeroradial joint. Surprisingly, the annular ligament was found to be perfectly intact, while the radial head was in a slightly anteriorly dislocated position. Further inspection of the radial head revealed an abnormal, convex and bumpy articular surface . An intraoperative Valgus Elbow Stress Test showed that the radial head would dislocate anteriorly under a valgus force. To reduce the radial head, rotation of the forearm was tried first and the results were not satisfying. So we apply a manual force upon the anterior part of the radial head to achieve a well-aligned reduction while the forearm was in full supination and the elbow was in 90° flexion. Subsequently, a 2.0-mm percutaneous K-wire was used to stabilize the proximal radio-ulnar joint (PRUJ). Intraoperative radiographs showed that the radial head and the DRUJ were simultaneously reduced . After closing the wound, a long arm cast was used to keep the forearm in supination, 90° of elbow flexion, and the wrist in neutral deviation.
The long arm cast was kept for 4 weeks and replaced by an adjustable brace to allow a full range of flexion and extension. The K-wire was removed at 6 weeks postoperatively to allow a full range of forearm rotation. At 6 months postoperatively, the patient had regained a full range of flexion and extension, with normal supination and a slight limitation in pronation. Until 18 months postoperatively, the patient still had a slight limitation in pronation, with the Mayo elbow score being 85 and the Mayo wrist score being 90. Radiographic findings revealed that the radial head and the DRUJ were in better positions, but there was still a criss-cross appearance between radius and ulna on the lateral view .