A nineteen-year-old male presented with prominent dilated veins in his left leg since childhood which was initially not bothering him, but since one year he had been having swelling and pain in his left calf and leg. For six months, he had noticed some purplish pigmentation in the left calf and foot but without ulceration. There was however no history of trauma or surgical procedures done in the left lower limb. Doppler ultrasonography was done which showed dilated veins in the lateral aspect of the left lower limb starting from the ankle region and continuing up to the upper thigh. The maximum diameter of the vein was 7.3 mm. There was one long vein with multiple perforators between it and the deep veins and muscular veins. Deep veins were patent. These features are typical of the lateral marginal veins of Servelle. Computed Tomography Venogram reconfirmed the finding and 3D reconstruction showed the venous network and abnormal perforators in detail as shown in . The patient was advised for physiotherapy and compression stocking.
Electively Radio Frequency Ablation (RFA) of the lateral marginal vein of Servelle was done with adjunct sclerotherapy of the prominent veins and selected perforators. For RFA, cannulation was done in the distal calf and the RFA catheter could be negotiated well up to the proximal junction. A total of 11 segments of RFA was done with each treatment length of 7 cm, the temperature of 120 °C, and the time of the 20s. As shown in , , there was immediate improvement following RFA. For sclerotherapy 4 ml of inj. polidocanol mixed with 4 ml of normal saline and 4 ml of air via Tessari technique was used and given under ultrasonography guidance. Following the procedure, intraoperative Doppler ultrasonography didn't find significant residual varicose veins and thus segmental excision of the vein was not done. The patient was discharged the following day with analgesics and advised for compression bandaging for a month. In a follow-up of 40 days, the patient has much better cosmetic results and the pain has completely subsided. For residual varicosities, two more settings of sclerotherapy were done at three weeks and four weeks. In serial follow-up of two years with Doppler ultrasonography, there was the resolution of the lateral marginal vein along with the absence of incompetent perforators. Though there are some residual varicosities, for which sclerotherapy has been planned, other symptoms have completely subsided .