This is the case of a 77-year-old male who was referred to our hospital for severe shortness of breath that started 4 days before presentation. He had previous histories of bronchial asthma, sigmoid clonal cancer, small bowel obstruction, and acute duodenal ulcer. Physical examination revealed bilateral coarse crackle at the bases and absence of a heart murmur. Complete blood count showed a significant rise in the eosinophil count (2769/μL, 30.1%). The white blood cell count was 9200/μL (normal value: 3000–9000/μL), neutrophils accounted for 54.9% (30–72%) of the white blood cell count, lymphocytes 11.3% (20–53%), monocytes 3.5% (2–12%), and basophils 0.2% (0–3%). The haemoglobin level was 89 g/L (135–175 g/L) and platelet count was 183 000/μL. The brain natriuretic protein level was 1051.6 pg/mL (>18.4 pg/mL). Both myeloperoxidase and Proteinase3 antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. The chest X-ray showed bilateral pulmonary opacities. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed massive mural thrombi attached to the septo-apical wall and the posterior wall, which was consistent with Löffler endocarditis . We suspected Löffler endocarditis to be the cause of the mural thrombi because there was no regional wall motion abnormality on the affected wall. Left ventricular (LV) systolic function was visually preserved, without significant valve regurgitation and stenosis. We did not use the modified Simpson method since it is unreliable in the setting of extensive mural thrombi. The transmitral flow pattern was pseudonormal (E/A ratio was 1.68 and the deceleration time was 161.1 ms). e′ (septal) was 5.0 cm/s and E/e′ was 12.13. Cardiac MRI revealed obliteration of the LV apex and partial filling of the LV cavity as well as near circumferential subendocardial LGE in the mid- and apical segments . T2-weighted images showed a near circumferential high-intensity area of the LV subendocardial muscle in the mid- and apical segments . We differentiated subendocardial hyperintensity from the slow flow artefact often seen on STIR/TIR sequences at the endocardial border referring to the cine images. The MRI findings of the combination of subendocardial LGE and obliteration of the LV apex enabled us to make a confident diagnosis. Although he did not have any neurological and thrombotic symptoms, we searched for signs of cerebral and other systemic embolization. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed multiple small newly developed cerebral infarctions in the cortical watershed zone and the cerebellar region, while enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed no signs of systemic embolization in the rest of his body.
High-dose corticosteroid therapy (500 mg methylprednisolone for 3 days, followed by 60 mg prednisolone daily) was initiated. The percentage of eosinophils decreased to below 0.1% one day after the initiation of the corticosteroid therapy. Intravenous heparin administration was started immediately after admission, followed by maintenance warfarin therapy. Transthoracic echocardiography at Day 26 and electrocardiogram-gated CT at Day 31 showed no significant reduction in the size of the mural thrombus in the LV cavity. The dose of warfarin was adjusted to the therapeutic PT-INR range from 2.0 to 3.0.
The patient was event-free (no cardiovascular events) at 1 year. The reduction of the thrombotic burden was confirmed using TTE . Follow-up cardiac MRI at 18 months revealed the disappearance of the LV thrombus and a reduction of the endocardial high-intensity area upon gadolinium enhancement . High-intensity areas of T2-weighted images were also reduced .