A 33-years-old healthy woman with a history of endosulfan ingestion of uncertain quantity in a suicide attempt six hours ago was admitted to our emergency department by local ambulance service. On arrival to the emergency department, the patient presented with generalized tonic-clonic seizure. The seizure was ceased by intravenous diazepam of 8 mg. Her blood pressure was 105/69 mmHg, heart rate was 100 bpm and body temperature was 36.7°C. Then the patient underwent rapid sequence intubation by means of 10 mg midazolam and 70 mg rocuronium in order to provide secure airway and support ventilation. The intubation was confirmed by using capnometer, auscultation of positive breath sounds bilaterally and the absence of any sound over epigastrium during ventilation of the patient. The patient’s laboratory findings were as follows: blood glucose 524 mg/dL, pH: 7.12, pCO2: 26 mmHg, saO2: 96.9%, lactate: 9.4 mmol/L, serum bicarbonate: 8.1 mmol/L, base deficit: -19.89 mmol/L. Electrolytes, complete blood count, liver and renal function tests were within normal limits. Electrocardiography displayed normal sinus rhythm. There was no significant finding on head computed tomography. Normal saline and insulin infusion was administered to control blood glucose levels. 40 minutes after intubation, the patient went in to cardiac arrest. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was initiated according to advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) algorithm for asystole. During resuscitation, 1.5 mL/kg bolus of 20% intravenous lipid emulsion was administered for three times at five-minute intervals in addition to ACLS guidance. Spontaneous circulation returned after twenty minutes of resuscitation. After resuscitation her blood pressure and heart rate were ameliorated to normal limits within a few minutes. However; when the patient was reevaluated after achieving spontaneous circulation, it was realized that the patient’s weight was thought to be much more than she was; so the real dose of given ILE was 2 ml/kg for each time to a total dose of 480 ml. The patient was admitted to intensive care unit for 28 days. No other antidotal or vasopressor therapies were required during hospital course of the patient. However; the patient’s spontaneous respiration did not resume and she was discharged from the hospital with home ventilator and some neurologic sequel attributed to hypoxemic brain injury.