The patient is a 29 year-old woman who initially presented to her physician at the age of 25 with uncontrolled hypertension and hypokalemia. To control her blood pressure, multiple medications were required, with only minimal effect in establishing blood pressure control. Additionally, she had recurrent low potassium levels (less than 2.5 mEq/L) requiring large amounts of oral potassium chloride per day (120 MEq/day). Family history was significant for a deceased mother who had kidney failure at a young age from uncontrolled high blood pressure. Because of these above findings, she was sent to an endocrinologist for workup of secondary causes of hypertension.
The initial labs indicated possible PA by measuring plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC), plasma renin activity (PRA), and calculating an aldosterone-to-renin ratio (ARR) (PAC = 8.0 ng/dL, PRA = 0.1 ng/ml/h, ARR = 80 measured at 10 pm with potassium of 2.6 mEq/L). She was on multiple medications (labetalol and verapamil) at the time including spironolactone. Repeat labs indicated PAC = 16.0, PRA = 0.06, ARR = 267 measured at 10 am with potassium of 3.0 mEq/L, these labs were done after 6 weeks off of spironolactone. Of note, we had her take extra potassium tablets to obtain near-normal potassium levels before repeating these studies. Confirmation of PA was done by 2 liter saline infusion test over 4 hrs, where pre-infusion values showed a PAC/PRA ratio of 28/0.3 and post-infusion values showed a PAC/PRA ratio of 14/1.2 (potassium was 3.2 mEq/L at time of test, patient was off spironolactone for over 2 months prior to this test). Evaluation for other secondary causes of hypertension ruled out pheochromocytoma, Cushing’s syndrome, and renal artery stenosis.
During this period, she had dedicated adrenal imaging by both CT (3/23/2010) and MRI (7/13/2010) scan. These studies demonstrated normal adrenal glands, without evidence of nodules or hyperplasia (done 2 years after initial diagnosis, at age 27 years old). Adrenal venous sampling (AVS) was then performed to determine if lateralization of the aldosterone secretion to one adrenal gland occurred. However, the first AVS sampling was technically not successful. This procedure was subsequently repeated over the coming years twice more, and both times the serum potassium levels prior to the procedures were normal. While both procedures were technically successful, the results were difficult to interpret. These studies are highlighted in Table .
Through the subsequent few years, the patient had multiple admissions to emergency rooms. Her presenting symptoms for these visits were mostly related to severe headaches, a symptom that developed when her blood pressure was uncontrolled. Some of these emergency room visits led to hospital admissions for further management of her uncontrolled blood pressure and/or hypokalemia. On one of the most recent admissions, we reimaged her adrenal glands (10/17/2011) and found a left adrenal adenoma (2.3 × 1.4 cm, less than 10 Hounsfield units on non-contrast CT images), a finding not previously observed approximately 1 year ago by CT scan and MRI (Figure ). Considering her history, the authors discussed with her the pros and cons of left adrenalectomy and informed her that this is the likely source of excess aldosterone, though it could not be guaranteed. Due to her poor quality of life, which included multiple medications, intolerance to high dose potassium supplements, recurrent headaches and multiple hospital admissions, she decided to go forth with surgery. Pathology revealed adrenal cellular proliferation consistent with adrenal cortical adenoma. Post-operatively, she did well, and her blood pressure returned to normal limits on two anti-hypertensives. Aldosterone levels on post-operative day one were undetectable. She has maintained a normal blood pressure in the subsequent year on these two medications, including normal potassium levels off potassium supplementation on repeat blood studies. It has been 9 months since the operation, and at last visit, her blood pressure medications were decreased and one of these two medications will likely be able to be stopped altogether.