A 34 year old man with a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), obesity, depression and anxiety presented to his primary care physician with difficulty concentrating and increased time spent playing video games. He estimated that he had been playing video games for about 14 h per day and noted this had begun to affect his work. He worked from home as an information technology consultant, and his last job performance evaluation was poor, whereas previous evaluations were good or satisfactory. With the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, work tasks initially slowed down and he spent his extra time playing games online. Additionally, given social distancing he had not needed to, nor had he been leaving his house often. He currently lives with his parents who handle the family’s grocery shopping. When business improved, he found himself struggling to complete assignments, and would be gaming during work hours. Before the COVID-19 pandemic he estimated he spent 2 h a day playing games. Prior to the pandemic he socialized with friends weekly, however at the time of presentation, his social interactions occurred through online gaming only.
The patient had no history of addiction and denied present alcohol or recreational drug use. Of note, the patient was in a car accident at the age of 12 and suffered a basilar skull fracture and concussion, resulting in a coma. He continued to have concussion symptoms for approximately 1 year and believes that is when he began to have difficulty concentrating. His current medications include metformin for his T2DM (most recent hemoglobin A1C was 7.3%). In the past he has taken bupropion and paroxetine but had not taken either for 2 years at the time of presentation. Physical exam reveals an obese male with a BMI of 46.2 kg/m2, and who appears depressed. His PHQ9 score was 13 and GAD7 score was 7.
On the advice of his primary care physician, paroxetine and bupropion were resumed. The patient declined a recommended psychotherapy referral. A neuropsychological evaluation was ordered to investigate his difficulty with concentration. At follow up, the patient had reduced depression and anxiety and improved self esteem, with PHQ9 score of 1 and GAD 7 score of 1. However, he did not feel he had decreased his screen time and still estimated it to be 14 h per day. The patient canceled his neuropsychological evaluation and indicated that he would not reschedule.