The patient was a 74-year-old Asian woman with a 42-year history of schizophrenia. On February 23, 2023, she was admitted to the hospital due to auditory hallucinations and a behavioral disorder, which had been worsening for 2 days. Her medical history was as follows .
After admission, the patient was treated with clozapine 275 mg/day, and risperidone 3 mg/day in combination with clopidogrel 75 mg/day because of her history of cerebral infarction. In addition, our patient was receiving rosuvastatin 10 mg qn and estazolam 1 mg qn for hyperlipidemia and insomnia, respectively. She had a history of hypertension and was not receiving antihypertensive medication because her current blood pressure was normal. However, 4 days after admission, her blood pressure was 188/95 mmHg and she was prescribed valsartan 80 mg/day. On the same day, our patient was less active and depressed, so risperidone was discontinued and escitalopram 5 mg/d was added to improve depression. During treatment, the patient received intermittent potassium chloride for her persistent hypokalemia.
After 6 weeks of admission (April 13, 2023), our patient incidentally showed insomnia, agitation, refusal to eat, nervous expression, tachypnea, tremor in the lower extremities, confusion, negativism, and diaphoresis, with neurological pathological signs being all negative. Vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 196/106 mmHg, heart rate 118 beats/min, respiratory rate 30 breaths/min, and temperature 36.7°C. Initial physical examination revealed: eyes closed with fluttering; increased muscle tension; myoclonus; hyperreflexia; and bilateral plantar tremor. Laboratory findings showed that creatine kinase (CK) was 267.2 IU/L. Combined with her symptoms and medications, she was initially diagnosed with neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) .
Intravenous fluids, diazepam 5 mg injection, and propranolol 10 mg were started to relieve the symptoms, and the clozapine was immediately stopped. However, there was little change in her symptoms over the following 24 h. Moreover, what confused us was that the concentration of clozapine in our patient was 105.1 ng/mL, much lower than the normal level. On April 15, 2023, although the patient’s breathing was more stable than before, her lower extremities remained tense and jittered involuntarily. The timeline for our patient was as follows .
Such a triad of autonomic dysfunction, neuromuscular excitement, and mental state changes could also be considered a serotonin syndrome, according to the literature . Therefore, TDM and gene detection were introduced despite the low dose of escitalopram. The results showed that the escitalopram level was 210.9 ng/mL, which was much higher than the cutoff, and the polymorphism of CYP2C19 was typical of poor metabolizers (PMs). Combined with the patient’s current symptoms, she was diagnosed with serotonin syndrome .
Escitalopram was then discontinued. In the following 2 days, the patient’s blood pressure rose to 204/84 mmHg, and heart rate reached 145 beats/min. Intravenous fluids were used to promote drug metabolism, and captopril 25 mg was given orally as needed for antihypertensive therapy. The patient’s myoclonus persisted, and her CK increased to 716.8 IU/L on April 17. Given that the half-life of escitalopram is 30 h, its metabolites last longer, and an elderly patient needs more time to eliminate escitalopram, the increase in laboratory results 2 days after her discontinuation seemed to be normal . Over the next 4 days, the patient presented with intermittent jittering, negativism, and myoclonus. On April 21, 2023, her hyperreflexia, myoclonus, lower extremities tremor, and ocular flutter subsided, blood pressure gradually returned to 140/72 mmHg; CK returned to normal; and her escitalopram level decreased to 23.9 ng/mL. Subsequently, the patient developed other physical conditions, which included recurrent pneumonia and gastric bleeding, and was admitted to another hospital. After the completion of treatment, she returned to our hospital and was discharged in the following weeks.