A 51-year-old Indian female presented to the emergency department of her local hospital with a history of sudden-onset, severe bilateral occipital headache. Her headache had started suddenly three days earlier with no prodromal symptoms or preceding visual aura. The headache was continuous, exacerbated by coughing and relieved when she was recumbent. The pain radiated across the top of her head to the temporal region and was associated with nausea and mild photophobia. There was no relief with simple analgesia. A history of a recent coryzal illness was elicited but that had fully resolved by the time of presentation.
Her past medical history was unremarkable and she was on no regular medications. There was no history of migraine and no family history of headaches, cerebrovascular accident or sudden death.
On examination, the patient was alert and her vital signs were within normal limits. Neurological examination was normal and Kernig's sign was negative. There was no neck stiffness and no rash. Fundoscopy showed no signs of raised intracranial pressure.
Initial investigations revealed a mild leucocytosis with a neutrophilia but inflammatory markers were normal (erythrocyte sedimentation rate 32 mm/hour; C-reactive protein level <5 mg/L).
Her history of acute-onset severe headache suggested a diagnosis of subarachnoid haemorrhage. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) brain scan proved normal. A lumbar puncture showed no evidence of red cells in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and the opening pressure was normal at 11 cm/H2O. Spectrophotometric examination of the CSF was negative for xanthochromia. A magnetic resonance angiogram was performed to exclude the presence of an intracranial aneurysm. This was normal.
In light of the negative investigations and symptomatic improvement with bed rest and weak opioid analgesia, a tentative diagnosis of migraine was made and the patient was discharged.
Two months later, although symptomatically improved, the patient still had persistent headache and sought a further opinion. A repeat magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain scan revealed new bilateral thin (<1 cm) subdural collections suggesting the possibility of reduced intracranial pressure . An MRI of the spinal cord demonstrated a large right-sided spinal arachnoid cyst at the level of T10/11 extending out through the neural foramen . A right-sided pleural effusion was also noted suggesting that the cyst had ruptured into the pleural space.
In retrospect it seems likely that the patient's initial presentation was precipitated by spontaneous rupture of the spinal arachnoid cyst. Her persistent headache was the result of ongoing CSF hypotension.
Twelve months after initial presentation our patient is well and her headache has completely abated. Her right-sided pleural effusion has resolved and she has not required any neurosurgical intervention.