A 43-year-old non-smoking male with a history of Mixed Connective Tissue Disease (MCTD) presented to the emergency room due to chest pain. His drug history was hydroxychloroquine 400 mg once daily (for the past 5 months), and he was otherwise healthy in excellent physical condition. The patient presented with a 4 day history of fever and cough. The patient’s wife was also suffering from similar symptoms. Physical examination revealed no murmurs or rales, systolic blood pressure (BP) of 100 mmHg, a heart rate of 130 b.p.m., and oxygen saturations of 90–100% on 10–15 L/min of oxygen. Electrocardiograms showed sinus tachycardia and diffuse ST-segment elevation. All electrocardiograms are presented in .
Thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan revealed no pathology. High sensitivity Troponin T (hsTnT) was 590 ng/L [upper limit of normal (ULN) 15 ng/L] and the patient was initially treated as non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) with aspirin, ticagrelor, and fondaparinux. Later, perimyocarditis was suspected and cefotaxime and colchicine were administered. Treatment with cefotaxime was not the hospitals’ policy, treatment was initiated to cover for a possible bacterial infection. The nasopharyngeal swab polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for SARS-CoV-2 was positive. During the night, the patient was stable with 3 L of O2 (saturation 100%), BP 110/75 mmHg, and heart rate 95 b.p.m.
Blood samples on the second day of admission showed an elevated N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-ProBNP) of 6100 ng/L (ULN <300 ng/L). Echocardiography showed a normal sized left ventricle with severely depressed systolic function, ejection fraction (EF) 10–15%. A 5 mm pericardial effusion was found along the right ventricular wall. The central venous saturation (ScvO2) was 53% and the patient was referred to the local Coronary Care Unit (CCU). Upon arrival at the CCU, the patient was somnolent but did express significant anxiety, and complained of chest and abdominal pain. He showed signs of CS with cold extremities, oliguria, heart rate 120–130 b.p.m., and BP 85/70 mmHg. Levosimendan and norepinephrine infusions were started together with IV fluid. ScvO2 had dropped to 36%. Immediate echocardiography confirmed the previous findings and the patient was referred to the cardiothoracic intensive care unit (ICU). Inotropic support was enhanced with epinephrine and milrinone. He received a Swahn-Ganz pulmonary artery catheter as well as mechanical circulatory support (MCS) (Impella® CP Smart Assist, Abiomed, Aachen, Germany), initially at 3.8 L/min later increased to 4.2 L/min. Mixed venous gas saturation (SvO2) improved to 57%. However, cardiac index remained low between 1.8 and 2.5 L/m2 and norepinephrine in high doses was needed to maintain mean arterial BP above 60 mmHg. During the night, he was bleeding profoundly from the MCS access site and received massive transfusions with 48E erythrocytes, 22E fresh frozen plasma and 3E platelets. Hydroxychloroquine treatment was terminated upon his arrival to ICU.
The next day the patient was anaesthetized, intubated and surgical revision of the access site was performed as well as endomyocardial biopsy (EMB) via the right internal jugular vein. Milrinone was terminated and vasopressin added because of vasodilatation. Hydrocortisone, 100 mg three times/day, was started due to clinical suspicion of Addison crisis, as he periodically had been on cortisone due to MCTD. The biopsies showed no histopathological signs of myocarditis and the myocardial samples tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 RNA. Repeated PCR tests for SARS-CoV-2 were positive, both in tracheal secretion and a few days afterwards even in urine culture. In total, the patient was positive for SARS-CoV-2 in three different tests.
Despite massive inotropic and vasopressor support as well as Impella®, pre-shock signs remained. It was felt that this mandated an upgrade of MCS to include veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO, Cardiohelp™ Maquet Cardiovascular, Bridgewater, NJ, USA) in combination with the Impella®. Within hours the circulation stabilized (initially blood flow of 3.7 L/min, sweep gas flow of 2.5 L/min at 100% oxygen) and inotropic support could gradually be decreased.
A new CT scan could not demonstrate any pulmonary infiltrates, and laboratory parameters improved. Within 24 h after the VA-ECMO institution, renal function improved.
After 3 days, while weaning MCS, transthoracic echocardiography confirmed biventricular systolic improvement. After a multidisciplinary meeting on Day 7, the patient was successfully weaned off MCS, the left ventricular function normalized , and he was later moved to the CCU. At Day 25, he was referred to his local county hospital being treated for an infection of unclear focus.