A 72-year-old woman with chronic atrial fibrillation, temporal arteritis, and avascular necrosis of the right hip requiring hemiarthroplasty that was complicated by deep venous thrombosis in the past, now presents with new onset left upper extremity clumsiness. A head computed tomography (CT) scan and subsequent magnetic resonance imaging study revealed a hemorrhage into the right parietal and occipital regions of the brain. In view of these findings, warfarin therapy was discontinued and as part of the workup a transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was performed and revealed a 4 × 6 mm mass on the aortic valve and a patent foramen ovale (PFO) with bidirectional shunting (right to left after the intravenous injection of agitated saline), mild bi-atrial enlargement, mildly dilated but normally functioning right ventricle, normal left ventricular systolic function and no significant valvular regurgitation. The patient was afebrile and blood cultures were negative. The patient was referred to our institution for surgical evaluation given the TEE findings and the patient clinical presentation. Surgical resection of the aortic valve mass and closure of the PFO were recommended.
Upon examination of the aortic valve, a filamentous mass was identified on the leading edge of the noncoronary cusp midway between the ranula and the commisure. The mass was excised with sharp dissection. A second 2 × 3 mm mass was also observed on the underside of the leaflet and was excised in a similar fashion. Lesions were also observed at the commisure and on the left coronary cusp and were also excised. Pathologic examination subsequently revealed that these lesions were small fragments of myxoid tissue with hyalinization. A modified Maze procedure was also performed at the time of surgery and it required mobilization of the pulmonary veins bilaterally with application of radiofrequency lesions just proximal to the entrance of the left and right pulmonary veins. Another radiofrequency lesion was placed at the base of the left atrial appendage and this was then excised and then over sewn. Finally, the right atrium was then opened in a longitudinal fashion, the PFO was identified at the cephalad portion of the fossa ovalis and was then closed in a running fashion.
The patient was weaned from bypass without incident and a TEE performed in the operating room revealed no residual masses on the aortic valve or right to left shunt. However, a mild degree of tricuspid regurgitation was now identified for the first time. Both right ventricular size and systolic function remained normal. The patient was taken to the intensive care unit in stable condition and the immediate post-operative course was unremarkable. There was no need for either vasopressor or ionotropic support and the patient was extubated on the first post-operative day and subsequently transferred to a step down unit.
The patient did well until the night of the second post-operative day when she developed oliguria that progressively worsened followed by tachycardia and hypotension. At this time, a pronounced jugular venous distention was noted and a bedside transthoracic echo was immediately obtained to rule out the presence of pericardial tamponade. No pericardial effusion was noted; however, severe tricuspid regurgitation was now noted with dilatation and dysfunction of the right ventricle. In view of these findings, a spiral chest CT was requested but there was no evidence of pulmonary embolus; however, both superior as well as inferior vena cavae were dilated. The pericardium thickness was reported as normal. Because the clinical deterioration persisted, the patient was taken back to the operating room for mediastinal exploration; only a small amount of pericardial fluid was removed. Although the pericardial sac appeared to be under tension, no clot was found after extensive exploration.
Despite a trial of medical management, the patient's cardiac index remained low and all facial and neck veins became progressively and markedly engorged. A repeated TEE demonstrated marked dilatation of the right-sided chambers with severe reduction in right ventricular systolic function and severe tricuspid regurgitation as a result of an incomplete coaptation of the tricuspid valve leaflets . During this TEE, normal left ventricular contractility was noted with no regional wall motion abnormalities, with the exception of a paradoxical septal wall motion as expected post recent surgery, and normal left ventricular systolic function. In addition, pulsed interrogation of all four pulmonary veins showed normal velocities in order to rule out post-surgical Maze procedure pulmonary vein stenosis. No visible alteration in either the main or secondary pulmonary arteries was seen by TEE or CT. Although a clear unifying mechanism that would encompass the hemodynamic deterioration as well as the disproportionate symptoms of dyspnea with the rapidly progressive dilatation of all superficial neck and facial veins could not be given, it was clearly evident that the incomplete coaptation of the tricuspid valve leaflets, as seen on TEE, would certainly continue to further deteriorate the current clinical condition. Therefore, the patient was taken to the operating room again and upon opening the right atrium, the dilatation of the tricuspid valve annulus was confirmed resulting in failure of coaptation of the otherwise normal appearing tricuspid leaflets. Tricuspid annuloplasty with a 34 mm Cosgrove band was performed with marked improvement in cardiac output not requiring further inotropic support. A postoperative TEE revealed no evidence of residual tricuspid regurgitation and the chest was closed. The remainder of the patient's post-operative course was uncomplicated. Unfractionated intravenous heparin was started once the surgeon felt it was safe to maintain a therapeutic activated partial thromboplastin time. The pronounced engorgement of her neck and face veins resolved and she remained hemodynamically stable. After the 5th postoperative day, the patient was transferred to a rehabilitation facility. At one-month follow-up, the patient has remained in atrial fibrillation, but is otherwise doing well.