A 62-year-old woman presented to our hospital with lower back pain for 3 months. She had no history of fever, night sweats, weight loss or other symptoms. She had a 9-year history of hypertension, with a maximum blood pressure of 160/100 mmHg, which was controlled at about 120/80 mmHg with amlodipine benzenesulfonate. She had no history of other underlying conditions including coronary artery disease, chronic heart failure, and so on. On admission, her vital signs were stable with a blood pressure of 130/80 mm Hg, a heart rate of 102 beats/min and a temperature of 36.3°C. Because the severe low back pain interfered with sleep, she was mostly confined to bed and was treated with opioid analgesia. A 3.0 cm × 3.0 cm mass was palpable in the right supraclavicular region of the patient, with firm texture, poor mobility, and no tenderness. There was tenderness and percussion pain (+) in the 4, 8, and 11 thoracic regions. Her cardiovascular exam was normal. Laboratory tests revealed moderately elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) at 476 IU/L (100–300 IU/L) and elevated β2 microglobulin (β2MG) at 2.54 mg/L(0–0.3 mg/L). The hematuria and stool routine, liver and kidney function, electrolytes, and tumor markers were normal. The electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm with a left axis deviation.
To determine whether the masses were malignant, positron emission tomography (PET) imaging was performed with . The PET imaging showed multiple masses in the left ventricle, gallbladder, right adrenal gland, and right erector spinae with multiple enlarged lymph nodes and bone destruction throughout the body, all of which had significantly increased FDG uptake. In particular, the maximum standardized uptake value for left ventricular masses was 16.5 and 19.7 after delay, consistent with malignancy . Echocardiography showed a 14 × 17 mm additional echo detectable at the proximal apical segment of the septum in the left ventricle, with irregular morphology, tissue-like echoes, and mobility. Echocardiography of the cardiac chambers showed a detectable contrast-enhanced mass in the septum near the apex, with an irregular morphology, measuring approximately 12 × 22 mm, with a wide base and high mobility at the point of attachment, and with a relatively large amount of contrast filling detectable within it, which was considered to be malignant . The left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 59%. Axial Fiesta of cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) showed a mass measuring 1.6 cm × 1.1cm × 2.1 cm at the left cardiac chamber septum. Long-axis four-chamber myocardial delayed enhancement (MDE) showed nodular shadows in the left cardiac chamber, and the mass had no gadolinium enhancement . The patient refused to undergo an endomyocardial biopsy because of concerns about the risks of invasive procedures. Then, the patient underwent a biopsy of the right supraclavicular lymph node.
However, before the pathologic diagnosis was confirmed, the patient experienced spinal cord compression due to bone metastasis. Physical examination indicated that pain and temperature sensation below the level of the fourth thoracic vertebra disappeared, muscle strength of both lower limbs was grade 2, and no pathological reflexes were elicited. Magnetic resonance of the spine suggests bony destruction of vertebrae and appendages of thoracic vertebrae 4, 5, and 12, surrounded by visible soft tissue masses with spinal cord compression and edema. We hypothesized that the patient presented with spinal cord compression due to bone metastases. Glucocorticoids and mannitol dehydration were administered immediately to relieve the symptoms of spinal cord compression. Subsequently, pathology confirmed the diagnosis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, with positive immunohistochemical staining for CD20, CD3, CD5, BCL-2, and Ki67 (50%+).
Rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP) was treated immediately as first-line therapy. Almost all sites of tumor lesions were significantly reduced after two cycles of R-CHOP. The left ventricular mass was reduced to 1.1 cm × 0.6 cm, and the pain and temperature sensation below the level of the 4th thoracic vertebra were normalized, and the muscle strength of the left and right lower limbs improved to levels 4 and 5, respectively. After 4 cycles of R-CHOP, the left ventricular mass had almost regressed and the muscle strength of both lower limbs had completely returned to normal. A total of 6 cycles of R-CHOP were completed for first-line treatment, and the efficacy evaluation was complete response and then follow-up. During the treatment period, the LVEF increased from 65% at baseline to 69%, and no cardiovascular-related adverse events were observed. During the 5-year follow-up, all lesions, including the cardiac mass, remained complete regression, and FDG uptake was reduced to normal . The patient was able to walk normally and had no tumor-related symptoms. At the time of this manuscript (more than 5 years from follow-up), she is alive and has normal functional capacity. Despite the patient receiving anthracycline-based chemotherapy in first-line treatment, the LVEF remained normal, and no long-term cardiovascular toxicity was observed at 5 years of follow-up.