A 40-year-old right-handed man, who worked as a tea seller and had 12 years of formal education, was admitted to the hospital reporting gradual onset progressive dance-like movements for last 2 months and deterioration of mental status for last 1 month. The patient was unable to provide an accurate timeline of events leading up to his presentation. According to his wife, the patient had conversation difficulties and misplacement of objects associated with recent memory impairment and behavioral abnormalities (aggression, compulsive behavior and disinhibition).
His past medical history and drug history were unrevealing. He had no history of smoking, drug addiction and reported only occasional alcohol use, but had craving for tea. For last 10–15 years he used to drink on an average of 20 cups of black tea [150 ml (5 Oz) of tea per cup] per day. His wife noticed a significant increase in this craving for tea over last few months. Craving for tea became so severe that his family members had to shut down his tea-stall eventually.
On examination, he had severe dysarthria and impaired verbal fluency with apparently unaffected comprehension. Mini Mental Status Examination (MMSE) total score was 16/30. Complex attention, executive function, social cognition, learning, and memory domains were affected. He had normal power in all four limbs with generalized rigidity and asymmetric chorea (predominantly involving left upper and lower limbs) . Deep tendon reflexes were normal with bilateral flexor plantar responses. He had walking difficulties due to persistent abnormal movements. Saccades were poorly initiated and hypometric with fractionated smooth pursuit. All other aspects of neurological examination and review of other systems were normal.
Complete blood count, along with peripheral blood smear, renal, liver, thyroid function tests, blood glucose, serum sodium, potassium, calcium, phosphorus, lactate, and iron profile were within normal limits. Brain MRI revealed non-enhancing, bilateral symmetrical increased signal intensity on T1-weighted, T2-weighted and T2-weighted-fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images in basal ganglia (particularly involving caudate nucleus and putamen), with areas of gliosis, without any mass effect . Electroencephalogram was normal. Deposition and metabolic disorders, autoimmune and paraneoplastic encephalitis, and Huntington’s disease were considered as differential diagnoses. HIV serology, autoimmune and paraneoplastic neuronal antibodies panel [NMDA (anti-glutamate receptor against NR1 subunit), AMPA (anti-glutamate)-GluR1, AMPA (anti-glutamate)-GluR2, GABA-B receptor antibody, LGI-1 antibody, CASPR2 antibody, amphiphysin, anti-CRMP5/CV2, PNMA2 (Ma2/Ta), ANNA-1/Hu, ANNA-2/Ri, and PCA-1/Yo antibodies], amino acid chromatography and routine cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (cell type, cell count, protein, glucose, bacterial staining, and cultures), assay for protein 14-3-3 in CSF, and genetics for Huntington’s disease and Huntington’s disease like (HDL) 4/SCA 17 were all normal or negative. Serum ceruloplasmin, copper, 24 hours urinary copper, and test for ATP7B gene were normal. Slit lamp examination ruled out Kayser-Fleischer ring. MR portography was normal.
The serum manganese level was sent, which came out to be 3281 nmol/L (reference value < 320 nmol/L). Although inherited manganism was unlikely, considering the age of the patient and negative family history, screening for mutations for SLC39A14, SLC30A10 and SLC39A8 were done for objective confirmation and expectedly came out to be negative. Personal history revealed he had a compulsive habit of drinking black tea, on an average 20 cups (5 Oz/cup) per day over last 10–15 years. On an average he ingested 26 mg of manganese per day for last 10–15 years.
Edetate calcium disodium was administered as a chelation therapy at 1 g/m2/day (in 500 ml normal saline) once daily for 5 days. Further, oral tetrabenazine (50 mg/day) was given. On tenth day, the serum manganese level decreased (1070 nmol/L) and motor symptoms started showing some improvement. Intravenous chelation with edetate calcium disodium was repeated twice in first month (two weeks apart) and once in third month. Metabolic parameters were routinely monitored alongside serum manganese level . After three cycles of chelation therapy, his serum manganese level normalized (189 nmol/L) and we then stopped chelation therapy. Tetrabenazine was also stopped at four weeks of follow-up as there was no abnormal movement.
At the sixth month of follow-up, complete resolution of chorea, dysarthria and partial amelioration of rigidity were observed. Serum manganese level remained normal (178 nmol/L). Cognitive function improved in the following domains: complex attention, executive function, social cognition, learning and memory. MMSE score improved by 5 points (i.e. 21/30). Brain MRI, at follow-up, revealed partial resolution of previous findings, but the gliotic areas, which persisted along with resultant dilatation of frontal horns of lateral ventricles due to negative mass effects . At the one year of follow-up, the patient’s clinical status remained similar and had a normal serum manganese level (170 nmol/L). Figure summarizes the timeline of events in relation to serum manganese level and MMSE along time.