A 20-year-old Egyptian female presented to the Cleft Center, Ain Shams University, seeking for better facial esthetics. She had a history of various operations for amendments of a cleft lip and a cleft palate defect, at various points of her growth timeline, which may indicate the presence of a congenital NDO and which may be due to (or not) the presence of the cleft deformity. The patient’s mother reported previous multiple occurrences of epiphora during the patient’s childhood, leading to an ocular surgery being performed to treat this symptom.
The patient presented with a remaining anterior palatal fistula, and an angle class III maxillomandibular, causing a concave profile appearance of the face. Facial features included widened and flattened nasal bridge. The treatment option was a surgical decision to perform bimaxillary surgery, including a LF-1 osteotomy in the maxilla, and bilateral sagittal split osteotomy (BSSO) in the mandible. The plan was to move the maxilla forward and the mandible backwards to correct the maxillomandibular relation.
The required investigations and radiographic and clinical examinations were collected before the surgery, including a cone-beam computed topographical (CBCT) scan. It is an important notice that the CBCT scan revealed deficient lateral nasal walls, which was attributed to the CLP defect, and proper consents taken from the Institutional Review Board of the Ain Shams University.
The patient was admitted to the operations room, and general anesthesia was induced in patient by nasotracheal intubation. Maxillary vestibular incision and the LF-1 osteotomy were carried out. LF-1 osteotomy started from the lateral nasal rim, 3–4 mm above the nasal floor, and extended to the pterygomaxillary junction, 5 mm above the teeth roots. The pterygoid plates were separated, and osteotomies were completed in the lateral nasal walls, followed by downfracture. The incision and osteotomies were completed without any obvious complications or deterrents. Incision along the anterior border of the ramus and external oblique ridge was executed to allow the BSSO osteotomy. All incisions were sutured properly at the end of the surgical operation.
On the second day after the surgery, the patient reported overflow of tears mixed with bloody discharge . It occurred independently, on drinking with a straw, and when applying any slight pressure on the cheeks. This symptom continued until the fourth postoperative day but decreasing in instances and intensity gradually, until complete disappearance. It began to cease after 2 days, disappearing completely on the fourth postoperative day.
The CBCT scan of the patient was reassessed, as to search for a cause of this symptom, and the nasolacrimal duct was found to be partially blocked, showing an air-fluid level .