A 58 year-old man with a 44 pack-year history of smoking initially presented with a 3 year history of a painless right neck mass and new temperomandibular joint pain. Follow-up two months later after treatment with muscle relaxants revealed persistent pain and a new right facial nerve palsy. Physical exam revealed a 2 cm nontender palpable mass proximal to the right temperomandibular joint, while CT and FDG-PET also showed three enlarged hypermetabolic lymph nodes. Fine needle aspiration revealed poorly differentiated carcinoma. The patient underwent right total parotidectomy with sacrifice of cranial nerve VII. Tumor size was 2 cm, 4/18 lymph nodes (levels 2, 4, and 5) were involved by tumor, and the final pathologic diagnosis was carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma, high grade. The final stage was T1N2bM0. He received 60 Gy of radiation to the right parotid bed and involved lymph nodes. One year later, FDG-PET revealed multiple areas of increased bony uptake and bone biopsy confirmed disease recurrence .
At the time of documented recurrence, immunohistochemical analysis of the original parotid resection revealed 3+ HER2/neu staining. Subsequent FISH analysis (performed after the patient was already on therapy) showed that the HER2/neu gene was not amplified. Given the strong immunostaining for HER2/neu and the known benefit of combining HER2-directed therapy with chemotherapy in HER2-overexpressing breast carcinoma, therapy was initiated with trastuzumab 6 mg/kg every 21 days and capecitabine 2000 mg/m2 days 1-14 of a 21 day cycle . Zoledronic acid 4 mg every 21 days was also initiated in view of the extensive bone involvement. The patient subsequently noted disappearance of bone pain and return to his baseline energy level. Repeat FDG-PET scan after three cycles revealed interval disease resolution with only physiologic uptake reported . With continued treatment, clinical and radiological responses were sustained for greater than two years and were ongoing at the time of the last contact with the patient.