A 77-year-old man underwent esophagectomy for thoracic esophageal cancer with 3-field lymph node dissection, followed by gastric tube reconstruction through the posterior mediastinal route. The reconstruction was performed in the cervical region with end-to-side anastomosis using an automatic anastomotic device. Eventually, the length of the residual esophagus was about 3 cm. On the 6th postoperative day (POD), redness was observed around the cervical wound. The wound was partially opened, and AL discharge was observed. Conservative treatment, including fasting, drainage of defective granulation, and tube feeding, was initiated; however, a large amount of exudate continued to come out, producing an enterocutaneous fistula. On the 29th and 43rd POD, we attempted to close the fistula by suturing, but it soon broke apart. On the 57th POD, we injected Dermabond® into the fistula, but to no avail. On the 58th POD, because it is considered that the stenosis of the anastomosis is an obstacle to the healing of the fistula, endoscopic balloon bougie to enlarge the size of anastomosis was performed . However, the exudate was never reduced. Therefore, we speculated that the large amount of exudate incessantly flowing out might be obstructing fistula closure. First, we aimed to reduce the flow through the fistula using scopolamine ointment. On the 61st POD, a small amount of scopolamine ointment was applied near the papillary process in the posterior auricle twice a day . In Japan, transdermal scopolamine is not commercially available, and therefore, it was prepared in our hospital; its use was approved by the Ethics Review Committee in our hospital for off-label use. Although there was concern about anticholinergic side effects, only mild thirst was recognized. Simultaneously, NPWT was initiated to promote wound healing . A vacuum-assisted closure treatment system (KCI International, San Antonio, TX, USA) was used as a negative pressure maintenance device, and the polyurethane foam was replaced every 72 h. The negative pressure was appropriately adjusted to 100 to 150 mmHg. Sometimes, the negative pressure stopped. This issue was addressed by adjusting the suction pressure and appropriately improving the shape of the polyurethane foam. Gradually, good granulation appeared, and the fistula shrank . Approximately 3 weeks after the beginning of the treatment, the fistula had closed, and oral intake was possible . The patient was discharged from the hospital on the 97th POD with no symptoms.