A 28-year-old male was diagnosed with WD in 1997, when he was 15 years old. Kayser-Fleischer ring was found incidentally during ophthalmological examination for itchy eyes. The serum ceruloplasmin was 3.5 mg/dl (normal range 15-40); the serum copper was 38 ug/dl (normal range 70-155); and the 24 hour urine copper was 1620 ug/day (normal range 0-75). Abdominal sonography showed chronic liver disease and brain MRI was compatible with WD; however, he did not have hepatic or neurological symptoms at that time. As the treatment regime, Penicillamine was tried initially, and then, it was switched to trientine because of the side effects such as paresthesia. Compliance was poor for 10 years because he did not have any symptoms. In late 2009, tremors and behavioral changes including irritability, aggressive behavior, and a somewhat depressive mood developed and became progressively worse. He visited our clinic in May 2010. Dystonic tremor in the right hand and mild dysarthria was the main feature upon initial examination. The serum ceruloplasmin was repeatedly less than 8 mg/dl; the serum copper was 37.3 ug/dl, and the 24 hour urine was 630 ug/day. Kayser-Fleischer ring was present. Trientine was prescribed with a gradual increase to 1000 mg; however, he complained of worsening stuttering, tremor, and gait disturbance for the next several months, and more aggravation in the 2 weeks prior to his admission. He attested he had good compliance in taking his meds.
He was admitted to the hospital to evaluate his deterioration in September 2010.
Upon admission, he had dysarthria, stuttering, and bilateral dystonic movements in the limbs, which were worse on the right side. Neurological examination showed mild motor impairment, brisk deep tendon reflexes, and extensor plantar responses, mainly on the right leg. His speech disturbance and dystonia had peculiar fluctuations with intermittent worsening without change of alertness lasting from several minutes to an hour, and occurring many times a day (Additional file ). At times, he became almost anarthric and unable to move the affected parts with stiffening. In general, his neurological condition progressively deteriorated with the above mentioned intermittent worsening during his hospital stay. Blood and urine studies showed good compliance for his medication (serum copper was 16.5 ug/dL and 24 hour urine copper was 613 ug/day). Brain MRI was done after we confirmed above neurologic findings and showed high signal intensity lesions on the bilateral paramedian superior frontal gyri as well as on the basal ganglia, thalamus, and brain stem on T2, Flare, and DWI. Contrast enhancement was present on the left superior frontal gyrus (see Figure A).
Video EEG monitoring showed multiple episodes of stiffening of the right arm followed by dystonic then rhythmic tremor of the right leg, which correlated with the left frontal rhythmic delta activity (Additional file ). Levetiracetam 2500 mg and Trileptal 1200 mg markedly improved his neurological symptoms. Upon brain MRI, cortical enhancement almost disappeared one month after antiepileptic medications (see Figure B).