A 77-year-old Swiss Caucasian man was admitted to a peripheral hospital due to a compartment syndrome of his left calf following a minor trauma . A large (13 × 8 × 0.6 cm) isolated calf hematoma was documented on ultrasound, but the patient’s further physical evaluation was unremarkable. At admission, anticoagulant therapy with apixaban, prescribed for atrial fibrillation, was interrupted. The patient’s family and personal history were negative for hematological diseases. Two months earlier, the patient had undergone an uneventful colonoscopy with polypectomy initiated because of melena. No coagulation tests were available from that time. Despite two surgical interventions, the bleeding into the calf persisted. Six days after initial admission, AHA was suspected, and the patient was transferred to our hospital.
The results of the patient’s laboratory evaluation revealed a prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT; 119 s; reference range 25.0–36.0 s), and FVIII:C of 2% in the presence of a high-titer FVIII inhibitor of 102 Bethesda units (BU)/ml confirmed the diagnosis of AHA. Additional diagnostic workup revealed an IgG kappa paraprotein of 9.2 g/L as well as a slightly reduced hemoglobin of 106 g/L. The patient’s albumin corrected serum calcium was 2.38 mmol/L, serum creatinine 103 μmol/L, β2-microglobulin 3.0 mg/L, lactate dehydrogenase 301 U/L, free light chains kappa 41.1 mg/L and lambda 10.9 mg/L, and free light chain ratio of 3.77. Magnetic resonance imaging excluded multiple myeloma defining focal bone lesions. A subsequent bone marrow biopsy showed infiltration of clonal plasma cells of 15% . Conventional cytogenetic analysis was not performed; however, microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization revealed hyperdiploidy with trisomy 3, 4, 5, 9, 11, and 21, whereas the result of fluorescence in situ hybridization was negative for MYC, IGH rearrangement, and 17p. Apart from a smoldering myeloma, no other diseases potentially underlying the AHA were identified.
Treatment with prednisolone (1 mg/kg body weight) and cyclophosphamide (150 mg/day) was started the day of presentation at our hospital. Because of imminent compartment syndrome and potential need of further surgical interventions, immunoadsorption was started according to the modified Bonn Malmö protocol to rapidly deplete the FVIII inhibitor. Altogether, we performed seven immunoadsorption sessions processing approximately two total patient plasma volumes per session over the next 13 days. Within 1 month, aPTT and FVIII:C had normalized, whereas the inhibitor titer had significantly decreased but was still detectable (1.04 BU/ml).
Insertion of a central venous catheter for immunoadsorption, as well as the bone marrow biopsy, were done under substitution with rFVIIa (NovoSeven; Novo Nordisk, Plainsboro, NJ, USA). One to three doses of 90 μg/kg body weight were applied. Wound healing at the calf was delayed, and due to skin necrosis, surgical revision became necessary. At that time, the patient’s aPTT had already normalized, and substitution with rFVIIa was not needed.
Lack of complete remission of AHA prompted us to initiate a VRD (bortezomib, lenalidomide, dexamethasone) regimen to treat the patient’s smoldering myeloma. After two cycles, the FVIII inhibitor had further declined to 0.31 BU/ml. The monoclonal immunoglobulin was still detectable by immune fixation but no longer quantifiable. Subsequently, treatment intensity was reduced to a VRD-lite regimen because of thrombocytopenia, mild polyneuropathy, and signs of congestive heart failure. During follow-up, no further bleeding occurred. After nine cycles of induction therapy and five cycles of consolidation therapy with the VRD-lite regimen, the patient is in complete remission of his AHA and in very good partial remission of his PCN .