A 14-year-old adolescent male presented to us with complaints of non-traumatic right hip pain and painful limp for 1 month. The onset was insidious and gradually progressed to a stage where he was unable to bear weight on the affected limb. He remained systemically well and afebrile. He had a high pitched voice and a body mass index of 28.67 kg/m2. The patient had a Tanner’s stage of 4 which was one level below the level appropriate for his age.
On examination, flexion, abduction, and internal rotation were restricted, with a 1 cm shortening on the right side. No local rise of temperature or skin discoloration was seen. Plain radiographs showed a discontinuity and a relative displacement suggestive of an SCFE . Sclerotic focus at the separation site raised a suspicion which was evaluated with a CT scan of the hip. This revealed a cleavage and cortical separation at the subcapital region with lysis and fragmentation at the head-neck junction . MRI on T2-weighted images showed joint effusion with fluid outpouchings in the intramuscular and intermuscular spaces along with edema in the proximal femur .
Since an infection was not suspected initially, on retrospective correlation with the blood parameters, we found that ESR was 54 mm/h, CRP was 10.2 mg/dL, and differential neutrophil count was 74%.
We decided to manage the patient in a staged manner with an interim debridement using Smith-Peterson approach. On capsulotomy, thick, yellow, and purulent fluid was drained. The femur head looked non-viable and was extracted . Samples were sent for culture, sensitivity, and microscopy.
Histopathological examination showed bony fragments surrounded by a dense inflammatory infiltrate comprising of lymphocytes and plasma cells. There was no evidence of fibrosis in the marrow. Cultures were positive for methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Mycobacterial cultures were proven to be negative. All barrier and nursing precautions were taken. The patient was initially treated with 3 weeks of intravenous linezolid and clindamycin followed by the same oral medications for 3 weeks, in line with local microbiological protocols.
At the end of 6 weeks, resolution of infection was seen clinically, which was further confirmed with laboratory investigations. Thereafter, the patient was definitively managed with a pelvic support osteotomy (PSO), where a proximal valgus osteotomy was supported by a dynamic compression plate (DCP) . After 6 weeks, a distal femur varus osteotomy was done using an LRS (limb reconstruction system) fixator over which distraction was done, to correct the axis alignment and limb length discrepancy (LLD) . On post-operative follow-up at 6 months, the patient had a painless full weight bearing walk using a shoe raise of 2 cm .
The LRS fixator was removed after 10 months and the patient was allowed to bear weight as tolerated. Radiographs at 1-year follow-up showed a satisfactory outcome with good healing . Clinically, the patient had an LLD of 2 cm, was completely pain free, and had a negative Trendelenburg sign at the final follow-up. The range of motion at the hip was almost similar to the contralateral hip.
A literature search was performed with PubMed search engine of the National Library of Medicine of the Institutes of Health (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed) using following combinations of keywords: “Slipped capital femoral epiphysis”; or “SCFE”; or “Slipped upper femoral epiphysis’” (SUFE); or ‘’SUFE” and “Subacute bacterial infection” or “Septic arthritis” or “Pediatric hip osteomyelitis”. Our search strategy was restricted to cases only involving a slip following septic arthritis or bacterial infection. We included only English-language publications with no date limitations .