A 36-year-old housewife who lived with her husband and 4 children in a small town, was admitted to the hospital because of a 6-month history of anorexia, 20-kg body weight loss, fatigue and malaise. A diagnosis of hyperthyroidism due to Graves' disease had been made 10 months earlier, on the basis of consistent clinical manifestations, elevated thyroid hormones, suppressed concentrations of TSH and positive thyroid peroxidase antibodies, and the patient had since been treated with methimazole. She had a history of idiopathic epilepsy treated with phenytoin since the age of 19 years. She was also treated with pantoprazole for dyspepsia and ferrous sulfate for iron deficiency anemia attributed to menstruations. There was no family history of autoimmune disease or cancer. None of her close contacts had been ill. She had smoked 20 cigarettes daily for 15 years, and did not consume alcohol or use illegal drugs. She had not travelled abroad recently.
On physical examination, the patient appeared chronically ill, weighed 38 kg, was 160 cm tall, with a body mass index of 14.8. Her temperature was 37.8°C, blood pressure 100/60 mmHg, and heart rate 100 bpm. The thyroid gland was diffusely enlarged, without palpable nodules, and was non-tender. The remainder of the examination was normal.
The most prominent laboratory abnormality was elevated serum liver enzymes, consistent with cholestasis, including alkaline phosphatase at 396 U/l (normal < 129 U/l) and γ-glutamyltransferase at 654 U/l (normal < 61 U/l). Serum bilirubin and aminotransferases were normal. Hemoglobin was 11.0 g/dl, white cell 8,500/mm3, with a normal differential count, platelets 438,000/mm3, mean corpuscular volume 79 μm3, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 125 mm/h, C-reactive protein, 25 mg/dl (normal < 0.5 mg/dl); serum ferritin 363 ng/ml, total serum protein 8.1 g/dl, and albumin 3 g/dl. A polyclonal gammopathy was observed on serum protein electrophoresis. The serum TSH concentration was < 0.004 μU/ml, while the serum free thyroxine and triiodothyronine concentrations were within the normal range. Immunologic investigations revealed the absence of rheumatoid factor and antinuclear, antineutrophil cytoplasmic and antimitochondrial antibodies. The urinalysis showed no hematuria or pyuria, blood and urine cultures were sterile, cytologic examination of the urine showed no malignant cells and the tuberculin skin test was negative.
On ultrasound of the abdomen a 7.8-cm in diameter solid mass was present in the mid portion of the left kidney. No other organ abnormality was observed. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan , obtained after oral and intravenous administration of contrast material, confirmed the results of ultrasonography, revealing a highly heterogenous renal mass, which contained multiple necrotic areas and zones of solid enhancement. The left renal vein and contralateral kidney were normal. There was no abdominal lymphadenopathy or liver metastasis. Distant metastases were absent on chest CT and radionuclide bone scans.
After the left kidney was surgically excised, a 6.8 × 6.5 × 5.7 cm tumour was found within the central parenchyma, which, on gross examination, dislodged but did not invade the renal pelvis and calyces. A Fuhrman nuclear grade 3 clear-cell, renal-cell carcinoma was present on histological examination, invading the pelvi-caliceal system, (though leaving intact the overlying urothelium), the renal capsule and the perirenal fat. The surgical margins were free of tumour. The patient made an uneventful postoperative recovery.
At 1 year of follow-up, the patient is afebrile and has regained weight. Her appetite has returned and she feels well. The serum concentrations of cholestatic liver enzymes have returned to normal.