A 69-year-old female patient who had a history of renal calculi and diabetes mellitus was admitted to the hospital because of a large right renal calculus found by urinary ultrasonographic examination.
The patient had no discomfort, and no positive signs were found on physical examination. The ultrasound showed that there was a large calculus in the right renal pelvis and multiple calculi in the left kidney, and both kidneys had hydronephrosis. The kidney-ureter-bladder radiograph (KUB) appearance supported the ultrasonographic findings. However, the core of the right renal calculus appeared to be radiolucent on plain films. The computed tomography urography (CTU) scan also suggested a calculus in the right pelvis with hydrops in the upper calyx of the kidney and left renal calculi with hydronephrosis . However, when we analysed the CTU images for the second time, we found that there was a low-density lesion in the calculus on the non-contrast-enhanced CTU sequence, which we thought was a foreign body or infection, so empirical anti-infection therapy was provided.
Then, PCNL was performed on the patient’s right renal pelvis calculus. We chose the posterior lower renal calyces for puncture and established the operation channel. No calculi were found in the renal pelvis or any calyces, but we could feel the calculus with the forceps under the mucosa of the renal pelvis, so we considered the calculus to be located in the diverticulum. Then, we removed the mucosa of the renal pelvis with a holmium laser until the calculus was observed. When cutting the surface of the calculus with a holmium laser, we observed a fluctuating unruptured aneurysm . Therefore, the previous diagnosis of a renal calculus was disregarded, and a calcified renal artery aneurysm was considered.
The operation was stopped immediately, and the patient was transferred to the endovascular treatment department. The haemoglobin re-examination results were normal after PCNL; then, computed tomography (CT) angiography was performed, confirming the right renal aneurysm with calcification . RAA coil embolization was performed under local anaesthesia on the 9th day after PCNL .
After more than 1 year of follow-up, the patient recovered well.