A 70-year-old Arabian woman presented to our hospital with a 6-month history of a right lumbago and weight loss. She had no personal or family history of tuberous sclerosis. Her physical examination revealed a mass occupying the right side of the lumbar region. Computed tomography (CT) was performed, which demonstrated a large heterogeneous mass measuring 12cm within the middle of the right kidney, with venous thrombosis and several lymph nodes of the renal pedicle and interaortocaval regions . The left kidney had no anomaly. It also showed the presence of four abdominopelvic cystic formations measuring between 3.3cm and 10.5cm, some of which were calcified . These radiological findings favored the diagnosis of malignant renal tumor associated with abdominopelvic hydatid cysts. Thus, the patient underwent a right nephroureterectomy and removal of abdominal and pelvic masses. A midline incision from the xiphoid process to the pubic symphysis was made. After detachment of the right colon and ligature of the right renal pedicle, a right nephrectomy was performed. Then, packing of the operative field with povidone-iodine-soaked sponges was used. Finally, dissection and resection of intraperitoneal abdominopelvic cysts were performed.
Gross examination revealed that the renal tumor was whitish and firm and measured 12x11x6 cm. It showed patchy areas of hemorrhage and necrosis. The tumoral capsule was focally ruptured, and the tumor infiltrated the renal hilum and pelvis . Histologically, it corresponded to a proliferation of large eosinophils cells, polygonal or ovoid, with epithelial appearance, associated with thickened-wall hyalinized vessels, fat cells and bundles of smooth muscle cells . Mitoses were estimated at 2 per 50 high-power fields. There was no nuclear anaplasia, vascular invasion or infiltration of perirenal fat. One lymph node was found at the renal hilum and was reactive. In immunohistochemical study, epithelioid tumor cells expressed melanocytic markers: S-100 protein and Melan-A . However, they were negative for anti-pancytokeratin. The diagnosis of malignant epithelioid AML was made. Gross examination of the abdominopelvic cysts showed hydatid membranes. Some of these cysts were calcified . Their wall was eosinophilic and lamellar, corresponding to the cuticular membrane of hydatid cysts . Thoracoabdominopelvic CT showed no distant metastasis of the renal tumor. The patient was lost to follow-up.