A 63-year-old man was transported to our hospital via an ambulance due to sudden onset of chest pain. He had untreated hypertension for the past 2 years. On arrival, he demonstrated pallor and incontinence of urine in the emergency department. He was in a cardiogenic shock state with a blood pressure of 90/40 mmHg and a heart rate of 60 beats/min. His ECG showed ST-segment elevation in the precordial (V2–6) and inferior leads (II, III, and aVF) and ST-segment depression in aVR . We attempted emergent CAG to evaluate his coronary artery. During the preparations for catheterization we performed following tests. His blood levels of cardiac enzymes were not elevated, although the troponin T level was within the normal range, and the white blood cell (WBC) count was slightly higher than normal . His UCG showed that the left ventricular apical level was akinetic, papillary muscle level was severely hypokinetic, and basal level was hyperkinetic, resembling TC. We treated with the intravenous administration of heparin (5000 units) as well as the oral administration of aspirin (200 mg) and clopidogel (300 mg) in the emergency room. And then he underwent an emergent CAG , which showed the total occlusion of the proximal right coronary artery (RCA) with a thrombus, severe stenosis in the distal circumflex, and the total occlusion of the proximal left ascending artery (LAD). These findings led to a diagnosis of AMI.
The culprit lesion was proximal RCA diagnosed from his CAG. We inserted an intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP), and he was intubated using mechanical ventilation. Then, we performed percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) of the proximal RCA. We aspirated the thrombus and implanted a coronary stent in the proximal RCA to provide TIMI-3 blood flow in the RCA. After stent implantation, his CAG showed that his right posterior lateral artery communicated with the diagonal branch and his right posterior descending artery communicated directly with the LAD , and his left ventricular angiogram showed like TC .
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit and then proper ST-segment resolution was achieved. He was weaned from the IABP and was extubated for 3 days after the procedure. No major complications occurred. On day 23, he was discharged from our hospital after elective PCI to the distal branches of RCA posterior lateral branch and atrio-ventricular branch .