A 64-year-old female patient with history of refractory hypertension, prediabetes, and chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage IIIa initially presented to our facility with substernal chest pressure. Upon undergoing exercise stress testing, she exhibited adequate tolerance capacity with unremarkable electrocardiographic (ECG) findings not concerning for ischemia. Concurrently while undergoing exercise stress testing, she suffered a fifth metatarsal fracture and was advised to follow-up in the outpatient setting with orthopedic surgery. She was discharged with a new prescription for metoprolol.
Upon returning home, the patient described three days of refractory nausea and vomiting prompting her to return to the hospital. Her vital signs on arrival were notable for 219/124 mmHg blood pressure, tachycardia with heart rate 117, tachypnea with respiratory rate of 28, SpO2 98% on room air, and afebrile. Physical exam findings on arrival revealed unremarkable ocular examination with pupils equal and reactive to light bilaterally and intact extraocular movements, no thyromegaly, tachycardia with an early-peaking 2/6 systolic ejection murmur best appreciated at the right upper sternal border with bounding peripheral pulses, chronic venous stasis changes, no flank tenderness, intact cranial nerves, and no rashes visualized. Given fluctuating, paroxysmal blood pressures along with continued nausea, the admitting clinician suspected sepsis and admitted the patient to a cardiac telemetry floor.
Less than a day into admission, she experienced sudden blurry vision and confusion prompting a non-contrast CT scan of her head; a subsequent CTA of the head and neck were also performed revealing ischemic penumbra in both posterior and occipital lobes; the carotids were unremarkable. Thereafter, her blurry vision worsened, and she attested to bilateral cortical blindness; she was taken for MRI of the brain showing bilateral subcortical white matter infarcts, left greater than right, and an acute left occipital cortical infarct in the watershed zone . Given concomitant AKI on CKD , she underwent bilateral renal ultrasound detailing what was read as a large right renal cyst. Coinciding with her deterioration hemodynamically and clinically, her hemoglobin continued to decrease, dropping from over 15 g/dL on admission to 9.6 g/dL within 72 h. The anemia was correlated with a peripheral blood smear revealing 3 + schistocytes consistent with her markedly elevated blood pressures presumed to be due to hypertensive thrombotic microangiopathy. Direct Coomb’s testing was performed and was negative, pointing likely to a hypertensive etiology. Her troponin, originally elevated at 0.35 ng/mL on arrival, peaked to 3.2 ng/mL, and she complained of waxing and waning chest pressure, at which point cardiology was consulted. The patient had been in the hospital less than a week prior undergoing coronary ischemic evaluation and underwent transthoracic echocardiogram revealing hyperdynamic ejection fraction of 70–75%, grade ¼ diastolic dysfunction, without significant valvular pathology or evidence of shunting. A repeat echocardiogram performed during the current admission which revealed no significant changes.
Given persistent nausea and vomiting, paroxysmal fluctuant pressure, severe headache now accompanied with bilateral vision loss, and overall decompensation, a CT scan of the abdomen was performed revealing a 66 mm mass in the right suprarenal fossa . Plasma metanephrines along with an MRI of the Abdomen were ordered, due to suspicion for underlying pheochromocytoma. The MRI confirmed the presence of a 6.7 cm cystic right-sided adrenal mass . Serum metanephrines, urine metanephrines, and urine VMA/HVA all revealed marked elevation . Beta-blockade therapy was immediately stopped, and phenoxybenzamine therapy was initiated, which promptly reduced the patient’s mean arterial pressure . The dose of phenoxybenzamine was titrated up until the patient reached a maximum dosage of 60 mg twice daily; during this process, general surgery was consulted, and the decision was made to allow for full alpha-blockade preoperatively, with a plan for tumor extirpation. Throughout this time, the patient was closely observed in the intensive care unit, occasionally requiring clevidipine infusion and nitroglycerin infusions to combat elevated blood pressures. Her admission calcium was found to be slightly elevated as well, prompting further evaluation for Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Syndrome Type 2A. This led to subsequent checking of calcitonin and intact parathyroid hormones, of which the former was within normal range, but the latter was elevated at 331.7 pg/mL. Revisiting her CTA of the neck, multiple small hypodense thyroid nodules were, thus a complete thyroid panel along with thyroid ultrasound were obtained. Thyroid ultrasound showed a mildly asymmetric thyroid gland with very small hypoechoic lesions seen bilaterally, with follow-up recommended in one year. The remainder of her stay until anticipated surgery was quite uneventful, and she noted marked clinical improvement while receiving phenoxybenzamine therapy. Other etiologies for adrenal masses were also excluded during this time through checking aldosterone and renin activity and conferring with cortisol levels showing marked elevation . Rheumatologic panel and urine protein electrophoresis were also performed, both of which yielded negative. Two days prior to procedure, an MIBG scintigraphy scan was conducted to ensure that presence of extra-adrenal paragangliomas was excluded, and a detailed visual of the tumor was mapped.
Finally, the anticipated day of surgery arrived, and our patient was taken to the operating room with an expected robotic-assisted laparoscopic adrenalectomy to be performed. Detailed pre-operative planning was conducted through the coordination of anesthesiology, surgery, medicine, and endocrinology collaboration. Pre-operative planning involved anticipated need for significant volume resuscitation throughout the procedure given sudden catecholamine loss leading to profound hypotension; this in junction with concomitant intravenous corticosteroids (100 mg hydrocortisone given intra-operatively) was planned. The patient was planned to return to the intensive care unit for vigilant post-operative monitoring. Given extent of tumor size and complex anatomical variation in our patient with proximity of mass to inferior vena cava, as well as the patient’s obesity, the planned minimally invasive procedure was converted to an open adrenalectomy. No post-operative complications occurred, and the tumor was sent for surgical pathology review . The slides were stained with chromogranin, synaptophysin, hematoxylin and eosin stain revealing evidence of adrenal origin and marked catecholamine presence. The remainder of the patient’s post-operative course unveiled gradual return of vision (though not fully returned at time of discharge), hemodynamic lability and cessation of all anti-hypertensive medications upon discharge to rehab facility, and resolution of hypertensive hemolytic anemia after tumor resection. We believe this to be the first reported case in the literature of pheochromocytoma manifesting with cortical blindness secondary to presumed PRES and thrombotic microangiopathy.