A 14-year-old boy was admitted to the outpatient clinic with ulnar-sided wrist pain following an acute injury after hitting the opponent during a boxing match four months prior to hospital admission. At the time of the injury, the wrist was suddenly locked and felt very painful. The patient went to the general practitioner and had the wrist treated conservatively with a brace. Although the acute pain and swelling had improved, the patient was still troubled with the pain associated with wrist rotation and weight lifting, particularly during his boxing activities. Moreover, there was a sense of instability, including weakness and a joint “clunk”.
On the physical examination, there was a bony prominence over the ulnar styloid and tenderness over the distal ulnar region and ulnar side of the wrist . The foveal sign and ulnar grinding tests were negative. The piano key sign and the intraoperative ballottement test revealed DRUJ instability with the most stable position in supination. The ECU synergy test was positive with pain elicited through the course of ECU on dorso-ulnar side of the wrist. The PL tendon was evident on physical examination. The plain radiograph suggested DRUJ subluxation ( and ) and the MRI revealed an absence of volar radio-ulnar ligament . There was also evidence of ECU sub-sheath injury .
The patient was diagnosed with chronic DRUJ injury associated with ECU tendinitis and underwent the reconstructive procedure. Surprisingly, during tendon harvesting, the PL tendon was anomalous. Initially, after the identification of the distal attachment, the tendon was difficult to obtain through small separate incisions. Thus, we extended the incision and found that the PL had two tendinous insertions into the palmar aponeurosis, with the point of bifurcation being 2.5 cm from the distal wrist crease. The lateral division lies superficially, has a 0.4 cm width, and is 0.5 cm shorter than the medial division. The medial division has a 0.6 cm width and lies between the flexor retinaculum and the transverse carpal ligament. The total length obtained from the harvesting was only 13 cm . We prepared the tendon for grafting with both divisions used and the Krakow sutures were applied on both ends.
We reconstructed the dorsal and volar RUL using PL tendon using the modification of Adams’ technique of DRUJ reconstruction. A dorso-ulnar incision was made over the DRUJ and the extensor retinaculum was opened to expose the 5th compartment. The extensor digiti minimi (EDM) tendon was retracted radially and an inverted L-shaped capsular incision was made to expose the DRUJ, with the smaller limb of the L-shaped being made just proximal to the triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC). The TFCC remnant was debrided to expose the fovea and make an interosseous tunnel from the fovea to the ulnar side of the ulnar styloid. The 4th dorsal compartment was elevated subperiosteally to reflect the dorsal margin of the sigmoid notch and lunate fossa of the distal radius. A 3.5 mm drill hole was made in the lunate fossa approximately 5 mm radial to the radial edge of DRUJ and 5 mm to the radio-carpal joint to avoid breaching the sigmoid notch .
Volarly, the radial tunnel was made on the ulnar column of distal radius approximately 0.5 cm radial to the sigmoid notch and 0.5 cm proximal to the radiocarpal joint. The bone was exposed through the PL harvesting incision by retracting the whole carpal tunnel content radially. After the graft preparation, the PL graft was passed through this radial tunnel with a suture retriever from dorsal to volar . The volar limb of the graft was passed back dorsally through the soft tissue tunnel from volar to dorsal DRUJ capsule .
Both limbs of the PL graft were then passed to the ulna interosseous tunnel with one end pulled longer than the other. A second ulnar tunnel was made proximally to pass the longer limb. Both limbs were fixed with Pulvertaft’s weave technique after appropriate graft tensioning in the neutral wrist and compressed DRUJ . The summary of the technique is illustrated in .
A Muenster anti-rotation splint was applied with the forearm in a neutral to slight supination position up to 6 weeks postoperative. Heavy lifting, boxing, and other strenuous exercises for the wrist are discouraged for the first 6 months after surgery. On the 3rd and 6th months follow-up, the wound healed uneventfully and the DRUJ remains stable in prono-supination movement and is pain-free.