A 2-year-old intact female orangutan from an open zoo in Bangkok was presented with bilateral opacity of the lenses, showing slow movement and bumping into objects during 2 weeks of observation. Ophthalmic examination revealed complete cataract OU. Menace response was negative, whereas dazzle reflex and pupillary light reflex were positive OU. The conjunctiva, cornea, anterior chamber, and iris were evaluated as normal using a slit lamp biomicroscope (Kowa SL-17 Portable Slit-lamp biomicroscope, Kowa Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan). Intraocular pressures which were measured using a rebound tonometer (Icare®TonoVet, Icare Finland Oy, Helsinki, Finland) were normal (25 mmHg OU). Fundic examination could not be carried out due to cloudiness in the lenses OU. Definitive diagnosis was mature cataracts OU . B-scan ocular ultrasonography (Logiq E9, GE Healthcare, WI) with topical 0.5% tetracaine hydrochloride (Alcon®, Alcon-Couvreur, Puurs, Belgium) revealed bilateral cataracts with no other ocular abnormalities . Physical examination, hematology, and blood chemistry results were within normal limits. Cataract surgery with phacoemulsification and IOL implantation were planned. A-scan biometry was planned before the surgical date to prepare the IOL. Electroretinography was planned to be carried out just before phacoemulsification and dark adaptation was skipped to decrease the anesthetic period.
An immersion ultrasound A-scan biometry (Axis II PR, Quantel Medical, France) was carried out to determine the axial length (AL) and the IOL dioptric power calculation . Anesthesia was carried out using intramuscular 2.5 mg/kg tiletamine–zolazepam (Zoletil, Virbac Laboratories, Carros, France), followed by topical anesthesia with 0.5% tetracaine hydrochloride (Alcon®, Alcon-Couvreur, Puurs, Belgium). The scleral immersion shell, which was filled with normal saline, was placed on the cornea and positioned parallel to the axis of the eye. The average ALs were 21.54 mm OD and 21.22 mm OS . The refractive powers of the IOLs were +25.48 diopter OD and +25.97 diopter OS and were calculated based on the SPK-2 formula . Since this orangutan was quite young, corneal flattening and increasing AL would be expected when growing up . The chosen IOL dioptric power was 20% subtraction from the calculated dioptric power from the SPK-2 formula to avoid the development of high myopia. Therefore, IOLs with +23.5 diopter OD and +24 diopter OS were prepared for this surgery.
Premedication was prescribed with topical 0.5% moxifloxacin hydrochloride (Vigamox®, Alcon Laboratories, Inc., Fort Worth, TX) and 1% prednisolone acetate (Inf-Oph, Seng Thai Company, Bangkok, Thailand) four times a day for 3 days before surgery. One percent topical tropicamine (Mydriacyl®, Alcon-Couvreur, Puurs, Belgium) was applied every 30 minutes for 2 hours before surgery. Intramuscular 1 mg/kg ketamine hydrochloride (Ketamine-Hameln, Siegfried Hameln GmbH, Hameln, Germany), 0.03 mg/kg midazolam (Midazolam Sandoz®, EVER Pharma Jena GmbH, Jena, Germany), and 0.01 mg/kg atropine sulfate (Atropine, Atlantic Lab, Bangkok, Thailand) were used as pre-anesthesia. 0.7 mg/kg propofol (TroypofolTM, Troikaa Pharmaceuticals, Uttarakhand, India) was administered intravenously as an anesthetic induction. A 0.5 cm endotracheal tube (Tuoren, Henan Tuoren Medical Device, Henan, China) was intubated. Anesthesia was maintained with 2% isoflurane (AttaneTM, Piramal Critical Care, Inc., PA) inhalation. Intravenous acetar solution (R-CETATE, General Hospital Products Public Co., Ltd., Pathum Thani, Thailand) was administered during the anesthetic period. Local anesthesia at four sites of the peribulbar area with 4 mg lidocaine hydrochloride (Locana, L.B.S. Laboratory, Bangkok, Thailand) was injected to stabilize the eyeball .
Electroretinography was carried out to access the retinal function using Handheld Multispecies electroretinography (HMsERG model 2000, Ocuscience LLC, MO) just before surgery. Dark adaptation was skipped to reduce the anesthetic period. A contact lens monopolar electrode (ERG-jet®, Fabrinal SA, LaChaux-de-Fonda, Switzerland) was placed on the corneal surface and contained a drop of sterile ophthalmic gel-carbomer (Lacryvisc®, Alcon®, Alcon-Couvreur, Puurs, Belgium). Two platinum subdermal needle electrodes (ViasysTM Healthcare, Neurocare group, Madison, WI) were placed at the occiput and at 3 cm from the eyelid margin rostral to the base of the ear to be used as a reference and ground electrodes, respectively. The result of the electroretinography based on the QuickRetCheck protocol is shown in and . At standard light intensity (3,000 mcd.s/m2) stimulation, the a-wave amplitudes were 101.3 μv OD and 113.2 μv OS and the implicit times were 18.8 mseconds OD and 18.6 mseconds OS. The b-wave amplitudes were 305.2 μv OD and 442.1 μv OS and the implicit times were 42.0 mseconds OD and 43.6 mseconds OS.
Standard surgical preparation was carried out by eyelash clipping and conjunctival flushing with 1:50 povidone–iodine solution diluted. Intramuscular enrofloxacin (Baytril®, Bayer Korea Ltd., Ansan, Korea) 2.5 mg/kg and intravenous 0.2 mg/kg flunixin meglumine (Finadyne®, Schering-Plough Sante Animale, Segre, France) were administered. An incision site was made at 11 o’clock of the limbus using a 3.0 mm Slit Knife (SharpointTM, Surgical Specialties Corporation, Tijuana, C.P., Mexico). Intracameral administration of 0.1 ml of 0.1% trypan blue for the anterior lens capsule staining was carried out. The anterior chamber was filled with 2% sodium hyaluronate (Viscovet, AJL Ophthalmic, S.A., Álava, Spain) to stabilize the anterior chamber and protect the corneal endothelium. The anterior lens capsule was incised with a 25 g hypodermic needle and continuous capsulorhexis was conducted using Utrata capsulorhexis forceps. The anterior lens capsule was apparently soft and thin. Phacoemulsification using a one-handed technique was carried out in a phacoemulsification unit (Accurus, Alcon® Surgical, Keller, TX) at 70% phaco power. The lens material was soft. An IOL was not implanted OS due to posterior capsular rupture (1 mm diameter). An anterior vitrectomy was carried out OS. Cortical lens materials were completely removed using an I/A probe. Sodium hyaluronate was then aspirated from the anterior chamber and capsular bag. The surgical wound was sutured using a simple, interrupted pattern with 9/0 polyglycolic acid suture material (PGA, FSSB Chirurgischenadeln GMBH, Jestetten, Germany). The balanced salt solution was injected to reform the anterior chamber. The same procedure was carried out in the contralateral eye, except an IOL (CT ASPHINA 509MP +23.5 diopter, Carl Zeiss, Dublin, CA) was inserted via a lens inserter (BLUEMIXSTM 180 injector, Carl Zeiss, Dublin, CA) OD . The orangutan recovered from anesthesia uneventfully. Postoperative management with topical 0.5% moxifloxacin hydrochloride and 1% prednisolone acetate four times a day was administered for 3 weeks.
One day after surgery, the vision of the orangutan was restored. The orangutan could precisely catch the fruit that was thrown to her and quickly escaped all the obstacles to reach her caretaker. Neuroophthalmic tests (menace response, dazzle reflex, and pupillary light reflex) were positive OU. The IOP was 17 mmHg OD and 20 mmHg OS. Intramuscular prednisolone acetate 0.25 mg/kg (Prednisolone, T.P. drug Laboratories, Bangkok, Thailand) and 20 mg/kg amoxycillin–clavulonic acid (Synulox®, Haupt PharmaS.r.l, Latina, Italy) were prescribed for 1 week. The orangutan showed no adverse behavior to disturb the surgical wounds and consequently, an Elizabethan collar, eye patch, or other eye protection was unnecessary.
One week postoperatively, the presence of fibrin on the anterior lens capsule OD was found. Intramuscular prednisolone acetate 0.125 mg/kg was administered for 1 week. At 3 weeks postoperatively, no trace of fibrin was found in either of the eyes . All ocular media remained clear. Topical 1% prednisolone acetate three times a day was administered for 2 more weeks and reduced to twice a day for 1 month before all medications were discontinued. Retinoscopy revealed hyperopia of +2.0 diopters OD. One month postoperatively, the orangutan was alert and exhibiting normal behavior such as grasping food or swinging hand over hand from one branch to another. The orangutan had a steady functional vision and all ocular media remained clear at 3 years follow-up. Postoperative complication presented as mild uveitis only for the first week after surgery.