A 70-year-old male patient with a previous history of multiple sclerosis, previously successfully resected colon cancer 10 years earlier and late-onset asthma (age of 62 years) presented with retrosternal chest pain, small troponin rise, and without ECG changes. Physical examination revealed no abnormalities of the cardiovascular and respiratory system. Echocardiography showed normal left ventricular function with no regional wall motion abnormality and no valvular disease. A diagnosis of non-ST elevation myocardial infarction was made, and diagnostic coronary angiography showed a smooth stenosis in the right coronary artery (RCA) and unobstructed left coronary artery (, Videos S1 and S2). He was listed for angioplasty to the RCA but upon reimaging, the RCA looked smooth and unobstructed. However, the mid-circumflex artery now had a smooth stenosis which resolved with administration of intracoronary isosorbide dinitrate (, Videos S3 and S4). A diagnosis of coronary artery spasm was made, and the patient was treated with aspirin and he was started on oral isosorbide mononitrate. A month later he was admitted with anterior ST-segment elevation which completely resolved with administration of sublingual glyceryl trinitrate in the emergency room. The chest pains continued intermittently at rest and diltiazem and nicorandil were added in stepwise fashion to try and settle ongoing symptoms. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging revealed small areas of myocardial infarction in both the RCA and the LAD territories. Due to concern over possible ongoing infarction due to spasm, clopidogrel 75 mg o.d. was added and continued long-term. Over the next 18 months, the patient remained stable, with minimal symptoms and no changes on serial CMR scans at 6 monthly intervals. He was continued on maximal antianginal therapy, dual antiplatelet therapy, and advised to avoid beta-blockers and phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors.
He subsequently represented with further episodes of atypical chest pain at rest, unresponsive to glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) and associated marked troponin rise (troponin I > 400 ng/L [normal range <16 ng/L]), that fluctuated over a couple of months with no correlation with symptoms or any ECG changes. Full blood count was normal apart from raised eosinophils (4.3 × 109/L [normal range 0.02–0.5 × 109/L]) with normal renal and liver function tests. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was normal (<5 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (CRP) 5.7 mg/L. Over the next few weeks, CRP rose to 28 and troponin fluctuated, albeit markedly elevated, with no correlation with symptoms. Coronary anatomy was revisited with a CT coronary angiography which showed a calcium score of 202 with no obstructive lesions.
Repeat CMR revealed normal right and left ventricular volumes and function. In the late gadolinium phase, there were two separate regions of infarction. There was infarction in the inferior/inferoseptal wall from the basal to apical level. This was predominantly transmural (>50%) in the inferior and inferoseptal wall at the basal to mid-level. There was some new extension into the basal inferolateral wall not seen on the previous scan that was also transmural. Separately, there was localized infarction (>50% transmurality) in the basal anterior wall.
Given the presence of eosinophilia, recurrent episodic myocardial infarction and the lack of correlation between the extent of epicardial coronary disease and CMR findings, combined with the suspicious history of late-onset asthma, a diagnosis of Churg–Strauss syndrome was postulated. The patient was treated with prednisolone 30 mg o.d. and azathioprine 50 mg t.d.s. Following immunosuppressive therapy, the chest pains resolved with corresponding normalization of eosinophil and troponin levels. antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) levels checked in the non-acute phase was normal with myeloperoxidase (MPO) <0.3 (normal range < 3.5 IU/mL) and PR3 < 0.7 (normal range < 2.0 IU/mL). Nine months after treatment began, his medication has been gradually weaned to prednisolone 5 mg o.d. and azathioprine 50 mg o.d. with a plan for slow ongoing tapering of both.