A 48-year-old homeless male presented to the ED with left-eye vision loss and pain. The patient described the gradual onset of these symptoms over three weeks, causing him to stop wearing his contact lenses two weeks prior to presentation. The patient endorsed a similar problem in the past that resolved with the use of eye drops. He also noted that the center of his eye had begun to appear white. The patient denied fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, and headache. Upon initial evaluation, the patient demonstrated 20/25 vision bilaterally, 20/30 vision in his right eye, and only finger counting at approximately two feet in his left eye. Extraocular movements were intact; intraocular pressures were 13 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) in the right and 24 mm Hg in the left (reference range 10–21 mm Hg). Bilateral pupils were reactive to light without afferent pupillary defect. By visual examination, the patient demonstrated prominent conjunctival injection, a 4 mm × 4 mm round corneal ulcer in the three o’clock position of the cornea, and a hypopyon covering one third of the anterior chamber with a line of sediment covering one half the anterior chamber (reaching a height of five mm). On fluorescein staining, the corneal ulcer appeared yellow without any other dye uptake or Seidel sign .
Computed tomography (CT) of the orbits demonstrated asymmetric decrease in volume and enhancement along the left anterior chamber, without evidence of posterior inflammation or retrobulbar abscess. Ophthalmology was consulted but could not attain a dilated retinal exam on the left due to overlying anterior chamber opacity. B-scan ultrasound was performed without evidence of endophthalmitis. Ophthalmology collected corneal cultures, and the patient was admitted for monitoring and administering topical vancomycin, tobramycin, and atropine drops. Unfortunately, the patient left against medical advice (AMA) two days later; he stated that this choice was due to difficulty with his insurance. The corneal culture collected on admission ultimately grew Staphylococcus epidermidis with resistance to clindamycin and erythromycin.
The patient returned five days later due to concern for worsening symptoms. He reported good compliance to his vancomycin drops six times per day and tobramycin drops twice daily. He demonstrated 20/20 vision in his right eye but only hand motions with light perception in his left eye, which was worse than his first exam. Extraocular movements remained intact. Pupils were reactive to light bilaterally without afferent pupillary defect. Visual examination yielded continued conjunctival injection, enlarged 6 mm x 4 mm round corneal ulcer at three o’clock, and similar hypopyon covering one third to one half of the anterior chamber .
Ophthalmology was consulted, and corneal cultures were re-collected. He was admitted for continued vancomycin, tobramycin, and atropine drops. Repeat corneal cultures grew Cutibacterium acnes and Psychrobacter faecalis/pulmonis. The patient remained inpatient for six days with improved sight and pain control. At this point, he was noted to show a reduction in the size of the hypopyon and severity of the ulcer .
He was then discharged to continue vancomycin and atropine drops for one week and follow up with ophthalmology. Unfortunately, the patient returned to the ED six days after discharge reporting that his medications had been stolen from him; he was provided with refills and discharged from the ED.