A 68-year-old female with a known history of diverticulosis, hypercholesterolemia, and hypothyroidism presented to our emergency department (ED) complaining of three days of worsening abdominal pain. The pain was severe in the lower quadrants and more so in the left lower quadrant. Review of systems was notable for fever, chills, and diarrhea. She denied any associated nausea or vomiting. In a past exacerbation of her diverticulosis she had experienced lower gastrointestinal bleeding. Her last colonoscopy had been performed three years prior to date of presentation and showed diverticula. Current medications included aspirin, levothyroxine, atorvastatin, and ramipril. On physical exam, the abdomen was diffusely tender and distended with guarding. There were no other pertinent findings. Initial ED vital signs were within normal limits, with the exception of an elevated oral temperature that ranged between 99.0–102.9° Fahrenheit throughout the ED course.
Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with iodinated intravenous contrast demonstrated a perforated diverticulum in the sigmoid colon and showed local extraluminal air. On admission, laboratory results revealed mild leukocytosis (11,500/microliters [uL]) (reference range 4,000–11,000/uL) with increased neutrophils (9,400/uL) (2,500–6,000/uL). There were also trace leukocyte esterase and 5–10 white blood cells per high-power field found in urinalysis. The patient was admitted to the surgical service for observation and initially treated with piperacillin/tazobactam.
While inpatient, the patient’s clinical condition deteriorated resulting in fluid-refractory tachycardia and hypotension. She was intubated and taken to the operating room for surgical resection of the perforated bowel under general anesthesia, and a successful Hartman procedure was performed with minimal blood loss. Postoperatively, the patient was maintained on norepinephrine for hemodynamic support as well as fentanyl, midazolam, and propofol for post-intubation sedation. During her postoperative recovery, the patient failed to return to her baseline normal mental status, becoming increasingly agitated, delirious, and uncooperative. Soft physical restraints were maintained on both wrists.
A CT head without contrast was performed on postoperative day 7 to investigate persistent mental status changes and visual deficits. Multiple hypodensities in the white matter of the posterior parietal and occipital lobes were identified .
The next day, MRI brain without contrast demonstrated bilateral and symmetric T2-weighted signal hyperintensities confined to the white matter of the posterior cerebral cortex and cerebellum .
The symmetrical nature of the abnormality and its confinement to the posterior cortex made it highly suspicious for PRES. Following the MRI, a 24-hour video electroencephalogram study was performed, which showed moderate diffuse cortical dysfunction and background slowing. The patient continued to receive supportive measures over several days and was discharged on postoperative day 21 with no residual neurologic deficits.