A 35-year-old Caucasian Greek woman, at the 17th week of her sixth pregnancy, was referred by her treating cardiologist to the Cardiology Outpatient Clinic due to enlargement of a known, chronic, presumably idiopathic, moderate, asymptomatic pericardial effusion (maximal diameter 17 mm at the inferolateral wall at end-diastole), diagnosed 5 years previously, at a routine check-up assessment, in February 2022. The patient had a history of OAPS complicated by five miscarriages, androgenetic alopecia, and Hashimoto thyroiditis. She denied any tobacco, alcohol, or illicit drug use. Her family history was not significant for thrombotic or haemorrhagic events, but her mother was diagnosed in her 30s with a chronic, idiopathic, asymptomatic pericardial effusion (maximal diameter 18 mm) that remains stable without treatment, and her mother’s sister was diagnosed in her forties with a chronic, idiopathic pericardial effusion that evolved to tamponade and needed an emergent pericardiocentesis, without relapse, pointing probably a familial predisposition. She received folic acid 5 mg, levothyroxine 75 mg, aspirin 100 mg (while trying to conceive), and a prophylactic dose of tinzaparin 4500 IU s.c. once daily (since the beginning of pregnancy), as recommended for OAPS. She had also received vitamin D3 and small doses of methylprednisolone during the first 8 weeks of gestation by her haematologist for OAPS.
At presentation, she had mild dyspnoea on exertion. Vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 120/70 mmHg, heart rate 65 b.p.m. and regular, respiratory rate 15 breaths per minute, and temperature 36.7°C. Physical examination was normal, except for mild ankle oedema. Her electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with low QRS voltages in all leads. The transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a normal left ventricular ejection fraction of 55%, a very large pericardial effusion (maximal diameter 42 mm at the inferolateral wall and 26 mm in the space adjacent to the right ventricle), and a dilated inferior vena cava with reduced inspiratory decrease . There were no signs of tamponade, e.g. swinging heart, transmitral early diastolic filling velocity respiratory variation, or diastolic collapse of the right chambers.
The patient was admitted for haemodynamic monitoring. A complete laboratory work-up revealed elevated anti-cardiolipin antibodies, while all other laboratory investigations were normal, including C-reactive protein levels, corrected for pregnancy, excluding therefore additional triggers (like infections or polyserositis) that may have contributed to the increase of the pericardial effusion.
A multidisciplinary team, consisting of the treating obstetrician–gynaecologist, haematologist, cardiothoracic surgeon, and cardiologist, was assembled to discuss the management, focusing on the following parameters: (i) the large size of the pericardial effusion; (ii) the significant increase compared with before pregnancy; (iii) the expected further increase, especially during the third trimester; (iv) the need for continuation of the antiplatelet and antithrombotic treatment, which increased the haemorrhagic risk; and (v) the difficulty and risk to intervene, with pericardiocentesis or surgery, later in pregnancy. Taken these into account, the team recommended performing a surgical pericardial window during this hospitalization, for reasons exposed in detail in the discussion, instead of pericardiocentesis or watchful waiting. This was explained in detail to the patient and family who agreed with the recommendation. The patient gave her consent, and the intervention was scheduled for the next day, without aspirin discontinuation, under general anaesthesia. A subxiphoid surgical pericardial window and drainage was successively performed; ∼800 mL of transudative, sterile, without any malignant cells, pericardial fluid was removed.
Following the operation, the patient was stable and well. The day after there was no leg oedema, a chest X-ray with abdominal shield showed clear lung fields and no overt sign of pericardial effusion . Subsequently, she was discharged from the hospital. She remained stable and had an uneventful delivery on August 2022.