A 2-month-old boy was admitted to our hospital due to persistent feeding difficulties, poor weight gain and weak crying for 2 mo.
The patient was the second child of his mother and was born via spontaneous vaginal delivery. The gestational age was 34 wk. Apgar score was 10 points. There were no abnormalities in the placenta and umbilical cord except for oligohydramnios (100 mL). At birth, the infant had the following birth parameters: 31.5 cm head circumference, 2.5 kg body weight, and 46 cm length, placing him in the 25–50th percentile in Chinese newborns. Ten minutes later, he was immediately admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit because of transient respiratory difficulty, and was diagnosed with neonatal hypoglycemia and congenital anal atresia. He was thereafter treated with respiratory support, glucose rehydration, and surgical correction of the anal atresia. Three weeks later, he was discharged from the hospital except feeding difficulty and poor weight gain.
The patient was the second child of Chinese parents who were healthy and non-consanguineous. He was born at 34 weeks’ gestation from a healthy 32-year-old woman via spontaneous vaginal delivery. Prenatal ultrasound imaging showed that the mother had reduced amniotic fluid level since 32 weeks’ gestation and the amniotic fluid index was 7.0 cm. The ultrasound imaging also suggested mild hydronephrosis with dilatation of the upper ureteral diameter (0.6 cm) on the right kidney. There were no other abnormalities identified. The mother had irregular vaginal bleeding 8 h before delivery. His mother did not suffer from fever or use tobacco, alcohol, or illicit drugs during the entire pregnancy.
The infant was born at 34 weeks’ gestation from a healthy 32-year-old woman via spontaneous vaginal delivery and the father was aged 34 years. The parents were healthy and unrelated. The infant had a healthy 4-year-old brother. Family history was unremarkable.
He had severe malnutrition and poor skin elasticity with stable vital signs, but his growth and development level was below the normal range with the 3rd centiles, e.g., his height was 50.0 cm, weight 3.05 kg and head circumference 35.0 cm, and according to the WHO (2006) child growth standards, he was indicated as having postnatal onset of growth retardation. He also had distinctive body features, namely a long palpebral fissure, arched eyebrow, lateral sparse of the eyebrow, long eyelashes, and high-arched palate, but short nasal columella with a broad and depressed nasal tip . His palms had a simian crease. He also showed weak crying, muscle hypotonia, and motor delay and could not lift his head and accomplish a test of audio and visual tracking.
Routine blood analyses revealed mild anemia (hemoglobin, 98 g/L), blood sugar level was low (2.31 mmol/L; normal range, 3.9–6.1 mmol/L) and his blood ammonia level was high (76 μmol/L; normal range, < 60 μmol/L). The level of insulin-like growth factor 1 was low (< 25 ng/mL) and growth hormone (GH) level was in the normal range. Liver, kidney and thyroid functions and electrolyte level were normal. Laboratory tests of urine and blood samples did not show any amino acid or aliphatic acid metabolic disorders. Furthermore, his chromosome count was normal (46, XY).
Cardiac ultrasound revealed patent foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus, and urological ultrasound indicated mild hydronephrosis and dilatation in the right kidney. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed corpus callosum hypoplasia, enlarged ventricles, and white matter dysplasia. Chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound showed no apparent abnormality. Ophthalmological examination revealed hypoplasia of the optic nerve and retina with hearing loss in both ears .
As this infant showed peculiar facial features, multisystem anomalies, persistent feeding difficulties, hypoglycemia, and serious postnatal growth deficiency, KS diagnosis was indicated. Thus, the venous blood samples from both patient and parents were collected for whole-exome sequencing to confirm the diagnosis. Data from the infant’s sample showed a novel KDM6A frameshift mutation (c.704_705delAG, p. N236Sfs*26) (GRCh37/hg19), whereas blood samples from his parents showed no abnormality .