An 89-year-old man presented to the Gastroenterology Department of our hospital complaining of vomiting for 4 d.
The patient developed vomiting 4 d ago after eating milk and fruits, which appeared as projectile vomiting with epigastric distension. He did not have obvious abdominal pain. He reported having had neither bowel movements nor flatus.
The patient had a history of gallstones for 10 years with intermittent right upper quadrant pain that was treated conservatively. He also had a history of hypertension and diabetes. About 50 years ago, he had a history of pulmonary tuberculosis and schistosomiasis.
The patient had a history of moderate drinking but no smoking. He denied a history of allergies and had an unremarkable family history.
The patient’s temperature was 36.2 °C, heart rate was 77 beats per min, respiratory rate was 20 breaths per min, and blood pressure was 137/74 mmHg. Abdominal examination showed slight abdominal tenderness in the epigastric abdomen without rebound tenderness. Abdominal auscultation showed hyperactive bowel sounds in the right abdomen. Lung and heart examinations were normal.
After admission, blood analysis showed normal findings for routine blood examination, liver and renal function, coagulation function, troponin, and procalcitonin. High-sensitivity C-reactive protein was increased (26.1 mg/L; normal range: < 1 mg/L).
Abdominal contrast computed tomography (CT) showed a normal shape of the liver with dilatation of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic ducts. Pneumatosis was observed in the gallbladder, and the gallbladder communicated with the duodenal bulb . A stone was shown in the upper jejunum with proximal intestinal effusion and dilatation . CT showed cholecystoduodenal fistula and upper jejunum obstruction due to a gallstone. Cholecystitis and pneumobilia were also observed. This combination of radiologic findings of an ectopic gallstone, small bowel obstruction, and pneumobilia is known as Rigler’s triad and aroused concern about gallstone ileus. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed short T2 signal as long as 25 mm in the upper jejunum with proximal intestinal dilatation and cholecystoduodenal fistula .