A 41-year-old Japanese man with depression complained of nighttime eating. The patient could not remember these events the next morning. He has been obese for 20 years. He had no history of sleep apnea, restless leg syndrome, somnambulism, or eating disorders and no symptoms similar to binge eating or night eating. He had no family history of any sleep-related disorders. He had developed depression and insomnia because of stress after 5 months on a new job, and he visited our clinic 2 months later. He was not receiving any medication and did not take herbal medicine or supplements. He did not have suicidal thoughts or self-harm behavior. During his first visit, a physical examination revealed that his height was 167 cm, body weight was 90 kg, and body mass index (BMI) was 32.2 kg/m2. His laboratory test results revealed slight liver damage and hyperlipidemia, with a serum alanine aminotransferase level of 52 U/L (normal range, 10–42 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase level of 35 U/L (normal range, 13–30 U/L), and triglyceride level of 277 mg/dl (normal range, 40–150 mg/dl). His Self-Rating Depression Scale score was 62 (normal range, 27–47; range of values, 20–80) .
The patient was diagnosed with depression and obesity. Along with supportive psychotherapy, he began sertraline treatment prior to sleep; his dose was titrated up to 100 mg (Japanese full dose) over 4 weeks. In addition, he received the sleep inducers zolpidem and flunitrazepam, and the anxiolytic clotiazepam. His depressive mood slightly improved, but it continued for an additional 4 months despite resolution of insomnia. Subsequently, 3 mg of aripiprazole was added as an adjunctive therapy. His depressive mood immediately improved, and his appetite increased. The patient reported enjoying driving and cleaning up his room, but felt fatigued the next morning. Three weeks after the initiation of aripiprazole treatment, the patient’s mother found that the patient woke up and ate food from the refrigerator during the night. The patient did not respond to the mother during this episode. The patient did not remember this event, felt full, and wondered why the bags of food were empty the next morning. He did not consume any improper substances such as raw, frozen, or spoiled food. This episode lasted for 2 days. During the 3 weeks after aripiprazole treatment, the patient gained 5 kg. The patient acknowledged that he remembered urinating at night only once before starting aripiprazole. Re-examination of laboratory results revealed that the patient’s serum glucose, cortisol, and thyroid hormone levels were normal. He was advised to reduce his aripiprazole and zolpidem doses. However, he continued to use the same zolpidem dose because his insomnia returned after a dose reduction.
After aripiprazole was reduced to 1.5 mg, the patient’s nocturnal eating episodes rapidly and completely disappeared. However, amnesia of nocturnal urination occurred three times during the next 6 months. This amnesia of nocturnal urination disappeared after zolpidem was replaced with triazolam. The patient’s depressive mood continued to improve, and his body weight remained at 94 kg . He did not exhibit any psychotic features during his entire treatment.