A 51-year-old male presented to our institution for pain in the right hip irradiating to the lower limb. The pain was persisting at rest, and sometimes worsened with movement, especially during the last 6 months before admission. He is a known smoker but did not report any chronic diseases. The patient reported a history of trauma to the lumbar spinal region secondary to a fall, three years ago treated medically. Physical examination was unremarkable and excluded any neurologic deficit that could account for his pain.
MRI of the pelvic bones showed a diffuse fleshy intraosseous lesion involving the entire right iliac bone extending from the iliac crest to the superior ramus and ischial ramus and the entire right acetabulum. This lesion appeared to extend into the adjacent soft tissues, mainly in the iliopsoas and obturator muscles . A suspicious pathologic fissure was noted in the ischial ramus. The right sacral bone showed features of edema. The MRI findings were suggestive of lymphoma or metastasis. A primary bone tumor could however not be excluded. CT scan, performed 3 days after the MRI, showed extensive lytic lesion, affecting the entire right iliac and ischial bones, with destruction of bone cortices and the presence of some normal bony streaks. This lesion was spontaneously hyperdense (130 UH). There was also diffuse bone enlargement without the coarsened trabecular pattern usually found in Paget disease . Biochemical blood tests revealed low phosphorus concentration (2,3 mg/dL, normal values 2,5–5 mg/dL) and high calcium concentration (11.3 mg/dL, normal values 8,4–10,5 mg/dL). These findings were deemed secondary to the bone tumor. A bone biopsy was performed under CT scan guidance, several cores were sampled and sent for culture and histopathologic examination. Culture returned negative results, ruling out the possibility of infection. Histopathologic evaluation showed remodeled and newly formed trabecula of cancellous bone separated by a cellular fibrovascular, edematous tissue containing several osteoclasts . Characteristically the osteoclasts were tunneling into bone trabeculae forming Howship’s lacunae . There was no evidence of malignancy in the biopsy sample. The histopathologic findings were suggestive of OFC associated with hyperparathyroidism. PTH dosage was subsequently performed, showing high blood level (389.6 pg/ml, normal values 10–69 pg/ml). Cervical ultrasound revealed a 52 × 22 mm mixed solid and cystic nodule in the left inferior posterior pole of the thyroid gland, consistent with a parathyroid cystic adenoma.
After parathyroidectomy, the patient no longer complained from bone pain and imaging performed few months later showed significant improvement, with reduction of the bone lesion dimensions and complete reconstruction of bone cortices .