A 62-year-old man presented in the emergency department complaining of a recent deterioration of general condition with the appearance of a painless progressive abdominal gangrene without any obstructive lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS). On medical history, he was diagnosed two months before with a bladder tumour. The patient did not consult because of the Covid-19 pandemic. No history of any trauma or urethral instrumentation was found. On examination, he had a bad general condition and was dehydrated with a blood pressure of 120/75 mm Hg. On abdominal inspection, we noticed a painless large necrotic lesion spread over the anterior wall of the abdomen under the umbilicus with a smell of urine (, ). On palpation, there was a renitent mass in the hypogastrium. There were no features suggestive of peritonitis. A urethral catheterization by a Foley catheter failed due probably to anterior urethral stenosis. Basic investigation on admission reported high creatinine levels at 513 umol/l with no electrolytic disorders. Complete blood count showed a decreased haemoglobin level at 6.6 g/dl with thrombocytopenia at 96,000 cmm. A contrast-enhanced abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) was then performed and revealed the presence of a large tumour of the posterior wall of the bladder with bilateral ureteropelvic dilatation, the bladder was distended and perforated on its anterior wall with an extraperitoneal urinoma 10 × 12 cm evoking an extraperitoneal urinary bladder rupture. There was no peritoneal effusion . The established diagnosis was abdominal gangrene secondary to an extraperitoneal rupture of the urinary bladder. Our attitude was to put a catheter to relieve the urinoma and a suprapubic catheter to drain urine from the bladder and to begin empiric antibiotic therapy. Bilateral nephrostomies were set in order to improve creatinine levels. The patient remained afebrile and stable. After a rapid optimization of the patient’s condition, we carried out excision of all necrotic tissue, we found a 2-cm defect in the anterior bladder wall which was used to perform a biopsy from the tumour (, ). The procedure was performed by a urologist and a plastic surgeon with a 20-year experience in gangrene surgery. A cystectomy was difficult to achieve because of the patient’s general condition which did not permit to perform such a surgery. The patient did well without complications postoperatively. After normalization of creatinine levels, a body-CT-scan was performed 12 days after drainage and 3 days postoperatively, it has demonstrated total resolution of the urinoma and showed no metastases. The patient was discharged home on the fifteenth day. Pathologic examination of the biopsy concluded to a massive transitional cell carcinoma with minimal micropapillary differentiation, it did not allow to stage the tumour due to the quality of the pathologic material. In the multidisciplinary consultation meeting, we opted for palliative management by transurethral resection of the bladder tumour (TURB) considering that the tumour is locally advanced and curative cystectomy could not be performed, then palliative chemotherapy should be discussed depending on the course of the disease and the patient's condition.