A 31-year-old woman was admitted to hospital with a 2-mo history of worsening palpitation and chest distress.
The patient had experienced the symptoms of palpitation and chest distress 20 years prior but reported their recurrence, with greater intensity, over the past 2 mo.
Two years prior, the patient had been hospitalized due to massive postpartum hemorrhage and dyspnea, lasting for 1 d. Physical examination revealed grade 3/6 diastolic murmur in the aortic valve auscultation area, and laboratory examination showed an increased blood D-dimer level (3.39 mg/L; normal range: 0-0.256 mg/L). Conventional echocardiography, at that time, revealed enlargement of the right heart, thickening of the right ventricular wall, obvious broadening of the pulmonary artery, shortening of the pulmonary artery systolic blood flow acceleration time, pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary artery systolic pressure, pulmonary artery diastolic pressure, and mean pulmonary artery pressure were 81 mmHg, 24 mmHg, and 43 mmHg, respectively), and moderate insufficiency and mild stenosis of the aortic valve . Meanwhile, computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed embolism in a branch of the pulmonary artery, evidenced by a filling defect in the superior lobe of the right lung and the lingual lobe of the left lung . The patient was discharged after successful thrombolytic treatment.
The patient had no previous or family history of similar illnesses.
Physical examination at admission for the current complaints found grade 3/6 diastolic murmur in the aortic valve auscultation area.
Blood analysis showed a normal blood D-dimer level (0.2 mg/L).
Conventional echocardiography upon admission gave results similar to those from the 2-year previous admission, but the pulmonary hypertension was more severe (pulmonary artery systolic pressure, pulmonary artery diastolic pressure, and mean pulmonary artery pressure were 115 mmHg, 73 mmHg, and 87 mmHg, respectively) . CTA showed no sign of pulmonary artery embolism. To extend our search for the cause of the patient’s increased pulmonary artery hypertension, RHCE was performed. After agitated 50% glucose was injected into the left antecubital vein, the right atrium and right ventricle were found to immediately fill with microbubbles, as observed on the parasternal four-chamber view. The microbubbles appeared in the left ventricle with a slight delay (about three cardiac cycles) after the right heart was filled with microbubbles; no microbubbles appeared in the left atrium and no intracardiac shunt was found. We chose to re-perform the RHCE to look for any new clues on other echocardiography views. At the suprasternal aortic arch long axis view, many microbubbles were found in the descending aorta, appearing at almost the same time as those in the right pulmonary artery .
Conventional echocardiography was re-performed and the findings from the CTA were re-reviewed. On the echocardiography, we found an arterial horizontal bidirectional shunt, evidenced by Doppler enhancement effects caused by microbubbles. On the CTA, we found a PDA (width: 4 mm; length: 8 mm) and no obvious pulmonary embolism .