A 2-day-old male child was referred to orthopedic department with decreased movements of his right lower limb and both arms and being irritable. A 20-year-old primigravida with twin pregnancy had delivered the baby by cesarean section at 37 weeks of gestation. The first of the twin was a female cephalic presentation and was delivered by normal vaginal delivery who did not have any complications. Non progress of labor and fetal distress with breech presentation compelled the surgeons to perform a cesarean section for the 2nd baby. A history of energetic traction and rotation was elicited from the operating surgeon since it was a difficult delivery as liquor had drained out in the 30 mins after delivery of 1st twin with the 2nd twin in distress. The operating surgeon applied a groin traction with a pull on the right leg and both arms to deliver the baby quickly no obvious sounds were heard during the extraction. A 2490 g female neonate was delivered who cried immediately after birth with Apgar scores of 7 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively.
On examination, the baby started crying on moving the right limb and the arms. Radiographs (infantogram) were obtained of both femur and humerus which revealed bilateral undisplaced humerus shaft fracture and a right femur fracture with displacement ( and ). The bone structure and mineralization was visibly normal and there were no other findings like blue sclera or other deformities, hypotonia on physical examination. Ophthalmic consultation was taken who performed an eye fundoscopy and reported as normal. Biochemical analysis such as serum calcium, phosphorus, and alkaline phosphatase was normal. There was no positive family history or similar complaint in the other infant. We considered a working diagnosis of fracture of both humerus and right femur secondary to a birth injury.
Child was treated by splinting the hip in flexion for the right femur and simple chest strapping for the humerus fracture for 3 weeks. The immobilization was removed, and the child was able to move both his arms and right lower limb actively. Follow-up radiograph showed both the humerus fracture had united and the right femur fracture showed good callus formation with no significant deformity . Follow-up after 2 months showed complete union of the femur fracture both clinically and radiologically.