A 28-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency department because of continuous abdominal pain around the umbilicus and epigastrium accompanied by abdominal distension, nausea, and vomiting for 11 d. She denied fever, diarrhea, constipation, hematochezia, and melena. She had been hospitalized in a local hospital due to these symptoms, where she underwent laboratory tests, abdominal ultrasonography, and abdominal/pelvic X-rays, and was diagnosed with ileus, and treatment included fasting and water deprivation, gastrointestinal decompression, intravenous antibiotics, and fluid replacement. None of these treatments alleviated her abdominal pain and distention but did reduce nausea and vomiting. However, the etiology of ileus could not be clearly defined and the patient’s symptoms did not improve significantly during hospitalization. She was then transferred to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment.
The patient had been hospitalized for 11 d in a local hospital due to continuous abdominal pain accompanied by abdominal distension, nausea, and vomiting prior to admission to our hospital. The symptoms started 11 d ago and the patient complained of persistent abdominal pain and distention.
The patient had been taking oral contraceptives (ethinyl estradiol 0.03 mg and drospirenone 3 mg/d) to treat abnormal uterine bleeding, prescribed at the gynecology department of a local hospital for 13 mo prior to presentation.
The patient denied smoking or alcohol consumption. She had no personal or family history of thrombosis, thrombophilia, cancer, or pregnancy loss.
The patient’s initial vital signs were stable, including blood pressure of 108/84 mmHg, heart rate of 90 bpm, respiratory rate of 16 breaths/min, and body temperature of 36.4 °C. Her body mass index was 20.5 kg/m2, weight was 50 kg, and height was 156 cm. Physical examination revealed tenderness in the epigastrium and periumbilical region, and no significant peritoneal signs, and rectal examination was normal. These findings were not consistent with her symptoms of severe pain and distension.
Laboratory tests performed on the day of admission showed an elevated white blood cell count of 25.5 × 109/L (normal range, 3.5-9.5 × 109/L), C-reactive protein (CRP) of 206 mg/mL (normal range, 0.0-6.0 mg/mL), procalcitonin (PCT) of 0.6236 ng/mL (normal range, 0.0000-0.5000 ng/mL), and D-dimer of 15.88 μg/mL (normal range, 0.00-1.00 μg/mL). Hematocrit, platelet count, and kidney and liver function tests were normal. Prothrombin time was 13.6 s (normal range, 9.4-12.5 s), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) was 30.2 s (normal range, 25.4-32.4 s), and international normalized ratio (INR) was 1.16 (normal range, 0.80-1.20). Arterial blood gas analysis showed the following: pH, 7.40; partial pressure of oxygen, 89 mmHg; partial pressure of carbon dioxide, 35 mmHg; bicarbonate concentration, 23.1 mmol/L; and lactate concentration, 1.1 mg/dL. Prothrombotic testing revealed the following: Protein S, 67% (normal range 55%-145%); protein C, 81% (normal range 60%-140%); antithrombin-III, 90% (normal range 75%-125%); anticardiolipin antibody IgG, 7.5 RU/mL (normal range 0-12 RU/mL); anti-β2-glycoprotein I antibodies, 14 RU/mL (normal range 0-20 RU/mL); and lupus anticoagulant ratio, 1.0 (normal range 0.8-1.2). None of the following were detected by polymerase chain reaction assay: Factor V leiden mutation, prothrombin G20210A mutation, and JAK2V617F mutation. These results were obtained 10 d after the specimens were sent to the laboratory.
Subsequent laboratory tests on day 7 after admission showed elevated CRP of 20.4 mg/mL and D-dimer of 7.24 μg/mL; other blood tests, for example, PCT, PT, aPTT, INR, white blood cell count, and plasma lactate concentration, returned to normal. Routine blood tests performed on days 15 and 31 after admission were normal.
Imaging examinations performed on the day of admission showed that chest radiography was normal, and abdominal radiography revealed scattered air fluid levels with no free air. Abdominal ultrasound showed no fluid collection. CECT of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a large thrombus in the superior mesenteric vein (SMV), right branch of the portal vein (PV), and main vessels of the PV and splenic vein (SV). CECT showed segmented small bowel with increased fat concentration in the intestinal mesentery, intestinal wall thickening, and luminal stenosis. The segmented small bowel was dilated proximal to the intestinal stenosis, and there were no signs of intestinal pneumatosis or vein gas. There were no signs of intra-abdominal cancer or inflammatory conditions .
Follow-up CECT on day 7 after admission showed that the large thrombus in the right branches and main vessels of the PV and SV had slightly regressed .
Follow-up CECT on day 15 after admission showed that the thrombus in the right branches of the PV had significantly regressed. There were no signs of thrombus in the main PV and SV, and the MVT had slightly subsided and collateral circulation was established . Bowel dilation was improved, and total gastroenterography revealed intestinal segmentation and luminal stenosis .
Follow-up CECT on day 31 after admission revealed complete resolution of PV and SV thrombi, obliteration of the remnant thrombus in the SMV, and a well-developed collateral circulation. CECT also showed segmental stricture of the distal jejunum with proximal dilatated jejunum .