A 77-year-old man was referred to our hospital because of nausea and vomiting. He had a past medical history of cerebral infarction, having been prescribed antiplatelet drug, and there was no relevant family history. He has never had any abdominal surgery before. There were no abnormal findings in the physical examination. Computed tomography revealed gastric outlet obstruction and duodenal wall thickening . Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a type 1 tumor arising from the gastric antrum and extending into the duodenal bulb . A tissue biopsy specimen showed both adenocarcinoma and spindle sarcomatoid cell components. His serum carcinoembryonic antigen level was 1.3 ng/mL, and his carbohydrate antigen 19–9 level was 7.3 ng/mL. Other laboratory data showed no abnormalities. The patient underwent distal gastrectomy (D2) with Roux-en-Y reconstruction. Histopathologically, the 75 × 72 × 35-mm-sized mass was a type 1 tumor with mixed adenocarcinoma and sarcoma components . The adenocarcinoma component was composed of a well- to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, while the sarcoma component was composed of spindle sarcomatoid cells . Immunohistochemically, the carcinoma component was positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3 but negative for vimentin . In contrast, the sarcoma component was positive for vimentin but negative for cytokeratin AE1/AE3 . Both components were negative for desmin, α-smooth muscle/sarcomeric actin, CD34, CD117 (c-kit), and S100P. Since the tumor was continuous with the existing gastric mucosa without duodenal invasion, primary gastric carcinosarcoma was diagnosed. Although the depth of wall invasion was confined to the submucosa, lymph and blood vessel invasions were noted. Lymph node metastasis was positive in 1 of the 24 dissected lymph nodes and contained the sarcoma component alone. The postoperative diagnosis was pT1bN1M0 stage IB. At postoperative month (POM) 2, liver metastasis was detected with a 22-mm-diameter tumor in Segment 4, and thus, S-1 + cisplatin was initiated. After one cycle of chemotherapy, febrile neutropenia developed (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v5.0 [CTCAE v5.0] grade 4), and S-1 + cisplatin was discontinued. At POM 5, the liver metastasis enlarged to 43 mm in size, and ramucirumab + paclitaxel was initiated. At POM 10, no increase in liver metastasis was noted, and partial hepatectomy was performed. Histopathological examination of the liver metastasis showed a moderately to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma without a sarcoma component, and it was classified as grade 1a based on the histological evaluation of the response to chemotherapy. After the second surgery, chemotherapy was discontinued owing to fatigue (CTCAE v5.0 grade 2). At POM 17, multiple lung metastases were detected, and nivolumab was initiated. However, by POM 21, the size of the lung metastases had increased, and nivolumab was discontinued and pazopanib (800 mg/daily) initiated . In addition, a genomic profiling test using the OncoGuide™ NCC Oncopanel System was performed using liver specimens, and abnormalities were identified in five cancer-related genes such as fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) 2 amplification, TP53 R209*, AKT3 N127D, NOTCH1 A2036T, and POLD1 M161I. During the first 11 months after initiating pazopanib, the lung metastases shrank, with the maximum size decreasing from 34 mm to 17 mm . At POM 32, only the lung metastasis in the right upper lobe increased from 17 to 25 mm. At POM 34, brain metastasis was detected with a tumor size of 40 mm, and pazopanib was discontinued. The patient received radiation therapy for brain metastasis and enlarged right upper lobe lung metastasis, which subsequently shrunk. Currently (POM 40), the patient is under treatment-free follow-up.