A 10-year-old boy presented to the clinic complaining of bilateral scapular deformity noted by his family while he was swimming over the past few months. Movement of the affected extremity caused a vague discomfort in the posterior shoulder. The patient was in good overall health and had no personal or family history of hypertension, heart disease, or muscle disease. He denied any known trauma or doing any vigorous routine of weight-lifting within the prior few months. Routine physical examination of the shoulder aimed to assess the static and dynamic scapula posturing and movement, and it revealed a prominent medial border of both scapulas. This finding was accentuated to a blatant deformity when the patient forwardly flexed the right arm (A-D). Neurovascular examination and Neurodiagnostic studies including electromyography and nerve conduction velocity testing of both upper arms were normal. The diagnosis of bilateral winged scapula of idiopathic cause was established and arrangements were made for referral to orthopedic ward to do surgery which is preferred over any other nonsurgical treatment by the patient's parents. The Right scapula winging causing more discomfort and more cosmetic disfigurement than the left, because of that in addition to that the patient is Right-handed dominate, Split Pectoralis Major Transfer for Right scapular winging is planned first.
With the patient under general anesthesia and in the left lateral decubitus position with the head of the bed elevated 15°, An anterior axillary curvy incision of 6 cm in length was made, electrocautery is used to dissect through the subcutaneous tissue layer. The cephalic vein is mobilized laterally with the deltoid. Wide subcutaneous tissue flaps are created to optimize visualization. Then the surgeon identified the sternal part of right pectoralis major and dissected its tendon at insertion part (lateral lip of bicipital groove). During tendon release, a finger is placed over the underlying biceps long head tendon to prevent iatrogenic injury. After harvest, meticulous hemostasis within the anterior wound is performed.
The arm is repositioned with in-line traction away from the body in approximately 130° of forward elevation to expose the scapula. A second incision was made over the middle portion of the Right inferior scapular angle (5 cm long). And electrocautery is used to dissect through the subcutaneous tissue. By use of digital dissection from the anterior and posterior wounds, a submuscular tissue tunnel is created within the axilla to connect the 2 incisions to properly place the sternal tendon of pectoralis major. At this point, Attention is turned toward assessment of the pectoralis major length-to-transfer distance, and fortunately the length is adequate, so we didn't use autograft tissue harvest, and this help reduce additional morbidity and operative time. After that, using drill, 4 holes were created at the distal part of the scapula. By Lasso suture, the tendon was sutured to the anterior aspect of distal scapula through created holes. A drain applied to the axillary incision. Closure of incisions was done; the operation otherwise was uncomplicated.
The procedure was done with no postoperative complications, stayed at hospital for one day after it, during which he was given painkillers and broad-spectrum antibiotics. The patient was seen several days after the procedure for follow-up, the surgeon removed the sutures and referred him to physiotherapy, he was also seen 3 months and 6 months after the operation, at the last visit, the surgeon noticed spontaneous resolution of the left side winging, the patient and his parents were very satisfied and pleased about the cosmetic result, along with marked improvement of the discomfort and shoulder movements, the surgeon also was fulfilled as the procedure made a significant difference on both functional and aesthetic levels.