A-51-year-old man was referred to urology for adrenal mass and potentially related secondary hypertension. Except for five years of uncontrolled hypertension with hypokalemia he has no other history of medication and diseases including renal disease, diabetes or other systemic disorders. His basal serum creatinine (sCr) was 1.9 mg/dl with microalbuminuria, but no hematuria and cylinduria were detected at admission. Apart from the increase blood pressure there was no significant physical abnormality was identified. And his renal disorder was deem to be associated with benign nephrosclerosis caused by uncontrolled hypertension. To make a better evaluation for the adrenal mass before surgery he was subjected to enhanced adrenal CT scan with intravenous injection of iomeprol (a nonionic, monomeric iodinated contrast medium). Ahead of CM injection preventive therapies (intravenous hydration with reduced glutathione) were given to minimize the side effects of CM. The operation went extremely well and his blood pressure was well controlled after that; however his sCr was increased to 3.3 mg/dl with 2+ dysmorphic hematuria and 2+ proteinuria three days later after iomeprol injection. Therefore he remained hospitalized for the elevated sCr level; unfortunately the sCr failed to drop to his basal level despite three weeks comprehensive treatment (reduced glutathione plus prostaglandin E1 administration). And the hematuria and proteinuria still persisted.
Then, he was transferred to nephrology. And he was diagnosed as acute kidney injury (AKI) superimposed on chronic kidney disease (CKD). A series of serologic and radiologic workup was ordered. Except for the elevated sCr other serologic results were unremarkable including serum potassium. Emission Computed Tomography indicated glomerular filtration rate was decreased. To get a better understanding of the nature of the renal injury the kidney biopsy was performed. On immunofluroscence microscopy no diagnostic staining of immunoglobulin and complement were detected in glomeruli, tubulointerstitium and vessels. Under light microscopy there was only mild to moderate ischemic alteration of glomeruli without proliferative lesions which is believed to be associated with the history of uncontrolled hypertension. Moreover focal mild acute tubular injury was identified presenting as the loss of brush border and isometric vacuolization of tubular epithelial cells. No coarse vacuole degeneration, the feature of hypokalemic nephrosis, was seen in tubular epithelium (data not shown). Interestingly, with the aid of transmission electron microscopy we found scattered distributed myelin figure like structure, presenting as almost-empty vacuoles circled with electron-dense membrane, in endothelium, mesangial cells and less frequently in podocyte .
Combining the clinic features and pathologic findings we believed that in this case the CKD was due to moderate nephrosclerosis which could be explained by longstanding secondary hypertension. On the other hand the AKI may relate to mild acute tubular injury and scattered distributed myelin figure like structure was observed in glomerular cells.
What made us confused was the underlying etiology for the formation of myelin figure structure. As we known, zebra bodies and myelin-like figures are ordinarily seen in Fabry disease and various lysosomal storage disorders and usually infer lipid accumulation in cell bodies or subcellular organelles. However, our patient didn’t have any other systemic symptoms or family history of that genetic diseases. More importantly, his renal impairment just aggravated after CM administration. Thus we were curious to study whether CM will lead to the lipidosis in glomerular endothelial and mesangial cells. To test that, we exposed the cultured glomerular endothelial and mesangial cells to the CM, iomeprol, to evaluate whether this treatment will cause the lipid accumulation as we observed in vivo (Additional file ). In detail, cells were treated with iomeprol or cultured in regular medium for 1 h. After that they were stained with Oil Red O or Sudan Black to detect the deposition of neutral lipids and phospholipids. Interestingly, our data revealed that iomeprol exposure promotes the lipid accumulation in the cytoplasma of endothelial and mesangial cells obviously . Next we explored the underlying mechanisms of above abnormalities. It is well-established that CD36 is an essential transporter mediating lipid uptake, whereas ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) accelerates the discharge of lipid from cytosol [, ]. Our immunofluorescence staining showed that with the treatment of iomeprol CD36 is upregulated accompanying with diminished ABCA1 intensity in both glomerular endothelial and mesangial cells and which is the potential underlying mechanism accounting for the lipid aggregation during CM exposure.
Based on the morphologic alterations from biopsy sample and the experimental data from in vitro cultured cells, the patient was prescribed oral statins (fluvastatin, 20 mg, qn) and antioxidant (Atomolam, 0.4, tid). Two months later, his next visit, we found the hematuria was resolved, and the proteinuria decreased to 1+ with improved renal function (sCr was 2.4 mg/dl). (The whole timeline of this case is shown in Fig. ).