A 67-year-old Asian woman with a known long history of major depressive disorder was brought to our emergency room (ER) with complaints of intentional ingestion of two tablets of AlP 5 hours prior to presentation. Except for the depressive illness for which she was taking a tablet form of escitalopram 20 mg twice daily, with which she was compliant, there was no other significant medical, surgical, or family history. She was seen by her son who found her in her room complaining of nausea and vomiting when she expressed to him about her ingesting the tablets. She had multiple episodes of vomiting containing greenish-colored particulate material which was not blood mixed. She also had three episodes of loose stools and generalized body weakness with altered sensorium. Before she was brought to our ER, she was taken to another center where she was primarily managed with gastric lavage and initial resuscitation. When she was evaluated in our ER, she was drowsy, her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 8/15, and her pupils were bilaterally 4 mm and sluggish reactive to light. Her pulse was 58/minute, she had blood pressure (BP) of 80/60 mmHg, her respiratory rate (RR) was 35/minute, and arterial oxygen saturation was 93% with supplemental oxygen via face mask. On auscultation, there were crepitations bilaterally along with decreased breath sounds. An initial arterial blood gas (ABG) done in ER revealed pH of 7.094, partial pressure of oxygen in blood (PaO2) 130 mmHg, partial pressure of carbon dioxide in blood (PaCO2) 23.5 mmHg, bicarbonate (HCO3) 8.9 mmHg, and serum lactate of 15.
Besides these clinical findings and laboratory parameters other tests were within normal range. A chest X-ray was done immediately, which showed infiltrations with bilateral opacities. A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm, non-specific ST-T changes in all leads. Cardiologists were immediately called for screening echocardiographic evaluation which showed significantly reduced systolic function of left ventricle with an ejection fraction (LVEF) of 20%. While evaluation was ongoing, a wide bore canula was opened, and dopamine was started to support the blood pressure. However, patient’s condition continued to deteriorate and an immediate plan for veno-arterial ECMO was made. After obtaining consent for ECMO from patient’s son, the intensive care unit (ICU) team was alerted and cardiac surgeons were informed accordingly. The patient was successfully connected to ECMO (Sorin SCPC Centrifugal Pump System) via right femoral vein and femoral artery. An extra 6F sheath was inserted distally into femoral artery for perfusion of distal leg.
In the immediate postoperative period the patient was kept on mechanical ventilator volume assist-control mode on low tidal volume lung protective ventilation at 40% fraction of inspired oxygen concentration (FiO2) with positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 7 cmH2O. We were able to deliver an almost constant flow of 3 L/minute/m2 on ECMO and provided oxygenation at FiO2 of 70%. She was also kept on epinephrine, norepinephrine support, magnesium sulfate, vitamin C, thiamine, hydrocortisone, heparin infusion, and sodium bicarbonate therapy. An ABG done immediately after the procedure showed improvement in acid-base status as well as decrease in lactate level to 0.31. Blood gases were repeated 4 hourly. Boluses of heparin 1000–3000 U were given along with adjustment in background infusion rate to keep the activated clotting time (ACT) between 180 and 220 seconds.
An echocardiography done the next day showed significant improvement in cardiac status with LVEF reaching 35%. Her general condition, consciousness level, hemodynamic stability, and ventilatory parameters, especially peak airway pressure, also showed significant improvement over the next 3 days and we were able to stop all inotropic supports by ECMO day 2. She was finally weaned off the ECMO on day 3 and extubated the next day. At all times during her stay in ICU, although she showed signs of myocardial dysfunction and respiratory failure along with depression of mental status, her renal and liver function tests remained within normal range. A psychiatric evaluation was done while she was in ICU. After observation in ICU for 2 more days, she was discharged to ward with stable vital signs. She stayed in wards for 4 more days and was then finally discharged to home to have follow-up later and scheduled psychiatric consultation and adjustment of medications accordingly (timeline; Fig. ).