An adult patient, a male 24 years old, was admitted to our service, presenting fever as an initial symptom. On neurological examination, we showed the presence of meningeal irritation associated with phlogistic signs and continuous solution of skin in the occipital region while no other clinical abnormality was detected. In the patient’s past clinical history, he was diagnosed with an occipital DS in his childhood, which was previously instructed to be operated on by another neurosurgical team. However, the patient refused to perform the procedure. A lumbar puncture of the cerebrospinal fluid showed suggestive bacterial meningitis (protein elevated, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and low glucose) in the biochemical and cytological analysis.
The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) investigation showed the previously diagnosed DS associated with a cerebellar mass with 2.0 cm on its main diameter. The cerebellar mass presented as an enhanced, heterogeneous, partially hyperintense posterior fossa lesion with moderate mass effect on axial and sagittal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MRI .
The patient was treated with antibiotic therapy for ten days preoperatively. After the preoperative trichotomy, it is possible to see the DS skin defect . We performed a midline occipital craniotomy in the ventral position that showed the communication of the DS through the skull bone in the occipital region . After performing the craniotomy and identifying the landmarks , a successful gross total resection was performed , and it was removed in block stepwise by microsurgical technique. The tumor mass showed slight adherence to the cortex. The tumor was rubbery, vascular, and well-demarcated from the surrounding brain. Finally, the DS correction was performed .
The conventional H&E (×100) showed a chronic granulomatous inflammatory process with the presence of body giant cells and an immune response of a strange body showed in detail when the body giant cell phagocyting the hair . There was no evidence of infiltrative growth, and a small rim of reactive glial tissue was visible at parts of the tumor margins. Immunohistochemical expression using antibodies against GFAP confirmed the presence of glial tissue . Thus, a dermoid cyst was ruled out, and a mature infected teratoma was diagnosed.
The postoperative period was uneventful; neurological examination did not reveal any additional deficits, and imaging control did not show any residual or recurrent tumor . After surgery, further computed tomography (CT) scan analysis showed the presence of cervical vertebrae fusion, compatible with KFS diagnosis . At present, the patient is doing well after five years postoperatively, without any signs of recidive.