A 68-year-old woman complaining of dyspnea on exertion was admitted to our hospital. Her medical history included hypertension for several years, for which she had been treated. Despite consultations at multiple hospitals for over a year, a diagnosis could not be established for her gradually worsening symptoms. On admission, her blood pressure was 132/62 mmHg. Her pulse rate was 72 beats/min and regular. A grade II/VI midsystolic heart murmur was evident on auscultation in the second intercostal space in the parasternal plane. A chest radiograph revealed moderate cardiomegaly with a cardiothoracic ratio of 65% and an increased pulmonary vascular shadow. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with a right bundle branch block pattern. Laboratory evaluations revealed no abnormalities. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a normal function of the left ventricle and severe dilatation of the right cardiac chambers associated with diastolic ventricular septal flattening. Severe tricuspid regurgitation and absence of visible interatrial communication was also observed. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) clearly demonstrated the draining of both the right upper and right lower pulmonary veins into the RA with an intact atrial septum. ECG-gated multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) revealed anomalous drainage of both the right upper and right lower pulmonary veins into the RA . In addition, the positional relationship between the superior vena cava (SVC), inferior vena cava (IVC), and orifices of the anomalous pulmonary veins, with the exception of the atrial septum, was consistent with the normal anatomy. Furthermore, the size of the intact atrial septum was diminished, and its plane was displaced leftward. No further congenital cardiovascular anomalies were observed. No significant coronary stenosis was identified by coronary angiography. Right heart catheterization (RHC) concurrently revealed severe pulmonary artery hypertension with a mean pulmonary artery pressure (MPAP) of 46 mmHg, step-up of oxygen saturation at the mid-level of the RA with a pulmonary-to-systemic blood flow ratio (Qp/Qs) of 2.4, a pulmonary-to-systemic vascular resistance ratio (Rp/Rs) of 0.11, a pulmonary-to-systemic artery systolic pressure ratio (Pp/Ps) of 0.42, and a pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) of 3.1 Wood Units. Oxygen inhalation during RHC decreased MPAP from 46 to 41 mmHg, resulting in no significant changes. After a comprehensive evaluation, PAPVC involving the right pulmonary veins draining into the RA with an intact atrial septum was diagnosed. A patient took 62.5 mg of Bosentan twice a day at her discretion for 6 months. Since there was no improvement in clinical symptoms, the patient underwent surgical repair after providing written informed consent.
A median sternotomy was performed, and the position of the anomalous right lower pulmonary vein was identified to be adjacent to the IVC orifice. The IVC was cannulated through the right femoral vein in order to achieve satisfactory exposure of the RA. Through right atriotomy, an anomalous connection of both the right upper and right lower pulmonary veins to the RA with an intact atrial septum was identified . The posterior side of coronary sinus formed a steep bank and led to the IVC. Initially, the maze procedure in the RA was performed by means of bipolar radiofrequency ablation and cryoablation. Subsequently, ASD was created surgically; the incision extended posteriorly from the superior margin of the fossa ovalis toward the inferior margin of the septum secundum showing a curvilinear tongue-shaped cut. The flap of the interatrial septum, which was kept in continuity with the anterior margin and covered an area of 15 mm2, was completed. For the purpose of preventing thrombus formation in the exposed muscle and for approximating the orifices of the right lower anomalous pulmonary vein to the excised atrial septum as far as possible, the endocardial layer between the LA and the RA was reconstructed with 5–0 monofilament running sutures while maintaining an extroverted configuration . The right anomalous pulmonary veins were rerouted with the flap of the interatrial septum baffle through the surgically created ASD into the LA using 5–0 monofilament continuous sutures, mobilizing the RA. The anastomotic portion of the superior, inferior, and posterior margin of the flap were formed by the posterior wall of the SVC-RA junction, the posterior wall of the IVC-RA junction, and the right lateral wall just above the right pulmonary vein orifices, respectively . Finally, tricuspid annuloplasty was performed with a 28-mm Carpentier-Edwards PhysioTricuspid ring (Edwards LifeSciences, Irvine, CA) for annular enlargement. Weaning from the cardiopulmonary bypass was successful. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course without undesirable complications related to sinus node dysfunction and residual intracardiac shunt. Postoperative ECG-gated MDCT demonstrated that the intra-atrial baffle showed neither a pulmonary vein stenosis nor vena cava obstruction . The patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 27 without the use of Bosentan. At follow-up 1 year later, the patient remained asymptomatic with normal echocardiography.