We report the case of a 71-year old female patient (165 cm, 83 kg) who was transferred to our department for vascular surgery with a CSSS-related acute NSTEMI in 05/2017. The patient underwent twofold CABG (LIMA to Ramus circumflexus (RCX), RIMA to RIMA/LAD) in 08/2006. Beside coronary heart disease, she suffered from bradycardia and atrial fibrillation, arterial hypertension, type II diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolaemia, obesity, Fountain’s stage IIa peripheral arterial occlusive disease (PAOD), pulmonary hypertension, stage III chronic kidney disease, and hepatitis B. According to her medical history, she has undergone multiple interventional therapies for the PAOD and an internal carotid artery (ICA) thrombendarterectomy due to an ipsilateral stenosis in 10/2005 and an occlusion of the right ICA. A coronary angiography (CA) in early 2017 revealed no pathologies with both CABGs open and functioning.
The initial cardiological presentation in late 04/2017 took place in the emergency department due to recurrent syncopes, bradycardia and chest pain after exhaustive left arm strain. Beside a sinus bradycardia, a NSTEMI with elevated troponin levels of 0.45 ng/ml (0.27 ng/ml the following day, normal values < 0.014) was diagnosed. Occlusion pressures (mmHg) were 60 in the left and 130 in the right arm with a systemic blood pressure of 120/60. Duplex sonography showed a proximal occlusion of the left SA and retorgrade flow in the ipsilateral vertebral artery . Two arterial punctures (transfemoral and transbrachial, both from the left side) and a CA were performed. Both CABGs proved to be patent and without stenoses and therefore a CSSS was assumed to be the cause of the NSTEMI. Two attempts for an interventional recanalization of the left SA failed as the SA occlusion could not be passed with the guide wire due to severe calcifications. Subsequently, the patient was transferred to our department for vascular surgery for further diagnostics and therapy in early 05/2015. Here, a CT-A was performed to evaluate the vascular configuration and proved the SA stenosis as well as the CSSS as the underlying pathologies. Within our interdisciplinary vascular conference, we agreed on the indication for bypass surgery. A left-sided carotid-subclavian bypass (CSB) (polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) prosthesis, 8 mm, ring reinforced) was performed . Postoperatively, the occlusion pressures were 120 in the left and 120 in the right arm with a systemic blood pressure of 120/80. Duplex sonography showed a regular antegrade blood flow in the CSB and a CT-A proved a regular configuration and patency of the CSB and both CABGs . A cardiac adenosine-stress-MR showed a perfusion deficit/hypoperfusion in the supply area of the left and right coronary artery and ischaemic scar tissue of the basal and anterior medial and posterior cardiac wall. No postoperative complications occurred; especially no chest pain, dyspnea, syncope or symptoms in the left arm were observed. Low molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin sodium) was administered in a therapeutic dosage (80 mg s.c, twice daily) and an anticoagulative therapy with phenprocoumon was recommended with a target-INR of 2–3. Additionally, Clopidogrel 75 mg orally was prescribed once daily. The patient was discharged on the 10th postoperative day in a good general condition. At the follow-up-visits at 6 weeks, 6 months and 12 months postoperatively, the patient was in a good general condition without cardiac or neurological symptoms. The patency of her bypass graft was demonstrated on duplex sonography on each with these visits.