At 10:08 am, a 73-year-old-man underwent an abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan using non-ionic iodinated contrast medium, as a follow-up procedure for chronic pancreatitis. The procedure was completed uneventfully and the CT showed no significant findings. One hour after the procedure, he was admitted to the emergency department for chest discomfort. The patient had a medical history of chronic pancreatitis and allergy to a different contrast medium with symptoms of only nausea that occurred 6 years ago. Thus, we changed the contrast medium and used them 10 times. No symptoms occurred before the present case. The patient's initial findings were: height, 173 cm; weight, 77.0 kg; blood pressure, 83/52 mmHg; heart rate, 40 b.p.m.; temperature, 36.1°C; respiratory rate, 18/min; SpO2, 98% with oxygen delivered through a face mask (5 L/min); and a Glasgow Coma Scale score of E3V5M6. A physical examination revealed normal bilateral air entry without any wheezing or rhonchi. The results of his cardiovascular and neurological examinations were normal. His abdomen on examination appeared normal and did not show any skin eruptions. The clinical course of the patient is shown in Fig. .
The laboratory findings are shown in Table . Both the electrocardiogram and chest X-ray did not reveal any significant findings. The patient's total white blood cell, neutrophil, and lymphocyte counts were 930, 232, and 678/μL, respectively . His hemoglobin levels and platelet counts were normal. Initially, anaphylaxis was suspected due to his medical history and cardiovascular symptoms. Thus, the patient was given 5 mg chlorpheniramine malcinic acid, 20 mg famotidine, and 125 mg methylprednisolone, and admitted to the hospital for follow-up.
Shortly after admission, the patient complained of chills and had a temperature of 37.6°C. His total white blood cell count was 1,160/μL and the neutrophil count was 557/μL. Approximately 2 h after admission the patient developed a fever and his body temperature was 38.9°C. We obtained samples of blood, sputum, and urine for culture. Subsequent whole-body CT scans and a chest X-rays did not reveal any infection foci. The patient was diagnosed with neutropenic fever and treated with cefepime. At 3:00 am the next day, his temperature returned to normal. In addition, his white blood cell count had fully recovered. Microbial culture results were negative for bacterial infection. Consequently, we diagnosed the patient with idiosyncratic transient leukopenia that was induced by the contrast medium. Interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and anti-neutrophil antibody findings were unremarkable. The condition of the patient improved on day two after hospitalization and he was discharged . The patient has not experienced a recurrence in the 1 year since this event.