A 33-year-old African American man with no past medical history was evaluated in the emergency room (ER) 3 weeks after returning from Ivory Coast. He was born in Ivory Coast and came to the USA as a toddler. Since then, he had been visiting Abidjan, Ivory Coast, every few years to see family. Recently, he spent 1 uneventful month in Abidjan and returned to the USA. He denied any history of malaria in the past. He did not take any anti-malarial prophylaxis during the recent visit. He confessed to smoking a few tobacco cigarettes daily but denied any illicit drug abuse. He developed a fever after 7 days. The fever was high grade (103 °F) in intensity and intermittent, with each episode lasting several hours. The patient took multiple tablets of over-the-counter Tylenol and Motrin for the fever at home without any significant improvement.
The patient had visited the ER twice in the last week for a similar complaint of low-grade fevers. Thrombocytopenia and transaminitis were seen on blood testing. However, given the COVID-19 pandemic, recent international travel, and blood testing results bearing similarity to COVID-19, he was promptly tested for COVID-19. He was discharged home after the COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test result was negative. The fevers persisted at home for the next 3 days, nonetheless. Two days before the presentation, he developed chills, nausea, and vomiting. The vomiting was initially bilious and later became dark-colored. The patient's family noticed that his mental status had gradually worsened over the past week, and they decided to bring him to the ER again.
On this visit to the ER, he had an initial temperature of 101.4 °F, blood pressure of 122/78 mmHg, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 98%. Physical examination revealed scleral icterus. The patient was oriented only to himself with a Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score of 13 out of 15. The physical examination did not reveal any hepatosplenomegaly, flapping tremors, or focal neurological deficits.
The initial blood testing was significant for hypoglycemia, pancytopenia (microcytic anemia and thrombocytopenia), elevated lactate level, and transaminitis (AST 75 U/l, ALT 36 U/l, bilirubin 15.2 mg/dl, alkaline phosphate 124 U/l) . The COVID-19 PCR was negative again.
This time the medical team consulted the Infectious Diseases service, which recommended obtaining an immediate peripheral blood smear and acute hepatitis panel. A peripheral blood smear showed intraerythrocytic parasites consistent with Plasmodium falciparum with a high degree of parasitemia (33%). A lumbar puncture was recommended to rule out cerebral malaria as the patient was confused. The blood alcohol, acetaminophen, and salicylate levels were normal. Hepatitis E IgM was positive, and the rest of the acute hepatitis panel was negative . There was no evidence of retinopathy on fundoscopic examination. A diagnostic lumber puncture was performed to rule out cerebral infection. The initial cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) studies were unremarkable for any elevated cell count, glucose, or proteins. CSF PCR studies for E. coli, H. influenzae, Listeria monocytogenes, Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus agalactiae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, sytomegalovirus (CMV), Cryptococcus neoforms, herpes simplex virus (HSV-1, HSV-2), human herpesvirus 6 enterovirus, parechovirus and varicella zoster virus (VZV) came out negative . The head CT scan checked for any bleeding, mass effect, or midline shift .
Given the high degree of parasitemia and concern about cerebral malaria, we consulted the regional Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The patient was started on intravenous artesunate (2.4 mg/kg at 0 h, 12 h, and 24 h). A dramatic improvement was seen in his blood work and mental status from hospital day 3. He was fully alert, awake, and oriented to himself, time, and place by hospital day 5. Parasitemia was also entirely resolved by hospital day 5 (0.02%). The liver enzymes trended down, and the platelet count was back to normal . Three negative blood smears were obtained, and the patient was discharged home on Coartem (20 mg/120 mg tablets, four tablets as the initial dose, four tablets again after 8 h, and then four tablets twice daily for the following 2 days) with instructions to be closely monitored by the primary care physician. The medicine team followed the patient on telehealth, and he reported doing well and performing his daily activities without any restrictions. CSF PCR for Plasmodium tested positive 3 weeks later, confirming the diagnosis of cerebral malaria. His liver enzymes and bilirubin further trended down on repeat outpatient blood testing after discharge from the hospital .