A 73-year-old Caucasian woman underwent a right parieto-occipital craniotomy to remove a meningioma. The surgical procedure lasted for 7 hours and was performed in the prone position with the head slightly turned to the right. Her medical history included arterial hypertension, colonic diverticula, hiatal hernia, cystic renal dysplasia, and no known allergies. Anesthesia was induced with propofol (2 mg/kg) and fentanest (1 μg/kg) and maintained with sevoflurane (1 MAC) and fentanest (boli of 50 to 100 μg intravenously); after muscle relaxation with vecuronium bromide (0.1 mg/kg, followed by boli of 1 mg), her airways were secured with an endotracheal tube (internal diameter 8 mm) and the patient was connected to a mechanical ventilator (Servo 300, Siemens-Elema, Sweden). During anesthesia, 2 g of induction cefazolin was given intravenously. At the end of surgery, the patient was moved to the surgical intensive care unit (S-ICU), where she was sedated with propofol (3 mg/kg/h) and connected to a Servo 300 mechanical ventilator (Siemens-Elema, Sweden) in volume controlled modality.
One hour later, the patient presented an increasing swelling in the left submandibular triangle which successively spread to the left cheek and to the whole left anterior triangle. Four hours after admission to the S-ICU, no local sign of inflammation was present (the skin was not reddened or warm) and the patient was afebrile. Oral examination revealed massive lingual edema and the presence of petechiae on the gums and on the lateral borders of the tongue. Laboratory tests were normal and serum amylases were 87 IU/L (normal values <100 IU/L). On the basis of the evolving clinical picture, the patient was kept sedated and mechanically ventilated. Drug therapy included diuretics (mannitol 18%, 100 mL intravenously QID), corticosteroids (dexamethasone, 4 mg intravenously TID), and antibiotics (linezolid, 600 mg intravenously BID; meropemen, 1 g intravenously TID; and clindamycin, 600 mg intravenously TID). During the night, serum amylases rose to 230 IU/L and contrast enhanced spiral computed tomography of the head and neck performed 7 hours after the end of surgery showed swelling of the left parotid and submandibular glands with a marked edema that spread to the periglandular fat, muscles, and aponeuroses. Glandular ducts were not dilated and no calculus was observed. Both larynx and pharynx were markedly edematous and the airway lumen was totally obliterated so that no empty space was observed around the endotracheal tube .
On the 1st postoperative day, the patient was still afebrile. Facial edema had further increased, spreading to the periorbital region and to the forehead. Serum amylases were 211 IU/L. White blood count was normal and semiquantitative procalcitonin measurement was negative (<0.5 μg/mL). Swabs of Wharton's and Stensen's orifices and three blood cultures were performed and the results were negative. Ultrasonography confirmed the swelling of the salivary glands and the absence of calculi, and showed a slight compression of the left internal jugular vein by the enlarged submandibulary gland, but the patency of the vein was maintained; no thrombus was observed in the left subclavian and internal jugular veins.
On the 3rd postoperative day, magnetic resonance imaging of the head and neck was performed with intravenous contrast enhancement . The exam confirmed the inflammatory process of the parotid and submandibular glands, showing swelling, areas of inhomogeneous signal, and marked enhancement after intravenous contrast. Edema and increased contrast enhancement were also observed in the superficial and deep neck spaces, particularly in the masticatory space. The tongue base was still enlarged and the pharynx and larynx were dislocated to the right.
From the 4th postoperative day, salivary gland swelling and facial edema regressed progressively and on the 7th postoperative day, mechanical ventilation was ended and the endotracheal tube removed. Serum amylases were 111 IU/L on the 9th postoperative day and 116 IU/L on the 13th postoperative day. On the 14th postoperative day, the patient was moved from the S-ICU to the neurosurgical ward. She was fully awake, but still complained of dysphonia and dysphagia; her voice was breathy and she had difficulty in swallowing fluids. In the following days, the patient fully recovered cough and deglutition reflexes. ENT examination indicated the presence of right vocal cord palsy, which was not reported in her medical history; a swelling of the left submandibular gland was still present, but the patient refused surgical biopsy. She was discharged from the hospital on the 28th postoperative day.