A 71-year-old Caucasian man with non-insulin-dependent diabetes was admitted with a diagnosis of loosened right hip prosthesis. The prosthesis had been implanted 6 years earlier for degenerative joint disease.
He was a social drinker and did not smoke tobacco. He reported high blood pressure and dyslipidemia with high triglycerides and low high-density lipoprotein levels. The medical treatment consisted of: metformin 500 mg/day, ramipril 5 mg/day, and fenofibrate 145 mg/day.
Four months earlier, he experienced a sudden onset of hip pain which became progressively worse. A hip radiograph showed radiolucency at the proximal femoral/stem interface . A tri-phase bone scan evidenced normal distribution of the radionuclide at the early phase, and increased uptake at the delayed phase; the findings were judged non-indicative of infection . On admission, he also reported to have suffered for the past 17 years from a perianal fistula, with recurrent flare ups of infection and multiple short courses of antibiotics. The last episode occurred 1 week before admission for which he was prescribed amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 1 g twice a day. A physical examination evidenced good general condition, normal temperature, blood pressure 130/70 mmHg, pulse rate 70, and O2 saturation 99%. No crepitations were present on auscultation in both lung bases; his abdomen was not distended, not tender, and bowel sounds were present. His liver and spleen were not enlarged. Cardiovascular and neurological systems examinations were normal. A draining perianal fistula was present. Also, pain of his right hip on leg motion and limited motion with lameness of his right leg were evidenced.
Laboratory examinations revealed: white blood cells (WBCs) 8240/mm3 with neutrophils 74%, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 15 mm 1°hour, C-reactive protein (CRP) 1.32 mg/dL (normal range 0.1–0.75 mg/dL), alanine aminotransferase 16 IU/L (normal range 17–63), aspartate aminotransferase 18 IU/L (normal range 0–40), urea 23 mg/dL (normal range 12–71), and creatinine 0.36 mg/dL (normal range 0.9–1.3). The day after admission, he underwent prosthesis explant. The Synovasure® Alpha Defensin Test, CD diagnostics (Zimmer GmbH, Switzerland), was performed during surgery and it was indicative of infection [, ]. Purulent material was also evident around the acetabular cavity and the femoral diaphysis, and both prosthesis components were loosened and easily removed. A total of eight different samples, including the synovial fluid, the periprosthetic tissue, and the prosthesis, were sent for microbiological investigation. None was examined histologically. Thereafter, teicoplanin 600 mg twice a day was administered intravenously for the first day, followed by 600 mg a day administered intravenously and imipenem 500 mg four times a day administered intravenously, thus having empiric activity against Gram-positive bacteria as well as Gram-negative and anaerobic bacteria. The samples collected were transported without the use of specific transport media for anaerobic bacteria to the microbiology laboratory; however, cultures for aerobic and anaerobe bacteria and fungi on solid media were performed. When surgery was performed, blood cultures were not obtained, nor were cultures of the rectal swabs and the perianal fistula. A week later, from all samples examined, except the synovial fluid, C. glabrata grew on Sabouraud dextrose agar plates. The isolate was identified using the commercial VITEK® 2 card for yeast identification card (bioMérieux Diagnostic, Chemin de L’Orme, France). Antifungal susceptibility was determined evaluating the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC), resulting in: fluconazole 4 mg/L, caspofungin ≤ 0.25 mg/L, micafungin ≤ 0.06 mg/L, and amphotericin B ≤ 0.25 mg/L (commercial VITEK® 2 system for susceptibility testing of yeast species, bioMérieux Diagnostic, Chemin de L’Orme, France). Micafungin 100 mg a day administered intravenously was added to the antibiotic regimen.
While on antibiotic and antifungal combination therapy, he underwent surgical treatment of the perianal fistula by positioning a cutting seton. When surgery was performed, rectal swab and perianal fistula cultures were not obtained. One week later, imipenem was replaced with ertapenem 1 g administered intravenously daily, to allow once a day out-patient treatment. Overall, the antimicrobial combination, including teicoplanin 600 mg administered intravenously, ertapenem 1 g administered intravenously, and micafungin 100 mg administered intravenously once a day, was administered for a total of 7 weeks. While on this therapy, he was monitored every 10 days for toxicity and efficacy, and teicoplanin blood levels ranged between 15 and 19 mg/L.
After 8 weeks of an antimicrobial-free interval, prosthesis reimplant was performed. Before reimplant, cardiac, abdominal, and eye fungal localizations were excluded, blood cultures resulted negative, and ESR and CRP were normal. At surgery, bone samples and the spacer were collected for microbiologic investigations, then teicoplanin 600 mg, ertapenem 1 g, and micafungin 100 mg once a day were administered intravenously. Two weeks later, the microbiologic reports failed to identify fungi or bacteria in all the samples cultured, including the spacer examined with and without the sonication technique , and with traditional as well as commercial real-time multiplex polymerase chain reaction assay LightCycler® testing (Roche Molecular Diagnostics, Mannheim, German) [, ]. Therefore, both antibiotic as well antifungal drugs were discontinued.
At follow-up, 24 months later, he was cured and free of pain. The prosthesis is functioning well, and ESR and CRP are within the normal range.