An 11-year-old boy presented to the outpatient neurosurgery clinic at a tertiary care hospital with a 3-month history of seizures and severe headaches. The patient’s family described two episodes of generalized tonic-clonic seizures lasting for 2–3 minutes each. The patient had also reported experiencing intermittent headaches for the past 2 years which had gradually increased in severity over the past 3 months. These more recent headaches were dull in character, radiating to the neck, and associated with nausea and vomiting. He had a history of asthma that was controlled on medications. He was born to consanguineously married parents. The patient’s family history was otherwise unremarkable. On initial presentation, his physical examination, including a complete neurological examination, was unremarkable.
Initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) from an outside hospital showed a right parasagittal lesion with postcontrast enhancement that was suggestive of a highly vascular pathology. Differential diagnoses based on radiology included hemangiopericytoma and a lipomatous lesion. He was prescribed divalproex sodium, which was unsuccessful in controlling his seizures.
Based on these findings, the patient underwent a CT angiogram (CTA) for further investigation of a vascular etiology. CTA revealed a well-defined heterogeneous lesion in the right parasagittal region with significant internal calcification . Flow voids were suggestive of an AVM. A digital subtraction angiogram (DSA) confirmed the diagnosis of a large, calcified AVM in the right parasagittal location, with the nidus located at its anterolateral margin. This was supplied by the right anterior cerebral artery, mainly through branches of the right pericallosal artery [, and ]. There were no feeders arising from external carotid arteries, left internal carotid artery, or posterior circulation. The AVM was seen to be draining into the superior sagittal sinus through a superficial cortical draining vein.
After discussing the risks and benefits of stereotactic radiosurgery and conventional surgical resection, the patient’s family opted for surgery. The patient underwent a neuronavigation-guided right frontal craniotomy under general anesthesia. Intraoperative findings included a hard, calcified, and well-encapsulated lesion which was adherent to the falx cerebri. The nidus of the AVM was confirmed to be at the anterolateral margin. The lesion was separated from the brain parenchyma along the falx cerebri and collateral vessels were coagulated. The AVM was resected en bloc along with its nidus . Histopathology confirmed a calcified AVM with no evidence of malignancy [ and ]. The patient lost approximately 500 ml of blood but there were no intraoperative complications.
The patient remained stable postoperatively and was subsequently shifted to the intensive care unit for overnight monitoring. On the 1st postoperative day, he noticed difficulty in moving his left arm and leg against gravity. Power in his left upper extremity was 3/5 while power in his left lower extremity was 2/5. He did not have any additional neurological deficits. He was managed with intravenous fluids, antibiotics, anti-emetics, analgesics, and steroids. In addition, he received chest and limb physiotherapy and occupational therapy. A DSA on the 2nd postoperative day showed no evidence of residual disease or arterial blush [ and ]. The patient’s left-sided weakness continued to improve and he was discharged from hospital on the 4th postoperative day. He continued to receive physiotherapy. On his clinic follow-up after 2 weeks, the patient reported improving motor function with resolution of his previous symptoms.