A 32-year-old Japanese woman with no history of thyroid disease presented to our hospital with auditory and visual hallucinations, agitation, and pressured speech. She had no previous clinical diagnosis of any thyroid disorder and had not undergone any thyroid-specific diagnostic evaluations. The patient had a history of delusions, offensive auditory hallucinations, and thought broadcasting since her marriage 8 years prior, and had previously presented with delusions of observation and auditory hallucinations 6 years ago. She was diagnosed with schizophrenia and prescribed perospirone 8 mg at a psychiatric clinic, but she did not have her thyroid hormone levels measured. Following treatment discontinuation and divorce 2 years prior, the patient experienced social withdrawal. Five months before presentation, she developed auditory and visual hallucinations, along with pressured speech and agitation, which prompted her father and police officers to bring her to the hospital.
Upon arrival, the patient exhibited psychomotor agitation and was found to have a blood pressure of 184/96 mmHg, a heart rate ranging from 154 to 180 bpm, and exophthalmos. Neck ultrasonography revealed an enlarged thyroid gland with increased vascularity. Laboratory examination showed elevated levels of free triiodothyronine (F-T3, >25.0 pg./mL) and free thyroxine (F-T4, >8.0 ng/dL), decreased levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH; <0.01 μU/mL), as well as elevated levels of TSH receptor antibody (>50 IU/L; reference, 0.0–1.9 IU/L), thyroid-stimulating antibody (1920 IU/mL; reference 0.0–3.2 IU/mL), and thyroglobulin antibody (867 IU/mL; reference 0.0–19.2 IU/mL). The patient was diagnosed with definite thyroid storm due to probable Graves’ disease , as well as schizophrenia according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition .
To better understand the patterns of changes in F-T3 and F-T4 levels, we divided the patient’s clinical course into four phases (A, B, A′, and B′), as shown in ; . illustrates the patient’s treatment course, which involved hospitalization on day 1, discharge on day 130, and subsequent hospital visits on days 135 and 140. At the time of admission, the patient had extremely high levels of F-T3 and F-T4, which gradually decreased until day 20, increased again around day 40, and then decreased steadily until discharge. Throughout treatment, TSH levels remained consistently below the detection sensitivity (<0.01 μU/mL).
During phase A, for managing thyrotoxicosis, the patient received treatment with 8 mg of dexamethasone, 200 mg of potassium iodide, 2 mg of bisoprolol fumarate, and 30 mg of methimazole, while her psychotic symptoms were treated with a 40 mg/day blonanserin transdermal patch (details are shown in , ). The patient’s auditory/visual hallucinations, agitation, and pressured speech disappeared within 2 days. However, she continued to talk to herself actively and reported hearing voices from her “friends,” indicating persisting auditory hallucinations. The doses of the medications for treating hyperthyroidism were gradually reduced according to the clinical manifestations and thyroid hormone levels. Specifically, the dexamethasone dose was tapered from an initial dose of 8 mg, and dexamethasone was discontinued on day 10. The methimazole dose was tapered to a daily dose of 20 mg from day 3 onwards. Bisoprolol fumarate was discontinued on day 7.
In phase B, F-T3 and F-T4 levels decreased, as did the auditory hallucinations and self-talk. The patient’s vital signs mostly remained within the normal range. For example, on day 13, the blood pressure was 130/70 mmHg and pulse rate ranged from 65 to 77 bpm. The patient’s treatment was adjusted considering the potential future administration of long-acting injectable paliperidone palmitate (PAL-LAI). From day 13 onward, the use of the blonanserin transdermal patch was discontinued, and oral administration of 3 mg of paliperidone was started. On day 20, the paliperidone dose was increased to 6 mg. For managing hyperthyroidism, the methimazole dose was tapered to 15 mg on day 11. Additionally, the potassium iodide dose was tapered to 50 mg on day 20. By day 23, her Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) score was 87 (positive: 19; negative: 27; global psychopathology: 41).
During phase A′, F-T3 and F-T4 levels increased considerably, and auditory hallucinations and self-talk increased again, but no visual hallucinations were observed. Among the medications for treating psychiatric symptoms, on day 34, oral paliperidone administration was discontinued and 150 mg PAL-LAI administration was initiated. The PAL-LAI dose was tapered to 100 mg on day 41. For treating hyperthyroidism, the methimazole dose was increased to 20 mg on day 28. Potassium iodide administration was initially discontinued, but it was restarted at a dose of 50 mg on day 45 due to an increasing trend in F-T3 and F-T4 levels.
In phase B′, F-T3 and F-T4 levels again decreased. Additionally, the patient’s psychiatric symptoms gradually improved. Notably, logorrhea disappeared, speech coherence improved, and the patient showed improved engagement in interactions with healthcare providers and other hospitalized patients and participation in group therapy. She experienced fewer auditory hallucinations, expressed discomfort with them, and gradually gained insight into her psychosis. The patient continued PAL-LAI treatment according to the prescribed regimen, receiving injections of 75 mg on days 69, 97, and 125. For treating hyperthyroidism, the potassium iodide dose was maintained at 50 mg, while the methimazole dose was reduced to 15 mg on day 100, 10 mg on day 112, and 5 mg on day 120. On day 140, 50 mg levothyroxine administration was initiated. By day 125, her PANSS score had decreased to 55 (positive: 12; negative: 17; global psychopathology: 26), and she was discharged on day 130. The treatment course is shown in , .