A 57-year-old Iranian female was referred to the infectious diseases department at Amiralmomenin Medical School hospital with jaundice, fever, body itching, abdominal pain, progressive muscle weakness, and pain from 1 week ago; on physical examination, she was found to have icteric sclera, right upper quadrant pain, and reduced muscle force. The patient had a history of diabetes mellitus (10 years), hypothyroidism, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and diabetic foot 5 months ago. The patient’s drug history included atorvastatin [40 mg per oral (PO) every day (QD), acetylsalicylic acid (80 mg PO QD], losartan (25mg PO QD), ranitidine (150 mg PO every 12 hours), amlodipine (2.5 mg PO QD), and furosemide (40 mg PO QD). The patient has been using insulin for the past 2 years. The patient was admitted to the hospital with the clinical diagnosis of acute hepatitis and myopathy. Before acute hepatitis, the patient did not have serum creatine kinase (CK) elevation due to statin consumption. On neurological examination, at the time of admission, muscle strength was 4 out of 5 in upper limbs and 2 out of 5 in lower limbs. One day after being hospitalized, the patient developed urinary retention leading to catheterization. Then, the muscle weakness became so severe that the patient was unable to walk and do defecation. After 1 week, the patient was visited by a neurologist and rheumatologist. All joints were normal, but limb muscle force and strength of gluteal muscle and external anal sphincter decreased. Initial differential diagnoses were acute hepatitis, statin toxicity, and rhabdomyolysis. As reported in the tables, the patient’s lab results demonstrated that the virology test for HBV Ag was positive with a high viral load level; however, the tests for other hepatitis viruses and HBV Ab were negative . At the first visit, lab tests demonstrated an increase in aminotransferases (ALT, AST), alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, CK, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), aldolase, and ferritin; however, the results improved 14 days later without any specific medication .
An ultrasonogram of the abdomen showed mild hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. Urine analysis (U/A) was negative for myoglobin. Electromyography/nerve conduction velocity (EMG/NCV) revealed acute myopathic process and chronic sensorimotor polyneuropathy . Chronic sensorimotor polyneuropathy was a complication of diabetes mellitus. All rheumatologic tests were negative, including antinuclear antibody (ANA), peripheral antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (p-ANCA), cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (c-ANCA), anti-double-stranded (ds)-DNA, antimitochondrial Ab, anti-smooth muscle Ab, tissue transglutaminase Ab, antigliadin Ab (IgG, IgM), and liver kidney microsomal type 1 (LKM-1). Copper (urine and blood), Fe, total iron binding capacity (TIBC), and ceruloplasmin were in normal range; Wright, Coombs Wright, and blood culture were negative. Urine analysis for myoglobinuria was negative, ruling out rhabdomyolysis.
Without any treatment, the patient’s hepatitis and muscle strength improved gradually. She was able to walk with a walker on discharge day after improving hepatitis symptoms, liver function test, and decreasing HBV viral load. The patient was discharged on day 19 with a relatively good general condition. The final diagnosis at discharge was coexisting acute hepatitis B and myopathy as a complication of viral hepatitis B .
Outpatient follow-up on day 30 and 1 year later revealed complete recovery, with the following test results: serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) 13 IU/l, serum glutamic-pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) 25 IU/l, alkaline phosphatase (ALK P) 230 IU/l, creatine kinase (CK) 152 IU/l, LDH 589 IU/l, total bilirubin (Billi T) 0.9 mg/dl, direct bilirubin (Billi D) 0.2 mg/dl, HBS Ag negative, HBS Ab 171 mIU/mL.