A 69-year-old man presented to the Urology Department with 2 years of lower urinary tract symptoms and macroscopic hematuria. His comorbidities included hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and insulin-dependent type 2 diabetes. Originally from Vietnam, he had a history of potential carcinogen exposure as a prisoner of war during the Vietnam War. Examination revealed normal external genitalia and a moderately enlarged, benign prostate on digital rectal exam, correlating with a gland volume of 61 cc on MRI. His PSA level and density was measured at 5.67 ng/mL and 0.09 ng/mL/m3. Subsequent bladder malignancy work up was normal, though an enlarged and vascular prostate was observed on flexible cystoscopy. After a failed trial of medical management, he underwent an elective TURP, in which 39.9 g of tissue was resected. Histology revealed a basaloid lesion with a spectrum of changes, including multiple foci of basal cell carcinoma. The cells were positive for P63, cytokeratin 5/6 and negative for alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase immunohistochemistry. There was strong staining seen with Bcl2 and luminal staining seen with cytokeratin 7 .
Subsequent staging investigations included multiparametric MRI of the prostate, which showed a bulky Prostate Imaging-Reporting and Data System tumor, with suspicious extra-capsular extension and seminal vesical involvement . However, positron emission tomography-computed tomography did not demonstrate fluorodeoxyglucose-avidity within these areas, the surrounding pelvic lymph nodes or more distally. The patient was offered robot-assisted radical prostatectomy. The final histopathology of the resected specimen showed basal cell carcinoma in both lobes, involving approximately 4% of the gland, without extra capsular extension, lymphovascular invasion, or seminal vesicle involvement (T2c) . Concomitant acinar adenocarcinoma (Gleason 3 + 3) was also identified, involving less than 1% of the gland, with one focus of perineural invasion . The PSA reduced to <0.03 ng/mL at 3 weeks post-robot-assisted radical prostatectomy. A follow-up surveillance plan of 6-monthly computed tomography abdomen/pelvis and PSA level was unanimously decided upon in consultation with urologists, uropathologists, and oncologists, given the unpredictable risk of recurrence in this disease.