A 68-year-old Caucasian male was referred to the emergency department with progressive complaints of fatigue, dyspnea, and poor appetite since 12 days. He had also fallen down and needed help getting back up. The patient was a retiree who had previously worked in law enforcement. He had no significant past medical history and did not take regular medications. He had a long-term history of smoking (80 pack-years) and consumed three alcoholic drinks daily. His general practitioner had noted a new diabetes mellitus with a glucose of 28 mmol/L when the patient presented in his practice 5 days earlier, but had not started treatment. The patient did not report coughing, chills, or chest pain. On physical examination, he appeared dyspneic and had an altered mental status but could still speak complete sentences. He had a blood pressure of 141/105 mmHg, pulse rate of 115 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 34 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 97% without supplemental oxygen, and temperature of 36.2 °C. He had cold extremities with a capillary refill < 3 seconds. No other signs such as peripheral edema, heart murmurs, pericardial friction rub, or pulmonary crackles were present. Excepting the altered mental status, the global neurological examination was normal. Laboratory studies showed a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 341 mg/L, neutrophilic leukocytosis with leukocyte count of 12.6 × 109/L, glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) of 96 mmol/mol, mildly elevated hepatic transaminases, and low serum myocardial markers. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed partially compensated respiratory alkalosis (pH 7.49, pCO2 3.5 kPa, pO2 12.6 kPa, HCO3 19.4 mmol/L, base excess −2.4 mmol/L, sO2 97%) (see Additional file for all laboratory values at first presentation). Chest X-ray revealed an enlarged cardiac silhouette and left lower-lobe atelectasis but no evident pleural effusion or infiltration . Electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with a QS pattern in V1–4, suggestive of an old anterior wall myocardial infarction. Point-of-care echocardiography was performed and visualized large, circumferential pericardial effusion . Also, wall motion abnormalities were seen that supported the theory that the patient had experienced an out-of-hospital anterior myocardial infarction in the weeks to months before the current presentation. The day after admission, ultrasound-guided pericardiocentesis was performed with immediate drainage of 600 mL of purulent fluid. Analysis of the fluid indicated a leukocyte count of 267 × 109/L, total protein of 51 g/L, and lactate dehydrogenase pericardial fluid-to-serum ratio of 8.7. As Gram stains of blood revealed Gram-positive diplococci, antibiotic therapy consisting of continuous, intravenous infusion with 6 million international units benzylpenicillin daily was initiated. At admission, blood culture specimens for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria had been collected and directly transported to a BacT/Alert Virtuo system (BioMérieux). Later on, these blood cultures as well as pericardial fluid cultures grew Streptococcus pneumoniae (serotype unknown). Antimicrobial susceptibility tests showed that the isolated strain was susceptible to a variety of antibiotics including penicillin, with a minimum inhibitory concentration of 0.016 mg/L. Initially, insulin and metformin were started for the newly diagnosed diabetes mellitus. Acetylsalicylic acid and low-molecular-weight heparin where started to prevent occlusive vascular events. Moreover, during the admission, several other medications were started for cardiovascular protection, to treat electrolyte imbalances, and to supplement vitamins because of the previous alcohol use (see Additional file for all medication administered during admission).
In the days following pericardiocentesis, a further 635 mL of purulent pericardial fluid was drained through the pericardial catheter and the patient’s clinical condition improved markedly. Daily, bedside transthoracic echocardiography confirmed adequate drainage of the pericardial effusion. The patient did not develop any symptoms that pointed us in the direction of a primary focus (for instance, no coughing, urinary complaints, or back pains). Repeated chest X-rays did not show signs of pneumonia or empyema. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antigen/antibody assay was negative, as were tests for other microorganisms (ELISpot for detection of M. tuberculosis; hepatitis C virus serology; and feces assays for C. difficile, Campylobacter, Salmonella, Shigella, Yersinia, and norovirus). The CRP level dropped to 102 mg/L. However, 6 days post-admission, the patient’s condition suddenly deteriorated with a blood pressure of 100/66 mmHg, sinus tachycardia of 131 beats per minute, and respiratory rate of 33 breaths per minute. A small amount of sanguineous fluid drained through the pericardial catheter. Echocardiography revealed reaccumulation of pericardial fluid including blood clot formation at the level of the right chamber in the pericardial cavity. Moreover, the wide inferior vena cava, right ventricular compression, and increased respiratory inflow variation (> 25%) over the mitral valve were indicative of cardiac tamponade. Attempts to clear the drain blockage by flushing with saline and adjusting the catheter’s location in the pericardial cavity did not lead to evacuation of any pericardial fluid. Thus, as removal of the obstructing blood clot through the pericardial catheter proved impossible, the patient was transferred to a tertiary hospital to undergo emergent cardiothoracic surgery. Immediately before transfer, the patient went into cardiac arrest and he was ultimately transported with ongoing cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Unfortunately, surgical removal of the clot proved unsuccessful, and the patient died only hours after onset of his sudden hemodynamic deterioration. In consultation with the family, no autopsy was performed.