A case of a 45-year-old female presented with neck pain, paresthesia in all four limbs, and difficulty in walking for 1 year duration. She had no history of headache, seizures, or any other symptoms attributable to intracranial pathology. Neurological examination revealed spasticity with hyperreflexia in bilateral lower limb. She had B/L hand grip weakness. There were no subcutaneous nodules, hypopigmented macules, or other stigmata of NF. Imaging study revealed only multiple meningiomas at foramen magnum and no other intracranial lesions suggestive of NF-2.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed well-defined lobulated dural-based mass lesion at foramen magnum on either side of spinal canal, located posterolateral causing severe compression of spinal cord. The cervicomedullary junction and upper cervical cord were sandwiched between the lesions. On contrast MRI, lesion showed homogenous avid enhancement. The left VA was encased within the lesion while the right vertebral was seen abutting it. The mass measured 14 mm (craniocaudal) × 12 mm (anterior- posterior) × 8 mm (width) on the right side and 12 mm (craniocaudal) × 11 mm (anterior-posterior) × 7 mm (width) on the left side . A diagnosis of mirror meningioma at foramen magnum was made and resection was planned. The patient underwent C-1 posterior arch excision, C-2 laminectomy, foramen magnum decompression, and resection of lesions. The tumor was highly vascular with different dural attachments posterior to dentate ligaments, on either side. Tumor was resected gross totally on the right side, in piecemeal. However, during the resection of medial part of the left side tumor, it was found to be adhered to the VA. Since the mass was adherent to the left VA, subtotal resection was done in a piecemeal manner and the dura was closed. Postoperative period was uneventful and the patient improved symptomatically. A contrast-enhanced MRI at follow-up of 6 months showed complete removal of tumor on the right side and small residual lesion on the left side . Histopathology revealed meningothelial meningioma (WHO-Grade 1) .
The patient was advised Gamma Knife radiosurgery (GKRS) for residual lesion but due to personal financial constraints, it could not be administered. Now, the patient is under regular clinical as well as imaging follow-up for early pick up of increase in size of residual cranial or appearance of new spinal lesion.