The patient was a 33 years-old male who was a herder living in Tibetan Plateau. He denied any history of smoking, alcohol, food allergy and drugs, and had no evident past medical history or history evident in family members. He was admitted to our hospital because of intermittent jaundice and scleral icterus. Also, he complained of bloating and an occasional bout of diarrhea. The patient did not receive any medications prior to admission. Physical examination revealed an epigastric mass and mild pitting edema in both lower limbs.
Laboratory investigation showed that hemoglobin was 93.0 g/dL, the white blood count was 5.85 × 109/L, the platelet count was 184.0 × 109/L, the international normalized ratio was 1.17, glucose was 4.15 mmol/L, and blood urea nitrogen was 3.28 mmol/L. Liver function tests showed the bilirubin total/direct was 285.70/136.31 µmol/L. Aspartate aminotransferase was 75.70 U/L, alanine aminotransferase was 44.45 U/L, and gamma glutamyl transferase was 79.47 U/L. Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) was 1.99 ng/mL, CA 125 (cancer antigen 125) was 153.50, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 1.69 ng/mL. Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT showed a 19.32 cm × 13.85 cm mass in the right hepatic lobe, encroaching the second hepatic hilum and compressing the inferior vena cava (IVC), and a large number of calcifications were observed. The right portal vein, middle and right hepatic veins and bile duct were all involved. Signs of portal hypertension, such as cavernous transformation of the portal vein (CTPV), ascites, and splenomegaly, were observed . Due to the low sensitivity and specificity of AE molecular diagnosis, we did not adopt it. On the basis of the long-life history of epidemic area, abdominal CT scan findings and laboratory examinations, a presumptive diagnosis of AE with Budd–Chiari syndrome (BCS) was made. The patient’s staging score was P3N0M0 (stage III a) based on parasitic liver mass, adjacent organ involvement, and metastasis (PNM) .
Preoperative biliary drainage was performed by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). The jaundice quickly declined after 3 weeks. Subsequently, emergency endoscopic hemostasis was conducted for upper gastrointestinal bleeding due to portal hypertension. The patient underwent ex vivo liver resection and auto transplantation (ELRA) after the extrahepatic lesions were resected. Samples were taken from the liver lesion, normal tissue, and the junction between each other . All liver tissues were fixed for more than 24 h, and then cut into 5 μm sections after paraffin embedding. Hematoxylin–eosin (HE) staining and immunohistochemical staining were performed according to the instructions . HE staining showed abundant granulomatous reaction and coagulative necrosis around the laminated parasitic membranes . A large number of nerves were observed at the junction by immunohistochemistry , and these were identified as sympathetic nerves by fluorescence colocalization . Follow-up 3 months after treatment showed complete relief of the symptoms.