A 37-year-old woman presented with a painless nodule in her umbilicus which histopathology examination suggested to be a malignant umbilical tumor. Fourteen months before admission, the patient had a history of umbilical tumor surgery, with histopathology examination suggesting moderately-differentiated adenocarcinoma. The patient also had additional oral chemotherapy six times, using Capecitabine 2 × 1500 mg. The patient complained about a recurrent mass in her umbilicus at the surgical scar site.
On examination, cytology examination using Fine Needle Aspiration Biopsy (FNAB) results identified some malignant cells (+). As seen in Figs. and , the adenocarcinoma of the sudoriferous gland is arranged into tubular and papillary patterns consisting of polymorphic cells, scanty cytoplasm, irregular nuclei, and coarse chromatin. Colonoscopy examination was performed to ascertain whether the tumor was primary or secondary colonic metastasis. Results were in the normal range, without intraluminal mass or stricture, and subsequent colon mucosa biopsy showed chronic colitis. CT (Computed tomography) scan was also performed, and the results showed no metastasis.
A recurrent tumor mass of adenocarcinoma with the diameter of 7 cm had been excised with the tumor margin of 5 cm. Wide excision surgery was performed leaving a 17 cm surgical defect on the anterior abdominal wall . The reconstruction was performed using anti-adhesive Parietex polyester mesh. Reasonable collagen barrier on one side to limit visceral attachment was sized 30 × 30 cm. Histopathology examination of the excised tissue suggested sudoriferous gland adenocarcinoma with adjacent tissue free of tumor cells. Treatment was continued with additional chemotherapy using Capecitabine 500 mg dose 3–0-2 mg and Bevacizumab (Avastin) 400 mg 12 times. Follow up PET (Positron Emission Tomography) scan six months post-surgery was performed and showed no residual tumor in the umbilical region, and no apparent paraaortic nor mesenteric lymphadenopathy. Postoperative follow-up after 2 years is shown in Fig. .