A 4-year-old boy presented to our Level 1 Trauma Center after being hit by a car in the parking lot where he was playing. The patient arrived to the Emergency Department awake and alert, however in respiratory distress. Primary survey revealed that his airway was intact. He had diminished breath sounds on the left side. GCS was 15. External injuries included an abrasion to the left hip. Blood pressure was 101/66, heart rate 174, and his oxygen saturation was in mid 80 percent range. FAST was negative. Patient was complaining of abdominal pain and chest pain rated 10 out of 10 in severity. He also had labored breathing.
Given the respiratory status, patient was intubated in the trauma bay. A chest radiograph was taken to evaluate for any life-threatening thoracic injuries as well as to confirm the position of the endotracheal tube . The chest radiograph revealed an elevated left hemi-diaphragm with patchy parenchymal opacities bilaterally. Initial labs were significant for leukocytosis of 15,700 (normal 3,600−11,000), normal creatinine 0.53 (normal 0.12–1.06), elevated AST 1,459 (normal 10–60), ALT 941 (normal 10–60), amylase 160 (normal 25–115), lipase 941 (normal 23–300), and lactate dehydrogenase 2,669 (normal 84–246). Calculated Blunt Abdominal Trauma in Children (BATiC) score was 9, indicating risk for abdominal injury.
Due to initial findings in the trauma bay, the diagnosis of rupture of the left diaphragm was strongly considered and a decision was made to take the patient to the operating room. Initially, he underwent a diagnostic laparoscopy. A large posterior traumatic diaphragmatic rupture with herniation of stomach, colon and spleen was identified on laparoscopy and so the decision was made to convert to an exploratory laparotomy. The patient then underwent reduction of herniated contents, and repair of large left diaphragmatic rent. The diaphragmatic defect was closed with a running PDS suture with the pneumothorax suctioned out using a red rubber catheter prior to complete closure.
On postoperative day one, physical exam revealed no respiratory distress, rales or wheezing, and breath sounds were clear bilaterally . In addition, his laboratory results normalized, except for the liver function tests, amylase, and lipase, which were improving. His rapid shallow breathing index (RSBI) was less than 105 and he was extubated to nasal cannula oxygen, which was later weaned off. The patient had an uncomplicated course from postoperative day two through six. He was kept until he tolerated a diet and his liver function tests were normalizing. On postoperative day seven, patient was stable for discharge home with laboratory results having normalized. He followed up in the outpatient clinic two weeks later and he was doing well without any respiratory issues.