A 51-year-old man underwent a distal pancreatectomy (DP) for PNET 13 years ago, with a histopathological diagnosis of NET G2. Lymph node metastasis was positive in 1/14 (near the pancreas); endocrine function was insulin negative, glucagon negative, and somatostatin negative; and Ki67 was 4%. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed indications of liver metastasis 6 months after surgery ; however, as there was no obvious tendency toward enlargement and multiple biopsies showed no evidence of malignancy. Thus the patient was followed up with CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) without additional treatments. Although the patient was followed up for 12 years after DP, CT, and MRI, these studies showed multiple lesions in both liver lobes and a trend toward enlargement with an increase from 23 to 36 mm in greatest diameter after one year . Left hepatectomy, partial resection, and cholecystectomy were performed for liver metastases. The Ki67 positivity rate of liver metastatic lesions was heterogeneous, ranging from < 3% to 20%. A follow-up MRI taken 1 year after liver surgery showed a nodular lesion in the pelvis with the greatest diameter of 13 mm; a MRI conducted 4 months later showed an enlargement to 19 mm in diameter . The nodules were not identified during the surgical resection of the liver metastasis. Serum neuron-specific enolase (NSE) was within normal limits, and colonoscopy (CS) findings were unremarkable. An ultrasound endoscopy was not performed because the tumor location could not be identified inside the gastrointestinal tract. A contrast-enhanced CT showed a 20-mm intrapelvic nodule, and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron-emission tomography (PET)/CT showed low FDG accumulation in the nodule . Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) showed low expression of somatostatin receptors in the nodule . The peritoneal dissemination of PNET was also deemed possible. Thus, laparoscopic surgery was performed as a diagnostic and potentially therapeutic procedure. The neoplastic lesion was found in the mesenteric side of the sigmoid colon after the dissection of adhesions surrounding the area. It was difficult to excise the tumor alone because the lesion involved the mesentery of the sigmoid colon. Thus, partial colectomy was performed, and the defective intestinal wall was sutured . The operative duration was 2 h and 45 min, and there was no blood loss. The tumor was 16 × 13 mm in size, and the split surface was white . Histopathological examination showed that the tumor originated from sigmoidal muscularis propria on the serosal side and an arrangement of eosinophilic spindle-shaped cells in the colonic wall, and immunohistochemistry revealed expression of S100 but no expression of c-kit , confirming the diagnosis of schwannoma arising from the Auerbach’s plexus. On the seventh postoperative day, the patient was discharged.