A 31-year-old woman, who complained of gaining body weight, red face, moon face, bruising, and menstrual irregularity for two years, presented to our outpatient department.
The patient’s symptoms started two years ago with weight gain, red face, moon face, bruising, and menstrual irregularity.
She was diagnosed with hypertension a month ago and was medicated with nifedipine delayed-release tablets (II) 40 mg twice a day. Her family history was negative.
Physical examination revealed centripetal obesity, moon face, buffalo hump, thin skin, hirsutism, acne, striae on her abdomen, arms, and legs, and edema of both lower extremities. The height of this patient was 159 cm, and her body weight was 73.5 kg. Her blood pressure was 130/100 mmHg, with a pulse of 84 beats per minute.
Her blood counts were within the normal limits, and she had no serum electrolytes disorders. The biochemical data showed dyslipidemia. The oral glucose tolerance test showed impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and obviously increased insulin and C-peptide levels. The endocrinological data showed elevated cortisol (761.0 nmol/L) and 24-h urine free cortisol (UFC) (1650.7 nmol/L) and the absence of a circadian rhythm and a non-suppression response to dexamethasone (dexamethasone 0.5 mg every 6 h for 2 d and 2 mg every 6 h for 2 d) administration .
Abdominal CT showed bilateral adrenal adenomas with atrophic adrenal glands (right: 3.1 cm × 2.0 cm × 1.9 cm; left: 2.2 cm × 1.9 cm × 2.1 cm), which were enhanced homogeneously with contrast material . A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the pituitary gland demonstrated normal findings.
The patient was further evaluated with 1-deamino-8-D-arginine-vasopressin (DDVAP). The peripheral DDVAP stimulation test showed a baseline ACTH level of 6.9 pmol/L, and ACTH reached a peak level (7.26 pmol/L) at 90 min after stimulation, which was 1.05 times as high as the baseline level . Then, we performed bilateral AVS to examine if the two adenomas were cortisol-secreting. Bilateral AVS results were as follows: the left-side adrenal vein (LAV)-to-peripheral vein (PV) cortisol gradient was 16.00; the right-side AV (RAV)-to-PV gradient was 8.29; and the ratio of the LAV cortisol-to-left side aldosterone (ALD) gradient to the RAV cortisol-to-right side ALD gradient was 1.23 .