This case study describes a 48-year-old female patient who was diagnosed with T1DM at the age of 16. The patient remained under regular follow-up while conducting a labile glycemic control by first using insulin NPH twice a day and, subsequently, using a long- acting human insulin analog (from 1999 to present) [Figure ].
There was no family history related to DM, systemic arterial hypertension or CAD. Smoking habits were absent during all her life. Her father died from stroke after the age of 70 years and her mother died from acute myocardial infarction when she was 75 years. Lipid profile and body mass index (BMI) and Blood pressure levels were normal, as were acute phase markers (C-reactive protein – CRP, homocysteine, apoprotein A and apoprotein B) [Figures , and ]. Accordingly, this patient had a low risk for CAD. Proteinuria levels were within normality until the age of 40 years and after this urinary albuminuria excretion rate (UAER) was either within normality [Figure ].
At the age of 42 (26 years of disease evolution), she presented for the first time with clinical symptoms of acute coronary syndrome (ACS) with an acute myocardial infarction (AMI). The cineangiocoronarography (CAT) of the left coronary artery disclosed extended stenosis of 90% at the anterior descending artery (DA) after the first diagonal branch and 80% at the proximal segment of the diagonal artery. The right coronary artery presented an extended stenosis of 90% before its bifurcation, and its posterior branches showed a stenosis of 90% at the medium segment [Figures and ]. She was submitted to a myocardial revascularization by implanting an internal left mammary graft for DA, an internal right mammary graft for the diagonal artery, and an aorta coronary bypass for the marginal coronary artery. At the age of 44 (2 years after the first ACS event), she presented another AMI, this time involving the right coronary artery (RCA) in the proximal portion with obstruction of 80-90% [Figure ]. Stents with rapamycin were immediately implanted at the right coronary artery. By this time, the echocardiogram disclosed no diastolic dysfunction, showing an ejection fraction of 70%.
At the age of 48, her last evaluation disclosed a predominantly systolic hypertension, and her myocardial scintigraphy showed an ischemia induced by effort, despite the optimized cardiovascular therapy.