A 72-year-old woman with a history of multiple anterior circulation cerebral aneurysm clipping (6 years previously) was referred to our department because of a gradually growing and unruptured basilar tip aneurysm. Her neurological examination was normal and a cerebral angiogram revealed a basilar tip aneurysm with a maximum size of 4.6 mm. Endovascular balloon-assisted coil embolization was performed under general anesthesia. Dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg) was started 2 weeks before the surgery, and cilostazol (200 mg) was orally administered on the day of the treatment. A 6-French (Fr) introducer was placed in the right femoral artery. After systemic heparinization (intravenous injection at 5000 units, followed by continuous intravenous infusion of 1000 units/h), a 6-Fr guiding catheter (Roadmaster STR 90 cm; Goodman, Aichi, Japan) was placed in the right VA. The tip of the guiding catheter was placed in the distal end of the V2 segment and a VA angiogram confirmed no findings of decreasing contrast flow from the arterial to venous phases . Balloon-assisted coil embolization using a microcatheter (SL-10; Stryker Neurovascular, Fremont, CA, USA) and compliant balloon (SHOURYU 4 mm × 7 mm; Kaneka Medics, Kanagawa, Japan) was performed. Six coils were inserted into the aneurysm, with preservation of the bilateral posterior cerebral arteries . During the procedure, there was no blood regurgitation into the Y-connector and no complications with the continuous infusion of saline with heparin in the guiding system. The duration of the guiding catheter placement in the right VA was approximately 120 min. According to the anesthesia records, mean arterial pressure (MAP) during the procedure ranged from 46 to 76 mmHg. The activating clotting time at the completion of the procedure was 283 s and was reversed with protamine.
Although the awakening from anesthesia was good, the patient presented with right hemiparesis (Manual Muscle Test: 2/5); thus, an emergency brain MRI was performed. Diffusion-weighted imaging revealed very small ischemic lesions involving the pons and bilateral cerebellar hemispheres; however, these lesions were not related to the patient’s neurological deficit. Four days after the intervention, the patient noted left thermal hypoalgesia, and cervical MRI revealed spinal cord infarction associated with spinal cord swelling on the right side at the level of the second and third cervical vertebral body [-]; this seemed likely to have caused the symptoms. Her right-sided hemiparesis rapidly improved but chronic discomfort of the left limb continued. We performed conventional cerebral angiography 27 days after the intervention and confirmed a well-embolized aneurysm without opacification of the ASAs [ and ]. A coronal CBCT scan of the right VA showed an avascular area consistent with spinal cord infarction [, blank arrow]. Radiculomedullary arteries (RMAs) at the level of C4 and C5 were visible; however, the RMA of the upper cervical spine from the right VA was not visualized. Although an axial CBCT view of the right VA at the level of C3 showed faint opacification around the right side of the spinal cord, an axial view of the left VA at the same level showed clear opacification of the left side of the spinal cord. On the other hand, an axial CBCT view of the right VA at the level of C4 showed clear opacification of the bilateral spinal surface pial vessels. A coronal CBCT scan of the left VA showed clear opacification of the RMA , arrow) connected to an anterior spinal artery. Cervical MRI 28 days after the intervention showed an improvement in spinal cord edema; the final extent of the infarction was well defined [-, arrows]. The patient was discharged home and showed improvements in motor function after an intensive rehabilitation program. Despite chronic pain in the left upper and lower limbs, she was able to conduct her daily life without any assistance (modified Rankin Scale: 2) at a 3-month follow-up.