A 67-year-old woman who complained of gross hematuria for 3 days was admitted to our department on November 21, 2012. The patient reported hematuria without fever, and denied having low back pain or edema of lower limbs. She had been diagnosed with diabetes, but was not undergoing regular treatment. Her main laboratory examination and ancillary investigation results were as follows. Routine urine test showed occult blood in the urine, with ++ cells/μL. Biochemical examination showed a blood sugar level of 8.36 mmol/L. The serum creatinine (SCr) level and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) were 93.5 μmol/L and 60.78 ml/min/1.73 m2, respectively. Urine cytology test showed the presence of tumor cells twice. Enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a soft tissue density in the upper calyx of the left kidney, suggesting pyelo-carcinoma . Computed tomography angiography (CTA) identified the blood vessels that supply the tumor region .
After admission, the patient received aggressive perioperative treatment in order to improve her cardiac and renal function, and to control her blood sugar levels, so as to improve her tolerance to surgery. Ureteroscopy detected a papillary neoplasm with a pedicle in the upper calyx of the left kidney. Subsequently, the patient underwent LPN with segmental renal artery clamping. After entering the retroperitoneal space and dissociating the renal artery and renal vein, the target artery was clamped beyond the final bifurcation before entering the parenchyma. Access and clamping strategies for target arteries were preoperatively determined on the basis of the 3D models by the radiologist and surgeon. After incision of the left renal parenchyma and exposure of the upper calyceal neck, the tumor was found confined to the upper calyx. Later, the renal calyx and parenchyma were sutured successively after complete resection of the neoplasm. During the operation, a double J tube was placed for drainage of urine and for postoperative infusion therapy. The tumor was found to be confined to the upper calyx of the left kidney. Histopathological examination of the surgical specimens confirmed a diagnosis of papillary Grade I carcinoma of the renal pelvis, with massive hemorrhage, with the tumor measuring 18 mm × 10 mm × 7 mm and confined to the mucosal layer . All surgical margins were negative.
The patient received postoperative intravesical instillation of pharmorubicin fortnightly for 3 months. Subsequently, the double J tube was removed. A cystoscopy was performed every 3 months for the first 3 years. CT was performed to check for the recurrence or metastasis of the tumor every 6 months for the first 3 years, and annually thereafter. There was no evidence of recurrence during the follow-up period for more than 43 months after surgery till the time of writing this report. The most recent SCr level and eGFR of the patient were 82.9 μmol/L and 69.78 mL/min/1.73 m2, respectively.