The patient was an 8-month-old male (height 65.7 cm; weight 7 kg) born through normal vaginal delivery weighing 2768 g. A heart murmur was audible, and the patient was diagnosed as having a perimembranous ventricular septal defect (VSD) with pulmonary hypertension due to a left-to-right shunt 4 days after birth. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed that the defect passed from the perimembranous septum to the infundibular septum. The defect was 7.4–8.9 mm in diameter and was accompanied by mild tricuspid regurgitation (TR) and mitral regurgitation. The peak TR pressure gradient was 54 mmHg, and the left ventricle ejection fraction was 73%. The patient had no other congenital heart malformations. Although the patient was administered diuretics after diagnosis, he had poor weight gain after 5 months of age, secondary to heart failure. Therefore, the patient was scheduled for VSD closure with lower partial sternotomy.
Preoperative data were within normal ranges, with the exception of the concentration of hemoglobin (Hb) in blood ([Hb]) that was 10.2 g/dL. Upon arrival to the operating room, general anesthesia was induced with 5% sevoflurane in a mixture of 50% nitrous oxide and 50% oxygen. Following placement of an intravenous catheter, endotracheal intubation was facilitated with 70 μg fentanyl and 10 mg rocuronium. Anesthesia was maintained with 1–5% sevoflurane in the air, with concomitant fentanyl and rocuronium as required. During CPB, fentanyl, midazolam, and rocuronium were intravenously administered. Monitoring included electrocardiography and measurement of invasive right radial artery blood pressure (RRBP) and right femoral arterial blood pressure (RFBP), oxygen saturation of peripheral artery (SpO2) in the patient’s left finger and toe, end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2), and central venous pressure (CVP) via a central venous catheter inserted into the right internal jugular vein as well as nasopharyngeal and bladder temperatures. In addition to transesophageal echocardiography (TEE; iE33 xMATRIX S8-3 t Micro TEE transducer; Philips Japan, Ltd.), rSO2 was measured by using an INVOS 5100C (Medtronic Japan Co., Ltd.) adult sensor placed on the patient’s right forehead. The insertion of the TEE probe did not affect the patient’s vital signs. The patient’s vital signs at the start of the operation were as follows: RRBP 82/44 mmHg, RFBP 91/52 mmHg, SpO2 100% at fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) 0.21, ETCO2 36 mmHg, CVP 10 mmHg, rSO2 59%, nasopharyngeal temperature (Tnaso) 36.4 °C, and [Hb] 10.2 g/dL.
Following lower partial sternotomy, the pericardium was towed cephalad and fixed to expose the aorta. Suddenly, RRBP decreased from 82/44 to 26/22 mmHg, followed by a subsequent decrease in rSO2 from 59 to 16% . Simultaneously, the other vital signs remained steady as follows: RFBP 88/44 mmHg, SpO2 100% on the left hand (FiO2 0.21), ETCO2 36 mmHg, CVP 10 mmHg, and Tnaso 36.3 °C. We confirmed that [Hb] was 10.2 g/dL without any signs of sudden hemorrhage in the surgical area. On the basis of these parameters, the decreases of RRBP and rSO2 might have been caused by an obstruction of the right innominate artery, secondary to the pericardium and aortic root traction. We promptly discussed this issue with the surgeons and reached a consensus to remove the pericardium fixation. Following removal, RRBP increased to 59/33 mmHg and rSO2 to > 50%. Transient reduction in RRBP and rSO2 continued for approximately 30 s until the pericardial fixation was removed. Subsequently, the traction of pericardium was modified to maintain rSO2 stability. After modification, the operation proceeded uneventfully. Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) under sedation and intubated. The patient gained consciousness and was extubated 3 h later, without any neurological abnormalities. The patient was discharged from the ICU on postoperative day 3.