A 24-year-old Japanese woman presented to our hospital with complaints of recurrent fever and subcutaneous abscess on her left upper limb. She had been previously healthy and worked as a nurse in a general hospital. She had a history of multiple subcutaneous abscesses in a year, all occurring after surgeries of the shoulder and forearms performed for bone fracture and impingement syndrome. For 3 months before admission she had repeated episodes of subcutaneous abscess on her left forearm, which was the site of blood collection and arterial line puncture. Cefazolin, cefotiam, piperacillin, sulbactam/ampicillin, clindamycin, ceftazidime, gentamicin, and meropenem were sequentially administered, but the problem was not resolved. The cellulitis worsened in spite of these antibiotic treatments, and finally she developed bacteremia. Incision and drainage of her left upper limb was conducted 1 week before admission, and she was referred and admitted to our hospital for further investigation and treatment.
She did not have underlying diseases or any family members with psychiatric disorders, autoimmune diseases, or malignancies. Her social history revealed no trouble with her surroundings, including her workplace. Her physical characteristics on admission were as follows: height, 155 cm; weight, 45 kg; body temperature, 37.4 °C; blood pressure, 122/76 mmHg; heart rate, 70 beats/minute and regular; and respiratory rate, 15/minute. A physical examination on admission did not reveal any focus of infection other than her left forearm. The skin of her left upper extremity had been incised at two points. Redness, swelling, and induration of the skin by cellulitis were seen around the incision . Laboratory data suggested systemic inflammation and mild liver dysfunction .
On admission, we considered the possibility of immunodeficiency, but there were no abnormalities of her immune system, such as changes in the number of lymphocytes and neutrophils, neutrophil phagocytosis disinfection capacity, or natural killer (NK) cell activity. She was also negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection . Contrast-enhancedcomputed tomography (CT) of her whole body, transesophageal echocardiography, magnetic resonance imaging of her heart and spine, and bone marrow puncture all failed to detect any focus of infection except her left upper limb. Microbiological examinations, including a culture for anaerobic bacteria using an anaerobic porter, detected Streptococcus mitis, β-Streptococcus, genus Mobiluncus, and Prevotella buccae from the wound, but no microorganisms were detected in her blood. At first, she was treated with meropenem (2 g/day) and linezolid (1200 mg/day) intravenously, and the cellulitis was promptly resolved. However, unexpectedly, she suddenly developed high fever and complained of severe pain at the site of the cellulitis. We made an emergency incision of her left upper limb for diagnosis of compartment syndrome and observed a jet of pus out of the supinator muscle . As a result, the antibiotic was switched to garenoxacin (400 mg/day). Stenotrophomonas maltophilia was detected in blood and pus cultures, so sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim was added. However, an allergic reaction to sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, such as acute fever and extensive skin eruption, occurred, so we switched to minocycline instead. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy was also performed nine times against the refractory soft tissue infection to improve neutrophil functions . At the end, these multidisciplinary treatments allowed her to consider discharge, however, high fever and subcutaneous abscess of the same limb suddenly developed again.
As a result of this puzzling clinical course, especially the fact that multiple species, including oral indigenous bacteria with a polymicrobial pattern, were detected in cultures of blood and the wound abscess , we finally suspected the possibility of self-injury. A psychiatrist was consulted and gave sufficient explanation to our patient and her family to persuade them to cooperate in diagnosing and treating her. Her sister found three syringes with needles in her bag, and one of these syringes contained a turbid liquid . Enterobacter cloacae and Enterococcus faecalis were detected in the liquid, with identical susceptibility to that of the bacteria detected in pus from the muscle. An analysis by repetitive element sequence-based polymerase chain reaction (PCR) determined that Enterococcus faecalis from the wound and the syringe contents were genetically identical . Finally, a diagnosis of Munchausen syndrome was confirmed.
No further episodes of fever and cellulitis occurred after the start of monitoring by camera and restraint of both upper and lower limbs but, 3 weeks later, our patient suddenly left our hospital and attempted suicide. An order was obtained for compulsory hospitalization for medical care and protection, and she was admitted to the psychiatric department. Two weeks later she confessed that she had injected her saliva or toilet water into a drip bag and into her wound with a syringe. She expressed feelings of extreme loneliness when deprived of care by medical staff. Her mental condition has gradually improved. She was discharged after 2 months of treatment in the psychiatric ward and was followed up in out-patients for a few years.