A 58-year-old man with a medical history of hypertension for about 30 years and ultrasonic lithotripsy 9 days prior presented to the emergency department with drowsiness, loss of appetite, emesis, and left limb weakness that had lasted 1 week. Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 169/94 mmHg (range, 124–185 to 58–112 mmHg in the days prior to admission), lethargy, impaired memory and attention, and left hemiparesis. Head noncontrast computed tomography (CT) showed multiple subcortical hypodense changes. The next morning, the neurologic deficit was worsening, and there was also right limb weakness with bilateral extensor plantar response. At noon on the same day, the patient experienced a seizure. Emergency magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed diffuse hyperintensities on T2-weighted images localized subcortically in the white matter of both hemispheres, predominantly in the temporal and occipital lobes, and several small cortical and subcortical hypointense signal changes in bilateral temporal lobes consistent with CMBs on susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI). The apparent diffusion coefficient map suggested vasogenic edema . The angiogram was negative for cerebral venous sinus thrombosis.
Laboratory tests showed normal total and differential leukocyte counts, normal prothrombin and partial thromboplastin time, normal thyroid peroxidase antibody, Na 139 mmol/l, blood urea nitrogen 5.06 mmol/l, ammonia 28 μmol/l, and elevated serum C-reactive protein level (8.5 mg/dl; normal < 0.20 mg/dl). The CSF analysis showed 13 cells/mm3 (mononuclear cells, 10 cells/mm3; polynuclear cells, 3 cells/mm3) and elevated total protein concentration (207 mg/dl) with an opening pressure of 400 mmH2O. Both immunoglobulin G (IgG) and albumin were significantly increased in the CSF (464 mg/l and 1.57 g/l, respectively), suggesting severe disruption of the blood–brain barrier (BBB). The IgG index was mildly elevated (0.89; normal ≤ 0.70); however, no CSF oligoclonal IgG bands were detected. The workup for rheumatic disease was negative. CSF cultures showed no bacteria, mycobacteria, or fungi. Polymerase chain reaction was negative for herpes simplex virus and Mycobacterium avium complex. Serum and CSF antibodies suggestive of autoimmune encephalitis, central nervous system demyelinating disease, or paraneoplastic encephalitis were not detected.
A diagnosis of PRES due to shock wave lithotripsy and hypertension was initially suggested. Following MRI, the patient was immediately given intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone (1000 mg/day for 3 days and then 500 mg/day for 3 days), mannitol, glycerol fructose, and torasemide, with nicardipine by infusion for hypertension control; levetiracetam and valproic acid were also administered out of concern for ongoing seizure activity. The neurologic symptoms rapidly improved over the course of the following week, and the therapy was adjusted according the principle of PRES treatment with blood pressure control strictly maintained and IV mannitol tapered off.
However, the patient’s mental status again deteriorated, with several vomiting episodes on day 10 after withdrawal of methylprednisolone. The patient fell into a stupor with obtunded pupils. An emergency head CT scan showed patchy low-attenuation white matter lesions predominantly in the right hemisphere with distinct mass effect. (see supplementary Fig. ).
The diagnosis of PRES was questioned at that time and CAA-RI was instead considered. Given that the worsening of brain edema may have been caused by methylprednisolone withdrawal, high-dose methylprednisolone (500 mg/day for 5 days) and dehydration therapy were immediately reinitiated followed by oral prednisone (initially 60 mg/day, followed by 5 mg tapering off every 10 days) . Ten days after methylprednisolone reinitiation, MRI showed that the edema had subsided considerably although innumerable cortical CMBs appeared on SWI . The patient’s mental status gradually improved and he was discharged 24 days later; the apolipoprotein E (ApoE) gene report revealed a ε4/ε4 genotype.
At the 3-month follow-up, the patient had achieved both clinical and radiologic recovery with oral prednisone 15 mg/day, although the multiple and scattered subcortical CMBs showed no change . A final diagnosis of probable CAA-RI was made.