A 40-year-old, right hand dominant, unemployed, female presented to the emergency department with right wrist pain following a fall onto her right outstretched hand. She had a past medical history of smoking (30 pack/years), hypertension, adult obstructive sleep apnea, depression, bipolar disorder, and anxiety. Her body mass index (BMI) at that time was 39. Initial evaluations revealed a swollen wrist, no ecchymosis and a 2+ radial pulse. Radiographs demonstrated a right intra-articular distal radius fracture (AO, type 23-A3) in AP and lateral views. Following reduction, patient was placed in a sugar tong splint and was instructed to return for follow-up in one week. At 7 days, radiographs showed -20 degree of dorsal tilt . At that point, she chose to undergo surgery.
Patient underwent open reduction and internal fixation of the fracture using volar locked plating (Acumed, Aculock, Hillsboro, OR). The fracture was fixed with three 2.7 mm cortical screws on the shaft and four 2.3 mm locking screws distally. She was placed in a volar wrist splint for 10 days. Following suture removal, she received two sessions of formal physical therapy. At 4 weeks after the surgery, she had 30 degrees of wrist extension, 40 degrees of flexion, 10 degrees of radial deviation, 25 degrees of ulnar deviation, 60 degrees of supination, and 60 degrees of pronation. Her grip strength was 17 lbs on the right and 60 lbs on left.
At 10 weeks after the surgery, she presented with new onset of pain following a popping sensation while trying to push a revolving door. She denied any falls or acute trauma, however admitted to have repeatedly used her arms to push herself up from a seated position. On physical examination, she had no obvious edema, erythema and ecchymosis. She did have tenderness to palpation over the distal radius and ulnar styloid process. She had decreased range of motion secondary to pain in flexion, extension, ulnar deviation, and radial deviation. The sensations to light touch in the distribution of radial, median, and ulnar nerves were intact. Radiographs showed 4 broken screws . No immediate action was taken to revise the surgery as radiographs showed only 2 mm shortening with neutral lateral tilt. Due to her tenderness, we placed her in a cast for 3 weeks, followed by a removable splint for 3 additional weeks.
Six months following failure of the hardware, she continued to have ulnar sided wrist pain as well as impingement of the plate on the volar aspect of the wrist. She then elected to undergo plate removal. Following removal of the plate, she stayed relatively asymptomatic for 2 weeks and was lost to follow-up for 12 months. Eighteen months after the first surgery, she presented with significant pain, collapse of the radius relative to the ulna (4 mm), and a nonunion of the distal radius despite the bridging callus seen on the x-rays . She denied any major traumas since her fall, but her wrist pain had gradually worsened. Due to her significant pain, we took her to the OR for a revision surgery.
During the surgery, a significant degree of bone loss and nonunion were noted at the fracture site. The distal end of the radius had a significant bone defect, approximately 2.5 cm in length, between the metaphyseal and the subchondral areas of the bone. In the absence of any bony support, the decision was made to span the join with an AO wrist fusion plate. This plate was preferred over conventional plates since it contained a combination of 3.5 mm screws on the radius and 2.7 mm screws on the metacarpal shaft. A total of 10 cc of demineralized bone matrix chips were placed at the fracture site. During the application of the fusion plate, we noted that the proximal carpal row was still impinging on the head of the ulna. Therefore, we decided to perform an ulnar shortening osteotomy at the same time. Final radiographic views obtained 12 months after the wrist fusion surgery is shown on Figure .