A 37 year old male presented with complaints of low grade fever with evening rise, malaise, anorexia and weight loss for 3 months, pain and redness in the right eye for 2 months, and diplopia and swelling in the right eyeball for 1 1/2 months.
General and systemic examinations were within normal limits. Ophthalmologic examination revealed a right proptosis and conjunctival chemosis. Visual acuity was normal. A diffuse tender swelling was present in the right periorbital and temporal region.
Routine hematological investigations showed mild normocytic normochromic anemia (Hemoglobin-9.7 g %) and an elevated Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) (124 mm/1st hour). Other parameters were within normal limits.
Routine biochemical investigations did not reveal any abnormality.
Contrast Enhanced Computerized Tomography (CECT) [Figure and ] and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) [Figure ] of head showed a lytic destructive lesion involving the right sphenoid bone, frontal bone and zygomatic arch. An associated soft tissue component was seen extending laterally into the infratemporal fossa and medially into the orbit.
Based on the clinico-radiological findings, diagnostic possibilities of a tubercular lesion, lymphoma and a sphenoid wing meningioma were considered.
FNAC from the diffuse swelling in the temporal region was performed using a 23 gauge needle attached to a 20 cc syringe. The aspirate was hemorrhagic. Smears fixed in 90% alcohol and air dried smears were stained by Papanicoloau technique, and Giemsa stain respectively.
Microscopic examination revealed hemorrhagic smears exhibiting single cells as well as groups of plasma cells having eccentrically placed nuclei with cartwheel chromatin pattern and basophilic cytoplasm with variable degree of paranuclear clearing [Figure ]. Few cells also showed cytoplasmic vacuoles and binucleation [Figure ]. A cytological diagnosis of plasmacytoma was thus given and further evaluation advised to rule out systemic involvement.
A detailed workup was performed. Test for urinary Bence-Jones proteins on a random urine sample was negative. Serum proteins showed a reversed albumin/globulin ratio (0.58). Serum calcium level (9.5 mg/dl) and renal function tests were normal. Serum beta-2 microglobulin was elevated (3788 μg/L; normal range 700–3400 μg/L).
Serum protein electrophoresis showed hypergammaglobulinemia and a monoclonal gammopathy (M spike) in the gamma globulin region (4.03 g/dL).
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy [Fig ] showed infiltration by groups and sheets of plasma cells comprising about 40% of marrow population.
A skeletal survey did not show evidence of any other bony involvement.
A final diagnosis of multiple myeloma manifesting as orbital involvement at presentation was thus made.