A 50-year-old male Caucasian patient from Northern Ireland presented with a 6-month history of an enlarging firm tender swelling adjacent to his left buttock. He also described progressive dysphagia to solids with intermittent odynophagia. He had associated anorexia and weight loss of 7 kilograms over a 3-month period. He had no other gastrointestinal symptomatology. He had no other significant medical history but smoked 40 cigarettes a day. There was no history of oesophageal cancer but his father died from colon cancer aged 87. He drank alcohol occasionally and had no previous proton pump inhibitor usage.
On examination, he was haemodynamically stable. Abdominal examination was unremarkable. However, he had a suspicious 18 cm × 12 cm mass arising adjacent to his left buttock that was tender on palpation and fixed to the underlying left sacroiliac joint. Initial haematological investigations demonstrated a haemoglobin level of 16.9 g/dl and a white cell count of 9.71 × 109/litre. Urea and electrolytes were normal. The alkaline phosphatase was 129 μ/L and corrected calcium was 3.07 mmol/L. Both carcinoembyronic antigen and CA 19-9 tumour marker levels were raised at 18.7 (normal range = 0-4) and 235 (normal range = 0-37) units/ml respectively.
A plain X-ray of the pelvis demonstrated a soft tissue density over the left sacroiliac joint without any evidence of definite bone destruction . An urgent OGD revealed marked inflammatory changes in the distal oesophagus at 35 cm with a slightly raised mucosa which was suspicious of an underlying malignancy. Multiple biopsies were taken. A subsequent CLO-test was positive for helicobacter pylori and he was commenced on appropriate eradication therapy combined with oral omeprazole 20 mg twice a day. A contrast-enhanced computerised tomography of the chest, abdomen and pelvis revealed multiple opacities in the left and right hemithoraces suspicious of metastatic deposits . The oesophagus was thick walled at the level of the posterior mediastinum in keeping with a possible neoplastic lesion. A large soft tissue mass was identified arising from the posterior sacro- iliac joints . There was erosion of the iliac bone into the sacro-iliac joint with increased vascularity to the left gluteal musculature. The differential diagnosis included an oesophageal lesion or a primary bone tumour such as a chondrosarcoma or osteosarcoma which had metastasised to the lung or even a dual pathology. Although not usually associated with such widespread metastatic disease, a solitary plasmacytoma was also considered. Histopathological assessments from the oesophagus confirmed a squamous carcinoma while an ultrasound guided biopsy from the left gluteal mass revealed the presence of a metastatic squamous cell carcinoma originating from the primary oesophageal tumour.
Unfortunately with the advanced nature of the patient's neoplastic disease, aggressive surgical intervention was not appropriate. Oesophageal stenting was discussed with the patient and delayed due to a lack of complete obstructive symptomatology. He had a 2-week course of palliative radiotherapy (10 fraction course) to the posterior aspect of his left pelvis with a moderate response. Unfortunately he has developed a left foot drop which may be related to possible metastatic sacral nerve involvement. Although palliative chemotherapy was planned, he was not fit to undergo the treatment and was referred to the palliative care team. His prognosis remains guarded.