A 63-year old man had been suffering from multiple system atrophy (MSA) for four years, due to which he was physically deteriorating. This led him to request euthanasia. The man was a former health care professional and his last wish was to donate his organs following euthanasia. He was aware of factors influencing the quality of donated organs, like the warm ischemic time (WIT). Consequently, he specifically requested euthanasia to be performed in the operating room.
However, he objected to spending his last conscious moments in a hospital. His explicit wish was to be sedated at home, followed by transportation to the hospital. This way, he could ‘fall asleep’ in his familiar environment, surrounded by his loved ones.
Before the procedure, the patient’s case was discussed several times with all stakeholders, including his general practitioner, the organ donation coordinator (ODC), the hospital’s legal officer, medical director, coordinating intensivist for donation affairs, municipal coroner, public prosecutor, anaesthesiologist-intensivists, the medical ethical committee and the hospital board. All were in favour of facilitating the patient’s last wish.
Anticipatory preparations were necessary to perform general anesthesia at home. The ODC visited the patient and his family multiple times, during which he developed and maintained a close, yet professional relationship with both the patient and his relatives. He discussed the patient’s wishes, provided information about the combined euthanasia and organ donation procedure, and anticipated any practical issues that might arise, including measuring the elevator for the ambulance stretcher and the working space around the patient’s bed. This was especially important because the patient’s family, his wife, and (grand)children wanted to be present during induction of anesthesia. All potential scenarios were discussed with the patient and his relatives to achieve clarity on mutual expectations and to prevent any potential unpleasant or unforeseen experiences for the family. All visits were pre- and post-discussed with the patient’s own general practitioner and all other stakeholders.
On the day of the procedure the team (ODC, anesthetist-intensivists, intensive care nurse) was professionally equipped to provide anesthesia, and perform endotracheal intubation and subsequent mechanical ventilation at the patient’s home. The patient was sitting in his lounge chair in the living room facing a beautiful outdoor environment, with his wife, children, grandchildren and his dog surrounding him, while music was playing in the background.
The patient confirmed his last wish to undergo euthanasia followed by organ donation. After transferring the patient to his bed, he was given an intravenous access. He said farewell to his family, and subsequently the general anesthesia was induced with 15 mg midazolam, 10 mg piritramide and 100 mg rocuronium. Following uncomplicated intubation and mechanical ventilation, he was transported to the university hospital by ambulance (mobile intensive care unit). The patients’ relatives chose to stay at home and not to be present during euthanasia itself.
After the patient’s arrival in the OR’s preparation room, the remaining preparatory investigations were performed, including an abdominal ultrasound. His general practitioner administered the euthanasia drugs according to the euthanasia guideline after which the mechanical ventilation was switched off. After circulatory arrest and the mandated 5-min no-touch waiting period, the patient was declared dead and transported to the operating room, where the surgical retrieval team was anticipating his arrival. Any contact between those performing anesthesia and euthanasia and the surgical team was avoided. Organ procurement was uneventful; both kidneys, the liver and pancreas were donated. The lungs were rejected because of relapsing aspiration pneumonias in the past.
As euthanasia, from a legal perspective, is a non-natural death, the municipal coroner and public prosecutor were asked to grant a priori permission for the combined euthanasia and donation procedure. After the procurement, the patient’s body was brought home again by the mortician. The euthanasia review committee evaluated the procedure post hoc and determined that all due diligence criteria criteria had been fulfilled. All extra costs of the organ donation procedure were reimbursed by the Dutch transplantation society. The costs for the (exceptional) mobile intensive care transport were not charged. None of these measures had consequences for the regular care of other patients.