A 26-year-old pregnant women of Asian Indian origin was referred to the obstetric casualty by the general practitioner with a provisional diagnosis of placental abruption in view of abdominal pain, pallor and inability to find fetal heart. The women had insidious onset of pain for 12 hrs, and with reduced fetal movements for the same duration. The woman was third gravida with 32 weeks gestation, with previous two normal deliveries and an uneventful antenatal period. Her dating and anomaly scan were normal. There was also no history of trauma, any diagnostic or therapeutic intrauterine intervention, vaginal bleeding or labor pains. She had no significant past medical, surgical history or gynecological history.
On examination, she was pale with respiratory rate of 28 per minute, pulse rate of 110 per minute and blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg. On abdominal examination, uterus measured 30 weeks, with mild abdominal tenderness and no increased tone. The uterine wall felt thin but with regular outline and no fetal part was palpable. Fetal heart could not be localized. Speculum examination showed no vaginal bleeding and there was marked tenderness on internal examination and cervix was uneffaced and os admitted tip of finger.
Ultrasound scan revealed fetal demise. An intact amniotic sac with fetus and normal volume of amniotic fluid, without any echogenecity to suggest blood, was seen lying outside the uterus. Uterus was deviated towards left iliac fossa. Diagnosis of rupture uterus with fetal demise was made and the woman was prepared for laparotomy. Blood investigations revealed hemoglobin of 7.7 gm% with no evidence of coagulopathy.
After resuscitation with intravenous fluids, the patient was taken for surgery. Emergency exploratory laparotomy was done with consent for hysterectomy or uterine repair with tubal sterilization under intravenous antibiotic cover. An intact amniotic sac with fetus was found along with 1.5 liter of haemoperitoneum. Membranes were ruptured and male stillborn fetus (weight 2.2 kilograms) was delivered with breech extraction. The amniotic fluid was clear, and placenta was lying outside the uterus and appeared complete and normal. There was a 3 inch tear on the right side of the uterine fundus, 2 cm anterior to the cornua. The myometrium adjacent to this was relatively thin. There was no evidence of couvelier uterus. The tear was repaired by suturing the uterus in double layer. Bilateral tubal ligation was done. She received one unit of blood during intra-operative and three during the postoperative period. Her postoperative period was uneventful and was discharged after eight days.