A 46-year-old man presented to the emergency medical assessment unit with an 8-day history of visual hallucinations and paranoid delusions. He had a past medical history of essential tremor that was being treated with topiramate. In the past he had tried propranolol and labetalol with little benefit. There was no past history of psychiatric symptoms. He had consumed no alcohol in the previous 3 months but had in the past been drinking eight units of alcohol per day to help control his tremor. No cause for the altered mental state was apparent on clinical examination and initial investigations. The following blood tests were performed and were all normal: full blood count, urea, creatinine, electrolytes, liver function tests, vitamin B12 level, thyroid function tests, autoimmune screen, syphilis serology and blood cultures. On the mini-mental state examination he scored 26/30. A computer tomography scan of the brain and a lumbar puncture were performed and both were normal. There was no evidence of delirium tremens or Wernicke's encephalopathy.
After a discussion with his father on day five of the admission we were told that the onset of the symptoms occurred 2 days after an increase in the dose of topiramate. The patient had commenced topiramate 3 months previously and reached a dose of 75 mg twice a day. The dose had been increased in 25 mg increments. Since the increase in the dose of topiramate and while in the ward he was disorientated as to time and place, had visual and auditory hallucinations and his short-term registration and recall were impaired. He was unable to remember any events occurring after the day the dose of topiramate was increased. The topiramate was stopped and over the following few days he gradually improved. A week after discontinuing the topiramate he was back to his normal self and was discharged. Unfortunately his tremor returned.
After discussing the diagnosis of topiramate-induced psychosis with the patient he told us that his sister had developed visual hallucinations when commenced on topiramate 25 mg twice a day for migraine prophylaxis, and that these had resolved on discontinuing the treatment. She also had no past history of psychiatric symptoms.