A 55-year-old woman presented in May 2013 with cough, sputum, and annihilation after activities of daily living, for more than 20 days. She had no history of smoking or alcoholism, but had undergone total hysterectomy because of hysteromyoma in 2010. She was diagnosed with hypertension three years earlier. On physical examination, an enlarged right cervical lymph node was palpated. Chest computed tomography (CT) scan (Figure A) indicated the presence of a mass in the lower lobe of the right lung and mediastinal lymph node enlargement. The patient was then accepted and treated by the Department of Respiration for lung cancer stage IV with cervical lymph node metastasis (T4N3M1).
The whole enlarged right cervical lymph node was resected, and followed by biopsy and histologic examination. Hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) staining showed the typical morphology of squamous cell carcinoma cells (Figure A and B). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis demonstrated that tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin (CK) 5/6 (Figure C) and P63 (Figure D), and negative for CK7, CK20, TTF-1, and Napsin A. The positive rate of Ki-67 was 30%. Altogether, these results confirmed the diagnosis of metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. The patient requested treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) because dozens of patients with squamous cell carcinoma and EGFR mutations responded well to TKIs at our institute. Amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS) was used to assess EGFR and K-RAS gene profiles to determine the presence of mutated variants. However, evidence of a normal genotype excluded the patient from receiving EGFR-TKI treatment.
As first-line chemotherapy, the patient was initially administered 135 mg/m2 (210 mg) of paclitaxel and 80 mg/m2 (120 mg) of nedaplatin. During treatment, the patient’s condition did not seem to improve; thus, after a 20-day treatment, a second round of chemotherapy was administered with 75 mg/m2 (120 mg) of docetaxel and 80 mg/m2 (120 mg) of nedaplatin. Unfortunately, increasing levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) (25.41 vs 16.03 pg/mL) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (23.43 vs 7.13 ng/mL) indicated cancer progression, which was confirmed by the presence of multiple metastases in both lungs on CT scan images (Figure B). Although not initially indicated, the patient was then administered oral treatment with the EGFR-TKI, erlotinib (1-month trial). However, this treatment showed no efficacy.
After the use of crizotinib was approved by the China Food and Drug Administration (CFDA) in July 2013, the patient underwent ALK testing. IHC staining (Clone 1A4, Origene, 1:200) showed tumor cell positivity for ALK protein (Figure E). Then ALK break-apart fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed on 4-μm, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections. Slides were hybridized with the LSI ALK Break Apart Rearrangement Probe (Vysis, Abbott Molecular, Des Plaines, IL, USA), and read on an epifluorescence microscope (BX41, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The lung cancer cell line, NCI-H2228, (American Type Culture Collection-ATCC) was used as positive control. At least 50 tumor cell nuclei were analyzed and at least 15% of interpretable tumor cells harboring break-apart signals were used as the cutoff value
. As a result, the presence of ALK gene translocation was confirmed (Figure F).
The patient underwent crizotinib treatment (250 mg/bid, orally) for 26 days. After this period, symptoms, including neck constriction and cough, were improved. Chest CT scan images demonstrated decrease in tumor size and metastases. According to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) guidelines (version 1.1), such tumor response to crizotinib was classified as partial response (PR) (Figure C). Follow-up chest CT scan performed 11 weeks after the beginning of the treatment revealed a dramatic reduction in tumor size and mediastinal lymph node, with nearly no presence of metastases in both lungs (Figure D). IL-6 (3.34 vs 25.41 pg/mL) and CEA (1.84 vs 23.43 ng/mL) levels were also reduced 23 weeks after the beginning of the therapy, which demonstrated continuous partial response.