A 32 year-old male, who underwent laparoscopic re-sleeve gastrectomy for morbid obesity six weeks prior to current presentation, presented to emergency department (ED) complaining of two-day history of recurrent moderate amount of coffee ground vomiting, multiple attacks of melena, inability to tolerate food, generalized abdominal pain mainly epigastric and generalized body fatigue.
He did not have any comorbidities. Three years back, he underwent an uneventful LSG as his body mass index BMI was 42 kg/m2 (136 kg, 180 cm). He lost 32 kg (58% of excess body weight, BMI 32 kg/m2) over two years. Unfortunately, he regained 15 kg afterwards, and his BMI reached 36.7 kg/m2. Therefore, he underwent laparoscopic re-sleeve gastrectomy in another hospital six weeks prior to current presentation. He was discharged after two days.
Upon presentation, the patient looked ill, toxic and disoriented. He was tachycardic (110 beats/minute), hypotensive (90/55 mmHg), and feverish (39.5 °C). Abdominal examination revealed rigidity all over the abdomen and epigastric tenderness with no bowel sounds. Laboratory investigations showed leukocytosis with neutrophilia. Computed tomography (CT) of abdomen with intravenous and oral contrasts confirmed leakage . He was diagnosed as septic shock secondary to leakage after sleeve gastrectomy with Wernicke’s encephalopathy.
Image-guided percutaneous drainage failed due to close proximity of the transverse colon to the abscess cavity. He was shifted after resuscitation to the operating theater. After general anesthesia and endotracheal intubation, the patient was in supine position at 30° anti-Trendelenburg with abducted legs. Examination under anesthesia revealed epigastric fullness. Pneumoperitoneum was done using Veress needle in Palmer’s point. First trocar was introduced under vision 20 cm below xiphisternum, two centimeters to the left of midline. The second and third trocars were inserted at midclavicular line 15 cm below costal margin left and right respectively. Emergency diagnostic laparoscopy showed no free fluid collection in the abdomen. The greater omentum and transverse colon were walling off a huge abscess with failure of identification of the sleeved stomach. Meticulous blunt dissection was done to reach the gastro-esophageal junction (GEJ) revealing large amount of pus, dark fecal material, and altered blood from the abscess cavity. A large area of leakage was identified with eversion of the gastric mucosa just distal to GEJ. Dissection of the distal part was difficult due to severe adhesions. A tubular structure connecting the stomach and the transverse colon was dissected carefully, which turned out to be a gastrocolic fistula . It was excised using laparoscopic linear stapler. Three drains were inserted; around the area of the disrupted suture line, in the sub-phrenic space and in the pelvic cavity. Feeding jejunostomy was created laparoscopically.
Postoperatively, he was kept under total parenteral nutrition followed by jejunostomy feeding. Empirical antibiotics and antifungals were changed according to fluid culture results. Other medications included proton pump inhibitor, analgesia and anticoagulants.
After 6 weeks, a definitive open esophago-jejunostomy with total gastrectomy was performed successfully after failed attempt of laparoscopic intervention. Water-soluble contrast study confirmed the continuity of the bowel with no residual leak. The patient was discharged home in a stable condition. He is now following regularly in the outpatient clinic.