A caucasian man aged 77 was admitted to the emergency room with symptoms indicative of a right brachial monoparesis and facio-brachial tingling paresthesiae. Brain computerized tomography (CT) was negative for acute lesions. Approximately 3 h following the onset of symptoms the patient was transferred to a stroke unit where he underwent intravenous thrombolysis with alteplase 0.9 mg kg−1.
The procedure was well tolerated with no side effects. The patient was then discharged, despite still suffering of right facio-brachial paresthesiae. A brain CT performed 4 days after the event showed an ischemic lesion to the left ventral-posterior lateral thalamus (VPLT).
Two weeks after the event a new symptom was observed by the patient and reported to the first Author. A crying spell, inclusive of tears but devoid of any emotional substrate, was triggered whenever the patient rubbed the tips of his right hand thumb and index fingers. The examiner established through a stopwatch that the frequency of the movement had to be at least 1 Hz. The crying spell started in 5–10 s and faded 3–5 s after the movement stopped. The symptoms were also triggered by various daily activities such as using cutlery and playing cards, thus impairing the patient’s social interaction. No pain was reported. The patient adapted to his condition by wearing a thick glove on his right hand. A series of tests was started 8 weeks after the acute event. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient. Representative motor tests are shown in the video provided with the Additional file . Clinical examination showed a moderate sensory loss on light touch on the palmar side of the first three right hand fingers, as well as on the right infra-orbital and nose-labial areas. A video-EEG excluded epileptic seizures during crying spells . Motor evoked potentials were normal. Sensory evoked potentials from stimulation of the left limbs evidenced increased latency, low voltage and temporal dispersion (not shown).
The patient was administered a neuropsychological evaluation in order to describe his cognitive functioning and to exclude cognitive deficits. Thalamic lesions may in fact lead to many cognitive impairments, spanning from decreased consciousness to dementia and including deficits in spatial representation and memory , the latter being of potential relevance for the motor tests described below. However, the cognitive tests ruled out language, praxic, executive, attention, spatial attention, memory and abstract reasoning deficits, as in all tests the patient’s performance was within the tolerance limits of a reference sample of subjects similar for age and educational level (details are provided in the Additional file ). This was also consistent with the site and the size of the lesion (see below). Active thumb-index rubbing, passive fingertips stimulation and interaction of sensory-motor stimulation with cognitive/speech activities were tested under different paradigms, in blocks as shown in Table .
One examiner (CC) stimulated the patient for about 20 s in each task. Another examiner (LT) determined the onset of a crying spell when an evident change in size and/or frequency of ventilation and a typical grimace developed (usually, within 5–6 s). In this case, the stimulation was suddenly stopped. Blocks of tasks were balanced (ABBA sequence). The patient was videotaped. Representative tasks (marked with asterisk in Table ) are shown in the Additional file .
During the experimental session, three independent observers (TL, BR, BE) checked for presence/absence of the crying spell. In Table the fourth column from the right gives the observed outcome (onset/absence of crying spells). This was fully reproducible with no exceptions across repetitions of identical tasks and across observers. It must be highlighted that crying (a) was only triggered by active rubbing of the fingers (not toes), with eyes either open or closed, during either a real or imagined task; (b) it persisted when the fingertips were oiled (olive oil at room temperature 24 °C), but ceased if the hand was immersed in tap water at 18 °C; (c) it appeared irrespective of the fact that the hand was placed in the left or the right hemi-space.
The MRI exam showed an old lacunar infarct in the left thalamus, likely involving its ventral, posterolateral portion (VPLT, Fig. ). This small lesion (6 mm largest diameter, 83 mm3 volume) appeared characteristically hypointense in the T1-weighted image (lower left image) and hyperintense in the T2-weighted image (lower right image). MRI also showed signs of chronic microvascular ischemic disease, a common finding in elderly people.
An fMRI exam was also performed . A blocked-design sensory-motor task was adopted, with 12 active blocks (6 for each side) alternating with 8 rest blocks. The task consisted of active thumb-index rubbing on visual instruction, for 20 s per block. Two examiners (CR, LT) checked the patient’s performance. The patient was instructed to stop rubbing when crying started (usually within 5–6 s) in order to avoid head movements hindering the results of the fMRI task. The sensory-motor task elicited a typical pattern of activations in the motor and sensory hand area, which were weaker for the affected (right) hand (P < 0.001, uncorrected) as the movement was only briefly performed. Presumably, this asymmetry also reflected the longer stimulation allowed to the unimpaired hand. During movement of the impaired hand, the pattern of activation observed with fMRI involved expected areas, i.e. both the controlateral motor and sensory hand area and the ipsilateral hand area. Pregabalin was prescribed (75 mg the first day, then 75 mg twice daily). The crying spells receded within a week. The drug, however, caused some sedation. After the first week it was gradually suspended through the subsequent week. Crying spells reappeared the day after the treatment was discontinued. The drug was re-administered and crying spells disappeared again in one week. Under continuous treatment no crying spells were reported during a 6 months period.