A 52-year-old African woman presented to our department complaining of 8 months of fever with hematuria, weight loss, decreased appetite, generalized weakness, and intermittent right flank pain. She had a history of pulmonary tuberculosis treated for a 6-month period 10 years ago. Her physical examination was unremarkable. Her temperature was 37.7 °C, blood pressure 124/84 mmHg, and pulse rate regular at 86 beats/min. Laboratory investigations revealed hemoglobin of 10 g/dl, total leukocyte count 15,000/mm3, and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 150 mm/hr. Liver function test and other biological investigation results were normal. Urinalysis demonstrated urinary pH 6.0, leukocytes 1+, protein 4+, erythrocytes 3+, uncountable leukocyte casts, and negative culture of the urine for pyogenic agents. Abdominal color Doppler ultrasound revealed an enlarged right kidney measuring approximately 8 × 6 cm with minimal flow. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen subsequently revealed a large heterogeneously enhancing mass in the right kidney, measuring approximately 8 × 7 cm, giving a radiological impression of renal cell carcinoma . An enhanced computed tomographic scan showed a normal bladder. No hydronephrosis or wall thickening of the ureter was seen. Considering the clinical presentation as well as laboratory and radiological investigations, a provisional diagnosis of renal cell carcinoma was made, and the patient underwent an open right radical nephrectomy using a transperitoneal approach in view of the large size of the lesion. Radical nephrectomy of the specimen was sent for histopathological examination.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. Surprisingly, histopathological examination of the specimen revealed numerous confluent caseating granulomas with areas of dense inflammation extending into the perinephric fat, suggesting renal tuberculosis . The patient had received bacille Calmette-Guérin vaccination as a child. A cutaneous tuberculin test was performed (12 mm), and ten samples of urine for mycobacterial culture and bronchoscopy with culture for Koch bacilli from the bronchoalveolar lavage were obtained. All mycobacterial culture results were negative. The result of a QuantiFERON-TB Gold test (Quest Diagnostics, Secaucus, NJ, USA) was positive. Treatment with antituberculosis drugs was started and continued for 6 months. She was in good health after 35 months of follow-up.