A 46-year-old female presented to the orthopaedic outpatient clinic of our level 1 trauma center one month after sustaining bilateral femur fractures in a motor vehicle accident. These injuries were treated at an outside hospital by locked plating of the right distal femur fracture, and by antegrade intramedullary interlocking nail fixation of the left femoral shaft fracture. She presented for a second opinion experiencing progressive left groin pain in the absence of an additional trauma, resulting in wheelchair dependency. The physical examination revealed healed surgical incisions on bilateral lower extremities, and impaired active and passive range of motion to the left hip secondary to significant pain. Neuromuscular examination of the distal left lower extremity was within normal limits. She had a leg-length discrepancy with shortening of the right leg secondary to multiple previous surgical procedures, which included a right total hip arthroplasty (THA) after acetabular fracture fixation, ipsilateral sacro-iliac joint fusion, and right-side distal femur plate fixation . The patient also demonstrated a right-sided foot drop. Radiographic evaluation revealed a displaced basicervical femoral neck fracture adjacent to the piriformis entry point of an antegrade femoral interlocking nail. This implant was effectively stabilizing a transverse midshaft femur fracture, with early signs of callus formation . After discussing all treatment options, the patient underwent closed reduction of the femoral neck fracture on a traction table, and revision fixation of both fractures was performed with a reamed cephalomedullary nail (Stryker Gamma 3™, Mahwah, NJ) through a greater trochanter starting point. Postoperative radiographs revealed an adequate cumulative tip-apex distance of <25 mm, however, the reduction appeared to be in slight varus of the hip .
At two-week follow-up, the patient was ambulating with weight bearing as tolerated on crutches. All surgical incisions were healed and staples were removed. Six weeks later, she reported progressive worsening of left hip pain without additional hip trauma. She was no longer able to bear weight on the left leg and had resumed use of a wheelchair for 3 weeks. Physical examination demonstrated no indication of infection, but any motion of her left hip was extremely painful. Radiographs revealed a failure of fixation of the basicervical femoral neck fracture, with “cut-out” of the lag screw through the femoral head. The midshaft femur fracture was continuing to heal uneventfully .
Given the unsalvageable damage to the femoral head and acetabulum she was converted to a total hip arthroplasty (THA). The procedure was performed without complications, using non-cemented acetabular cup and press-fit stem components (Zimmer, Warsaw, IN). The stem of the arthroplasty appears to have been placed in slight varus position . On postoperative day one, the patient mobilized with physical therapy and noted a significant leg-length discrepancy, with the left leg approximately 3.5 cm longer than the right, as confirmed by full-length standing X-rays . The patient was offered a revision THA to partially correct the leg length discrepancy. She agreed and a revision THA was performed, including proximal femoral shortening and revision of acetabular and femoral components resulting in a near equal leg length . The patient subsequently sustained an acute anterior dislocation of her left THA revision at one week after discharge from the hospital, possibly related to the shortening procedure . The dislocation was successfully managed by closed reduction under general anesthesia. The intraoperative exam revealed that the hip was stable in full flexion and abduction, but unstable in extremes of extension or adduction. The THA dislocation was successfully managed in a hip abduction orthosis for 6 weeks. The patient had no further complications or adverse events, and presented with an acceptable outcome at one-year follow-up in our orthopaedic clinic.