A 45-year-old male patient reported to the casualty with a history of sudden-onset severe headache with loss of consciousness for 1 day. On examination, the patient was E1M5V1, vitals were stable, pupil was normal sized and reacting to light, and there were no focal deficits. Patient came with noncontrast computed tomography (NCCT) of the head [Figure and ]. NCCT was suggestive of anterior interhemispheric bleed, corpus callosal hematoma, and intraventricular blood. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the brain from outside was suggestive of aneurysm on both distal anterior cerebral artery (ACA) at the junction of pericallosal and callosomarginal arteries [Figure and ]. Patient was intubated, kept on ventilator, and stabilized after admission. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was done which was suggestive of two different aneurysms over both DACA at the junction of pericallosal and callosomarginal arteries. Right side aneurysm was size 8.1 × 8.7 mm with a neck measuring 2.5 mm. Left-sided aneurysm measured size 9.2 × 6.5 mm with a neck of 3.5 mm with a daughter lobule and superiorly projecting rupture site. Both were directed anterosuperiorly. Both A1 ACAs were of the same size with good crossflow. Focal segmental areas of spasm were noted in both pericallosal arteries [Figure –].
The patient was operated; right frontal craniotomy was done. Interhemispheric approach was utilized. Ventricle was opened and intraventricular hematoma (IVH) was evacuated. Pericallosal and callosomarginal arteries of the left side was identified and traced proximally. Left DACA aneurysm arising from the junction of pericallosal and callosomarginal artery directing anterosuperiorly was visualized. Intraoperatively, aneurysmal ruptured site was projecting superiorly with overlying hematoma and adhesions. Moreover, majority of the hematomas were present over the left DACA aneurysm embedded in brain parenchyma. Neck dissected from the surrounding structures and both the arteries visualized with proximal ACA. Clip of size 5 mm was applied on the left side. Right-sided DACA aneurysm was identified and clipped in a similar manner . While clipping the left-sided aneurysm, retraction was applied only on the left medial frontal lobe. Right-sided frontal lobe was left undisturbed to avoid the rupture of left DACA aneurysm and vice versa.
Intraoperatively, the procedure was uneventful. There was no aneurysm rupture. There was no episode of blood pressure fluctuation. Minimal brain retraction was done. Postoperatively, the patient was electively ventilated and hypertensive therapy was given. On the 4th postoperative day, patient hemiparesis worsens. CT of the head was done, which was suggestive of right posterior frontal venous infarct and bleed . Patient was managed conservatively. After 1 month of hospital care, patient became E4M6Vt with 80% recovery in left hemiparesis. NCCT head performed after 1 month was suggestive of resolving hematoma without any evidence of infarct .