A 29-year-old man was referred to the Department of Urology in QiLu Hospital on May 5, 2015 for diagnosis and treatment of a giant abdominal mass, which was discovered incidentally 1 month earlier. The patient had a medical history of PV associated with symptoms of splenomegaly and flush for 9 years. The patient had been admitted to a local hospital because of flush in 2006. The physical examination indicated splenomegaly, peripheral blood test and bone marrow trephine biopsy indicated erythrocytosis, and the result of p210 breakpoint cluster region-Abelson (BCR-ABL) fusion gene examination was negative. The patient was then diagnosed with PV. The results of peripheral blood tests of the patient remained abnormal; as a result, the patient was treated with intermittent phlebotomy therapy at the local hospital for 9 years. He also complained of progressive swelling of the abdomen, but the sign had always been ignored because it was considered to be related to splenomegaly. The patient had no symptoms, such as hematuresis, headache, fever, cough, and pain, suggesting any other syndromes.
At QiLu Hospital, the physical examination revealed a solid painless giant mass on the left side of the abdomen. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis on May 6, 2015 showed a giant mass with a maximum diameter of 22 cm located in the middle-to-upper pole of the left kidney. The normal renal tissue of the left kidney was seriously constricted, and the ipsilateral renal pelvis of the right kidney showed hydronephrotic changes . Renal emission computed tomography (ECT) revealed mild-to-moderate damage in the left kidney . The results of peripheral blood test were consistent with the diagnosis of PV: a red blood cell count of 6.44 × 1012/L, a hemoglobin level of 22.2 g/dL, and a hematocrit level of 62.8%.
Following the routine examination, percutaneous renal biopsy under ultrasound guidance was performed on May 13, 2015 at the strong request of the patient to define the diagnosis. The histologic result indicated a diagnosis of RCC, but the specific subtype could not be clearly confirmed.
Treatment was initiated on May 15, 2015 with phlebotomy therapy to reduce the level of erythrocytosis and the risk of surgery. Following the hematologist’s advice, 8 sessions of bloodletting (400 mL each time, once a week) were performed over the following 2 months, and aspirin at a dose of 100 mg/day was administered at the same time to prevent thrombogenesis. The patient’s hemoglobin and hematocrit levels were controlled within normal limits before surgery.
To prevent serious intraoperative bleeding, a selective embolization of the left renal artery was also performed on June 30, 2015 . Afterwards, an open radical left nephrectomy was performed. No obvious infiltration or local metastasis around the tumor was found during the surgery . The total operation time (including the embolization) was 175 min. Intraoperative blood loss was approximately 500 mL, and no blood transfusion was performed.
The pathologic examination of the gross specimen revealed an encapsulated solid mass measuring 20.5 cm × 16 cm × 15 cm, with multiple tiny cysts of various sizes in the central part of the tumor . Large cells with finely reticulated cytoplasm and small cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and perinuclear clearing were found using hematoxylin–eosin staining . Immunohistochemical staining was also performed with paraffin-embedded samples, which were positive for cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and negative for Vimentin and CD10 . Considering the combination of the above results, the patient was finally diagnosed with stage pT2bN0M0 chRCC (according to the 2010 American Joint Committee on Cancer TNM staging system). A test for the JAK2 V617F mutation was performed, which returned a negative result, excluding the diagnosis of PV. Immunohistochemical staining with EPO-specific antibody was also performed, which was positive . Therefore, we confirmed that the erythrocytosis was caused by the tumor and was a type of paraneoplastic syndrome of chRCC.
The upper and lower abdominal drains were removed separately 5 and 10 days later, and the patient was discharged on the 15th postoperative day. His 30-day postoperative hemoglobin level was 13.4 g/dL, and his hematocrit level was 40.0%.
During the 18 months of follow-up until January 5, 2017, no evidence of disease recurrence or metastasis was identified. The patient’s blood test index was still within normal limits without any adjuvant therapies .