A 12-years old female was admitted to our hospital with the complaint of abdominal pain. The patient has developed abdominal pain two days before admission, manifesting as intermittent lower abdominal pain, which were aggravated when the body position was changed, without other accompanying discomfort. One day ago, the patient felt the abdominal pain was worsened, so she turned to Emergency Department of our hospital.
By inquiring the patient's medical history, we acquired that she was born with low crying and hypotonia. Unfortunately, this phenomenon did not attract enough attention by doctors and parents at the time, so no examination or treatment was performed on the patient. The patient has also exhibited the delayed development, who learned to sit alone at 1-year old, and started to walk at 2-years old. Since the age of 3-years, she displayed an uncontrollable appetite, accompanied with the significantly increased weight. These abnormal performances have also not attracted sufficient attention from parents. The menarche occurred when she was 11-years old, with a regular period about once every 30 days, and lasting 2–3 day each time. There reported no history of dysmenorrhea, and the time of the last menstrual period could not be accurately described.
The results of physical examination were, body temperature: 38 °C, heart rate: 109 beats/min, breathing: 24 times/min, blood pressure: 130/94 mmHg, height: 150 cm, weight: 103 kg, BMI: 45.77 kg/m2, obesity, abnormal facial appearance, disordered behavior, obstructive sleep apnea, soft abdominal muscles, a spherical shape of the distended abdomen. The fat accumulation in the abdomen significantly embarrassed the palpation. Mild tenderness was reported in the right lower abdomen near the pelvic cavity, without rebound pain, abnormal vulvar shape, sparse pubic hair.
After admitted to the hospital, the auxiliary examination was performed on the patient, with the result of, Blood-test: WBC18.87 × 109/L, CRP: 224.04 mg/L, Hb1Ac12.9%, BG13.64 mmol/L, Urine-Test: UG 4 + , MAU > 344 mg/L. The results of abdominal ultrasound: a liquid dark area was identified in the right appendage area, about 138 × 118 mm in size, with clear boundary and transparent internal space, the left ovary was normal, without obvious abnormality in the left appendage area. Results of CT-scan: 1. Right lower abdomen to pelvic cavity occupied by cystic space 2. Stone formation in appendicular fecal 3. Intestinal effusion in lower abdomen 4. Multiple small lymph nodes at the root of mesenteric .
Considering the unusual history and performance of patient, by combining the clinical manifestations and diagnostic criteria of PWS [, ], we speculated an occurrence of PWS. To confirm this conjecture, genetic testing was conducted on the patients. The results of multiple ligation probe amplification (MLPA) detection eventually indicated a loss of heterozygosity in the 15q11-13 region gene and abnormal methylation, which supported paternal deletion of genes at 15q11-q13 .
We organized a multidisciplinary consultation covering Anesthesiology, Endocrinology, Respiratory, Cardiovascular unit and Nutrition Section for operation and the following treatment measures were performed: 1. Considering the fever symptoms, abdominal tenderness, and the existence of infection revealed by blood routine examination showed, Cefazolin sodium injection anti-infective treatment was provided. 2. The patient exhibited high blood pressure and a kidney damage showed by urine tests, for which benazepril is administrated to control blood pressure. 3. Metformin was given to intervene the hyperglycemia of patient. 4. The patient was overweight with the increased circulatory load, so coenzyme Q10 was administrated to nourish the myocardium. 5. The application of Growth Hormone has been proved to produce many benefits for PWS, which was also provided for therapy. 6. Diet and exercise instructions were specially formulated for patients to facilitate better weight control.
Finally, the operation was performed under the general anesthesia. During the operation, 10 mm Trocar was inserted through the para-umbilical approach, with 5 mm Trocar placed on the left and right sides of the umbilicus. The exploration on right ovary was conducted, revealing a cyst about 20 cm × 15 cm × 10 cm, together with the fallopian tube, rotate 180 degrees counterclockwise. The cyst fluid during the operation was evacuated to be about 1500 ml, the torsion fallopian tube was reset, the cyst was completely peeled off from the ovary, the ovarian cortex was trimmed, followed by the rebuilt ovarian shape, the pelvic drainage tube was placed passing through the umbilical cord. The tissue was loaded into a specimen bag, the specimen was cut into small pieces at the incision and removed, then the incision was sutured. The lesion was finally removed from the side incision and the incision was sutured. The blood lost during the whole procedure was approximately 15 ml. Postoperative pathology: Ovarian cyst, cystadenoma ovarii serosum .
After the operation, the patient was admitted to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) for respiratory management, the tracheal intubation was withdrawn at that night and the patient returned to the general ward the next day. Eating was started on the first day after the operation and PWS treatment was continued accompanied with Guidance of diet and exercise, control of blood pressure and blood sugar. Coenzyme Q10 was continued to nourish myocardium and Growth Hormone was used regularly.
After 7 days, the patient was cured and discharged, followed by the postoperative follow-up till now. According to the present outcomes, the patient has a good recovery, which is mainly revealed by two aspects. First, the surgical recovery is considerable, with the beautiful abdominal scar, without signs of recurrence indicated by the abdominal CT, or occurrence of surgical complications. Second, for PWS, guidance endocrinology and nutrition is continued to be received by the patient, the weight control is currently satisfactory, the BMI index dropped significantly to 38.67 kg/m2, accompanied with the satisfactory blood pressure and blood sugar control, and outpatient review is regularly carried out .