A 72-year-old man with a history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and cerebral infarction presented to our hospital with progressive left-sided hemiparesis four months previously. At the initial presentation, cranial magnetic resonance imaging/cranial and cervical magnetic resonance angiography revealed right cervical internal carotid artery (ICA) stenosis; moreover, acute and subacute infarctions in the right ICA territory were observed on diffusion-weighted image sequences . A head and neck computed tomography angiogram revealed a focal area of high-grade calcified stenosis . Ultrasonography of the right carotid artery revealed a hyperechoic plaque within the stent, and routine carotid angiography revealed severe stenosis of the right cervical ICA [, white arrow].
Right CAS was planned to prevent future ischemic stroke events. The patient was treated with 100 mg aspirin and 200 mg cilostazol daily for four weeks before the procedure.
With the patient under local anesthesia, a 7-Fr long sheath was inserted into the right femoral artery, and a 7-Fr Optimo (Tokai Medical Products, Aichi, Japan) was delivered to the right common carotid artery. An activated clotting time of 250 seconds was maintained using intravenous heparin. A distal protection device (Filter-Wire EZ; Stryker, Fremont, California, USA) was inserted into the ICA. This device crossed the stenotic lesion after inflation of the guiding catheter balloon with proximal flow control. Attempts with a 3 mm × 40 mm SHIDEN balloon dilatation catheter (Kaneka, Osaka, Japan) and a 4 mm × 40 mm SHIDEN balloon dilatation catheter were unsuccessful despite inflation to a nominal pressure of 8 atm for 45 s. An 8 × 29 mm Carotid Wallstent Monorail (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) was inserted into the ICA and did not cross the stenotic lesion. Restenosis was thought to be caused by recoil. An NSE PTA balloon with three longitudinal nylon elements attached proximally and distally to the balloon component was used as a pre-dilatation step . A 3.5 × 20 mm NSE PTA balloon was then inflated in the lesion at 8 atm for 60 s, 8 atm for 60 s, and 14 atm for 60 s to achieve successful luminal expansion [ and ]. An 8 × 29 mm Carotid Wallstent Monorail was deployed, and a 4 × 40 mm SHIDEN balloon dilatation catheter was inflated at 8 atm for 60 s as a post-dilatation step [-]. Due to the angiographic slow flow, no visible debris was aspirated from the suction catheter. The distal protection device was removed, and no visible debris was observed. Right common carotid angiography showed improved ICA flow . No periprocedural bradycardia or hypotension was observed.
No postprocedural stroke events occurred . The postprocedural course was uneventful without complications.