A 26-year-old woman with a 1-month history of misalignment of the right eye and diplopia was referred to the Department of Ophthalmology, Kindai University Faculty of Medicine. Starting 2 years and 4 months prior to her referral to our clinic, she underwent local steroid injections for approximately 1 year, in the Department of Dermatology for alopecia areata. Her decimal visual acuity was 1.2 in each eye. Her intraocular pressure was 19 mmHg in the right eye and 20 mmHg in the left. The anterior ocular segment examination showed hypertropia of the right eye, but no conjunctival hyperemia or eyelid swelling was observed. Measurement of proptosis with a Hertel exophthalmometer showed 16 mm in each eye. Fundus examination showed no abnormalities. The misalignment of the right eye measured by an alternate prism cover test was 25-prism diopter (PD) hypertropia and 40 PD exotropia in the primary gaze position with fixation on a distant target. Eye movement examination revealed overelevation of the right eye in adduction and restriction in the superior oblique muscle direction of the right eye, with almost normal movements in the left eye . A dominant-eye test using a telescope showed that her left eye was dominant. In the first step of the Bielschowsky head-tilt test (BHTT), hypertropia of the right eye was observed. The second step of BHTT revealed an increase in right eye hypertropia with left gaze. The third step of BHTT was positive on right head tilts. The results of the BHTT measurements of vertical deviation were 35 PD and 14 PD on head tilts to the right and left, respectively. MRI showed a slight enlargement of the superior oblique muscle of the left eye, but neither enlargement nor abnormal signal of the four extraocular rectus muscles was seen in either eye . Since the patient was also aware of ptosis of the right eye, an antibody test for myasthenia gravis was performed. However, both antiacetylcholine receptor and anti-muscle-specific kinase antibodies were negative, and the Tensilon test was also negative.
A blood test, performed in the dermatology department three months earlier, showed abnormal thyroid-related values as follows. Thyroid studies revealed a decreased thyroid-stimulating hormone level of < 0.01 (normal, 0.5–5 μIU/mL), an elevated free T3 level of 16.9 (normal, 2.3–4 pg/mL), an elevated free T4 level of 4.8 (normal, 0.9–1.7 ng/dL), and an elevated anti-thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibody level of 9.2 (normal, 0–2 U/L). From these findings, the patient was diagnosed with ophthalmopathy associated with Graves' disease, with superior oblique muscle involvement.
For detailed investigation and treatment of Graves' disease, the patient was also referred to an endocrinologist and metabolic physician. Thyrotoxicosis, such as increased sweating and diffuse thyromegaly, was confirmed, and a high uptake rate was confirmed by a thyroid isotope test. Oral treatment with thiamazole was started, but it was changed to potassium iodide due to side effects such as fever and joint pain; no remission was achieved. Therefore, a total thyroidectomy was performed by her otorhinolaryngologist, about 3 months after her first visit to our clinic. Within a few weeks after the operation, her subjective symptoms, such as hand tremors and increased sweating, improved and diplopia gradually decreased. Four months after the operation, the patient transferred from our hospital to a hospital outside the prefecture, because of relocation, but diplopia and abnormal eye position had improved at the final visit .