A 70-year-old man was transferred to our hospital for further management of intermittent fever, chills, and fatigue lasting for 10 d.
The patient experienced intermittent symptoms accompanied by severe night sweats. His body temperature was 38.5 °C, and his fever temporarily subsided after taking oral acetaminophen. He denied respiratory symptoms, such as cough, sore throat, or runny nose, and did not experience any gastrointestinal symptoms such as vomiting or diarrhea. Although the patient did not report urinary symptoms such as blood in urine, urgency, difficulty or pain during urination, or frequent voiding, he did report persistent bilateral lower back pain in the past 10 d. The patient had previously been diagnosed with lumbar herniated intervertebral disc disorder and had been undergoing rehabilitation therapy. As he believed that his current back pain was not significantly different from his previous pain, he did not pay particular attention to it.
The patient had developed anorexia, with a weight loss of 5.6 kg during the past year. Moreover, he had third–fourth lumbar herniated intervertebral disc disorder which had been treated with physical rehabilitation therapy since the age of 63. He did not have any systemic disorders, such as diabetes mellitus or liver cirrhosis.
The patient disclosed a smoking history of 31 pack-years and reported infrequent alcohol consumption. He worked as a bus driver and had been experiencing fatigue prior to this visit. The patient denied any recent travel history or engagement in unsafe sexual activities or drug abuse. Furthermore, he had no history of prescription medication use or underlying medical conditions.
During the physical examination, dull percussions were noted bilaterally in the upper back, along with the presence of rhonchi in the same region. Despite these findings, the patient did not exhibit any signs of respiratory distress. His vital signs were within normal limits, with a temperature of 36.5 °C, blood pressure of 144/87 mmHg, heart rate of 102 beats per minute, and respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute. The patient did not display any pain or discomfort upon percussion of the bilateral kidney areas. No discharge was observed around the urethra, and there were no suspicious lumps, rashes, or wounds in the perineal or other areas of the body.
The patient’s hemogram revealed leukocytosis with neutrophil predominance. The blood electrolytes, glucose levels, and hepatic function were all within normal ranges. His serum urea nitrogen and creatinine levels were elevated. The urinal analysis found microscopic hematuria and pyuria. Detailed laboratory test results are presented in Table .
Chest radiography revealed patchy consolidation with fibrosis in both upper lungs .