We present the case of a 77-year-old Caucasian man with a leiomyosarcoma of the base of the tongue. He had reported difficulty in swallowing and hoarseness for a month before admission to our department. He also reported a history of dyspnea during exercise and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) treated with salmeterol 50μg (two puffs/day). He was a long-term smoker, with lipid disorders and allergy to aspirin.
Endoscopy and a computed tomography scan showed a mass on the basis of the tongue , on which a biopsy was performed. The biopsy results indicated a malignant epithelial neoplasm, which required further immunohistochemical studies, ulcerated and infiltrative with spindle cells on the base of the tongue and free edge of the epiglottis.
Our patient was hospitalized and underwent surgery. Before the operation, we performed a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) procedure to facilitate the nutrition of our patient after the intervention, since removal of the tongue base can be associated with difficulties in swallowing.
After insertion of a central venous line in the right subclavian vein our patient underwent surgery consisting of a tracheostomy performed under general anesthesia, preparation of a cervical flap, bilateral neck dissections (levels 2 to 4) on which an extemporaneous examination was performed (proving negative for lymph node metastases), isolation of the hypoglossal nerves and examination of their entry into the tongue base to preserve these structures, total laryngectomy extended to the base of the tongue, preparation of a myofascial flap of the left pectoralis major muscle (chosen because our patient is right-handed) and its positioning at the base of the tongue, placement of drainages and trachea tube and dressing.
The definitive histological examination performed on surgical specimens showed leiomyosarcoma of the base of the tongue and free edge of the epiglottis and the absence of neoplastic infiltration of surgical resection margins. Immunohistochemical studies performed on the biopsy confirmed the same diagnosis.
Our patient had a regular post-operative course and was discharged from our clinic, able to use both PEG enteral and mouth feeding.
To date, about eight months after surgery, our patient remains disease free.