A 57-year-old Greek housewife, who was 165 cm tall and weighed 65 kg, was admitted to our hospital after a closed injury of her right femur. She was a married mother with one 18- year-old daughter who was a non-smoker and who did not drink alcohol. She was suffering from an ipsilateral dysplastic hip . As a child she had undergone an unsuccessful operation for a non-defined femoral osteotomy. She had no other significant medical history and received no medication except pain killers. Her right leg was fixed in a flexed and internally rotated deformity. She had been walking with great difficulty for more than 10 years, due to hip and knee stiffness with concomitant severe hip arthritis.
She had fallen in her house while walking. On clinical examination, the leg was in fixed flexion with adduction and internal rotation. X-rays revealed an isolated spiral mid-shaft fracture of the right femur : type 0 according to the Winquist-Hansen classification or 32-A1 according to the AO-OTA classification .
We performed a total hip arthroplasty via a posterolateral incision, using a long cementless Wagner stem and a porous tantalum monoblock acetabular cup to address both morbidities. The fixed deformity meant that straight forward hip dislocation was impossible and, therefore, the femoral neck had first to be osteotomised. The cup was placed in the anatomic position. Part of the native head was used as a morselised autograft at the true acetabular bed. The superolateral part of the head was used as a structural graft and secured with one screw. A cup was then inserted in a press fit manner, basing the initial stability on the periphery of the cup. After an additional small incision at the fracture site, the fracture was initially reduced anatomically. Reduction was secured with five cerclage wires and the stem was inserted under direct vision. The operation took 95 minutes. Tissues were sent for culture and histological analysis: the results were negative for tumor or infection, revealing that the fracture was not pathological. The patient received three doses of prophylactic antibiotic and was given low molecular weight heparin for six weeks. There was no leg length discrepancy post-operatively and no complications were recorded. She was mobilized with partial weight bearing the second postoperative day. Full weight bearing was allowed after three weeks, due to the concomitant presence of acetabular graft and diaphyseal cerclage wires. Three months postoperatively, the fracture had healed, the cup showed no signs of migration , there was a normal hip range of motion and patient was walking and free of symptoms.