A 56-year-old Afghanistan-born woman presented to our hospital with a 2-week history of constant left-sided neck pain, associated fevers (38.0 °C), and rigors. Her past medical history included mild asthma and osteoarthritis. A physical examination revealed exquisite tenderness over the anterior triangle of her left neck. Laboratory studies showed a white cell count of 4.1 × 109 cells/L (reference range 3.9 to 11.1), hemoglobin 112 g/L (115 to 165), mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 96 fL (82 to 98), C-reactive protein (CRP) 109 mg/L (≤3), with normal electrolytes and liver function tests. Computed tomography (CT) of her neck revealed wall thickening of her left distal common carotid artery with hazing of the adjacent fat. Autoimmune serology, including anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, antibodies to extractable nuclear antigens, double stranded-deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) antibodies, rheumatoid factor, and antibodies to cyclic citrullinated peptide, were negative. These results were helpful in excluding a systemic small vessel vasculitis. Her serum complement levels were normal, and a left temporal artery biopsy was negative. Her neck pain and fevers resolved spontaneously without corticosteroids or other immunosuppression and she was discharged home on day 6. She presented 17 days later with fever (38.0 °C) and abdominal pain 20 to 30 minutes after eating. A CT of her abdomen revealed mild upper abdominal periaortic stranding with mural thickening, similar in appearance to her left common carotid artery from the original CT scan of her neck. During the next 24 to 48 hours, she developed new right-sided neck pain, contralateral to her pain on initial presentation. A CT angiogram revealed improvement in her left common carotid artery thickening, interval development of new right common carotid artery thickening, and hazing around her upper abdominal aorta, coeliac axis, and superior mesenteric arteries. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan demonstrated diffuse, intense fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake of her right common carotid artery, abdominal aorta, and superior mesenteric artery, consistent with a large vessel vasculitis, which had presented with a systemic inflammatory response, carotidynia, and mesenteric angina.
She was treated with methylprednisolone (500 mg daily for 3 days) administered intravenously with immediate resolution of her abdominal and neck pain and fevers. She was subsequently commenced on methotrexate 15 mg/week administered orally and prednisone 50 mg/day. She remained well over the following 5 months, with continuation of methotrexate, and her prednisone dose was gradually reduced to 15 mg/day.
Five months later, she reported fatigue and persistent cough despite multiple courses of antibiotics. Blood tests revealed neutropenia with >20 % blasts on peripheral blood film. A subsequent bone marrow aspirate demonstrated a markedly hypercellular marrow with 69 % blasts, which by flow cytometry were identified as an abnormal population of myeloid cells expressing CD117, CD13, CD33, human leukocyte antigen-antigen D related (HLA-DR), CD123, lacking CD34, with aberrant CD4 expression, consistent with AML. Molecular studies showed a FLT3-internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutation, which characterizes more aggressive disease and frequent relapses . She received induction chemotherapy with cytarabine and idarubicin but a month later a bone marrow aspirate demonstrated residual blasts (9 %) consistent with persistent AML. She received re-induction chemotherapy with cytarabine and idarubicin, and then further re-induction with fludarabine, cytarabine, and idarubicin. Despite initial morphological remission, her AML relapsed 3 months later. She had many infective complications, including febrile neutropenia and Clostridium difficile colitis, but her large vessel vasculitis did not recur. Due to a rapidly rising blast count and refractory disease, she was palliated and died 8 months after her diagnosis of AML.