A 58-year-old lady presented to the emergency department with a one day history of progressive constant, non-radiating epigastric pain and sudden onset haematemesis. She was brought in by ambulance for urgent review after four episodes of bright haematemesis with clots and associated dizziness. She reported a recent history of reflux symptoms but denied any previous episodes of haematemesis, malaena or rectal bleeding. Her bowels had opened twice that day with soft, brown stools and was actively passing flatus.
Past medical history included laparoscopic adjustable gastric band insertion in 2000, hysterectomy, diverticular disease, moderate obesity, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, asthma, hypertension and hypercholesterolaemia. Her gastric band port had been dislodged into her pelvis five years earlier. There was no previous history of gastric band slippage or erosion. She denied any gastroscopies and colonoscopies within the past five years. Her regular medications included her insulin regimen, rosuvastatin and irbesartan.
On clinical examination she appeared generally well with mild pallor. She had mild tachycardia (115 beats/minute) with a normal blood pressure (systolic 150 mmHg). She remained afebrile during her emergency department admission. Abdominal examination revealed an upper midline incisional scar. She had epigastric tenderness with guarding. Her abdomen was otherwise soft with a negative Murphy's sign and no palpable masses. The gastric band port was not palpable.
Laboratory findings revealed leucocytosis (14.8 × 109 cells/L) with neutrophilia (10.2 × 109 cells/L). A mildly raised lactate level was seen on venous blood gas analysis (2.8 mmol/L) with normal pH (7.38) and base excess (−2.1 mmol/L). Her biochemistry was unremarkable aside from hyperglycaemia (27.1 mmol/L).
An abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan with intravenous contrast was performed on the suspicion of a perforated gastric or duodenal ulcer. The gastric band was malpositioned with each end pointing towards the 3 and 9 o’clock positions on the coronal view. It also appeared to be in the posterior wall of the gastric fundus with marked wall thickening and gastric emphysema . There was prominent debris within the lumen distending the duodenal cap and pylorus. The gastric band port remained attached to the band lying in the upper right pelvis. There was no evidence of free intraperitoneal gas, fluid or pneumomediastinum.
The patient proceeded to laparoscopy on a provisional diagnosis of gastric ischaemia secondary to gastric prolapse due to band slippage. She was given preoperative doses of ceftriaxone 1 g, metronidazole 500 mg and pantoprazole 40 mg. Initial laparoscopic examination revealed dense adhesions involving the lesser curve of the stomach but no evidence of the band. An estimated 800–1000 ml of clotted blood was found within the stomach on gastroscopy. Adequate views were difficult to obtain due to the significant haematoma. A laparoscopic anterior gastrotomy was performed for further exploration but was impaired by significant inflammation and dense clot formation within the stomach. A midline laparotomy was performed to improve visualisation. A chronically eroded band was found after clot evacuation. The band appeared to be 80% intraluminal with no evidence of active bleeding or gastric necrosis. The posterior gastric wall defect and anterior gastrotomy were repaired with 3-0 polydioxanone sutures after band and port removal. A drain was placed alongside the lesser curve and abdominal wall closed primarily.
The patient was diagnosed with gastric band erosion and associated GE without evidence of EG. She was managed in the intensive care unit for eight days, extubated on postoperative day one and commenced on sips of water progressing to clear fluids. There was no evidence of a leak on injection of methylene blue dye via nasogastric tube or an oral gastrograffin contrast abdominal CT scan on day four. Parenteral feeding was commenced on day four due to her inability to tolerate enteral feeding and continued until she was able to tolerate a full oral diet. Her nasogastric tube was removed on day six and abdominal drain on day seven. Intravenous antibiotics and oral pantoprazole were continued until discharge. She was instructed to continue oral pantroprazole 40 mg twice daily until her next outpatient review.
Our patient developed several minor complications. These included a small inferior wound separation treated by negative pressure dressing, atrial fibrillation that resolved with an amiodarone infusion and left subphrenic collection that did not require drainage . There were no major complications.