A 67-year-old Caucasian man presented to the emergency department with back and abdominal pain, fever and malaise. He reported that his wife and granddaughter had previously suffered from mild gastroenteritis. He had a history of colorectal cancer with a solitary metastasis (7 × 7.5cm) of the abdominal wall, and previously underwent aortocoronary bypass surgery and mitral valve reconstruction. On examination, he was febrile (38.5°C axillary) with otherwise normal vital signs. The abdomen was distended with discomfort on deep palpation with a palpable mass in the abdominal wall. The lower spine was tender on percussion.
Laboratory tests showed an elevated C-reactive protein (99mg/L, normal < 10mg/L) with mild leukocytosis . Three out of four pairs of blood cultures grew Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis (serogroup D). Stool cultures for Salmonella were negative. After exclusion of endocarditis, a computed tomographic (CT) scan for an endovascular focus showed an intramural hematoma of the infrarenal aorta (20 x 18 x 6mm) with paraaortic fat stranding as well as atherosclerotic plaques . Thus, the diagnosis of an infectious aortitis caused by S. Enteritidis was made and he was treated with ceftriaxone and ciprofloxacin. Open surgery with excision of the inflammatory tissue and extra-anatomical bypass-grafting or in situ reconstruction was not an option because the colon carcinoma had metastasized directly in the potential operation area. Since there was neither evidence of gross aneurysm nor active bleeding, he was initially treated with intravenous antibiotics and after a 16-day course of antimicrobial therapy in the presence of a stable follow-up documented by computed tomography (CT) scan, EVAR with the Gore Excluder (W. L. Gore & Associates GmbH, Putzbrunn, Germany) was performed.
The post-interventional clinical course was uneventful. Intravenous antibiotic therapy was continued for another 10 days (altogether 26 days) and then switched to an oral monotherapy with ciprofloxacin for 12 months. Repeated computed tomography (CT) scans (after three, six, 12 and 15 months) and blood analysis (with leukocyte counts and C-reactive protein) were performed during follow-up .
Four months later (16 months after EVAR) the patient died of an ileus. Postmortem the macroscopic examination revealed circumferential atheromatous thickening of the intima and media due to extensive fibrosis and sclerosis . Microscopically, diffuse fibrosis and sclerosis of the aortic wall in the area of the endoluminal stent graft was described. These findings were unspecific but consistent with lapsed aortitis. There were no signs of residual active or chronic inflammation .