A 12-year-old boy presented with 2 months of right para-midline neck swelling. Physical examination revealed a soft, mobile, smooth, and painless mass (4 cm × 3 cm in size) in the upper anterior neck. On blood examination, the levels of free T4, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and thyroglobulin (Tg) were 1.03 ng/dl (normal range: 0.70–1.48 ng/dl), 2.399 µU/ml (normal range: 0.350–4.940 µU/ml), and 168.30 ng/dl (normal range: ≤ 33.7 ng/dl), respectively. Anti-Tg antibody was negative. Neck ultrasonography showed a well-circumscribed multilocular cyst (4 cm × 3 cm) in the upper part of the neck, with no orthotopic thyroid gland . These findings suggested the possibility of undescended thyroid tissue. By neck MRI, both T1- and T2-weighted images showed a round, well-circumscribed lesion of high intensity in the pretracheal region below the hyoid and that of low intensity in the base of the tongue. . Fine-needle aspiration was performed, and cytological evaluation diagnosed a nonmalignant thyroid cyst. Based on these results, we suspected dual ectopic thyroid with euthyroidism. The patient was followed up every 6 months because he had no local symptoms and was euthyroid. After 2 years, the mass gradually enlarged; thus, we decided to perform surgery to improve the cosmetic outcome. Preoperative neck CT revealed both a high-density solid mass at the base of the tongue and a central low-density region surrounded by a high-density area at the pretracheal region below the hyoid . Laryngeal fiberscopy showed a mass in the sublingual lesion . During the operation, the infrahyoid mass, which was well circumscribed with a fibrous capsule, was removed through a low cervical collar incision. The mass was located more cranially than a normal thyroid gland. There was no normal thyroid gland at any location along the trachea. During the surgery, the asymptomatic sublingual mass was left intact. No embryological abnormalities were found in either the parathyroid or recurrent laryngeal nerve. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the third day after surgery. The pathological specimen showed a multilocular cystic mass with a size of 6 cm × 5 cm × 4 cm and a weight of 36 g . Pathological findings showed the growth of multiple-size follicles, which led to a diagnosis of nonmalignant adenomatous goiter. Postoperative 123−I scintigraphy showed that radioactive iodine uptake was present in the sublingual lesion, but not in the normal thyroid bed, which was in concordance with the intraoperative findings. . This result proved that the sublingual mass was ectopic thyroid tissue. Six months postoperatively, blood examination showed subclinical hypothyroidism. The free T4 and TSH levels were 0.84 ng/dl and 15.33 µIU/ml, respectively; thus, replacement therapy with thyroxine 25 µg daily was started to prevent enlargement of the sublingual thyroid. At the time of this writing, 1 year after surgery, the patient’s clinical course was uneventful, and he was euthyroid with thyroxin 50 µg daily.