A 15-year-old, Caucasian male went into a dental office for an ordinary clinical examination due to an upcoming orthodontic treatment. After radiography of the jaws, a lesion on the left side of the mandible angle was discovered. The following day, the boy was sent to the clinic of oral and maxillofacial surgery at “Sv. Panteleimon” hospital in Plovdiv for evaluation.
From routine blood tests, cholesterol, triglycerides, and blood sugar are within normal values. Total cholesterol was 4.28 mmol/l, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol was 0.79 mmol/l, triglycerides were 1.06 mmol/l, and blood glucose was 5.27 mmol/l. The other indicators were without deviation from the normal range.
An orthopontomography in the area of the left mandibular angle shows an area of diffuse lesion with uneven outlines and blurred boundaries of the surrounding normal bone .
An area of diffuse osteolysis is observed on the axial computed tomography sections in the area of the left mandibular angle, which starts from the distal root of the lower second molar and reaches the ascending process. The mandibular canal is also involved in some places .
Three days after the initial diagnosis was established, a bone biopsy was performed via intraoral approach under local anesthesia. Access was made into the retromolar space by retracting a flap and removing a 3.0 cm by 2.0 cm buccal cortical plate window using a high-speed handpiece and a chisel. A tissue specimen was collected using a bone curette and a bone gauge. Yellow ‘‘granules’’ were clinically noted in the cancellous bone .
The buccal cortical plate and specimen were submitted in 10% formalin for histologic examination, which showed a benign proliferative process composed of histiocytic cells involving and infiltrating trabecular bone in a background of loose fibrous connective tissue devoid of any other significant inflammatory infiltrate. High-power examination demonstrated an abundance of foamy cells .
Immunohistochemical staining was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded 5-μm sections. This was achieved following antigen retrieval using citrate pH 6.0, blocking endogenous biotin and peroxidase. DAKO’s immunostainer was utilized for this procedure. Antibody binding to the cells in sections was detected using the horseradish peroxidase (HRP) reaction kits (DAKO, Carpinteria, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol instructions. Images were visualized and captured with a digital camera mounted on a Nikon Eclipse 80i microscope using NIS-Elements Advanced Research Software version 4.13 (Nikon Instruments; Tokyo, Japan). Immunohistochemical staining for CD68 was strongly positive to confirm the histiocytic/macrophage lineage of the cells and negative for S-100 and CD1a, which excludes Langerhans cell-related histiocytic disease .
Under a combination of intravenous sedation and local anesthesia, a second operation was performed. Access was made by an initial horizontal incision in the retromolar space and a vertical incision in the left vestibule. After reflecting a triangle mucoperiostal flap, the bone was fenestrated in the retromolar area with burs. The third molar (wisdom tooth) was exposed and pulled out. The tumor tissue was removed with a curette. An osteoplasty of the cavity was performed with round burs. After replacing the flap it was sutured .
After the surgical procedure, the patient underwent postoperative evaluations at 14-day, 30-day, and 60-day intervals, followed by an evaluation 1 year later. These evaluations indicated the absence of any noticeable complications throughout the specified observation periods.