A 59 years old Caucasian woman was admitted in December 2011 to the emergency department of our institution for a tumefaction in the right scarpa. This painful and fast expending pulsatile tumefaction was developed over a week and was accompanied by fever at 39–40 ℃.
Her case history indicated a left iliofemoral bypass in 2005 and a changed by femoral left right crossover graft in April 2009. Moreover a tobacco addiction and an alcohol intoxication were stopped in 2006 with neither cirrhosis nor chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In 2008, she had a T2N2aM0 tonsil cancer, treated by surgery and radiotherapy. She has been considered in remission since 2008.
In the emergency department, the clinical examination showed an abscess next to the right scarpa. Pertinent laboratory data on admission included the following polymorphonuclear leukocyte count: 19.550 G/L (normal range: 1.5–7 G/L) and chain reactive protein (CRP) at 211 mg/L (upper normal: <10 mg/L). Other biological exams were normal. The contrast enhanced computer tomography scan of the pelvis and leg showed an abscess contracted with the vascular graft without sign of septic perforation . The following day, the patient showed an active skin bleeding due to an abscess fistula with a graft perforation. She was operated in emergency, with a flattening of the abscess, a removal of the bypass distal part replaced by an impregnated silver salt Dacron (Intergard Silver, Maquet, Rastatt, Germany) allowing the revascularization of the profunda femoris and sartorius plasty. The culture of intraoperative samples from the vascular graft and the abcess pus both yield P. multocida. All other samples (blood cultures and fluid suction drains) remained sterile. In vitro culture indicated that the strain was sensitive to penicillin, third generation cephalosporin, aminoglycosides, cotrimoxazole, fluoroquinolones and fosfomycin. The initial empiric treatment was instituted pre-operative by piperacillin/tazobactam (4 g/500 mg × 4 per day) combined with amikacin (15 mg/kg once a day). It was modified 2 days after according to the bacteriological results by ofloxacine 200 mg × 3 per day combined with cotrimoxazole (800/160 mg) 1cp × 3 per day for 6 weeks. After 7 days of this antibiotic treatment, the patient had no fever anymore and a clean scar without pain or inflammatory signs. From a biological standpoint, there was a regression of hyperleukocytosis (7600 G/L) and a decrease in CRP (54 mg/L). Fifteen days after the surgery, the patient was admitted into a convalescent center. Four weeks after the introduction of antibiotic therapy, she presented a scar division of right scarpa without sign of infection and a good vascularization of the distal lower limb. Laboratory data was returned to normal. Three mouths after surgery, she has still the scar division without any infectious sign.