A 25-year-old male presented to our hospital with intense pain in the right flank region and lower back. At admission, his blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg and heart rate was 85 bpm. On clinical examination, he appeared anaemic and was cool peripherally. He was noted to have bilateral gynecomastia and no obvious Adam’s apple. The abdomen was visibly distended, and there was tenderness to palpation and percussion in the entire right abdominal area. Pain was also present on ballottement of the right kidney. He had hypospadias and cryptorchidism, which on questioning had been present since birth in both the patient and his twin brother; neither had yet undergone any corrective procedures for this.
Initial blood tests showed an initial Hb concentration of 150 g/L, however three hours after presentation this had dropped to 137 g/L. An ultrasound of the urinary tract showed an enlarged and irregularly-shaped right kidney. CT showed an enlarged right kidney, kidney lesions, and right renal haemorrhage with perirenal hematoma formation , together with further lesions in the lung. Angiomyolipoma was first considered as this is the most common cause of SRH in our local demographic, the initial management of which is often selective angio-embolization. However, due to the lesions in the kidney and lungs together with genital malformation, we could not rule out a diagnosis of a malignant tumour and therefore, we instead opted to perform an emergency partial nephrectomy to control the haemorrhage, allow early kidney resection and provide histological biopsies. During the operation, a 1000 g retroperitoneal haematoma was found and evacuated. Intraoperatively, the lesions were evident in the middle and lower right kidney, with the lower one having ruptured. Due to the genital abnormalities present and imaging results inconsistent with more common conditions, choriocarcinoma was suspected. Subsequently, post-operative histology samples were taken which confirmed this diagnosis , with positive immunohistochemistry when stained for β-HCG .
Laboratory investigations showed raised β-HCG, oestradiol, progesterone, Ferritin, and cytokeratin-19 fragment. Post-operative renal function remained within normal limits. Karyotype analysis showed the patient to have a normal 46, XY karyotype. Further CT scans showed additional metastases in the brain and both lungs . A contrast CT of the abdomen and pelvis showed epididymal and testicular shadowing in the right groin area; this was edge-enhancing and of uniform density . At this time, the working diagnosis was right testicular choriocarcinoma with metastases to the right kidney, brain and both lungs.
After declining early surgical treatment, the patient was referred to the oncology department for chemotherapy and radiotherapy. His initial treatment included a modified BEP chemotherapy regimen (bleomycin 15,000 IU (d1, d15), etoposide 120 mg (d1 - d5), cisplatin 30 mg (d1 - d5)) with whole brain radiotherapy. Following each round of chemotherapy, the sex hormone levels were monitored . Initially, a significant reduction in the blood concentration of oestradiol, keratin and β-HCG was observed. Additionally, chest x-rays, MRI brain and CT scans suggested marked reduction in the size of all metastases . However, after the fourth cycle of chemotherapy, multiple liver metastases were found on an enhanced abdominal CT during a work-up of gastritis. The team felt this indicated BEP resistance, and so the BEP regimen was changed to ITP (ifosfamide d1-d5 + taxol d1 + cisplatin d1–4), with the addition of oral apatinib for tumour-targeted therapy.
Despite this, one month later enhanced chest and abdominal CT scans showed that several metastases had increased in size . Ultrasound showed enlarged lymph nodes in the cervical and axillary groups, with additional calcification in the right inguinal groups. Laboratory investigations showed severe anaemia, hypoalbuminaemia, and a significant rise in β-HCG and other tumour markers. Due to significant side effects and continued disease progression, the patient opted to discontinue active treatment. He later passed away at home.
The patient’s twin brother was also evaluated by the hospital due to the presence of genital malformations on physical examination. These included perineal hypospadias, short penis, chordee, penoscrotal transposition, right cryptorchidism and scrotal splitting. His AFP, β-HCG and other sex hormone levels were within normal limits, and his chromosomal analysis showed the typical male genotype of 46, XY. He opted for a surgical urethral reconstruction, right orchiectomy and correction of the penoscrotal transposition, chordee and scrotal splitting. The pathological specimens taken from his undescended testis showed normal testicular histology.