A 47 year-old, 42-kg man with 1-year history of localised scleroderma referred to Trauma Department in our hospital because of acetabular fracture due to a car accident. After a series of pre-operation examinations, he was scheduled for a selective operation of inner fixation 6 days after his trauma. During the preanesthesia assessment, we found him not on any drugs but some kind of Chinese medication occasionally for scleroderma for about a year because of the side effects of the Chinese medications. There was no history of any surgery or anesthesia. Examination of his airway revealed microstomia with mouth opening of 2.5 cm and a Mallampati class III airway. However, there was no problem with motion of his head and neck, as the skin on his neck was not affected by scleroderma. On general physical examination, vital signs were stable, heart sounds were normal and breath sounds were clear bilaterally. His face was smooth and wrinkleless, his forearms had non-pitting edema, and his fingers were shortened and sausage-like, with flexion contractures on both wrists and fingers. Laboratory tests of total blood cell count, arterial blood gas analysis, pulmonary, liver and kidney function, ECG, echocardiography and X-ray were taken, all of which were normal except for mild anemia (Hb 90 g/L), which could be inferred that his viscera were not badly affected by scleroderma. For the reason of his anemia and predicted volume of blood loss he might have during the surgery, 2 U of packed red blood cell was prepared and ready for use on the surgery day.
In the operating room, standard monitors were attached, showing heart rate of 72 bpm and blood pressure of 112/65 mmHg. However, SpO2 could not be read on any of his fingers. We assumed it may because of skin thickening and vasospasm on his hands and fingers, so we moved the probe to his toes and finally got the value of 95 % while he was breathing room air. Peripheral intravenous access was obtained with difficulty hence awake right internal jugular venous insertion was achieved under regional anesthesia. Ranitidine 50 mg and tropisetron 3 mg were given intravenously. An ENT surgeon for tracheostomy was kept ready. After pre-oxygenation, anesthesia was induced with penehyclidine hydrocloride 0.2 mg, midazolam 2 mg, sufentanyl 25 μg, propofol 40 mg. After ensuring optimal bag and mask ventilation, neuromuscular blockade was administered with 60 mg succinylcholine to facilitate tracheal intubation. With epiglottis, glottis and tracheal cartilage clearly seen under Shikani Optical Stylet (SOS), endotracheal tube of ID (internal diameter) 7 mm was achieved and confirmed by symmetrical breath sounds and capnography. Before changing to lateral position, radial artery cannulation was preformed with difficulty. Anesthesia was maintained with 1 % sevoflurane, 4–6 mg/kg of propofol and 0.1–0.2 μg/kg/min of remifentanil. Guided by neuromuscular monitor, non-depolarization muscle reluxant atracurium was administered intermittently. Surgery lasted for 1 h and 40 min, with the blood loss of 300 ml. At the end of surgery and before he was transferred to post-anesthesia care unit (PACU), neuromuscular block was reversed and trachea was extubated. Intra-operative and postoperative course was uneventful.