A 65-year-old male patient encountered a sudden onset of slurred speech at 8:30 in the morning (Day 0), which was breifly resolved at noon, then relapsed at 20:00 on the same day and persisted, accompanied with right-sided weakness, facial paralysis and confusion (National Institute of Health Stroke Score (NIHSS) = 11). He presented to a local hospital and completed a brain CT scan with a normal result. He was detected with an unexplained thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 19 × 109/L on Day 0 at the local hospital, and was not given intravenous thrombolysis or any antiplatelet therapy. The patient was then transferred to our hospital the next morning (Day 1) and admitted to the department of neurology. He reported a history of anemia 4 years ago, which was rectified without further examination. He had no previous personal or familial history of stroke or thrombosis.
The assessment at the time of admission showed disorientation, dysarthria, right-sided facial paralysis and hemiplegia, and hypermyotonia of the left-sided extremities. The patient also had several bruises on the left leg and both hands.
The brain MRI and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) on Day 2 were both negative without presenting new ischemic lesions . There was also no evidence of thrombosis on the magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) . Laboratory tests on Day 1 showed a platelet count of 17 × 109/L, a hemoglobin level of 63 g/L, a serum total bilirubin level of 25.7µmol/L, and a direct bilirubin level of 8.3µmol/L. On Day 2, a low ADAMTS-13 activity (below 1%) and a high lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level (901 U/L) were detected, and the peripheral blood smear was found to be > 5% schistocytes. Based on the results above, the patient was diagnosed with TTP. Then, plasma exchanges (PE) with fresh frozen plasma were conducted once a day from Day 3 to Day 7, and then every other day for twice. The platelet count was normalized to 153 × 109/L on Day 6. The hemoglobin level was increased to 88 g/L on Day 14. Both indicators were gradually improved . The percentage of schistocytes in the peripheral blood smear decreased to 2.2% (11/500) on Day 14. The LDH level decreased to 251.7 U/L, while the serum total bilirubin level and direct bilirubin level decreased to normal on Day 15. The renal function remained normal consistently. In addition, bilateral cephalic vein thrombosis and plexus venosus leg muscle thrombosis were detected on Day 13 by ultrasonography, while no deep vein thrombosis was found on Day 2. Therefore, rivaroxaban was added to the treatment therapy on Day 13. The facial paralysis, hemiplegia, and dysarthria symptoms were rapidly resolved undergoing plasma exchanges therapy, followed by recovery of cognitive impairment. The symptoms and positive signs of the nervous system above were almost completely resolved 14 days after initiation of the PE therapy (NIHSS = 0).