On February 28, 2016, a 46-year-old Chinese woman with end-stage renal disease secondary to chronic glomerulonephritis visited our hospital due to severe nausea and vomiting, and she requested to undergo PD. The patient’s past medical history included chronic glomerulonephritis for 8 years; chronic renal dysfunction and renal hypertension for 4 years, for which she was taking amlodipine to control blood pressure; untreated congenital heart disease without symptoms; and appendectomy performed 30 years prior.
The patient’s physical examination on admission revealed the following characteristics: height, 160 cm; weight, 52 kg; body temperature, 36.5 °C; heart rate, 74 beats/min; respiratory rate, 18 breaths/min; blood pressure, 144/77 mmHg. She had mild eyelid edema, pale eyelid conjunctiva, and mild lower-extremity edema. All other examination results were unremarkable.
The full blood count revealed a white blood cell count of 5.41 × 109/L with 70.2% neutrophils, a red blood cell count of 2.86 × 1012/L, a hemoglobin concentration of 82 g/L, and a platelet count of 182 × 109/L. The blood test results revealed an albumin concentration of 49 g/L, a blood urea nitrogen concentration of 41.4 mmol/L, a creatinine concentration of 1119 μmol/L, an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 4.54 mL/min, and a C-reactive protein concentration of 4 mg/L. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed three secundum ASDs, two of which were located near the superior vena cava (measuring 5.4 mm and 5.2 mm, respectively) and the other near the inferior vena cava (measuring 7.6 mm). All ASDs had left-to-right shunts, as well as minor mitral regurgitation and slight right atrial enlargement. No other concomitant disorders were detected, such as ventricular septal defect, aortic or mitral valve disease, or patent ductus arteriosus.
Due to the high creatinine concentration, the patient required urgent dialysis. On the third day of hospitalization, the straight, double-cuffed Tenckhoff 41-cm silicon PD catheter was implanted by open surgery. The patient was administered intravenous cefazolin (0.5 g) before the procedure for antibiotic prophylaxis. After PD catheter implantation, the urgent-start PD regimen was initiated. Immediately, the dialysis prescription was administered, with a fill volume of 1000 mL and a dwell time of 4 h (four times per day for 5 days). Then, the PD regimen was changed to continuous ambulatory PD (CAPD) with three 2-L exchanges of 1.5% dextrose PD solution (Dianeal PD4, Baxter) per day. The Baxter double-bag system was used, and glucose solution served as the penetrant. The dressing was changed on the third day after surgery, and suture removal was performed 10 days after catheter implantation. The patient was educated on the PD technique on the third day after catheter insertion by a trained PD nurse. After 12 days of treatment, symptoms of uremia were eliminated, and the patient was discharged. The patient continued CAPD at home with a fill volume dialysate exchange of 2 L three times per day.
The patient was re-admitted to the hospital on April 5, 2016, due to abdominal pain and fever for 1 week (maximum temperature of 38.5 °C) accompanied by chills and shivering. The patient’s physical examination revealed the following characteristics: blood pressure, 149/95 mmHg; body temperature, 37.6℃; normal cardiopulmonary physical examination; and abdominal muscle tension, tenderness, and rebound pain. The PD catheter exit site was normal, and there was no swelling or pain around the tunnel. The PD effluent was turbid, with a white blood cell count of 1900/μL and a neutrophil percentage of 87%. The patient was diagnosed with PD-related peritonitis.
According to 2016 International Society for Peritoneal Dialysis (ISPD) guidelines , the patient underwent empirical antibiotic treatment with cephalothin (1 g/day) and amikacin (200 mg/day) administered intraperitoneally. On the fourth day of hospitalization, the patient’s symptoms improved and her body temperature decreased to within the normal range. The PD effluent became clear, and the white blood cell count of the effluent decreased to 40/μL with mononuclear leukocyte predominance. Simultaneously, we discovered that the PD effluent culture from the time of her admission was positive for S. aureus. Although blood cultures were not obtained, antibacterial treatment was adjusted according to the PD effluent culture results. We discontinued cephalothin and started intermittent vancomycin (1.5 g every 5 days for 3 weeks), and amikacin was discontinued after 7 days to protect residual renal function. In the meantime, tunnel ultrasonography was performed to rule out tunnel infection. The exit site was dry without exudation. There were no manifestations of inflammation, and because antibiotic therapy had been started, nasal swab and catheter exit site culture were not performed.
On May 13, 2016, the patient was readmitted with the same symptoms and signs as the previous episode. The PD effluent was turbid, with a white blood cell count of 1920/μL and a neutrophil percentage of 80%. Computed tomography of the heart, chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed no sign of infection. The cultures of the catheter exit site and nares were negative. The PD effluent was positive for S. aureus, which is susceptible to vancomycin and amikacin. Although blood cultures were also not obtained this time, we did not identify any other potential sources of infection. Therefore, we speculate that the initial anti-infective treatment duration was not long enough. When the patient was admitted to the hospital, vancomycin and amikacin were selected as the antibiotics for empirical treatment. The PD effluent turned clear after 2 days, and the white blood cell count of the effluent was normal after 4 days. Therefore, we did not change the antibiotic regimen. The patient was treated with amikacin (200 mg/day) for 1 week, but intermittent vancomycin (1.5 g every 5 days) was used for 4 consecutive weeks intraperitoneally.
On June 21, 2016, peritonitis relapsed again. This time, we performed PD effluent culture and blood culture simultaneously. The PD effluent culture and the two sets of blood cultures revealed the presence of the same organism, S. aureus. Transthoracic echocardiography was performed again, but this time, a vegetation measuring 9.5 × 6.4 mm attached to the surface of the right ventricle around the ventricular septal membrane was identified. Even though the white blood cell count of the PD effluent was normal on the sixth day of hospitalization, intermittent vancomycin (1.5 g) was administered intraperitoneally every 5 days for 4 weeks, while piperacillin and tazobactam (2.25 g every 8 h) were administered intravenously for 3 weeks until the vegetation was no longer detected on transthoracic echocardiography. To avoid further peritonitis relapse, ASD repair surgery was successfully performed by open heart surgery at Beijing Anzhen Hospital affiliated to Capital Medical University. No vegetations were found on the surface of the right ventricle during surgery. The patient has thus far been followed up for 5 years, with no further episodes of recurrence.