A 9-year-old girl presented to our orthopaedic clinic, with main complaint of a mass which was getting bigger on her upper back. Her parents noticed that she has already had the mass since six years. The initial mass size was around 1 cm in diameter (like a marble) located just below the tip of both scapulae. Subsequently, more masses appeared on the left lateral side of vertebrae. It was accompanied by difficulty in moving both shoulders and neck since 4 years. Because of these complains, her family tried various traditional medicines without improvement.
Six months prior to admission, she fell down on her back, and since then the masses grew progressively. She also felt pain around the masses. Meanwhile her neck and shoulder movement were becoming more limited than usual. She was brought to a district hospital in other province and then referred to our hospital to get more appropriate treatment. There was no history of similar disease in her family.
On physical examination, general condition was good and no abnormality was found in other organ. We found multiple bony prominences measuring about 2 cm in diameter at paravertebral region from cervical to lumbar and posterior thoracic wall. They made bone bridges starting from inferior occipital bone to cervical spine and extending to paravertebral lumbar region. We also found multiple masses at both axilla. Cervical lordosis and thoracic kyphosis were diminished. All the masses were hard in consistency. There was no tenderness, and the masses were fixed to the bone. The shoulder, cervical, and thoracal spine ranges of movement were limited .
Radiograph of the cervical spine showed new bone formation starting from occipital bone, cervical, until upper thoracal spine. Chest and shoulder radiographs also showed new bone formation at both humerus bridging to the tip of scapulae, with subluxation of both humeral head superiorly. The radiologist saw it as mustiple exostoses (osteochondroma lesion) with the differential diagnosis progressive myositis ossificans. HLA-B27 was negative, it was investigated since we also thought ankylosing spondylitis as a differential diagnosis. The 3D computerized tomography (CT) reconstruction revealed multifocal ossification on soft tissue including right pectoral muscle, bilateral latissimus dorsi, and left longisimus thoracis muscle. It was in accordance with myositis ossificans progresiva . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed similar result with CT scan and no other abnormality detected at the spine.
Because of the problem was multiple exostoses and stiffness, total excision of occipito-cervico-lumbar and paravertebral ossification and also exostoses at bilateral shoulder was done. Histopathological findings showed tissue consisting of cartilaginous component, irregular underlying bony trabeculae, and bone marrow between trabeculae. There was also endochondral ossification with no cellular atypia . After review of all patient’s data in one of the clinicopathological conference, we concluded that it was fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP). Four months after surgery local recurrences were detected, which was confirmed with radiograph . At three years follow up, she had similar signs and symptoms as before surgery.