A 73-year-old woman with a medical history of hypertension presented to the emergency department after 30 min of severe pressure-like substernal chest pain that radiated to her left arm and jaw at rest. The pain began 30 min prior to presentation. Her review of systems was positive for nausea and acute shortness of breath at rest. Pertinent negatives included any history of these symptoms, dyspnea on exertion at baseline, absence of trauma, initiation of new medications, exposure to sick contacts, or recent travel.
Patient's past medical history was significant for hypertension, generalized anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder, hypertension, and severe osteoarthritis. Patient was noted to have atypical polymyalgia rheumatica for which she was placed on 6 months taper course of steroids. She has been under the care of rheumatology with autoimmune and inflammatory markers all negative, indicative of osteoarthritis. Patient was on buspirone, duloxetine, hydrochlorothiazide, valsartan and meloxicam as needed. Patient's family history was significant for a father with sudden cardiac death due to dilated cardiomyopathy. No other risk factors or high-risk behaviors were reported.
On physical examination, the patient was normothermic and tachycardic with a rate of 112 beats per minute. Her blood pressure was 88/55 mm of Mercury (mmHg) and peripheral oxygen saturation was 88% on 5 L of supplemental oxygen via nasal cannula. She was in acute distress, diaphoretic, with jugular venous distension to the mid-neck, and bibasilar crackles. Normal S1 and decreased S2 were noted, with a holosystolic murmur radiating to her axilla; well-perfused extremities with + 1 lower extremity edema to the knees were also noted.
Initial electrocardiogram was indicative of diffuse ST-segment depressions and ST-segment elevation in lead aVR . Initial blood investigations were notable for lactate of 1.7 mg/dl and troponin of 1.33 ng/dL. She was given aspirin, ticagrelor, and heparin infusion in the emergency department. Catheter angiography was negative for coronary artery disease with less than 30% of obstruction of all coronary vessels (Additional file and : Videos 1 & 2). Patient's left ventricular end-diastolic pressure was elevated at 31 mmHg and left ventriculopgraphy was indicative of severe (4 +) mitral regurgitation (MR) with dilated left atrium (Additional file : Video 3). Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) in the cath lab showed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 65%, severe MR, flail posterior mitral valve leaflet as well as flail head of posterior papillary muscle (Additional file : Video 4).
An intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was placed in the cardiac catheterization laboratory and patient was admitted to the cardiac intensive unit for diuresis. She was intubated in the cath lab due to severe acute hypoxemic respiratory failure. She improved with diuresis and hemodynamic support. She was taken for operative repair on hospital day 3. Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) revealed severe eccentric MR (Additional file : Video 5). After standard initiation of cardiopulmonary bypass and cardiac arrest, direct visual inspection revealed a hemorrhagic posteromedial papillary muscle. The decision was made to replace the irreparably injured valve, and a 31 mm Epic™ bioprosthetic valve was placed. Postoperative TEE showed no evidence of residual MR and mean gradient of 2 mmHg (Additional file : Video 6). Pathologic specimen revealed ruptured posterior papillary muscle head, without any vegetations, calcifications, perforations; chordae tendinae appeared normal . Microscopic pathologic evaluation revealed ruptured papillary muscle with myocyte necrosis and hemorrhage secondary to the rupture .
Patient was diagnosed with acute severe mitral valve regurgitation secondary to posterior papillary muscle rupture (PMR). Given patient's presentation consistent with acute myocardial ischemia, myocardial infarction (MI) complicated by PMR was higher in our differential. Nonetheless, coronary angiogram showed no evidence of coronary artery disease. Coronary spasm, myocardial infraction without coronary artery occlusion (MINOCA) or acute coronary artery thrombosis followed by spontaneous recanalization could not be ruled out at this point. The patient’s unstable hemodynamic status did not allow for a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) prior to surgery. A diagnosis of idiopathic papillary muscle rupture leading to severe acute mitral regurgitation was made.
The patient had a prolonged postoperative hospitalization complicated by respiratory failure and ventricular cataplexy requiring prolonged support with IABP and milrinone. Cardiac output and cardiac index did improve to normal, she was weaned off all support and was discharged from the hospital. There was no MR or decreased LVEF on follow up transthoracic echo.