An 8-year-old female presented with an acute onset of left hip pain after tripping over her dog at home. She had a history of hypermobility syndrome (hyperextended knee, pes planus and broad-based gait), foetal alcohol spectrum disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. The patient was of Australian Aboriginal descent without a known history of endocrine disorders. Her body mass index (BMI) was 18.6 kg/m2 (height of 135 cm and weight of 33.9 kg).
She was unable to bear weight on presentation. Her roentgenograms, shown in , demonstrated bilateral coxa valga with an intact Klein’s line and slight effacement of the left femoral epiphysis. The femoral head appeared to be more spherical compared to the contralateral side. Lateral radiographs revealed posterior displacement of the epiphysis in relation to the metaphysis. The posterior slip angle was measured to be 45 degrees.
The decision was made to proceed emergently for closed reduction and percutaneous fixation. With the patient positioned supine in a traction table, closed reduction was performed by providing longitudinal traction and internal rotation. Under fluoroscopic guidance, entry point was confirmed utilising two 1.8 mm K-wires placed perpendicular to each other on the skin. The entry point was challenging as it was far more medial and anterior than for a varus-type SCFE placing the neurovascular bundle at risk. The line of the guidewire was felt to be most appropriate anteromedially to allow for maximum capture of the femoral head. Preoperative sonography was utilised to mark the position and note the depth of the femoral vessels. Cephazolin prophylaxis was given, and standard skin preparation and draping was performed. The skin and facia were incised, and a careful subfascial dissection was performed to gain access to the anterior femur. A cannulated guide wire was inserted, and position confirmed by fluoroscopy. The guide wire was placed in the centre of the head and measured, and a 7.3 mm partially threaded screw (Synthes, USA) was inserted. Approach withdrawal technique was utilised to confirm that the screw had not penetrated the epiphyses. A second screw was inserted just superior and parallel to the first to achieve greater biomechanical stability. Aspiration of the hip joint was not performed.
Postoperatively, the patient was instructed to non-weight bear for 6 weeks, followed by partial weight-bearing for further 6 weeks. Low dose computed tomography (CT) scan was performed to confirm screw position. Screening for endocrine disorders (thyroid and parathyroid dysfunction, growth hormone disorders and renal osteodystrophy) revealed Vitamin D deficiency (39 nmol/L). Replacement therapy was commenced at 1000 IU/day for 3 months. Postoperative radiographs taken at 6 weeks following fixation are shown in , showing sustained improvement in the posterior slope angle. Contralateral prophylactic fixation with 7.3 mm cannulated shaft screw (Synthes, USA) was performed 6 weeks following her initial operation. This was in line with institutional-based practice.
We followed-up with this patient at 3 weeks, 6 weeks, 6 months, 12 months, and 18 months postoperatively. The range of movement in each of her follow-up appointments is detailed in . At her recent 18-month follow-up, the patient had equal range of movement with her contralateral side. There was no evidence of slip progression, avascular necrosis, or chondrolysis. Vitamin D levels following treatment were 65 nmol/L. Epiphyseal escape of the prophylactically pinned side was noted at her one-year follow-up, which was revised. Her one-year roentgenograms are shown in .