On 22nd March 2012, a 46-year-old right-handed Chinese male, who had been misdiagnosed with multiple sclerosis three years earlier in another hospital because of the white matter lesions in MRI, came into the hospital due to sudden dysarthria and left hemiparesis. His blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg and his temperature was 36.6˚C. A neurological examination revealed left hemiparesis, dysarthria, spasticity in his extremities and diffuse brisk deep tendon reflexes, corresponding to a diagnosis of pure motor stroke . Mini-mental status examination was normal (a score of 28 out of 30).
An acute subcortical infarction was found in the right basal ganglia and periventricular areas on the 2nd day of hospitalization . There was no significant stenosis or malformation of major cerebral arteries on MR angiography . MRI confirmed the severe white matter lesions concentrated around the periventricular, pons, external capsule and the anterior temporal pole and multiple subcortical lacunar infarcts . Some cerebral microbleeds (CMBs) were also present in the bilateral basal ganglia and subcortical areas . There was no evidence for head trauma, cavernous hemangioma, arteriovenous malformations, aneurysms or neoplasia. In the past, he did not have any episodes of migraine and any vascular risk factors other than smoking. His family history disclosed that his brother had a similar episode of dysarthria. Blood tests, including a complete blood cell count, glucose, cholesterol, creatinine, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, homocysteine, and C-reactive protein were normal. Hemocoagulation tests were within normal values. Coagulation factors such as factor II, V, VII, VIII, IX and von Willebrand factor were normal. Serological tests for collagen disease were unremarkable, as was the cerebrospinal fluid testing. Lactate and pyruvate levels were normal in blood. Urine analysis was normal with no proteinuria. Cocaine urine test was negative. An echocardiogram was normal, and electrocardiographic monitoring did not show arrhythmias.
Since CADASIL was suspected based on the characteristic MRI findings and his family history, a skin biopsy and NOTCH3 gene analysis was performed on hospital day 13 after the informed consent. Ultrastructural examination showed the accumulation of GOM in small arterial walls . NOTCH3 gene testing revealed a heterozygote Arg90Cys mutation in exon 3 . The patient remained normotensive throughout his hospital stay. He was not given any antithrombotics because of gastric hemorrhage 1 year ago. The modified Rankin scale (mRS) score at 30 days after this ictus was 1 point.
Two months after discharge, he was admitted again to our hospital with a sudden unresponsiveness. Initial blood pressure was 138/98 mmHg and neurological examination showed mild coma and right spastic hemiplegia. The admission Glasgow Coma Scale score and NIH Stroke scale (NIHSS) score was 11 and 20 respectively. An immediate computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated an acute ICH in the left basal ganglia extending into the ventricular system . There was no evidence of trauma on head CT. Follow-up CT three days later showed no significant change of hematoma size . The patient showed gradual recovery from his right hemiplegia without hematoma evacuation. The 30-day Barthel index and NIHSS score after ICH was 45 and 14 respectively. Then, the patient had an mRS of 2 at 12 months after ICH onset, supporting a favorable outcome. In addition, the patient developed migraine at about 10 months after the second hospital admission.