A 61-year-old woman underwent implantation of a permanent epicardial pacemaker in her upper left abdomen for complete atrioventricular block at 10 years of age. The device was programmed to VVI mode. The generator was exchanged, and a new epicardial right ventricular lead (Medtronic 5071; Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was added at 47 years of age. The generator (Kappa KDR731; Medtronic) was exchanged for the second time at 51 years of age. No adverse events were seen at routine pacemaker check-ups. However, at 53 years of age, the patient presented with several syncopal episodes. On checking the pacemaker, V-lead impedance was markedly elevated to 8786 Ohm. We changed the V-lead from bipolar to unipolar, which improved the impedance to 400 Ohm.
At 53 years of age, when the patient was hospitalized for a caesarean section, we performed another pacemaker check-up and found that the pacing threshold had increased. Therefore, we implanted a second pacemaker (EnPulse E2DR31; Medtronic) via the left axillary vein. The setting of the new pacemaker was DDD mode, and we set a lower rate of 50 ppm and an upper rate of 120 ppm. The old generator, which was placed in the left upper abdomen, was turned off and set to OVO mode. However, to avoid infection, we did not remove the old generator immediately after caesarean section, which would have required open surgery to remove her abdominal generator and leads. Open surgery would have been a high-risk procedure for the patient, especially postpartum. Therefore, both pacemakers were in place with the abdominal pacemaker not in use, and the other in use in her left chest . She was subsequently followed at our outpatient pacemaker clinic.
The patient developed dizziness and an intermittent pulse on 6 September 2015, and she visited our outpatient pacemaker clinic. Her electrocardiogram and intracardiac electrogram showed confusing pacing spikes following or not following QRS complexes . Her Holter monitor showed waveform-like pacing failure, and she was admitted to our hospital because of dizziness and presyncope later in September 2015. We questioned whether the mechanism underlying the confusing pacing spikes was pacing failure, sensing failure, or something else.