A 23-year-old woman presented with a 1-day history of the right hemiparesis before admission to our clinic. She was otherwise neurologically intact with normal mental status, sensation, reflexes, and coordination. No hematological or electrolyte abnormalities, underlying pathologies such as vasculitis, or autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus were identified.
Initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) of the head demonstrated acute infarction of the left basal ganglia, but no subarachnoid hemorrhage [ and ]. A small, high-density spot on CT and high-intensity spot on T1-weighted MRI was shown beside the infarction [ and ]. Subsequent MR angiography and CT angiography (CTA) demonstrated what appeared to be a 2.3-mm fusiform aneurysm with a left LSA origin [ and ].
The cerebral infarction of the left basal ganglia was not aggravated on repeat CT or MRI, and neurological symptoms resolved within 2 weeks. However, DSA revealed filling of 7.8 mm of the fusiform aneurysm near the left M1 segment, with the body of the aneurysm separate from M1 . The aneurysm was diagnosed as proximal LSA aneurysm. Because the size of the aneurysm was increasing and the risk of rupture was increasing, we decided to perform surgical clipping of the proximal LSA itself to collapse inflow into the aneurysm.
Left pterional craniotomy was performed. Intraoperatively, the orifice of the aneurysm was identified not on the proximal LSA but on M1. The aneurysm was brown in color and was diagnosed as a thrombotic aneurysm [ and ]. The orifice of the aneurysm was almost entirely covered with thrombus, and the M1-LSA aneurysm was found to have been mistakenly interpreted as LSA aneurysm on preoperative DSA. Some small LSAs and arteries supplying the surrounding brain were seen to be adherent to the surface of the thrombosed aneurysm. Simple neck clipping was unsuitable, because M1 was collapsed with thrombus after neck clipping, so partial thrombectomy was performed with temporary clips on the parent artery without heparin administration [ and ]. After thrombectomy, neck clipping with a fenestrated clip was performed, preserving the parent artery and LSAs, but not preserving one of the small perforator’s adherents to the aneurysm [ and ].
Postoperatively, right hemiparesis re-aggravated, and a small new infarction was detected on MRI in the basal ganglia beside the previous infarction . The aneurysm was not filled, and the left M1 and LSAs were well preserved on DSA [ and ]. She was discharged to a rehabilitation hospital with a modified Rankin Scale (mRS) Grade 2, and then discharged home with mRS Grade 0 at 3 months postoperatively.