We report the case of a 55-year-old male with progressive coronary PSA after routine DES implantation in an external hospital in May 2021. The patient’s medical record included coronary artery disease (CAD) with multiple stentings of the right coronary artery, ramus circumflexus (LCx), ramus interventricularis anterior (LAD), and the left main coronary artery (LMCA), an ischaemic cardiomyopathy with left ventricular reduced ejection fraction (40%), severe peripheral arterial disease with occlusions of the pelvic arteries, chronic kidney disease (Stage 3b, eGFR 33 mL/min/1.73), and furthermore, a broad spectrum of cardiovascular risk factors such as non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus Type 2 (current HbA1c 6.8%), arterial hypertension, and hypercholesterinaemia. The home medication included dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel, heart failure medication with an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor, beta-blocker, an aldosterone antagonist, and an antidiabetic therapy with metformin and sitagliptin as well as a statin.
In April 2021, a coronary intervention with stent implantation in the LMCA, LAD, and LCx (culotte-stenting) due to high-gradient bifurcation stenosis was performed in another clinic. No PSA was detected before or after percutaneous coronary intervention (; , and ).
In May 2021, another coronary angiography was carried out in an external clinic due to chest pain and an elevation of troponin, suggesting a progression of the patient’s coronary heart disease. Here, a small PSA in the proximal LCx behind the stent was detected. At that time, there was no need for a therapeutic intervention (; , ). Afterwards, the patient developed a groin haematoma, which needed surgical intervention.
In June 2021, the patient was readmitted to the external clinic due to Staphylococcus aureus bacteraemia, most likely caused by a femoral puncture, with subsequent spondylodiscitis without the need for surgical intervention. An anti-infective therapy with flucloxacillin was initiated. The overview computed tomography (CT) at admission showed the progression of his coronary PSA . During hospitalization, the patient showed signs of cardiac decompensation with bilateral pleural effusions, followed by respiratory insufficiency, which led to intermittent intubation and the need for catecholamine therapy. Acute left ventricular heart failure and a worsening of the ejection fraction down to 30% in the echocardiography led to the suspicion of a progressing CAD, and a new invasive coronary imaging was indicated in the external clinic. The intervention revealed a progression in the size of the known coronary PSA (, , ) and LCx in-stent occlusion. In CT, the LCx PSA measured 40 × 33 × 24 mm .
The patient was referred to our hospital for evaluation of an emergency surgery. Due to multiple pre-existing diseases (S. aureus bacteraemia, cardiac decompensation with EF 30% with the need for catecholamine therapy, suspected bladder cancer with active bleeding, and his distinct peripheral artery disease with high-gradient stenosis of iliac arteries), an interdisciplinary heart team made up of interventional cardiologists and cardiac surgeons estimated that the intraoperative risk for the patient was too high. Therefore, this interdisciplinary conference agreed on an interventional procedure rather than a surgical approach. Since the proximal occlusion of the LCx was chronic, there was no indication for recanalization. A coronary angiography with brachial access was performed. Radial access was not possible, and femoral access was not chosen due to peripheral artery disease, haematoma from the previous coronary angiography. The guide catheter was placed in the left main stem ostium, and a covered stent (Graftmaster 2.8/19 mm) could be implanted from the LMCA into the LAD. After post-implantation dilatation with non-compliant balloons (NC Quantum 4.5/12 mm″ in LMCA and NC Quantum 3.5/12 mm in the LAD), a complete sealing of the coronary PSA could be achieved (; , ). Finally, the ostium of the left main stem was treated with a drug-eluting balloon catheter (SeQuent Please NEO 4.0/20 mm). Intravascular ultrasound confirmed the successful closure of the LCx (see , ).
Initially elevated troponin levels were declining the post-interventional period, and the patient’s dyspnoea improved after a forced diuretic therapy. After the implantation of a covered stent, a prolonged triple therapy consisting of aspirin 100 mg, clopidogrel 75 mg, and apixaban 2.5 mg bid for 3 months (due to the newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation), followed by 9 months of dual therapy of clopidogrel 75 mg and apixaban 2.5 mg, was recommended. A relocation of the cardiopulmonary-stable patient for further treatment to the referring hospital was possible 2 days after the intervention. The patient has remained asymptomatic in a 6-month follow-up.