A 60-years-old female with chronic hypertension, came to neurosurgical clinic with history of gradually progressive bilateral blurring of vision for 7 months and severe, headache for 3 months.
Neurological examination and systemic examination of this lady were normal without deficits.
Hematological and biochemical tests were within normal parameters. However, pituitary function tests revealed raised ACTH = 143 pg/ml. Rest of the pituitary hormones’, i.e., follicle stimulating, luteinizing, thyroid-stimulating hormone, prolactin, and insulin-like growth factor levels were within normal range.
On imaging, computed tomography scan bran revealed erosive lesion in region of sella causing bony destruction and remodeling [ and ]. This was followed by magnetic resonance imaging brain with contrast which showed indicated a well-defined, rounded, and homogenous cystic area in the region of sella showing high signal on both T1 and T2 images with no contrast enhancement [-].
At this point, a clear diagnosis could not be made due to atypical radiological features. Hence, patient was planned for surgery + biopsy of suspected lesion.
After careful planning, the cyst was removed by a routine trans-nasal trans-spenoidal endoscopic approach. The cyst contained greenish jelly like material which was removed completely along with the cyst wall. The contents were sent for histopathological examination.
Histopathological examination revealed benign cyst lined with flattened squamous epithelium and underlying fibrous tissue. On one region, a pseudostratified ciliated epithelium was also seen. Abundant hemorrhage was seen along with few calcified fragments. There was no evidence of malignancy in the sections examined. A diagnosis of benign atypical sellar cyst was made. This pathology report was reviewed by the head of the department pathology who concurred with the findings.
Post procedure, patient recovered well and was discharged. Her initial symptoms had resolved completely on her follow-up at 4 weeks.