A 91-year-old female, who has worked in the agriculture sector for over five years, presented to the outpatient clinic for further evaluation of a lung tumor that was incidentally noted. The patient had an ECOG-performance status of 0 and an unremarkable past medical history. No abnormalities were observed on routine blood examination and serum tumor marker analysis. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed an approximately 2.5 cm-sized mass in the right upper lobe of the lung [Fig. A]. No enlargement or calcification of the hilar LNs was noted [Fig. B]. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) revealed high tumor uptake, with a maximal standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 21.5, and diffusely-arranged bilateral hilar and mediastinal nodes, with SUVmax of 3–5, diagnosed as nonspecific FDG accumulation [Fig. C and D]. The tumor was identified to be an adenocarcinoma on a CT-guided biopsy. The patient was diagnosed with stage IA3 primary lung adenocarcinoma, according to the eighth edition of TNM classification of lung cancer.
Thoracoscopic right upper lobectomy, using the four-port method, was performed for the primary lung cancer. The upper lobar branch of the superior pulmonary vein and superior arterial trunk were isolated using an auto-stapler. Intraoperatively, multiple adherent LNs were observed around the upper bronchus and adjacent tissues. Several interlobar LNs (#12u and #11s) were strongly adherent with, and partially infiltrated to, the posterior ascending branch of the PA (ascending A2). Accurate dissection would have been challenging [Fig. A]. Intraoperative frozen section analysis confirmed the absence of metastases in one of the hilar LNs (#12u). We decided to convert from a thoracoscopic approach to thoracotomy in preparation for potential PA injury because the upper lobar branch of the superior pulmonary vein was already transected. After performing a 12 cm skin incision, the posterior ascending branch of the PA was safely isolated via proximal double ligation, with transfixing sutures and a distal single adherent LN-transfixing suture, while retaining a part of the hilar LNs. The upper lobe bronchus was secured using an auto-stapler. Only the hilar LNs were dissected. The mediastinal LNs were left untouched. The total operative time was 307 min, and the estimated blood loss was 80 mL.
The tumor was histopathologically diagnosed as a well-differentiated apT1cN0M0 stage IA3 adenocarcinoma. Microscopic examination revealed anthracosilicosis in the lobar LNs, which presented as fibrotic nodules in a concentric onion-skinned arrangement of hyalinized collagen bundles, in extensive proximity to the peripheral PA wall, accompanied by granulomatous inflammation [Fig. B]. By contrast, fibrotic nodules were inconspicuous in the lung parenchyma. The LNs with silicotic changes had no lymphoid lobules surrounded by lymph-filled sinuses, tumor metastasis, and calcifications. The adventitial stroma of the PA, which typically consists of a loose extracellular matrix scaffold where a boundary between LN anthracosilicosis and PA is dissected [Fig. C], developed into a dense and borderless fibrous tissue with variable dust-laden macrophages [Fig. D]. No cancerous tissue was observed at the PA stump.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and no further complications were noted. The chest tube was removed one day postoperative after confirming that there was no air leakage. The patient was discharged on the seventh postoperative day. The patient was regularly followed up on an outpatient basis, with routine blood examinations and CT scans every three months. No recurrence was observed two years later.