A 54-year-old female patient developed persistent severe pain in the upper abdomen after abdominal trauma combined with general weakness. After admission to a local hospital, she was diagnosed with abdominal hemorrhage with hemorrhagic shock, and emergency laparotomy was performed. During the operation, the liver was found to be enlarged diffusely, and a significant amount of non-coagulant blood was in the abdominal cavity. The right hepatic capsule was ruptured, and there was a large hematoma in the left liver. Liver biopsy was not performed, and the abdomen was closed after placing the abdominal drainage tube. Hemorrhagic ascites outflow continued after the operation. As the patient was in a critical condition, she was transferred to a superior hospital 2 d after the operation. After completing the relevant examinations, the patient was diagnosed with Budd-Chiari syndrome (a type of HVOD), portal hypertension, varicose esophageal veins, and gastric fundus veins. For further treatment, the patient came to our hospital. She had no history of other diseases.
Physical examinations showed temperature: 36.5 °C; pulse rate: 80 times/min; breathing rate: 16 times/min; and blood pressure: 120/80 mmHg. The patient had a poor general condition, emaciated, and weak with severe jaundice on the skin and mucous membranes; however, there were no liver palms or spider moles. Cardiopulmonary examination did not show any obvious abnormality. Abdominal swelling was present. There were no varicose veins in the abdominal wall. There was no obvious tenderness, rebound pain, and muscle tension, and the liver could be touched. Intestinal sound was 4 times/min, and both lower limbs had mild edema.
Laboratory tests revealed the following: White blood cell count: 11.97 × 109/L; routine urinalysis: Bilirubin 2 +, urine protein 3 +; Sed occult blood (-); blood biochemistry: ALT29U/L, AST74U/L, TBIL27 (1.4 µmol/L), DBIL (148.3 µmol/L), ALB (33.9 g/L), BUN (4.91 mmol/L), Cr (29 µmol/L); coagulation: PT15.3S, PTA (61%), INR (1.38); blood ammonia (45.2 µmol/L); HBsAg (-), HBsAb (+); CA125: 202.1; antibodies against autoimmune liver disease (-).
No abnormalities were observed on both chest radiography and electrocardiography.
Hepatic vascular ultrasound revealed that the inferior vena cava of the hepatic segment was compressed and narrowed by the enlarged hepatic tissue. The blood flow was unobstructed, and the three hepatic veins were not visible. The main portal vein and its intrahepatic branches were unobstructed.
Abdominal computed tomography showed that the inferior vena cava of the hepatic segment was narrowed. The left, middle, and right hepatic veins were not clearly visible. The main portal vein and its branches were unobstructed .