A 72-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for surgery because of severe and progressive left knee pain for the past decade. Her pre-operative ADLs ranged from walking with a single cane to walking with a silver car. Her medical history included diabetes mellitus, with a glycated hemoglobin level of 7.6%. Pre-operative radiographs of the right lower extremity were shown .
The patient was placed under general anesthesia, and isodine was used to disinfect the knee area during surgery. TKA was performed using a medial parapatellar approach . The operative time was 1 h and 39 min, and an air tourniquet was used to avoid massive bleeding. Cefazolin sodium was given intra-operatively as a single dose of 2 g intravenously and was continued post-operatively at an infusion dose of 3 g/day for 3 days. On post-operative day 6 (POD), increased exudates and erythema on the wound and fever were noted. Blood tests revealed a normal white blood cell count (7.47 × 103 cells/µL) and neutrophil count (5.93 × 103 cells/µL), but an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level at 19.51 mg/dL, indicating an increased inflammatory response. Examination of the joint fluid was positive for α-defensin [, ].
Considering the extremely high possibility of infection, the patient underwent an initial cleaning procedure after obtaining samples for culture studies. Surgery was performed by opening the previous skin incision. Intra-operatively, tissue perfusion was poor in some areas, but abscess formation was scant, and contaminated tissues were removed as much as possible. The soft tissue and other replaceable inserts were replaced, and a drain was placed. At our hospital, the antimicrobial regimen for SSIs is an intravenous three-drug combination of linezolid (LZD) to cover MRSA; tazobactam/piperacillin hydrate to cover gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, especially Pseudomonas aeruginosa; and clindamycin (CLDM) to address the possibility of intracellular transfer of bacteria . Post-operatively, the patient was started on infusions of the following antimicrobials: 600 mg of LZD 2 times daily, 4.5 g of tazobactam/piperacillin hydrate 3 times daily, and 600 mg of CLDM 3 times daily.
The culture results from the initial surgery became available only on POD 12 and revealed S. marcescens. At this time, the drainage increased, and a fever of 38°C appeared . In addition, the CRP level was 9.7 mg/dL, and the white blood cell and neutrophil counts increased to 9.11 × 103 cells/μL and 7.95 × 103 cells/μL, respectively. The presence of erythema around the wound and purulent drainage indicated that the TKA infection had not completely subsided and had even worsened. With the identification of the causative organism, retreatment with DAIR was deemed likely to be effective. The same skin incision site was used for the procedure. After obtaining joint fluid for culture examination, further washing and debridement were performed. Considering reinfection, the area was washed with 10 L of saline solution, and hemochromatic tissues were removed as much as possible. The implant was not loosened and was retained, but the insert was replaced, and a drain was placed. Culture-guided antimicrobial treatment with intravenous levofloxacin and sulfamethoxazole was administered. After the second cleaning, the CRP level rapidly decreased.
After the detection of S. marcescens, DAIR led to a rapid decrease in the CRP level. Four weeks after the initial TKA, the CRP level decreased to 0.8 mg/dL. Subsequently, all antimicrobials were switched to oral therapy. At 34 days after TKA, the wound . At 16 weeks after TKA, the CRP level further decreased to 0.03 mg/dL, and the symptoms of erythema and burning sensation gradually improved. The wound was completely closed , and the patient was able to walk with a silver car for short distances. The entire course after TKA is shown in . There was no recurrence of infection at the time of the last follow-up, 2 years after TKA.