A 50-year-old postmenopausal woman, gravida 15, para 7, from a rural area in northwest Ethiopia presented to the University of Gondar Urogynecology unit after she sustained an ox horn injury to her genitalia 6 days prior to presentation. She initially had profuse bleeding from the injury site, but the bleeding stopped spontaneously and she did not seek medical care until she presented to our urogynecology unit. At presentation, she reported a history of failure to control urine and pain, and a foul-smelling discharge at the wound site. She had history of a mass protruding outside the vagina of 7 years duration that was progressively increasing and associated with difficulty in urinating for which she had not sought medical care. Following the injury she denied abdominal pain, abdominal distension or failure to pass feces and flatus. Her last menses was 2 years prior to the injury. She had no known history of other medical problems or illness.
On physical examination she was acutely sick looking, vital signs were within normal range and she had slightly pale conjunctiva. Her abdomen was flat, non-tender and with active bowel sounds with no palpable mass or sign of fluid collection. Evaluation of the genitourinary system revealed stage three POP with the leading point being the cervix. The anterior vaginal and posterior bladder walls were disrupted with visible draining of the left ureter. The wound was dirty and edematous with a whitish discharge . There was no involvement of the urethra and the distal one-third of the vagina in the injury. She had difficulty walking due to the pain from the wound. Otherwise there were no remarkable findings from her physical examination. Her hematocrit was 31.6%, and abdominopelvic ultrasound revealed a mild right-sided hydronephrosis with hydroureter. There was no sign of intra-abdominal or pelvic fluid collection. She was admitted to the urogynecology ward with a diagnosis of stage three POP, posterior bladder rupture and wound infection. The right ureteral orifice was identified and stented , and she received wound care twice daily.
Three months following admission, the wound was clean and well granulated and the edema had resolved. The right sacrospinous ligament fixation was then completed .
Six weeks after the RSSF the ruptured bladder was repaired after adequate mobilization of the bladder . Both the ureters were identified and stented prior to the repair. Vaginal packing and transurethral catheter were left in situ. The vaginal packing and the urinary catheter were removed after 24 hours and 3 weeks, respectively. The patient was fully continent when discharged on postoperative day 21 following bladder repair and on postoperative day 63 following her RSSF.