The patient was a 4-year-old Chinese boy, presented with progressive erythematous plaques on his nose for 6 months. The skin lesions gradually involved all the hands and feet , with an intermittent fever. No other symptoms like stomachache, or diarrhea were complained. His parents denied trauma or allergy history. No parental consanguinity or any remarkable family history was recorded.
On physical examination, lymph nodes in bilateral axillary moderately enlarged. No obvious abnormality of internal organs was found. Multiple erythematous plaques were noted on his face and extremities. He had clubbed fingers, toes and also had mild joint contracture in his fingers. Laboratory analysis revealed a slightly anemia with hemoglobin 107 g/L (normal 120-140 g/L). Serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 44 IU/L (normal 15-40 IU/L), lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) 347 IU/L (normal 120-250 IU/L), hydroxybutyrate deacidification enzyme (HBDH) 286 IU/L (normal 26-195 IU/L) were elevated, while erythrocyte sedimentation rate, ANA series tests and other routine tests were negative. X-ray of chest showed increased lung markings. Serial cranial CT scans were taken which revealed no basal ganglia calcification. Abdominal CT scan didn’t show hepatosplenomegaly.
Skin biopsy from the hand lesion showed hyperkeratosis, irregular epidermal hyperplasia, mild spongy edema and single necrotic keratinocytes in epidermis along with mild vacuolar degeneration. Medium monocytes with neutrophilic cells infiltrated around dermal vessels. Nuclear dust and mitotic figures were seen . Immunohistochemical examination showed that the most infiltrating cells were positive for CD3, CD68 and MPO.
Furthermore, we collected blood samples from the patient and his parents on receipt of informed consent. Whole exome sequencing was performed and results were revalidated by Sanger sequencing. The results showed compound heterozygous mutations c.373C > T (p.R125C) and c.355G > A (p.D119N) in the exon3 of the PSMB8 (NM_004159.5; MIM 177046) gene in proband. His parents were both heterozygous carriers with no clinical symptom. Based on the clinical manifestations and the genomic mutation on PSMB8 gene, the diagnosis of Nakajo–Nishimura syndrome was made.
After the treatment with methylprednisolone 8 mg/d for 2 months, the lesions improved and the lymph nodes in bilateral axillary returned to normal size. The erythematous plaques on his face disappeared eventually with the dosage of methylprednisolone tapered.