We describe the case of an 81-year-old Caucasian woman who was referred to our hospital with swelling of the neck and upper left limb and a 2-week history of dysphonia and dysphagia, associated with an involuntary weight loss of 16 kg over the previous 2 months. Ten months earlier she had been diagnosed with ascending colon adenocarcinoma stage IIIb without distant metastatic disease (T4aN1b.IVL), and underwent right hemicolectomy. She was not eligible for adjuvant chemotherapy as she had stage 3 chronic kidney disease and ischaemic cardiomyopathy. On physical examination, she had face and neck oedema with visible collateral veins. She had three abdominal non-painful subcutaneous nodules, but no further relevant abnormalities.
Laboratory tests showed anaemia (haemoglobin 10.5 g/dl; normal range 12.0–16.0 g/dl), a normal serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA, 5 ng/ml; normal range 0–5 ng/dl) and elevated cancer antigen 19-9 (57 U/ml; normal range <37 U/ml). A chest x-ray revealed enlargement of the mediastinum .
Therefore, upper endoscopy was performed and revealed an extrinsic compression area of approximately 4 cm (18–22 cm from the incisor teeth); no other changes were observed. An abdominal ultrasound only revealed three well-defined hypoechogenic subcutaneous nodules that could have been tumour implants. Computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest, abdomen and pelvis showed a large bulky solid tumoral lesion with heterogeneous density, measuring 9.0 cm at its greatest diameter, in the posterior mediastinum with invasion of the first two dorsal vertebral bodies, as well as of the supra-aortic trunks, close to the posterior wall of the trachea. It had invaded the oesophagus and the pleural space bilaterally (–).
Several cutaneous nodules on the abdomen compatible with metastases were found . No metastases or other pathologies were identified in the lungs, and abdominal-pelvic CT images were unremarkable. CT-guided fine needle aspiration cytology of the mediastinal tumour and the subcutaneous nodules was compatible with metastatic adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical staining of the core biopsy samples was negative for cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and neuroendocrine markers, and positive for cytokeratin (CK) AE1/AE3, CDX2, CAM 5.2 and CK20, which is typical of colorectal primary carcinoma.