The patient, a 59-year-old Chinese woman, was treated at our centre in 1994 for a T3N0M0 nasopharyngeal carcinoma. She was treated with external beam radiotherapy to 60 Gy in 30 fractions over 6 weeks in accordance to ICRU-50. Two lateral parallel opposed fields were used to treat the nasopharynx and upper neck. The lower neck was irradiated with a direct anterior field with a central cord shield and a lower border just below clavicular heads. The junction of the upper and lower field was at the level of hyoid bone. It was followed by a 10 Gy Iridium-192 brachytherapy boost to the nasopharynx. Treatment was completed in May 1994. She remained well with no further recurrence of the nasopharyngeal carcinoma but developed xerostomia and mild fibrosis of the lower neck.
She re-presented in December 1999 with a mass in the left supraclavicular fossa and numbness in the arm, but no motor weakness. The mass was located within the area previously irradiated to 60 Gy. Her disease was staged with our standard protocol at the time with MRI of the neck and shoulder, CT of the chest and functional imaging using thallium-201 scintigraphy . MRI showed a 3 cm × 5 cm mass involving the brachial plexus . Open biopsy confirmed pleomorphic spindle cell sarcoma.
The management of her case was discussed in our multi-disciplinary meeting. The agreed treatment plan was preoperative radiotherapy followed by en bloc resection. She received an accelerated hyperfractionated course of radiotherapy 48 Gy in 40 fractions (ICRU-50), treating twice a day over four weeks. The radiation field incorporated the brachial plexus and used 6 MV photons in an anterior-weighted, opposed oblique arrangement avoiding the spinal cord. Radiotherapy was completed in February 2000. Restaging investigations showed that the lesion had become more cystic on MRI, but its size had not changed. The degree of thallium-201 scintigraphy uptake had not changed significantly either. The patient proceeded on to surgery four weeks later.
Surgery in March 2000 consisted of en bloc resection of the tumor along with the left sternomastoid and superior and middle trunks of the brachial plexus. Clavicular osteotomy was necessary to allow dissection of the tumor from the subclavian vessels. Sural nerve grafts were used to restore continuity of nerve supply from C5 and C6 to the suprascapular, musculocutaneous and axillary nerves. A latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap was raised to close the defect in the neck. The middle third of the clavicle that had been reflected downwards was replaced and secured with a plate and screws.
Histological examination of the surgical specimen showed evidence of radiotherapy, with large areas of necrosis and hemorrhage seen both macroscopically and microscopically. Comparison was made between the operative specimen and the pre-irradiation biopsy; necrosis was not seen in the pre-irradiation specimen . Surgical excision appeared complete.
Immediate postoperative recovery was uncomplicated. The patient retained good function in her hand but was left with a flail shoulder and no power in elbow flexion. She thus underwent cable grafting of the musculocutaneous nerve in October 2000, with gradual return of elbow function following this procedure.
The patient presented again in December 2001 with pain in the shoulder. X-ray confirmed that there had been non-union of the osteopaenic clavicle, the plate having detached from the lateral end of the clavicle. She returned to theatre and had a bone graft and internal fixation . Following this procedure, pain settled and she continues to have good use of her arm, although shoulder movement remains minimal.
The patient remains well five years after combined therapy for the PRS, with no evidence of recurrence of either her nasopharyngeal carcinoma or the PRS. The patient had no lymphoedema, neurovascular, severe fibrosis or other significant late effect as a result of re-irradiation.