A 66-year-old man with a history of arterial hypertension was referred to our hospital with an open wound on his anterior neck due to a cultivator accident. His arterial systolic blood pressure and heart rate were 130/80 mmHg and 80/min, respectively. His respiratory rate and SpO2 were 24/min and 85%, respectively, under a non-rebreathing mask with 15L/min oxygen. He was immediately intubated for dyspnea and hypoxemia. Chest and neck computed tomography (CT) to determine the degree of injury revealed thyroid cartilage fracture to the 3rd ring of the tracheal transection with extensive subcutaneous emphysema . After bagging, the emphysema worsened, with the intubation tube protruding toward the anterior side of the fractured trachea. While preparing for emergency surgery, the patient’s SPO2 dropped to 70% and cyanosis was observed, with an O2 partial pressure of 40 mmHg. In addition, his mental status changed and he became drowsy. Although urgent tracheostomy or cricothyroidotomy were considered, it was not possible to perform them because the emphysema of his anterior chest was too extensive. Adequate ventilation was compromised owing to extrusion of the intubation tube; therefore, we decided to perform VV-ECMO. Given the risk of accessing the internal jugular vein because of the subcutaneous emphysema, we cannulated both femoral veins. The right femoral vein was used for venous drainage (23 French) while the left femoral vein was used for venous return (17 French) (MAQUET PLS, NJ, USA). After ECMO application, the patient’s saturation was maintained at > 90%. He was transferred to the operation room for surgery. After making a midline longitudinal incision on the anterior neck to expose the injured trachea, we confirmed tracheal transection and that the posterior membranous portion was intact . We withdrew the endotracheal tube (ETT) to the epiglottis level and adjusted the alignment of the trachea. We then advanced the ETT to the upper 1 cm of the carina and confirmed tidal volume recovery. Tracheal transection was repaired by end-to-end anastomosis with 4–0 Vicryl interrupted suture. The operation was completed after confirming that there was no air leakage of the surgical site . After being transferred to the intensive care unit, the patient’s respiratory function was well recovered and ECMO weaning was successful on the day following surgery . We did not start anticoagulation therapy owing to the risk of bleeding at the injury site; instead, the pump speed was maintained at high revolutions per minute (> 3500). On the third day after surgery, bronchoscopy was performed to confirm that the lesion was intact . The patient underwent percutaneous tracheostomy on the fourth tracheal ring using a bronchoscopic guide on the seventh day after surgery. After being weaned from the ventilator, the patient was transferred to the ward on the ninth day after surgery. We also confirmed that he had no accompanying injury or swallowing difficulty by pharyngoesophagram . The patient was discharged with comfortable respiration without additional oxygenation support on day 29 and had received outpatient follow-up without severe complications for 12 months.