A 35-year-old Caucasian male was referred to our comprehensive obesity clinic for medical weight management. He presented with a past medical history of fatty liver disease, hypertension, and hypothyroidism. He denied insomnia or mood disturbances. He drank 4–5 alcoholic drinks per day on the weekends. He was a former smoker but denied illicit drug use. His diet was high in processed carbohydrates and saturated fats, and he did not engage in any regular physical activity. He was unable to maintain sustained weight loss, with several self-directed interventions in the past. Medications included amlodipine, hydrochlorothiazide, lisinopril, and levothyroxine. He did not use any agents for sleep or psychiatric indications. Blood pressure was 132/84 mm Hg, heart rate 86 beats per minute, oxygen saturation 97% on room air, weight 135.7 kg, with a body mass index (BMI) of 41.7 kg/m2. Physical examination was notable for a waist circumference of 136 cm and a narrow airway with Mallampati score of III.
The patient reported that on most nights, for several years, he would consume food in the kitchen or bedroom without awareness and with complete amnesia of the behavior when he awoke in the morning. On occasion, he noticed particles of food or wrappers in the bed. He reported morning anorexia. There were no associated injuries. There was no history of purging.
In addition to engaging in nutrition modification, physical activity, and behavior therapy, adjunctive pharmacotherapy with PHEN-TPM ER was initiated, titrated to 7.5–46 mg daily. He was also counseled on reducing alcohol consumption. Two months later, he had lost 6.8 kg (5% of initial weight), with complete cessation of night eating episodes and marked reduction of alcohol consumption. At follow-up 3 months later, he had maintained 5% weight loss despite intermittent use of the medication (due to insurance authorization challenges) and fragmented adherence to lifestyle changes. An overnight video polysomnogram performed 3 months after presentation while taking PHEN-TPM ER revealed moderate obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) with no significant periodic limb movements nor observed somnambulism. Apnea–hypopnea index was 27 events per hour and oxygen saturation nadir was 87%.
The patient was then lost to follow-up and returned 6 months later, having self-discontinued PHEN-TPM ER. He had maintained his weight loss, but his night-eating behaviors had recurred. He reported poor adherence to positive pressure therapy due to discomfort from the nasal mask. Having achieved remission of nocturnal eating behaviors, he expressed interest in resuming the medication more for that purpose than weight loss. The patient endorsed that resolution of his nocturnal binges had great benefit on quality of life.