A 27-year-old gravida 2 para 1 live birth 1 North Indian woman with one previous lower segment caesarean section (LSCS) presented to our outpatient department (OPD) at 35 weeks with complaints of intermittent pain in the lower abdomen that was radiating to her back for the last 5 hours. There was no associated complaint of leaking or bleeding per vaginum. Her antenatal period was uneventful. However, she was diagnosed as having a fibroid on the left side of the uterus but reported no complications that could be attributed to it. Her general and systemic examination was unremarkable. All the antenatal investigations were normal. Her recent ultrasound (USG) report suggested a single live intrauterine pregnancy with an intramural fibroid measuring 8.6 × 6.5 cm located in the left anterolateral wall of the lower uterine segment.
On admission, her heart rate was 96 beats per minute, blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, and mild pallor was present. Abdominal examination revealed a term size uterus with longitudinal lie. Mild uterine contractions were present with positive scar tenderness. On auscultation, fetal heart rate was 142 beats/minute. Vaginal examination depicted a 2 cm dilated cervix, which was 20–30% effaced, presenting part at −3 station with intact membranes. She was taken up for emergency LSCS given previous cesarean section with preterm labor and scar tenderness. Her preoperative hemoglobin was 12.1 gm%, hematocrit was 34.5%, and blood group was O positive. Adequate blood products were arranged and informed written consent was obtained from the patient and her relatives after explaining to them about the risk of excessive bleeding, need for blood transfusion, and peripartum hysterectomy. During surgery, the abdomen was opened by an infra-umbilical vertical incision for adequate access. There was a single large intramural fibroid occupying most of the lower uterine segment. The previous scar was intact but thinned out, possibly because of the stretching effect of the fibroid. A lower segment transverse incision was made below the inferior margin of the fibroid, and a 2.54 kg female baby was delivered, with an APGAR score of 9 at 1 minute. As the fibroid was bulging into the incision line and causing difficulty in closure of the uterine wound, the decision of myomectomy was taken . Prophylactically, oxytocin infusion, bilateral ligation of uterine arteries, and injection of vasopressin (diluted) was injected to decrease the blood loss. The fibroid was then enucleated and the myoma bed closed with delayed absorbable sutures followed by closure of the uterine wound. A complete hemostasis was achieved. The total duration of the surgery was approximately 50 minutes and the amount of blood lost around 1100 mL, which is almost comparable to other cesarean sections. Broad-spectrum antibiotics and analgesics were administered in the postoperative period. Her post-surgery hemoglobin was 11.4 gm% and hematocrit was 33%, thus not requiring any blood transfusion. The patient was discharged on the seventh postoperative day with a normal involuting uterus. On follow-up at 6 weeks, the uterus was completely involuted, and repeat USG did not show any fibroid. On further follow-up to 6 months, she was asymptomatic and had an uneventful course.