A 63-year-old male was admitted to Showa General Hospital with right hemiparesis. He had a history of hypertension, and no other risk factor of atherosclerosis. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging revealed acute cerebral infarction in the left watershed area , and MR angiography and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) demonstrated occlusion of the left ICA at the cervical portion [ and ]. He was treated conservatively in the acute phase and scheduled for anastomotic surgery because technetium-99m-ethyl cysteinate dimer single photon emission computed tomography (99mTc-ECD SPECT) showed decreased cerebral blood flow.
The patient underwent a left superficial temporal artery (STA)-middle cerebral artery (MCA) single anastomosis at the M4 portion with 15 sutures of 10-0 monofilament nylon . Postoperative DSA showed good patency of the anastomosis , and 99mTc-ECD SPECT demonstrated improvement of cerebral blood flow. Postoperatively, the right hemiparesis improved with rehabilitation, and he was discharged without neurological deficit. First follow-up MR angiography with an interval of 2 years (due to transient lost follow-up) showed de novo aneurysm . DSA performed 2.5 years after anastomosis (at the age of 66) revealed a 19.0-mm de novo saccular aneurysm at the anastomotic site . The left MCA territory was perfused mainly via the anastomosed STA, whereas cross flow via the anterior communicating artery, which had been detected immediately after anastomosis, had disappeared. He was scheduled for surgical intervention because the aneurysm was considered to be at high risk of rupture.
The patient underwent trapping of the aneurysm and left ECA-radial artery (RA)-MCA (M2 portion) and STA-MCA (M4 portion) anastomoses. Intraoperative findings showed that the de novo aneurysm at the anastomotic site had adhered to the superficial dura mater and the bottom brain surface with connective tissue. Clipping of the aneurysm was difficult, because the aneurysm was located exactly at the site of anastomosis . First, ECA-RA-MCA anastomosis was performed at the M2 portion to maintain perfusion of the MCA territory during the trapping procedure. Next, we resected the aneurysm, with ligation of the stump of the proximal M4. Finally, we performed anastomosis of the stumps of the STA and the distal M4 . Histological examination revealed that the aneurysm wall was thinned and consisted of collagen fibers, almost without media and internal elastic lamina, but immunohistochemistry revealed fragmented smooth muscle cells throughout the circumference, which established the diagnosis as true aneurysm . Postoperative DSA showed good patency of the anastomoses , and he was discharged without neurological deficit.
Follow-up MR angiography showed good patency of the anastomoses and no other abnormal findings over the next 3 years . However, MR angiography 4 years after the second anastomosis (at the age of 70) demonstrated a dilatation of the left M3 portion that was remote from the ECA-RA-MCA anastomotic site. Follow-up MR angiography for 3 years showed that the dilatation enlarged gradually and became a 12.0-mm saccular aneurysm at the nonbranching site [–]. Therefore, he was scheduled for DSA. DSA revealed a slightly dilated vessel, but the aneurysm lumen was not detected . These findings suggested that the aneurysm lumen was completely thrombosed, and had little risk of rupture. The last follow-up MR imaging showed no enlargement of the thrombosed aneurysm. The patient remains under observation without ischemic event or neurological deficit.
The patient's son had been incidentally diagnosed with asymptomatic right MCA occlusion, so these craniocervical major artery diseases were suspected to have some association with genetic factors. The patient was referred to The University of Tokyo Hospital and genetic analysis was performed there as described previously. Genetic analysis revealed the patient had RNF213 c.14576G>A variant (heterozygote) . The ethical reviews of the genetic analysis study in the two facilities (The University of Tokyo Hospital and Showa General Hospital) were both approved by the Human Genome, Gene Analysis Research Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Medicine, the University of Tokyo (approval number G10026-1). Written informed consent was obtained from the patient.