A 24-year-old male was referred to our hospital complaining of a ten-month history of dyspnea, nausea, and anorexia, followed by a mild intermittent chest pain radiating to his back. He was a lifetime nonsmoker and denied any recent fever, chills, night sweats, or weight loss during this time. In physical examination, the patient was afebrile with normal vital signs, and oxygen saturation of 97%.
In his past medical history, first, the patient was visited regarding his signs and symptoms by a local physician, and high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan was requested. The HRCT showed a large soft tissue mass in the anterior mediastinum with areas of coarse calcification (130 × 139 × 176 mm), causing the shift of heart and trachea to the left side and several lung nodules in both lungs up to 9.5 × 11 mm in the upper part of the lower lobe of the left lung, which could be metastatic lung nodules. The possible diagnosis was reported malignant teratoma and less likely other germ cell tumors. Besides, mild to moderate pericardial effusion was seen. He was referred to another city for further evaluation.
There, spiral computed tomography (CT) angiography of pulmonary vessels, chest x-ray, and biopsy of the mass were requested. Chest x-ray demonstrated a very large mass in the right mediastinum , and the CT angiography reported a well-defined heterogeneous soft tissue density in the anterior mediastinum, anterior to the heart and great vessels, measuring about 190 × 150 × 140 mm. The mass contained fat and calcification, It caused pressure effect on the great vessels and heart, leading to heart displacement to left. Also, pressure effect on superior vena cava, right side bronchus, right pulmonary artery, and veins was seen. Besides, moderate pericardial effusion and multiple round-shaped nodules were seen in both lungs up to 14 mm in the right lower lobe, which could be metastatic lesions. Of note, prominence of both breasts in favor of gynecomastia was also detected . The biopsy reported immature teratoma, at least grade II; however, the pathologist stated that the diagnosis was inconclusive, and a better evaluation had to be done after tumor excision. For unknown reasons, the patient went to another center for further evaluation.
In the second center, another HRCT was done. Pericardial tap, pericardial biopsy, and tumor biopsy were also taken; HRCT report was similar to previous HRCT report, pericardial fluid cytology was negative for malignancy, pericardial biopsy showed congestion and mesothelial cell hyperplasia with no malignant cell, and tumor biopsy was reported teratomatous tissue containing foci of immature mesenchymal and cartilaginous tissues, in favor of immature teratoma (grade I-II). Besides, another CT angiography was done, which the report was similar to the previous CT angiography. Based on the diagnosis made by tumor biopsy, the patient was referred to an oncologist.
The oncologist started chemotherapy, and the patient received four episodes of the VeIP regimen (vinblastine, ifosfamide, and cisplatin). Then, he was referred to our center with a high β- Human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) and alpha-fetoprotein (α-FP) and diagnosis of immature teratoma for tumor excision. Laboratory features of the patient are demonstrated in Table .
The operation was performed under general anesthesia with a right posterolateral thoracostomy. In exploration, a huge mass with adhesion to the trachea, superior vena cava, innominate vein, esophagus, lung, pericardium, and diaphragm was observed. Also, the mass extended to the left pleura. Therefore, pneumolysis and then, partial pericardiectomy was done; and, the mass was released from its adhesive sites. Two chest tubes into the right side and one chest tube into the left side were inserted. Besides, the mass was sent for pathological evaluation.
Grossly, the tumor size was 20 × 20 × 11 cm. In the pathological examination, serial cut sections revealed bone and cartilage formation, cystic space, some of them filled with yellow soft material and hair tuft. Also, diffuse myxoid degeneration and calcification with multiple finger-like projections covered by skin and hair were present. Finally, the definite diagnosis was reported to be an immature cystic teratoma with 10% necrosis. Microscopic sections showed mature cartilage, glial tissue, and gastrointestinal type epithelium as well as cutaneous tissue .
The patient was discharged a week after the surgery in good condition . Currently, he has been under our follow-up for 6 months following the operation without any signs of recurrence.