A 59-year-old woman had a history of esophageal benign tumor after esophagectomy and reconstruction with gastric tube, 4 years ago. She had past history of neck pain radiating to the left shoulder and occipital region. Severe neck pain limited her range of motion. She had been admitted to a hospital with the suspicion of cervical disk herniation with cervical radiculopathy.
Two months before admission, she complained of dysphagia, and esophageal dilatation was performed due to the stricture. One month later, she developed diplopia, slurred speech and dysphasia. Low-grade fever and whitish rhinorrhea were also noticed. On neurological examination, the patient was alert and oriented. She had severe neck pain, left sixth nerve palsy, mildly slurred speech and dysphagia. Other cranial nerves, including III, IV, V, had no defect. Muscle strength was normal in upper extremities. The deep-tendon reflexes were normal bilaterally. Sensory examination showed nothing unusual. Laboratory studies were within the normal range. A plain chest film showed a supradiaphragmatic gastric bulb. C-reactive protein levels were elevated to 3.6mg/dL (normal range 0.0-0.8 mg/dL). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of sellar region disclosed a thickening of the nasopharyngeal wall with irregular contrast enhancement. Ill-defined enhancement was seen over the skull base including the left cavernous sinus, left parasellar region, clivus, bilateral petrosal apex, condylar process of the occipital bone and C1 vertebra . Nasopharynx carcinoma was first considered. A nasopharyngoscopy was performed by an ENT doctor and showed a necrotic lesion over the left nasopharynx. The pathological report of a punch biopsy showed acute necrotic inflammation, tissue granulation and bacteria colonies.
We took an endonasal endoscopic approach to treat the suprasellar and nasopharyngeal lesion. Gray brownish necrotic tissue of soft to firm nature was removed . Pathology showed extensive acute gangrenous inflammation and sequestrum of bone. The culture from this specimen grew E.coli. Two weeks of Flomoxef therapy was given and the patient was discharged 22 days after operation and she presented with only mild left sixth nerve palsy. Two months later, MRI scan with DWI sequences showed residual abscesses in the left cavernous sinus and parasellar region .