A 23-year-old male came to the Department of Orthodontics at the clinic of Nanjing Stomatological Hospital. His chief complaint was his facial appearance, especially his upper lip incompetence and the increased convexity of his profile.
He presented a history of a previous two-year orthodontic treatment at another clinic where an attempt was made to retract protruded maxillary anterior teeth but without any improvement. Teeth 14, 24, 35, and 45 had been extracted.
The patient denied any family history of his present illness.
Copies of the initial extra-oral and intra-oral photographs were requested from the original clinic, and new treatment records were collected after the unsuccessful initial treatment. The patient’s photographs before any orthodontic intervention showed a typical class II molar and canine relationship and a skeletal class II relationship, with a deep overbite (III°) as well as a deep overjet (6 mm). Mild crowding was found in both the maxillary and mandibular arches. Extra-oral pictures showed upper lip incompetence and a convex profile.
After the initial orthodontic camouflage treatment, extra oral examination revealed a severe convex profile, a deep labiomental fold, excessive gingival display, and an everted upper lip with incompetence . Intraoral examination revealed that the patient had had teeth 14, 24, 35, 45 extracted, an almost class I occlusion after the camouflage treatment, an unclosed 3 mm space in his maxillary arch, and an unclosed 2 mm space in his mandibular arch. An overjet of 3 mm and an overbite of 4 mm were observed with no transverse discrepancies .
Lateral cephalometric analysis revealed a skeletal class II jaw relation , an increased ANB angle (ANB = 11.5°), a retrognathic mandible [sella-nasion-B point (SNB) = 75.9°], a protruded maxilla [sella-nasion-A point (SNA) = 87.4°], a vertical maxillary excess [upper incisor to palatal plane (U1-PP) = 33.2 mm], and excessive lingual inclination of the maxillary incisors [upper incisor to nasion-A point line (U1-NA) = -5.5°, U1-NA = -6.1 mm). The inclination of the mandibular incisors was normal, and the mandibular plane angle was below average [sella-nasion-mandibular plane (SN-MP) = 31.8°]. A panoramic radiograph showed the extraction of four premolars, the presence of all the third molars, and no pathological ﬁndings for the temporomandibular joints .