A 64-year-old man was diagnosed 6 years earlier with cirrhosis secondary to chronic hepatitis B. He was noted to have splenomegaly in a routine follow up. Laboratory data were as follows: aspartate aminotransferase, 126 U/litre (normal, < 40); alanine aminotransferase, 66 U/litre (normal, < 36); alkaline phosphatase, 123 U/litre (normal, < 96); and γ-glutamyltransferase, 178 IU/litre (normal, < 96). Serum fetoprotein was 256 μg/litre (normal, < 20). Serum hepatitis B virus surface antigen was positive and antihepatitis C virus antibody was negative.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the abdomen showed an approximately 3.5 cm in diameter with a heterogeneous, hypervascular enhancing mass in the left lateral segment of the liver. A multiple, small-to-moderate nodules composed of a low-density area throughout the parenchyma was present in the enlarged spleen. There were no tumor thrombi within the portal veins and lymphadenopathy .
Positron emission tomography findings revealed the ringed dense uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose in the spleen. It was not absorbed in the lymph nodes of the splenic hilus and behind the pancreatic head; there were no abnormal hot areas in the liver.
After the liver tumor and spleen were resected, the serum fetoprotein concentrations returned to within the normal range. However, the patient who was treated symptomatically and not treated with chemotherapy due to poor general condition died 6 months after surgical resection.
Grossly, the resected liver tissue measured 10 × 7 × 5 cm. There was a well circumscribed tumor measuring 4 × 3 × 3 cm. The mass was grey and soft with a small area of bleeding, necrosis and intact capsule. The non-tumorous portion showed obvious cirrhotic nodularity. The resected spleen measured 25 × 17 × 7.5 cm and weighed 1750 g. The outer capsule was smooth, glistening, and intact. Cut surface of the spleen was red-purple and had a diffuse reticulonodular appearance indicative of prominent white pulp. Splenic hilar and mesenteric lymph nodes were not enlarged obviously.
On histologic sections, the tumor cells were growing in cords of variable thickness, which were separated by sinusoid-like blood spaces in the liver mass. Diffuse fatty change of tumor cells was found in small area . The non-tumour part showed cirrhotic change. The tumor in the spleen was characterised by a micronodular lymphoid infiltrate located in white pulp, with variable red pulp infiltration, marginal zone differentiation and follicular replacement by neoplastic cells . The white pulp tumoral nodules were composed of an inner central zone of small lymphocytes, located in the mantle zone and replacing the germinal center, and a peripheral zone of medium-sized cells with clear cytoplasm and scattered blasts , the marginal zone component. Splenic hilar and mesenteric lymph nodes were not effaced with intact capsules, sinuses, and germinal centers.
Immunohistochemical staining of the neoplastic cells showed positivity for CD20, CD79α , Pax-5, bcl-2 and lacked co-expression of cyclin D, CD30, CD3, CD5, bcl-6, bcl-10, CD68, and cytokeratin, indicating that the tumor was B-cell lymphoma. The proliferative index is low, and Ki67 staining showed a distinctive annular pattern, outlining the presence of an increased growth fraction in the germinal center and marginal zone.
Amplification of Immunoglobulin heavy chain genes was performed by semi-nested PCR, using primers directed to the framework 2 (FR-2) region and to the joining region (JH) as described previously [,] Gene rearrangement studies also supported a clonal B-cell process with heavy chain rearrangement .
Therefore, the liver mass was well and moderately differentiated HCC, the diagnosis of SMZL was made from the splenic specimen. The final pathological diagnosis was coexistent SMZL with HCC in the course of chronic HBV infection.