A 13-year-old Caucasian, Italian female adolescent attended our Emergency Department complaining of abdominal pain, a fever of up to 38°C, night sweats, diarrhea with blood in stool, and a weight loss of about three kilograms over the previous two months. Her family history was negative for any relevant diseases, particularly TB; furthermore, she, who was not BCG vaccinated, had not travelled abroad recently and no case of TB had been diagnosed among her school-fellows. Physical examination revealed a marked skin pallor and considerable abdominal distension with relevant discomfort in all the abdominal quadrant. No other abnormal signs and symptoms were found or reported. Laboratory tests revealed a decreased white blood cell count (WBC, 4,100/mm3) with anemia (Hb 7.6 g/dL), and increased C-reactive protein levels (1.18 mg/dL). The Mantoux tuberculin skin test (TST) was negative. A chest X-ray and an abdominal ultrasonography did not reveal any significant findings. In particular, no acites was evidenced. After a blood transfusion, the patient underwent colonoscopy that showed diffuse mucosal congestion and significant blood loss, and laparatomy showed small bowel and colon loops with a whitish appearance. A biopsy of the ileal mucosa revealed inflammation with noncaseating granulomas possibly due to bacterial infection, and so only a standard bacterial culture was carried out. Given the suspicion of an opportunistic bacterial infection in a child with chronic inflammatory bowel disease (possibly CD), treatment with a third-generation cephalosporin was started (ceftriaxone 2 g/day).
However, the abdominal pain, fever and poor general condition persisted and so, after 11 days, the patient underwent total body computed tomography (CT). Chest CT showed lower right lobe consolidation with coalescing nodules leading to patchy irregular opacities. The upper lobes contained numerous, bilateral, poorly defined and randomly distributed small pulmonary nodules with a preferentially centrilobular location . Other significant CT findings were a hypodense lesion in the left kidney and lytic lesions in a number of vertebral bodies, without any demonstrable brain alterations. However, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed multiple nodular lesions in the subcortical white matter of both cerebellar hemispheres and medium-sized cerebellar peduncles; some of these lesions showed target signs of probable caseous necrosis.
On the basis of the radiological findings, miliary TB was suspected and bronchoscopy was performed together with a brochoalveolar lavage (BAL) in order to search for Mt by means of polymerase chain reaction (real-time PCR, Cobas TaqMan MTB PCR system) and culture. A urine sample was also tested for the same reason. Both cultures were positive, whereas PCR identified Mt only in the BAL fluid. Miliary TB was confirmed and treatment with four drugs was started in accordance with the WHO guidelines (isoniazid 10 mg/kg/day, rifampicin 15 mg/kg/day, ethambutol 20 mg/kg/day, and pyrazinamide 35 mg/kg/daily) . The therapy was rapidly effective as the fever disappeared within a few days, the abdominal problems resolved, and the patient’s general condition improved together with a gain in body weight. Routine blood examinations were tested every week for the evaluation of drugs safety in the first month, and they were always in normal range. The patient was discharged one month after starting therapy with the indication to continue the four drugs for two months and to monitor blood examinations every two week. At the end of the second month of four-drug treatment, on the basis of the negative clinical condition it was decided to continue with isoniazid and rifampicin for further 7 months with blood examinations evaluated once every month. Total body CT and brain MRI six months after the beginning of anti-TB treatment confirmed the complete disappearance of all of the lesions in all body sites.