A 91-year-old Puerto Rican man presented for evaluation of progressively worsening shortness of breath over the past six months associated with two weeks of productive cough of yellowish sputum. The patient also had complaints of fatigue, palpitations and dyspnea with minimal exertion. His past medical history was significant for pulmonary tuberculosis in 1969 for which he received approximately 24 months of medical treatment. The patient also had a history of coronary artery disease, bronchiectasis, moderate pulmonary hypertension, moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and has had multiple exacerbations of his bronchiectasis and COPD which did not require hospitalization. He had a history of smoking 30 cigarette packs per year but discontinued cigarette smoking 45 years prior to his admission. He denied alcohol or drug use and had no history of prior surgeries. He had been followed by a pulmonologist for over seven years, and spirometry testing done four months before his presentation showed an forced expiratory volume1 (FEV1) to forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio of 64%, FEV1 of 71%, and FVC of 84%. One year prior to presentation, an echocardiographic assessment demonstrated left ventricular hypertrophy with moderate pulmonary hypertension, and a dobutamine stress echocardiogram demonstrated a defect in the inferior wall consistent with a previous infarction.
On physical examination, the patient was tachycardic at a heart rate of 140 beats per minute, tachypneic with a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute and saturating oxygen at 94% on atmospheric air. The patient was awake, alert, and oriented to person, time, and place and able to speak in full sentences. He did not demonstrate jugular venous distention, but his trachea was deviated towards his right side. There was no evidence of stridor. The patient’s breath sounds were diminished bilaterally with more prominently diminished sounds over his right lung fields. Coarse rhonchi were notable over his right lower lung. No wheezing or rales were appreciated. Heart sounds were more prominent on the right side of the chest and were characterized as an irregular tachycardia, with no murmurs, gallops or accentuated heart sounds appreciated. Laboratory studies demonstrated a white blood cell count of 7100/mm3, hemoglobin level 9.1g/dL, hematocrit 28.0%, sodium 137mEq/L, potassium 4.0mEq/L, chlorine 101mEq/L, bicarbonate 30mEq/L, blood urea nitrogen 16mg/dL, serum creatinine 0.6mg/dL, glucose 140mg/dL, troponin I: 0.03ng/mL, B-type natriuretic peptide 320ng/L, and normal liver and kidney function. Arterial blood gas showed a pH of 7.480, partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 46, partial pressure of oxygen of 116 and an oxygen saturation of 99% on two L of oxygen. An electrocardiogram showed a multifocal atrial tachycardia without T wave or ST segment changes . A chest X-ray demonstrated opacification of the right hemithorax with a marked mediastinal shift to the right and hyperinflation of the left lung . A computed tomography scan of the patient’s chest showed hyperinflation of his left lung, cystic bronchiectasis, mediastinal shifting to the right with clockwise rotation of his trachea and marked absence of normal lung parenchyma in his right lung . Venous Doppler ultrasound of his lower extremities was negative for venous thrombosis. The patient’s presentation was attributed to a cardiac arrhythmia secondary to his extensive lung disease and was treated with calcium channel blockers to control his heart rate. However, four days into his hospital course, he became lethargic with a three gram drop of his hemoglobin and subsequently went into cardiac arrest. The patient was immediately intubated and was resuscitated according to Advanced Cardiac Life Support protocol. During the arrest he was noticed to have profound coffee ground emesis. Despite resuscitation efforts, the patient remained pulseless and subsequently died.