The case was a 54-year-old woman, referred to our department for hypercalcemia. Her past medical history included chronic renal failure (maintenance dialysis), hypertension, and hyperuricemia. No significant family history was noted. The patient had been on hemodialysis since the age of 40 years. In April 2020 (at the age of 53 years), poor control of blood calcium levels was observed, and high-dose maxacalcitol was commenced in October 2020, but no improvement was observed. In December 2020, she was referred to her previous doctor with a diagnosis of drug-resistant secondary hyperparathyroidism and was referred to our hospital for close examination and treatment.
On admission, the patient had a height of 155.0 cm, weight of 56.7 kg, body mass index of 23.6 kg/m2, and no palpable mass in the neck. Her blood test results are presented in Table . High creatinine (8.73 mg/dL), calcium (11.4 mg/dL), phosphorus (9.2 mg/dL), and intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels (1007 pg/mL) were observed. Neck ultrasonography revealed a hypoechoic mass measuring 30.3 × 23.7x21.8 mm in size with irregular and partly indistinct margins, D(23.7)/W(21.8) ratio > 1, and abundant blood flow at the dorsal surface of the left thyroid lobe, outside the capsule . A 10-mm large well-defined hypoechoic mass was observed at the dorsal surface of the right thyroid lobe, outside the capsule.
Cervical computer tomography (CT) scan revealed a 20-mm nodule at the dorsal surface of the left thyroid lobe and a 10-mm enlarged parathyroid gland at the dorsal surface of the right thyroid lobe. 99mTc-hexakis-2-methoxyisobutylisonitrile scintigraphy revealed an accumulation at the upper pole of the left thyroid gland . Laryngeal endoscopy revealed paralysis of the left vocal cord (median fixation).
Based on the test results, we suspected secondary hyperparathyroidism with left parathyroid carcinoma, leading us to perform total parathyroidectomy, peritracheal lymph node dissection, combined thyroidectomy, left recurrent nerve resection and reconstruction (left recurrent nerve – ansa cervicalis), and autograft of the parathyroid to right upper arm in February 2021 .
The left upper parathyroid tumor was located 10 mm centrally from the left recurrent nerve and invading inwards circumferentially. We thus excised the left thyroid lobe, including the recurrent nerve, and reconnected it with the ansa cervicalis with two stitches of 6–0 Proline(Johnson & Johnson, City of New Brunswick, USA) and Beriplast(CSL Behring, King of Prussia, USA).
The anterior cervical drain was removed at postoperative day (POD) 2, and the patient was discharged at POD 3 without complications.
Macroscopic pathology analysis revealed a left thyroid lobe measuring 59 × 30 × 20 mm, including a milky white substantial mass measuring 18 × 13 × 18 mm in the upper pole. The left lower parathyroid gland was normal . We were unable to measure the left parathyroid due to cancer invasion. The right upper and lower parathyroid glands were 15 × 12 × 7 mm and 7 × 7 × 7 mm in size and weighed 450 mg and 90 mg, respectively.
Microscopic pathology analysis revealed that the left upper mass consisted of a large round nucleus, fenestrated to dense growth of principal cells with pale acidophilic cytoplasm, and a fibrous capsule covering the mass. We observed acidophilic cells with acidophilic cytoplasm proliferating in a fenestrated to dense manner . Some parts of the lesion appeared to proliferate beyond the fibrous capsule. Elastin van Gieson staining revealed venous infiltration in some areas, suggesting vascular invasion ; therefore, the diagnosis was parathyroid carcinoma. No lymph node metastasis was observed(0/1). The other parathyroid glands exhibited nodular proliferation of principal cells and eosinophilic cells forming a fenestrated to follicular structure. No obvious normal rim was noted at the specimen margins. The diagnosis was hyperplasia of the right upper and lower parathyroid gland.
At 1 month postoperatively, calcium and iPTH levels were 9.5 mg/dL and 15 pg/mL, respectively, with no subsequent increase. At 25 months postsurgery, no apparent evidence of recurrence was observed. Table shows pre and postoperative calcium and iPTH levels.