A 56-year old man presented to a regional hospital with acute gout of the right knee, on a background of 6 months of lethargy, easy bruising, epistaxis and recent episodes of macroscopic haematuria. On presentation, he was noted to have AKI, anaemia, thrombocytopaenia and abnormal liver function tests. His past medical history included gout, alcoholism (10 standard drinks daily), gastro-oesophageal reflux and previous gastric fundoplication. He was not on any regular medications. He lived alone and was an active smoker of 20 pack-years but denied intravenous or recreational drugs. He reported no fever, sweats or weight loss (body mass index, 22.9 kg/m2). He had no haemodynamic compromise and was transferred to our centre for further management.
On arrival, his blood pressure was 140/80 mmHg. He had a normal mental status and no focal neurological signs. Physical examination was notable for mild hepatomegaly, subcutaneous bruising and spider naevi. Macroscopic haematuria was evident when the patient voided. His vital signs were normal and the laboratory results on arrival are shown in Table . The blood film showed target cells, anisocytosis, stomatocytes, occasional myelocytes and confirmed thrombocytopaenia. In retrospect, thrombocytopaenia was first noted eight months prior to presentation (platelet count, 60 × 106/L; reference range [RR], 150–400 × 106/L). At this time, the patient’s serum creatinine was 100 μmol/L (RR, 60–110 μmol/L), with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 73 ml/min. Kidney function was noted to be slightly impaired (serum creatinine, 113 umol/L (eGFR, 63 ml/min) four months ago, after the onset of haematuria was noted.
Autoimmune studies were negative including: anti-nuclear, anti-extractable nuclear antigens, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic, anti-glomerular basement membrane, anti-double stranded DNA antibodies. The serum electrophoresis revealed neither serum paraprotein nor increased free light chains. Serology was negative for hepatitis B, C and HIV. Serum IgA level was elevated at 6.7 g/L (RR, 0.80–4.50 g/L) with normal IgG and IgM levels. Serum complement was low on presentation, with a C3 of 0.56 g/L (RR, 0.79–1.52 g/L) and C4 of 0.10 (RR, 0.16–0.38 g/L). Blood cultures were negative on two separate occasions.
Urinalysis of a sterile, mid-stream sample confirmed haematuria, with an erythrocyte count >999× 106/L (RR, <13 × 106/L) and leukocyte count of 10 × 106/L (RR, <10 × 106/L). Urine sediment analysis showed dysmorphic erythrocytes and casts, consistent with a glomerular origin. A 24-h urine collection showed a protein excretion of 1.8 g/24 h (protein:creatinine ratio 0.25 g/mmol; RR, 0.00–0.03 g/mmol). Abdominal ultrasound demonstrated mild hepatomegaly with diffuse echogenicity consistent with hepatic steatosis. The kidneys measured 11.1 cm and 11.4 cm, with no hydronephrosis. Urine cytology was negative for malignant cells.
Acute glomerulonephritis was suspected and he was treated with intravenous methylprednisolone. An urgent kidney biopsy was performed after platelet transfusion to a count of 102 × 109/L. A bone marrow biopsy was also performed. The kidney specimens demonstrated cortex with 27 glomeruli, of which 6 were globally sclerosed. The principal abnormality was extensive tubular intra-luminal erythrocyte cast formation associated with acute tubular necrosis . The presence of haemosiderin deposition within tubular cells was suggestive of recurrent glomerular bleeding. There was interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy (approximately 30 %), along with a mild inflammatory infiltrate without eosinophils or granulomas. Glomerular capillary loops appeared normal and there were no segmental necrotizing lesions or crescents. Immunoperoxidase stains showed weak, non-specific mesangial staining for IgM (1+) and no significant staining for IgA, IgG, C3, C1q and fibrinogen. Electron microscopy showed thinning of the glomerular basement membrane but no immune complexes. The average glomerular basement membrane thickness was 251 ± 70 nm (range, 125–439 nm), consistent with thin basement membrane disease. This was associated with incomplete pedicel effacement, indicating podocytopathy . Bone marrow examination showed moderately reduced megakarypoeisis but otherwise normal haemopoeitic function. Cytogenetics and immunophenotyping were unremarkable.
The patient’s macroscopic haematuria ceased after correction of platelet count and intravenous desmopressin given for biopsy. The serum creatinine peaked at 552 μmol/L and subsequently improved. He maintained a good urine output and was discharged for outpatient follow-up. He achieved a best serum creatinine of 250 μmol/L at 6 months, with significant chronic kidney disease (eGFR, 25 ml/min) with mild proteinuria (protein:creatinine ratio, 0.07–0.10 g/mmol). He continued to experience episodes of macroscopic haematuria and AKI although not to the extent experienced on initial admission. His platelet count continued to fluctuate at 26–53 × 109/L. A second bone marrow biopsy 4 months later only showed mildly reduced megakaryopoiesis. A reduced production of thrombopoeitin associated with liver disease and the direct toxic effects of alcohol may be potential factors contributing to the reduced platelet production. Repeat serum complement and autoimmune studies were normal on two separate occasions. After nine months of ongoing alcohol intake, repeat abdominal ultrasound noted hepatic nodularity and small volume ascites. The spleen was borderline enlarged, measuring 14.0 × 7.24 × 6.08 cm, giving a splenic volume of 323 cm3. Thus, splenic sequestration-destruction could also be contributing to the thrombocytopaenia. The follow-up ultrasound also noted a reduction in kidney size (right 9.4 cm, left 10.2 cm), associated with an eGFR of 15 ml/min. Due to progression of his chronic kidney disease, he has been worked up for long term haemodialysis with the creation of an arterio-venous fistula.