A 58-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to the Department of Pulmonary Disease at our institution for worsened chronic respiratory failure. He had an end-stage fibrotic form of siderosis and had been evaluated 3 months earlier as candidate for lung transplantation. At admission, the patient presented with fever at 38.5°C, cough with mild productive sputum, an important increased dyspnea on exertion and severe hypoxemia requiring oxygen supplementation of 12L/minute at rest to obtain a systemic oxygen saturation of 94%, whereas he had required 6L/minute at rest 3 months before this presentation. His peripheral white blood cell count was 15.2 g/L, and neutrophils were 10.6g/L. There was no other organ dysfunction. A chest X-ray (CXR) and computed tomographic (CT) scan were obtained on admission. The radiological findings confirmed a pattern of advanced fibrosis. There were no significant changes or new findings compared to the CXR and CT scan obtained 3 months previously.
He had stopped smoking 5 months before his current presentation, and his body mass index was 29.4kg/m2. His usual treatment consisted of nebulized terbutaline 5mg and ipratropium bromide 0.5mg, three times daily, together with oral prednisone 40mg/day tapered to 30mg/day during this hospitalization. In this context, an expectorated sputum specimen was collected for microbiological investigations. H. pittmaniae was isolated in this specimen. Other causes of respiratory decompensation were excluded, and his respiratory virus panel and fungi were negative. Following the detection of H. pittmaniae, a single antibiotic, oral amoxicillin 3g/day, was administered for 10 days, which had a rapid clinical benefit, permitting his oxygen supplementation to be reduced to the previous dosage of 6L/minute at rest and allowing him to await the single-lung transplantation, which was performed successfully 2 months later.
Direct microscopic examination of the sputum specimen showed the presence of numerous polymorphonuclear leukocytes and a few epithelial cells, but no bacteria were detected after Gram staining. The sputum specimen was cultured on chocolate agar (BioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France), incubated under a 5% CO2-enriched atmosphere at 37°C and on Columbia agar (BioMérieux) under aerobic and anaerobic atmospheres at 37°C. Antibiotic susceptibility testing was performed by determining the minimum inhibitory concentration to amoxicillin, amoxicillin-clavulanate, ceftriaxone, gentamicin, ciprofloxacin, erythromycin and doxycycline using the disk diffusion method on a chocolate agar (BioMérieux) incubated under a 5% CO2-enriched atmosphere at 37°C and read after 48-hour incubation. The presence of β-lactamase was tested by using the cefinase test with a paper disk impregnated with nitrocefin (Becton Dickinson, Le Pont de Claix, France) in the presence of a β-lactamase-producing H. influenzae isolate as a positive control.
The chocolate agar showed grayish white colonies after 48-hour incubation in aerobic atmosphere, whereas the Columbia agar plates remained sterile after 5-day incubation in both aerobic and anaerobic atmospheres. Gram staining revealed Gram-negative bacilli susceptible to β-lactam and ciprofloxacin . The cefinase test was negative.
One colony was harvested and deposited on MTP 384 target plate polished steel (Brüker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) in four replicates. Two microliters of matrix solution (saturated α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid, 50% acetonitrile and 2.5% trifluoroacetic acid) were then added, and samples were air-dried for 5 minutes before being processed in the mass spectrometer. Measurements were performed using an autoflex II matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometer (Brüker Daltonik GmbH). Four raw spectra were automatically acquired using Brüker Daltonik’s flexControl version 3.0 software and then compared with the Brüker Daltonik database and MALDI Biotyper version 2.0 software (Brüker Daltonik GmbH). To validate the analysis of a whole MTP 384 target, bacterial test standard (protein extract of Escherichia coli DH5α, 255343; Brüker Daltonik GmbH) and matrix solution were added to the analysis batch as positive and negative controls, respectively. Two deposits of 1.5 μl of bacterial test standard covered with 1.5 μl of matrix were used to calibrate the Brüker Daltonik Biotyper analysis and as a validation standard for the analysis. To validate the analysis using the Maldi Biotyper software, the bacterial identification must be E. coli with an identification score >2 and the two negative controls’ deposits of 1.5 μl of matrix solution must give a score <1.7. In MALDI-TOF mass spectrometric analysis, negative controls yielded faint spectra with non-significant identification scores and the E. coli positive control yielded the expected spectrum. The isolate yielded four spectra , and the comparison with the Brüker Daltonik database yielded identification of H. pittmaniae three times, with scores of 2.085, 2.062 and 2.081. The fourth colony was identified as H. parainfluenzae, with a score of 2.014.
Bacterial DNA was extracted by using a MagNA Pure LC DNA Isolation Kit III (Roche Diagnostics, Meylan, France) with a MagNA Pure LC instrument according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of the 16S rRNA gene was performed by using the universal primer pair fD1 (5′-AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG-3′) and rP2 (5′-ACGGCTACCTTGTTACGACTT-3′) [,] in an ABI 2720 thermal cycler (Applied Biosystems, Courtaboeuf, France). PCR mix without DNA was used as a negative control. PCR products were purified by using a MultiScreen PCR filter plate (Millipore, Molsheim, France), and sequencing reactions were carried out by using a DNA sequencing kit (BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit version 1.1; Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sequencing products were purified and electrophoresis was performed with a 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). Sequences obtained were analyzed with AutoAssembler software (Applied Biosystems) and Sequencher software (Gene Codes Corp, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) and compared with those available in the GenBank database by using the BLAST program . PCR yielded a unique product, but negative controls remained negative. The 1464-bp 16S rRNA gene sequence was compared with sequences deposited in the GenBank database and was found to be 99% similar to that of H. pittmaniae (NR 025423.1, strain HK85). The next closest bacteria was H. parainfluenzae with a 97% similarity score.