A 75-year-old man was admitted with unilateral right pleural effusion. He presented with pleuritic chest pain that started 4 days before and had no other relevant complaints, namely fever, diaphoresis, dyspnoea, cough, haemoptysis, rash or arthralgia.
He had a past medical history of arterial hypertension, atrial fibrillation, end-stage renal disease on haemodialysis, peripheral artery disease and prostatic hyperplasia. His ambulatory prescription consisted of enalapril, carvedilol, nifedipine, aspirin, warfarin, omeprazole and tansulosin, for more than 3 years. Amiodarone had been suspended, 2 months before, due to ocular toxicity. There was no evidence of thoracic trauma or previous asbestos exposure.
Ten days before hospital admission the patient had an episode of unstable angina. He underwent coronary angiography which showed a lesion in the circumflex artery and angioplasty and implantation of an intracoronary stent coated drug were performed. He started treatment with clopidogrel. By this time blood tests showed low TSH (0.055 uU/mL; reference range: 0.55–4.78 uU/mL) and high FT4 (1.81 ng/dL; reference range: 0.80–1.76 ng/dL) and FT3 (4.84 pg/mL; reference range: 2.3–4.2 pg/mL). Methimazole was started. There was no evidence of pleural effusion at that time.
At hospital admission the patient was afebrile, with a respiratory rate of 18 cycles per minute and oxygen saturation of 95% on room air. His blood pressure was 131/63 mmHg and heart rate was 76 beats per minute. Cardio-pulmonary examination revealed arrhythmic heart sounds, diminished breath sounds on the lower half of the right lung and dullness on percussion at that site was noted. All other findings on physical examination were unremarkable.
Laboratory tests showed normal leucocytes (6 510/uL) and eosinophils (320/uL) counts, elevated C-reactive protein (10.9 mg/dL) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (58 mm) and normal liver enzymes; TSH (0.019 uU/mL) was low and FT4 (2.51 ng/dL) and FT3 (7.22 pg/mL) were high; INR (1.13) was not in therapeutic range. Arterial blood gases, while the patient was in room air and after haemodialysis, showed hypoxemia (PO2: 57.6 mmHg) and metabolic alkalosis (pH: 7.48, PCO2: 37.8 mmHg, HCO3
−: 28.9 mmol/L). Electrocardiogram revealed atrial fibrillation rhythm without acute ischaemic changes. Chest radiography showed a homogenous opacity in the lower half of the right pulmonary field and chest ultrasound findings were suggestive of pleural effusion with septa. Right-sided diagnostic thoracentesis was performed. The aspirated pleural fluid had 2277 cells/uL with 70% being macrophages, 18% eosinophils and 12% neutrophils. The effusion protein/serum protein ratio was 0.7 and the effusion lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)/serum LDH ratio was 1.8. Pleural fluid cultures revealed no bacteria or mycobacteria and no malignant cells were detected on cytological examination of pleural fluid. Bronchofibroscopy did not reveal any macroscopic lesion. Bronchoalveolar fluid cultures were negative and the cytological analysis of the fluid showed no malignant cells. Pleural biopsy was not performed due to high bleeding risk as the patient was on double anti-platelet and anticoagulation therapy. The blood cultures yielded no bacteria or mycobacteria and blood interferon gamma release assay for Mycobacterium tuberculosis was negative. Anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-double stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibodies and ANCA were negative.
Thoracic, abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) was performed and confirmed the moderate right pleural effusion with no other positive findings. Thoracic CT angiography excluded pulmonary embolism. Although Dressler syndrome was considered , it usually occurs after myocardial infarction rather than unstable angina and moreover, the short interval between the cardiac event and the pleural effusion did not support this hypothesis .
Titers of thyroglobulin (Tg), anti-Tg, anti-thyroperoxidase and anti-TSH receptor antibodies were normal. The cervical ultrasonography revealed thyroid micronodules and there was no radioisotope uptake in the 99mTechnetium thyroid scintigraphy. Hyperthyroidism was interpreted as type II amiodarone induced thyrotoxicosis.
After the exclusion of neoplastic, infectious and primary auto-immune diseases, considering an exudative pleural effusion with significant eosinophilia and a well-established temporal relation with the initiation of methimazole treatment, a diagnosis of methimazole-induced pleural effusion was made. A single organ drug hypersensitivity reaction was assumed in the absence of evidence of other organ involvement. Anti-thyroid medication was suspended, systemic corticosteroid was initiated and all other medications were maintained. Progressive and rapid clinical and laboratorial improvement was evident with normalization of inflammatory biomarkers and thyroid function and resolution of hypoxemia. Three months after methimazole was suspended there was complete resolution of pleural effusion.