A 69-year-old female was initially referred for neuro-ophthalmic care at our institution following two episodes of sudden painless visual disturbance in her right eye. Her past medical history was significant for mitral valve prolapse, scoliosis, hypertension (controlled with medications), and osteopenia. Past ocular history was significant for uneventful bilateral cataract extraction with implantation of posterior chamber toric IOL 2 years prior to presentation. She awoke to both episodes with transient visual loss, reporting “everything (was) blurred,” that lasted 12 hours before resolving. She sought medical care after experiencing her second episode. At this evaluation, her right IOP was 42 mm Hg. Topical steroids and three topical IOP-lowering agents were used to control this episode. Due to the unclear etiology of the patient's visual symptoms, a neurologic workup was also conducted, including magnetic resonance imaging, echocardiogram, and carotid ultrasound. All imaging was interpreted as normal.
On our initial examination, there was no relative afferent pupillary defect, and uncorrected visual acuity was 20/25 + 2 right eye [oculus dexter (OD)] and 20/25 − 1 left eye [oculus sinister (OS)]. IOP was 18 mm Hg OD and 14 mm Hg OS. Humphrey visual fields were full in both eyes [oculus uterque (OU)], and optical coherence tomography showed superior thinning OD. Fundus exam was within normal limits with vertical cup-to-disk ratios of 0.4 in both eyes. Initial assessment ruled out a neurologic etiology, and a uveitic workup was recommended due to the presence of inflammation.
After continuing to experience recurrent episodes of blurred vision, the patient was referred to our glaucoma clinic 5 months after initial presentation under a presumptive diagnosis of uveitic glaucoma. She remained on topical steroids and three IOP-lowering agents at this time. Visual acuity was 20/20 OD and 20/25 OS; IOP was 20 mm Hg OD and 16 mm Hg OS. Examination at this time was notable for a superior crescent-shaped transillumination defect superiorly in the right iris . Due to the recurrent spontaneous episodes of blurred vision, UBM scan was done to evaluate the position of the IOL. UBM of the right eye showed a tilted IOL with its superior haptic in the sulcus . These findings confirmed a diagnosis of UGH syndrome.
The patient underwent surgery to reposition the right haptic. Three months following lens repositioning, the patient was tapered off all topical medications. Visual acuity was 20/25 + 1 OD and 20/20 − 1 OS with IOP of 15 mm Hg OU.