A 43-year-old Ethiopian man, with no significant past medical history, presented to our hospital, 3 weeks after receiving the first dose of Moderna COVID-19 vaccine, with both bilateral lower extremities and scrotal edema. He initially developed a sudden-onset bilateral lower limb swelling on day 7 post-vaccine. Following on from that, he developed dyspnea on exertion and scrotal swelling over a time span of 2 weeks. He denied fever, chills, nasal congestion, sore throat, cough, chest pain, vomiting, diarrhea, skin rash, joint pain, change in the color or amount of urine, hematuria or dysuria. The patient did not report any recent viral infection, and he did not travel or come in contact with any sick people. Furthermore, he denied taking any herbals or over the counter medications such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The patient also denied having a similar episode in the past or having a family history of kidney diseases. He is married and works in an office. He occasionally drinks alcohol, but he does not smoke cigarettes.
Upon presentation, his temperature was 36.8 degree Celsius, blood pressure was 150/92 mmHg, heart rate was 87 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. On physical examination, he had a decreased air entry at both lung bases, and massive bilateral lower limb pitting edema extending to above the knees and scrotal swelling. The rest of the exam was unremarkable with no palpable lymph nodes. The initial laboratory investigations revealed serum creatinine of 80 μmol/L, blood urea nitrogen of 3.9 mmol/L and albumin of 8 g/L. His urinalysis showed 3+ protein and 2+ blood. He only had 4 red blood cells per high power field on urine microscopy, while his 24-h urine protein was 15 g. His immunologic workup, including complements (C3, C4), antinuclear and anti-phospholipase A2 antibodies, was normal. Additionally, HIV, hepatitis B, C and nasopharyngeal COVID-19 polymerase chain reactions were all negative. Chest x-ray revealed prominent vascular markings and mild bilateral pleural effusion, while abdominal ultrasound showed normal-sized kidneys with normal echogenicity and corticomedullary differentiation. The patient did not have previous lab results or imaging prior to this hospitalization.
The patient was started on furosemide and amlodipine and later had a kidney biopsy. There were 14 glomeruli, on light microscopy, with mild mesangial proliferation and expansion; however, none of the glomeruli had endocapillary proliferation, segmental glomerulosclerosis or crescents . Also, there was no tubular atrophy or interstitial fibrosis. Direct immunofluorescence study revealed 2+ mesangial deposition of immunoglobulin A (IgA), trace immunoglobulin G (IgG) and 1+ C3 . However, electron microscopy was not performed due to unavailability. The patient’s nephrotic syndrome was attributed to MCD and he was treated with oral prednisolone 80 mg daily. When seen in the clinic, after 2 weeks of steroids, he had no lower extremities or scrotal edema. In addition, his serum albumin increased to 25 g/L and his 24-h urine protein was down to 1 g. The patient tolerated treatment well without side effects. He was advised to continue prednisolone 80 mg daily to complete a total of 4 weeks and then his prednisolone dosage will be tapered down over the following 4 months under close monitoring in clinic.