A 52-year-old male with a past medical history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus type 2, end-stage renal disease (ESRD) on hemodialysis (HD), coronary artery disease status post coronary artery bypass grafting, and past cerebrovascular accident presented to the emergency department (ED) with altered mental status. The patient had been well, per family, including an uncomplicated HD session earlier that day, until the evening of presentation when family noted that he had increasing confusion and agitation, progressive for three to four hours, prompting them to call 911. On arrival to the patient’s home, paramedics noted that he was severely agitated, moaning loudly, and “jerking about,” particularly the bilateral upper extremities. To facilitate safe transfer to the hospital and due to paramedic concern for possible seizure-like activity, they administered midazolam five milligrams (mg) intramuscularly.
Upon presentation to the ED, the patient was noted to be febrile (38.94°C), tachycardic (115 beats per minute), and hypertensive (blood pressure 224/104 millimeters mercury (mmHg). He was moaning loudly with no coherent speech and unable to follow specific commands; however, he was responding to painful stimuli and appeared to respond to his name. Additionally, the patient was moving all extremities spontaneously and had no appreciable cranial nerve defects. The remainder of his physical exam revealed clear breath sounds bilaterally, no abdominal distension or perceived tenderness, and warm, dry, intact skin with no signs of breakdown or ulcers. Further evaluation and treatment were initiated, and the patient was started on vancomycin, ceftriaxone, azithromycin, and acyclovir for empiric meningitis coverage. A clevidipine infusion at one mg per hour was also started in the ED.
One hour after arrival and treatment initiation, the patient’s blood pressure was 143/90 mm Hg, and the infusion was discontinued. Additionally, chest radiograph did not show any acute abnormality, and computed tomography (CT) of the head without contrast showed chronic changes in the left putamen in the setting of known remote cerebrovascular accident. Laboratory evaluation was significant for an elevated blood urea nitrogen of 60 mg per deciliter (mg/dL) (reference range: 7–20 mg/dL) and creatinine of 8.3 mg/dL (0.8–1.2 mg/dL) in the setting of known ESRD. Otherwise, urinalysis did not show evidence of infection, urinary drug screen was negative, white blood cell count was 7.05 × 103/microliter (mL) (4.5–11 × 103/mL), and salicylate and acetaminophen levels were within normal limits. However, nasopharyngeal polymerase chain reaction (PCR) swab returned positive for SARS-CoV-2. A lumbar puncture was also performed, which evidenced clear cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), white blood cell count of zero per cubic millimeter (mm3) (0–5/mm3), protein of 46 mg/dL (10–60 mg/dL), and mildly elevated glucose of 121 mg/100 mL (50–80 mg/100 mL). The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for further management.
During ICU admission, the patient remained encephalopathic despite administration of antipyretics in the ED. His blood pressure remained stable with systolic less than 180 mm Hg with lisinopril 20 mg and amlodipine 10 mg daily. Antibiotic coverage was discontinued after approximately 48 hours as no signs of infection were present clinically or by laboratory evidence, and CSF culture returned negative (including varicella, herpes simplex, and cytomegalovirus). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was performed on the morning of ICU day two, which did not show any acute pathologic changes. Continuous electroencephalogram for 24 hours was begun approximately six hours after initial presentation and showed evidence of mild, diffuse cerebral dysfunction. On ICU day three, the patient’s mentation began to improve, and he was noted to be increasingly alert, able to follow basic commands and speak simple phrases. On hospital day four, the patient was downgraded to a floor bed setting where he remained for an additional five days until his mentation was considered “back to baseline” with subsequent hospital discharge.
Repeat SARS-CoV-2 testing during outpatient follow-up 20 days after his initial ED presentation was negative. To date, the patient appears to have fully recovered from this episode of encephalopathy without neurologic sequelae.