Our patient is a right hand dominant 63-year-old female with no significant past medical history, who sustained an open right distal radius fracture in 2013 with subsequent open reduction and internal fixation with a distal radius volar locking plate. She is a nonsmoker and denies illicit or recreational drug use. Family and psychosocial history was determined to be non-contributory.
She presented to the clinic seven years post-operatively in 2020, after three recent falls onto her outstretched hand one month prior to consultation, with right wrist pain and triggering of her thumb. Upon physical examination, the patient had tenderness over the A1 pulley of the thumb and demonstrable triggering. There was no evidence of instability on exam and she was able to flex, extend, abduct, adduct and oppose the thumb. Right wrist range of motion was extension to 60°, flexion to 80°, ulnar deviation to 30°, radial deviation to 10°, and full prono-supination.
Radiographs of the right wrist on presentation demonstrated intact hardware fixation of the distal radius fracture with mild DISI deformity, ulnar styloid nonunion, and possible intra-articular screw. Subsequent CT scan showed no evidence of intra articular hardware (, , , , ).
For treatment of the trigger thumb, the A1 pulley of the right thumb was injected with 2 cm3 of 1% lidocaine and 1 cm3 of dexamethasone. Patient then returned two weeks later without improvement of the wrist pain or triggering of the thumb. She stated that she had been adherent with all post-injection precautions and recommended conservative treatment modalities. At this time, the patient was scheduled for surgical removal of hardware, extended open carpal tunnel release, and trigger thumb release.
At her preoperative visit, she was unable to actively flex the IP joint of the thumb. Tenodesis testing indicated that the FPL was ruptured, though still with demonstrable triggering of the thumb. She was then additionally scheduled for flexor tenosynovectomy and palmaris longus to FPL tendon autograft reconstruction. This operation was performed by an attending orthopedic surgeon, fellowship-trained in hand and wrist surgery, in a community hospital setting.
A limited modified Henry approach was used to remove the volar locking plate and associated screws. Then, a palmar approach to the A1 pulley was performed in the usual fashion of the ipsilateral thumb. Intraoperatively, the FPL tendon was ruptured at just proximal to the A1 pulley in the carpal tunnel with demonstrable triggering when traction was pulled on the distal stump. The triggering was successfully released at the A1 pulley. The proximal stump was then palpated through the skin and found to be retracted to the mid-forearm level. Due to this gap, a palmaris longus tendon graft was used to reconstruct the FPL (, , , ).
During her follow up visits up to 14 weeks, the patient progressed well with hand therapy and was ultimately able to achieve full range of motion of the thumb in flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, and opposition. She was able to make a full fist and had no evidence of triggering.