A 62-year-old right-handed Asian female swimming coach reported to our hospital with the complaint of difficulty in flexing her left thumb. She had a history of sudden onset of fever, cough, and diarrhea developed in August 2021. She had no relevant past medical history. She tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 using a nasopharyngeal swab reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (RT–PCR). She received symptomatic treatment at home. She recovered from respiratory and gastric symptoms within 10 days after the onset of COVID-19.
Five days after the onset of COVID-19, she had sudden onset fatigue and severe pain on the left arm. Although the fatigue and pain decreased spontaneously approximately after 1 week, she noticed paralysis of the left thumb at 2 weeks after the onset of COVID-19. Due to persistent difficulty in flexing the left thumb, she came to our hospital at 2 months after the onset of paralysis.
On physical examination, neither active flexion of the thumb interphalangeal joint nor joint contracture (passive range of motion was 30° in extension and 80° in flexion) was observed. There was no sensory disturbance and Tinel’s sign at her left upper extremity. Tenderness at the ulno–volar area of elbow was observed. Manual muscle test (MMT) result of the anterior interosseous nerve (AIN)-dominated muscle showed grade 0/5 in FPL and PQ, and 5/5 in flexor digitorum profundus for the index and middle digits (FDP-I and FDP-M).
No abnormal findings were found on plain radiograph or computed tomography. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed no intensity change indicating inflammation around the median nerve and AIN area. No occupying lesion such as tumor or cyst compressing nerve was observed around the median nerve and AIN. No characteristic sign of AINS such as bullseye sign in MRI or torsion in ultrasonography, which indicate nerve or fascicle constriction, were observed. No abnormal findings suggesting autoimmune disease were observed from blood testing.
Electrophysiological studies (nerve conduction test and electromyography) were performed at 3 months after the onset of symptoms. There were no abnormal findings in the median nerve conduction test. Electromyography of the AIN-dominated muscles revealed neurogenic changes such as positive sharp wave and fibrillation in the FPL and PQ .
From the above findings, we diagnosed the case as AINS. In the absence of recovery in the left thumb paralysis at 6 months after symptom onset, we proceeded with functional reconstruction surgery of the thumb by tendon transfer from the extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL) to the FPL.
The surgery was performed under wide-awake local anesthesia no tourniquet (WALANT) . The ECRL tendon was cut at the attachment of second metacarpal bone; the distal end of ECRL tendon was then passed through the subcutaneous tunnel from dorsal to volar side of the forearm, and finally it was transferred to FPL tendon by interlacing suture technique performed three times at 3 cm proximal to the wrist. To decide the tension of each tendon, a single interlacing suture was performed under maximum passive traction in the wrist neutral position. We instructed the patient to move her thumb interphalangeal joint. The final tension was decided based on whether the patient was able to perform tip pinch movement completely and extend thumb metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joint completely in wrist neutral position. After deciding the suture tension, additional interlacing suture was performed (sutured three times in total). Smooth active flexion of the thumb was easily confirmed intraoperatively using the WALANT technique .
A thumb spica splint of the wrist in neutral position and thumb in volar-abduction position was applied for 3 weeks after surgery. Active range of motion exercise of the thumb interphalangeal joint was started immediately after surgery with a hand therapist. At final follow-up (1 year after surgery), the active range of motion of the thumb was 0–60° in metacarpophalangeal joint and −6° to 66° in interphalangeal joint. Pinch strength improved over 80% on the ipsilateral side; R3.5/L3.0 kg in tip pinch and R6.2/L5.2 kg in key pinch. Patient-reported outcomes were good (2.27 points in QuickDASH Disability/Symptom scoring and 5 points in Hand20 scoring) .