A 77-year-old woman who had been prescribed medical treatment for hypertension by a local physician was referred to our hospital because of elevated serum alkaline ALP and γ-GTP levels. She did not complain of any symptoms and had no history of biliary tract disease, abdominal surgery, autoimmune disease, allergies, or abdominal trauma. She also had no history of heavy alcohol consumption or smoking. Her brother had a history of pancreatic cancer. Neither skin yellowing nor abdominal tumor was observed. The patient’s general condition was good, and she had a normal body mass index (22.7 kg/m2).
Laboratory examination results revealed slightly elevated serum aspartate aminotransferase (52 IU/L; reference: 13–30 IU/L), alanine aminotransferase (54 IU/L; reference: 17–23 IU/L), ALP (414 IU/L; reference: 106–322 IU/L), and γ-GTP (449 IU/L; reference: 9–32 IU/L) levels. Neither serum total bilirubin nor direct bilirubin was elevated. The patient was positive for serum hepatitis C virus antibody, and serum tumor markers (CEA, CA19-9) and IgG4 levels were within the normal limits.
We performed upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and a total colonoscopy preoperatively to rule out inflammatory bowel disease or other diseases, neither of which revealed any lesions.
Axial view of CE-CT showed dilation from intrahepatic to upper common bile duct , and an irregular mass lesion in distal bile duct . On the coronal view, this lesion appeared as multiple overlapping leaf-like folds . T2-weighted MRI showed irregular signal defect in the middle bile duct . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) also indicated a signal defect and mild dilation of the proximal bile duct . 18F-FDG-PET/CT revealed no uptake in this lesion. Both biliary cytology and brushing cytology were performed twice, but no malignant disease was proven in all specimens.
Since distal bile duct cancer could not be completely ruled out in this case, we decided to perform surgical treatment with full patient consent. Subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy with regional lymph node dissection was performed. The patient had a good clinical course and was discharged on the 35th day postoperatively.
The resected specimen exhibited bile duct wall thickening in the middle bile duct . Cut surface showed diffuse homogenous bile duct wall thickening, but no evidence of invasion into the pancreas . Microscopically, the bile duct lesion showed dense fibrosis under the mucosal layer and severe inflammation of the peribiliary glands . In the magnified view, marked lymphoplasmacytic cells invasion under the dense fibrosis was observed. These cells formed numerous lymphoid follicles containing germinal centers .
IHC showed positive for CD3 , CD20 and CD79a in infiltrated lymphoplasmacytic cells under the thickening fibrosis. Although many CD138-positive plasma cells were scattered around the lymphoid follicles , IgG4-positive plasma cells were few . Based on these findings, this unique lesion was diagnosed as FC. The patient has been followed up as an outpatient, and she has not experienced recurrence at 42 months after surgery.