A 55-year-old Turkish woman presented with a two-year history of hoarseness. She did not use tobacco or alcohol, and other than a three-year history of diabetes mellitus, her medical history was unremarkable. Her family history was non-contributory.
On endoscopic laryngeal examination, a supraglottic mass was seen, involving the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis and medial aspect of the pyriform sinus. Mobility of the vocal cords was normal. Examination of the neck found no palpable lymphadenopathy. No other abnormalities were found during the remainder of the otorhinolaryngological examination, or the general physical and pulmonary examinations. The results of laboratory tests were normal, including complete blood count, Westergren erythrocyte sedimentation rate, glucose level and electrolytes.
Cervical computed tomography (CT) showed a supraglottic mass extending from the right aspect of the medial glossoepiglottic fold to the right aryepiglottic fold and pyriform sinus, with involvement of the parapharyngeal fat tissue . No lymphadenopathy was seen on cervical CT. Thoracic and abdominal CT revealed no metastases or synchronous lesions.
Direct suspension laryngoscopy was performed under general anesthesia. A laryngeal mass with a smooth surface was seen. Multiple punch biopsies were taken from the mass, and histopathologic examination was performed. The tissues were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and evaluated by light microscopy. Pathological examination of the biopsy showed tumor infiltration, with trabeculae and small nests of round eosinophilic cells with uniform hyperchromatic nuclei, displaying a 'salt and pepper' chromatin pattern. There was no marked pleomorphism or necrosis . The cells were strongly immunopositive for neuron-specific enolase, chromogranin , synaptophysin and pancytokeratin. Light microscopy and immunohistochemical analysis revealed typical carcinoid tumor of the larynx.
A supraglottic horizontal laryngectomy with a tracheotomy was performed. The histopathologic diagnosis was not changed postoperatively, and the surgical margins were tumor-free. There were no intraoperative or postoperative complications. The tracheotomy was closed in the second postoperative week. Postoperatively, the patient did not receive radiation therapy or chemotherapy. There was no recurrence during a follow-up period of three years.