A 38-year-old man was aware of bilateral lower limb weakness 3 days after upper respiratory infection. The next day, he showed disturbance of consciousness and bilateral upper limb weakness. Two days after onset, he showed respiratory failure and needed support by mechanical ventilation. The patient was admitted to our hospital. At admission, he showed bradycardia (heart rate was 40 beats per minute). In neurological examination under no sedation, he showed no response to painful and visual stimuli. Light reflex was bilaterally dull though pupil diameter was 5 mm. No voluntary ocular and facial movements were observed. Oculocephalic, corneal, gag and cough reflexes were absent. He showed complete flaccid tetraplegia with areflexia in all limbs. Babinski reflex was negative. At 13 days after onset, cerebrospinal fluid examination revealed a normal cell count at 4 /μL, but protein levels increased to 98.5 mg/dL. At 21 days after onset, the nerve conduction study showed that compound muscle and sensory nerve action potentials decreased from the distal portion in upper limb nerves, and distal latencies and nerve conduction velocities were normal in all nerves tested. These findings were electrophysiologically consistent with the pattern of axonal damage in peripheral nerves . Brain MRI showed no intracranial abnormal signals on diffusion-, T1-, T2- and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery-weighted images. Spinal MRI also showed no intramedullary abnormal signals. Auditory brain stem response was normal. Various anti-ganglioside antibodies were detected in laboratory examinations. Anti-GQ1b, GT1a, GT1b, GD1a, GD1b and GD3 IgG antibodies were positive . These data confirmed the diagnosis of GBS. At 4 days after onset, we started to administrate intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) at a daily dose of 0.4 g/kg for five days and intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP) at a daily dose of 1000 mg for three days. At 22 days after onset, we repeated IVIg, followed by IVMP . Disturbance of consciousness, eye symptoms and weakness of the distal upper and lower limbs improved gradually, whereas severe PCB-like weakness of the oropharynx, neck, and proximal upper limbs remained. Anti-GQ1b, GT1b, GD1a, GD1b and GD3 IgG antibodies were turned to be negative, but anti-GT1a IgG antibodies remained positive. We added plasma exchange (PE) three times from 39 days after onset. However, the PCB-like weakness did not improve, muscle atrophy of limbs became apparent, and anti-GT1a IgG antibodies persistently positive. We further performed PE four times from 68 days after onset. Although anti-GT1a IgG antibodies decreased, severe PCB-like weakness did not ameliorate. Consequently, mechanical ventilation and tube feeding was required for 7 and 10 months, respectively. At 18 months after onset, in the nerve conduction study, the decrease in compound muscle action potentials in upper limb nerves was persistently observed . Two years later, he could walk using assistance, but weakness of the proximal upper limbs remained as sequelae . Additionally, his pulmonary dysfunction failed to improve fully as vital capacity decreased to 71.0%.