A 41-year-old white male was referred to us for the evaluation of painless blurry vision in his left eye which had progressed gradually over the course of one month. The patient reported a constant inferonasal area of blurry vision with both near and distance vision. Otherwise, he had unremarkable ocular, medical, and surgical histories. He was an ex-cigarette smoker. He had a family history of non-melanoma skin cancer in his mother and multiple sclerosis in one distant relative. His review of systems, including additional neurological symptoms, was unremarkable.
At the time of presentation, central visual acuity was 20/15 in his right eye (OD) and 20/25 in his left eye (OS). There was no overt dyschromatopsia on isochromatic color plates, although he had some difficulty reading the plates with his left eye. His pupils were equal and reactive without relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD). Funduscopic examination of his left eye revealed inferior disc swelling which had not been present three years prior in his previous ophthalmologic exam. The initial laboratory results for unilateral optic nerve swelling included erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), antinuclear antibody (ANA), angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), rapid plasma reagin (RPR) levels, complete blood count (CBC), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) titers, Bartonella antibody titers, Lyme disease panels, and herpetic viral panels. The results were normal except leukocytosis (19.7 TH/L) with atypical lymphocytosis (74%) noted as abundant smudge cells. Serum polymerase chain reactions (PCR) for Epstein-Barr and cytomegalovirus were negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain and orbits, with and without contrast, was unremarkable. Static visual field testing (Humphrey Visual Fields: HVF) revealed an inferior scotoma in the left eye respecting the horizontal meridian. Initial color fundus photography [Figure 1] and Fourier-domain optical coherence tomography (OCT, Figure 2(a)) of the left eye showed inferior nerve fiber layer (NFL) swelling beyond his age-appropriate norm. The patient was admitted to the neurology ward for full workup and inpatient hematology consultation.
Collected cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analyses, including opening pressure, infectious, autoimmune, and routine studies, were unremarkable. Repeat CBC with manual slide review confirmed the presence of leukocytosis with lymphocytic predominance, and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) revealed 13q14 deletion. Flow cytometry showed monoclonal CD5+/CD10-B cell population consistent with CLL, classified as Rai stage 0/Binet stage A with favorable cytogenetic studies. Visual evoked potential was normal OD (106 milliseconds) but minimally prolonged OS (113 milliseconds). According to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines, the patient was not immediately treated for his CLL and was prescribed prednisone for suspected atypical infiltrative optic neuropathy.
One month after discharge, the patient reported stability of his left eye blurry scotoma without involvement of the right eye. He again denied focal neurologic symptoms. Physical examination showed stable central visual acuity, but identified new onset left RAPD; funduscopic examination re-demonstrated the left optic nerve inferior swelling unchanged from the previous exam. Static visual field testing showed slight worsening of his left eye inferior nasal scotoma and OCT revealed significant progression of NFL loss [Figure 2(b)]. Following discussions with our colleagues in the hematology department and extensive literature review, chemotherapy was initiated.
During the patient's first two cycles of FR chemotherapy, he noted no visual decline nor progression of his blurry vision scotoma. OCT during this time showed stabilization of the NFL without further loss [Figure 2(c)]. After four cycles of chemotherapy with continued stabilization of nerve fiber loss on OCT, and without progression of his scotoma size or density on HVF, we decided to monitor him according to the NCCN guidelines without further chemotherapy.