In 2014, a 75-year-old female was hospitalized in our institution for the careful examination of whole body bone pain and fragility fracture. In 2012, she experienced fracture in proximal end of left tibia and left foot joint. At that time, bone density was as follows: lumbar spine YAM, 79%; left femur YAM, 58%. She was diagnosed as osteoporosis and started taking PTH formulation in local clinic. Furthermore, in 2013, she experienced femur fracture on both sides and multiple rib fracture. At that time, bone density was as follows: lumbar spine YAM, 66%; left femur YAM, 59%. After then, she started taking bisphosphonates. In spite of such therapy, in 2014, she experienced fracture in various parts of the body such as left pubis and left olecranon. After then, she started taking active vitamin D preparations. Finally, she was hospitalized in our institution for the careful examination of such frequent fracture in various parts of body.
On admission (August, 2014), her height was 142.5 cm and body weight was 44.7 kg (body mass index: 22.0 kg/m2). Although her previous height was unknown, it seemed that her height became shorter apparently due to scoliosis and vertebral compression fracture. Blood pressure was 132/84 mmHg and heart rate was 80 bpm. Body temperature was 36.9 °C. Her consciousness was clear, but she was under bedrest state all day due to severe bone pain throughout the whole body and she had a lot of difficulties even when she tried to turn over in bed. Although there was thoracic deformity, respiratory and heart sound was normal. In addition, there was no abnormality in abdomen. Table shows the clinical characteristics of this subject on admission. Hypophosphatemia (1.5 mg/dL) and hypocalcemia (8.1 mg/dL) (8.3 mg/dL after correction with serum albumin level) were observed. ALP level was high (855 U/L), and BAP (bone-type ALP) level was as high as 88.2 μg/L (normal range 3.8–22.6 μg/L). Serum FGF23 level was also as high as 275 pg/mL (normal range: 10–50 pg/mL). As shown in Table , various tumor marker levels all of which we measured were within normal range except for the slight increase of SCC level. As shown in Fig. a, in chest X-ray, there were remnants of multiple rib fracture, marked deformation of the thorax, scoliosis and cardiomegaly. In bone scintigraphy, abnormal accumulation was observed in ribs on both sides and limb joints . These are the findings after multiple fractures in the body. In computer tomography (CT), there was sciatic fracture on both sides, multiple rib fracture, vertebral compression fracture and marked deformation in the thorax . Neoplastic lesion was not observed in bone and soft tissues. There was localized frosted glass shade in upper right lung field. In FDG-PET/CT, there was no abnormal accumulation in the whole body, although slight accumulation was observed in thoracolumbar spine and upper limb joint which was presumably due to arthritis . Furthermore, we performed selective venous sampling and measured serum FGF23 levels in various parts of limb, but there was no marked difference in FGF23 levels among various parts of limb as follows: elbow vein, 331 pg/mL (left), 326 pg/mL (right), femoral vein, 299 pg/mL (left), 295 pg/mL (right).
Since we failed to identify the localization of tumor in this subject even with various kind of measurements, we had no choice but to depend on drug therapy and started phosphorus replacement therapy for hypophosphatemia. On September, 2014, we started using calcium phosphate for the treatment of hypophosphatemia in addition to active vitamin D preparations. We used relatively small amounts of calcium phosphate (1.5 g/day) (phosphorus content: 270 mg) in order to avoid the appearance of some side effects in this elderly subject. Such treatment, however, exerted marked beneficial effects in this subject. Hypophosphatemia was significantly ameliorated from 1.5 to 2.5 mg/dL. After discharge from our institution, serum phosphorus levels were within normal range and there was no recurrence of hypophosphatemia with the same amounts of calcium phosphate (1.5 g/day). Serum phosphorus level on March and July in 2015 was 2.5 and 2.7 mg/dL, respectively. Serum calcium levels were also within normal range and there was no recurrence of hypocalcemia. Serum calcium level on March and July in 2015 was 9.1 mg/dL (8.9 mg/dL after correction with serum albumin level) and 9.4 mg/dL (9.1 mg/dL after the correction), respectively. ALP level gradually decreased after the discharge, but it did not reach the normal range. ALP levels on March and July in 2015 was 654 U/L and 591 U/L, respectively. Since this patient hesitated to have an examination about bone density after starting calcium phosphate, we failed to obtain the follow-up data about this point after starting the therapy. We think, however, that it would be better to examine the alteration of bone density after starting the therapy in such cases.
About one month after the treatment, bone pain was decreased by half, and about two months later, she did not feel at all any pain at rest. Finally, about three months later, she became able to stand up without any difficulties and perform a light labor. It is noted here there was no special treatment for this subject except for the phosphorus replacement therapy.
Taken together, bone pain was dramatically reduced after phosphorus replacement therapy in an elder female subject with FGF23-related hypophosphatemic osteomalacia.