We present a case of a 62-year-old Caucasian man with several neurovascular and psychiatric conditions. The patient was first injured in 1980 in a construction worksite accident, wherein he was struck by a falling cinder block and experienced significant cranial trauma that required a right frontotemporal craniotomy and partial brain resection. The resected bone was then replaced with artificial titanium plating. Following this surgery, the patient remained comatose for a period of 6 days, finally awakening on Christmas Day 1980. Follow-up magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography confirmed the presence of a large, right-sided cystic encephalomalacia with subsequent gliosis subjacent to the resected brain tissue. Following this initial injury, the patient surprisingly made a full recovery, with no permanent neurological deficits. However, he began to experience painful and intractable headaches. Despite the best efforts of his physicians, these headaches soon became debilitating and made it difficult for the patient to hold a steady job. For the next 30 years, he struggled with his injury, eventually becoming homeless. During one visit to the hospital, he was diagnosed with major depressive disorder and subsequently was started on amitriptyline, which the patient has taken ever since. For most of this period, however, the patient had little or no regular healthcare, and his health slowly deteriorated.
In 2013, the patient, a lifetime smoker, experienced a thromboembolic left pontine infarction. He again recovered, and, interestingly, this event caused a dramatic reduction in the frequency and intensity of the patient’s headaches. However, this time, the patient retained a unilateral right-sided oculomotor nerve palsy and significant speech deficits for years afterward. Several days after this stroke, the patient began to experience episodes of inappropriate laughing and crying and general emotional incontinence. At this time, he was diagnosed with PBA. In addition to his amitriptyline, initial attempts at treatment with several commonly prescribed antidepressants had no effect on the patient’s PBA symptoms. The patient stated that he was not so much bothered by his emotional incontinence in and of itself, but rather by the perception of others in social or everyday public settings. The patient gradually became more socially reserved. Apprehensive of inappropriate and involuntary displays of emotion, the patient started to avoid public settings altogether, such as church and the grocery store. In early 2017, after years of unsuccessful pharmacotherapy, the patient was placed on DM/Q 30 mg by mouth twice daily. At this time, the patient’s vital signs were recorded as follows: blood pressure 116/82 mmHg, weight 296 lb., body mass index 42.47 kg/m2, heart rate 82 beats/minute, respiratory rate 20 breaths/minute, body temperature 97.7 °F, and oxygen saturation 93%. Within 1 week, he experienced total resolution of his symptoms. The patient has experienced no negative side effects. Additionally, he reports that if he forgets or is unable to take this medication for 2–3 days, he begins to experience breakthrough symptoms, which quickly resolve after resuming medication.
This patient’s quality of life is now much improved. The authors are happy to report that he is recently married and living comfortably, thanks to federal government benefits. Through great personal effort, the patient has recovered near-full speech ability and is no longer apprehensive of social settings.