The first patient was a 63-yr-old female with Body Mass Index (BMI) 19.8 kg/m2. She presented to our hospital for DBS implantation. Unfortunately, she suffered severe kyphosis and could not tolerate supine position. The second patient was a 56-yr-old male with BMI 24.4 kg/m2 suffering from severe back pain and anxiety. Both patients refused MAC for surgery. The third patient was a 64-yr-old male and the BMI was 28.7 kg/m2. This patient had severely uncontrollable motor symptoms and Obstructive Sleep Apnea syndrome (OSA) (Apnea Hypopnea Index is 33). His OSAS was triggered and the head movements associated with snoring also hampered the preoperative MRI scan when we gave dexmedetomidine to reduce the body movement. Only after the OSAS was eliminated by placing a nasopharyngeal airway to overcome the upper airway obstruction, the MRI scan was finished successfully. This made MAC is a poor choice for his DBS surgery. All three patients agreed with our proposed IEI and AAA technique. Written consent from patients and Institutional Review Board approval were obtained. During preoperative interview, we described the protocol of arousing, extubation, macrostimulation testing and reintubation in great details. On the day of surgery, The Leksell stereotactic head frame was placed under local anesthesia before entering the operation room.
After entering the operation room, dexmedetomidine 0.4μg/kg was given within 15 min. We kept the first patient in the supine position with multiple cushions . The other two patients were placed in routine supine position . The oxygen saturation, expired carbon dioxide, ECG and invasive blood pressure were monitored. One nostril was sprayed with 1% ephedrine, then the nasal and oral mucosa were anesthetized with 1% dyclonine gel. After glycopyrrolate 0.2 mg and palonosetron 0.25 mg i.v., general anesthesia was induced with dexamethasone 5 mg, fentanyl 2μg/kg, propofol 1-2 mg/kg and atracurium 1 mg/kg. After 3 min of mask ventilation, the laryngeal and tracheal mucosa was anesthetized with 2% lidocaine (5 ml) through a disposable endolaryngeal anesthetic tube sprayer (Henan Tuoren Medical Device Co., Ltd., China) under video laryngoscope guidance (Aircraft Medical Ltd., Ediburgh, United Kindom). A nasotracheal tube (ID 6.5 for male and ID 6.0 for female) was advanced past the vocal cords and the distance between the nare and the epiglottis was recorded. General anesthesia was maintained with 4 mg/kg/h propofol, remifentanil 0.1μg/kg/min and dexmedetomidine 0.2μg/kg/h. Local anesthesia to operative sites was provided with 0.325% ropivacaine by surgeons.
Ten minutes before the anticipated microelectrode recording (MER), dexmedetomidine, propofol and remifentanil were discontinued. After patient’s spontaneous respiration was restored, we deflated the cuff of endotracheal tube and injected atomized 2% lidocaine 3 ml via a catheter mount and a simple atomizer (Jiangsu Sona Care Medical Science-Technology Co., LTD, Nantong, China) . The endotracheal tube was retracted to the top of epiglottis (at level of the tongue base) under the guidance of FB-10 V FOB (HOYA Corporation, PENTAX Lifecare Division, Tokyo, Japan) and kept there as a nasopharyngeal airway. When the patient woke up fully, MER, macrostimulation testing and language communication were performed. All three patients opened their eyes upon commands (7 ± 0.66 min) and their spontaneous respiration restored within 5–10 min after stopping sedation. They all tolerated nasal endotracheal tube well . Both blood pressure and heart rate were significantly higher than asleep stage. Compared with baseline blood pressure, the fluctuation of mean arterial pressure (MAP) of the first patient and third patient were within 30% and we did nto give any treatment. The MAP of the second patient was higher than 30% baseline blood pressure, we gave nicardipine (0.1 mg) and esmolol (0.5μg/Kg) intermittently to maintain hemodynamic stability (the total dose of nicardipine was 0.3 mg, esmolol was 100μg).
The neurophysiologists finished MER successfully and were satisfied with the quality of signals. During the macrostimulation testing, all the patients were calm and cooperative, able to move fingers, limbs, to count numbers upon instructions and to communicate orally with the operator easily .
Once the electrophysiological test was complete, atomized 2% lidocaine 3 ml via nasotracheal tube was injected again. Midazolam 0.04 mg/kg, fentanyl 2μg/kg, propofol 1 mg/kg were utilized to sedate patients and maintained spontaneous respirations. The glottis was identified with FOB and oxygen was supplemented through the catheter mount. Once the FOB entered the trachea, the nasotracheal tube was passed over the FOB into the trachea . Rocuronium 1 mg/kg, remifentanil 0.5μg/kg and propofol 1 mg/kg were injected intravenously to induce general anesthesia. The rest of the procedure, such as implantation of electrodes and pacemakers, was continued under general anesthesia. The reintubation guided by FOB were successful on the first attempt in all three patients .
Total AAA time were 235–280 min, including first asleep stage 80–100 min, wake-up test time of 58–70 min, and the second asleep stage 97–110 min. No patient had coughing or body movement. One patient suffered mild nose bleeding but had no significant impact on nasotracheal reintubation guided by FOB. No patient suffered hypoxia during the whole process. All patients were extubated within 10mins after operation without complication. Anesthesia follow up on postoperative day 2 demonstrated that all patients were satisfied with their anesthesia experiences.