A 61-year-old otherwise healthy Caucasian male presented to the emergency department for evaluation of 1 month history of generalized intermittent abdominal pain with occasional dark blood with bowel movements. He denied fever, chills, weight loss, diarrhea, or obstructive symptoms. He had no family history of gastrointestinal, hematologic, or malignant diseases. He underwent screening colonoscopy 12 years prior which was unremarkable. Physical examination yielded no significant findings. Complete blood count and basic metabolic panel were within normal limits. An abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a proximal colon-colonic intussusception with appearance of a mass at the leading edge of the intussusceptum with diffuse mural thickening in the intussusceptum and the intussuscipiens with extensive mesenteric lymphadenopathy . Findings were discussed with the patient who refused hospital admission. He was discharged with outpatient appointment arranged.
In office 3 days later, the patient reported continued intermittent sharp abdominal pain and denied obstructive symptoms. With a presumed diagnosis of colonic malignancy, work-up was pursued in accordance with National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines. Carcinoembryonic Antigen level was 0.5 ng/mL. Staging CT chest demonstrated a 12 mm hyper-enhancing focus in liver Segment 8. Colonoscopy identified a traversable, fungating, non-circumferential 10 cm cecal mass and a 15 mm pedunculated descending colon polyp . Cold forceps biopsies were obtained and polypectomy was performed. The patient was scheduled for laparoscopic right hemicolectomy and hepatic wedge resection.
Biopsy histology demonstrated marked expansion of colonic lamina propria by a lymphoid infiltrate composed predominately of small, mature appearing lymphocytes. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining identified the abnormal lymphocytes to be CD20+, CD5+, BCL2+, Cyclin D1+, and SOX11+ B-cells with proliferation index of 30–40% by Ki-67+ nuclei diagnosing MCL. The abnormal cell population was negative for BCL6 and CD23. The pedunculated polyp was a benign inflammatory polyp.
This case was presented at hospital tumor board which recommended cancellation of surgery and oncologic referral.