In December 2015, an asymptomatic 52-year-old Korean woman with hypertension was referred to our hospital because of a right-sided renal mass detected on transabdominal ultrasound. She was a housewife and did not have any medical history. Her physical examination was unremarkable, and routine laboratory studies did not document any abnormalities (creatinine 0.47 mg/dl, normal complete blood count, normal liver function test, normal serum electrolyte concentrations, microscopic hematuria 2+).
Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen demonstrated a 32-mm multicystic mass with some calcifications in the lower pole of the right kidney . At the lower end of the mass, a small additional mass was detected, but it was thought to be part of the multicystic mass. The patient underwent laparoscopic partial nephrectomy. The bullous tumor was found in the operative field at the lower pole of the right kidney. The tumor was marked by a monopolar hook electrode, and it was excised using 10-mm Metzenbaum scissors with minimal safety margins. Clamping of the renal artery was performed, followed by gentle resection with a harmonic blade. After resection of the tumor, it was confirmed that the kidney calyx was opened. The opened calyx and remnant renal parenchyma were closed with a V-Loc™ (Covidien, Dublin, Ireland) and 3-0 Vicryl suture (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA). The clamping time was 27 minutes. The patient was discharged 7 days after surgery without any postoperative complications. She did not receive chemotherapy or any other treatment after surgery, and we have been following her for 2 years.
Grossly, the ovoid mass was well circumscribed and measured 3.5 × 2.7 × 2.5 cm, and on sections, the mass was composed of two back-to-back masses . The mass was 0.7 mm and 0.5 mm away from the renal capsular margin and the renal parenchymal margin, respectively. The larger mass was cystic, and it was filled with tan necrotic material. The smaller mass was bright brown and solid with numerous tiny cystic spaces. The larger mass measured 2.6 × 2.5 cm in cross-sectional diameter, and the smaller mass was 1.5 × 1.5 cm in cross-sectional diameter.
Microscopically, the smaller mass showed solid nest architecture of low cuboidal eosinophilic cells admixed with cystic spaces lined by low cuboidal eosinophilic cells . These epithelial cells had abundant, densely granular cytoplasm and uniform, round, bland nuclei with no mitoses. There was a focal area of tubular or cystic structures lined by atypical epithelial cells with a hobnail appearance. Focally, these atypical tubules or cysts were admixed with the oncocytoma component. A few cystic spaces were lined by oncocytes that abruptly continued with these atypical epithelial lining cells. These atypical epithelial cells had round, ovoid, or occasionally cleaved nuclei and small to moderate amounts of eosinophilic or occasionally clear cytoplasm. The size of the nuclei of these atypical cells was 1.5–2 times that of the nuclei of the onocytoma, with an increased nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio and visible or prominent nucleoli. There were occasionally papillary protrusions in the atypical tubules or cystic spaces. Immunohistochemical staining showed that the cells of the oncocytoma were immunopositive for CD117 but negative for cytokeratin 7, vimentin, CD10, and α-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase (AMACR). The atypical tubular and cystic epithelial cells were immunopositive for cytokeratin 7 and vimentin and focally positive for CD10, but they were negative for CD117 and AMACR. The histological and immunohistochemical results were consistent with a hybrid neoplasm composed of PRCC and oncocytoma.
The preoperative creatinine level was 0.47 mg/dl, and the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) calculated by the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease equation was ≥ 120 ml/minute/1.73m2. At the 12-month follow-up after surgery, the patient’s creatinine level was 0.52 mg/dl, and her eGFR was ≥ 120 ml/minute/1.73m2. There was no evidence of recurrence on chest or abdominal CT.