In August of 2015, a 36-year-old man with neurofibromatosis type 1, multiple peripheral nerve sheath tumors and chronic pain presented to our emergency department with complaints of worsening back pain and progressive right leg weakness. In 2010, he had undergone placement of an intrathecal catheter and drug infusion pump at an outside hospital. At the time of presentation, the pump was administering 8.9 mg/day of fentanyl and 22.2 mg/day of bupivacaine (fentanyl concentration, 14 mg/mL; bupivacaine concentration, 35 mg/mL). Ten days prior to presentation, the patient had undergone lumbar epidural steroid injection at an outside hospital for complaints of cramping in his bilateral quadriceps. Five days prior to presentation, he noted onset of paresthesias in his right foot, then, 3 days prior to presentation, he began to experience progressive right leg weakness resulting in an inability to ambulate. He denied any history of recent trauma.
Motor examination revealed full strength in the bilateral arms and left leg. The right leg was flaccid, with 2/5 right hip flexor strength, and 1/5 strength in all other muscle groups. Bilateral numbness was noted below the T8 level, and was more pronounced in the left leg. Reflex examination revealed diminished patellar reflexes; myoclonus was absent.
Spinal imaging was performed . This depicted numerous peripheral nerve sheath tumors throughout the bilateral spine, consistent with the patient’s history of neurofibromatosis. The intrathecal catheter was noted to enter the spinal canal at the L2-L3 level, and terminate in the dorsal intrathecal space at the superior T9 level. At the level of the T9-T10 interspace, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a strongly enhancing, compressive intrathecal mass, with associated T2 cord hyperintensity spanning from the T4 level to the level of the conus.
Given the patient’s rapid neurologic decline, and radiologic evidence of thoracic spinal cord compression, the patient was admitted for surgical treatment. The intrathecal pump was set to the minimum infusion rate. The patient was given dexamethasone (4 mg every 6 h) for spinal cord inflammation, and he received systemic pain medications, including intravenous fentanyl and ketamine (200 μg/h and 2 μg/kg/min, respectively), transdermal clonidine (200 μg/day), and intravenous methadone (10 mg every 8 h). His outpatient oral medications were continued (baclofen 10 mg every 8 h and oxycodone 30–60 mg every 4 h as needed). A fiducial screw was percutaneously placed using computed tomography guidance at the right T9 lamina.
On the day after admission, the patient was taken to the operating room for thoracic spinal decompression. A T9-T10 laminectomy was performed to expose the thecal sac at the level of the lesion. At the T9-T10 left neuroforamen, a 1.1 cm × 0.4 cm × 0.2 cm mass was adhered to the exiting nerve root; this lesion was resected and later identified by pathological examination to be a neurofibroma. The exposed dura was incised, revealing an adherent, 1.2 cm × 0.6 cm × 0.5 cm, soft tissue mass just proximal to the terminus of the intrathecal catheter . The mass was completely dissected from the dura and the catheter. After resection of the mass, the dorsal spinal cord remained slightly deformed due to prior mass effect. The dural incision was sutured, the overlying paraspinal tissues were reapproximated, and the skin was closed using sutures and staples.
The spinal segment of the catheter was then removed through a small incision over the lumbar region. The implanted drug pump and the abdominal portion of the catheter were left in place for potential future pain management. A needle was used to access the pump reservoir; the fentanyl-bupivacaine admixture was removed, and replaced with sterile saline. The pump was then confirmed to be in minimum rate to avoid damage to the internal pump mechanism and allow for future reactivation.
On histologic examination, the catheter-associated mass was found to contain dense fibrous tissue with necrotic debris and chronic inflammation, consistent with granuloma .
Following surgery, the patient’s right leg strength began to improve, and his lower body sensation returned. Five days after surgery, at the time of discharge, he exhibited full strength throughout his left lower extremity, and 4/5 strength throughout his right lower extremity. The patient did not experience withdrawals from cessation of intrathecal therapy; his pain was managed with fentanyl infusion, methadone, transdermal clonidine, and a low-dose ketamine infusion. Sensation was intact in his left leg, and it had improved in his right leg. The patient was able to ambulate with a walker, and reported pain equal to his baseline, presurgical level.
The patient’s discharge pain medication regimen consisted of transdermal fentanyl (200 μg/h), transdermal clonidine (200 μg/day), oral methadone (10 mg every 8 h), oral baclofen (10 mg every 8 h), and oral oxycodone (30–60 mg every 4 h, as needed).