A 63-year-old retired Caucasian male presented to Emergency with severe epigastric pain and dysphagia and odynophagia to both solids and liquids leading to several days of anorexia. He also complained of nausea and non-bloody, non-bilious emesis. There was no evidence of overt GIB.
The patient noted that due to his hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) he was attempting to lose weight. To do this, his primary care provider switched him from his previous liraglutide which he had received for one year, to a trial of semaglutide one week prior to symptom onset. Additionally, he began a ketogenic diet to help with his weight loss goals and 2 d later, when performing manual labour, he became acutely unwell. He did not have a history of reflux disease or dysphagia prior to this episode and attempted to alleviate the discomfort with bed rest and ceasing oral intake. When the pain and nausea peaked 5 d following symptom onset, see Figure for timeline, he presented to the hospital.
The patient had a several-year history of hypertension, dyslipidemia and T2DM with no known microvascular complications. His glycemic control had been poor with a most recent HbA1c of 8.4%. His medications included metformin 500 mg twice daily, ramipril 5 mg daily, ezetimibe 10 mg daily, duloxetine 60 mg daily, pravastatin 40 mg daily, and semaglutide 0.5 mg weekly.
The patient did not have any pertinent personal or family history. He did not have a significant alcohol intake, nor did he smoke or use recreational drugs.
The patient was 94 kg, 1.778 m tall, with a body mass index of 31.14 kg/m². Vital signs on presentation were notable for tachycardia (125 beats per minute), tachypnea (respiratory rate of 40) and blood pressure of 136/81. On physical exam he was noted to be in distress with Kussmaul respirations, lying in lateral decubitus position with voluntary abdominal guarding and frequent painful belching.
Admission blood work revealed hemoglobin of 165 g/L, leukocytes of 17.9 × 109 /L and an anion gap of 25 with bicarbonate of 5 mmol/L. Venous blood gas showed acidemia (pH = 7.02) and a B-hydroxybutyrate level of 10.2 mmol/L (normal < 0.25 mmol/L). His glucose was initially 17 mmol/L and peaked at 82 mmol/L. Urinalysis was negative for leukocytes or nitrites.
An abdominal CT ruled out bowel obstruction or intra-abdominal infection/abscess as the source of his discomfort but demonstrated circumferential wall thickening of the distal esophagus.