A 21-year-old female multigravida (gravida 2, parity 2, abortion 0) at 34 weeks of twin pregnancy was admitted to our hospital with preterm prelabor rupture of membranes followed by uterine contractions. There was no history of smoking, alcohol, toxemia, exposure to drugs, radiation, or any diseases during pregnancy. The pregnancy was not booked and without regular follow up. There was no history of birth defects in her family members. The patient had had two previous singleton vaginal deliveries four and two years ago. The first vaginal delivery was at 35 weeks of pregnancy. The fetus was at cephalic presentation, female with birth weight—2055 g. The neonate had PS (absence of kidneys, lung hypoplasia, PS facies, congenital bilateral talipes equinovarus) and died twenty minutes after birth due to respiratory distress syndrome .
A genetic study was refused. A lung weight/body weight ratio was not performed.
The second pregnancy went without any complications, and the baby was in good health condition. After hospitalization, ultrasound examination revealed diamniotic twin pregnancy with an absence of amniotic fluid in twin A and oligohydramnios in twin B. Twin A and twin B were in cephalic and in breech presentation, respectively. Both placentas were in fundal position and Grade II. Vaginal examination revealed cervical dilatation of 5 cm. Although the amniotic membrane in twin A was intact, leakage of amniotic fluid during examination was noticed.
Twin A exhibited signs of fetal distress. External cardiotocography (CTG) showed variable decelerations. We decided to perform a cesarean section due to variable decelerations, anhydramnios, and prematurity of twins. Twin A had an intact amniotic membrane and an absence of amniotic fluid. The neonate had extrarenal manifestations of PS and growth weight—1690 g, length 32 cm, head circumference 31 cm. Twin A died 3 h after birth due to respiratory distress secondary to PH. The Apgar score at one and five minutes was two and three, respectively. There was a preterm prelabor rupture of membranes of twin B. This twin had a growth weight—1350 g, length—30 cm, head circumference—30 cm, and no visual anomalies. The Apgar score at one and five minutes was three and five, respectively. Twin B had a normal neonatal course and was discharged 14 days after delivery. Both babies were male with two separate placentas, amniotic sacs, and umbilical cords. Their umbilical cords contained two arteries and a vein. The pregnancy was dizygotic as neonates had different blood types—Twin A—“AB”/+/; Twin B—“A”/+/. There was an extremely small chance of mosaicism or blood chimerism, which is more likely to occur in monochorionic twins. An autopsy of twin A was performed . He had typical facial features for PS—a flattened nose, low set ears, a specific suborbital crease, and a short neck. Another facial anomaly was a preauricular sinus, which is not typical for this condition. Limb malformations were also present—congenital bilateral talipes equinovarus. Heart, liver, spleen, anus, and genitals were normal. Further examination revealed polycystic kidneys and lung hypoplasia—lung weight 14 grams. The calculated lung weight/body weight ratio (LW/BW) was 0.008. A histopathologic examination of lungs and kidneys was performed .