A 40-year-old woman received excision of a superficial spreading melanoma from the rima ani with a safety margin of 3 cm (Clark-Level IV, tumor thickness 1,82 mm). Lymphatic drainage was detected to both inguinal basins and both excised sentinel lymph nodes were unaffected. None of the staging examinations including computer tomography (CT) of the brain, chest, abdomen and pelvis, as well as lymph node sonography revealed any signs of tumor manifestation. The medical history of the patient was otherwise unremarkable and she was not on any medication. There was no family history of hypertension, heart disease or pulmonary disease. Because of the high-risk nature of the melanoma, the patient started long-term adjuvant therapy with IFN α2b (5 × 10 million U. s.c. per week for 4 weeks followed by 3 × 10 million U. s.c. per week).
After 30 months of IFN α2b treatment the patient reported increasing dyspnea on exertion and afebrile non-productive coughing accompanied by sudden malaise and edema of the lower legs. Electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia (120 /min) and right axis deviation. A chest x-ray showed signs of right ventricular dilatation and pleural effusion on the right side; no pneumonic infiltrates were seen. Abdominal sonography revealed a significant amount of ascites. The patient was diagnosed with decompensated right heart failure and was therefore hospitalized. Initial investigations with transthoracic echocardiography showed right ventricular hypertrophy and dilatation , PAH with a calculated systolic pulmonary artery pressure (PAPsyst) of 80 mmHg and tricuspid insufficiency grade II-III with morphologically normal valves , a reduced right ventricular ejection fraction of 40%, a hypokinetic right ventricle and pericardial effusion without signs of tamponade. Laboratory work-up showed slightly increased levels of d-dimers and liver enzymes, while inflammatory markers were within the normal range. There were no signs of vasculitis, hypercoagulability or rheumatologic disorders. A high-resolution CT of the chest revealed no signs of pulmonary embolism, alveolar or interstitial lung diseases, but signs of PAH with a widened central pulmonary artery (40 mm), right ventricular dilatation (> 80 mm), regurgitation of contrast medium into liver veins, a circular pericardial effusion and a 300–400 ml pleural effusion of the right side.
Diagnostic right heart catheter revealed a PAPmean of 56 mmHg (PAPsyst 87 mmHg), a pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) of 1.128 dyn × sec × cm-5, an impaired cardiac index and a 3 fold increased total peripheral resistance. Testing of pulmonary vasoreactivity showed a reduction of PAPmean from 56 mmHg to 26 mmHg with the PDE-5-inhibitor sildenafil .
Therefore, treatment with 3 × 25 mg sildenafil per day was initiated. No side effects occurred. After one month, tricuspid insufficiency improved to grade I-II. After six months right ventricular hypertrophy and dilatation were reduced. Because of the 2 documented cases of patients with PAH due to therapy with IFNα2 where PAH was reversible half a year after termination of IFNα2 [,] we attempted to terminate sildenafil under control of hemodynamic monitoring. PAPmean increased promptly to 57 mmHg. In this context we could verify the same effectiveness for therapy with vardenafil in comparison to sildenafil. Reduction of PVR was higher in vardenafil vs. sildenafil ; therefore the therapy was switched from sildenafil to vardenafil 10 mg twice daily. 24 months after onset of PAH the patient felt fine and resumed working. Vardenafil is still necessary to lower her PAP as demonstrated with transthoracic echocardiography: after pausing vardenafil for two days the PAPsyst increased about 40 mmHg, but decreased again 120 minutes after administration of vardenafil. The heart diameter is steadily decreasing (right ventricular outflow tract from 39 to 27 mm and right atrium from 60–65 to 36–44 mm). Regarding the melanoma she remains relapse-free.