In this report, we present a case of genu recurvatum with ACL injury in a poliotic limb, treated with supracondylar femur flexion osteotomy and ACL reconstruction with Achilles allograft in a staged procedure.
A 49-year-old female, known case of poliomyelitis, came with complains of pain and right knee instability. The pain and deformity were gradually progressing. On clinical examination, genu recurvatum deformity of 20° was seen. Lachman’s and anterior drawer test were positive. The power of the quadriceps was 4+ and there was no other deformity in the right lower limb. Long leg standing films showed severe hyperextension of 20° and varus with femoral condyle flexion deformity and flattening .
Radiological investigations revealed complete ACL tear with complex tear of both menisci and osteoarthritis .
The patient was planned for a two-stage procedure with supracondylar femur osteotomy first for correction of recurvatum, followed by ACL reconstruction.
To protect the quadriceps, a lateral incision was taken for the osteotomy. After incising periosteum, the anterior two-thirds of the femur was osteotomized just above the trochlea level, and opened to correct the deformity leaving the posterior cortex intact. Iliac strut bone graft was filled in the osteotomy gap and fixed by a plate .
The deformity was corrected clinically and radiologically .
The patient was being followed up regularly but after 3 months post-operative suffered a lower pole patella fracture which was fixed with CC screws.
At a later stage, ACL reconstruction was planned. The author WHJ routinely does ACLR with bone patella tendon graft using a custom-made scalpel of 1 cm width . However, due to the history of patella fracture, it was decided to avoid the BTB graft and Achilles allograft was chosen. Under spinal anesthesia, using high anterolateral and anteromedial portals, diagnostic arthroscopy was performed which revealed complete ACL tear with complex tears of both menisci. Partial medial and lateral meniscectomy was done. Tibial and femoral tunnels were prepared using transtibial technique. Graft was prepared as per standard procedure and passed through the tunnels with the calcaneal bone block placed in the femur . Femoral fixation of graft was done by Kurosaka screw and with bio screw in tibia .
The patient was kept on knee brace initially and started on physiotherapy. Gradually, the patient progressed from partial weight-bearing to full weight-bearing and within 1 month was able to do 90° flexion. There was improvement in laxity and Lachman’s test was negative.