A 54-year-old woman with schizophrenia presented with right shoulder swelling. She had had a right proximal humeral fracture 12 years earlier. Surgery was indicated for the fracture, but the family opted for conservative treatment because of concurrent Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. She had been unable to move her right arm spontaneously thereafter. During her admission at another hospital for rehabilitation a month before the referral to us, her right shoulder developed a swelling, which deteriorated over 3 weeks. She was then referred to our hospital. On admission, her right shoulder was markedly swollen and painful on passive motion and had a purple skin color. Her right arm was cold. Doppler ultrasonography showed a “Yin-Yang sign” in the distal AA , which indicated a partial thrombosis of the PSA , while blood-flow was not detected in her right radial artery.
Ultrasonography around the right humeral articulation revealed a 6-cm cystic structure located 5 cm from the skin, which was supplied by an artery. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) revealed a right proximal humeral fracture with posterior dislocation of the right humeral articulation and a 6-cm-diameter PSA connected to the right AA trunk, which were separated by a large hematoma .
Angioplasty of the AA was deemed impossible after consultation with the vascular and orthopedic surgeons. We decided to perform coil embolization to reduce the risk of extensive bleeding during the probable amputation of the arm. We placed a 4-Fr short sheath (Terumo Medical, Shibuya, Japan) in the right femoral artery and a Goodtec catheter JB2 (Medikit, Tokyo, Japan) in the brachiocephalic artery. Right AA angiography confirmed a giant PSA at the distal right AA . The right AA trunk was thought to be disrupted, given the lack of a vessel beyond the PSA. We identified collateral flows to the brachial artery from the proximal to the right AA . To preserve collateral flows to the forearm, selective catheterization of the inflow artery (diameter of 5 mm and length of 20 mm) to the PSA, which derived from the distal AA, was directly performed using Goodtec catheter JB2 . With the edge of the coil placed slightly out from the microcatheter (LIGHTHOUSE 0.021-inch microcatheter with an outer diameter of 2 Fr at the tip [PIOLAX, Yokohama, Japan]) into the PSA, we pushed the microcatheter back and forth to stack four coils (AZUR CX, Terumo Medical: 5 mm × 16 cm, 4 mm × 13 cm, and two 3 mm × 8 cm coils) at the inflow artery. The arteriogram showed no flow into the PSA, but collateral flows into the brachial artery were preserved .
The post-procedural course was uneventful. Based on the treatment for thromboangiitis obliterans, the patient was administered aspirin 100 mg and intravenous alprostadil 10 μg daily. She regained warmth in her right arm and hand, and her sense of touch in the hand improved on post-embolization day 4. Repeat CECT on post-embolization day 9 confirmed blood-flow to her right radial artery . Thrombus formation within and no inflow into the PSA were also confirmed. Therefore, aspirin and alprostadil were discontinued. She was subsequently transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation. At the one-year follow-up consultation with her primary care physician, the swelling of her right shoulder had resolved; blood-flow to her radial artery was confirmed via ultrasonography. Thus, angiography was not repeated.