We report a case of a 69-year-old male patient with post-radiotherapy laryngeal edema. The patient was treated with tumor resection, right selective neck dissection of levels II to IV, and adjuvant radiotherapy due to a pT2N1M0R0 oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma of the right tonsil. In the 2 years following radiotherapy, the patient was treated six times as an inpatient due to acute dyspnea. The endoscopic findings of the larynx always revealed a massive edema of the arytenoid area . Treatment included corticosteroid/adrenalin inhalation with systemic corticosteroids. Each time, subjective and objective recovery were transient. The endoscopic and radiologic findings revealed no indications of tumor recurrence. As an outpatient, the patient underwent multiple sessions of lymphatic massage drainage without improvement. Treatment with proton pump inhibitors also showed neither subjective nor objective benefits.
Two and a half years after radiotherapy, the patient underwent transoral laser microsurgery of the arytenoid area. An erbium laser was used. The laser was set at 103 J/cm2 and 10 Hz. To prevent postoperative synechia and/or webs, only the right arytenoid was assessed. This intervention aimed to minimize the edema without causing severe thermal tissue damage, which could lead to additional edema. Therefore, the cranial surface of the right arytenoid was pulse targeted to achieve a shrinking effect. Subsequently, multiple targeted holes were made in the tissue. Edema fluid was emptied from the channels. The intraoperative effect was slightly obvious . The patient remained under general anesthesia. The day after the procedure, microlaryngoscopy was performed. No additional edema was observed. The right arytenoid was still shrunken, and the patient was extubated.
The patient was admitted 2 weeks later to our department due to acute dyspnea. However, endoscopic examination of the larynx revealed a slight edema reduction of the right arytenoid. After conservative treatment with inhalation and systemic corticosteroids, the same procedure was performed for the left arytenoid, resulting in similar intraoperative edema reduction . In January 2015, 2 months later, endoscopic findings revealed a slight edema reduction of the left arytenoid area, whereas the postoperative status of the right arytenoid remained stable. No synechiae, webs, or local swelling were observed. The patient also noted a slight improvement of the dyspnea. Thus, a new procedure was performed using the same surgical technique, this time in both arytenoids, with the same intraoperative findings. Again, no synechiae or webs were observed postoperatively.
During the next 6 months, the patient underwent three procedures in both arytenoids using the same surgical technique, with the same intraoperative findings. The erbium laser settings varied between 100 and 200 J/cm2 and 3 and 10 Hz, depending on the precise exposure of the cranial surface of the arytenoid area. No complications were observed. Endoscopic findings of the larynx at 2 months after the final procedure revealed a massive improvement. The patient experienced no symptoms. Thirty months after the final procedure, no additional edema was observed .