Our patient was a 32-year-old man, coming from a country with low availability of factor replacement therapy, height 185 cm, weight 90 kg, professional driver, with severe haemophilia A (F VIII < 1%). Family history positive for severe haemophilia A (his aunt was affected). The diagnosis of severe haemophilia A occurred in his hometown during childhood because he was involved in several atraumatic intra-articular haemorrhages in the elbows, ankles and knees.
In March 2017, after an accidental fall skiing, he reported a blunt trauma of the right iliac wing with development of blood collection in that site.
Pelvic X-rays and bone biopsy were performed at the local hospital and osteosarcoma was excluded. In July 2017 he went to another Haemophilia Centre for the appearance of swelling, fistulisation, leakage of serum blood material and functional limitation of the right hip. He also reported an evening fever of >39°. The physical examination also revealed severe atraumatic functional limitation of the left elbow and the right ankle. Laboratory tests performed showed F VIII <1%, F VIII inhibitors: 0 BU/mL. A pelvis CT was performed, showing the presence of an abscess and a fistula at the right iliac crest . Staphylococcus aureus was isolated from the culture swab, therefore antibiotic therapy with Teicoplanin + Rifampicin was introduced but subsequently suspended for gastrointestinal intolerance. The patient started prophylaxis with pd-FVIII 30 IU/Kg three times a week. In June 2018, the patient was referred to our Clinic for right hip swelling, fistulisation, serum secretion, pain and functional limitation. Blood exams at the entrance showed Hb 8.6 g/dL, aPTT 40 s, F VIII 20.7% (range 70–120%), inhibitors F VIII 0 BU/mL, PCR 4.4 mg/dL (<0.5). A contrast medium pelvic CT scan demonstrated the presence, at the right iliac wing, of a large (10.1 × 14.2 × 10.7 cm) osteolytic lesion, inhomogeneous, septate and bounded by a peripheral wall of irregular thickness (6–7 mm). The lesion interrupted the cortical bone on both the posterior and anterior side of the iliac bone, also involving the sacroiliac joint plane and the sacral joint surface at S1-level. The lesion infiltrated both the gluteal muscle lodge posteriorly and the deep plane of the ileo-psoas muscle anteriorly. In addition, the presence of two subcutaneous fistulous communications was demonstrated, reaching the cutaneous plane respectively along the lateral side of the right flank and in the right paravertebral posterior lumbar region, at L5-level. Considering the patient’s medical history of haemophilia, a diagnosis of pseudotumour of the right iliac wing with an additional overlapping inflammatory-infectious complication was made.
Surgical treatment to remove the pseudotumour was proposed and accepted by the patient.
Pd-FVIII 20 IU/Kg were administered pre-operatively as a slow intravenous bolus every 12 h for seven days before surgery.
The day of the surgery, the patient underwent selective embolisation with Embosphere® 500–700 of the right superficial gluteal artery and the right lumbar artery .
Just before the anaesthesia, pd-FVIII 50 IU/Kg was administered as a slow intravenous bolus. After that, 1 g of vancomycin was administered intravenously as intra-operative antibiotic prophylaxis. Under general anaesthesia, the patient has been placed in the lateral decubitus position. Support placed under the thorax allowed to put the patient’s pelvic area into a three-quarter anterior and posterior pelvic tilt during the intervention. Anterolateral and posterior access to the pelvis were used. The incision started along the contours of the iliac crest in a curvilinear manner and ends in the back with a vertical portion on the sacroiliac joint. The wing of the ilium and the sacrum are exposed, allowing for safety margins around the pseudotumour, which extend into the soft tissue. The iliac muscle was sectioned and detached from the endopelvic side of the ilium. The iliac vessels, ureter, lumbosacral trunk, sacral roots and sciatic nerve were identified and protected. On the exopelvic side, the gluteus muscles were moved as a unit with their fascia and skin, creating a lower myocutaneous flap.
After a layered dissection of the soft tissues, we reached the pseudotumour which appeared as a voluminous brownish-red mass with a pasty-like consistency; its capsule was emptied and removed. Subsequently, the right iliac crest was custom-fit by means of a pedicle-screw and rod system (PSRS), a metal bar and two fixing screws (one in correspondence with the acetabulum and the other on the sacro-iliac synchondrosis). Dead space between the implants and the remaining bone were therefore filled by antibiotic coated bone cement with the aid of two polyglycolic acid MESH in order to build up an artificial ilium-like bony mass, as well as graft compression.
Finally, two treble hooks were positioned for repositioning the pelvic muscles. One surgical drain was placed at the end of the surgery. Intraoperatively, a biopsy of the lesion demonstrated the presence of fibrin-haematic organised material with fragments of necro-inflammatory material and scattered microcalcifications. Swabs in fistulous passages were also performed and they showed that there was no superinfection. The patient was transfused intraoperatively with one unit of RBC
At the end of the surgical procedure, pd-FVIII 20 IU/Kg was administered as bolus, then pd-FVIII 20 IU/kg every 12 h on the first postoperative day; from the second post-operative day pd-FVIII 20 UI/Kg at 8 a.m. and 10 UI/Kg at 8 p.m., up to the 4th day postoperatively; from the fifth post-operative day pd-FVIII 30 IU/Kg at 8 a.m. and 10 IU/Kg at 8 p.m. for two weeks, with the aim of maintaining F VIII level > 50%. Every 48 h, before the administration of concentrate of FVIII, blood was taken to check Hb, PTT and FVIII. The variations of FVIII biological activity levels during the hospital stay are summarised in . Antibiotic intravenous post-operative prophylaxis with Vancomycin 500 mg every 12 h was continued until surgical drain removal. The surgical drain was kept for 24 h and then removed with a residual volume of 300 mL of serosanguinous liquid.
The patient was transfused with one RBC unit the day-4, the day-6 and the day-7 after surgery owing to post-operative anaemia. A 21-days hospital stay was necessary in order to achieve a good clinical condition.
In the immediate post-operative period, X-ray and CT of the pelvis showed emptying of the pseudotumour and correct positioning of screws and metal cerclage . Physiotherapy was started during hospitalisation, from day-1 after surgery and continued during the hospital stay. The patient was discharged at home with the indications for the continuation of physiotherapy, with cautious and progressive recovery of total flexion of the trunk and right thigh. Walking was allowed with aids and load pain-compatible. The patient continued replacement therapy with recombinant F VIII and analgesic therapy with paracetamol. At discharge blood exams showed Hb 8.4 g/dL, aPTT 30.7 s, FVIII 96.5%, CRP 1.3 mg/dL, ESR 109 mm/h (<10). During the rehabilitation period the patient prophylaxis scheme was pd-FVIII 30 IU/Kg every other day. At the first outpatient visit, 8 days after discharge, the patient was in good general condition, he walked with aids, and the pain was well-controlled. The stitches were removed and medicated, no signs of inflammation were noted. Pelvis X-ray unchanged compared to the post-operative one. One month later the patient went to another emergency room for leakage of blood serum material from the surgical scar. A positive culture swab was found for MSSA. After two days, the patient was re-evaluated at our clinic, a wound dehiscence was observed, thus indication for wound revision was given. Five days later, the patient had a feverish episode (T 42 °C) with shaking chills and PCR increase. A broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy was begun and pd-FVIII 3000 IU at 8 and 1000 U at 20 was continued. Therefore, the patient was hospitalised at our Institution for wound surgical revision. Blood exams at the entrance showed Hb 10.6 g/dL, leukocytes 5.37 × 103/uL (4.00–10.00), CRP 0.97 mg/dL, ESR 85 mm/h. Preoperatively, pelvic CT was performed, and it showed a voluminous collection of infected blood fluids both on the pelvic side along the planes of the ileo-psoas muscle and on the buttock side. The fluid collection extended to the paravertebral musculature, the quadrate loin muscle, and the external oblique muscle superiorly and posteriorly. In the postero-superior site, the collection went beyond the muscle fascia and extended into the subcutaneous fat layer. Therefore, surgical toilet and abundant irrigation was performed. During the surgical procedure, swabs were carried out for culture tests, later found negative for infection. The patient was discharged with a recommendation to continue antibiotic therapy with Rifampicin and Levofloxacin for 5 days and to continue the factor VIII replacement therapy. In this second hospitalisation a 11-days hospital stay was necessary in order to achieve optimal medical condition.
Patients were followed at outpatient clinic, at 7, 14 and 21 days. He was always in good general condition with surgical wound healed without signs of inflammation. Right hip ROM was almost complete at one month with control X-ray unchanged than the post-operative one. At the 6- and 12-month outpatient visit the patient was in good clinical conditions, he denied disorders or functional limitations in every-day life. Currently, the patient is checked with an X-ray every 6 months.
The patient continued prophylaxis with pd-FVIII 30 IU/Kg three times a week. No further bleeding manifestations occurred.