A 79-year-old woman, presenting with bloody stool, underwent lower endoscopy, revealing a type 3 lesion with a semicircular cancer spread in the rectum, immediately above the rectal dentate line, showing muscular infiltration (T2) . She was diagnosed with advanced rectal adenocarcinoma without lymph node (N0) or distant metastasis (M0). A preoperative CT scan incidentally revealed a horseshoe kidney , while a 3D-CT angiography revealed a meandered descending aorta, two renal arteries supplying each side of the kidney from the aorta, and an aberrant excess renal artery . The excess renal artery was supplying the surrounding of the isthmus and the left side of the lower horseshoe kidney branching from the aorta originating above the level of the isthmus. Additionally, 3D-CT angiography showed that the renal veins from the horseshoe kidney merged into the left and right renal veins, which merged into the inferior vena cava (IVC) . The left ureter ran in front of the isthmus of the horseshoe kidney with calculus formation in the ureter.
The patient was diagnosed with rectal cancer with a horseshoe kidney (T2N0M0, Stage I) and underwent surgery without neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy. Laparoscopic abdominal perineal rectal resection was performed with a five-port conventional technique in which the sigmoid colon and the rectum were mobilized via a medial approach. The retroperitoneum was raised abdominally by the horseshoe kidney . Dissection between the sigmoid colon mesentery and the isthmus of the horseshoe kidney showed a clear release layer. During the operation, the left ureter, the left gonadal vessels, and the hypogastric nerve plexus were recognized on the surface of the isthmus and were preserved . The root of the aberrant renal artery was not visualized, whereas that of the IMA was identified on the temporal side of the renal isthmus, dividing immediately above the hypogastric nerve. Aided by 3D-CT angiography, D3 lymph node dissection was safely completed around the root of the IMA, avoiding intraoperative injury. The sigmoid colon and the rectum were dissected from the abdominal cavity to above the levator ani, and the tumor was excised from the incision wound around the perineum. The isthmus of the horseshoe kidney was bulging on the ventral side but was unharmed by the forceps during the operation. A sigmoid colostomy was constructed by the retroperitoneal route, and the perineal defect underwent primary closure. The operation time was 338 min, and the estimated blood loss was 200 mL. No immediate or delayed complications were observed. Gross findings of the resected specimen included an ulcerative and infiltrative (type 3) tumor (approximately 45 × 45 mm) , and the pathological examination revealed that the tumor invaded beyond the muscle layer (T3) and identified 12 lymph nodes harvested from the specimen; however, it did not reveal any metastasis. Subsequently, the patient was classified as having Stage IIB (T3N0M0) rectal cancer.
The patient did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy. The patient has been stable and healthy for 28 months since she underwent the operation, without any evidence of rectal cancer recurrence.