A 44-year-old woman of Afghanistani ancestry presented to our rheumatology outpatient clinic with a non-pruritic petechial rash that was symmetrically distributed across both legs. She had a decade long history of peripheral arthritis diagnosed as HLA-B27 positive peripheral spondylarthritis. Her medical history included hypertension, migraine and hepatitis B core antibody positivity with negative HBV DNA on serial bloods.
Her arthritis was initially treated with sulfasalazine at 500 mg once daily but was ceased due to persistent headaches and nausea and switched to methotrexate at 20 mg weekly. Due to inadequate disease control, the decision was made to escalate to Adalimumab with the cessation of methotrexate and sulfasalazine. Two weeks after its commencement she developed a symmetrical petechial rash on her lower limbs with brown pigmented patches . During this time, she also developed neutropenia and based on this a decision was made to switch to Golimumab, another TNF-α inhibitor, 3 months after Adalimumab was started. Both agents controlled her peripheral disease. The neutropenia resolved on Golimumab however the rash continued to worsen and progress up to her lower abdomen.
Physical exam was unremarkable with no hepato-splenomegaly or lymphadenopathy. She had no features of psoriasis, uveitis or inflammatory bowel disease on history and examination.
Laboratory testing revealed that her hemoglobin (Hb) was 123 g/L (RR 120–155 g/L); white cell count (WCC) was 4.8 × 109/L (RR 4.5 to 11.0 × 109/L); C-reactive protein (CRP) was 5.0 mg/L (RR < 5.0 mg/L); erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 10 mm/1st hour (RR 1–20 mm/1st hour); Creatinine (Cr) was 67 μmol/L (RR 45–90 μmol/L). Vasculitis panel revealed no abnormalities in anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), serum electrophoresis, urine microscopy and protein. A biopsy of the rash demonstrated basal vacuolar change with superficial perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate and presence of red blood cell extravasation . PERL’s stain was negative for hemosiderin and PAS stain negative for fungal organisms. The findings were consistent with PPD. Based on the clinical and histopathological findings, it is most likely that this patient had Schamberg's disease, the most common form of PPD.
Golimumab was ceased and she was commenced on Secukinumab, an interleukin-17 inhibitor and was advised that her rash did not require additional treatment. After discontinuing Golimumab, the eruptions stopped within a week and the lesions on her abdomen and legs were noted to have improved significantly 3 months later at her next outpatient review and eventually resolved over the next 6 months.