A 21-month-old Hispanic girl born full term via cesarean was diagnosed as having cross-reactive immunologic material negative (CRIM-negative) Pompe disease at 4 months of age. Her disease was complicated by dilated cardiomyopathy, ventilator dependence, and failure to thrive requiring primary nutrition by a gastrojejunostomy (GJ) feeding tube. At 6 months of life, she initiated alglucosidase alfa therapy and treatment to limit immune rejection of the enzyme therapy with rituximab and methotrexate, eliciting a B cell immunodeficient state. At 9 months of life, she presented with recurrent foul-smelling diarrhea, fever, and abdominal discomfort while receiving broad-spectrum antibiotics (piperacillin/tazobactam) for presumed aspiration pneumonia based on her initial symptoms of cough and fever. The diagnosis of CDI was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for C. difficile toxin and exclusion of other infectious etiology. Her CDI was treated with metronidazole with symptom resolution and subsequent negative PCR for toxin; however, her symptoms and positive PCR continued to recur soon after cessation of antibiotic therapy . With each new recurrence, she presented with fever, diarrhea, and decompensated with respiratory distress, hospital admission, and use of systemic antibiotics; a recurrent cycle leading to significant morbidity and reduced quality of life.
After 12-months of recurrent CDI, four courses of metronidazole, and one short course of vancomycin followed by two rounds of tapered vancomycin therapy, she continued to experience symptoms of fever, foul smelling diarrhea, and respiratory distress. FMT was presented as an alternative therapy. The child’s biological mother, originally from El Salvador, was screened to be the fecal donor using a previously described protocol . Her mother, a previously healthy woman of normal body habitus, had no history of parasitic infections, typhoid fever, or dysentery, no recent antibiotic use, no immunosuppressant drug use, no metabolic disorders, and no history of colonic polyps or cancers. Laboratory testing included screening for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, rapid plasma reagin (RPR), and Trypanosoma cruzi serologies which were all negative. A complete blood count and complete metabolic profile were within normal limits. Two separate stool samples were screened: by culture for enteric pathogens including Giardia, Cryptosporidium, and Yersinia; for C. difficile toxin by PCR; and for ova and parasites at 3 weeks and 1 week prior to transplant. All studies were negative.
Five days prior to transplant our patient’s symptoms reappeared, and vancomycin was initiated (40 mg/kg per day divided each 6 hours), her parents agreed to a signed consent for fecal transplantation. On the day of transplant, our patient was afebrile, her vital signs were stable with weight of 12 kg on respiratory ventilation, and her physical examination was within normal limits for her baseline. The freshly donated maternal stool sample weighed 11 g and was homogenized with 100 mL normal saline. The stool was then filtered through sterile gauze and a coffee filter to remove all significant particulate matter. Our patient’s longstanding GJ tube was accessed and flushed with 15 ml of saline through the jejunal inlet; 35 ml of the stool filtrate was then administered, followed by 15 ml normal saline flush without complication, all within approximately 4 hours of the sample donation. Her vital signs were measured prior to the transplant and every 30 minutes for 2 hours after the transplant. She was discharged home with instructions to resume regular feeds and medications. Orally administered vancomycin was discontinued. To date (5-years post-fecal transplant), our patient remains PCR negative for C. difficile toxin and free of CDI symptoms. She experienced no adverse events attributable to FMT.