The patient was a six-year-old Chinese Han girl suffering from strabismus in the right eye for three years, and thus her parents brought her to The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University for treatment. The child’s visual acuity was OD:HM (hand motions); OS: 0.6, and refraction was: OD: − 6.00 DS (spherical lens) − 1.75 DC (cylindrical lens) × 90 < 0.05; OS: + 0.75DC (cylindrical lens) × 100 = 1.0. The intraocular pressure measured via a non-contact tonometer was OD: 17 mmHg; OS: 18 mmHg. A slit lamp examination revealed that the sclera, conjunctiva, and cornea in the right eye were normal, but the lens was in a state of opacification and dislocation without an ectopic pupil in the anterior segment. The lens was unequal, white, opacified, and displaced to the temporal area, shown in Fig. . Her right eye’s posterior segment and left eye appeared normal under a slit-lamp biomicroscope and direct ophthalmoscopy.
She was tall and thin, her height was 125 cm (percentile 75–90), weight was 17.5 kg (approximately 10th percentile), and body mass index (BMI) was 11.2 kg/m2, indicating an extremely lean physique. A comprehensive physical examination was conducted upon admission, including temperature (36.7 °C), heart rate (80 beats/minute), respiratory rate (20 breaths/minute), and blood pressure (80/52 mmHg). Lung and heart auscultation revealed no abnormalities, and abdominal palpation did not reveal any significant findings. Neurological examination, including cranial nerve assessment, motor and sensory system examination, as well as tendon reflexes and pathological signs, all showed normal results. The arm-span measurement, wrist and thumb sign, and other skeletal features of Marfan syndrome were negative. The score of the physical examination was 0 in the systemic calculator of the revised Ghent criteria for Marfan syndrome. The patient also consented to ocular examinations, including corneal endothelium analysis, corneal topography analysis, IOL Master biometry, A-B ultrasonography, and macular optical coherence tomography. Corneal endothelium analysis displayed that the average endothelial cell density was 3285.6/mm2 in the right eye and 3234.8/mm2 in the left eye. Moreover, corneal topography analysis determined that the total corneal astigmatism was 1.4D in the right eye and 1.3D in the left eye; both were with-the-rule astigmatism. The axial length was 21.39 mm (OD) and 22.20 mm (OS) as measured by IOL Master, and 21.78 mm (OD) and 22.38 mm (OS) as detected via A ultrasonography. Neither B ultrasonography nor macular optical coherence tomography detected any abnormalities. Thereafter, she consented to an echocardiography assessment, and the results uncovered that the internal diameter of the aortic root was 20 mm, with a Z score of 2 (< 3), not satisfying the revised Ghent criteria for Marfan syndrome.
Laboratory investigations upon admission demonstrated normal values: Hematology parameters included a white blood cell count (WBC) of 9.29 × 109/L, red blood cell count (RBC) of 4.74 × 1012/L, hemoglobin (HGB) of 133 g/L, platelet count (PLT) of 307 × 109/L, neutrophil percentage (NEU%) of 0.622, and hematocrit (Hct) of 0.394. Liver function tests showed total bilirubin (TBiL) at 7.6 µmol/L, albumin (ALB) at 45 g/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) at 9 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) at 35 U/L, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) at 206 U/L. Renal function parameters included urea at 3.74 mmol/L, creatinine (Cr) at 24 µmol/L, and uric acid (UA) at 196 µmol/L. Urinalysis revealed no protein, glucose, or occult blood. Electrolytes, coagulation function, and infectious disease investigations all showed normal results.
A comprehensive medical history from her parents revealed that her prenatal and developmental conditions were normal. This child’s mother had an uneventful prenatal period without specific illnesses, medication use, or exposure to harmful substances. The child was born at full term (38 weeks + 4 days) through a normal delivery, with a birth weight of 3050 g, length of 50 cm, chest circumference of 30 cm, and head circumference of 32 cm. The Apgar score was 10, and from infancy until present, there has been no history of systemic illnesses, surgeries, or prolonged medication use. The child grew up in a typical working-class family, with no history of exposure to radioactive or other harmful substances. The parents are not relatives, and none of her family members, including her elder sisters and younger brother, were diagnosed with ocular abnormalities during childhood.
The patient achieved age-appropriate developmental milestones, including rolling over at 3 months, sitting at 6 months, crawling at 9 months, walking and basic speech at 1 year and 1 month, attending kindergarten at 2 and a half years, starting first grade at 6 years with average academic performance. Nevertheless, her family observed frequent falls during her initial attempts at walking, concomitant with the identification of strabismus.
The patient and her parents were subsequently subjected to gene detection– whole-exome sequencing (WES). WES is a technique to identify pathogenic mutations by preparing DNA library, enriching and sequencing targeted genes, conducting bioinformatics analysis and selecting variants.
Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples using MagPure Tissue&Blood DNA LQ Kit (Magen, Beijing, China) following the manufacturer’s instructions, then 200 ng genomic DNA of each individual was sheared by Biorupter (Diagenode, Belgium) to acquire 150–200 bp fragments. The ends of DNA fragment were repaired and Illumina Adaptor was added (Fast Library Prep Kit, iGeneTech, Beijing, China). After sequencing library were constructed, the whole exons were captured with AIExome Enrichment Kit V1 (iGeneTech, Beijing, China) and sequenced on Illumina platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA) with with 150 base paired-end reads. Raw reads were filtered to remove low quality reads by using FastQC. Then clean reads were mapped to the reference genome GRCh37 by using Bwa. After removing duplications, SNV and InDel were called and annotated by using GATK. CNVkit was used to call the large copy number variations (CNVs) and the parameters were as default. To identify large copy number variations (CNVs), part of the sequencing library was sequenced directly and each sample yielded 1G Raw data. CNVs were called by using CNVseq and the control was the health parents.