An eight-year-old Moroccan male patient was referred to our center for a medical genetics consultation because of the associated presentation of a dysmorphic facies and multiple malformations. He was born to a healthy consanguineous couple, a 27-year-old mother and 40-year-old father. There was a family history of one sister dying at the age of three years with the same symptoms as her brother without a clear diagnosis. The pregnancy was not medically followed, but it was reported to be without complications. At birth, he weighed 2800g, he had a length of 52cm and a head circumference of 36cm. During the first month of life, he appeared to progress normally in his development. A clinical examination at eight-years-old showed a delay in growth development with a weight of 15kg (–3 standard deviation), height of 80cm (–4 standard deviation) and an Occipital Frontal Circumference of 52cm (mean). He presented with joint contractures, painful diffusely thickened skin, hyperpigmentation over joints, papular and/or nodular skin lesions and gingival hypertrophy (Figure ). His cognitive development was normal. His skin biopsy showed hyaline material accumulation in the dermis.
Based on the clinical pictures and the histological test, a diagnosis of hyaline fibromatosis syndrome grade 2 (HFS) was made. The child was managed conservatively with supportive care given with pain relief, physiotherapy, antimicrobial therapy and dietary modifications.
Informed consent was obtained from the child’s parents prior to implementation of the molecular assay. Peripheral blood was collected from the affected child and his parents.
DNA was extracted from whole blood by conventional methods. Because there is a known hotspot region in exon 13, we amplified this exon using the following primers: CMG2-13F: GCAAGCTTCAGTGAGGGACT and CMG2-13R: GCATGGTATCTGCATTTGGA.
Sequencing of the exon 13 of the CMG2 gene revealed a homozygous deletion in the exon 13 (c.1074delT; p.A359HfsX50; Figure B), confirming the diagnosis of HFS. The parents were extensively counseled regarding the diagnosis and its grave outcome.We searched for this mutation in the child’s sister, a two-day-old newborn, who was found to be carrying the familial mutation in the heterozygous state (Figure C).