A 44-year old healthy woman was operated on May 2006, of bilateral mastectomy for an invasive lobular carcinoma and associated in situ lobular carcinoma in the left breast. On the left side, a skin sparing radical modified mastectomy was performed, and on the right side a prophylactic nipple sparing simple mastectomy was done. Mastectomy was followed by bilateral breast augmentation with Mentor prosthesis (Mentor Worldwide LLC, California, USA) filled with 150 mL saline serum, the prosthesis was inserted behind the pectoral muscles.
Prophylactic antibiotherapy with amoxicillin and clavulanate 2 g/day was prescribed for 10 days. The patient received later on, chemotherapy and radiotherapy treatment. Two years later, she had her Mentor® prosthesis changed with a similar new one filled with 110 mL of gel and 215 cc of saline serum for unsatisfactory esthetic results. Valves were inserted on the lateral thoracic wall. Augmentin® (amoxicillin and clavulanate) was given intravenously 30 minutes before surgery and then was continued for 10 days.
As a follow-up, she was seeing her plastic surgeon on a regular basis and her prosthesis were progressively filled with saline serum through the valves. Her postoperative course was uneventful until January 2009, when she presented with edema and redness of her right breast after valve ablation, without pus drainage nor fever. She was treated with empiric antibiotherapy (Augmentin® 2 g/day and ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily) for 10 days and received local care. Her serum white blood cell count was 6,000 (neutrophils of 81%). Consequently, since she had no improvement of her symptoms, she underwent removal of her right breast implant with capsulectomy and massive irrigation with bacitracin and 9 liters of saline serum, then new prosthesis re-implantation.
Serous fluid drained from her right breast was sent to culture, as well as the capsule and the whole prosthesis. Gram stain, aerobic and anaerobic cultures of the fluid, prosthesis, and breast tissue returned negative. Histopathological examination of the breast capsule revealed none specific inflammatory changes without identifying any germ. Fungal culture returned negative as well after 40 days of incubation. Furthermore, acid-fast stain of the fluid drained from the right breast, debridement tissue, and the prosthesis returned negative. Acid-fast culture of the fluid, and of the resected right breast tissue were also negative, while acid-fast culture of the ablated prosthesis were positive, it revealed the presence of an acid-fast bacilli resembling to Mycobacterium tuberculosis. A swab culture of the periprosthetic space – the space between the prosthesis and the breast wall – as well as a definitive mycobacterial culture of the unidentified pathogen isolated from the prosthesis in the initial laboratory were sent to the National Reference Center on Mycobacteria of Pitié-Salpêtrière hospital in Paris, France. The antimicrobial susceptibility testing of the pathogen were obtained from Rapid Growing Mycobacteria Plate Format (RAPMYCO) Sensititre plates in Mueller-Hinton medium incubated for 7 days. The identification was done by sequencing the gene of the Heat Shock Protein (HSP) and revealed the presence of M. canariasense in the prosthesis and the peri-prosthetic space.
Subsequently, the patient received post-operatively empirical antibiotherapy including vancomycin 1 g every 12 hours, Tienam® (imipinem/cilastatin) 500 mg every 6 hours, and Tavanic® (levofloxacin) 500 mg/day, for 10 days. She was then discharged on oral tritherapy: ciprofloxacin, Bactrim® (sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim) and clindamycin for 6 months, after the culture revealed the presence of an atypical Mycobacterium. The first two antibiotics were prescribed based on the antibiogram’s results (Table ). However, clindamycin was prescribed by the infectious disease specialist without performing clindamycin susceptibility testing. The patient was last seen in March 2014. She was symptom-free, without signs of infection and achieved a satisfactory psychological, psychosocial and esthetic results.