A 26-year-old female patient complained of epigastric pain for 2 years.
This patient had frequent epigastric pain accompanied by posterior back pain starting 2 years prior, which could not be relieved by changing positions. A pancreatic mass was found at a local medical institution, and a frozen tissue biopsy revealed a possible rhabdomyosarcoma. The mass was assessed as unresectable, and the operation was halted. The patient was then transferred to a higher tier hospital for treatment, where the previous biopsy was retrieved, with the diagnosis of mucinous spindle cell soft tissue tumor favored. The patient was discharged after receiving chemotherapy (paclitaxel liposome + nedaplatin four times), radiotherapy (25 d), targeted therapy (anlotinib), and immunotherapy (toripalimab), which produced no significant effect, and the above therapeutic measures were discontinued after more than 1 year.
The patient previously had elevated blood glucose levels up to 21 mmol/L and was not receiving regular treatment. She denied hypertension or other medical histories.
The patient had no history of alcohol or tobacco abuse. There was no obvious abnormality in her family history.
There was no obvious abnormality in the physical examination. The patient’s abdomen was soft, without tenderness or a palpable mass.
Laboratory examinations showed that the patient's fasting glucose and antithyroid peroxidase antibody (TPO-Ab) levels were 9.03 mmol/L and 359.88 IU/mL, respectively, on admission. The serum tumor markers were within the normal ranges. There was no plasma/urine levels of fractioned metanephrines and catecholamines measured.
Abdominal dual-layer spectral-detector computed tomography (DLCT) showed a mixed density mass in the pancreatic body and tail, measuring approximately 7.1 cm × 5.7 cm × 3.7 cm, with indistinct borders and short streaks of calcification within the mass . The contrast-enhanced scans showed significant mass enhancement, especially in the arterial phase, and patchy hypointense areas were observed within the mass. The peritumor and intratumor vessels were abundant, and the draining veins of the mass were observed early and converged into the portal venous system , with extensive tortuous and dilated veins in the portal venous basin. The standard portal vein trunk structure disappeared and showed sponge-like changes. The mass enveloped the splenic artery and splenic vein, and multiple abnormally enhanced and enlarged lymph nodes were observed in the peripancreatic fatty and hepatogastric spaces. The largest lymph node was approximately 3.4 cm, with circumferential enhancement and central necrosis visible within the lymph node. The upper edge of the mass was adherent to the gastric wall, and there was no clear invasion of the gastric wall . The mass showed low intensity on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and slight hyperintensity on T2 WI. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed no dilatation of the bile duct, hepatic ducts, or pancreatic duct . The imaging diagnosis indicated a malignant neuroendocrine tumor.