A previously healthy 23-year-old female complained of the sudden onset of abdominal pain and vomiting after eating supper and drinking alcohol. She presented to her local hospital’s emergency department. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed a collapsed cystic lesion and abdominal fluid. A ruptured splenic cyst was suspected, and so the patient was referred to our hospital. On arrival, the patient complained of upper abdominal pain. She stated that she had not suffered any diarrhea, hematemesis, or trauma, nor had she recently come into contact with any sick individuals or gone travelling. She was not taking any regular medication and had no relevant family medical history. She had a slightly elevated temperature (37.3 °C), but the rest of her vital signs were normal. An abdominal examination revealed rebound tenderness in the epigastric region. The initial laboratory tests demonstrated an elevated white blood cell count (18.4 × 103 /L) (predominantly due to increased numbers of neutrophils) and increased serum amylase levels (162 U/L), together with normal hemoglobin and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels. A coagulation screen produced normal results. However, the following tumor marker level measurements were obtained: CA19–9: 17580 U/L (normal: < 37 U/mL), CA125: 909.8 U/L (normal: < 35 U/mL), CEA: 2.5 ng/mL (normal: 5.3 ng/mL), and interleukin-2 receptor (IL-2R): 389 U/L (normal: < 530 U/L). An ascitic tap was obtained, which revealed the following results: lactate dehydrogenase (LDH): 904 U/L, serum total protein (TP): 5.0 g/dL, CA19–9: 490000 U/L, CA125: 24560 U/L, and CEA: 60.6 ng/mL . Abdominal fluid cytology revealed no evidence of malignancy. An abdominal CT scan showed a collapsed cystic lesion, measuring 12 × 12 × 8 cm, in the spleen and abdominal fluid in Morison’s pouch and around the liver and spleen. Moreover, an 8-mm cyst and a small collapsed cystic lesion were found posterior to the large cystic splenic lesion. No masses were found in the liver, pancreas, kidneys, or gastrointestinal tract. There was no evidence of contrast medium extravasation . Based on these results, we excluded a ruptured spleen and made a diagnosis of a ruptured splenic cyst. The differential diagnoses for ruptured epidermoid cysts include splenic pseudocyst, lymphangioma, primary mucinous cystadenocarcinoma, splenic lymphoma, and metastatic tumors. Cystic Echinococcosis were denied because she had denied any history of traveling abroad. There was no evidence of massive hemorrhaging, and an additional contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was obtained on the following day. It showed a cystic lesion, which exhibited slightly hyperintense signals on the T1- and diffusion-weighted sequences and hyperintense signals on the T2-weighted sequence. No solid components or mural cysts were found in the cyst .
After one week, we removed the splenic cyst via laparoscopic fenestration. Exploration of the surgical field revealed abdominal fluid. The cyst was located at the upper pole of the spleen. We dissected the part of the greater omentum that had adhered to the cyst wall, drained the cyst cavity, and fenestrated the splenic cyst wall using an ultrasonic scalpel, before cauterizing the interior of the cyst wall . The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course and was discharged on postoperative day 5.
A pathological examination revealed an epidermoid cyst. The cyst wall consisted of fibrous tissue and was lined by a single layer or several layers of squamous epithelium. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that the epithelial cells were positive for CA19–9 and CEA . The patient’s serum levels of CA19–9 and CA125 were 1024 U/mL and 199 U/mL, respectively, at 2 weeks after surgery and had returned to normal at 4 postoperative months . A follow-up abdominal CT scan performed at 6 postoperative months did not show any recurrence. The patient was healthy at 15 postoperative months.