A 51-year-old woman, with a past medical history of Type 1 diabetes mellitus, presented to the hospital with a 2-week history of progressive facial swelling, leg swelling, dyspnoea, and orthopnoea. She had gained 5 kg of weight in 6 weeks. She gave a short, self-limiting history of having viral gastroenteritis 2 weeks before her onset of symptoms.
On examination, she appeared restless with blood pressure dropped from 99/63 mmHg to 93/54 mmHg, and heart rate was 90 b.p.m., respiratory rate of 20 per minute, and oxygen saturation of 96% on room air. There was generalized pitting oedema over her entire body, more pronounced over areas of dependency such as legs and lower abdomen. JVP was raised, and cardiac auscultation over the precordium revealed muffled heart sounds. Respiratory auscultation revealed air entry bilaterally, with scattered bilateral basal crackles over the lung fields. Intravenous (IV) fluid challenges were given every 15 min with no sustained improvement of the blood pressure. Urgent CXR was performed to assess lung fields, and surprisingly it showed pleural effusions and a globular heart (see ).
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed global pericardial effusion with a maximum of 2.9 cm around the apex and anterior left ventricular (LV) wall . There was a collapse of the right atrium and ventricle along with transvalvular Doppler velocities consistent with tamponade. Left ventricular ejection fraction was greater than 55%. An inotropic support for temporary improvement was considered but she appeared stable enough for urgent pericardiocentesis to be performed safely. Pericardiocentesis drained 500 mL of blood-stained exudative fluid (serum protein: fluid protein > 0.5) with numerous white blood cells. Blood pressure rebounded quickly to 143/76 mmHg and stabilized with range between 106/72 mmHg and 118/76 mmHg over the next 24 h. No organisms or malignant cells were identified in the fluid. Admission blood tests did not show a remarkable abnormality including haematocrit of 0.48 (0.36–0.47 L/L). These tests included complete blood count, urea and electrolytes, liver function tests, thyroid function tests, brain natriuretic peptide, cortisol, C-reactive protein (CRP), alpha-1 antitrypsin, and ESR. Viral serology including hepatitis and HIV screening was negative except for Varicella zoster immunoglobulins (IgG antibodies) which were deemed positive.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging ruled out structural heart disease and myocardial infiltration with LV thickness less than 10 mm with no signs of inflammation. The computed tomography chest/abdomen/pelvis did not show any cause of presentation or evidence of malignancy. Ultrasound of the kidneys showed both kidneys to have a regular outline and consistency measuring 10 cm in bipolar length. Nephrotic syndrome was excluded with healthy protein–creatinine ratio. There was no evidence to suggest renal or intestinal losses of protein.
The patient was readmitted within 15 days with the same presentation. A pleural tap was negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis bacteria and did not reveal any diagnosis during microbiology and cytology analysis. A TTE showed accumulation of pericardial effusion with features of cardiac tamponade. Urgent pericardiocentesis drained more than 500 mL of exudative fluid. An autoimmune panel was requested to assess for features to support the diagnosis of CLS. ANA was weakly positive in low titres of <400. Monoclonal antibodies, serum paraproteins, and protein electrophoresis excluded myeloma. Autoimmune and compliment factors were in normal range. Amyloidosis was ruled out after a bone marrow biopsy was performed. Negative blood cultures, pericardial fluid cultures, urine cultures, and maximum CRP of 37 mg/L (<10 mg/L) excluded infectious source of her presentation.
A diagnosis of CLS was established based on hypoalbuminaemia without albuminuria, hypovolaemic shock without causal evidence. Her blood pressure readings at previous doctor office visits were in the normal or mild hypertensive range. The acute deterioration was due to cardiac tamponade and due to systemic state of hypovolaemia supported by higher haematocrit.
The patient showed improvement in blood pressure to 138/78 mmHg with resolution of her oedema on IV methylprednisolone 1 g for 2 days and switched to oral prednisolone 40 mg o.d. Any effort to wean the steroids down led to reaccumulating pericardial and pleural effusions. Monthly IV immunoglobulins at dose of 1 mg/kg were arranged following her second admission to minimize reaccumulating fluid and albumin into interstitial spaces.
She was reviewed three monthly for the first year following her initial presentation and has remained haemodynamically stable with no further hospital admission. Her repeat TTE showed persistent global pericardial effusion with maximum accumulation around the right ventricle at 1 cm with no haemodynamic compromise. Since the IV immunoglobulins (IVIG) did not resolve the pericardial effusion, she was commenced on tumour necrosis factor (TNF) alpha inhibitor (Etanercept) to prevent disease recurrence at a dose of 50 mg subcutaneous injections once a week. On follow-up over 7 months, there has been no relapse of CLS or accumulation of pericardial effusion on echocardiograms.