I report the case of a 32-year-old Ethiopian male patient from Addis Ababa who presented with lower abdominal pain of three months’ duration.
The abdominal pain started after our patient inserted metallic and wooden materials via a self-inflicted stab wound from a rusted knife into his left lower abdomen, 3 months prior to his presentation to our hospital. He stated that he did this to commit suicide. He did not seek any medical attention at that time because he had no family around and lived on the street. He claimed that he did not take any medication for the pain or the wound.
Our patient was taken to a clinic run by Missionaries of Charity in Addis Ababa by police after they saw the wound. He was then referred to our hospital for better management. Three months earlier, he had visited a psychiatric hospital for his psychiatric problems. He had not received any treatment because he had been asked to bring a relative with him to make sure he took his medications properly. He claimed that he occasionally used Khat (Khat is the fresh leaves and twigs of the shrub Catha edulis, which has a stimulating and euphoric effect when chewed or brewed as tea). He was single and had completed 12th grade in school.
On examination, he was not sick looking, was indifferent to his surroundings, and had stable vital signs. The pertinent finding was of a clean, healing granulating wound in his left lower abdomen measuring 2×2 cm with skin loss. There was tenderness on deep palpation in his lower abdomen but no rebound tenderness .
Radiographic investigations revealed two radio-opaque shadows on the plain film of his abdomen, estimated to be 12–15 cm long . We diagnosed intra-abdominal foreign bodies and opted for exploratory surgery.
A laparotomy revealed that the materials were lodged in his sigmoid colon. There were three wooden sticks of 8–10 cm in length in addition to two sharp pieces of saw . The area including the perforation in the colon was completely sealed by omentum. The materials were extracted via an enterotomy on the anti-mesenteric side of his colon and the site was closed primarily. The area was lavaged with a liter of saline and his abdomen closed. Our patient had a psychiatric consultation and was started on appropriate medications. He was discharged a week later with no major complications.
Our patient was seen on two occasions after discharge and his surgical wound and stab wound healed completely. He started regular follow-up with the psychiatric unit of our hospital and showed marked improvement.