A 71-year-old female, diagnosed with depression 20 years ago, was admitted to the emergency room on this occasion with the primary symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and impaired consciousness for 6 h after taking 400 clozapine tablets (25 mg/tablet). The patient had a history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, coronary artery disease, and post-stenting. The examination showed a drowsy state, hypotension, muscle tremor, and rapid heart rate. As medical technologists, we used liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry technology to detect blood clozapine concentration, the initial concentration was 5200 μg/L, nearly nine times above the upper limit of the therapeutic concentration reference range. She was diagnosed with a clozapine overdose after a differential diagnosis. After gastric lavage and the first hemoperfusion, the blood clozapine concentration dropped to 1847.11 μg/L. However, this result was still higher than the laboratory alert concentration. So, the second hemoperfusion was administered, and then the second blood sample was sent to our laboratory to detect the real-time blood clozapine concentration.
Unexpectedly, the result significantly increased from 1847.11 μg/L to 5554.15 μg/L, exceeding the initial result. We scrutinized the laboratory data. Then, we immediately communicated with the clinical physician and knew that the patient’s clinical symptoms were not significantly better than before. She had a fever accompanied by sputum, and her arterial blood gas indicated hypoxemia. Several vital laboratory indicators were elevated, including inflammatory indexes and cardiac markers . This abnormal blood clozapine concentration increase may be related to delayed absorption, and we recommend continuous monitoring of blood clozapine concentration. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit based on those conditions. In order to accelerate the clearance of clozapine in the body, hemoperfusion was adjusted to twice a day. Fluid infusion and diuresis were continuously administered, and the patient’s blood clozapine concentration was monitored. The monitoring results are shown in Table . On Day 8 of the hospitalization, the blood clozapine concentration decreased to 1808.37 μg/L. Nevertheless, on the next day, a similar concentration fluctuation happened as before.
The blood clozapine concentration rose to 2303 μg/L, which increased by 27% compared with the result of Day 8. After reviewing medical records, we found that the clinical physician stopped the administration of hemoperfusion after Day 8, and several vital laboratory indicators (e.g., Creatinine, CREA; UREA; N-terminal Pro-Natriuretic Peptide, NT-ProBNP, γ-glutamyl transpetadase, γ-GGT) were raised in varying degrees. After communicating this abnormal blood concentration increase with the clinical physician, we recommend continuing hemoperfusion based on other necessary medical treatments and monitoring the blood levels two days later. Afterward, another hemoperfusion, anti-inflammatory, and anti-heart failure treatment were administered. On Day 11, the result decreased to 1084.58 μg/L, which decreased by 53% compared to Day 9 . After 14 days of routine maintenance therapy, the patient’s blood clozapine concentration decreased to the therapeutic concentration range, and her mental state improved. She was transferred from the intensive care unit to the general ward to continue treatment until stabilized.