A 13 year-old boy was referred to the endocrine service for evaluation. Our patient and his family described a history of early adrenarche aged 5, and, beginning at age 9, the gradual onset of marked weight gain and development of a rounded, plethoric facies. In retrospect, proximal muscle weakness was also felt to have begun at this time. He presented to his primary care practitioner at the age of 12, and was referred on to a paediatric endocrinology tertiary referral centre for further assessment.
At initial assessment, weight was 95.9 kg (above the 99.6th centile) with a height of 147 cm (between 10- 25th centile). He had markedly Cushingoid facies, an interscapular fat pad, and increased abdominal girth with striae, with objective evidence of proximal myopathy . Blood pressure was normal.
A 1 mg overnight dexamethasone suppression revealed a post-suppression cortisol value of 258 nmol/L (normal <50 nmol/l). Twenty-four hour urinary free cortisol was markedly elevated at 987 nmol/24 h (reference range 0–83 nmol/24 h). Given the characteristic clinical picture, and 2 positive screening tests, a diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome was made. His ACTH level was not suppressed, consistent with ACTH-dependent Cushing’s syndrome. A peripheral human corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) test showed a greater than 50 % rise in ACTH after 15 min, (60.1 pg/ml at 0 mins rising to 104 pg/ml at 15 mins), along with an almost 50 % rise in cortisol (756 to 1126 nmol/L). This is highly characteristic of pituitary dependent Cushing’s syndrome (Cushing’s disease) . A contrast-enhanced dynamic pituitary MRI scan was performed, and interpreted by a specialist pituitary neuroradiologist. This revealed a radiologically normal pituitary gland.
On questioning, the patient reported fluctuations in his symptoms with some days feeling more symptomatic than others. To assess for the possibility of cyclical oversecretion of ACTH/cortisol, we performed serial salivary cortisol measurement, which has been shown to have similar sensitivity to urine sampling for the detection of cyclical hypercortisolism (the patient was not taking any medication that could interfere with the result). This showed several peaks and two normal value troughs , consistent with cyclical Cushing’s disease.
To confirm the diagnosis of pituitary dependant Cushing’s syndrome, inferior petrosal sinus sampling (IPSS) was performed under general anaesthesia with samples obtained at baseline, and then at different time points following CRH administration. Unfortunately, the first test showed no central to peripheral gradient as it was done on a day when the disease was not active. A repeat IPSS was subsequently performed on a morning when the disease was active - an early morning cortisol on the morning of the procedure was 845 nmol/l, confirming hypercortisolaemia. This second IPSS showed a marked central to peripheral gradient (Left petrosal ACTH concentration at 0 mins > 2100 pg/ml, left peripheral ACTH concentration 167 pg/ml at 0 mins). A marked left to right gradient was also evident (Results summarised in Table ). This confirmed that the patient had Cushing’s disease.
The patient underwent endoscopic transsphenoidal exploration of the pituitary by our dedicated pituitary surgeon. This revealed abnormal soft tissue in the midline and to the left of the pituitary fossa, all of which was macroscopically removed at surgery. Aside from transient diabetes insipidus, our patient’s post-operative course was unremarkable. Several serial morning (8 am) serum cortisol levels were all less than 28 nmol/l confirming early remission (defined as post-operative cortisol values < 50 nmol/L). The patient was discharged on hydrocortisone 10 mgs twice daily.
The excised surgical specimen consisted of adenohypophysis characterised by an admixture of cells arranged into nests . Cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and clear cytoplasm, together with occasional cells having basophilic cytoplasm were all present. Immunocytochemistry demonstrated immunoreactivity for TSH, FSH, LH, and prolactin. Additionally there was extensive widespread ACTH expression throughout all of the resected material. There was no evidence of isolated focal ACTH immunostaining in the resected pituitary tissue. ACTH immunostaining would have been markedly suppressed in the non-adenomatous gland in the presence of an ACTH-secreting pituitary adenoma if such an adenoma was present in the gland, but not in the laboratory specimen (a phenomenon which is recognised in some cases following successful neurosurgery for Cushing’s disease). Also, reticulin staining demonstrated a normal pericellular reticulin pattern, as opposed to the pattern of reticulin disruption that would be expected if an adenoma were present . Therefore, this extensive ACTH expression in the resected adenohypophysis tissue reflected diffuse corticotroph cell hyperplasia.
Six weeks post-operatively, the patient underwent a glucagon stimulation test, which showed severe growth hormone deficiency and persistent severe hypocortisolaemia. The patient was started on recombinant human growth hormone (GH) therapy. He later developed post-GH secondary hypothyroidism and was treated with L-thyroxine. One year later, he remained hypocortisolaemic, and reported excellent progress. His weight has declined from a peak of 97 to 63 kg and his height has increased from 147 to 152 cm. His Cushingoid features have also markedly improved.