A 67-year-old Asian woman, who was a nonsmoker, presented to our hospital with a complaint of prolonged dry cough for 2 months. The patient also had dyspnea in the supine position, night sweats, and mild appetite loss for 1 month, but no complaints of any gastrointestinal symptoms. She was diagnosed with UC at the age of 29 years with bloody diarrhea, had been in long-term remission for over 35 years, and was taking salazosulfapyridine (1000–1500 mg/day) orally. She had no history of occupational dust exposure, but had a family history of pulmonary tuberculosis.
On physical examination, her vital signs were as follows: temperature, 36.4 °C; heart rate, 99 beats per minute; blood pressure, 136/74 mmHg; respiratory rate, 16 breaths per minute; and oxygen saturation on room air, 98%. Auscultation of the neck and chest revealed normal breath sounds, without adventitious sounds. The rest of the physical examination, including the outer ear, nose, and joints, was normal.
Blood analysis revealed elevated C-reactive protein (CRP; 10.71 mg/dL) and increased levels of leucine-rich α-2-glycoprotein (LRG; 44.2 μg/mL, normal < 16.0 μg/mL), a new biomarker for evaluating disease activity in patients with UC . Tumor markers, proteinase-3 anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, soluble interleukin (IL)-2 receptor, and angiotensin-converting enzyme were within normal limits, and T-SPOT.TB (an interferon-γ release assay) was negative.
Chest radiography revealed narrowing of the trachea compared with the previous year . Chest computed tomography (CT) demonstrated circumferential thickening of the tracheal wall, ranging from the trachea to the bilateral main bronchi , without lung parenchymal abnormalities. Pulmonary function tests showed a forced vital capacity of 2.81 L [114.5% of the predicted volume (pred)], forced expiratory volume in 1 second of 2.06 L (101.5% pred), and decreased peak expiratory flow of 3.11 L per second (53.3% pred). A flow–volume loop graph at the first visit revealed fixed upper airway obstruction .
Her symptoms were unresponsive to treatment with oral levofloxacin (500 mg/day) or inhaled fluticasone furoate (100 μg/day)/vilanterol trifenatate (25 μg/day) administered for 1 week. Bronchoscopy performed to investigate extensive large airway disease revealed widespread edema with erythema and diffuse concentric narrowing of the bronchial lumen from the trachea to the bilateral segmental bronchi ; however, neither swelling nor paralysis of the vocal cord could be confirmed. Dynamic collapse of the central airway was not observed during respiration. Mucosal biopsy specimens revealed marked submucosal lymphocytic infiltration . No evidence of infection, malignancy, vasculitis, or amyloidosis was found. After thorough examination, the patient was diagnosed with UC-related tracheobronchitis and was administered oral prednisolone at a starting dose of 40 mg/day.
The patient’s symptoms improved expeditiously, and the prednisolone dose was gradually reduced. Finally, dyspnea completely resolved at a dose of 25 mg/day. Repeat chest CT performed at 1.5- and 5-month follow-up showed improvement in bronchial wall thickening . CRP and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (normal < 16 mm/hour in females) decreased and remained within the normal range with oral prednisolone dose of 4 mg/day . Similarly, LRG decreased to a near-normal level (17.6 μg/mL) at 6-month follow-up.