A 42-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital with a two-year history of a gradually enlarging intrahepatic nodule.
A space-occupying lesion of 1 cm in diameter was found in the liver of the patient by physical examination 2 years earlier, and outpatient doctors suggested periodic monitoring. The mass has recently become larger, reaching 2.7 cm in diameter, leading to occasional pain in the right upper abdomen, but without discomfort such as bloating, nausea, vomiting, or fatigue.
The patient had a history of cranial meningioma seven years earlier, which was subjected to surgery and the postoperative pathological diagnosis revealed a hemangiopericytoma. Adjuvant radiotherapy was performed after the surgery. In addition, the patient had a history of chronic hepatitis B infection for 30 years. An antiviral treatment with nucleotide analogue entecavir 0.5 mg/d was administered to inhibit the HBV DNA.
The patient had no personal and family history related to cancer.
Physical examination was unremarkable, the liver and spleen were not palpable.
The patient was positive for HbsAg, HbeAb and HbcAb. HBV-DNA was lower than 30 IU/mL. The level of tumor markers was unremarkable, including alpha-fetoprotein 2.2 ng/mL (normal range < 20 ng/mL), carcinoembryonic antigen 1.0 ng/mL (normal range < 5 ng/mL), and cancer antigen 19-9 2.9 U/mL (normal range < 37 ng/mL). Liver and kidney functions were within the normal range, as same as blood routine examination, blood biochemistry and coagulation function.
The abdominal ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the liver revealed a 2.7 cm × 2.3 cm mass in the segment IV of the liver. The mass was slightly hypointense on the T1-weighted sequences and isointense to hyperintense on the T2-weighted sequences . The use of a contrast agent revealed that the mass showed a significant arterial phase enhancement , and a weakened of portal vein phase enhancement . The diffusion weighted imaging revealed a restriction to diffusion . Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed no lung parenchymal abnormality. In addition, the imaging of spleen, pancreas, and gallbladder was normal.
According to the radiologic features, the diagnosis prior to surgery was HCC.