A 62-year-old female was admitted for dyspnea. Her only medical history was cutaneous lupus treated with hydroxychloroquine sulfate for 8 years. Physical examination found dyspnea, edema limited to the lower extremities and superior vena cava syndrome. Laboratory tests confirmed hypoxemia with PaO2 at 70 mmHg; and normal renal function (creatinine: 0.97 mg/dL). A computed tomography (CT) scan found normal pulmonary parenchyma and vascularization, but revealed the presence of an anterior mediastinal mass. A PET scan confirmed positive metabolic activity of the mediastinal mass . A biopsy was performed under mediastinoscopy. Pathological examination of the mass revealed the presence of pseudo-epithelial tumor cells of the thymus, while the thymic cortex was normal, without lymphocyte infiltration in the tumor tissue. These features led to a diagnosis of type A non-invasive thymoma .
While investigations on the mediastinal mass were being performed, the patient developed acute kidney injury (Creatinine 4.7 mg/dL), with nephrotic syndrome: serum albumin was 9.7 g/L, proteinuria was 17 g/g (composed of more than 80% of albumin) and microscopic hematuria was positive. In agreement with the nephrotic syndrome, a high level of cholesterol (total cholesterol = 3.07 g/l triglycerides = 1.19 g/l, LDL = 2.13 g/l), and lower levels of serum immunoglobulins (IgG 2.58 g/l, IgA 1.73 g/l, IgM 2.5 g/l) were also found. Results of the renal biopsy were as follows: normal kidney parenchyma on optical microscopy and immuno-fluorescence analysis without any proliferation or deposition. Electronic microscopy showed extensive foot process effacement corresponding to a loss of cell differentiation, loss of pedicels and increased collagen matrix production, creating a gap between the podocyte and glomerular basement membrane . No podocyte detachment was observed and there was no evidence in favour of a diagnosis of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Regarding immunologic tests, anti-nucleic antibodies were positive (1/160), but Extractable Nuclear Antigen (ENA) antibodies, complement fractions C3/C4, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. Similarly, tests for HIV, hepatitis B and C, and cryoprotein were all negative. Our final diagnosis was minimal change disease (MCD) associated with thymoma. Therefore, oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) was initiated immediately and thymectomy was performed.
Eight weeks after initiation of the steroid therapy, the patient showed a significant lack of response to steroid therapy, with serum albumin of 10 g/L, and proteinuria of 13.5 g/g, Clinical examination found exacerbation of asthenia as well as edema. Given the intensity and the persistence of nephrotic syndrome, with no improvement after steroid induction, we decided to reinforce the treatment with rituximab (1 g given twice, 15 days apart). We monitored the CD19 count (96/mm3 before administration and 0/mm3 after the second dose - this is in agreement with the profound lymphocyte depletion expected). Over the following days, we noticed a progressive improvement in both albuminemia and proteinuria. Complete remission was observed 3 weeks after infusion of rituximab. We followed French guidelines for tapering off the corticosteroids. After 11 weeks at high dose (1 mg/kg/day = 80 mg/d from 09/06/19 to 22/08/19), we pursued with 50 mg/d for 2 weeks, 35 mg/d for 2 weeks, 25 mg/d for 2 weeks, 20 mg/d for 2 weeks, 17.5 mg/d for 2 weeks, 15 mg/d for 2 weeks, 10 mg/d for 2 weeks, 7.5 mg/d for 4 weeks, 5 mg/d for 4 weeks, followed by steroid withdrawal using hydrocortisone. At the last follow-up, serum albumin was 38 g/L, proteinuria was 0.6 g/g and creatinine 0.83 mg/dL . The patient consented to collection of serum at different timepoints. We performed a cytokine profile using a bead assay (Legendplex human inflammation panel, Biolegend, San Diego, CA) on serum collected before (BM1, BM2 and BM3) and after treatment with rituximab (BM4). We did not find any deregulation of the cytokine profile before treatment with rituximab, either on the TH1 side (INFg, TNF, IL6, IL12) or the TH2 side (IL4, IL5, IL10, IL13). Cytokines were in the normal range, except for MCP1 and IL18, which were increased. Interestingly, no modification was found on the serum collected after treatment with rituximab, suggesting that the beneficial effect of this treatment was not mediated by a modification of the cytokine balance .