In early 2020, the Dutch National Surveillance Center for Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) received a report from the chief neurologist of a previously independent, 63-year-old Asian male. The patient was referred to the neurology outpatient clinic due to suspected dementia, following a 1-year history of disturbances in speech fluency, memory loss, and behavioral changes. The issues in speech fluency started at the end of 2018, shortly after the patient’s spouse had passed away and were initially believed to be part of a bereavement disorder. The patient used to be proficient in both Dutch and his mother tongue, but over the course of 2019, he experienced difficulty recalling words and started stuttering in both languages. According to his daughter, he also experienced problems in short- and long-term memory, with increasingly worsening anger outbursts.
The patients’ medical history consisted of situs inversus totalis and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA), better known as Churg Strauss syndrome (CSS). The diagnosis of CSS was established in 1998, based on a combination of clinical criteria, including asthma, peripheral blood eosinophilia, systemic vasculitis of the medium and small vessels, glomerulonephritis and mononeuritis multiplex. Blood tests, including antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA and c-ANCA) supported the diagnosis. Extended details of the patient’s diagnosis of CSS are noted in Supplementary File . There was no history of surgery, blood transfusions, hormonal injections, or relevant travel history after 1980, and no family history of dementia or prion disease. The prescribed drugs included amitriptyline, pregabalin, diuretics and prednisone. Concurrent to the neuropsychiatric symptoms mentioned earlier, the patient had been experiencing worsening allodynia, which was attributed to small fiber neuropathy as a part of CSS. Accordingly, the dosage of amitriptyline and pregabalin was increased in an attempt to alleviate the symptoms, but without the desired effect. As the patient’s stuttering, memory problems, anger outbursts, and allodynia continued to worsen despite changes to his treatment regimen for CSS throughout 2019, he was eventually referred to the neurology outpatient clinic for suspected dementia.