A 51-year-old woman presented with a massive painless lump on both of her thighs that had been enlarging for the past 6 months. The patient denied any history of trauma, manipulation, or injection around the lump before. She was otherwise healthy despite her lumps. However, she had a history of lymph node tuberculosis on her neck about 25 years before and underwent tuberculosis chemotherapy regiment for about six months.
On the local physical examination, we found a painless non-mobile distention on her gluteal and upper femoral region bilaterally with some fluctuation and cystic consistency on palpation of the mass. The initial largest diameter of her thigh was 60 cm on the left and 45 cm on the right. There was no signs of inflammation, sinus or fistula around her thighs and buttock, or any remarkable signs on physical examinations . Laboratory examinations however, showed elevated level of ESR and CRP. Mantoux test were inconclusive due to previous infection of tuberculosis. Radiological examination showed no signs of abnormality besides the expanding soft tissue shadow especially on her left femur region.
MRI examinations were then performed over the lumbosacral and pelvis region. Sagittal T2 weighted MR images of the sacrum showed destruction on anterior lower sacral segments, with hyperintense anterior lesion and presacral abscess. Axial T2 weighted images confirmed sacral body destruction and extension of the hyperintense lesion that involved the insertion of piriformis muscle (a and b).
Pelvic axial fat-suppressed (FS) T2 weighted images gave another extended view of the lesion, showing lateral extension of the lesion over the posterior ilium that also extended to superior and inferior filling the gluteal compartment beneath the gluteus maximus and tensor fascia lata (c). Involvement of the piriformis muscle and gluteus medius were confirmed at the coronal FS-T2 images of proximal femur, in which there was a hyperintese bony lesion at the tip of greater trochanter.
The abscess also extended distally through the space around the greater trochanter between the vastus lateralis and tensor fascia lata without any intracapsular involvement of the hip joint (a). Distal extension of the abscess reached the level of midshaft femur beneath the hamstring and tensor fascia lata muscle (c).
Due to the previous history of tuberculosis and the endemic nature of the disease, we started anti-tuberculosis treatment (ATT) initially for about 2 weeks. Serial laboratory examination of ESR and CRP showed remarkable decrease, which substantiates our working diagnosis. Surgical debridement and biopsy was performed. A curved incision centered on the left greater trochanter was used since it was the convergence point of the abscess on MRI images (b). Superficial dissection of posterior approach of the hip were used and after dissecting the gluteus maximus muscle, sero-purulent liquid discharged from the plane. Further debridement was performed and about 2.7 liters of pus were evacuated. There was intact muscular structure around the greater trochanter as well as the short external rotator thus the debridement were not extended to the hip joint . An additional debridement through posterior midline incision through the multifidus muscle around the sacral region were also performed but turned out negative. During the wound closure, a submuscular drain was put and minimal production was found during the first two days. The patient was discharged and started her antituberculosis drug regime due to high suspicion of tuberculosis.
On the two weeks follow up, the surgical wound healed without any complication and there were no signs of recurrent fluid collection. Despite negative result on the culture result, the histopathological examination showed a necrotic tissue with appearance of epitheloid cells, lymphocytes, histiocytes, and Langhans multinucleated giant cells which was in accordance with chronic inflammation due to tuberculosis. Neither recurrence nor complication was found after 6 months follow up.