A 49-year-old Chinese male initially presented with dysphagia and foreign body sensation without obvious inducement. Later, the patient presented with aggravated dysphagia accompanied by chest and back pain; therefore, he was treated in our hospital. A non-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large esophageal tumor, and the mass size measurement was around 4.6 × 3.9 × 8.3 cm and located in the middle part of the esophagus. One month later, the patient was admitted to Tianjin Cancer Hospital. CT and endoscopic ultrasound confirmed that the patient had Stage T4 esophageal cancer with multiple mediastinal lymph node enlargements. The patient underwent surgery under general anesthesia with three incisions: radical resection of the lower thoracic segment of the esophagus, partial gastrectomy, tube and gastroplasty, left cervical esophagogastrostomy, thoracic and abdominal lymph node dissection, and jejunostomy. Postoperative pathological and immunohistochemical detection results indicated that the patient had a malignant glomus tumor in the middle section of the esophagus, and no tumor metastasis was observed in the regional lymph nodes. The final diagnosis was confirmed by immunohistochemistry of positive smooth muscle actin (SMA), vimentin, B-cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2), and a Ki67 index of 40%. The specimen showed negative staining for CK5/6, CK8/18, P40, S-100, CD34, ERG, EMA, CD31, Desmin, CD117, and LCA. The patient was not treated postoperatively.
The disease progressed by four months after surgery (December 17, 2021). CT examination revealed submediastinoid nodules and multiple nodules in both lungs, and metastasis was considered. January 1, 2022, the patient then underwent chemotherapy with docetaxel and cisplatin for one cycle. Docetaxel 100mg, ivgtt, d1, cisplatin 30mg, ivgtt, d1-3, repeated every 21-28 days. However, cough, hemoptysis, and obvious chest and back pain were observed after one cycle chemotherapy, and symptomatic treatment for medical hemostasis was ineffective.
On February 10, a follow-up examination showed the progression of bilateral lung nodules and liver metastases. At this time, there were nearly 20 bilateral lung metastases, with the largest one having a diameter of 1.2cm. There were multiple liver metastases, with the larger one located in the left lobe of the liver, approximately 3.1 * 2.0cm. Percutaneous selective arteriography was performed under local anesthesia on February 15, 2022. After percutaneous arterial embolization, the hemoptysis was slightly relieved. CT results on March 1 again showed multiple pulmonary nodules that were larger than before, with the diameter of the largest nodule increasing to 1.2 cm. An irregular mass was found near the left side of the chest and stomach, with a size of 4.3 × 2.7 cm, which compressed the left main bronchus, a large amount of fluid in the left thoracic cavity, and abdominal lymph node metastasis, considering the progression of the disease. The patient coughed violently, expelling soft tissue-like masses. These masses were examined pathologically and combined with immunohistochemical results, showed positivity for CD31, SMA, Caldesmon, CD34, and the Ki67 index was 60% . Combined with the history, the presentation was consistent with a malignant glomus tumor.
We combined the results of genetic testing to provide the patient with systemic therapy. NGS test results revealed a mutated gene, KEAP1, associated with immunosuppressive resistance at a high frequency, and the mutation abundance was 29.16%. Therefore, the patient was treated with simultaneous radiochemotherapy: radiotherapy for an irregular mass on the left side of the thoracic stomach, DT: 58 Gy/29 times/43 days, during synchronous paclitaxel (albumin type) (100 mg) weekly treatment four times for a total of 400 mg. CT review 20 days after the final treatment showed that the left lung was re-expanded, and the left pleural effusion was significantly reduced. However, multiple solid nodules in both lung fields were larger than before, and multiple liver metastases were observed on May 10, 2022. The disease progressed rapidly, and Anlotinib targeted therapy was intended, but the patient was unable to tolerate intermittent hemoptysis.
To further control hemoptysis, the patient underwent implantation of 60 I125 radioactive particles into the subcarina mass on June 6, 2022. CT reexamination 20 days after surgery showed that the irregular mass in the left side of the chest and stomach was further reduced. The lesions in both lungs and liver have further progressed, with nearly 30 metastases in both lungs and significantly larger than before, with the largest being approximately 2.1 * 3.6cm. Liver metastasis has also increased compared to before, with the larger one being about 5.9 * 4.3cm. At this time, the patient’s general condition is good, and there is no obvious cough, sputum, or hemoptysis. Starting from June 30, 2022, oral administration of anlotinib hydrochloride capsules 12mg, Qd, d1-14, repeated every three weeks. But after 10 days of oral administration, the patient intermittently had blood in the sputum with bright red color, so oral administration of anlotinib hydrochloride capsules was suspended and anti infection and hemostatic treatment was given. On July 15, 2022, a follow-up examination showed that the lung lesion had partially shrunk, with the maximum metastatic lesion shrinking from 2.1 * 3.6cm to 1.8 * 2.8cm, and the maximum liver metastatic lesion shrinking from 5.9 * 4.3cm to 5.3 * 3.5cm. The symptom of blood in sputum disappeared, and the initial treatment was shown to be effective.
Therefore, we once again considered precision treatment for the patient based on the results of genetic testing, which showed that the KEAP1 gene was no longer detected. At this time, the patient’s hemoptysis symptoms disappeared. After the patient’s cough and hemoptysis symptoms improved, the treatment was restarted on October 17, 2022, with the combination of anlotinib hydrochloride capsules and tislelizumab. The specific dosage was anlotinib 10mg, po, d1-14, tislelizumab injection 200mg, ivgtt, d1, repeated every three weeks. On January 14, 2023, a follow-up examination showed significant reduction in both lung nodules and multiple liver nodules compared to before, once again confirming the good therapeutic effect. According to RECIST 1.1, the efficacy was evaluated as a partial response (PR). After that, the patient continued the intermittent treatment of the scheme for 4 cycles (the treatment was interrupted due to repeated infection of COVID-19 and intermittent hemoptysis), and the last treatment was on June 12, 2023. The latest follow-up and reexamination date is August 25, 2023, indicating that the intrahepatic metastasis has further shrunk, with the largest being about 1.1 * 1.5cm in size, the efficacy was evaluated as PR . No significant changes were observed in the remaining lesions, and no treatment was taken before leaving the hospital. The patient maintained a PR for more than 7 months. Unfortunately, on September 19, 2023, the patient experienced vomiting blood and gastroscopy revealed perforation of the residual stomach. Despite receiving active supportive treatment, the patient passed away on October 15, 2023 due to gastrointestinal bleeding.