We present the case of a 19-year-old female who complained of headache and vomiting. On neurological examination, she was awake, conscious, and had mild truncal ataxia, dysmetria, and intentional tremor.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an intra-axial left hemisphere cerebellar lesion. One small area was visible within the mass. Severe vasogenic edema was noticed at the cerebellum causing mass effect, midline shift, and mild tonsilar herniation .
The patient underwent a posterior fossa craniotomy and microsurgical resection of cerebellar tumor . Patient was in the sitting position during surgery, and neuromonitoring was performed during the procedure. Neuromonitoring consisted of SSEPs (somatosensory evoked potentials) and motor evoked potentials. There was no change during the surgery.
A linear incision was made over the left side between the mastoid and inion. Skin and muscle were dissected all the way to the bone. A burr hole was perforated at the transverse sinus and another one lower down. The dura mater was easily dissected. Using craniotome, the two burr holes were connected and the bone flap was elevated. Dura was opened and elevated cranially, exposing the cerebellum. Using a superior approach to the cerebellum, the lesion was observed and resection was initiated with cavitron ultrasonic surgical aspirator (CUSA). The tumor was completely removed in a piece-meal fashion. Hemostasis was made using bipolar coagulation and injection of thrombin on the tumor bed. Dura mater was closed and a 2 × 2 piece of DuraGen® was placed over the dura. The bone flap was reapproximated and the fascia, muscle, and skin were closed. The patient was extubated and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) in a stable condition.
One month after the surgery, the patient was subjected to 18 Gy adjuvant radiotherapy to the tumor bed and 23 Gy to the neuroaxis. No chemotherapy was administered.
Histopathologic examination showed highly cellular neoplasm composed of large cells with hyperchromatic nuclei, scant cytoplasm, nuclear molding, and moderate pleomorphism, consistent with undifferentiated medulloblastoma .
On immunohistochemistry, the tumor was SHH subtype. No MYCN amplification or TP53 mutation were noted during molecular examinations.