A 70-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital because of mediastinal mass found during a routine health examination. He had also suffered from diabetes mellitus, but the disease was fully controlled through medication. Computed tomography (CT) scanning revealed a solid mass measuring 3 cm in the maximum diameter, located adjacent to the left side of the left pulmonary artery. Small calcification was found in the mass . Preoperative examination revealed no extra-mediastinal manifestation. We clinically suspected the mass might be a thymoma, and decided to remove the mass. Preoperative examination of his blood and serum detected no abnormal data, although IgG4 was not tested. He did not receive blood transfusion for operation and his loss of blood during operation was 28 ml. His serum was collected soon after surgery and contained 83.4 mg/dl of IgG4 (normal range: 4.8–105 mg/dl) and 1343 mg/dl of IgG (normal range: 800–1700 mg/dl), and IgG fractionation was within the normal range.
The resected specimen was macroscopically a solid and fibrous mass surrounded by fatty tissue . Sections showed a whitish and fibrous mass located in the center of the specimen. The mass seemed to be lobular but with no obvious fibrous septa .
Hematoxylin and eosin staining analyzed with a loupe showed a pinkish mass surrounded by mature fat tissue . Calcification was observed in the mass. Microscopically, the solid mass was composed of dense collagen, fibroblast-like spindle cells, some of which had a large nucleus, and inflammatory cells. No capsulation was seen. Fibroblast-like cells formed a storiform pattern , and hyalinized stroma was focal. The inflammatory cells included many small lymphocytes and plasma cells but few eosinophils. The lymphocytes and plasma cells had tendency to aggregate , while eosinophils were scattered throughout the mass. There were some plasmablasts, which had immature nuclei with some nucleoli and a narrow perinuclear halo, in the lymphoplasmacytic aggregates. There was no lymphoplasmacytic obliterative phlebitis in the mass by the Elastica van Gieson staining analysis. The histological findings indicated the differential diagnosis of IgG4-related disease, sclerosing thymoma, a solitary fibrous tumor and an inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor [–].
Immunohistochemical analyses were performed on paraffin-embedded materials using Bond-Max autostainer (Leica Biosystems Melbourne Pty, Ltd., Melbourne, Victoria, Australia). The mass was negative for keratin, signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6), desmin, smooth muscle actin and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), and there were no terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT)-positive immature lymphocytes in the mass. We did not consider the mass as a thymic epithelial tumor such as a thymoma, a solitary fibrous tumor and an inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor accordingly. Almost two thirds of plasma cells were positive for IgG and the mean percentage of IgG-positive plasma cells counted in three × 400 high power fields containing the highest number of IgG4 plasma cells was 40% . The surrounding fatty tissue contained aggregates of small lymphocytes that were positive for CD3, CD1a and TdT, and that were trapped in keratin-positive meshworks. Consistently, we observed that the surrounding tissue around the mass was an atrophic thymus. According to the histological criteria of IgG4-related disease reported by Deshpande et al. , we histopathologically diagnosed the mass as IgG4-related thymitis because the lesion was located in the thymus. Next, immunohistochemically analysis of FoxP3 demonstrated Tregs were scattered throughout the mass . We purchased antibodies or antiserum against keratin (clone AE1 and AE3), desmin, smooth muscle actin, CD3, CD1a, TdT and ALK from Leica Biosystems Newcastle Ltd. (Newcastle upon Tyne, UK), against IgG4 from The Binding Site Ltd. (Birmingham, UK), against STAT6 from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. (Dallas, TX, USA) and against FoxP3 from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA).
We used RT- ab-qPCR to compare the relative copy numbers of TGFB1, IL1B and IFNG mRNAs to TATA box-binding protein (TBP) mRNA of the mass with those of the surrounding thymus. We isolated total RNA from paraffin-embedded specimens of the mass and the surrounding thymus, using a miRNeasy FFPE Microkit (Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany). Then, the isolated RNAs were reverse-transcribed using PrimeScript II first strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Takara Bio Inc., Kusatsu, Shiga, Japan). RT-ab-qPCR primer pair for TBP mRNA was the same as previously reported , and primer pairs for TGFB1, IL1B and IFNG mRNAs for RT-ab-qPCR were generated according to National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) reference sequences NM_000660.6, NM_000576.2, and NM_000619.2, respectively. The primer pairs are listed in Table .We carried out quantitative PCR using the SYBR Green intercalation method with Illumina Eco (San Diego, CA, USA). We confirmed the specificity of every primer pair, seeing one sharp peak on a dissociation curve. The relative expression level of TGFB1 mRNA to TBP mRNA of the mass was 16.2, whereas that of the surrounding thymus was 0.06. The relative expression level of IL1B mRNA to TBP mRNA of the mass was 696.3, whereas that of the surrounding thymus was 4.4. The relative expression level of IFNG mRNA to TBP mRNA of the mass was 79.2, whereas that of the surrounding thymus was 14.5. TGB1, IL1B and IFNG mRNA expression levels of the mass was 270-, 158- and 5.5- fold higher than those of the surrounding thymus, respectively.
Two weeks after surgery, the serum IgG4 of the patient was 89.3 mg/dl and the IgG was 1490 mg/dl. Fractionation of IgG was within the normal range. He was doing well 2 months after surgery.