A 62-year-old white man first sought treatment for a subacute subdural hematoma of the left frontal lobe, for which he underwent trepanation. The neurological examinations done with contrast-enhanced MRI showed an elongated collection of hyperintense signals on T2, with peripheral enhancement, measuring 61 × 16 mm in the left frontal lobe, which characterized a subacute subdural hematoma. A solid tumor measuring 4.0 × 2.5 cm, occupying the base of the skull with total invasion of the sphenoid and the cavernous sinuses presenting suprasellar expansion was also observed. The tumor reached the optic chiasm and invaded the nasal area . A diagnosis of pituitary macroadenoma was made, but the occurrence of chordoma, metastasis, or cancer of the sphenoid sinus was also suspected.
The patient reported decreased libido and sexual impotence that had started 14 years earlier. He presented with no visual impairment and was a nonprofessional shooting competitor. He had astigmatism; his campimetry result was normal; and he did not complain of headaches.
Two-dimensional color flow Doppler echocardiography revealed a double aortic valve lesion with moderate stenosis, as well as concentric left ventricular hypertrophy with normal global and segmental systolic functions and left ventricular diastolic dysfunction. This pattern did not change throughout treatment.
At diagnosis, the patient had a prolactin level of 14,992 ng/ml (normal value < 17 ng/ml for males), follicle-stimulating hormone 0.5 IU/L (normal value up to 10 IU/L), luteinizing hormone 0.5 IU/L (normal value up to 9 IU/L), total testosterone 260 ng/dl (normal value 240 to 816 ng/ml), cortisol 25 μg/dl at 8 h (normal value 5.4 to 25 μg/dl), and 15 μg/dl at 16 h (normal value 2.4 to 13.6 μg/dl). The normal levels of cortisol secretion were preserved throughout treatment. During follow-up, the patient developed secondary hypothyroidism with thyroid-stimulating hormone (1.7 μIU/ml but free thyroxine 0.83 ng/dl, and replacement with 50 μg of levothyroxine was initiated. The patient’s complete blood count, electrolytes, urea, creatinine, glutamic pyruvic aminotransferase, glutamic oxaloacetic aminotransferase, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, calcium, and phosphorus were normal during the 17 years of observation.
Cabergoline treatment was initiated 2 months after diagnosis. The prolactin response is shown in Fig. . The prolactin level dropped from 14,922 ng/ml to 1717 ng/ml in the first 2 months of treatment with a 1.0-mg agonist. Nevertheless, the patient’s prolactin level remained high at 840 ng/ml even when taking a higher dose of cabergoline agonist of 3.5 mg per week for 48 months. At 111 months of treatment, quetiapine and mirtazapine were introduced, and the cabergoline was maintained, for treatment of psychotic conditions (see description below), causing a transient increase in prolactin that remained high until the last evaluation, 17 years after treatment was initiated.
After 4 months of cabergoline use, the prolactin level dropped to 646 ng/ml, but the testosterone level remained low (280 ng/dl), and sexual impotence persisted. Testosterone replacement was started, and the patient’s sexual activity normalized.
The patient presented with type 2 diabetes mellitus at first evaluation that was controlled with diet, metformin, and vildagliptin 50 mg. Glycated hemoglobin remained between 6.0% and 7.8% (normal value 4–6%). The patient also had high blood pressure. At the last evaluation, he was using indapamide 1.5 mg, bisoprolol hemifumarate 2.5 mg, amlodipine 5 mg, captopril 50 mg twice daily, and potassium chloride 600 mg twice daily. At age 67, and after 5 years of taking 2.0 mg of cabergoline weekly, the patient’s prolactin level was 1049 ng/ml. The patient underwent coronary angioplasty with stent placement due to unstable and progressive angina.
At age 69 and after 7 years of taking 2.0 mg of cabergoline weekly, the patient had a stroke. A computed tomographic scan showed right temporal intraparenchymal hemorrhage with ventricular flood. After neurosurgical interventions, the patient received phenytoin or carbamazepine for a few months.
One year after this event, he developed psychiatric alterations with persecutory delusion; he claimed that his neighbor was going to attack him. He also presented aggressive behavior with friends and family and demanded to have his firearm, which was used only for firing competitions, given back to him so he could defend himself, a behavior he had not presented previously. Initially, a 25-mg dose of quetiapine four times per day was used to control the psychiatric crisis. The dose was then changed to 100 mg once to three times daily as needed to control psychiatric symptoms; in the latter evaluation, he was taking 100 mg twice daily. Mirtazapine 30 mg every night was used throughout this period. Owing to the psychiatric outburst, the patient was maintained on a lower dose of cabergoline (1.5 mg per week) until the last evaluation.
MRI evaluation of the tumor at 8 months and again at 17 months of taking 1.5 mg of cabergoline weekly showed no changes in tumor characteristics. The patient was lost to follow-up for 3 years; during this time, he used 3.5 mg of cabergoline weekly. MRI evaluation at 41 months of treatment showed partial regression of the adenoma, especially where it invaded the sphenoid sinus, but there was still invasion of the cavernous sinus on both sides but no suprasellar expansion. Figure shows the images obtained in the last evaluations done at 17 years of treatment. Figure a shows a significant decrease in the pituitary adenoma with significant changes in the invasion pattern of the cavernous sinuses and the sphenoid sinus; the optical chiasm was downward. Figure b shows the tumor with heterogeneous contrast uptake and less invasion of the cavernous and sphenoid sinuses than when treatment began. Figure c shows heterogeneous uptake of contrast by the tumor with invasion of the sphenoid sinus and pituitary stalk. Figure d shows cystic degeneration of the tumor, hypersignal of the right temporal lobe, slightly dilated ventricles, and enlargement of the cerebral sinus.