We report the case of an 84-year-old Japanese woman with an atraumatic posterior hip dislocation. She underwent SFN fixation for a left femoral intertrochanteric fracture 8 years before at other facility and another SFN fixation in our hospital for a right femoral intertrochanteric fracture 2 years before . She experienced an acute-onset left hip pain when standing up from a sitting position while bathing at a day care facility. After her return home with the help of a staff member, a wait-and-see approach was applied, but she continued experiencing difficulty in walking due to the pain. She then consulted an orthopedist at the outpatient department of our hospital 2 days after the onset of the pain. On clinical evaluation, her height was 148 cm; weight, 31 kg; and body mass index, 14.1. She could not stand up from the wheelchair because of difficulty extending her left hip joint. A posterior subluxation of the left hip joint with undisplaced fracture of weight bearing portion of femoral head was identified on plain radiography and computed tomography (CT; ). On the images, un-united fragments of the lesser and greater trochanter were also observed.
An atraumatic posterior dislocation associated with the femoral head fracture was diagnosed, and closed reduction was immediately performed under fluoroscopy. Reduction by hip flexion and internal rotation under sedation was possible . She was admitted to the hospital with a hip abduction pillow, but 2 days later, she again complained of left hip pain and was found to have a redislocation and displaced femoral head fracture . She underwent surgery 10 days after admission. The operation was performed in the right lateral decubitus position under general anesthesia, and the SFN was removed (Gamma3, Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA). We then performed THA with a dual mobility system (G7 cup 50 mm, Zimmer Biomet, Warsaw, IN, USA) using the posterior approach and installed the cemented stem (CPT size 2 standard, Zimmer Biomet), ensuring proper femoral anteversion. Although no treatment was performed for the un-united fragments the trochanter and for the posterior hip soft tissue, no dislocation tendency was observed in the intraoperative trials . The post-operative hip abduction pillow was used 2 weeks after the THA. Early post-operative ambulation was started in accordance with the post-operative pain level, and the patient could straighten and raise the affected leg. She received gait training on the 3rd post-operative day. Education and guidance to prevent THA-related dislocation were provided early after the operation, and the patient’s walker-assisted gait gradually became stable and independent.
The positions of the implants were evaluated on the CT images of the hip joint after THA. The cup inclination angle was 28°; cup anteversion angle, 12°; stem antetorsion angle, 45°; and combined anteversion angle, 57°. No abnormalities such as implant loosening or stem sinking were found. However, 6 weeks after the THA, posterior dislocation occurred while the patient was trying to stand up from the nursing-care chair during a shower in the ward . Closed reduction was immediately performed, and a reduction was easily performed without anesthesia. Frequent recurrence of the dislocations after the THA seemed highly likely at that time, and reoperation was performed 10 days after the THA. The femoral head and bearing were replaced, and the neck was extended by 7 mm using the same dual mobility system. In addition, the free posterior trochanteric fragment was hung and anchored by two strong sutures (No. 2 FiberWire, Arthrex, Naples, FL, USA), striding over the stem-neck across the anterior and posterior femoral trochanters. The fragment was then partially pulled toward the bone defect of the posterior trochanter and fastened to repair the posterior soft tissue of the hip joint. At that time, due to degeneration, the piriformis and short external rotator muscles, which seemed to have inserted in the free fragment, were difficult to detect and identify. Moreover, because the bone fragments could not be drawn completely to the site where the bone defect was present, the posterior surface of the trochanter remained with the bone defect (, ). After the reoperation, as in the previous surgery, a hip abduction pillow was used for 2 weeks, and early post-operative ambulation was started in accordance with the postoperative pain level. Gait training was performed with a hip orthosis to prevent THA dislocation. Walking with a walker was possible 2 weeks after the revision, and T-cane walking was stable 1 month after the operation. At the final follow-up visit at 6 months after the operation, the hip joint pain had disappeared, and her activities of daily living recovered to almost the same level as her preinjury activities. Her Japanese Orthopaedic Association clinical hip score was 63 points. According to the measurement on the bone density scan obtained using dual energy X-ray absorptiometry of the distal radius, bone mineral density (65%) was lower than the young adult mean.