With a clinical diagnosis of XP, a 7-year-old, Turkish male was referred to the Department of Oncology at Hacettepe University for the recurring SCC after local excision of the tumor over his nose. The lesion was a rapidly growing lesion, this time measuring 8 × 4 cm in size . Physical examination revealed that he also had hemorrhagic crusted plaques and nodules over both eyelids and upper lip, as well as multiple hypo- and hyperpigmented punctate lesions all over his body.
Perinatal and early postnatal histories were unremarkable. He had no symptoms before 2 years of age when hyperpigmented spots were first recognized. The parents were first cousins. There was no history of other family members having a similar disorder. There was no known disease in his two siblings, either. The child was regularly immunized. The developmental milestones were normal. Systemic examination, including neurological functions, was essentially normal.
Starting at the age of 2 years, the patient had hyperpigmented spots all over his face and arms, more prominent on his forearm, and bilateral widespread hypopigmented areas over the thighs. This abnormal pigmentation progressively worsened on exposure to sunlight, particularly in overexposed areas. With these complaints, the patient received a clinical diagnosis of XP. When he was 2 years old, a crusted erythematous lesion appeared on the edge of his left eye, as well. Following facial lesion excision, the pathology result was found to be consistent with SCC. After a year, lesions on one side of his nose and two other parts of his face also were excised and reported again as consistent with SCC (4 × 5 × 7 cm in nasal region, 1 × 2 × 5 cm in left zygomatic, 4 × 2 × 2 satellite lesion in maxilla).
At the age of 6 years, the patient was admitted to our hospital for a rapidly growing nasal lesion . Incisional biopsy was done from the lobulated giant mass that caused narrowing of the right nasal aperture with external pressure. Pathological examination revealed SCC as being medium to well differentiated. The right submandibular and preauricular metastatic lymph nodes (LN) were noted during the postoperative period. Chemotherapy was started with reduced doses with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil owing to metastatic LN and unresectable primary tumor. Surgical excision could be performed after six cycles of chemotherapy, and the large mass of 9.5 cm in longest diameter was excised from the nose with positive surgical margin. After two more cycles, progressive disease was noted with enlarged submandibular LN and a new lesion on the right eyelid causing blurred vision. Anti-PD-1 antibody (nivolumab) treatment was planned with concomitant radiotherapy (66 Gy to the primary nasal mass, 60 Gy to preauricular LN, and 54 Gy to bilateral neck). He received nivolumab every 3 weeks for 4 months, and his vision was improved. However, after 4 months, nivolumab had to be stopped owing to financial reasons. Control magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed improvement in LN, and no new skin lesion was detected. He was followed up without any systemic chemotherapy, but local fluorouracil cream was used for new superficial lesions that appeared on the scalp, tongue, and right auricle.
After 18 months of follow-up, relapse was observed on a new lesion on his nape. The excised lesion was diagnosed as recurrent SCC. Nivolumab was planned, but owing to refusal of financial approval of nivolumab, paclitaxel (weekly 80 mg/m2) was given for 5 months. Partial response was noted in periorbital lesions, but auricular lesions were stable. Nivolumab was approved and was given for 15 months. No new lesions or active complaints have been observed in the current situation, and complete remission has been achieved.
Owing to the condition’s genetic heterogeneity, WES was performed with Ion Proton next-generation sequencing platform, and the c.2250 + 1G>A splice site mutation of the XPC gene was detected in the homozygous state. The variant was then validated by Sanger sequencing . This gene was associated with XP group C. This homozygous c.2250 + 1G>A splice site mutation is a mutation not yet reported in the ClinVar database. The parents of the patient were carriers (heterozygous) for the relevant mutation. The novel XPC variant identified in this study has been submitted to ClinVar with the submission ID of SUB11135062.