A 81-year-old male was victim of an accidental fall from a height of 5 m. The patient referred bilateral groin and thigh pain, clinical examination showed inability to actively move the legs and pain on passive movement. The radiographic studies showed a bilateral fracture of the femoral shaft, and a bilateral Robert Mathys (RM®) cementless total hip arthroplasty. The bone lesions were classified as Vancouver type-B2 periprosthetic femoral fracture .
The patient had a body mass index (BMI) of 33 kg/m2 and a notable comorbilities. On the right hip, a RM® cementless total hip arthroplasty (isoelastic polyacetal stem with stainless-steel head and polyethylene cementless acetabular cup) was implanted, with 24-years follow-up. On the left side, the anteroposterior radiograph showed also a RM® cementless total hip arthroplasty, with 21-years follow-up. On both sides it was possible to observe a biological process of acetabular polyethylene wear, instability of the femoral stem with broken femoral screws, and Paprosky type II femoral osteolysis .
The fractures were treated with open reduction and fixation with a distal femur locking compression plate (LCP®), with a combination of 3.5 mm nonlocking and locking screws. Therefore, a right distal LCP® plate was applied on left side and a left distal LCP® plate was used on the right side. The femoral stem was easily perforated with a 3.2 mm drill because the implant is composed by a polymer , a polyacetal resin, with a stainless steel core to avoid over-elasticity in the neck region . The fractures sites were augmented with criopreserved morselized cancellous bone allografts from the Bone and Tissue Bank of our institute . On the right side a criopreserved structural fibular bone allograft was also applied on the anterior surface of the femur and was fixed with two cerclage wires.
The surgery was performed in the lateral decubitus, in two phases. First the right femur was operated, then the patient was repositioned to operate the left side. The surgery was performed without the use of a pneumatic tourniquet. The time of the surgery was 2 h and 15 min. Using a Cell-Saver System® the total blood loss was 250 cc. No intraoperative difficulties in patient management were found.
No complications were reported in the perioperative course or during the hospitalization period. The postoperative course showed no problems with respect to the hips. The patient was submitted to an intensive rehabilitation protocol included early mobilization and walking with two crutches.
At 4-months follow-up, the patient presented stable hips and the radiographs showed signs of bone union of the fractures. He reported moderate pain, and some limitation of ordinary activity.
At 12-months follow-up, the patient presented an asymptomatic hips and expressed high degree of satisfaction with surgery result. He reported no pain in his thighs. The femoral radiograph showed consolidation of both fractures and the fibular structural allograft had no signs of bone resorption . The patient was clinically able to walk without external support.