A 78-year-old woman with a history of hypertension and apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy presented to the emergency department with a 30-min history of atypical chest discomfort and dizziness. She was taking bisoprolol 2.5 mg qd, lercanidipine 20 mg qd, valsartan 160 mg qd, spironolactone 12.5 mg qd, and torsemide 5 mg qd for hypertension. She had no history of cigarette smoking, alcohol intake, or connective tissue disease and no family history of acute aortic syndrome. Her electrocardiogram (ECG) showed biphasic T wave inversions in leads V3–V6 and left ventricular hypertrophy . Biphasic T wave inversions in anterolateral leads could be due to apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy as there was no interval change compared to a previous ECG, but the possibility of ischemic change could not be completely excluded. Chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly and a tortuous and calcified aorta . Echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) without regional wall motion abnormality (Additional file and : Video S1–2).. Thus, Elective cardiac catheterization was performed via the right radial artery. Only aspirin was administered from 3 days before cardiac catheterization and 3000 units of heparin were administered after radial artery puncture on the day of cardiac catheterization. The patient’s brachiocephalic artery was so tortuous that the 0.035″ hydrophilic soft guidewire had to be exchanged for a stiffer one. A 5-Fr Judkins right catheter was then introduced into the ascending aorta. The first contrast dye injection into the aortic root made a discrete dissection flap from the sinus of Valsalva to the origin of the brachiocephalic artery . Persistent dye staining within the dissection flap was observed on the final angiogram . Thus, the procedure was discontinued without coronary angiogram.
The patient’s vital signs were stable, and there was no evidence of pericardial effusion on immediate echocardiography. Five hours later, however, the patient complained of chest discomfort and back pain. Her blood pressure (BP) dropped to 85/50 mmHg, and her pulse rate was 48 bpm. Emergent echocardiography and computed tomography (CT) showed moderate amounts of pericardial effusion and crescentic aortic wall thickening without a dissection flap . The site of entry tear was suspected to be in the proximal brachiocephalic artery . These findings suggested an AD with a thrombosed lumen mimicking IMH. The AD extended in both directions: retrogradely, to the sinuses of Valsalva and anterogradely, to the proximal descending thoracic aorta . Blood flow to the branches of the aortic arch was preserved .
Her BP stabilized temporarily with rapid infusion of normal saline and 6% hydroxyethyl starch, but soon fell again. So we decided on emergency surgery for the acute AD, and at her request, she was immediately transferred to Asan Medical Center, Korea’s largest referral hospital. However, her BP did not drop again and chest discomfort and back pain also improved. Furthermore, follow-up CT, taken 5 h after the first CT showed a significant decrease in the IMH thickness from 19 to 4 mm at the mid-ascending aorta . Follow-up echocardiogram revealed normal LVEF with small amount of pericardial effusion and mild aortic regurgitation. Therefore, the surgery was withheld and she was monitored closely in the intensive care unit. For the first 3 days, intravenous esmolol was administered to control BP and pulse rate, and then changed to bisoprolol. Timeline of relevant events were presented in Table .
However, thereafter, the IMH thickness gradually increased to 11 mm until the second week . In the third week, there was no further increase in IMH thickness on follow-up CT. The patient remained stable and was discharged 3 weeks after hospitalization without surgery. She was prescribed bisoprolol 7.5 mg qd, amlodipine 5 mg qd, olmesartan 10 mg qd, and spironolactone 12.5 mg bid as discharge medications. After 3 months, the IMH thickness decreased to 2.7 mm, and it disappeared completely after 3 years. The diameter of the ascending aorta remained at 50 mm . Five years later, the patient remains well with medical treatment.