A 55-year-old man presented to our department with hemoptysis.
The patient’s chest computed tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography-CT demonstrated consolidation and thick-walled voids in the posterior and dorsal lobes of the right lung . Ultrasound bronchoscopy revealed the presence of adenocarcinoma. The patient then underwent radical resection for right lung cancer, after which postoperative pathology revealed central invasive adenocarcinoma (pT4N1M0, IIIA). Moreover, genetic testing revealed the following: Epidermal growth factor receptor (-), anaplastic lymphoma kinase (-), ROS1 (-), Kirsten rat sarcoma/murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (-), and programmed death 1 (-). Adjuvant chemotherapy was not provided following surgery in light of the patient’s poor physical condition. Six months postoperatively, the patient’s condition worsened, and chest enhanced CT demonstrated enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes, diffuse nodules in the left lung, and left pleural effusion. Endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial lung biopsy was difficult to obtain and was not performed due to the presence of diffuse small lesions within the left lung. The patient subsequently received regimen chemotherapy with bevacizumab 400 mg d1 + pemetrexed 750 mg d1 + carboplatin 500 mg d1, q3w for six cycles. The curative effect was evaluated as partial relief during chemotherapy according to RECIST 1.1 standards. The patient had no chemotherapy-related adverse reactions, including nausea and vomiting, and no bone marrow suppression, increased blood pressure, proteinuria, or bleeding. Bevacizumab 400 mg d1 + pemetrexed 750 mg d1, q3w was then maintained for three cycles. Afterward, the patient developed dizziness with nausea and vomiting, for which magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head displayed acute cerebral infarction in the right lateral ventricle , and CT angiography (CTA) of the head demonstrated local occlusion of the right superior cerebellar artery following bevacizumab combined with chemotherapy . In addition, the patient experienced symptoms, such as progressive dyspnea and decreased blood oxygen saturation. D-dimer increased 10-fold, and other blood coagulation function indexes were within normal range. Routine blood tests and C-reactive protein and procalcitonin levels were also within normal range. Chest enhanced CT revealed a filling defect of the right pulmonary artery , after which pulmonary embolism was diagnosed.
The patient had no history of hypertension, cardiovascular or cerebrovascular disease, and chronic kidney disease. He was a smoker for 30 years.
There was no family history of lung cancer.
There were no breath sounds in his right lung and low breath sounds in his left lung. His heart examination showed no significant abnormality.
Routine blood tests and C-reactive protein and procalcitonin levels were within normal range. D-dimer increased 10-fold, and other blood coagulation function indexes were within normal range.
MRI of the head displayed acute cerebral infarction in the right lateral ventricle . CTA of the head demonstrated local occlusion of the right superior cerebellar artery following bevacizumab combined with chemotherapy . Chest enhanced CT revealed a filling defect of the right pulmonary artery . Electrocardiogram (ECG) and color Doppler echocardiography showed no obvious abnormalities.