A 21-year-old man with no medical history had a headache that lasted about a month. During the course, he experienced nausea and a mild disturbance of consciousness, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed at a nearby clinic. The MRI showed a large tumor in the sella and surrounding region and he was referred to our hospital. His level of consciousness assessed by the Glasgow Coma Scale was 14 (E4 V4 M6). He had no significant visual disturbances at bedside examination. MRI taken at our hospital showed a contrast-enhanced lesion extending from the intrasellar area to the suprasellar area. The maximum tumor diameter was 53 mm. The cystic component of the tumor occupied the third ventricle and obstructed the foramen of Monro, causing acute hydrocephalus . A blood test showed a marked increase in PRL, up to 16,790 ng/mL (normal range: 3.7–16.3 ng/mL). The tumor was diagnosed clinically as a giant prolactinoma. The patient had acute obstructive hydrocephalus and needed quick surgical intervention. We considered that there was no time to wait for tumor shrinkage with the administration of dopamine agonists. Therefore, we decided to remove the tumor cyst to rescue the patient from hydrocephalus and make a histological diagnosis using a neuroendoscope.
The patient was placed in the supine position under general anesthesia. His head was set vertex up without rotation. A planned right anterior horn puncture was performed under navigational guidance . The pathway was then enlarged to insert a sheath (Neuroport mini, Hakko Co, Tokyo, Japan). A flexible endoscope (Olympus VEF-V, Olympus Co, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted into the ventricle to observe its interior. A purple cystic wall was observed blocking the right foramen of Monro . To communicate the left and right lateral ventricles, the septum was fenestrated with RAF electrodes (AIMS Co, Osaka, Japan) . Observation of the left lateral ventricle revealed that the left foramen of Monro was expanded by the tumor, larger than the right foramen of Monro . Therefore, the cyst removal was performed from the left side.
The cyst wall was cauterized with RAF electrodes and perforated using biopsy forceps . A yellow cystic fluid leaked out. The cyst wall was excised as much as possible with biopsy forceps . In addition, the cyst wall was cauterized with RAF electrodes to reduce the tumor volume. After the cyst had shrunk, the third ventricle was observed and the mammillary body and aqueduct could be identified . The operation was completed uneventfully.
Cabergoline 0.25 mg was started orally every week from 2 days after surgery until now. Head CT taken 7 days after surgery showed improvement in acute hydrocephalus and reduction in ventricle size . He had no hormonal abnormalities or diabetes insipidus. The time course of basal levels of anterior pituitary hormones is shown in . His consciousness also improved. He was discharged home 8 days after the operation. MRI taken 2 months later showed that the tumor had shrunk, and the hydrocephalus had disappeared . A blood test half year after surgery also showed a decreased PRL level to 443.7 ng/mL . Sufficient tumor shrinkage can be expected from oral administration of cabergoline alone in the future.