A 29-year-old Middle Eastern male bodybuilder with a history of prior repeated synthol injections presented at our clinic with ongoing pain and deformity in both upper arms. At the age of 25, our patient had 3mL synthol repeatedly injected by an unlicensed friend into both biceps brachii muscles. Injections were administered four times per week for a total period of four weeks. The total number of injections was 16 injections per biceps muscle. Our patient experienced pain and pressure in the injected muscle directly after each injection. The pain was rated initially as four using a visual analogue scale retrospectively. Despite this, a training session was carried out by our patient after each injection. His perception of pain gradually increased to six out of ten, and after two years our patient ceased training due to the severe pain (rated seven out of ten). Initially, our patient had been able to withstand the pain but, after two years of drug administration, the pain was increasing and not tolerable due to its constant and persistent nature.
Upon physical examination, our patient was observed to have rubbery firm hypertrophic and dysmorphic biceps in both arms with a free range of motion. He complained of a constant painful pressure within his right muscle more than his left one, and muscle deformity. He had several tender points all over his biceps muscle. A diagnosis was made through magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which revealed a swollen right biceps muscle and cystic lesions scattered throughout the muscle tissue with a hyperintense signal. MRI indicated these lesions to be oil deposits between muscle fibers, termed oleomas . It was concluded that his muscle underwent fibrotic changes in its appearance. In addition, contrast enhancement was inhomogeneous, indicating the presence of inflammation .
For ongoing pain and with no therapeutic alternatives, an open surgical excision of the anterior third of his biceps was carried out through an anterior bicipital approach. Intraoperative findings showed no common muscle tissue left but massive fibrotic tissue similar to scar tissue. Postoperatively, our patient experienced a release of the subjective pain and intracompartmental pressure.
The operative specimen, measuring 11.0cm × 5.0cm × 5.0cm, was sent to the Department of Neuropathology for histological examination. The diagnosis was reconfirmed as fibrosis. Sections of the unfixed material revealed a white to yellowish lesion with intermingled small fragments of muscle. Histology showed a predominance of connective tissue with vacuoles and small areas of striated muscle with myopathic changes . Several necrotic muscle fibers were observed. The connective tissue contained inflammatory infiltrates that were in part diffusely distributed, in part accumulated in foci . The infiltrates were dominated by CD68+ macrophages with numerous multinucleated giant cells and lymphocytes . Immunohistochemistry identified the lymphocytes as CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells as well as CD20+ B-cells (not shown).
Two weeks postoperatively, our patient was satisfied with the outcome. He was advised to withhold vigorous training for a period of 12 weeks. No complications were reported. After six months, the patient requested the same procedure to be done on his left biceps and surgery was carried out later.