A previously healthy 17-year old boy was admitted to the pediatric ward due to a one-week history of fatigue, inspiratory left side chest pain with the intensity of 7/10, dry cough and nasal obstruction. He did not report any recent history of fever, dyspnea, night sweats, hemoptysis, ear or throat pain, abdominal pain, weight loss or recent alterations in his bladder and bowel habits. There were no known recent contacts with people presenting with infectious diseases, including tuberculosis. He recalled having had a fall and having landed on his left side while playing football 1 week prior to the onset of the symptoms. His family medical history and his past personal medical background was unremarkable except for an episode of acute bronchiolitis and an episode of community-acquired pneumonia that required hospitalization at the age of 2 years. He maintained a regular follow-up in the immunoallergology outpatient clinic due to a history of allergic rhinitis. His vaccine schedule was updated according to the national vaccination programme.
The adolescent denied alcohol or smoking habits and recreational drug use.
On admission at his first visit to the emergency department, he was afebrile, with no signs of respiratory distress, but with diminished breath sounds on the left side. He complained of pain on palpation of the left lower costal margin. A left costal grid and a chest x-ray was performed , which showed the same opacity on the posterior basal segment of the left lower lobe and no signs of rib fracture; thus, the patient was discharged with oral amoxicillin 1000 mg three times a day with the diagnosis of community-acquired pneumonia.
Due to the progressive worsening of the productive cough with emission of purulent stinking thick green sputum, he returned to the emergency department 4 days after. On admission, he had a peripheral oxygen saturation of 98% (FiO2 21%), a heart rate of 95 bpm and an axillary temperature of 36.7 °C. His physical appearance was described as sickly, with no signs of respiratory distress, but with diminished breath sounds on the left lower lung, barely audible on the bases, and with crackles on the inferior two thirds of the left lung. The chest x-ray showed the same retrocardiac opacity on the left lower lobe. Laboratory studies including a complete blood count, glucose, ionogram, renal and hepatic function and c-reactive protein were normal, except for a leucocyte count of 15200/uL (neutrophil count of 12500/uL and lymphocyte count of 1700/uL) and a c-reactive protein of 172 mg/L. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan was ordered, which was suggestive of a consolidation with air bronchogram of the left lower lobe base associated with necrotizing characteristics and a central abscess measuring 5 cm in its greatest diameter . Immunoglobulin, complement and alpha-1-antitrypsin levels were normal. Viral markers for hepatitis B and C and Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) were negative. Serologic markers for rubeola, toxoplasmosis, CMV, EBV, herpes simplex virus, adenovirus, Chlamydia trachomatis and Chlamydia pneumoniae, Brucella and Mycoplasma pneumoniae showed no evidence of active infection. The virologic exam of nasopharyngeal aspirate and the bacteriologic and mycobacteriologic exam of the sputum were negative. Blood cultures for aerobic and anaerobic agents were negative.
It was decided to admit the patient to the pediatric ward in order to administer intravenous antibiotics and to maintain a closer surveillance.
A course of intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g twice a day and clindamycin 30 mg/kg/day twice a day was initiated, with a favourable clinical outcome. He ceased complaining of chest pain on day three and reported a significant improvement of his cough. A single episode of fever was recorded on day seven without any further complications. After a consult with pneumology, it was decided to submit the patient to a bronchofibroscopy on day four after his admission. As his coagulation studies were abnormal with a prothrombin time (PT) of 16.7 s and a ratio of 1.5, 10 mg of intravenous vitamin K was administered twice with a decrease to a PT value of 15.9 s and a ratio of 1.4. A mixing test was ordered, with the result of a probable coagulation factor deficiency.
The bronchofibroscopy revealed the presence of a tracheal bronchus as well as numerous purulent secretions in the left posterior basal segmental bronchus, and excluded bronchial obstruction. Culture examination of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid samples was positive (> 10^5) for Enterococcus faecalis (E. faecalis), which was sensitive to ampicillin, imipenem, nitrofurantoin, linezolid, teicoplanin, vancomycin and tigecycline, and resistant to levofloxacin, quinupristin/dalfopristin, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. BAL was negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis DNA. Thus, it was decided to complete a 14-day course of intravenous antibiotics with ceftriaxone and clindamycin. An abdominal ultrasound was performed before he was discharged, which excluded the presence of a thoraco-abdominal fistula.
No complications were documented during his stay in the pediatric ward. A chest x-ray was repeated on day 12 showing an improvement of the opacity .
He was discharged after 14 days with the recommendation to complete a four-week course of oral amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 875 mg/125 mg three times a day. He was referred to the pediatric and to the hematology outpatient clinic.
On his reevaluation 4 weeks after his discharge, he denied dyspnea, cough, chest pain, hemoptysis, respiratory distress or anorexia. His physical exam was unremarkable except for some crackles on the left lower lobe base and a slight decrease of breath sounds on the same side. The sweat test was negative. The patient completed the course of oral antibiotics without any complications; he is currently asymptomatic.