A 2 days old premature female neonate, born at 34th gestational weeks, from healthy parents, and controlled pregnancy, weighing 1600 grams, after the routine neonatal examination and heart murmur detection, was referred for cardiac investigation. Family history for congenital heart disease, consanguinity, and diabetes were negative. Initially vigorous, at the second day of life she was noted to be dehydrated, anxious and cyanotic. An arterial blood gas was obtained, and showed a pH of 7.35, with a partial pressure of oxygen of 29 mmHg, and partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 74 mmHg. Routine lab analysis revealed normal values, as well as glucose concentration which in some measure were regularly above 15 mmol. After the initial signs of respiratory distress, the infant was given supplemental oxygen and surfactant, with saturations increasing to mild 87 %. The infant was transferred to a tertiary medical facility level for evaluation.
ECG examination revealed a right ventricular lift and incomplete right block. Clinical examination showed equal and full pulses in all extremities, and no hepatomegaly. There was a normal first heart sound, systolic murmur, single second heart sound, and no diastolic murmur. A chest radiograph revealed an augmented cardiac silhouette with a narrow mediastinum . The pulmonary vasculature was increased in appearance. Echocardiography demonstrated concordant atrioventricular and discordant ventriculo-arterial connections. There was a normal pulmonary and systemic venous return. There was a large hole and voluminous velocity left-to right shunting at the atrial level. Both AV valves had normal morphology within normal functionality, normal anterograd flow and good systolic coaptation. There was a large perimembranous and juxtapulmonary ventricular septal defect with muscular posterior rim, and within the aorta to the right of the pulmonary artery (Tausig–Bing type of the double outlet right ventricle). Inspection revealed the normal arising of both coronary arteries. There was a large patent arterial duct, with left-to-right shunting . The infant continued on 100 % inspired oxygen via a hood. At 4th days of age, the value of glucose concentration continued to be above15 mmol/l, and a lab sign of metabolic acidosis were presented. After consulting the endocrinologist, insulin-therapy was introduced. After that, the value of serum glucose was normalized.
A routine abdomen ultrasound examination demonstrated enlargement of both kidneys (9 x 4.2cm). Liver ultrasound examination was normal.
Routine lab analysis showed normal range excluding HbAlc which was extremely high–114 mmol/mol or 12.6 %, (normal value 29 – 42 mmol/mol or 4.5 – 5.7 %).
Genetic examination showed classic mutations in the EIF2AK3 gene–eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2α kinase 3.