In January of 2020 a 37-year-old transgender woman (she/her), visited the centre of expertise on gender dysphoria in Amsterdam. She and her partner, a cisgender woman, wanted to fulfil their wish for a child, and both had the desire to chestfeed the infant. They had read about the possibility of lactation induction in transgender women on social media. The main motivation for lactation induction was to enhance parent–child bonding. Furthermore, they were planning to alternate chestfeeding to limit the burden, because the partner was experiencing some physical limitations.
The patient’s medical history was notable for gender incongruence. Hence, she was using gender affirming hormone therapy since October 2007 and had undergone a vaginoplasty in 2010, which was revised in 2011 and 2012. Her surgical history was also significant for an appendectomy because of appendicitis in 2010. The patient’s history was negative for smoking, alcohol and drugs.
Prior to initiating gender affirming hormone therapy she had cryopreserved her semen.
At the time of her visit to the clinic she used estradiol gel 75ug per day, once daily. Her laboratory results from her initial evaluation are displayed in Table .
As healthcare practitioners of the centre of expertise on gender dysphoria in Amsterdam did not have any experience with lactation induction in transgender women, her request was discussed, and medical research and literature was consulted. At that time only one previous case report, by Reisman and Goldstein, was available of lactation induction in a similar situation and the team decided to apply the same protocol . Low milk production, and thus the possible inability of exclusive nursing were discussed with the patient. Hence, by shared decision making, our patient chose non-puerperal lactation induction.
Her partner conceived after Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection (ICSI) with cryopreserved sperm of our patient. On 1st June 2020, when her partner was approximately 14 weeks gestation, our patient started non-puerperal lactation induction. The first step was the use of a 150ug estradiol adhesive dermal patch once daily and 100 mg progesterone once daily orally. Laboratory follow up after one month, on the 11th June, are shown in Table .
On 22nd June 2020 two pumps estradiol dermal spray (equals approximately 100ug estradiol adhesive patch) was added to the estradiol treatment regime. Our patient started manual stimulation of the nipples and breast.
On the 13th July she started domperidone 10 mg four times daily orally.
On the 20th July domperidone dosage was doubled to 20 mg four times daily orally.
On the 27th July the progesterone dosage was doubled to 100 mg twice daily orally.
She experienced gastrointestinal discomfort due to the use of domperidone, which decreased over the course of time.
Our patient and her partner visited a lactation consultant for lactation support. The lactation consultant was primarily focused on education about massaging of the breasts, pumping techniques and routines. The lactation consultant did not have prior experience with lactation induction in transgender women.
On 10th August 2020, the patient expressed the first drops of fluid from her nipples. Laboratory results are shown in Table . Since serum estradiol levels were high, estradiol treatment was decreased by 50ug, to a total of 200ug estradiol daily. Progesterone was increased to three times daily. Laboratory results two weeks later (27th August) are displayed in Table . On October 8th 2020, estradiol dosage was decreased by stopping the transdermal spray to a daily dosage of 100ug estradiol daily. On the 16th October progesterone was discontinued and the patient started pumping every four hours, including throughout the night. Every time she pumped a few droplets of milk were released. She produced approximately 2 ml milk per day. Estradiol treatment was decreased to 50ug daily.
On the 5th November 2020 her partner gave birth to their child at 38 weeks and 2 days gestation. Her partner was induced because of gestational diabetes. Both mothers continued or commenced pumping. Our patient produced a maximum of 7 mls a day, which was enough for supplementary feeding. Since the infant had a short lingual frenulum, latching to the nipple was suboptimal and caused suckling problems. She decided to discontinue lactation induction two weeks after the birth of her child, because she experienced the frequent pumping to be exhausting and milk production to be low. Two weeks after the birth her estradiol dosage was increased to 100ug.
Our patient reported that lactation induction did not have a significant effect on her gender identity, neither did it alter the amount of gender dysphoria experienced. The short duration of lactation and low milk production were not experienced negatively, but she experienced the decision to stop as “tough”. She was happy to have achieved lactation and for her infant to latch on and be comforted a few times. Though she knew that (exclusive) nursing was probably not possible, she expressed that “it was a pity” that the experience of long-term feeding had not been possible. Figure shows a summary of highlights in the treatment regime of the patient.