A 30-year-old postpartum Han-Chinese woman presented to the department with gradually worsening headache and vomiting for 10 days followed by acute motor aphasia. She was 20 days post-partum and had a decreased appetite following a normal vaginal delivery. The pregnancy was healthy with no complications. The patient had no medical history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, coronary heart disease, or pulmonary tuberculosis. There was no family history.
On presentation, the patient (height 165 cm, weight 60 kg, body mass index 22 kg/m2) was drowsy, and unable to cooperate perfectly. Neurological examinations showed motor aphasia. Basic observations revealed: heart rate of 92 beats/min, blood pressure of 96/50 mmHg, temperature of 36.6 °C and blood glucose of 5.1 mmol/L. Laboratory findings including routine blood and urine tests, blood chemistry analysis, autoimmune markers, and homocysteine level were normal; prothrombin time of 14.1 S, international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.17, activated partial thromboplastin time of 48.3 S, fibrinogen of 4.52 g/L, thrombin time of 17.6 S, and D-dimer of 1.03 mg/L. Additional extensive research was further performed: erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 15 mm/h, C-reactive protein of 13.6 mg/L, protein C of 71%, protein S of 76%, and lupus anti-coagulant screening of 1.12%. Screening for anti-cardiolipid, anti-nuclear, anti-keratin, anti-SSA/Ro, anti-SSB/La, perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic, and cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. Anti-double-stranded-DNA antibody was 55.22 IU/mL, anti-SM-D1 antibody was 1.97 RU/mL, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody was 3.89 RU/mL, anti-RA33 antibody was 5.54 U/mL, rheumatoid factor IgG was 10.12 RU/mL, rheumatoid factor IgA was 2.12 RU/mL, and rheumatoid factor IgM was 14.63 RU/mL.
Lumbar puncture was performed immediately after admission and the opening pressure of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was 45 cm H2O. CSF analysis showed 2 lymphocytes per mm3, glucose was 80 mg/dL, total protein was 125 mg/dL, and Cl− was 436.035 mg/dL. Further cerebrospinal fluid culture and virus tests were negative. An urgent brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed bilateral corpus callosum and radiata infarction . Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed sharply delineated areas of diffusion restriction involving corpus callosum and corona radiate, which was consistent with ADC images. Interestingly, the infarction areas were bilateral.
MR angiography (MRA) showed cerebral arteries were normal, but MR venography (MRV) revealed a signal void in the transverse aspect of the superior sagittal sinus and non-visualization of the left transverse sinus. Small sigmoid sinuses and jugular vein were also noted . When the clinical profile, the results of the above mentioned laboratory tests, plus CSF and MRI images were combined, we suspected a diagnosis of CVST.
Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed to verify our diagnosis, and the images revealed poor filling in the superior and inferior sagittal sinus. In addition, we found ophthalmic vein expansion, reverse direction of the venous flow, and non-visualization of left transverse sinus. A slender sigmoid sinus as well as small internal jugular vein were noted .
Based on the above findings, the diagnosis of CVST with venous infarction was considered likely. The patient was managed with anticoagulation (oral warfarin and injection low molecular weight heparin) and anti-edema measures (glycerin fructose) immediately upon diagnosis confirmation. The treatment was effective and resulted in marked recovery from clinical symptoms within 1 week and consequently INR reached the target range of 2–3. After 1 week, the patient was symptom-free and follow-up MRI revealed reversible changes in DWI and ADC . With anticoagulation therapy continuing, she was discharged with close follow-up. Two and a half years later, she was stable.