A 42-year-old male patient presented to our emergency department with musculoskeletal weakness, bladder and bowel retention, blurred vision and ascending hypoesthesia up to a level of T8 within 4 days before admission. Clinical examination showed an anicteric, cardiopulmonary stable patient. We saw a patient with spasticity of the lower limbs with a non-exhaustive clonus of the achilles tendon reflex and strength of the lower limbs was found to be 3/5 on the right and 4/5 on the left according to the “British Medical Research Council-Scale” (BMRC) . The upper limbs were clinical unremarkable. Blood samples which were taken on admission showed elevated liver enzymes (alanine-transaminase: 40.16 μmol/(s*l); aspartate-transaminase: 16.45 μmol/(s*l); gamma-glutamyltransferase: 9.71 μmol/(s*l), bilirubin: 31.9 μmol/l). A standard serum viral test battery was performed suspecting an acute viral hepatitis. It includes serology testing of hepatitis A, B, C, D and E. Serology testing revealed an acute HEV infection with a positive titer of IgM and 4.09e+ 02 IU/ml copies of HEV-RNA. Analysis of the CSF showed pleocytosis (15 cells, 43 atypical lymphocytes/mm3) with normal levels of glucose, lactate, and protein as well as HEV-RNA copies [333 IU/ml]) without signs of an infection with CMV, VZV, HSV 1, 2, 6 or any other hepatic pathogens. HEV-RNA copies were also found in a stool sample.
Genotyping and RNA quantification were confirmed at German national reference laboratories. Serology was found to be negative for antinuclear and extractable nuclear antigens, anti-ganglioside-, anti-aquaporin-4-, anti-VGCC- and anti-VGKC-antibodies. A test of HIV antibodies was negative. The diagnosis of a parainfectious myelitis caused by a bacterial infection was excluded by negative blood culture test results of streptococcus pneumonia, legionella, treponema pallidum. Within 3 days after admission the patient became paraplegic, had full visual loss, absent pupillary reflexes. The patient described dysesthesia in the arms which ascended within 3 days after admission up to the shoulders.
First taken cranial MRI showed demyelination of the white matter adjacent to the lateral ventricle and of the rostral corpus callosum . Moreover subcortical T2 and FLAIR hyperintense lesions were found in the superior frontal gyrus on the right and punctual white matter lesion were observed in the precentral right lobe. With the use of contrast medium, bilateral enhancement of the optic nerve sheaths with an extension of 7 mm were detected consistent with a retrobulbar neuritis . Spinal T2 weighted MRI showed small monosegmental hyperintensities at the cervical level 7 and thoracic level 2, 5, 8/9 and 12 leading down to the conus medullaris. Lesions appeared unchanged after using a contrast medium . Electrophysiology revealed axonal damage of the peroneal nerve on both sides with absent F-waves. Upon confirmation of a HEV infection, treatment with ribavirin (1 g per day) was initiated. Subsequently, liver enzymes normalized after 1 week. Serum HEV-RNA was negative after 3 weeks. In addition, two cycles of plasma exchange (PLEX) and one cycle of intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG; 0.35 g/kg/d for 10 days) were performed over a period of 11 weeks.
Two weeks after treatment initiation, MRI showed progressive demyelination and new leptomeningeal enhancements at the thoracic spine and cauda equina with hemorrhagic lesions . Furthermore, we found new turbo inversion recovery magnitude (TIRM)-weighted retrobulbar lesions and after adding contrast medium, small enhancements of the optic nerves were detected. A progression of the lesions in the rostral corpus callosum on the left and the right precentral lobe was detected in T2 and FLAIR-weighted images. A new lesion was observed in the temporal lobe on the right as well as new punctual T2 hyperintensities on the right temporal and the left precentral lobe. An initially observed FLAIR-hyperintense lesion of the superior temporal lobe on the right was stable. The cord spine showed a significant progress of T2 hyperintensities from the cervical level 2 down to the conus medullaris. Within this long stretched lesion, a ten-millimeter long hypointense lesion with adjacent enhancement was detected. As these radiological findings progressed, the patient remained paraplegic and hypoesthesia had ascended up to T5 after completion of treatment. Nevertheless he regained full vision.
Subsequently, the patient had been transferred to a rehabilitation center before he was readmitted to our clinic for follow-up assessment 6 weeks later. Repeated physical examination and electrophysiology revealed no improvement. Follow up MRI showed regressive enhancement of the optic nerve sheaths. A partial decrease of supratentorial white matter T2-hyperintense lesions were observed. There were no new enhancements in the brain or spine. Furthermore, the spinal cord lesions displayed gliotic transformation with reduced caliber and swelling absent any signs of active inflammation.
The patient underwent another cycle of PLEX and rituximab (5 courses; 1 g per day) was added to the regimen. The patient showed less dysesthesia of the arms and shoulders and began to feel tingling in the thighs and the left feet. Power of the limbs remained unchanged and the patient was transferred to continue rehabilitation.