A 16-year-old male was referred to our hospital for investigation and management of left femoral deep vein thrombosis (DVT) that had developed 1 month prior. Initially treated with enoxaparin 50 mg twice daily, he was later switched to rivaroxaban 20 mg once daily. Upon his visit to our hematology clinic, he reported persistent pain in his left leg and a new onset of pain and swelling in his right leg, despite adherence to his rivaroxaban regimen. An emergent Doppler ultrasound was performed, confirming the diagnosis of bilateral breakthrough thrombosis in the femoral veins. Breakthrough thrombosis refers to the occurrence of thrombotic events, such as the formation of a blood clot, despite the patient receiving therapeutic anticoagulation. This finding necessitated the patient’s prompt admission to the hospital for further management.
Three months prior, the patient had flu-like symptoms and acute otitis media, following a SARS-CoV-2 booster shot. He had no other episodes of thrombosis in his personal history, apart from the recent event. He denied any history of connective tissue diseases, oral or genital ulcers, Raynaud’s phenomenon, joint pain, or photosensitivity. He also denied using any other medications or supplements. There were no lifestyle factors such as smoking or recent periods of immobility. Furthermore, there were no symptoms suggestive of pulmonary embolism or stroke. He also denied any unusual or excessive bleeding episodes. The family history was negative for thrombosis, cancer, autoimmune diseases, and known thrombophilia conditions.
During his admission, initial lab work showed elevated levels of D-dimer (1,430 mg/L), CRP (75.9 mg/L), ESR (58 mm/h), INR (1.58), PTT (41.7 s), and PT (16.3 s). The patient underwent extensive investigations to identify possible causes of his breakthrough thrombosis. For hereditary thrombophilia, tests were conducted for Factor V Leiden, factor II prothrombin genetic mutation, hyperhomocysteinemia, Protein C, Protein S, and Antithrombin III, all of which revealed normal levels. For potential acquired thrombophilia, tests were ordered for antiphospholipid syndrome (including lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin, and b2 macroglobulin) and vasculitis markers (C-ANCA and P-ANCA). The only positive result was a lupus anticoagulant test, which was considered as potentially a false positive due to the patient’s ongoing anticoagulant therapy.
The patient underwent a CT chest, which showed no evidence of pulmonary embolism. Additionally, a CT of the abdomen and pelvis with IV contrast was performed, revealing thrombosis in the bilateral external iliac veins and femoral veins. Following a notable improvement in his symptoms, the patient was discharged after 1 week on enoxaparin 50 mg twice daily and was scheduled for a follow-up appointment at the hospital’s hematology clinic.
Six weeks later, despite his initial treatment, the patient presented with worsening bilateral leg pain and swelling. Initial lab work showed elevated levels of D-dimer (2.86 mg/L), CRP (63.1 mg/L), ESR (75 mm/h), INR (1.23), PTT (37.7 s), PT (12.9 s). Lower extremities Doppler ultrasound was performed, showing bilateral iliac thrombosis with multiple new small venous thromboses in different territories . CT chest showed bilateral segmental/subsegmental pulmonary embolism involving the lower lobes. He was admitted for another episode of breakthrough thrombosis. A bilateral upper extremities Doppler ultrasound was performed to screen for widespread thrombosis and showed multiple thrombi across the distribution of upper extremities and neck veins. Enoxaparin dose was increased by 25% as per breakthrough thrombosis treatment guidelines with monitoring of anti-Xa. Additional potential causes of breakthrough thrombosis, such as paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) and hematological malignancies, were ruled out with a peripheral blood flow cytometry analysis. Given the recurrent episodes of deep vein thrombosis and the exclusion of other causes of breakthrough thrombosis, Behcet’s syndrome was suspected. An HLA-B51 test was conducted, revealing a positive result, indicating the presence of the HLA-B51 allele, which supported this suspicion. During the examination, erythematous papulopustular lesions were incidentally observed on both arms. These lesions, which had developed in response to needle sticks from routine blood tests, were indicative of a pathergy reaction—a phenomenon associated with Behcet’s syndrome. With these findings, a diagnosis of atypical Bechet syndrome was made. Based on his diagnosis, prednisolone 50 mg (i.e., 1 mg/kg) and azathioprine 50 mg (i.e., 1 mg/kg) were initiated. Later, His D-dimer levels demonstrated a downward trend.
At the four-week follow-up post-diagnosis, the patient reported improvement in bilateral leg pain and swelling. A Doppler ultrasound of the lower extremities indicated improvement in the external iliac thrombosis, although not fully resolved. The Doppler ultrasound for the upper extremities showed the right brachial thrombosis remained unchanged. The azathioprine dosage was titrated up to 100 mg (i.e., 2 mg/kg) with an aim to reach 125 mg (i.e., 2.5 mg/kg). A structured tapering strategy was initiated for prednisolone, reducing the dose by 5 mg every 2 weeks.
At the second follow-up, 12 weeks post-diagnosis, the patient reported exacerbated pain and swelling in the left lower limb, especially while walking. Doppler ultrasound confirmed bilateral femoral thrombosis. Due to relapse of symptoms, prednisolone was adjusted from 30 mg to 40 mg (i.e., 0.75 mg/kg) and azathioprine was increased to 125 mg (i.e., 2.5 mg/kg).
At the third follow-up, fourteenth weeks post diagnosis, he exhibited side effects from azathioprine, manifesting as persistent diarrhea, nausea, and a mild elevation in liver enzymes. Consequently, the azathioprine dose was adjusted down to 100 mg (i.e., 2 mg/kg).
At the fourth follow-up, 16 weeks post diagnosis, he remained asymptomatic with both upper and lower extremity Doppler ultrasounds showing good recanalization. At this stage, prednisolone was tapered down from 40 mg (i.e., 0.75 mg/kg) by 5 mg every 2 weeks.
During the fifth follow-up at 24 weeks post-diagnosis, the patient experienced a relapse, evidenced by progressive swelling in the bilateral lower limbs and the right upper limb. Doppler ultrasounds confirmed these findings . In response, the prednisolone dose was increased from 20 mg to 50 mg (i.e., 1 mg/kg) with continuation of azathioprine 100 mg (i.e., 2 mg/kg). Given the recurrent relapses of the disease, infliximab 5 mg/kg injections were initiated on a schedule of 0, 2, 4 weeks, followed by every 6 weeks thereafter. As of the current time, the patient has received a total of eight infliximab injections and is being maintained on azathioprine 100 mg daily. This regimen has resulted in marked clinical improvement, with an absence of active symptoms. Furthermore, ultrasound imaging of both the upper and lower extremities has revealed significant vascular recanalization with multiple collaterals .