A 32-years-old unmarried woman who had no history of any medical disorder or head trauma and no family history of epilepsy suffering from major depressive disorder had been taking zolpidem for insomnia for more than 1 year. Since one year ago after her brother’s sudden death, she began to take zolpidem alone without mixing other kinds of hypnotics, and 50 mg of zolpidem used to be initially effective in treating her insomnia. In some days, the dose increased up to 100 mg per day About 9 months later, she refers to a psychiatrist because of depression, anhedonia, fatigue, hopelessness and decreased appetite and the psychiatrist prescribed sertraline 50 mg once a day with diagnosis of major depressive disorder, the patient had taken the drugs with no problem for the past 3 months until than she was infected with herpes simplex virus and her doctor prescribed acyclovir 400 mg each 6 hours (1600 mg a day). In the end, she had to discontinue zolpidem abruptly because she could not afford it anymore. After 2 days, she suddenly showed facial spasm, mouth opening, tonic-clonic seizure, and loss of consciousness for about 1-2 minutes. Postictal confusion with clouded consciousness, psycho-motor retardation, persisted in 1 day. So she referred to her psychiatrist and a consultation with a neurologist had been requested by the psychiatrist. The neurological examinations were normal and EEG in wakefulness revealed intermittent, generalized, diffused alpha wave and diffused sharp waves, and suggested seizure waves in patient. As well as we use Naranjo scale for estimating the probability of relationship between seizure and zolpidem withdrawal, the patient score was 10, hence other etiologies or drugs either idiopathic causes were ruled out. After a series of laboratory tests and other examinations, no other etiologies could be identified in MRI. After 4 weeks follow-up, she consumed 5 mg zolpidem at bed time and she had no further seizure attacks and her postictal confusion resolved gradually 1 day after seizure occurred.