A 23-year-old male patient presented with right congenital hallux varus with duplicate great toe and syndactyly untreated since childhood. Apart from bad cosmetic appearance, patient was unable to wear regular footwear and had difficulty in pulling the trousers up in his routine life. There was no past history of any surgery or trauma to right foot.
Clinical Examination:
Patient had polydactyly with syndactyly of right great toe . These two great toes were almost at right angle to the first metatarsal [ and ]. Each great toe had a separate nail plate and medial great toe was little longer than lateral one .
Plantar flexion and dorsiflexion of 20 degrees each was possible at first metatarsophalangeal (MP) joint. No correction of deformity at MP joint towards lateral side was possible. Other than foot, there was no musculoskeletal or neurological abnormality.
Radiological Evaluation:
Weight bearing anteroposterior, oblique and lateral radiographs of right foot were taken . Radiographs showed short first metatarsal with deformed head. Each great toe had proximal and distal phalanges. The distal phalanx of lateral great toe was trapezoidal. Only one sesamoid was present at MP joint. Both proximal phalanges were articulating with deformed medial aspect of first metatarsal head. Intermetatarsal angle (IMA) measured about 27 degrees.
Other Investigations:
Portable Audio Doppler study of right foot was performed. It demonstrated better vascularity of medial great toe than the lateral one.
Treatment Planning:
We planned treatment in two stages to avoid neurovascular compromise.
First Stage: Lateral great toe needed to be excised as it was smaller than the medial one and had less vascularity on portable Audio Doppler study. Then gradual correction of medial great toe was planned with gradual soft tissue distraction using external fixator. Two distractors were planned, one at MP joint and another at tarsometatarsal (TM) joint. Second distractor was needed as it was metatarsus adductus and we wanted to include TM joint in future surgical procedure.
Second Stage: As the patient was skeletally mature with deformed first metatarsal head and abnormal MP joint, we decided to opt for MP joint fusion after achieving correction of the deformity.
Operative Technique:
Surgery was performed under spinal anesthesia. Right foot was prepped with liquid betadine and sterily draped. Dorsal incision of approximately 3 cm was taken on lateral great toe centering head of first metatarsal. Lateral great toe consisting of proximal and distal phalanges was excised . Kirschner wires (K-wires) were inserted in the following manner-first axial 1.5mm K-wire was inserted from distal to proximal phalanx of medial great toe. Two 1.8mm K- wires were inserted horizontally in the first metatarsal. Two more 1.8mm K- wires were inserted through medial cuneiform into the middle cuneiform. Distractors[ and ] were applied in the following manner. One distractor was applied between axial wire of great toe bent at 90 degrees and metatarsal K-wires. Second distractor was applied between k-wires of first metatarsal and cuneiform. Distraction of 1mm per day (one complete turn of 360 degrees of the distractor knob) was started at TM and MP joints from third postoperative day. The patient was discharged on seventh postoperative day with loose dressing without slab. The patient was taught the procedure of external fixator distraction and did the distraction in increments of 1mm per day at both distarctors. He was also I supervised every week in the outpatient I department. During the period of distraction, I patient was kept non-weight bearing and care I was taken to avoid pin tract infection. I Distraction was continued for six weeks. I Significant correction of deformity was achieved without neurovascular compromise.
After six weeks, the external fixator was removed and one week of waiting period was observed for pin tract healing. After one week, patient was again taken for surgery under spinal anesthesia. Dorsomedial incision of approximately 10 cm was taken starting 2 cm distal to metatarsal head and extending proximally along its medial border crossing first TM joint . MP joint surfaces were prepared for fusion . Tricortical bone graft was harvested from iliac crest and grafted at MP joint [ and ]. This added length to the first ray. Care was taken to align the joints so that great toe remains plantigrade. A 2.7mm dynamic compression plate with 2.7mm screws was applied on the medial side [ to ]. Medial plating was done to provide biomechanically better support during fusion and prevent recurrence of deformity. Plate was spanning both TM and MP joints. TM joint was stable and spanned without fusion in corrected position. One axial K-wire was inserted from distal phalanx, proximal phalanx, bone graft and first metatarsal into the medial cuneiform before applying the plate[ and ]. The axial K-wire was removed after four weeks. Patient was kept non weight bearing for two months and monitored for radiological signs of fusion at MP joint.
Result:
Patient started gradual weight bearing two months after second surgery. Bony fusion was achieved in 3.5 months. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs taken at three years follow up show satisfactory alignment and fusion . Though first toe was short but still it was in the acceptable plantigrade alignment . After correction, patient was painless on weight bearing and can carry out all daily activities without discomfort. Unlike preoperative status, now he can wear regular shoes and pull the trousers up without difficulty [ and ]. This has improved his social activities. At present he is actively participating in sports activities like cricket. There is no recurrence of the deformity. The Revised Foot Function Index (FFI-R) improved to 65 from 120.