A 55-year-old woman was referred to our department for treatment of severe fatigue that developed after SARS-CoV-2 infection. She had worked as a nurse for more than 20 years. In April 2020, a cluster of infections with SARS-CoV-2 occurred in her hospital. On April 19, she developed a fever of 38.3℃. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test of a nasopharyngeal swab was positive for SARS-CoV-2. She took a leave of absence and was almost completely bedridden at home. On May 9, she was hospitalized in the Department of Respiratory Medicine because of exacerbation of her dyspnea, which was diagnosed as COVID-19 pneumonia. She received ciclesonide (200 μg, twice a day) for 14 days. After confirmation of a negative PCR test for COVID-19, she was discharged on May 28. However, she continued to have severe fatigue and dyspnea at rest despite a percutaneous arterial oxygen saturation of 98%. Thereafter, her dyspnea at rest gradually improved. However, she fatigued easily and complained of palpitations. Her heart rate increased to 120 beats per minute (bpm) after a short walk.
Because she had continued weakness and lack of stamina, she decided to retire. On a follow-up visit to the Department of Respiratory Medicine in June, her signs and symptoms were diagnosed as the sequelae of a coronavirus infection, i.e. long COVID. In August, she was examined in the Department of Neurology, which did not find any abnormalities that would account for her signs and symptoms. A neurologist suspected ME/CFS and referred her to our department for treatment on December 2.
On her first visit to our department, the patient complained of severe fatigue and PEM after physical and cognitive exertion and spent about 60% of her day in bed. She also complained of weakness, dyspnea, palpitations, pharyngeal pain, arthralgia, and exacerbation of a sensation of heat around her neck and head on physical exertion. When her malaise increased, her sore throat worsened. She initially complained of insomnia and nonrestorative sleep; however, these symptoms gradually resolved. Her complaints satisfied the 1994 Fukuda case definition of CFS . Before her visit to our department, her complaints to other physicians also satisfied the 2003 Canadian clinical case definition of myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME)/CFS . However, because her sleeping problems gradually resolved, she did not quite satisfy the Canadian clinical case definition at the time of her visit to our department.
The patient had a history of allergic rhinitis. Her past and family histories were negative for psychiatric disorders. She had a negative history for alcohol consumption and smoking. Her physical examination was unremarkable except for an axillary temperature of 37.2° C. Results of laboratory testing of a peripheral blood sample were unremarkable. She was not anemic and had normal thyroid function. Her serum cortisol level was 5.34 μg/dL at 16:00 h. Her electrocardiogram was normal, and cardiac echography showed preserved left ventricular systolic function. During an active standing test, she complained of palpitations and worsening fatigue. She showed orthostatic hypertension, was negative for orthostatic hypotension, and has slight orthostatic tachycardia .
Her fatigue score on the numerical rating scale (NRS) was 5: the maximum fatigue score is10 and an absence of fatigue is scored 0. On the brief fatigue inventory (BFI), which was developed to assess the degree of fatigue of cancer patients , her score was 7.0, which corresponds to severe fatigue. The Japanese version of the trail making test-A (TMT-A) was used to evaluate her cognitive function [, ]. Her completion time was 45 s (mean time for healthy subjects her age is 33.7 ± 6.2 s), indicating impaired cognitive function compared to healthy participants of her age . Her score on the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale, a self-rating questionnaire for evaluating depression, was 9, indicating that she was not depressed.
The patient’s disabling symptoms included the following. (1) Severe fatigue at rest and PEM, even after minimal physical or mental exertion; she spent more than 50% of the day in bed. After physical exertion such as going to the supermarket, she became bedridden for several hours to days. After mental exertion such as paperwork for retirement, she had difficulty concentrating and understanding and had to read the same sentence repeatedly. (2) Weakness, dyspnea, tachycardia, and exacerbation of a sensation of heat around her neck and head on physical exertion. Even after her resting dyspnea improved, she experienced these symptoms during and after physical exertion such as when walking or standing upright. When she felt hot, her axillary temperature increased up to 37.5℃. (3) Dull pain. She first complained of hip pain because of osteoarthritis of the left hip joint, which was initially relieved by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or resting. After the infection, she developed generalized dull pain that was not alleviated by NSAIDs or rest. These symptoms led to her retirement.
She was treated from multiple perspectives according to our usual treatment regimen for patients with ME/CFS [–] . (1) Instruction on eating habits and supplements. After her infection with SARS-CoV-2, the patient changed to a vegetable-based diet and began daily ingestion of ascorbic acid (1000 mg/day). She was advised to maintain these habits to minimize the potentially harmful effects of oxidative stress. (2) Cognitive and behavioral modifications of daily life for adaptive self-management, with the following interventions (evaluation of her current coping strategy against fatigue; understanding and acknowledgement of her beliefs and feelings behind current strategies; encouragement for acquisition of new coping strategies for management of symptoms, including “self-pacing”; enhancement of awareness of thresholds resulting in exacerbation of fatigue, exhaustion, and PEM; initiation of relaxing and meditative-relaxing movements; minimization of cognitive fatigue caused by habitual rumination of negative thoughts; improvement in self-esteem and self-efficacy; development of a habit of adaptive coping and appreciation of its value) .
Because of the patient’s limited energy and memory, written explanations for how to achieve her cognitive and behavioral modifications were provided. The explanations included outlining the self-help strategies and precautions in daily life for ME/CFS patients. She was asked to follow the advice as much as possible. She was encouraged to consult me with any questions and confusion about the prescribed regimen. These interventions were not conducted by introducing her to cognitive behavioral therapists, but were done during medical treatment for her cognitive and physical limitations on the day of her visit. (3) After her dyspnea and fatigue at rest were improved, exercise was gradually added to her regimen to help her recover from physical deconditioning, while at the same time avoiding exhaustion and PEM . (4) Oral amitriptyline (10 mg before sleep) and hochuekkito, a Japanese herbal (Kampo) medicine (7.5 g before every meal) were prescribed.
After her first visit to our department, the patient began to take her prescribed medication and to perform the activities of daily life while being aware of the precautions she needed to take. At her second visit 2 weeks later, she reported that her fatigue, pain, and low-grade fever had started to decrease when she was at rest. She also said that she learned the idea of “idling” (i.e., ruminating on negative thoughts at rest) and found it very helpful because she noticed that reduced idling actually improved her cognitive fatigue. At the third visit (6 weeks later), she reported that her low-grade fever and sensation of heat had disappeared. At the fourth visit (11 weeks later), she said she was in good shape and her fatigue was almost zero when she was at rest; however, she did not have enough endurance for shopping. Therefore, she was instructed to gradually increase her exercise to improve deconditioning. At the sixth visit (21 weeks later), she said she had become able to practice the activities of daily living without medication and that her physical and mental condition had recovered to almost the same level as that before she became ill. She reported that she was planning to return to work, and her treatment was terminated. Table shows her clinical test values on her first and last visits. In addition to improvement of her axillary temperature, subjective level of fatigue, BFI score, and the TMT-A result, the average heart rate (HR) from 2 to 5 min after standing (mean ± standard deviation, from 99.0 ± 1.2 bpm to 94.3 ± 1.7 bpm, P = 0.015, paired t-test) and the change of HR by standing (from 15.0 ± 1.2 bpm to 4.3 ± 1.7 bpm, P = 0.002, paired t-test) were also significantly reduced.