A 79-year-old Japanese woman complained of upper abdominal discomfort during postoperative follow-up for breast cancer in March 2005. She had no remarkable past history other than breast cancer and her relatives have not been suffered no malignant diseases. On physical findings, her temperature was 36.6°C, and there was no palpable abdominal mass. No sign of lymphadenopathy was found. Initial laboratory testing revealed no abnormalities other than a high serum concentration of CA19-9 (42.4 U/ml; normal, <37 U/ml) . Endoscopic examination revealed an irregular nodulated lesion in the antrum area , and a reddish aggregated-type semi-circumferential nodulated lesion extending from the prepyloric area to the duodenal bulb through the normal mucosa with the antrum lesion . The biopsy specimens revealed a tubular adenoma from the antrum lesion and a well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma from the prepyloric lesion. A double-contrast picture showed an irregular nodulated lesion extending from the prepyloric area to the duodenal bulb; however, no hardening of the gastric wall was detected on barium study . Metastatic workup was negative. Distal gastrectomy with sufficient distal surgical margin, 30 mm from pyloric ring, and lymph node dissection (D2) was performed in April 2005. We adopted Roux-en Y reconstruction which is capable of cancer free anastomosis even if duodenal resection reached broad. The intraoperative distal surgical margin was negative. Macroscopically, the resected specimen showed two independent polypoid lesions, an oral-side lesion of 70 × 40 mm located in the antrum area extending superficially and an anal-side semi-circumferential lesion of 70 × 25 mm located mainly in the prepyloric area and duodenal bulb beyond the pyloric ring. The intervening mucosa between the two lesions was normal .
The resected specimen was examined histologically to determine the depth and mode of invasion, metastasis to lymph nodes, histologic type, and invasion to the duodenum according to the general rules established by the Japanese Gastric Cancer Association . Microscopically, the antrum lesion showed a papillary adenocarcinoma with high-grade atypia limited within the gastric mucosa without vessel invasion . The prepyloric lesion showed a mainly papillary adenocarcinoma mixed with tubular and villous formations which partially invaded the submucosa without vessel invasion . The cancerous lesion extended into the duodenal bulb, and was 12 mm in length from the oral end of Brunner's gland's area, and limited within the duodenal mucosa. This lesion showed an identical histology to the prepyloric part . The two lesions were classified as intestinal type and separated by at least 20 mm of intervening normal mucosa. The back ground mucosa of these lesions was mild atrophic gastritis and intestinal metaplasia. Helicobacter pylori infection was detected by histological findings. The distal margin of the surgical specimen, 4 mm in length, was negative. A schematic representation of the resected specimen is shown in Figure . No dissected lymph nodes showed metastasis. We finally diagnosed the lesions as two early gastric cancers, as follows. Antrum lesion: L, pap, type 0 I, pT1(M), ly0, v0, pPM(-), pDM(-), pN0, sH0, sP0, sM0, CY0; and prepyloric lesion: LD, pap, type 0 I, pT1(SM), ly0, v0, pPM(-), pDM(-), pN0, sH0, sP0, sM0, CY0, stage IA. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged 38 days after admission. No recurrence or metastasis has been detected during three years of follow-up after the operation.