A 72-year-old man, who was diagnosed with chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, was prescribed direct-acting antivirals. After 6 months of a sustained virological response (SVR), ultrasound (US) imaging detected two liver tumors. Computed tomography (CT) revealed one tumor (4.5 cm) located at segment 7 , which involved the right hepatic vein and was adjacent to the middle hepatic vein. A second tumor (2.7 cm) was located at segment 6. Contrast-enhanced (CE) CT detected the tumors during the early phase as well as a perfusion defect during the portal phase. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed the same features . CE-CT detected gastric varices as an enlarged gastrorenal shunt from the left renal vein to the left gastric vein . Furthermore, endoscopic images showed markedly enlarged nodular (F3), risky gastric varices . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) revealed the accumulation of 18F-FDG. The maximum standard uptake values were 5.43 at S7 and 4.42 at S6, and distant metastasis was not detected.
Laboratory results were as follows: white blood cell count, 3200/μL; platelet count, 75,000/μL; total serum albumin, 3.5 g/dL; %prothrombin time, 95%; total serum bilirubin, 0.6 mg/dL; direct bilirubin, 0.03 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 22 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 15 U/L; alkaline phosphatase, 191 U/L; gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase, 49 U/L; ammonia concentration, 51 μg/dL; and the indocyanine green dye retention test at 15 min (ICGR15) was 15.3%. The concentrations of tumor markers such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 were normal, and the concentrations of arufa-fetoprotein (AFP) (217.2 ng/mL) and des-gamma-carboxy prothrombin (DCP) (1951 AU/mL) were elevated. Hepatitis B virus (HB)s-antigen, HBc-antibody, and HCV-RNA were undetectable, and HCV-antibody was positive. Mac-2 binding protein glycosylation isomer (M2BPGi) which indicated liver fibrosis was 1.95 cut off index (COI). Virtual touch quantification (VTQ) using ultrasonography was 3.09 mL/s. The Child–Pugh score was 6, grade A. The Albumin–Indocyanine Green Evaluation (ALICE) score was − 1.731 and ALICE grade was 2b.
The patient was administered insulin injection therapy because of diabetes mellitus, and he underwent percutaneous coronary intervention for coronary artery stenosis in 2015. He was diagnosed with stage III HCC with risky gastric varices. We first performed BRTO for gastric varices . The wedged hepatic venous pressure (WHVP) was 13 mmHg, and the hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) was 11 mmHg. WHVP increased to 15 mmHg after BRTO. The tumor was close to the middle hepatic vein, and we therefore planned right-hepatic resection of the liver.
The remnant liver volume was 867 mL (59.4%), according to 3D-CT volumetry . Although the remnant liver volume was sufficient, to reduce surgical risk, we planned PTPE and HALS splenectomy before hepatic resection because of PH. We performed PTPE 9 days after BRTO without complications. After PTPE, the portal vein pressure was 15 mmHg. Spleen volume was 428 g at the first visit and increased to 512 g just before splenectomy. Three weeks after PTPE, HALS splenectomy was performed using an 8-cm midline incision and four ports. The spleen weighed 439 g. Operation time was 191 min, blood loss was 42 g, and blood transfusion was not required. In this patients was received anti-thrombin III (ATIII) concentrates for 3 days after splenectomy because of low ATIII activity as a prophylactic treatment. There was no portal vein thrombosis, and the patient was discharged 10 days after splenectomy without complications.
Right hepatic resection was performed 27 days after HALS splenectomy. ICGR15 improved just before hepatectomy . Three-dimensional-CT revealed an increase in the remnant liver volume (1097 mL, 64.2%). Immediately before hepatic resection, WHVP was 13 mmHg and HVPG was 9 mmHg. M2BPGi increased to 2.36 COI. The sizes of the tumors slightly increased (5.1 cm at S7 and 3.1 cm at S6) , and the levels of tumor markers increased (AFP, 611 ng/mL and DCP, 3289 AU/mL). Operation time was 473 min, blood loss was 136 g, and a blood transfusion was not required.
Figure shows the macroscopic findings of the resected tumors. The right hepatic vein was surrounded by the tumor, although a venous thrombus was not detected. The patient was discharged 13 days after hepatic resection without complications. Histological diagnosis was well- to moderately differentiated HCC, and portal vein invasion by the tumor was detected in S7. Fibrosis grade was F3. Table summarizes the patient’s clinical course. When this manuscript was submitted, he was free of recurrence for 1 year. He received vaccination after hepatectomy to prevent over whelming post splenectomy infection (OPSI).