An 11-year-old boy reported the chief complaint of pain in the lower left back tooth region of the jaw and spontaneous bleeding through the oral cavity past 2 months. The patient gave a history of few epileptic episodes that occurred at an early age only. The natal history was non-contributory. General examination showed appropriate motor and speech function and absence of cardiovascular or respiratory diseases. Extraorally purplish-red pigmentation patches, i.e., PWS were present and confined to the middle and lower left side of the face without crossing the midline .
Intraoral examination revealed an extension of erythematous reddish-pink patches of residual vascular plexus on the left side of the oral cavity involving the lower lip, left labial, and buccal vestibule and floor of mouth . The mandibular left first primary molar was the tooth of chief complaint which was grossly carious and was associated with gingival hyperplastic growth. The gingival hyperplastic tissue tended to bleed profusely even on mild probing. Occlusal caries was present with 54, 55, 65, 75, 84, and 85. An intraoral periapical radiograph (IOPAR) with 74 and orthopantomogram (OPG) was taken to confirm any root resorptions, eruption status of developing 1st premolar and osteohypertrophy ( and ). He had poor oral hygiene, cariogenic diet habits that aggravated the spontaneous bleeding tendency on the affected site due to vascular dysfunction. The observed findings were indicative toward a provisional diagnosis of the case as SWS. The patient has advised computed tomography (CT) scan, radiographic examinations of the head region, complete hematological examinations, and ophthalmic examination. Dermatology, pediatric, and neurology consultations were given to have an accurate diagnosis and to obtain medical fitness of the child to undergo required dental treatment.
Intraoral periapical radiograph with 74 and OPG revealed no evidence of any osteohypertrophy thus confirming only soft tissue gingival hyperplastic growth associated with grossly carious 74 with spontaneous bleeding tendency which was indicated for extraction . Computed tomography head examination showed a positive finding by the presence of calcifications in the choroid plexus of the brain . Ocular examination revealed no significant findings but the patient has been advised to follow regular ophthalmic check-ups. The hemogram of the patient was normal. The patient underwent a plaque control regimen that included oral prophylaxis, use of chlorhexidine mouth rinses, and patient–parent education to motivate them to follow a strict oral hygiene routine. Age-appropriate brushing technique was demonstrated and diet counseling was done. Glass ionomer cement restorations were done with 55, 65, 75, 84, and 85. Pit and fissure sealant application was done with 16, 26, 36, and 46. Topical fluoride application was done. Extraction was indicated with 54 and 74. On completion of restorative and preventive dental treatments, the extraction of 74 was carried out under 2% lignocaine local anesthesia along with excision of associated gingival overgrowth with 74. Careful curettage was performed for granulation tissue removal followed by irrigation of the extraction socket. Complete hemostasis was achieved with a pressure pack of gauze pieces soaked in tranexamic acid. After treatment, the patient was under observation for 3 hours before discharge. Appropriate postoperative instructions were given.
On the follow-up visit again emphasis was on patient–parent education and motivation to follow strict oral hygiene and a healthy balanced diet regimen. Preventive dental treatments were performed. Follow-up intraoral periapical radiograph was taken to evaluate the development status of the left mandibular 1st premolar tooth which showed adequate development. The patient is under regular follow-up examinations in neurology and ophthalmic specialties with a good prognosis rate due to his early diagnosis done during his dental visit and timely referral of the patient.