A 58-year-old Caucasian female with significant history of smoking and no past medical history presented to the emergency department with chest pain and cough at T = 0 in January 2015. Computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram revealed a large pericardial effusion measuring 40 mm in diameter along with moderate right pleural effusion .
There was a spiculated anterior subpleural lesion measuring 28 mm extending to the anterolateral pleural surface of the right upper lobe and significant enlargement of the mediastinal with right paratracheal lymph node measuring 15 mm and subcarinal lymph node measuring 18 mm and left axillary lymph nodes measuring 12.5 mm. Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) pleurodesis was carried out.
The pericardial and pleural fluid cytology contained small numbers of malignant cells, presenting predominately singly in a bloodstained background. These cells have enlarged pleomorphic nuclei with granular to coarse chromatin, prominent nucleoli, and irregular nuclear contours. Immunohistochemical studies showed positive staining of tumor cells for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), napsin A, and Cytokeratin 7 (CK7). Staining for Estrogen receptor (ER), Cytokeratin 20 (CK20), Caudal Type Homeobox 2 (CDX2), and calretinin were all negative. These findings are in support of adenocarcinoma of lung origin.
In 2015, the fluid sample sent was not sufficient to undergo further testing to determine PD-L1 expression, immunohistochemistry testing for c-ros oncogene 1 (ROS1) / anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) mutation, or molecular testing for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR).
With the imaging and histology findings, she was diagnosed with stage IV (T3N2M1a) according to the TNM classification of the Union of International Cancer Control (UICC), 7th edition lung adenocarcinoma . She had Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 1 after VATS pleurodesis. The patient quit smoking at the time of diagnosis. She was then commenced on first-line chemotherapy, carboplatin (AUC 5), and gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2) 3 weekly at T = 1 month in February 2015. She completed four cycles with no dose reduction. Follow-up CT imaging was done 3 months later (T = 4 months) demonstrated good clinical and radiological response. According to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) version 1.1 , complete response was achieved with disappearance of the pleural based right upper lobe lesion. There is complete response to the mediastinal, hilar, and axillary lymph nodes. She was clinically well with maintenance of her performance status.
Given the excellent response after first-line chemotherapy, she was then commenced on maintenance chemotherapy with pemetrexed at a dose of 500 mg/m2 every 21 days. This is based on evidence that it prolongs overall survival and progression-free survival . The patient completed eight cycles of pemetrexed without significant toxicities.
In December 2015, there was single lesion progression with a new right upper lobe lesion (18 × 15 mm2) . The patient declined biopsy of this lesion. Given disease progression as per RECIST version 1.1, she was commenced on nivolumab 240 mg every 2 weeks at around T = 12 months in February 2016 owing to emerging evidence of immunotherapy in this setting for previously treated metastatic non-small cell lung cancer.
After the commencement of immunotherapy, her follow-up scan done in May 2016 showed complete response of single lung lesion as per RECIST version 1.1. Further imaging subsequently every 3 months with CT of brain, chest, abdomen and pelvis continues to show no evidence of recurrence or new metastatic disease.
At T = 59 months in November 2019, she had an elective cholecystectomy for chronic cholecystitis secondary to multiple cholelithiases. Her nivolumab was not withheld during the surgery, and she did not develop any complications during the perioperative period.
At T = 63 months in March 2020, somatic gene mutation analysis was requested on her previous pericardial fluid and tissue sample done early in the diagnosis as the patient was not keen for rebiopsy. Reanalysis of the sample could be done using molecular testing. A mutation was detected in the KRAS gene p.(Gly12Cys): G12C (16%). No clinically relevant mutation was found in the tested regions of EGFR, BRAF, MET, RET, or ERBB2. It was negative for rearrangements in ALK and ROS1 genes. There was high level PD-L1 expression with a tumor proportion score (TPS) of 80%.
18-Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan at T = 83 months in November 2021 showed no suspicious fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake within lungs. The foci of intense FDG uptake surrounding right lung pleura is consistent with a previous talc pleurodesis . The patient is currently continuing her immunotherapy and has no evidence of lung malignancy.