A 75-year-old Asian woman underwent cementless TKA (Cementless Vanguard, Biomet, Warsaw, IL, USA) in November, 2012, for severe osteoarthritis of the left knee . The medical history included hypertension treated with oral amlodipine and losartan. Preoperative bone mineral density (BMD) examined by a dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan was 0.43 g/cm2 which suggested osteoporosis (T score: −4.1).
The patient started to stand and walk on day 2 postoperatively. However, she reported continuing knee pain and knee swelling after surgery. Laboratory tests on day 14 postoperatively revealed a white blood cell count of 7.7 × 109/L and C-reactive protein of 9.81 mg/dL. At 5 weeks postoperatively, knee radiography showed radiolucent lines outlined beneath the tibial tray and around the stem . The tibial component was considered unstable due to loosening. At first, infection was suspected, and an antibiotic of sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim was administered. However, a culture of intra-knee fluid and a laboratory test of procalcitonin were both found to be negative for infection. At 6 weeks postoperatively, computed tomography was conducted, which clearly showed loosening around the tibial component . The patient was diagnosed with aseptic loosening caused by initial unstable fixation.
The patient was treated with a 56.5 µg weekly dose of teriparatide (rh [1-34] parathyroid hormone [PTH]). Daily activity such as walking with a cane and housework was permitted during treatment. After 2 months of treatment, knee pain and knee swelling had disappeared, and the patient was able to walk without a cane. Knee radiography at this time exhibited a decrease of previously observed radiolucent lines . Laboratory tests showed a gradual decrease of C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, which finally reached a negative value at 3 months after treatment.
After 6 months of teriparatide therapy, the patient achieved tomosynthesis, and no space between either femoral or tibial components and the osteotomy load surfaces was observed . Upon confirmation that the component had achieved complete ingrowth to the bone, the administration of teriparatide was discontinued. BMD examined using DEXA at this point showed an increase to 0.46 g/cm2, with an increased T-score of −3.6. Knee radiography at 1 year postoperatively showed no radiolucent lines around either the femoral or tibial components and an increase in sclerosis at the pedestal . Computed tomography also showed no space between the tibial tray and the tibial surface. Although some artifacts were observed around pegs, the implant still achieved ingrowth to the bone . The patient experienced no pain in her knee and was able to walk freely without a cane. The knee society score improved to 95.