A 52-year-old woman presented at the Gastroenterology Unit, University Tor Vergata Hospital, (Rome, Italy) in April 2011. Since 1990, the patient was complaining of diarrhea, abdominal pain and weight loss. In March 1993, CD was diagnosed based on positive serologic tests [anti-endomysium IgA antibody (EMA), anti-tissue transglutaminase-2 (TG-2) antibody], evidence of total villous atrophy of duodenal biopsies taken during upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, and positivity for human leukocyte antigen-DQ2. In October 2005, for the persistence of malabsorption symptoms/signs, despite a strict adherence to a GFD since 1993, the patient underwent further endoscopic and laboratory investigations, and eventually RCD was diagnosed. Therefore, she was treated with several courses of steroids and cyclosporine A with partial clinical response. Upon admission, she complained of abdominal pain, diarrhea (5 stools/day) and asthenia, despite she was on a strict GFD and treated with prednisolone (0.4 mg/kg/day). Her body mass index (BMI) was 15,6 kg/m2; the remaining physical examination was unremarkable. Laboratory analysis revealed exclusively anemia. Thyroid gland function tests were normal. EMA, anti-TG-2 and anti-enterocyte antibodies were negative. A bone density scan revealed low bone mineral density. Diagnostic work-up for infectious agents was negative. Colonoscopy with histological evaluation of colonic biopsies, CT enterography and small intestine contrast ultrasonography were normal. An upper endoscopy was performed and histological evaluation of duodenal biopsies showed an increased infiltration of the epithelial compartment with lymphocytes, crypts hyperplasia and a subtotal villous atrophy (Marsh 3b stage) . Further histological assessment of duodenal samples showed no collagen deposition. Diagnostic work-up for other villous atrophy-induced diseases (e.g. NSAIDs, olmesartan use, collagenous sprue and common variable immunodeficiency) was negative. Immunophenotyping analysis showed the absence of aberrant intraepithelial lymphocytes (RCD type I). Since a new course of steroids (prednisone 0.5 mg/kg/day) was unsuccessful and the patient refused to be treated with azathioprine, anti-TNF-α antibody infusion was scheduled for November 2011. However, in October 2011, she was reviewed again in our Hospital for a rapidly growing, painful inflammatory skin lesion of the left leg. At that time she was treated with oral prednisone (0.2 mg/kg/day) and complaining of diarrhea and abdominal pain. Physical examination revealed a painful lesion with focal ulceration, necrosis and pus discharge with active inflammatory borders at the external part of the left leg . Histological evaluation of a skin biopsy taken 7 days later in the Dermatology clinic at the Tor Vergata University Hospital, Rome, showed an irregular acantotic epidermis and underlying scarring dermis with acute and chronic inflammatory cell infiltrates. Additional biopsy samples were collected from both lesional and non-lesional skin and used to assess RNA expression of interleukin (IL)-8, IL-17A, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9, because these molecules are involved in the recruitment of neutrophils to the skin and supposed to play a key role in the pathogenesis of PG [,]. RNA transcripts of IL-17A, IL-8, MMP-2 and MMP-9 were more pronounced in the affected skin as compared to non-lesional skin . PG was eventually diagnosed and patient was treated with oral prednisone (0.7 mg/kg/day). A dramatic improvement was observed; the pain diminished considerably and a complete healing of the skin lesion was documented in December 2011. No recurrence was observed after a follow-up period of 8 months.