A 3-month-old boy presented with a poor fixation with occasional horizontal nystagmus detected by a local pediatrician. The boy was then referred to our department to evaluate the retinal detachment in both his eyes. The anterior segment was normal and the lens was clear. However, a bullous peripheral retinoschisis existed bilaterally overhanging the macula , and peripheral retinoschisis was almost touching the lens. Genetic analysis confirmed the RS1 mutation (c.554C > T), and an electroretinogram (ERG) demonstrated a significant reduction of b-wave and decreased cone and rod responses bilaterally . The boy had no family history of visual impairment. Magnetic resonance imaging of the head revealed subdural effusion, but no other systemic complications were noted. Surgical intervention was proposed for this patient, and informed consent was obtained from the boy’s parents after discussing the benefits and risks of the procedure in detail.
The patient underwent lens-sparing vitrectomy in both eyes. After posterior hyaloid dissection, the fluid was drained through a small retinotomy site. Laser photocoagulation was performed around the retinotomy and causative inner retinal holes. Then, silicone oil tamponade was applied to the vitreous cavity. However, at 6 months after the initial surgery, a secondary cataract developed in his right eye. After cataract extraction and intraocular lens placement, we observed that emulsified silicone oil had migrated into the intraschisis cavity. Inner wall retinectomy was then enlarged and the silicone oil was retrieved (Video 1). His left eye developed a cataract over time, for which we performed cataract removal and silicone oil extraction 3 years after the initial surgery. A clear visual axis was obtained, and the retina in both eyes remained stable 4 years after the last surgery . The postoperative optical coherence tomography showed cystic changes within the outer plexiform layer suggesting that the retinal splits seems to have occurred within that layer. The final visual acuity was 0.7 in the right eye and 0.3 in the left eye.
The samples extracted from both vitreous and intraschisis cavities at the initial surgery were separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. The gels obtained were then stained with silver. The silver-stained proteins in the gel were excised, and the peptides were extracted as described previously . A vitreous sample from a patient with a congenital cataract served as a control. Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization-Time of Flight MS was performed using a Shimadzu Axima Performance (Kyoto, Japan), and the fragment ions were matched by searching against peptide mass fingerprints in the NCBI nr database using the Mascot search engine. Albumin, transferrin, and pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) were found in all the samples. In particular, the band strongly expressed at the 140-kDa molecular weight position in the sample extracted from the intraschisis cavity was identified as IRBP by MS .