A 15-year-old female patient was referred to us for evaluation of uveitis treated in other clinics before. Child reported first symptoms 5 years ago, which consisted of blurry vision in right eye first then left eye and redness of eyes. She had oral aphtae and oral ulcers as well, that improved over time with treatment. She was treated earlier for right sided knee inflammation. She has been diagnosed with uveitis and for 5 years treated with on and off topical, peribulbar and systemic corticosteroids with periods of improvement and periods of worsening of symptoms. She developed cataract in both eyes and was planned for surgery two years ago, but parents refused surgical intervention. Two years prior to referral to our clinic she had laser fotocoagulation in both eyes due to retinal vasculitis and was started on Methotrexat 15 mg weekly. Despite the administration of local and systemic corticosteroids and MTX, inflammation persisted; therefore, the patient was referred to our clinic for second opinion.
The best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.9 in RE and 0.6 in LE, and the IOPs of the right and left eye were 17 and 18 mmHg, respectively. Anterior chamber cell grade of 0.5+ in the both eyes. She had posterior synechiae in both eyes and posterior cortical cataract in both eyes . The vitreous cell grade was 3+ in the right eye and 2+ in the left eye. On ultrasound she had inflammatory reaction in vitreus, more prominent in right eye . Posterior segment was hazy due to vitreal changes and cataract, but laser burns could be seen as well as signs of vasculitis and macular changes. We performed fluorescein angiography and SD OCT on patient to reveal intraretinal cysts on both eyes and perifoveolar oedema right eye ( and ).
Non-ocular manifestations oral ulcers were improved with previous treatment. Skin or genital lesions were not observed. She was refered to pediatric rheumatologist for complete evaluation. All laboratory workup was within normal limits. Chest X ray and abdominal ultrasound were normal. Interferon-gamma release assay and Quanti Feron Tb gold test for tuberculosis infection and Treponema pallidum antibody hemagglutination test for syphilis were negative; Hepatitis HBs and anti HBc were negative as well as HCV Ag; angiotensin-converting enzyme, antinuclear antibody, and anti-citrullinated protein antibody levels were within the normal range. MRI of brain and cervical spine were normal, as well as EEG. Neurological examination was normal. She tested positive for HLA-B51. There was no family history of autoimmune diseases. Following treatment, initiated in the previous clinic, was continued: 0.1% dexamethasone eye drops (four times/day), tropicamide/phenylephrine eye drops (once/day), Methotrexat (MTX) 15 mg once a week followed by folic acid. The patient was diagnosed with the incomplete type of Behçet’s disease on the basis of the presence of a typical ocular symptoms and recurrent oral ulcers, retinal vasculitis recurred in both eyes in spite of treatment with MTX, therefore, initiation of adalimumab was proposed. Subcutaneous adalimumab injection was then introduced. The patient was 15-year-old and weighed 57 kg when adalimumab was initiated, thus we administered 40 mg every 2 weeks. After 2 months BCVA improved in both eyes, to 1.0 RE and 0.7 LE. The anterior chamber in both eyes improved to 0 , within 2 months after beginning adalimumab administration. Posterior synechiae and cataract did not change. Oral ulcers and problems with knee did not repeat after adalimumab therapy. The inflammation subsided. After three months she was taken off local medication. On the first follow up SD OCT showed significant improvement as well as after 18 months.
After 12 months with adalimumab we decided to lower MTX dosage to 10 mg once per week and she remained symptoms free with this lower dose. The follow-up period after introduction of adalimumab was 18 months (at the time this report was written) and the patient did not experience any side effects. Her ocular and oral symptoms of BD were well controlled.