A 58-year-old man was referred to our outpatient clinic with a 3-week history of cough and respiratory distress. He was a current smoker (40 pack-years) but had no other medical history. His body temperature was 37.2 °C, blood pressure was 82/51 mmHg, pulse rate was 110 beats/min, respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation was 84% in room air. He had erythema over the V area of the neck and a Gottron’s sign , but no signs of muscle weakness. Fine crackles were auscultated in the bilateral lung bases. The serum level of creatine kinase was not elevated (68.0 U/L). The serum aldolase, Krebs von den Lungen-6, lactate dehydrogenase, and ferritin levels were increased (11.0, 1.040, 658 U/L and 1.679 ng/mL, respectively). Anti-aminoacyl tRNA synthetase and other antibodies suggestive of autoimmune disorders were not detected . Chest radiography showed bilateral reticular shadows, predominantly in the right lung . Chest computed tomography (CT) showed bilateral, asymmetric, ground-glass opacities and reticular shadows, predominantly in the lower lungs, suspicious for CADM with RP-ILD . Bronchoalveolar lavage was performed from right B5. The total cell count was 0.394 × 105/mL, and the percentages of neutrophils, eosinophils, and lymphocytes were 47.2, 1.8, and 21.6%, respectively. A transbronchial lung biopsy specimen from right B2b showed a diffuse alveolar damage pattern . Following bronchoscopy, methylprednisolone pulse therapy (1000 mg daily for 3 days) and tacrolimus were initiated, followed by cyclophosphamide pulse therapy (500 mg for 1 day). After starting treatment, test for anti-MDA5 antibody was confirmed to be positive. Therefore, the diagnosis was CADM with anti-MDA5 antibody. His respiratory condition gradually improved, and the serum ferritin, lactate dehydrogenase, and aldolase levels decreased. However, after 4 weeks, his respiratory condition gradually worsened in association with an increasing serum ferritin level, but there was no deterioration on chest radiography . Although courses of methylprednisolone and cyclophosphamide pulse therapy were repeated, his respiratory condition worsened, and he died on hospital day 43. An autopsy showed diffuse fibrosis in all three right lung lobes. Some lymphocytic infiltrate was present in the alveolar wall. Diffuse fibrosis was present and local organizing pneumonia was observed in the left lung .