An 82-year-old man underwent uncomplicated phacoemulsification with implantation of a posterior chamber intraocular lens in his right eye. The continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis (CCC) was successful performed, and the IOL was centered in the capsular bag. The IOP was normal, and his Snellen best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/40 at the first day postoperatively. 20 years earlier, he had undergone bilateral neodymium: YAG (Nd: YAG) PI to treat narrow drainage angles and had persistently shallow anterior chambers with normal IOP after the Nd: YAG procedure. After 2 months postoperative, the IOP in the right eye increased. The patient received two antiglaucoma medications (i.e., Travatan once a day and 2% carteolol twice a day) to control the IOP, but it remained high. The IOP fluctuations ranged from 20.5 to 27.6 mmHg. He was then referred to our hospital.
As malignant glaucoma was highly suspected in the right eye, ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM), axial scan, slit lamp, and pharmacologic mydriasis were used to confirm the diagnosis. The patient’s both eyes were small, with an anterior chamber depth/axial length of 2.14/20.51 mm in the right eye, and 1.61/20.70 mm in the left eye. Slit lamp revealed a mild conjunctival hyperemia and corneal edema, a patent PI was present in the temple superior, and the anterior chamber was shallow . Ultrasound biomicroscopy showed extremely shallow anterior chamber . Pharmacologic mydriasis was performed. The IOP decreased from 27.5 to 22 mmHg after 30 min of application of compound tropicamide eyedrop. However, the IOP increased to 30.8 mmHg again after 6 h of application of tropicamide. A diagnosis of malignant glaucoma in nanophthalmos was made.
Peripheral iridotomy and goniosynechialysis were performed by the surgeon. Goniosynechialysis was performed using a 1 ml syringe needle tip under the observation of a gonioscope. Then, we used capsule scissors to cut off 1 mm × 1 mm sized iris tissue to build a channel between the anterior and posterior chamber at the preexisting peripheral iris defect. The first day after surgery, the IOP in the right eye was 20.0 mmHg and the anterior chamber remained shallow. Thus, we preformed YAG laser lens posterior capsulotomy in the central pupil zone, 4 h after YAG laser, the IOP was 19.7 mmHg. Then the IOP in the right eye increased uncontrollably from 22 to 33.1 mmHg. He received two kinds of anti-glaucoma medications (i.e., Travatan once a day and 2% carteolol twice a day) to control the IOP. However, it remained high. 5 days after PI and goniosynechialysis, the right eye underwent YAG laser lens posterior capsulotomy and vitreous anterior membranectomy in the temple superior where surgical PI had been performed. The IOP decreased from 31.1 mmHg to 21.1 mmHg within 6 h, and the anterior chamber became deep . At the last follow-up visit, 9 months after the YAG laser lens posterior capsulotomy and vitreous anterior membranectomy, the BCVA was 20/50 with + 1.00–1.25 × 106, the IOP was controlled at 11.2 mmHg, and the anterior chamber depth was 2.87 mm.
As the right eye appeared to have a series of complications after simple phacoemulsification and IOL implantation, we preformed combined surgery in the left eye. A clear corneal temporal incision was made. After a continuous curvilinear capsulorrhexis approximately 5.5 mm in diameter was created, phacoemulsification was performed. Then, goniosynechialysis was performed using a 1 ml syringe needle tip under the observation of a gonioscope. After performed goniosynechialysis, an infusion cannula was placed in the vitreous cavity through pars plana. Then posterior capsulorhexis was performed with the tip of a standard 23-gauge bent cystotome and the anterior vitreous was also excised. The anterior chamber deepened visibly during vitrectomy. We also preformed an iridectomy with 23-gauge bent cystotome at the superior iris, then, posterior lens capsule, part lens zonule, and vitreous anterior membrane were cut in the superior to create an open pathway between the anterior chamber and the vitreous cavity. We determined that anterior chamber could be rapidly deepened after discharging the aqueous humor of the anterior chamber, and that the channel was open. Then a foldable single-piece posterior chamber IOL (Akreos MI60, Bausch) was inserted into the capsular bag. 7 months after surgery, the BCVA was 20/50 with + 1.50–1.0 × 91, the IOP was controlled at 12.3 mmHg, and the anterior chamber depth was 2.74 mm. .