A 69-year-old Caucasian female with recently diagnosed celiac sprue presented with fever, nausea, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and weight loss despite adherence to a gluten-free diet. Past medical history included hypothyroidism, hypertension, and atrial fibrillation. She initially presented to an outside facility several months prior to presentation to our facility where she had a small bowel biopsy showing villous blunting consistent with celiac sprue as well as positive autoantibodies for gliadin and tissue transglutaminase. She was started on a gluten-free diet and discharged. Despite adhering to the gluten-free diet, she lost approximately 15 pounds over the month prior to presentation at our facility.
Given persistent symptoms, she was admitted to our institution, where initial blood work noted pancytopenia, elevated serum ferritin, elevated serum triglycerides, and low serum fibrinogen, raising clinical concern for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis noted extensive lymphadenopathy throughout the abdomen with the largest nodes including a 2.9 cm mesenteric node in the left abdomen, a 2.4 cm node near the left iliac crest, and a 3.4 cm mass adjacent to the cecum.
A needle biopsy of an intra-abdominal lymph node demonstrated a lymphoproliferative process, with a predominance of CD4-positive T-lymphocytes. Following needle biopsy, an excisional biopsy was obtained revealing a polymorphic-type EBV-positive lymphoproliferation with extensive paracortical T-cell hyperplasia. The paracortical expansion was comprised of predominantly CD4-positive polymorphic T cells that stained positively for CD2, CD3, and CD5, with partial loss of CD7 . A monotonous population of CD20-positive B cells was also identified that coexpress MUM-1 and was positive for EBER (Epstein-Barr virus encoded messenger RNA) . T-cell receptor gene rearrangement studies by PCR were not performed; however, gene rearrangement studies for TCR-gamma/delta and TCR-betaF1 by immunohistochemistry were performed. TCR-betaF1 was positive in the polymorphic T-cell population within the paracortical expansion. TCR-gamma/delta stained a small subset of T cells. The final diagnosis was a CD20-positive, EBV-positive lymphoproliferative disorder, which did not meet criteria for frank lymphoma and was not monoclonal in nature.
Following the diagnosis of EBV-associated LPD, peripheral blood EBV DNA quantitation via PCR was markedly positive at 9367 copies/mL (<200 copies/mL); to our knowledge, the patient's EBV status was unknown until this point. Subsequent bone marrow biopsy was performed to further evaluate her pancytopenia. This revealed marked hemophagocytic changes consistent with HLH . She was started on a course of rituximab and methylprednisolone for EBV-associated LPD with HLH. She subsequently developed methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) bacteremia, further worsening her clinical status. Following development of bacteremia, the patient and her family decided to pursue comfort care, and she succumbed while receiving comfort cares 25 days after initial presentation to our hospital.