History dates back around 2 years to a 53-year-old postmenopausal multiparous woman who presented to gynecological OPD with a complaint of lower abdominal pain. The pain was associated with abdominal heaviness and fullness. It was non-radiating with no known relieving and aggravating factors. Patient had no significant surgical or medical history in the past. There was no relevant family history.
Abdominal examination revealed a cystic/solid globular mass in the lower abdomen with a size of approximately 24 weeks. The mass was smooth, freely mobile with getting below the swelling possible. It was non-tender and non-pulsatile. Examination of the other systems were insignificant.
Admission was done for further work-up. Ultrasonography (USG) of the abdomen and pelvis done on August 14th, 2020, showed a large well defined, smoothly marginated thick-walled cystic lesion measuring approximately (14.0 × 12.0x10.0) cm in size in the abdominopelvic region with few foci of calcifications within suggestive of a dermoid cyst. It was followed by a Contrast-Enhanced Computed Tomography (CECT) abdomen and pelvis which revealed a large, well-defined, smoothly marginated, predominantly fat attenuating lesion with fat fluid level, few Rokitansky soft tissue nodules, and few calcifications in the abdominopelvic cavity abutting the bilateral adnexal region measuring about (9.7 × 14.5 × 13.7) cm-consistent with dermoid cyst most likely of ovarian origin . The tumor marker assessment showed no abnormality (CA-125 -9.5U/ml, CEA-2.8U/ml, and CA19.9–6.4U/ml).
During the hospital stay, the patient contracted COVID-19 infection and was kept in the isolation ward. Apart from mild fever patient did not develop any major symptoms of COVID-19. She was managed with Acetaminophen for fever. Patient denied the hospital stay and wanted self-home isolation. She was discharged on request with the consent signed, explained, and counseled about her disease condition.
2 years later, the patient experienced sudden severe pain and discomfort in her lower abdomen following one and half hours of two-way travel on a motorbike from her home to a nearby town along the unlevelled, graveled off-road in the remote hilly area of Nepal. The pain was sudden, severe, aggravated by movement, and associated with nausea, difficulty breathing, fatigue, chills, and fever. The following day patient visited the local medical shop and took some analgesics, but the pain did not completely resolve. She sought no medical attention in the meantime. However, the symptoms gradually subsided over the next three days except for the dull ache in her lower abdomen.
After 30 days of this event, as the symptoms persisted, the patient presented to the hospital in Gynecological OPD with the complaint of lower abdominal pain. The pain was dull, radiating to her right shoulder with no known relieving or aggravating factors.
This time, on examination, the abdomen was soft, non-tender, and non-distended with no organomegaly or palpable mass.
Her blood investigations showed no derangements. USG done on 31st May 2022 showed a lobulated thick-walled left complex adnexal cystic lesion. It was followed by CECT abdomen and pelvis the next day which revealed a significant decrease in size of the previously described lesion with lobulations in the wall suggesting rupture. The lesion measured approx. (6.3 × 8.5 × 4.6) cm with multiple calcific foci, thick strands, and areas of fat attenuation within. Multiple fat attenuating lesions were seen in different intra-peritoneal spaces including subdiaphragmatic, subhepatic, perisplenic, and perilesional regions. .
With the imaging diagnosis of a ruptured dermoid cyst, the patient was admitted to the hospital. On 6th June 2022 patient underwent exploratory laparotomy which revealed a ruptured dermoid cyst of approximately (9.0 × 8.5x4.5) cm with a rent of (2.0 × 2.0) cm from where the caseous material along with hair follicles was seen coming out . The peritoneal cavity showed the signs of chronic inflammation. The cyst was adherent to the adjacent bowel loops from all sides. A serosal tear was evident in the sigmoid colon. She was managed with dermoid removal, left oophorectomy, and serosal repair of the sigmoid colon. The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on her 5th postoperative day. She made a good recovery with no significant complaints in her follow-up postoperatively. The histopathological examination revealed a ruptured dermoid cyst with a giant cell reaction consistent with chronic granulomatous inflammation with no evidence of malignancy.