A 77-year-old woman presented at the outpatient clinic with a subcutaneous mass on her left back . She experienced severe weight loss and loss of appetite a few months before visiting the outpatient clinic. Excisional biopsy was performed, and histopathology showed a malignant neoplasm composed of well-formed ductal structures that were growing irregularly and invasively . Metastatic cutaneous cancer was suspected, because columnar epithelial cells formed a fused ductal structure, mucus was found in the lumen, and extensive necrosis of the lesion was noted. She was referred to our department for further examination and treatment.
The patient had no significant medical history, allergies, and was not on medication. Laboratory tests showed: Hb 13.4 g/dL, CEA 2.4 ng/mL (normal value < 4.5 ng/mL), CA19-9 < 0.6 U/mL, CA125 128.4 U/mL (normal value < 35 U/mL). Computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax to the abdomen showed thickening of the cecum wall, the presence of pericolic lymph nodes, multiple masses in the liver, and a single nodule in the right lung . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) revealed increased uptake in the cecum, the masses in the liver, and the right lung with standardized uptake values of 23.7, 8.6/5.9, and 4.9, respectively . Colonoscopy revealed a circumferential type 2 tumor of the cecum, and endoscopic biopsy showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma.
Although she presented with unresectable distant metastases, because of the almost-complete intestinal obstruction, right colectomy with D2 lymphadenectomy and functional end-to-end anastomosis was performed . The pathological diagnosis was moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma with metastases in 5 of 13 resected lymph nodes. Both the primary site and the cutaneous metastatic lesion were not found in these histopathological findings, such as tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, a Crohn’s-like lymphocytic reaction, mucinous or signet ring differentiation. The final pathological stage was pT4bN2aM1b, Stage IVb according to the Japanese Classification of Colorectal, Appendiceal, and Anal Carcinoma 9th edition. Furthermore, the expression of KRAS wild type, BRAFV600E mutation, and MSI-high was detected in the cecum cancer using molecular pathological examination with the PCR-reverse sequence-specific oligonucleotide probe method. After surgery, the patient received chemotherapy with XELOX + BEV regimen (capecitabine + oxaliplatin + bevacizumab). After four administrations of the XELOX + BEV regimen, a CT scan showed reduction of distant metastases, which suggested partial response . The patient is alive 8 months after surgery.