The 68-year-old male patient had a history of hypertension for approximately 20 years and chronic bronchitis for approximately 10 years. The patient was admitted to the respiratory department of our hospital because he had suffered from dyspnea and intermittent headaches for approximately 1 month. Physical examination revealed a 7 × 6 cm non-tender mass in the neck. No signs of hyperthyroidism or hoarseness existed. Neurological examination revealed no positive signs. Blood pressure (110/70 mmHg) was within the normal range. There was no family history of thyroid disease.
On admission, laboratory examination revealed the following: erythrocytes 3.94 (4.3–5.8 × 1012/L), hemoglobin content 124 (130–175 g/L), serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 480.0 (15–240 U/L), hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase 311.0 (50–220 U/L), total bilirubin 30.1 (5.1–20 μmol/L), direct bilirubin 11.6 (0.1–10 μmol/L) and indirect bilirubin 18.1 (3–15 μmol/L). All numbers in parentheses mentioned above indicate the reference range. Thyroid function tests revealed that serum calcitonin, thyroid hormones, thyroid stimulating hormone, and anti-thyroid autoantibodies were normal.
A CT (computed tomography) scan of the chest demonstrated bronchitis and bilateral bullae of lung. A CT scan of the head and neck revealed the following: 1) A slightly higher density nodule (1.5 cm) in the cerebellum caused a slight space-occupying effect; 2) Thyroid neoplasm invaded the anterior superior mediastinum. The left lobar thyroid was enlarged and occupied by a large, slightly lower density mass 5.8 × 4.7 × 8.4 cm in size. The mass protruded down to the chest entrance level, and the main manifestations were scattered calcified lesions, flaky necrosis areas of low density, and inhomogeneous enhancement . In the right lobar thyroid, there was a slightly higher density of round nodules (1.3 × 1.2 cm) without calcification or significant enhancement. The trachea was pushed by the giant mass to the right side and became narrow . There were no abnormal visible lymph nodes in either side of the neck. Thyroid color Doppler ultrasound revealed a giant hypoechoic mass (7.1 × 4.7 × 2.4 cm) with clear separation and heterogeneous echotexture in the left lobar thyroid and a hybrid echo-mass (1.3 × 1.2 × 1.0 cm) in the right side. CDFI exhibited an obvious blood flow signal in the lower density mass.
The patient was transferred to the thyroid breast surgery department. Thyroid mass resection was performed to establish a diagnosis and to relieve the symptoms caused by tumor compression. During the operation, the markedly enlarged thyroid was easily observed, and the trachea was pushed to the right. Multiple masses of various sizes were noted in the bilateral thyroid. The largest of these masses (10.0 × 6.0 × 5.0 cm) was noted in the left lobar thyroid, and 2/5 of the mass was behind the sternum with an intact capsule. In addition, a small (1.8 × 1.2 × 1.0 cm) mass with a distinct border was located in the middle of the right lobar thyroid. These masses were completely removed and sent to the pathology department for frozen section examination. Frozen section histological results revealed nodular goiter of bilateral and focal atypical hyperplasia in the left lobe. The patient then underwent a total thyroidectomy with central neck area lymph node dissection.
The entire thyroid had a complete packing membrane and a dark red appearance. The cutting appearance of the thyroid revealed that the giant mass (8.1 × 5.0 × 4.5 cm) in the left lobe was solid with medium hard features and an uneven texture. In addition, the 1.8 × 1.2 × 1.0 cm mass in the right lobe was gelatinous, soft, and uniform in texture. Both masses had a complete capsule. No visible enlargement of the lymph nodes was detected in the central neck area. Twenty paraffin blocks were cut from the total thyroidectomy specimen, 15 of which were cut from the left lobe and 5 from the right. However, only 3 paraffin blocks in the left lobe contained tumor cells as demonstrated by subsequent microscopic examination.
All tumor cells were located in the interstitium of thyroid follicular cells without forming a clear boundary line, which appeared as an invasion of lymphocytes under low magnification . Thus, it might have been easy to miss the tumor under low magnification if pathologists had not been informed of the gross features. However, these tumor cells could be distinguished from mature small lymphocytes under lower magnification mainly based on their intravascular growth pattern, atypical nuclei and larger size. Capillaries in the lesion area filled by large atypical lymphoma cells exhibited an expanded appearance , which was quite different from normal capillary appearance. Under higher magnification, large-sized tumor cells exhibit minimal cytoplasm, a thick nuclear membrane, irregular nuclear contours, and prominent nucleoli and coarse to somewhat dispersed chromatin .
Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the large-sized tumor cells were positive for CD20, PAX-5, MUM-1 and BCL-2, and were negative for CD3, CD5, CD43, CD10, CD23, CyclinD1, CD138, CD30, ALK, CD56, MPO, S-100, TTF-1, thyroglobulin and calcitonin. The Ki-67 index was estimated to be approximately 85%. The intravascular growth pattern of the tumor cells was highlighted by CD34 staining of the endothelial cells . CD20 and CD34 staining revealed that the tumor cells were not involved in the right lobe of the thyroid or the central neck area lymph nodes.
Based on the clinical history and histopathological and immunohistochemistry results, the patient was diagnosed as “Classical” IVLBCL non-germinal center B-cell type. The patient was recommended to receive the BCL-6/BCL-2 and MYC gene re-arrangement test and 6 cycles of Rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisolone (R-CHOP) immunochemotherapy. However, the patient declined chemotherapy and died in the fifth month after operation.