A 71-year-old Saudi male patient with a 10-year history of hydatid disease involving the right kidney, retroperitoneum and right inguinal subcutaneous tissue, treated years earlier by a course of albendazole 400 mg daily for 2 months followed by partial nephrectomy, presented with multiple episodes of sudden attacks of shortness of breath and dull abdominal pain for the past 10 months. The attacks were severe enough to require multiple emergency room visits and admissions. The patient did not recall any significant history of trauma or lung infection. There was no history of chronic cough or chronic constipation. He had a significant past medical history of chronic kidney disease, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, renal stones and ischemic heart disease, for which he had undergone percutaneous coronary intervention 2 years earlier, and was started on antiplatelet therapy. The patient had also experienced several thrombotic events affecting his lower limbs in the form of “trash feet,” which were managed at that time without complications.
Abdominal examination was unremarkable except for a painless, soft swelling over the right inguinal region. Additionally, his routine blood tests and hydatid titer were within normal limits. Chest X-ray showed absence of a right diaphragmatic shadow, with bowel loops projecting over the lower chest above the level of the liver. A small pleural effusion was also present. For further evaluation of the condition, computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest and abdomen were performed and clearly demonstrated the presence of multiloculated cystic lesion at the upper pole of the right kidney, as shown in Fig. . The lesion was abutting the crus and the dome of the right hemidiaphragm. Further, a large diaphragmatic defect was seen at the posteromedial aspect with herniation of bowel loops and accompanying fat into the chest cavity. Subsequently, collapse of the lower lobe of the lung was evident.
Ten years earlier, magnetic resonance imaging and CT of the abdomen were performed in an outside hospital and demonstrated that the diaphragm was intact. There was also a larger retroperitoneal multiloculated lesion that abuts the crus of the right hemidiaphragm as well as its dome, notably at the posteromedial aspect. A smaller similar lesion was seen within the right kidney, as illustrated in Fig. .
Based on his clinical situation, the decision was made to repair his DH, hopefully through a laparoscopic approach.
The operation started as a diagnostic laparoscopy where major portions of the small bowel, omental fat, and ascending and transverse colon were found to be partially herniating through two diaphragmatic defects, located posteromedially. The defects were separated from each other by a delicate septum with a total defect size of about 10 × 15 cm, and neither had a hernia sac, as shown in Fig. . The diagnosis of right-sided adult Bochdalek hernia was established, and hernial components were successfully reduced back into the abdominal cavity. However, the absence of a posterior anchoring point of the diaphragm made approximation of diaphragmatic edges or mesh implantation difficult to accomplish laparoscopically. Therefore, the approach was changed to posterolateral thoracotomy, where the two orifices were connected to each other, creating a 10 cm defect. The hernia was repaired with Gore-Tex DualMesh (15.0 cm × 19.0 cm × 2.0 mm oval) using a bridging technique fixed with Prolene 0 non-absorbable sutures, as demonstrated in Fig. . Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit and kept intubated. Two days postoperatively, he developed deterioration in liver function, demonstrated in the form of elevated aspartate and alanine aminotransferases reaching 2400 and 2000 IU/L, respectively. CT scan was done and showed perfusion changes; however, hepatic and portal veins and hepatic arteries were all patent, with no evidence of biliary dilatation. Liver enzymes returned to baseline after a few days. The patient was discharged from the hospital in good condition on postoperative day 20.
Currently, 2 years postoperatively, the patient is symptom-free, with significant improvement in terms of his original complaints.