A 34-year old man was referred to the International Center of Immunodeficiency Diseases (ICID) in January 2011 with hypogammaglobulinemia diagnosed in the context of severe pneumococcal meningitis, for which he had been hospitalized in the intensive care unit the previous month. The patient, who was splenectomized due to ITP, had experienced a very rapid and aggressive clinical course with invasive disease despite the use of oral penicillin prior to admission. In the intensive care unit he had been treated with standard antibiotic therapy, including intravenous penicillin and ceftriaxone as well as dexamethasone. He had made an uneventful recovery without neurological deficits. However, persistently reduced levels of serum IgG of 2.6 g/L (6.1 g/L - 14.9 g/L) and IgA of 0.14 g/L (0.80 g/L – 3.90 g/L) but normal IgM of 0.73 g/L (0.39 g/L – 2.08 g/L) remained.
The patient had been diagnosed with ITP at 11 years of age in 1987. At that time, he had severe thrombocytopenia (3 × 109 cells/L), modest leukopenia (2.2 × 109 cells/L) and lymphadenopathy. Peripheral blood smear, bone marrow biopsy, and lymph node biopsy all displayed normal histology. According to his pediatric medical file, he reported no increased frequency of bacterial infections during childhood, and neither relatives nor siblings had any known immunodeficiencies or autoimmune diseases. He was treated with thrombocyte infusions and intravenous immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg) followed by a three-week course of corticosteroid (2 mg/kg) with a resultant rapid increase in thrombocyte count. Unfortunately, immunoglobulin levels were not measured at the time. Due to several relapses of severe thrombocytopenia with each tapering of corticosteroid treatment, he was subsequently splenectomized in 1988. Hepato-splenomegaly was observed during the operation, and pathological evaluation of the spleen displayed hyperplasia without malignancy. In 2001, several accessory spleens were scintigraphically demonstrated but not removed.
During the following years, he was followed at the University Hospital Department of Hematology, and several episodes of severe thrombocytopenia accompanied by bruises and petecchiae occurred, each time responding immediately, but transiently, to high-dose corticosteroid treatment. Lymph node biopsy due to persistent lymphadenopathy again revealed benign hyperplasia. Due to lack of an acceptable response to repeated courses of high-dose corticosteroid (100 mg daily), the patient was treated in January 2009 with four doses of Rituximab (375 mg/m2 iv.) one week apart. He had an excellent response with normalization of thrombocyte counts and a lasting response, so far for 36 months. Based on the stable platelets and the fact that the patient was a medical doctor, his contacts with the Hematology Department were restricted to e-mails based on platelet counts performed twice a year.
After a vacation in Mallorca spent sailing in December 2010 the patient returned home with an upper respiratory tract infection as well as diarrhoea and vomiting. The patient developed high fevers and confusion and was admitted to the Department of Infectious Diseases, where pneumococcal meningitis was diagnosed. Within a few hours the patient became unconscious necessitating transfer to the Intensive Care Unit on mechanical ventilation, where he received ten days of antibiotic treatment and made a successful recovery. At presentation in the ICID with hypogammaglobulinemia in January 2011, it turned out that the patient had been suffering from several infections during the past two years, since Rituximab treatment in January 2009. He reported frequent episodes of upper airway infections, (although no sinusitis or pneumonia) and gastrointestinal symptoms, including almost daily discomfort and diarrhoea. According to his pediatric medical file, he had received appropriate vaccination before the splenectomy, and also reported having followed up correctly on pneumococcal antibody status and re-vaccination as prescribed.
An extensive immunological evaluation was performed in an attempt to distinguish between a primary immunodeficiency possibly aggravated by Rituximab treatment or, alternatively, hypogammaglobulinemia induced by Rituximab treatment. The results are summarized below and illustrated in Figure .
The patient had severely reduced serum IgG (2.6 g/L) with all subclasses affected except IgG3, and reduced IgA (0.14 g/L), whereas IgM was normal. Blood tests taken before Rituximab treatment revealed that selective IgA deficiency was present already in 2007, whereas normal levels (although only slightly above the lower limit dating back to 2001) of serum IgG had been measured at several occasions during the period between February 2007 and January 2009. In addition, low levels of isohaemagglutinins were present. Thrombocyte-specific antibodies (IgG with unknown allo-specificity) were present repeatedly in 2001, 2007, and 2008. In January 2009 just prior to Rituximab infusion membrane-bound but no soluble anti-thrombocyte antibodies were detectable, but were absent in 2010 and 2011 at several occasions. Finally, in March 2007 he had insufficient pneumococcal antibody levels following latest vaccination in February 2001. During the first evaluation in our department in 2010 he again had insufficient pneumococcal antibody levels despite vaccination in 2007 as well as in 2009 prior to Rituximab treatment. Antibody levels against difteria- and tetanus toxin were within normal limits in December 2010.
The number of B cells in the peripheral blood was evaluated by flow cytometry in 2001 and revealed a normal fraction of CD19/CD20+ cells without evidence of light chain restriction. At evaluation in January 2011, flow cytometry revealed a severely reduced fraction (0.1%) of isotype-switched memory B cells (CD19/20+ IgD- IgM- CD38- CD27+) (Additional file : Table S1). Additionally, selective reductions in marginal zone-like B cells (CD19/20+ IgD + IgM + CD38- CD27+) and absence of plasmablasts (CD19+ CD20- IgD- IgM+/− CD38+ CD27+) were observed. Within the T cell compartment only minor abnormalities were demonstrated (Additional file : Table S1), including a major, and possibly increased fraction of 15% of CD4- CD8- double negative T cells (normal range 4–11%) [,], a slightly decreased fraction of naïve cells among CD4 T cells, and a bias towards a terminally differentiated memory fraction among CD8 T cells. Consistent with this, lymphocyte proliferation analyses in response to a range of mitogens (PHA and PWM) and antigens (PPD, C. albicans, S. aureus, and tetanus toxoid) were all within normal limits. Histopathology and flow analysis of the bone marrow aspirate demonstrated a normal bone marrow with stimulated thrombopoiesis but without the existence of clonality or malignancy. Additional flow analyses of the bone marrow aspirate demonstrated abnormal distribution of B cells with increased fraction of CD19+ CD20- and absence of IgD- IgM- CD27+ memory B cells (Additional file : Figure S1).
Complement activation, including classical-, alternative-, and lectine pathways, were all normal.
By Ig gene rearrangement analysis no evidence of clonality was observed in the unfractionated B-cells or in B-cell subsets obtained by FACS. Somatic hypermutation within immunoglobulin kappa gene transcripts was not detected, although the result was uncertain due to very low numbers of B cells. Mutations associated with CVID were not demonstrated in either ICOS or TACI, and other potential mutations within BAFF-R, CD19, CD20 or CD81 were not analyzed.
Based on the results of these immunological analyses, particularly the low number of isotype- switched memory B cells, a presumptive diagnosis of CVID was made. Within CVID classification systems, the patient fulfilled the criteria for Freiburg type Ia and EUROClass group smB-Tr(high) CD21(low). In February 2011 subcutaneous immunoglobulin replacement therapy was initiated with Subcuvia 60 mL weekly and within three months of treatment his IgG level had risen to 7.6 g/L. In June 2011 flow cytometric evaluation of B and T cell subsets was performed, demonstrating a persistently significantly reduced fraction of isotype-switched memory B cells of 0.1%, although his total circulating CD19+ B lymphocyte count had risen to 1089 cells × 106/L (21.3% of total lymphocytes) compared to 285 cells × 106/L (12.1% of total lymphocytes) in January 2011 (Additional file : Table S1). Currently as of October 2012, he is doing well, does not experience increased frequency of bacterial infections receiving 60 mL subcutaneous immunoglobulin weekly (obtaining an IgG level ranging between 8 g/L and 10 g/L). Importantly, he preserves a normal thrombocyte count of 335 × 109 cells/L more than three years after Rituximab treatment for ITP.