A 34-year-old white man with type 1 diabetes mellitus presented to our hospital with a complaint of a 3-week history of bilateral blurred vision and headaches with vomiting. He was a carpenter by profession and had insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus for 30 years. He had mild systemic hypertension and a raised cholesterol level. He smoked four or five cigarettes per day and drank alcohol only on social occasions. He described his blood sugar control as poor with his hemoglobin A1c level always above 10%. His medications included NovoRapid (Novo Nordisk, Bagsværd, Denmark) and insulin detemir, aspirin 75 mg, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ramipril 10 mg), and a statin (rosuvastatin 10 mg).
He had persistent active bilateral proliferative diabetic retinopathy despite full PRP treatment. Four weeks prior to his presentation, he had undergone CABG in an attempt to improve his left ventricular function and attain fitness for combined renal and pancreatic transplant surgery. Following treatment for renal disease-related anemia with an erythropoietin-stimulating agent, his preoperative hemoglobin level was recorded as 13.0 g/dl. He was again anemic with hemoglobin below 9.0 g/dl during the first postoperative week, with the lowest level being 7.7 g/dl on day 7 and with a minimum hematocrit of 0.24 L/L on day 4. He was treated with iron sucrose darbepoetin alfa infusions, and by day 34 his hemoglobin had improved to 10.7 g/dl.
On presentation, his general condition was fair, but he was in pain because of his eye condition. His pulse was 70 beats per minute, regular, and of good volume, and his blood pressure was 142/80 mmHg. He had no organomegaly and no evidence of peripheral vascular insufficiency. His heart and breath sounds were normal. On ocular examination, his visual acuity was barely counting fingers in the right eye and 6/60 (Snellen chart) in the left eye. An anterior segment examination revealed a hazy right cornea, bilateral neovascularization of the iris, and intraocular pressure of 70 mmHg in the right eye and 40 mmHg in the left by applanation tonometry. The patient had poor fundal view owing to vitreous hemorrhage. He was put on the maximum tolerated antiglaucoma medication, consisting of guttae brimonidine 0.2% twice daily to both eyes, guttae timolol 0.5% twice daily to both eyes, guttae latanoprost at night to both eyes, and acetazolamide tablet 250 mg orally three times daily. He underwent transscleral diode laser cycloablation while under peribulbar anesthesia for the pain and raised intraocular pressure. He had symptomatic relief of the pain, but his visual acuity declined to no perception of light in the right and left eyes.