An 18 year old male fell from roof of a moving truck. The truck was moving at low speed and he fell on muddy floor from a height of approximately 12 feet and sustained impact over abdomen. He was admitted in Nepalgunj medical college where contrast enhanced computed tomography of abdomen showed grade III liver injury. He was managed conservatively with bed rest, 12 units of blood transfusion then discharged. He presented 15 days later to Alka Hospital emergency department with complaints of pain abdomen, excessive tiredness and vomiting of blood. His vitals in the emergency were pulse 100/min, blood pressure 90/60 mmHg, respiratory rate 20/min and temperature 99 degree F. Contrast enhanced computed tomography of abdomen was done which showed pseudoaneurysm of right hepatic artery with ruptured hematoma in segments VI, VII and VIII of liver . Clot was present in the pelvis and lesser sac. Haemoglobin was 8 g/dL.
Patient was immediately transferred to intensive care unit and started on intravenous fluid, antibiotics. Blood transfusion was started but the patient became hemodynamically unstable. Patient was transferred to operation theatre and exploratory laparotomy was done. Intraoperative finding was approximately three litres of clot and blood in lesser sac and pelvis with approximately 5 cm laceration in segments VII and VIII of liver. Bleeding from the liver surface was controlled with gel foam packing, surgicell application. Drains were kept in Morrison’s pouch and pelvis. Five units of packed cell and two units of fresh frozen plasma was transfused intraoperatively. The pseudoaneurysm couldn’t be clipped intraoperatively due to the difficult location and hemodynamic instability of the patient. Postoperatively patient was transferred to intensive care unit. Patient was transfused with two units of blood postoperatively. Patient was transferred to the general ward on third postoperative day. Patient was discharged on eighth postoperative day.
On the 15th post operative day patient presented with hematemesis two episodes. On presentation to the out patient department, he was hemodynamically stable. CECT abdomen revealed hematoma in right lobe of liver with right hepatic artery pseudoaneurysm. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was done which confirmed hemobilia. Coil embolization of the pseudoaneurysm was planned and he was transferred to the interventional radiology unit in Tribhuvan University Teaching Hospital. Under aseptic precaution using femoral artery access coil embolization of hepatic artery pseudoaneurysm was done. Three coils were used for embolization .
On the third post embolization day, patient developed high grade fever and persistent cough. Chest examination revealed basal crepitations on right side. Chest X ray and contrast enhanced computed tomography chest showed right lower lobe consolidation . Patient was started on intravenous antibiotics but the cough didn’t subside. Sputum content was sanguinous. On the seventh post embolisation day patient coughed up bile and a diagnosis of post traumatic bronchobiliary fistula was made. Bilioptysis increased with supine position. Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography was performed which showed an area of bile leak at right hepatic lobe close to the diaphragm at right anterior duct. Contrast was seen spilling into the right bronchial tree confirming fistulation. No obvious tract was noted. Modest sphincterotomy was performed and 10 Fr double pigtail stent was deployed. Post stenting the cough and bilioptysis resolved and the patient was discharged on the third day post endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. The stent was removed at 2 months. Follow up ultrasound scan at 2 months showed complete resolution of the hematoma.