A 16-year-old Caucasian boy was brought to the emergency department of our hospital after a motor vehicle accident. According to the description of the accident, the young man was hurled from his motorcycle and hit an immobile obstacle, impacting on it with his anterior abdominal wall. He had no apparent external injuries. When he arrived at the hospital he was haemodynamically stable with a blood pressure reading of 120/80 mmHg, a heart rate of 88 pulses/minute and a Glasgow Coma Scale(GCS) score of 15. The patient experienced pain and tenderness on palpation of his right upper abdominal quadrant; the rest of his abdomen was soft and nontender to palpation.
The patient underwent laboratory and radiological examination consisting of x-rays of his head, cervical spine, lumbar spine, chest and abdomen. His blood was cross-matched and an ultrasound examination of his abdominal region was performed in the emergency department to rule out any intra-abdominal haemorrhage and/or any organ injury. Laboratory results showed no specific pathological values (haematocrit of 41% and a white blood cell count of 9,500K/μl). The initial workup did not include serum amylase levels, since a basic serum biochemistry was examined at that time. Plain radiological and ultrasound examinations of the patient showed no pathological findings either. Soon after being admitted to hospital, the patient presented haematemesis and his clinical condition deteriorated. His abdominal pain increased at this time. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan without contrast agent administration was subsequently performed. This revealed a retroperitoneal haematoma at the level of the duodenum .
Due to the patient's clinical condition worsening and the CT findings, we did not deem it necessary to perform an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, and decided to proceed to an immediate exploratory laparotomy. The patient's peritoneal cavity was approached through a midline supra-umbilical incision. No solid organ bleeding or injury was found intraperitoneally. In the region of the head of the pancreas and the second part of the patient's duodenum, there was a retroperitoneal haematoma, which upon investigation was found to contain a fully circumferential rupture of the second part of the duodenum. There was also an apparently superficial rupture of the head of the patient's pancreas.
Both stumps of the patient's injured duodenum were dissected and Vater's papilla was found to be next to the distal stump. The major pancreatic duct was catheterised through the papilla of Vater and saline was injected to check for the presence of a rupture and none was found. The bile duct was also catheterised - as in the case of the pancreatic duct - but no rupture was found along it. Debridement of the stump edges followed, as far as was possible. Due to the position and the extent of the lesion, the risk of disrupting the blood supply of the remaining parts of the patient's duodenum was high and the option of restoration of the duodenal continuity with a primary end-to-end anastomosis was ruled out.
In order to restore the continuity of the patient's duodenum, we decided to interpose a pedicled loop of ileum (middle part of ileum) to bridge the gap. The two end-to-end anastomoses were performed at two layers (the bottom one in continuous suture) following catheterisation of Vater's papilla through a choledochotomy so that the papilla could be located and immobilised, in order to avoid including it in the suture line . Finally, a T-tube was placed through the choledochotomy and an intraoperative cholangiography confirmed that the patient's bile duct was unobstructed and the contrast agent was passing freely into the duodenum. There was no loss of blood during the operation. For better recovery, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit, where he stayed for five days without presenting any particular problems.
Postoperatively, the patient was given octreotide subcutaneously at a dosage of 0.1 mg three times a day for a total of 15 days to treat his pancreatic injury. His haematocrit remained stable at about 38%, and his white blood cell count stayed at a steady level of around 10,000 K/μl. His serum amylase level was on average 100 IU/L. On the 10th postoperative day, the patient had mild leukocytosis (17,000 × 103/μl), a serum amylase level of 166 IU/L and a body temperature of up to 38.8°C. An abdominal CT scan showed fluid collection in the region of the head of the patient's pancreas, which was clearly demarcated and not compatible with a pseudocyst. The consensus was that these were manifestations of pancreatitis. The antibiotic treatment was changed from intravenous ampicillin/sulbactam 3 grams once a day to intravenous ciprofloxacin 400 mg two times a day and in the next few days the patient's body temperature dropped and there was a gradual decrease in his white blood cell count and serum amylase levels. The patient continued to be given fluids parenterally. Abdominal CT scans performed on postoperative days 12 and 19 showed a reduction of the fluid in the region of the head of the patient's pancreas and significant improvement of the original imaging findings. The patient was orally fed from the 14th postoperative day and tolerated this very well. An upper gastrointestinal series with water-soluble contrast medium (Gastrografin) was performed on the 20th postoperative day. The contrast material passed easily from the patient's stomach to the duodenum and no stenosis in the region of the anastomoses or leaks or fistulae appeared . A cholangiography was also performed through the T-tube. This showed a satisfactory flow through the patient's bile duct and an unobstructed passage of the contrast agent to his duodenum . The T-tube was removed the following day (21st postoperative day). The patient was discharged on the 22nd postoperative day in excellent general condition and has remained so to present date, five years later.