We present a case of a 6.8-kg, 5-month-old Hispanic girl who was brought to the emergency room for 1 day of fever, vomiting, seizures, and leftward gaze deviation. Initial computed tomography revealed a large hemorrhagic intracranial mass in the suprasellar and third ventricular region causing obstructive hydrocephalus. An emergent extraventricular drain was placed, a magnetic resonance imaging study was obtained, and the girl was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU). Other than left gaze preference and clonus, the result of her examination was unremarkable, with normal capillary refill and no sunken fontanels, though a full examination was limited by sedation and her hydrocephalus. On hospital day 3, the mass was surgically resected, and its pathology was consistent with stage IV glioblastoma.
Prior to resection, she developed CDI, and a vasopressin infusion was initiated. Vasopressin was titrated to maintain urine output between 2 and 4 ml/kg/hour and was discontinued on postoperative day (POD) 1. On POD 3, she became hyponatremic with low to normal urine output, thought to be SIADH. On POD 7, she again became polyuric, but with continued hyponatremia and elevated urine sodium. She was started on sodium and fluid supplementation in the form of 0.9% NaCl, 3% NaCl, and enteral NaCl tablets to treat CSW. On POD 8, she developed brisk and dilute urine output, with serum hypernatremia, requiring reinitiation of a vasopressin infusion and temporary cessation of sodium supplementation for CDI . By the next day, she became hyponatremic with continued polyuria, suggestive of concurrent ongoing CSW, and sodium supplementation was resumed.
She fluctuated between hypo-osmolar and hyperosmolar polyuria. Trials of discontinuing vasopressin only resulted in worsened polyuria, so she remained on a vasopressin infusion. To promote renal sodium retention, fludrocortisone was started at 0.025 mg twice daily on POD 11 and increased to three times daily on POD 17 [, ]. Sodium supplementation was adjusted to maintain normonatremia. Urine output in excess of 4 ml/kg/hour was replaced with lactated Ringer solution, 0.45% NaCl, and 0.9% NaCl respective of her urine sodium content. A timeline of various fluid and sodium treatments and examples of laboratory findings that guided treatment are described in Fig. . It was presumed that the component CSW would resolve over time. Her serum sodium concentration remained generally stable, with urine output ranging from 2 to 8 ml/kg/hour. Her fluid balance was nearly even, although maintaining this balance required aggressive and frequent fluid replacement.
On POD 20, her urine output began increasing precipitously, reaching over 40 ml/kg/hour in the following days. Her vasopressin infusion was increased accordingly, with no effect in slowing her output . By this time, her acute neurosurgical issues had otherwise resolved, but she remained in the PICU for fluid management and vasopressin. Her fluid volume status was again maintained, with moist mucous membranes and flat fontanels observed on examination, though she required progressively larger fluid replacement to match her rising urine output. This pronounced polyuria, and apparent inefficacy of increased vasopressin prompted consultation with pediatric nephrology on POD 27.
She had previously responded well to vasopressin; she was given no known medications associated with NDI; her electrolytes other than sodium and chloride were within normal limits; and her creatinine was appropriate for her age, ranging from 0.06 to 0.12 mg/dl, ruling out most acute and congenital causes of NDI. Other causes of urinary concentration defects were therefore considered. Her total protein upon admission was normal, but her serum albumin had decreased from 3.7 mg/dl upon admission to 2.9 mg/dl. In the days prior to consultation, her hemoglobin decreased from 11.5 to 8.5 g/dl. Her blood urea nitrogen (BUN) became undetectable, which was thought to reflect a protein deficiency and depleted renal urea gradient . Prolonged increased fluid and solute intake with hypertension and daily sodium intake of 20 mEq/kg/day were also thought to exacerbate her polyuria, further depleting her osmotic gradient. As such, her fluid replacement was incrementally decreased by 2 ml/kg/hour each day, and she was started on enteral protein supplementation to restore her osmotic gradient. Within 4 days of treatment, her BUN increased, and her urine output, vasopressin needs, and fluid replacement dramatically decreased . Fludrocortisone was discontinued; protein supplementation was stopped by POD 31. She then exhibited a singular CDI physiology and remained only on vasopressin without need for frequent fluid replacements. She was transitioned to subcutaneous desmopressin on POD 33 and transferred to the general ward on POD 39. After hospital discharge, she remained on desmopressin long term.