The now 44-year-old male had been diagnosed with an overactive bladder at the age of 20 and had been on dutasteride/tamsulosin for the past 24 years. Now, he presented with a 2 year history of progressive bilateral lower limb numbness/paraparesis, in conjunction with perianal, scrotal, and penile numbness. His neurological examination revealed impaired light touch and temperature sensation below the level of T1 bilaterally, and proprioceptive ataxia. He was hyper-reflexic in the right knee and ankle jerks and there was an extensor plantar reflex on the right. There was no motor deficit.
The thoracic spine MRI demonstrated a well demarcated, 1.3 × 0.9 × 2.0 cm (TV × AP × CC) ovoid intramedullary lesion in the dorsal cord at T3/4; it expanded and displaced the cord to the left. There was also a smaller, caudal, and exophytic component. On the MR, the lesion was solid, homogeneous, and hypointense on T1-weighted images, hyperintense on T2-weighted images and did not enhance with gadolinium [ and ]. It also demonstrated restricted diffusion (e.g., on diffusion weighted studies), while spectroscopy identified water and lactate within the lesion .
A T2-T3 laminectomy with laminoplasty was performed. Once the dura was opened, the intramedullary cyst was immediately identified coming to the cord surface on the right; it is exophytic component was glistening white and thin walled [ and ]. A plane was developed between cyst and cord, enabling meticulous resection while avoiding spillage of cyst contents into the subarachnoid space.
The histologic examination confirmed an EC lined with a thin layer of keratinizing stratified squamous epithelium on a fibrocollagenous base. It contained abundant anucleate squames. No dermal skin appendages were identified in the wall of the cyst and there were no luminal hair shafts .
The patient received a single dose of 8 mg of intravenous dexamethasone given at the time of induction of anesthesia. This was followed by a 7 day postoperative tapering course of oral dexamethasone (starting with 4 mg tid). Postoperatively, the patient never developed symptoms or signs of chemical meningitis and was discharged to rehabilitation shortly thereafter.