A male neonate was born at 25 + 6 weeks of gestation to 35 years old gravida 2, parity1 (G2P1) mother with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. This was an in vitro fertilization (IVF) pregnancy. She was Rubella immune and negative for Hepatitis B surface antigen, Venereal disease research laboratory test (VDRL), Human immunodeficiency virus, Gonococci and Chlamydia. Her urine culture and vaginal swab for Group B Streptococci was also negative. Her anatomy scan at 18 weeks of gestation showed normal fetal anatomy and a short cervix for which she underwent cervical cerclage placement at 20 + 5 weeks gestation. There was no history of chorioamnionitis or prolonged rupture of membranes. She presented at 25 + 5 weeks with preterm labor and had a spontaneous vaginal delivery the next day. She had received two doses of Betamethasone and Magnesium sulphate prior to delivery. He initially required positive pressure ventilation followed by intubation and surfactant administration with an acceptable response. Umbilical arterial and venous catheters were placed and the neonate was transferred to neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) in a stable condition.
A blood culture was drawn at birth and empiric treatment with Ampicillin and Gentamicin was intiated. The antibiotics were discontinued after 36 hours as the blood culture showed no growth and he remained clinically stable. In addition, as per unit protocol, an endotracheal aspirate was sent for a Ureaplasma culture on admission. This grew a Mycoplasma species for which 3 days of intravenous Azithromycin was given.
A head ultrasound on day 4 of life showed bilateral intraventricular hemorrhage (grade 3) with mild ventriculomegaly and a hemorrhagic venous infarct in the right frontoparietal region. Umbilical arterial catheter was removed on day 4 of life whereas umbilical venous catheter was removed on day 6 of life. He remained stable till day 7 of life when he presented with an acute clinical deterioration presenting as lethargy and tachycardia; a septic work up including blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cultures was completed and Vancomycin and Cefotaxime were started as empiric antibiotics. His CSF analysis showed red blood cells (RBC) count of 4887 × 10E6/l, pleocytosis of white blood cells (WBC) 9620 × 10E6/l with neutrophilic predominance, hyperproteorachia - protein 8300 mg/l and hypoglycorachia - glucose 0.1 mmoles/liter. Gram staining in CSF was negative. Within hours he developed generalized clinical seizures which was treated with Lorazepam and Phenobarbital followed by a Levetiracetam load and maintenance dose. He had further episodes of clinical and subclinical seizures which resolved after further adjustment of levetiracetam doses.
His first CSF culture was suspected to grow Mycoplasma Hominis and was sent to the regional national diagnostic laboratory for confirmation. The CSF culture was repeated along with a sample for 16s ribosomal RNA PCR analyses. The 16s ribosomal RNA PCR analysis confirmed Mycoplasma hominis in both CSF samples. Antibiotics were then changed to Moxifloxacin and Doxycycline. The repeat CSF culture after 48 hours of Moxifloxacin and Doxycycline showed no growth. CSF analysis done seven days after starting this treatment showed RBC 5650 × 10E6/l, WBC 449 × 10E6/l, protein 3763 mg/l and glucose 0.2 mmoles/liter. Subsequent CSF findings repeated after another three days showed further improvement, RBC 7187 × 10E6/l, WBC 93 × 10E6/l, protein 3691 mg/l and glucose 0.5 mmoles/liter. No growth was seen on any of these CSF cultures. Serial head ultrasound scans were done which showed progressive ventriculomegaly, post hemorrhagic ventricular dilatation and cystic evolution of hemorrhagic/venous infarct in the right frontoparietal region. Although these findings could be attributed to extreme prematurity; there is a likelihood that infection with Mycoplasma Hominis may have played a role in its progression. There have been documented cases of Mycoplasma Hominis meningitis resulting in CNS complications including intraventricular and periventricular hemorrhage, hydrocephalus, and infarction . Lumbar taps were repeated as therapeutic measure to reduce ventriculomegaly, but optimal volumes of CSF were not obtained. Because of the ventriculomegaly, he was evaluated for a possible shunt on day 31; this was deferred because of the stable ventriculomegaly.
Antibiotics were given for a total duration of six weeks after which he was discharged home with a normal neurological examination. He was referred to Neurodevelopmental clinic for follow-up.