A 33-year-old woman initially presented with osmotic symptoms and a fasting blood glucose of 9 mmol/L, and was started on metformin and low dose gliclazide. Episodes of hypoglycemia started 3 months later, prompting the cessation of both these medications. However, her symptoms persisted and she experienced episodes of palpitation, sweating and dizziness at her workplace. Upon arrival at the Emergency Room, her blood glucose was confirmed to be below 3 mmol/L, and her symptoms improved following dextrose infusion. Physical examination revealed a well-built woman with a body mass index of 28.4kg/m2 and other examinations were unremarkable. She gave further history of intermittent dizziness, palpitation and sweating during exercise and while performing house chores within the last few months in the absence of any anti-diabetic medications. These symptoms occurred at any time of the day, with no clear predilection for the fasting periods. She had also been experiencing gradual weight gain over the last few months, but denied changes in behavior or morning headaches, and has not been taking traditional medications or supplements. She had no previous medical, surgical nor psychological history, and she had not been taking any prescribed medication. Interestingly, her late father who had hypertension and end-stage renal disease on dialysis was diagnosed with insulinoma 2 years previously, but unfortunately succumbed to septicemic shock secondary to pneumonia. Her 8 siblings had been well with no known medical illness. She had no allergies and never smoked. She lived with her sister and was financially independent as a shop assistant.
She was admitted and further investigated for unprovoked hypoglycemia. Her baseline blood results, including her hemoglobin, white cell count, platelets, renal and liver profiles were all within normal ranges. She was commenced on a prolonged fast, and developed hypoglycemia within 9 hours of fasting, with symptoms of sweating, palpitations and drowsiness, confirmed by a capillary blood glucose of 2.8mmol/l.
The results were suggestive of insulinoma, with venous blood glucose of 2.3 mmol/l, Insulin 24 uIU/L (6-27) and C-Peptide 1685 pmol/L (165-662). However, subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan with pancreatic protocol did not reveal any significant pancreatic lesions. In view of the family history of insulinoma, the possibility of Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia (MEN) 1 was entertained. However, further investigations revealed negative results . She was planned for further diagnostic workup, including an endoscopic ultrasound, unfortunately she was lost to subsequent follow-up for the next few months.
She presented six months later to a gynecologist with lower abdominal pain and irregular menses. She had learnt to overcome the intermittent symptoms of hypoglycemia in the interim by eating regular small meals. A computed tomography scan of the abdomen showed no pancreatic lesions, but revealed a left ovarian mass measuring 3.6 × 3.7 × 4cm, with features suggestive of a teratoma. Refer . The possibility of an insulin-producing ovarian teratoma was therefore considered, and while waiting for surgery, continuous unprovoked hypoglycemia necessitated diazoxide therapy, with some alleviation in her symptoms. She subsequently underwent laparoscopic left oopherectomy a few weeks later, and the histopathological examination reported a benign dermoid cyst. Unfortunately, the hypoglycemic episodes persisted after surgery requiring higher doses of diazoxide.
She underwent another battery of investigations for localization of the insulin-producing lesion, including a repeated CT pancreatic protocol, endoscopic ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pancreas, all of which failed to reveal any significant abnormalities. Refer . She subsequently underwent a selective arterial calcium stimulation test. This is an arteriography requiring catheterization of arterial branches of the celiac system supplying the pancreas, with calcium injections and simultaneous measurement of the hepatic vein insulin. An increase in insulin level accompanied by a raised c-peptide localizes the source of endogenous hyperinsulinism to a specific part of the pancreas, namely the pancreatic head, body or tail.
The results of the SACST was highly suggestive of localization towards the region supplied by the splenic artery, corresponding to the tail of pancreas. However, as the various imaging results were unable to confirm a definitive lesion, surgery was deemed inappropriate at that time. She continued to have intermittent episodes of hypoglycemia requiring increasing doses of diazoxide, and even short courses of prednisolone during hospital admissions for severe hypoglycemia. These caused significant disruptions in her work schedule, which led to termination of her employment, and subsequent financial and psychological burden. We continued to monitor her condition with periodic imaging of the pancreas and intermittent discussions with the surgeon. Due to the gradual worsening of her symptoms, a distal pancreatectomy was finally performed by a group of Endocrine and Hepatobiliary surgeons, almost 3 years after her initial presentation. Intraoperative ultrasonography showed a heterogenous hyperechoic lesion measuring 10.1 mm × 8.2 mm at the tail of pancreas, which corresponded to the thickened area palpated at the tail of pancreas. Histopathological examinations confirmed an islet cell hyperplasia. Her symptoms resolved almost immediately following the surgery. Approximately 4 months later she demonstrated levels of hyperglycemia, and was started on oral anti-diabetic medications. Her quality of life improved considerably, she was able to comply to the medications prescribed and was able to return to work. The patient remained under our follow up with regular biochemical monitoring. From her perspective, she initially could not understand the delay in the diagnosis and the need for the series of tests that she had to endure. Nevertheless, she remained positive throughout the whole challenging experience. She expressed her utmost appreciation and gratitude to the teams of physicians and surgeons involved in her management. She provided written informed consent for the publication of this case report and its related images.