We describe the case of a 65-year-old man who underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy for medical screening, which revealed two early stage type 0–IIc ESCC lesions 28–33 cm and 38–42 cm from the incisors. Endoscopic submucosal dissection was performed from the oral side of the lesions. The histopathological depth of the lesions was pT1b (SM2) in the eighth edition of the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC)–Tumor Node Metastasis (TNM) classification . In addition, fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)–positron emission tomography (PET)–computed tomography (CT) image revealed FDG uptake in regional lymph nodes (#2, #106, #108) and a 2-cm nodule at segment 6 of the right lung. Therefore, additional treatment was recommended according to the Guidelines for Diagnosis and Treatment of Carcinoma of Esophagus . Furthermore, we decided to simultaneously resect ESCC and the lung tumor after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC), because the lung tumor was suspected to be ESCC metastasis or primary lung cancer. After the administration of NAC with 5-fluorouracil (800 mg/m2) and cisplatin (80 mg/m2), thoracoscopic subtotal esophagectomy was performed; this was followed by reconstruction with a gastric conduit via the retrosternal route. The lung tumor was resected at the same time. Based on histopathological examinations under 8th UICC–TNM classification, both esophageal tumors were diagnosed as ESCCs (pT1bN3M0 stage III), and the lung tumor was diagnosed as adenocarcinoma (pT1N0M0 stage IA). After the surgery, the patient was discharged without complications. Eight months after the first surgery, local recurrence was observed at the anastomosis and the left cervical lymph node. dCRT with 5-fluorouracil (700 mg/m2) and cisplatin (70 mg/m2) combined with 60-Gy radiation for supraclavicular and superior mediastinal lesions was performed as curative treatment, and post-treatment CT scan revealed a complete response. Follow-up endoscopy performed 7 months after CRT revealed a ridge in the right piriform fossa that was diagnosed as hypopharyngeal carcinoma . CT and FDG-PET also showed a right cervical lymph node swelling with high FDG uptake . Radical resection was chosen as treatment, because the tumor and lymph node metastases were localized. We collaborated with head and neck, esophageal, and plastic surgeons to perform total pharyngolaryngectomy. After bilateral cervical lymph node dissection, the cervical esophagus was found to be controlled. To prevent injury to the anastomosis, minimal adhesiolysis of the dorsum of the esophagus was performed. However, the esophagus was firmly attached behind the sternum by adhesions . Although sternotomy was necessary to resect the anastomosis, we used indocyanine green (ICG)-based photodynamic diagnosis to determine whether the remnant cervical esophagus could be retained in place. The proximal side of the remnant esophagus was ligated with the left superior and inferior thyroid arteries; subsequently, 5 mg of ICG was injected. The remnant cervical esophagus was illuminated using a near-infrared laser beam from a thoracoscopic system (Karl Storz, Germany) . We planned to preserve the remnant esophagus with the anastomosis. One hour after pharyngolaryngeal resection, an additional 5 mg of ICG was injected again, and we were able to confirm blood flow to the remnant esophagus. Therefore, we preserved approximately 4 cm of remnant esophagus and performed reconstruction with free jejunum using vascular anastomosis and permanent tracheostomy . The total operation time was 618 min, and the blood loss was 306 g. Based on the TNM criteria, the tumor was classified as stage IVA (pT2N2bM0) . After 14 days of surgery, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed good coloration of the mucosa and no anastomotic leakage or stricture . The patient resumed oral intake on the same day as the endoscopy procedure, and he was discharged without complications on postoperative day 38. A metastatic lymph node was observed in the right neck 10 months after the second surgery. Immune checkpoint inhibitors and chemotherapy, including pembrolizumab (200 mg/body), 5-fluorouracil (700 mg/m2), and cisplatin (70 mg/m2), were administered, and the patient is alive and under treatment after 1.5 years of the second surgery.