A 42-year-old Taiwanese woman was admitted to our hospital due to hepatic tumors found incidentally during a routine check-up.
The patient denied any symptoms including abdominal pain, loss of body weight, and anorexia.
The patient denied any history of liver disease, including chronic hepatitis B or C viral infection. She was not taking any medications such as oral contraceptives or estrogens. She had been smoking 2 to 5 cigarettes per day for ten years but denied alcohol use. Her family history was negative for hereditary disease or malignancy.
Physical examination revealed no yellowish discoloration of the skin or sclera. There was no superficial lymph node enlargement, including the neck and the supra-clavicular, axillary, and inguinal regions. The abdomen was soft with no shifting dullness or tenderness.
Routine blood tests revealed the following: White blood cell count, 9950/µL; hemoglobin, 15.0 g/dL; prothrombin time, 10.6 s; and international normalized ratio, 1.0. Biochemistry metrics included aspartate aminotransferase, 37 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 82 U/L; total bilirubin, 0.6 mg/dL; albumin, 3.5 g/dL; alkaline phosphatase, 167 U/L; and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 180 U/L. Viral serology showed negativity for hepatitis B surface antigen and anti-hepatitis C virus antibodies. The tumor markers alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, cancer antigen 199, and cancer antigen 125 were all in the normal range.
Tri-phasic, contrast-enhanced abdominal computer tomography (CT) revealed several heterogeneous masses and nodules in both lobes of the liver with a maximal size of 8.3 cm at segment 4. The masses showed uneven enhancement in the arterial phase . The enhancement washout occurred in the portal venous phase and delayed phase .
A percutaneous ultrasound-guided liver biopsy was performed on the patient. Microscopical examination showed epithelioid tumor cells with moderate nuclear atypia, as well as focal intracytoplasmic melanin pigments arranged in solid nests infiltrating in the liver parenchyma . Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the specimen was HMB45 diffusely positive , Melan-A diffusely positive , SOX10 diffusely positive , cytokeratin negative , and BRAF-V600E positive . Based on the findings of pathological and immunohistochemical staining, melanoma was diagnosed.
After the pathologic diagnosis was confirmed, a detailed medical history was recorded. The patient had no history of any excised melanocytic or pigmented lesion. Comprehensive and rigorous examinations were performed. No skin lesions were found on her skin surface, including the scalp, face, soles of the feet, genitalia, and anus. Otolaryngologic and ophthalmologic examinations were normal. Upper gastrointestinal panendoscopy and colonoscopy showed negative results. Positron emission tomography-computer tomography (PET-CT) was performed and showed multiple fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid mass lesions in the bilateral lobes of the liver, with the most prominent being about 8.2 cm in size at segment 4 with an maximum standardized uptake value of 11.9. No marked FDG-avid primary cutaneous melanoma lesion was found.