A 67-year-old male of African origin from the Kilimanjaro region north of Tanzania was referred to us for expert management. He is a retired agromechanic with over 30 years exposure to asbestos-containing brake linings. His past medical history was unremarkable, but the family-social history was evident for a heavy alcohol intake (5 units/day) and chronic cigarette smoking (20 pack years). He presented with a 24-week history of progressive shortness of breath and an 8-week history of recurrent syncopal attacks. Such complaints were associated with awareness of heart beat, easy fatigability, light headedness, dry cough, and weight loss (∼15 kg in 6 months). There was a negative history of fever, night sweats, chest pain, visual disturbances, recurrent headaches, bone pain, vomiting, or diarrhea.
General examination revealed a wasted (BMI 17.6 kg/m2) man. He had a sinus bradycardia of 32 beats/minute and blood pressure of 117/66 mmHg on cardiovascular examination. Respiratory examination revealed features suggestive of right lung consolidation. Other systems were essentially normal. He underwent a number of hematological, biochemical, and serological tests, which revealed a normocytic normochromic anemia [hemoglobin (Hb) 11.1 g/dL] but otherwise normal. His echocardiography (ECHO) was essentially normal, however the electrocardiogram (ECG) showed features in keeping with the diagnosis of CHB, Fig. . Chest X-ray (CXR) showed a homogeneous opacification on the right side, and CT scan revealed a solid right lung mass with metastases to the heart, liver, bowels, and bone; , , , and. Furthermore, he underwent bronchoscopy, which revealed an endobronchial mass occluding the bronchus intermedius. Histological examination of a section of lung biopsy taken during bronchoscopy confirmed the diagnosis of small cell carcinoma, Fig. . Correspondingly, a histological section of heart muscle tissue revealed similar findings to lung biopsy. The patient underwent dual chamber pacemaker implantation with successful sinus rhythm restoration. He made an informed refusal of chemotherapy and inevitably died in his home village 18 months post pacing. We received the death information from his son via a phone call, and an autopsy was not practical.