A 23-year-old Thai man presented with unilateral left nasal obstruction with increased left-sided nasal discharge for 1 month. A history of nasal allergy had been reported since childhood without asthmatic symptoms. No allergic symptoms in other family members were noted. General physical examination revealed nothing abnormal. On nasal endoscopy, there was a polypoid mass arising from the left sphenoethmoidal recess with some thick discharge on the surface of the mass (A). CT scan of the paranasal sinuses showed left posterior ethmoid and sphenoid sinus opacity with sinus wall expansion (B). The lesion seen in the CT scan was inhomogeneous and hyperdense without further enhancement after contrast media injection. The complete blood count was normal with 7.0% eosinophil count. Serum total IgE level was 3540 IU/ml (normal adult level <100 IU/ml). Serum specific IgE was positive for Aspergillus, mixed mold, house dust mite and cockroach antigens. Due to the scarcity of reported AFRS in our country and the purely unilateral picture of the lesion, a neoplastic process was initially suspected and biopsy of the polypoid mass was done to make a definite diagnosis. The biopsy result was inflammatory polyp. After obtaining the histological study result, the diagnosis of AFRS was made and the patient was offered sinus surgery as a definite surgical treatment. Endoscopic sinus surgery was performed by the attending ENT surgeon (JL) in our tertiary hospital and polypoid change of the sinus mucosa with thick greenish-brown discharge were found intraoperatively, mainly in the left sphenoid sinus. As expected, no tumor mass was detected. The abnormal discharge was removed totally, the polyps were taken out as much as possible and the sinus openings were opened widely to facilitate postoperative topical therapy. The postoperative period was uneventful. The final histological result of the polyps was allergic polyp without demonstrable fungal tissue invasion. The mucinous discharge was eosinophilic in nature and was positive for fungal fragments which were branching septate hyphae on Gomori methenamine silver stain (A–D).
After the operation, the patient was prescribed a tapering course of oral prednisolone (starting from 0.5 mg/kg/day), intranasal fluticasone furoate spray (27.5 μg/spray) 2 puffs to each nostril twice daily and budesonide nasal irrigation once daily (budesonide 1mg mixed with normal saline solution 200ml). The patient started to feel better a few days postoperatively with only minor epistaxis and nasal obstruction. A significant improvement was reported by the patient after 2 weeks of systemic steroid administration. The decision to decrease the dose of oral prednisolone and other topical treatments was based on the patient's symptoms, endoscopic findings and serum total IgE level. Finally, oral prednisolone and budesonide nasal irrigation could be stopped at 3 months after surgery, with the serum total IgE level decreased from 3540 IU/ml to 1460 IU/ml. During and after cessation of the systemic steroid treatment, no obvious side effects of the medicine were observed. Topical intranasal corticosteroid spray was given to use for a longer period to control his allergy symptoms. On the last visit, 50 months after surgery, the patient had only clear nasal discharge occasionally and nasal endoscopic examination revealed normal sinus mucosa without polyps or thick discharge.