A 63-year-old Japanese man with a history of hypertension was transferred to our hospital with acute respiratory failure due to COVID-19 pneumonia. On arrival, his blood pressure was 126/70 mmHg, pulse rate was 90 b.p.m., temperature was 37.7°C, and O2 saturation was 91% on ventilation with the following settings: 15 cmH2O positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) and 65% fraction of inspiratory oxygen (FiO2). His body mass index was 26.8 kg/m2. On admission, computed tomography of the chest showed a crazy paving pattern . His Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score and disseminated intravascular coagulation score were 4 and 0, respectively.
After 5 days in the prone position, the patient’s respiratory failure worsened; the partial pressure of arterial oxygen was 66 mmHg with ventilation settings of 16 cmH2O PEEP and 80% FiO2. Venous-venous ECMO was provided through the right jugular vein and right common femoral vein.
During ECMO support, the dose of i.v. heparin was controlled by targeting an activated clotting time value of 160–180 s. Although the activated partial thromboplastin time was 88 s, circuit thrombosis appeared during ECMO therapy. Because V-V ECMO could not oxygenate his blood, replacement of the ECMO membrane was required 4 days after the initial V-V ECMO insertion . Just after the new membrane insertion, circuit thrombosis rapidly developed.
On day 11, nafamostat at 0.06 mg/kg/h was continuously infused into ECMO, in combination with i.v. heparin, to prevent circuit thrombosis. During this combination therapy, activated clotting time was well controlled and remained between 180 and 220 s with appropriate adjustment of the heparin dose. During the combination therapy, circuit thrombosis did not develop. Blood tests showed that fibrinogen had decreased while D-dimer had not increased with the combination therapy .
On day 15, the patient developed hyperkalemia (potassium, 6.5 mEq/L) and hemothorax; thus, nafamostat infusion was stopped . Rapid blood loss due to the hemothorax necessitated transfusion of 16 units of red blood cells and 12 units of fresh-frozen plasma over a 48-h period. Treatment with heparin was continued. However, ECMO membrane exchange was needed on days 17 and 28 .
On day 32, V-V ECMO was successfully discontinued because oxygenation was maintained without V-V ECMO support. Tracheostomy was carried out when oxygenation substantially recovered. The patient was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation on day 52.