A 32-year-old African American female with a past medical history of lupus anticoagulant syndrome on oral Rivaroxaban (Xarelto) was transferred from a local hospital to a regional trauma center for a higher level of care after a motor vehicle collision. The patient was a restrained driver who struck a pole at approximately twenty miles per hour. She was able to self-extricate and ambulate on the scene but did not recall the details of the incident. She complained of neck, abdomen, and lower back pain to emergency medical services at the scene. During the initial evaluation at the local hospital, the patient underwent a series of imaging studies that included CT of the brain, cervical spine, chest, abdomen, and pelvis without contrast. Imaging studies revealed abnormal findings at the cervical spine C3–C4 and C4–C5 spinal cord levels consistent with disc protrusion/extrusion or possible hematoma. There were also traces of free fluid noted in the pelvic cavity. Initial findings prompted the transfer to the regional trauma center by aeromedical transportation for a higher level of care. Patient’s course is detailed in Fig. .
On arrival at the trauma center, she was somnolent and complained of nausea in addition to the neck and lower back pain. Her initial vitals included a blood pressure of 119/88 mm of mercury (mmHg), heart rate of 104 beats per minutes, temporal temperature of 36.6 °C (97.8 °F), respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation of 99% on 2 L supplemental nasal cannula oxygen. Her past medical history was significant for lupus anticoagulant syndrome with prior history of deep vein thrombosis, anxiety, depression, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and insomnia. Her home medications included Rivaroxaban, Bupropion hydrochloride, Dextroamphetamine sulfate, Lamotrigine, and Quetiapine fumarate. Her social history was significant for smoking a pack of cigarettes every 3 days along with three to four glasses of wine weekly. She denied the use of any illicit drugs. On physical examination, the patient was alert, oriented, and calm with an initial Glasgow Coma Scale of 15. The patient was able to move all four extremities spontaneously. A cervical collar was placed at the initial hospital and was maintained during transportation. The patient had mild posterior cervical tenderness at the level of C3–C5. She had mild epigastric abdominal tenderness without guarding, rebound, or rigidity. The patient did not have any focal neurological deficits during initial or follow up exams. The rest of her physical exam was unremarkable.
The patient’s laboratory evaluations were grossly unremarkable on initial evaluation. These laboratory evaluations included complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, hemoglobin A1C, activated partial thromboplastin time, prothrombin time, and urinalysis. Urine toxicology was positive for marijuana and her serum ethanol level was 0.047 mg per deciliter. Repeat imaging studies at the trauma center included CT scans of the brain without contrast, and CT scan of cervical spine with intravenous (IV) contrast. The CT scan of the cervical region revealed a hyperdense material consistent with hematoma in the setting of anticoagulation . Subsequently, the patient underwent MRI of the cervical spine without contrast that indicated an anterior epidural soft tissue thickening at C2–C3 region consistent with an epidural hematoma .
The neurosurgical service was consulted, and the patient was evaluated by their team. The consultant recommended anticoagulation reversal with administration of IV prothrombin complex concentrate (Kcentra) and cervical precautions with continued cervical collar placement. The patient was admitted to the surgical intensive care unit with hourly neurological evaluations, head of bed at > 30°, and systolic blood pressure maintained between 100 and 140 mmHg at all times. The standard hospital anticoagulants were avoided in this case and sequential compression devices were applied for deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis. The patient was downgraded within 24 hours of admission and eventually discharged after 48 hours of hospitalization. There were no adverse or unanticipated events. The patient was instructed to follow up with a spine specialist in 1 week, to avoid anticoagulation for 1 month, and to maintain the cervical collar in place until reevaluation by the specialist. The patient then followed up uneventfully with their primary care at an outside facility not within the hospital network. It is unclear when or if the patient resumed their anticoagulation regimen.