The patient is a 102-year-old female who was referred to the Rush University Cancer Center for evaluation of a palpated right breast mass. Her medical history was significant for hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, chronic kidney disease, osteoporosis, Vitamin D deficiency, and frequent mechanical falls. Despite her comorbidities and age, the patient still led a very independent life and was performing her activities of daily living without issue. We graded her Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) status as one. There was no personal or family history of breast or ovarian cancer and the patient had no prior breast surgeries or biopsies.
On initial physical examination, we palpated bilateral breast masses without skin changes. A bilateral diagnostic mammogram demonstrated a right breast mass measuring 2.5 × 2.4 × 2.6 cm and two adjacent left breast masses measuring 2.4 × 1.0 × 0.9 cm in total, BIRAD 4C . Ultrasound of the bilateral axillae demonstrated no pathologically appearing lymph nodes. Based on the clinical and radiographic findings, we shared with the patient and her daughter our concern that these masses represented malignancies. We offered three options–observation, core biopsy, or upfront excision–although the patient expressed a desire to avoid any sort of intervention if possible.
We subsequently discussed the case at our multidisciplinary tumor board. Given the patient's age, the primary focus of treatment would be symptom control. The tumor board ultimately did not recommend systemic staging, as any positive findings would not have changed our treatment recommendation. Furthermore, if a biopsy demonstrated ER-positive cancer, the patient would not be a candidate for endocrine therapy given her profound osteoporosis and frequent falls. We shared this consensus with the patient and her daughter, who agreed with this approach and opted for short-term follow up to assess stability. They understood that tumor growth may necessitate intervention.
Over the course of 11 weeks, the right breast mass rapidly increased in size. Follow-up ultrasound indicated the mass had grown to 5.0 × 3.1 × 4.0 cm, BIRAD 5 . The left breast mass demonstrated no significant change in size. Based on these findings, we again determined that a preoperative biopsy was very unlikely to change our course of action. We recommended resection with the primary goal to improve quality of life as these masses were now causing the patient significant pain.
Surgery was performed 3 weeks following her second ultrasound; including the 11-week observation period, this was 3 months after the initial consultation. At this time, we noted that the right breast mass had markedly increased in size. The mass occupied the majority of the breast and caused significant skin dimpling. The patient was taken to the operating room and induced under general anesthesia without complication. We performed a right total mastectomy and a left partial mastectomy, which were well-tolerated. Given the patient's age, she was observed in the hospital for 23 h where she made an uneventful recovery. Her pain was well-controlled without the use of opiates and she was discharged home to the care of her daughter.
Pathology of all specimens was IDC, grade 3, pT3Nx for the right mass and pT2Nx for the left mass, without skin involvement. The right breast mass measured 5.1 cm in greatest dimension and the left breast mass measured 2.2 cm in greatest dimension. Immunohistochemical staining of both masses was performed. The right breast mass was ER/PR negative (<1%), HER2 2+, and Ki-67 > 20%. Fluorescence in situ hybridization demonstrated the right breast mass to be HER2 negative. Similarly, the left breast mass was ER/PR negative, HER2 0+, and Ki-67 > 20%.
At the first postoperative clinic visit, the patient was making a normal recovery and had no complaints. Pain was well-controlled with acetaminophen alone. The pathology was discussed with the patient and her daughter. The patient was offered referrals to medical and radiation oncology for consultation regarding the possibility of adjuvant treatment, which she declined. She was to return to our clinic for ongoing postoperative surveillance. At her last clinic visit–ten months postoperative–the patient was in good health and did not have any complaints. She had returned to her baseline daily activities, still lived independently, and had no evidence of recurrent disease. She had not received any adjuvant therapy.