The patient is a 37-year-old woman with a positive genetic test for BRCA1 and a nodular neoformation in the superior-outer/superior-inner quadrant of the right breast (x-ray mammograph: R5, breast ultrasound U5, AGB B5) .
She underwent bilateral NASMs with a right sentinel lymph node biopsy on 20 June 2007.
Final histological examination documented infiltrating ductal carcinoma on the right side (NOS-G3 peritumoural haematic/lymphatic vascular invasion absent) with a minimum distance between the tumour and the nipple margin greater than 10 mm.
The sentinel lymph node biopsy was negative pT1c, psN0(i-).
The biological characterization of the neoplasm was the following: ER neg-PGr neg-ki67 40%, c-erb-B2 neg, score 0. Histological examination of the tissue from the left breast demonstrated micro-fibroadenoma intracanalicolare (QSE) in the background of fibrocystic mastopathy.
Immediately following the mastectomies, a bilateral 450 cc tissue expanders were positioned in a submuscular pocket
The post-operative course was free of complication. In August 2007, the patient underwent prophylactic bilateral oophorectomies. On 28 January 2008, the patient underwent the second stage of the breast reconstruction. A partial bilateral capsulotomy was followed by a careful injection of cell-enhanced autologous fat into the subcutaneous areas. A total of 85 cc of cell-enhanced fat graft was injected on the left breast and 90 cc on the right. The tissue was obtained through a syringe-based liposuction of 355 cc of adipose tissue from abdomen and external thighs, which was performed at the beginning of the case. The tissue was then processed using an automated device (Celution 800/CRS-Cytori) to produce a cell-enhanced fat graft.
The surgical procedure was completed with placement of 370-cc bilateral silicone gel implants
The patient was discharged on post-operative day 1 and had no complications in the post-operative course. The aesthetic result was evaluated during a ten month follow-up after the second procedure. The patient evaluated the result as excellent, the surgeon as good. Graft retention in the mastectomy flap was evaluated with MRI and ultrasound at three months .
The oncological follow-up was negative at 17 months for local relapses and systemic metastasis.