A previously healthy, 15-year-old boy was admitted to our department with a two-day history of high-grade (e.g., 39.2 °C) fever, worsening chest pain and dyspnoea. Both family and personal medical history was unremarkable, except for a cholecystectomy at the age of 14 years.
Physical examination revealed high temperature (39.1 °C), tachycardia (125 bpm) and dyspnea requiring immediate oxygen therapy (peripheral oxygen saturation on room air was 85%). Mild hypotension (Hgmm 90/55 mmHg) was detected. Radial artery was palpable but weak. The patient was hemodynamically stable at this stage of the disease. Covid-19 antigen test and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of nasopharyngeal swab were positive. Our patient has not been vaccinated against the virus. COVID-19 infection was also confirmed in the parents by a rapid test. A chest CT scan was performed in view of the severe respiratory symptoms and COVID-19 positivity. Multifocal, bilaterally thickened interlobular and intralobular lines in combination with a ground glass pattern was detected, the CT Covid-19 score was 16/25. A 26 mm wide circumferential pericardial effusion was identified around the ventricles (, ). Electrocardiogram detected low QRS voltage, but ST-elevation or other electrical alteration was not observed. Characteristic echocardiographic abnormalities for pericardial tamponade, such as right atrial diastolic collapse and paradoxical septal motion, were seen.
Laboratory tests showed elevated C-reactive protein (65.8 mg/L), ferritin (394 µg/L), interleukin-6 (116.4 pg/ml), D-dimer (3,035 µg/L) concentrations with leukocytopenia (4110/µl) and lymphocytopenia (780/µl). Procalcitonin (PCT), pro-brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and troponin T concentrations were within the normal range . To rule out other aetiology of pericarditis, infectious serology test (Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, varicella-zoster virus, human immunodeficiency virus 1–2, parvovirus B19, hepatitis -A, -B, -C, -E viruses, enterovirus, Chlamydia pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae) and autoimmune serology test (anti-nuclear, anti-nucleosome, anti-dsDNA, anti-centromere, anti-C1Q, extractable nuclear, anti-saccharomyces cerevisiae, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic, anticardiolipin, anti-beta-2- glycoprotein, antiprothrombin antibody) were done with negative results.
Emergency pericardial drainage was performed; the haemorrhagic pericardial fluid was 1200 ml in volume. Laboratory results showed the fluid to be transudate. Pathology analysis ruled out malignancy, acute inflammation was reported. Bacterial culture was negative. Medication like favipiravir (1. day: 2 × 1,600 mg, after than 2 × 600 mg for 4 days), remdesivir (1. day: 1 × 200 mg, after than 1 × 100 mg for 4 days), dexamethasone (1 × 6 mg), enoxaparin (1 × 8,000 NE) and acetyl-salicylic acid (1 × 100 mg) has been introduced. His symptoms improved significantly, and the pericardial drain was removed after 48 h. Laboratory parameters were normalized within six days. Echocardiography control showed only minimal periventricular effusion, on CT scan some regression of the Covid-19 pneumonia was detected (CTSI: 12/25). The patient was discharged after and remained on dexamethasone, enoxaparin and acetyl-salicylic acid treatment.
Four days later, he was readmitted with sudden onset of sharp chest pain and mild hypotension (blood pressure: 92/70 mmHg). Pulmonary embolism was excluded by angio-CT, but pericardial tamponade (14–16 mm wide) and progression of Covid-19 pneumonia (CTSI: 18/25) were both identified. During urgent pericardial drainage, 500 ml of sanguinolent fluid can be drained. A ClotPro® test was performed to rule out coagulation abnormalities underlying the recurrent haemorrhagic tamponade, which was negative. High-dose ibuprofen (3 × 600 mg/day) and colchicine (3 × 0.5 mg/day) as well as the IL-1 antagonist, anakinra (1 × 100 mg/day) were introduced.
After 7 days of biological treatment, echocardiography showed normal heart function, pulmonary function tests revealed mild hyperinflation with normal diffusion capacity. The therapy was well tolerated without any side effect. During a 12-month-long follow-up period, the patient remained asymptomatic and no cardiological abnormality was observed. Serological tests after the second clinical admission showed low antibody titres, suggesting a recent infection . Since recurrent pericarditis could be a major sign of autoinflammatory disease (AID) , genetic tests were performed, but no mutations were found in the genes coding familial mediterranean fever, tumor necrosis factor receptor-1, mevaloante-kinase, Nod-like receptor caspase 4, NLR family pyrin domain containing 1, 3 and 12, phospholipase C gamma 2 and proteasome 20S subunit beta 8.