A 29-year-old Caucasian man presented with a 3- to 4-month history of discomfort in his right upper quadrant and right flank. He had no gastrointestinal or urinary disturbance and no endocrine symptoms. He had a previous medical history of latent tuberculosis, which was detected 3 months earlier, for which he was taking Rifanah® (rifampicin and isoniazid).
On physical examination, there was anterior displacement of his liver by a palpable mass in the right hypochondrium. His blood pressure was normal. A dexamethasone suppression test, 24-hour urine catecholamine and metanephrine assays, and a plasma aldosterone: renin ratio were normal. An ultrasound scan of his abdomen and a computed tomography scan of his upper abdomen revealed a 15cm heterogenous adrenal mass compressing his liver. These appearances raised the possibility of a primary adrenal carcinoma. A metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scan and single-photon emission computed tomography scan showed no significant uptake of tracer, making a phaeochromocytoma less likely. A fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography scan revealed a right adrenal mass of size 14.5×9.5×17.2cm which was intensely metabolically active and showed dystrophic calcification and central necrosis, consistent with either adrenal cortical carcinoma or tuberculosis . His left adrenal gland was normal and there were no features to suggest active tuberculosis elsewhere. There was no evidence of metastatic disease. He underwent a right open adrenalectomy due to the large size of the mass. As predicted by the imaging, a massive right adrenal tumour was found adherent to his diaphragm and the posterior surface of his liver, but separate from his right kidney. It was possible to mobilize the tumour away from all of these structures without including them in the resection. The postoperative course was uneventful.
On gross examination, the resection specimen comprised a lobulated cream-coloured tumour weighing 1.3kg and measuring 18cm in maximum dimension, with some compressed normal-looking adrenal gland at one end. The tumour had a smooth outer surface and a homogenous cut surface with a whorled appearance. There were occasional areas of haemorrhage. Microscopic examination showed a circumscribed tumour composed of plump, spindled cells and histiocytoid cells arranged haphazardly and in fascicles with intervening thick collagen bundles . There was an admixed moderate inflammatory cell infiltrate composed of lymphocytes, plasma cells and eosinophils. Occasional binucleated and ganglion-like cells were present . Mitoses were inconspicuous (<1/30 high-power fields) and no necrosis was seen. On immunohistochemical examination, the tumour cells were strongly positive for bcl-2 with focal positivity for desmin, smooth muscle actin and beta-catenin . Tumour cells were negative for broad-spectrum cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen, S100, MelanA, CD34, CD117, DOG-1 and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-1. MDM2 gene amplification analysis by fluorescent in situ hybridization was negative.