A previously healthy 21 year old Asian male working as a waiter in a tourist hotel presented with fever, arthalgia, myalgia and progressively reducing urine output over four days. He developed shortness of breath with non-productive cough following hospital admission and was electively intubated due to respiratory failure. There was no obvious history of leptospirosis exposure. He had no significant past medical or surgical history. He was not on any long term medication and with the onset of fever had self-medicated with paracetamol but in correct dose and correct time intervals. There was no significant family history of neurological disease or lung disease. He is a non-alcoholic, non-smoker and does not abuse illicit drugs. He denied any high risk sexual behaviour.
On examination he was febrile, tachypnoeic and pale. There was icterus with conjunctival injection. He was haemodynamically stable. Lungs had bilateral diffuse coarse crepitations and was desaturating on air prior to intubation. Examination of the abdomen was unremarkable. Neurological examination was normal at this point.
Arterial blood gas analysis showed evidence of type two respiratory failure with mixed respiratory and metabolic acidosis. Chest x-ray showed bilateral diffuse pulmonary shadowing and high resolution computed tomography(HRCT) of chest showed features suggestive of pulmonary haemorrhages. With the suggestive clinical picture, even with the absence of exposure to leptospirosis he was started on intravenous ceftriaxone empirically along with high dose intravenous methyl prednisolone pulses (500 mg daily for 3 days) for the treatment of pulmonary haemorrhages. Initial full blood count had neutrophil leucocytosis (white blood cells 16,000/uL, neutrophils 85%, lymphocytes 12%) with thrombocytopenia (platelet count 98,000/uL). Haemoglobin was normal (13.5 g/dL). Initial urine full report had 45–50 pus cells and 2–3 red cells per high power field. There was sub nephrotic range proteinuria (urine protein to creatinine ratio 2.5 g/mmol). Ultrasound scan showed acute renal parenchymal changes. Serum creatinine was high ranging from 256 umol/L and 768 umol/L) where regular haemodialysis was initiated.
After two weeks of the onset of the illness while he was being weaned off from the ventilatory support with improvement of pulmonary haemorrhages, he developed sudden severe lower limb weakness followed by upper limb weakness over one day. There was no diplopia. Assessment of dysphagia and bladder involvement was difficult at that point due to the indwelling nasogastric tube and the urinary catheter. Limb weakness then progressed to respiratory muscle weakness and required continued ventilatory support.
Examination at this point revealed flaccid weakness of both upper and lower limbs with global areflexia. There was no sensory impairment. Pupils were dilated with sluggish pupillary response and there was disc swelling bilaterally on examination of the optic fundi. Following recovery patient had permanent visual impairment (visual acuity 6/60 bilaterally) with pale optic discs. Other cranial nerves were normal.
With the development of neurological symptoms nerve conduction studies were performed which showed evidence of sensory motor demyelinating type polyneuropathy suggestive of AIDP type GBS. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis done on the 10th day from the onset of neurological symptoms showed cyto-protein dissociation. He was started on intravenous immunoglobulin 0.4 g/kg/day.
By day 18 of the illness there was progressive thrombocytopenia (lowest platelet count 15,000/uL) and severe anaemia (haemoglobin 5.6 g/dL). His lactate dehydrogenase (LDH 950 U/L) and indirect bilirubin was high with blood picture evidence of microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia. Direct antiglobulin test was negative. Prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time was within the normal range throughout the hospital stay. Diagnosis of TTP was made and plasmapheresis was initiated as it would treat both TTP and GBS. Human immunodeficiency virus antibodies, the Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test, Mycoplasma antibodies, Epstein Barr and Cytomegalovirus antibodies were negative. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) brain with Magnetic Resonance Angiogram (MRA), and Magnetic Resonance Venogram (MRV) brain was normal. Renal biopsy showed focal glomerular necrosis and acute tubular injury together with some evidence of infection. A 15 panel leptospirosis Microscopic Agglutination Test (MAT) done on day 8 of the illness revealed a high titre for leptospira antigen serogroup Semaranga (strain Patoc) (1:1280) followed by serogroup Australis (strain Australis) (1:640) and serogroup Autumnalis (strain Bankgkinang) (1:320) while serovars bataviae, bakeri, ratnapura, hardjo, icterohaemorrhagiae, pyrogenes, pomona, hebdomadid, cynopteri, canicola, javanka and Sarmin had insignificant titres (< 1:20). In the convalescent phase MAT titres had increased to a four fold rise for serovars patoc, australis and bangkinang diagnosing leptospirosis.
Intravenous Ceftriaxone was continued for 14 days. Neurological improvement was noted following 14 cycles of plasmapheresis and he recovered from TTP by 12 cycles of plasmapheresis. But complete neurological recovery was not achieved at the end of the hospital stay and he was planned for long term neurological rehabilitation and he ended with permanent bilateral visual loss. He was dialysis dependent on discharge from the hospital due to progression to chronic kidney disease.