A 27-year-old pregnant woman (gravida 1, para 0) was admitted to our center at 36 + 3 weeks of gestation. In her singleton fetus, a severe left diaphragmatic hernia with an o/e LHR of ≤25% and an MRI lung volume of ≤20%, as well as poor pulmonary perfusion and marked left heart hypoplasia from preferential streaming of ductus venosus/inferior caval vein flow toward the right side of the heart, was observed (—top).
After interdisciplinary counselling of both parents about the limited chances of neonatal survival without any prenatal treatment, the limitations expected from performing FETO as the only measure in such a case, and the potential benefits and maternal and fetal risks, as well as the experimental nature of combining FETO with the fetoscopic partial removal of the herniated bowel from the fetal chest by fetoscopic laparoschisis (FETO-LAP), the parents consented to the experimental intervention.
According to German law, as an individual, potentially life-saving treatment attempt, no approval by our local ethics committee was required. Apart from this deviation, the procedure was performed according to the guidelines of the Helsinki declaration. Importantly, there were no experimental surgical steps required for any maternal part of the intervention, as all necessary techniques had been routinely in use with low maternal and fetal risks for more than 15 years at our center.
The procedure was performed under general maternofetal anesthesia at 36 + 5 weeks of gestation. Intraoperative tocolysis was performed by the continuous infusion of the oxytocin antagonist atosiban. The infusion was stopped on the first day after surgery. Adequate preparations for performing an emergency C-section at any time if needed had been taken. Following the intraamniotic ultrasound-guided insertion of an 11-F-sheath (external diameter 5 mm) close to the fetal mouth, a fetoscope was advanced into the fetal trachea. Via the working channel of the fetoscope, the fetal trachea was occluded with a commercially available latex balloon .
Guided by maternal transabdominal ultrasound imaging, three additional 11-F-sheaths were inserted into the amniotic cavity and percutaneous partial amniotic carbon dioxide insufflation (PACI) was carried out as previously described [,] .
After intraamniotic insertion of a 3.3 mm rod-lens fetoscope, the fetus was postured on its right side with endoscopic instruments.
Employing scissors, monopolar cautery and various graspers, a vertical laparotomy was performed in the anterior axillary line, thus transsecting the oblique and transverse abdominal muscles . Particular care was taken to stay intraperitoneally and anterior to the left kidney. However, as a result of the leftward shift of the liver hilus from the intrathoracic herniation of its left lobe, the greatest care had to be taken not to injure the intraabdominal portion of the umbilical vein that coursed in immediate proximity below the incision site .
After 2 h of slow and careful dissection, interrupted by holding PACI and refilling the amniotic cavity for ultrasound assessment of the progress, orientation and depth of the incision in relation to the course of the intraabdominal umbilical vein, we succeeded in creating a 4 cm long vertical laparotomy in the anterior axillary line. Through the opening, it was easily possible to introduce the fetoscope via the defect into the fetal chest and even briefly insufflate the fetal thoracic cavity .
After the successful eventeration of one bowel loop before the fetal abdomen (—top), the insufflation was halted and the amniotic cavity refilled with warmed, sterile crystalline solution. Following trocar removal, the maternal abdominal skin incisions were closed with single stiches.
Mother and fetus tolerated the entire procedure well; no complications were observed during surgery. The pregnancy could be upheld for four more days when spontaneous contractions occurred at 37 + 2 weeks of gestation, and the child was delivered by caesarean section. Still on placental support, the tracheal balloon was removed and the baby was stabilized in the delivery suite and placed on ECMO in the first hours of life.
In the four days between FETO-LAP and delivery, more bowel loops had herniated through the iatrogenic abdominal wall defect (—bottom). The exposed bowel of the neonate was placed within a sterile plastic bag. Over the next eight days, the patient could be managed without systemic infection or signs of bowel ischemia. On lung support, a rapid increase in tidal volume was seen over the next eight days. Unfortunately, after this period, blood clots obstructed the ECMO circuit and the neonate passed away.