A 38-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with an initial presentation of abdominal pain and diarrhea over the preceding 2 mo.
The patient visited a local hospital with abdominal pain and diarrhea over the previous 2 mo. Colonoscopy performed at a local hospital revealed a 4-cm diameter mass in the descending colon, 40 cm from the anal verge.
The patient had no remarkable past medical history.
There were no significant findings in the patient’s personal and family history.
The patient complained of tenderness in the left lower abdomen upon palpation, but no rebound tenderness. The abdomen was otherwise soft, undistended, and revealed no palpable mass. There were no evidence of a mass or hematochezia on digital rectal examination.
White blood cell count was mildly increased to 13960 cells/μL; however, laboratory investigations, including markers of liver function and renal function, were normal. The patient’s carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; 3.04 ng/mL) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9; 7.44 U/mL) levels were normal.
Colonoscopy showed a 4-cm diameter mass in the descending colon, and a biopsy was performed . The colonoscopy biopsy specimen result showed an atypical spindle cell lesion, suggestive of a malignant mesenchymal tumor. Immunohistochemically, the tumor was positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and desmin, and negative for cluster of differentiation 34 (CD34), CD117, and discovered on gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST)-1 (DOG-1). Abdomino-pelvic computed tomography (CT) revealed intussusception in the descending colon due to a mass of approximately 4 cm with liquefaction, a small amount of ascites, and no distant metastasis in other solid organs . There was no abnormal finding on chest CT.
Based on the results of the biopsy and CT, a diagnosis of LMS arising from descending colon was suspected. The patient underwent a left hemicolectomy; no intraoperative or postoperative complications were noted. The pathology report showed a 7.5 cm × 5.5 cm × 4.0 cm LMS without necrosis in the descending colon with a clear resection margin and no metastasis in all 27 lymph nodes . Mitotic counts were as high as 32/10 high-power field, and immunohistochemical analysis revealed SMA and focal desmin positivity, and CD34, CD117, DOG-1, and S-100 protein negativity. Without adjuvant treatment, the patient underwent a checkup every 3 mo using a routine blood test and CT. The patient was found to have a possibly newly developed liver metastasis in segment 8 on an abdomino-pelvic CT performed 11 mo after the primary surgery; however, there were no evidence of local recurrence at the anastomosis site . In addition, magnetic resonance imaging of the liver identified a suspected 2.3-cm-sized liver metastasis in the same region . The patient’s CEA level had also increased to 10.23 ng/mL. The patient’s Child-Pugh score was 5 points.