A 75-year-old female with complaint of abdominal pain visited our hospital in August, 2015.
Abdominal pain was mainly located on the epigastric area which started three months ago accompanied by dyspepsia. She denied diarrhea, vomiting, weight loss, and fever.
The patient had hypertension and diabetes. She had no history of surgery.
She had no prior history of smoking or drinking alcohol. No family history was noted.
Her vital sign was stable, with blood pressure of 130/90 mmHg, heart rate of 98 beats per minute, and body temperature of 36.8 ℃. Physical examination of the abdomen revealed sharp tenderness at the epigastric area.
Routine laboratory test showed slight elevation of white blood cell (13600/mm3), C-reactive protein (5.199 mg/dL), and tumor marker CA 19-9 (488 U/mL). Other laboratory test results were within reference ranges. Her aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and total bilirubin levels were also within reference ranges.
Computed tomography (CT) scan was done to further evaluate the cause of pain. It revealed a 3.3 cm sized mass at the tail of the pancreas . Under clinical impression of resectable pancreatic cancer, she underwent distal pancreatectomy. Histopathologic finding of the surgical specimen was moderately differentiated SCC with papillary growth pattern and clear resection margin . Immunohistochemical staining showed that tumor cells were positive for p63 but negative for CK7 and CK20.
The patient recovered without complications after surgery. She was discharged from our hospital. After discharge, she needed periodic outpatient follow-up to check for recurrence. However, she no longer visited the hospital.
Three years later, in 2018, she received a gastroscopy for regular check-up at another hospital. She was referred to our hospital with clinical impression of gastric cancer. Gastroscopy showed a single, 2 cm sized, ill-defined irregular flat and hyperemic mass at the greater curvature side of high body with mucosa friability . Biopsy was performed. Moderately differentiated SCC was noted in the biopsy specimen . Tumor cells were positive for p63 but negative for CK7 and CK20. These histopathologic findings in the stomach were consistent with those of the pancreas that had previously undergone surgery. CT scan & positive emission tomography CT scan for staging work-up revealed multiple hepatic and peritoneal metastasis.