The patient was 30 years old when she applied to the clinic and had a history of four gravidas and one para. Her history also included two spontaneous aborts, and her living child was born via spontaneous vaginal delivery. In the medical anamnesis, the patient reported that this pregnancy had occurred spontaneously. No genetic anomaly was found in the family history. Iron replacement was performed during pregnancy. The patient, whose previous follow-ups took place in a private centre, was in her 31st gestational week according to her last menstrual period when she intake to our clinic.
Physical examination revealed no significant clinical findings other than third trimester abdominal pregnancy. Our ultrasonographic evaluations indicated a monochorionic diamniotic triplet pregnancy at first visit. Some sonographic markers were used to evaluate chorionicity. V-sign was not observed in ultrasonographic examination. Amniotic membrane thickness was measured less than 1.5 mm. Fetal sexes were female and the sex of the acardiac foetus could not be distinguished. The first amniotic sac contained one foetus (Foetus A). Biometric measurements of this foetus indicated that the foetus was in its 31st gestational week, and amnion liquid in the sac was sufficient. No structural anomalies were detected in the ultrasonographic organ scan of Foetus A. The second amniotic sac included a foetus in its 32nd gestational week (Foetus B) and an acardiac third foetus (Foetus C), as illustrated in Fig. . Ultrasonographic evaluations indicated a normal organ scan for Foetus B, but polyhydroamniosis was detected in the amniotic sac. Foetus A was in breech presentation and Foetus B was in head presentation.
Ultrasound did not reveal the cranium, thoracic organs and extremities of Foetus C; abdominal circumference was measured at 240.72 mm, indicating that the foetus was at 28 weeks of gestation. The foetus did not have vertebral integrity; and dorsal cystic hygroma, intra-abdominal acid and severe subcutaneous oedema were noted . The gastric pocket and bladder were not visible, and irregular, dense hyperechogenic areas were detected in the foetal abdomen. An evaluation of Foetus C’s umbilical cord flow showed two arteries and a single vein. The umbilical arterial flow direction was towards to the Foetus C, and the vein flow direction was towards the placenta. Echocardiography was conducted on Foetuses A and B to evaluate cardiothoracic ratio, pericardial effusion, left ventricle output, ventricular ejection force and Tei İndex (myocardial performance index) value, and to conduct colour flow mapping. No cardiomegaly, major vascular anomalies, cardiac output disorders, peak flow velocity disorders or pericardial effusion were detected in Foetuses A and B. Middle cerebral artery Doppler examinations of the healthy foetuses showed that multiple of median (MoM) values ranged between 1,30 and 1,50. A foetal magnetic resonance (MR) assessment was then performed for Foetus C. This examination showed no extremities belonging to Foetus C and indicated clearly that the placenta was monochorionic.
The patient’s non-stress test findings were normal and the pump foetus’s (Foetus B) examination did not indicate cardiac failure; thus, the patient was treated with betamethasone two times. The pregnancy was followed and was evaluated using ultrasound twice per week. Foetuses A and B grew appropriately. The follow-ups, including foetal biometrics, umbilical artery doppler measurements and non-stress testing, were performed six times. Foetus B was found to have improvement in the polyhydramnios detected in the first examination (11.2 cm) and the deepest vertical pocket until birth reached between 8 cm and 10 cm. The amount of amniotic fluid in Foetus A was never below 4 cm in the deepest pocket until birth. The abdominal circumference of Foetus A progressed from the 31st to 34th week, and the abdominal circumference of Foetus B progressed from the 32nd to 35th week. Blood flow in the umbilical and middle cerebral arteries did not worsen.
The patient came for follow-up on the 5th day of the 34th week. Ultrasonographic evaluations indicated bradycardia in the pump foetus (Foetus B). A foetal heart rate ranging between 70 beats per minute (BPM) and 100 BPM lasted approximately 3 min and then was regulated. Due to the bradycardia, an emergency caesarean section was performed. Two live foetuses were delivered via caesarean section, with Foetus A weighing 2010 g and Foetus B weighing 2150 g. The acardiac nonviable foetus (Foetus C) was born weighing about 500 g. The healthy foetuses breathed spontaneously; surviving babies APGAR (Appearance, Pulse, Grimace, Activity, Respiration) scores in the 1st and 5th minutes were recorded as 8/10 and 8/10. The surviving babies were monitored up to 3 months after birth; Foetus A reached 5410 g, and Foetus B reached 5360 g. Transfontanelle and hip ultrasound (Ultrasound Examination for Detection of Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip) examinations were performed for both foetuses and found normal. After birth, babies’echocardiography was repeated twice in one-month intervals and recorded as normal.
No extremities of the acardiac foetus (Foetus C) were detected in the macroscopic evaluations. Cranium, brain and vertebrae belonging to the central nervous system could not be distinguished. Extensive subcutaneous oedema was observed. Cartilage, bone and fatty tissue areas were present in the tissue dissection. No intra-abdominal organs or thoracic organs could be seen. The pathology of Foetus C indicated an 11 cm × 11 cm × 6.5 cm oval of irregular tissue in the area we thought to be of the abdomen and thorax. The umbilical cord had a length of 2.5 cm and three vein structures. Bone tissue, which was considered to be vertebra, was detected irregularly. Skin and subcutaneous oedema were found. Under subcutaneous dissection, fat tissue and cartilaginous areas were observed. Organs could not be distinguished. Placental cotyledons were observed completely. Eccentric insertion of the cord to the placenta was detected. Also 4 × 3 cm sub-chorionic bleeding area was detected in the placenta base . Where fibroblasts were distinguished in the abdomen, microscopic evaluations revealed connective tissue, cartilage and fatty tissue. Sections belonging to skin, muscle and bone tissues were natural.