A 16.5-year-old girl was admitted urgently to the General Pediatric Ward of Independent Public Hospital No. 1 in Zabrze due to uncontrolled vomiting, severe headache and fever. A few hours before the admission to the ward, the patient had an intravenous injection of methamphetamine along with morphine, which also regularly happened in the weeks preceding the current hospitalization. The patient's family history was burdened with Hashimoto's disease in her mother, allergic conditions of her father and her 3 years younger brother. From the pre-school period, the patient has been diagnosed with recurrent respiratory tract infections, and from the age of 6 in the spring and summer period, symptoms of hypersensitivity to grass pollen in the form of allergic rhinitis and seasonal asthma have been observed.
At 11 years of age aseptic necrosis of the right tibial tuberosity was confirmed, and at 12 years of age adenoidectomy was performed.
At 13 years of age due to recurrent abdominal pain for 3 years, gastroenterological diagnostics was performed. Lactose and fructose intolerance, and celiac disease were excluded. Esophagitis was diagnosed in the gastroscopic examination corresponding to grade A in the Los Angeles Classification of reflux esophagitis and gastroprotective treatment was recommended from that time. In addition, since the age of 13, the girl has exhibited behavioral disorders, performed self-harm to the body. She was experimenting with various psychoactive substances (morphine, amphetamine, methamphetamine, codeine).
At 15 years of age she attempted suicide by overdosing of drugs, which coincided with a difficult family situation (parents' divorce). Due to the above-mentioned mental disorders and adaptation difficulties, in the last 2 years she was hospitalized twice in the Youth Psychiatric Ward, where she was diagnosed with bipolar disorder. Pharmacological treatment was continued since October 2020 with arypiprazol 15 mg in the morning, pregabalin 75 mg in the evening, quetiapine XR 400 mg in the evening. For a year, she has been under the outpatient care of the Addiction Treatment Center, but the therapy was not effective. Until now, the patient has not consented to therapy in an inpatient center. Legal steps have been taken to issue appropriate treatment decisions for the teenager.
On admission, the patient had a fever up to Celsius 40-degree and complained of generalized pain. In addition, deviations from the normal state included tachypnea, fine-wave tremors of the upper and lower limbs, skin hyperalgesia, tattoos covering the neck, limbs and trunk, as well as numerous fresh and old scars of self-injury, features of dehydration, tachycardia (heart rate-120–130 beats/min), abdominal skin tenderness and dry oral mucosa were recorded. Laboratory tests revealed significantly increased inflammatory parameters: C-reactive protein (CRP) -37.4 mg/l, procalcitonin (PCT) 50.46 ng/ml), leukopenia with lymphopenia, monocytosis and eosinopenia, hypocapnia in capillary blood gas tests, increased levels of immunoglobulin G, A (IgG, IgA) and total immunoglobulin E (IgE), low concentration of vitamin D . Rapid SARS-CoV-2 antigen test was negative. While awaiting toxicological examination, parenteral hydration and empirical broad-spectral antibiotic therapy (cefuroxime) were used in the treatment. Toxicological tests confirmed the presence of amphetamines, ecstasy and opioids in blood and urine. On the second day of the patient's stay in the ward, a significant improvement in her general condition was observed and fever subsided. Neurological examination revealed no signs of focal CNS damage, meningeal symptoms were negative. The performed examinations: bacteriological (upper respiratory swabs, blood and urine cultures), thorax X-ray, ultrasound examination of the abdominal cavity, electrocardiography and echocardiographic examination were normal, therefore antibiotic therapy was abandoned on the 4th day. Psychological and psychiatric examinations, carried out during hospitalization confirmed behavioral disorders, substance abuse, bipolar disorder, and the patient was transferred to a psychiatric ward for further treatment. Ultimately, it was concluded that the elevated concentration of acute-phase proteins was most likely caused by intoxication with psychoactive drugs. After a month, the patient reported for periodic check-up at an allergy clinic. During the observation of the patient, and due to the mother's interview data about not taking any therapeutic measures in her daughter, a suspicion of further abuse of psychoactive substances was raised, which was confirmed in a narcotic test (present—tetrahydrocannabinol, amphetamine, ecstasy). Routine laboratory tests performed at that time, except for the elevated CRP (17.38 mg / l), neutrophils count to lymphocytes count ratio ( NLR) (3,41 ratio), platelets count to lymphocytes count ratio (PLR) (142,85 ratio) were normal.