A 4-years-old boy was referred to our emergency department complained of recurrent attacks of colicky abdominal pain and non-bilious vomiting 5 times in the previous 24 h. The child had allergic rhinitis and recurrent attacks of gastroenteritis in the last four months.
Upon presentation to our hospital, the child was conscious, alert, comfortable in bed, and his vital signs were stable. Abdominal examination by inspection showed normal contour without abdominal distention and no bulging mass, with normal respiratory movement. By palpation, the abdomen was soft and lax, with no tenderness or rigidity and no palpable mass. PR examination revealed no palpable mass and an empty rectum without red currant jelly stool; the child had last defecated 12 h before.
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a long segment small-intestinal intussusception extending from the subhepatic region through the right lumber region until the right iliac fossa region, which showed a pseudokidney appearance and no abdominal collection. Plain erect abdominal X-ray showed neither air-fluid levels nor gas under the diaphragm. Only fundic gas and a small amount of right colonic gas were observed. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) was not performed due to the poor resources of our hospital.
Our decision was to perform conservative treatment with multiple ultrasonographic examinations. The conservative approach was continued for 6 h duration with nothing per mouth (NPO). He had received medical treatment in the form of IV fluid, 3rd generation cephalosporin, ampicillin/sulbactam, metronidazole and antioedematous drugs such as dexamethasone, and lasix. During this period, the child had one attack of colicky abdominal pain and non-bilious gastric vomiting. However, during this period, the child passed well-formed normal brownish coloured stool. An abdominal examination had the same results as the previous clinical examination. PR examination revealed well formed, normal brown coloured stool without any redcurrant jelly secretion. Due to the recurrent symptoms of intestinal obstruction, the senior staff made a new decision to explore the abdomen.
After the child was administrated general anaesthesia, we palpated the abdomen and felt a hemispherical mass of 4 cm × 2 cm, movable in all directions without any restriction to its movement. A supraumbilical transverse incision was performed for exploration and revealed a long segment ileo-ileal intussusception approximately 50 cm long. Milking reduction was performed easily, without any intestinal ischaemia or intestinal wall oedema. The lead point of the intussusception was a hemispherical mass, canary yellow in colour and approximately 4 cm × 2 cm. It was firm, and rubbery inconsistency, did not obstruct the lumen of the ileum and originated from the antimesenteric border of the ileum. It was located 130 cm away from the ileocaecal junction . Resection and anastomosis of the ileal segment containing the mass were performed with 2 cm safety margin on each side.
A pathological macroscopic report described a polypoid submucosal fatty tumour 4 × 2 × 2 cm in size covered with intact mucosa. Microscopic examination showed a benign non-capsulated intramuscular soft tissue tumour formed of lobules of mature fat cells separated by delicate fibrovascular trabeculae . The opposite small-intestinal mucosa was infiltrated by lymphocytes, plasma cells, and neutrophils. The final diagnosis was polypoid intramuscular lipoma of the ileum.
The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 7th postoperative day. At 6 months following surgery, he is free of symptoms, and no evidence of recurrence has been reported.