Forty-eight-year-old man.
Right handed.
Pain and limited range of motion, thumb, right.
On November 6, 2014, while he was lifting a 3.1 kg antifreeze injection gun at the workplace, there was a crack sound and pain in the right wrist, and he could not move his right thumb. Before the onset of symptoms, there was no specific trauma or any other symptoms at the site. The ultrasonographic image taken on the day of the accident showed a complete EPL tendon rupture with a 4.31 cm gap in the right wrist , and the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images taken 4 days after the accident also showed a complete tear of EPL tendon with a 5.6 cm gap in the right wrist . The patient underwent immunohistochemistry including general blood tests to confirm the possibility of rupture by rheumatism. The C-reactive protein level was 0.16 mg/dL (normal range is less than 0.49 mg/dL), the rheumatoid factor level was 5.0 mg/dL (normal range is less than 20.0 mg/dL), the anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody level was 7.0 U/mL (normal range is less than 17.0 U/mL) and the uric acid level was 8.4 mg/dL (normal range is from 3.5 to 7.0 mg/mL). He underwent a repair operation 4 days after the accident and he has recovered from the illness.
He received medical treatment for lumbar disc herniation from 7th July 2001 to 26th February 2006 and he was allowed to claim worker's compensation insurance. He was treated conservatively for the right third trigger finger that occurred on March 27, 2008.
He played badminton for about 15 minutes a day during lunch break in 2007, and he quit after the conservative treatment for his right third trigger finger. He was an ex-smoker (1.5 pack-years) and social drinker. There was no special family history.
He joined an automotive manufacturing company on February 13, 1995. He had engaged in assembly line work, shifting day and night for 10 hours a day, until February 2013, and he performed day shifting work for 8 hours a day from February 2013 to the present. After joining the company, he has worked for about 15 years in the same assembly line except for the period of medical care for his lumbar disc herniation. His job is the line work to assemble 36 cars per hour, he is not able to self-control the speed. His work groups consist of a total of four, with 1 group consisting of 12 people, and each group shifts monthly. According to the patient's statement, the labor intensity in the past was higher than that of the current work, and the difference in labor intensity from the different vehicle models was not significant. He did not wear any protective gear such as anti-vibration gloves during work.
On January 16, 2017, he visited the occupational and environmental medicine outpatient clinic at a University Hospital in Busan, Korea for the work-relevance evaluation. First, the authors investigated the detailed job history by interviewing him. We performed a simple job simulation and confirmed that his tasks have repetitive motion and inadequate postures of the thumb and wrist. Especially applying pressure with extended thumb and hammering with extended wrist to deliver a strong and rapid impact seemed to be harmful. shows his tasks considered burdensome. He complained that assembling door scarf, installing tailgate trim panel, and adjusting windshield glasses are particularly burdensome on his thumb and wrist.
We requested the results of musculoskeletal risk factors survey for the patient's workplace. In accordance with the Rule 657 of Korean Occupational Safety and Health Act, employers shall investigate the risk factors of the following items every 3 years when workers are carrying out musculoskeletal burden work .
A. Workplace situation: facilities, work process, work volume, work speed, etc.
B. Working conditions: working time, working posture, and working method.
C. Work-related musculoskeletal signs and symptoms.
In the 2016 investigation, his work was divided into 12 tasks by the rule, and each task was divided into 6 burdened body parts (fingers/hands/wrists, arms/elbows, shoulders, neck, waist, and knees/legs). They were scored in terms of work posture, repeatability/static posture, strength and other burden work (hammering with hand or using vibration tools). shows the results of 2016 musculoskeletal risk factors survey on fingers/hands/wrists. Adjusting position after mounting windshield glasses, tailgate weather strip fit, and installing tailgate trim panel were high scored tasks, and they have the similar tendency to the patient's subjective assessment of thumb and wrist burdens.
In order to evaluate the burden more quantitatively, we divided his work by 22 tasks focusing on the right thumb and wrist (job sampling) and requested him to record videos of the 22 tasks. We discussed the videos with him and retook several times, and finally obtained the total 22 task-related videos. We evaluated his work through job strain index (JSI) using these 22 task-related videos in order to analyze more objectively. JSI is an ergonomic evaluation method that mainly evaluates the upper extremities to quantitatively assess the ergonomic risk level of hand and wrist joints . Under the guidance of an ergonomic expert, authors analyzed the total 22 task-related videos focusing on his right thumb and wrist. The results of JSI analysis were tabulated in . Among the 22 tasks analyzed by JSI, 11 tasks (50%) were evaluated as probably hazardous.
Additionally, most of the patient's tasks were using vibration tools. Among 12 tasks in the 2016 musculoskeletal risk factors survey, there were 2 tasks using a vibration tool for more than 2 hours and 4 tasks hammering with a hand more than 10 times per hour. In addition, there were 19 tasks using hand-arm vibration tools in the 22 task-related videos. shows information of the vibration tools. The vibration acceleration of the tools could not be measured, so we could not calculate the cumulative vibration exposure. However, according to 2003 Korea Occupational Safety and Health Agency study, it is reported that about 16% of workers in the automobile manufacturing exceed 5m/s2 which is the exposure limit for European Union . This case is also expected to be exposed to similar level. Considering his occupational history and the results of ergonomic evaluations, we determined that the EPL tendon rupture is highly correlated with the occupational exposure.
Written informed consents were obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying data.