A 54-year-old male patient was transferred with diagnosed acute perforated appendicitis. The patient was admitted to a public hospital after being confirmed for COVID-19 by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis four days before the transfer. The patient had no complaints including respiratory symptoms at the time of admission. Lower abdominal pain and diarrhea began two days prior to transfer, and he was diagnosed with perforated appendicitis on a non-contrast abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan. The public hospital mainly treated mild COVID-19 cases, and because it was not suitable for performing the emergency surgery, the patient was transferred to our hospital facility, dedicated to treating complicated COVID-19 cases and equipped with a negative-pressure operating room.
The patient was taking anti-hypertensive medication that did not contain anticoagulants and had no significant surgical, family, or social history. The patient was an immigrant construction worker.
The patient complained of only abdominal pain and did not report any respiratory symptoms such as coughing or sputum. The patient was 176 cm tall and 75 Kg with a body mass index (BMI) of 24.2. The physical examination was significant for tenderness and rebound tenderness throughout the lower abdomen. The vital signs showed 80/52 mmHg blood pressure, a pulse of 98 beats/min, a respiratory rate was 20 times/min, a body temperature of 36.2 OC, and 96 % oxygen saturation on room air.
Laboratory investigations revealed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 15.3 × 10³/㎕ and a C-reactive protein (CRP) value of 18.30 mg/dL. The other laboratory findings were not specific. Since information from the non-contrast CT scan that accompanied the patient was limited, a contrast-enhanced abdominal CT scan was ordered to establish a more precise surgical plan. The CT scan showed perforated acute appendicitis with a periappendiceal abscess and widespread pelvic peritonitis . There was no evidence of pneumonia on chest CT imaging.
Based on the above findings, upon written informed consent for the procedure and notification of the risks and benefits, a faculty surgeon with nine years of experience performed an emergency laparoscopic appendectomy. The CT scan findings showed inflammatory processes spread throughout the pelvic cavity, so it was felt that laparoscopic appendectomy was less invasive and could be completed within a short time, and thus, considered more favorable for the treatment outcome without the risk of further infection spread.
The patient entered the operating room on a negative-pressure cart, which was placed in the operating room (OR) during the surgery .
General anesthesia was performed through endotracheal intubation using a video laryngoscope by an anesthesiologist wearing a Level 4 protective suit. The operation was initiated by the surgical team wearing enhanced personal protective equipment (PEE). The enhanced PPE included an isolation gown, surgical gown, head cover, face shield, two pairs of surgical gloves, shoe covers, and an N95 mask .
A 12-mm port was applied to the umbilicus, and a 5 mm port was applied to the upper pubis and the left para-midline. Pneumoperitoneum was formed to 14 mmHg abdominal pressure at a CO2 flow rate of 40 L/min. A closed-circuit smoke evacuation system was not used. The perforated appendix and the spread of inflammation to the surrounding organs were observed, and suppurative fluid was accumulated in the pelvic cavity. Electrocautery was not used during surgery. An ultrasonic scalpel for dissection, a plastic clip for vascular ligation, and an endo-loop for stump ligation of the appendix were all used . Disposable devices were used whenever possible. The abdominal cavity was washed several times, and a self-retained negative-pressure silicone drainage tube was replaced. When the intra-abdominal gas was removed after the procedure, the valve was gradually opened so that the gas did not dissipate too suddenly, and no special instruments or filters were used in this step.
Personnel exiting the OR disposed of their PPE in the OR under supervision and showered immediately thereafter. Dedicated well-identifiable containers for infectious-risk waste were used.
The patient was monitored in a negative-pressure cart in that OR until the vital signs stabilized and the patient was fully conscious before being transferred to a negative-pressure isolation ward. The patient was subsequently transferred to the department of infectious disease for postoperative care.
The operation lasted 45 min, anesthesia was applied for 60 min, and the operating room retention time was 90 min.
The operating room was maintained under negative-pressure air conditioning for two hours after the patient was moved out. Following three hours of fumigating disinfectant, surface disinfection with diluted chlorine bleach (500 ppm) was applied. Five hours after the operation was completed, the operating room was ready for use again. The entire process of patient transfer, preparation of the operating room, the surgical procedure, and postoperative disinfection was monitored and recorded by an infection specialist nurse.
All participating members of the surgical team were monitored actively for two weeks. There were no signs of medical staff infection nor the spread of infection within the operating room.
On the 4th postoperative day, the patient started a normal diet. Pneumonia was found on a chest CT scan, prompted by subjective complaints of coughing symptoms, and hydroxychloroquine therapy was started . The drainage tube was removed on the 5th postoperative day. Fever, likely due to Staphylococcus capitis infection detected on blood cultures, persisted until the 6th postoperative day with resolution following antibiotic therapy. On the 7th postoperative day, the respiratory and abdominal symptoms improved, the WBC count normalized, and the CRP level decreased to 1.43 mg/dL.
No postoperative complications were observed, and after two consecutive negative results for COVID-19 by RT-PCR, the patient was discharged on the 30th postoperative day. Follow-up was not possible because the patient returned to his home country immediately after discharge.