A 76-year-old male was hospitalized in our hospital due to asthma in July 2019 and found a mass in the right masseter area without symptoms. Ultrasonography (US) showed a mass of 17 mm × 17 mm × 10 mm which could be detected in the muscle layer of the masseter area, with hypoechogenicity, clear boundary and high vascularity . A diagnosis of “fibroma” was made. The patient chose close follow-up rather than any treatment, because of concomitant asthma and painless mass.
The mass increased gradually, so he went to our hospital in June 2021. In the area of masseter muscle, a round protrusion with a diameter of 3 cm was touched and local skin was complete. It was a little tough in texture, with no tenderness and poor mobility. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated that the solitary mass of 38.4 mm × 22.3 mm existed at the surface of masseter muscle and the boundary with the masseter muscle was unclear . There was no other mass found in CT.
The patient had a history of laparoscopic radical nephrectomy in September 2014. The tumor was located at the pole of the kidney. There was no invasion of vascular system, lymphatic system, broken end of ureter and renal capsule. The post-operative pathology demonstrated clear-cell RCC (ccRCC, T1N0M0, Furhman grade 2) of the left kidney. It is possible that the mass is a metastatic lesion from RCC. Other history included asthma with stable condition. The patient and his family had no history of tumor.
The patient asked to remove the mass. Then the patient underwent a surgery in June 2021, for diagnosis and treatment at the same time. The mass was found at the surface of the masseter muscle. The mass and part of the masseter muscle were removed. The superficial lobe of parotid gland was also removed due to partial involvement. The mass was gray and yellow in section, and about 30 mm × 30 mm × 25 mm in size. Frozen sections were positive for malignancy and negative for surgical margin. Post-operative pathology showed tumor cells had same morphology of clear cytoplasm, and tumor tissue infiltrated in striated muscle tissue, with rich blood sinuses. Immunohistochemistry revealed positive reactivity to Pax-8, CD10, CA IX, Ki-67 (5%), PD-L1 (22c3, CPS ≈ 1), and negative reactivity to CK7, CK19, p63, calponin, CD117, S100 . Combining morphology, immunohistochemistry and previous medical history, we made the diagnosis of masseter muscle metastasis of RCC.
There was no local recurrence and distant metastasis in follow-up positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PETCT) one month later. The patient did not complain about any abnormality of facial function or appearance.