Our patient is a 31-year-old woman with a past medical history of end-stage renal failure, secondary to rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis from alpha-interferon-induced lupus-like activity and hepatitis B membranous nephropathy, for which she has been on hemodialysis for the past 18 years. In addition, she has a significant oncological history of bilateral renal cell carcinoma necessitating bilateral nephrectomy in 2014 complicated by multiple tumor recurrences.
She was referred by her nephrologist to the endocrine surgery department for consideration of parathyroidectomy in view of long-standing tertiary hyperparathyroidism complicated by hypercalcemia. Preoperatively, the patient’s serum intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) was elevated at 262.2 pmol/L (normal: 1.6–7.2 pmol/L) and her serum calcium was 2.60 mmol/L (normal: 2.10–2.60 mmol/L). Bedside ultrasonography scan (US) of the thyroid revealed three parathyroid glands ranging from 1.5 to 2 cm in size, as well as a hypoechoic right lower pole thyroid nodule with central calcification measuring 1.91 by 1.79 cm (shown in ). In view of the radiological findings, fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) was performed for the suspected thyroid nodule on the same day, which eventually yielded a follicular lesion of undetermined significance (shown in ). The patient was counseled on the radiological and pathological findings and was offered right hemithyroidectomy and total parathyroidectomy with deltoid implantation.
Intraoperative exploration revealed that the thyroid nodule noted at initial US was found to be the right superior parathyroid gland invading into the right thyroid itself. The right superior parathyroid gland was excised en bloc with the right hemithyroidectomy, and there was no macroscopic invasion of surrounding structures and muscles. The remaining 3 parathyroid glands were identified and excised and were clinically hyperplastic (shown in ). Detailed examination of the thyroid beds did not reveal any additional palpable parathyroid glands or clinical lymphadenopathy. Post-operatively, the patient was hypocalcemic with a serum calcium of 1.98 mmol/L and was started on intravenous 5% calcium gluconate infusion and high calcium bath dialysis while inpatient. Our patient was discharged well on post-operative day 5 and seen in the clinic 3 weeks post-operatively.
Histopathological diagnosis of the right hemithyroidectomy specimen containing the right superior parathyroid gland was consistent with that of parathyroid carcinoma (shown in ). The tumor cells appeared cytologically bland with inconspicuous mitotic activity. However, the carcinoma exhibited capsular and vascular invasion into the thyroid gland, with focal involvement of the circumferential margin. Notably, the isthmic margin was free of tumor. The other right inferior, left inferior, and left superior parathyroid glands were benign hypercellular parathyroid tissue, histologically consistent with parathyroid hyperplasia.