A 27-year-old man came with a complaint of sudden onset bilateral hearing loss while he was attending a religious event in a mosque the night before. He was confused and unable to find his way back to his car. There was associated slurred speech, dizziness, and vomiting. Otherwise there was no ear pain, tinnitus, vertigo or ear discharge. He also denied any fever, headache or body weakness. There was no previous history of ear infection, trauma or exposure to a loud voice. He also denied taking any ototoxic medications. He had a childhood history of epilepsy with the last fitting episode occurring when he was 12-years-old.
During his physical examination, the patient was alert and conscious.
The vital signs were normal. Free field voice test showed that the patient had bilateral profound hearing loss. He was unable to hear a shout at 2 feet and he spoke in a loud voice with some degree of dysarthria. Tuning fork test was not administered since the patient had profound hearing loss. Otoscopic examination was also normal. He had a normal gait, no facial asymmetry, and his muscle power and reflexes were normal.
His routine blood examinations showed a haemoglobin of 135 g/L, total white cell count of 8.51 x109/L, and an ESR 3 mm/hr. His coagulation profile was normal. Screening tests for Hepatitis and Syphilis infection were negative.Based on the patient’s history and physical examination, we referred him to the neuromedical team with the diagnosis of bilateral sudden sensorineural hearing loss secondary to central causes which could be stroke or meningitis. Computed tomography (CT) followed by CT venography, which were administered on the following day, revealed cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT) of bilateral transverse sinuses and torcular herophili with multifocal infarction of various ages . The neuromedical team prescribed him a subcutaneous anticoagulant (fondaparinux 7.5mg daily), intravenous dexamethasone 4mg every 8 hours, and intravenous Ceftriaxone 2g daily.
On the following day, the patient’s bilateral hearing started to improve. Free field voice test showed that he was able to hear a shout at 2 feet (80-90 dB hearing loss).
Pure Tone Audiometry (PTA) was not performed upon admission because the patient had giddiness and was not fit for the procedure (the patient was alert but had some giddiness and instability, so the audiology staff didn’t proceed with the procedure as they afraid he might fall in PTA room). The first PTA was administered on the third day after admission, which revealed moderate-to-severe sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) at high frequencies (4 kHz, 8 kHz) .
The patient’s hearing continues to improve and he claims to have his normal bilateral hearing back 10 days after admission.
Five days after the first imaging, an MRI of the brain was ordered for the patient to evaluate the progress of the CVT. The radiologist reported it as multifocal infarction of varying ages with no evidence of venous sinus thrombosis .
The patient was discharged after 11 days with an oral anticoagulant (aspirin 75mg daily) and to complete oral prednisolone in total of 2 weeks. (the patient was discharged with oral prednisolone tapering dose - every day for 2 weeks). Four weeks post-discharge, during the patient’s ORL clinic follow-up, he claimed having normal bilateral hearing and a subsequent PTA assessment showed normal findings .