A previously healthy 47-year-old female patient presented to the Rucheng County People’s Hospital’s urology department on September 26, 2022 with abdominal pain for 21 days and aggravation for 1 day. The patient had a medical history of thyroiditis and hypertension, denied any history of infectious diseases such as tuberculosis, and had no history of blood transfusion, surgery, or trauma.
On admission, the patient’s respiratory rate and body temperature were 20 /min and 36.5°C, respectively. Physical examination revealed a symmetrical and normal chest appearance with clear breath sounds in both lungs. However, the patient exhibited significant tenderness and rebound pain in the lower abdomen. The results of laboratory tests were as follows: The white blood cell (WBC) count was 11.65 × 109/L, the percentages of neutrophils and lymphocytes were 89.6 and 5.10%, respectively, the C-reactive protein level was 34.03 mg/L, and the hemoglobin was 107.00 g/L. Procalcitonin concentration (PCT) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were normal. Color Doppler ultrasound showed a large amount of fluid in the abdominal cavity and a 57 × 52 mm cystic dark in the left adnexal area. At the same time, computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen demonstrated patchy high-density lesions in both lungs. A large amount of effusion was observed in the abdominal cavity and pelvic cavity, along with a low-density cystic lesion of approximately 4.5 × 4.9 cm in the left adnexal area, along with an unclear and disarranged structure in the right adnexal area . These results suggested pulmonary tuberculosis and intraabdominal infection.
On the same day, the patient underwent laparoscopic exploration. Intraoperatively, it was found that the pelvic cavity contained approximately 400 mL of clear grass yellow fluid. The peritoneum, pelvic walls, and intestinal walls exhibited scattered grayish-yellow nodules. Adhesions were present between the intestinal duct, peritoneum, and the bilateral adnexa of the uterus. The left adnexa and the uterine basin wall formed an enveloped cyst with grass-yellow fluid inside. The surgeon aspirated fluid from the patient’s abdomen, separated the adhesions, aspirated fluid from the cyst, and excised the nodules in the greater omentum. Amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium tablets were given after the operation. Ascites fluid examination results were as follows: total protein, 55.81 g/L, glucose, 4.62 mmol/L, lactate dehydrogenase, 364.00 U/L, adenosine deaminase, 19 U/L, chlorine 100.3 mmol/L, and positive acid-fast staining. For further diagnosis of tuberculosis, ascites fluid was collected for Lowenstein–Jensen medium, acid-fast staining, and TB-DNA analysis, and sputum for Lowenstein–Jensen medium culture and acid-fast staining.
On the 2nd day, the histopathology of the greater omentum showed hyperplasia of fibrous tissue with chronic granulomatous inflammation, but acid-fast staining was negative . TB-DNA and acid-fast staining of the ascites fluid and sputum were negative. Based on the results from CT, pathology, and microscopic examination, the patient was diagnosed with tuberculous peritonitis and secondary tuberculosis, and anti-tuberculosis treatment was initiated with ethambutol hydrochloride, pyrazinamide, rifampicin, and isoniazid. On the 15th day, the patient’s condition improved and she was discharged from the hospital. Anti-tuberculosis treatment continued, and regular review was recommended.
On 14th October, the presence of yellow-green bacteria similar to Mycobacterium tuberculosis was observed in the ascites fluid culture after 12 days of incubation in the Lowenstein–Jensen medium . The acid-fast staining was positive , and single colonies were successfully grown after 3–4 days of bacteria isolation on blood agar plates and Lowenstein–Jensen medium. To gain further insight, WGS was performed on the cultures on 19th October, and the sequences of Mycobacterium syngnathidarum (ANI = 99.4282) were identified . To validate the result of WGS, targeted PCR was performed on the bacteria isolated from the Lowenstein–Jensen medium using a pair of primers: forward 5′-ATGAGCGGTTCGGTGATGTT-3′, reverse 5′-CTACTCGCCAAATTCGCAGC-3′, targeting the genome of Mycobacterium syngnathidarum. The primers were designed and verified using Primer-BLAST based on the reference genome sequence of Mycobacterium syngnathidarum available in NCBI. The capillary electrophoresis technique (Qsep 100™; Bioptic) and Sanger sequencing confirmed the presence of Mycobacterium syngnathidarum . However, due to the lack of reported pathogenicity with Mycobacterium syngnathidarum and the patient’s symptoms being alleviated after anti-tuberculosis treatment during hospitalization, no immediate adjustment to the treatment plan targeting Mycobacterium syngnathidarum was made.
On 8th December, the patient came to the hospital for reexamination as scheduled, prompting a review of CT and Color Doppler ultrasound. Compared to the CT result on 26 September, the abdominal effusion and pelvic effusion were observed. The cystic lesion in the left adnexal area shrank, but the lesion on the right side was enlarged . Combined with the patient’s symptoms and the previous results, the diagnosis of an intraabdominal infection caused by Mycobacterium syngnathidarum was made. Clarithromycin was added to the original treatment (ethambutol hydrochloride, pyrazinamide, rifampicin, and isoniazid) according to BacDive’s guidance. On March 21, 2023, the patient reported no abdominal discomfort and abdominal CT showed that the lesion in the left adnexal area disappeared . She continued eradication therapy for 6 months at home. In order to evaluate the sensitivity of Mycobacterium syngnathidarum to drugs, the drug susceptibility tests (Trek Diagnostic Systems Ltd., United Kingdom) of Mycobacterium syngnathidarum on August 29, 2023 showed that amikacin, ciprofloxacin, clarithromycin, doxycycline, linezolid, minocycline, and moxifloxacin were sensitive .