A 14-year-old female patient with a 4-month history of arthralgia was referred to our institution from an orthopedic clinic in April. She had undergone surgery for patent foramen ovale at age 3 and she has had anemia (hemoglobin of 60-80 g/L) since age 7. Several examinations for anemia including bone marrow puncture performed in the pediatric department of another hospital did not identify the cause of anemia. She has received treatment such as iron replacement and red blood cell transfusions when the anemia worsened. The patient had no significant familial medical history. She was diagnosed with polyarticular rheumatoid factor-positive JIA according to the International Federation of Rheumatology's classification criteria (presence of arthritis in five or more joints within 6 months of onset and two or more positive rheumatoid factors measured at intervals of 3 months or longer). The patient was administered naproxen, but her active arthralgia persisted. She received an intravenous infusion of 8 mg/kg tocilizumab for ongoing arthralgia with active synovitis on admission and was discharged 3 days after the first infusion because no adverse events occurred. However, she developed dyspnea 2 days after discharge and was re-admitted.
The patient’s percutaneous oxygen saturation was 55% on room air and 94% on 3 L/min of nasal oxygen. She was afebrile, and her blood pressure and pulse rate were normal. The eyelid conjunctiva were pale. On auscultation, fine crackles were heard in bilateral lung fields and a systolic murmur of Levine grade 1 was heard in the second intercostal space of the right margin of the sternum. Joint findings showed tenderness and swelling of the left mandibular joint, bilateral shoulder joints, bilateral wrist joints, bilateral ankle joints, right second and third metatarsophalangeal joints, and left first and fourth metatarsophalangeal joints.
The patient’s laboratory findings are summarized in Table . She had anemia (hemoglobin of 59 g/L). Lactate dehydrogenase, Krebs von den Lungen-6 and ferritin were elevated to 612 IU/L, 1820 U/mL and 593.7 µg/L, respectively. Her IgG was elevated to 21,490 mg/L. All tests for infectious diseases were negative.
Chest X-ray showed ground-glass opacities bilaterally . A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a broad range of panlobular or acinar ground-glass opacities . Bronchoalveolar lavage was not performed due to severe dyspnea. Because of her clinical course (dyspnea appearing immediately after discharge) and test results including CT findings, we diagnosed the patient with hypersensitivity pneumonitis and prescribed prednisolone (30 mg/day) without antibiotics. She was discharged 4 days after admission because her dyspnea and imaging findings improved immediately after the initiation of glucocorticoid treatment. Anti-Trichosporon asahii antibody was not detected.
The dose of prednisolone was decreased gradually and tacrolimus was subsequently added to her regimen. However, she was re-admitted 6 months after discharge to receive additional tocilizumab because her arthritis deteriorated under a reduced dose of prednisolone. We considered the hypersensitivity pneumonitis with the first treatment was more likely caused by house antigens such as fungus, house dust or bird droppings other than tocilizumab, because it occurred at home after discharge from the hospital. In addition, the efficacy of tocilizumab on arthritis was observed after the first tocilizumab infusion. These are why tocilizumab was reintroduced. Eight days after the injection, she was discharged from hospital with no recurrence of lung lesions. However, 11 days after the injection, she again developed dyspnea and she was urgently hospitalized with hypoxia . Imaging findings were like those after initial administration of tocilizumab, with extensive ground-glass opacities visible on chest X-ray and chest CT .
Prednisolone (30 mg daily) was started again, but the patient’s hypoxia progressed and imaging findings showed no improvement. Methylprednisolone (1 g/day) was administered as pulse therapy for 3 days, followed by prednisolone (50 mg/day). As her dyspnea and chest imaging findings improved, prednisolone was decreased gradually. The ground-glass opacities visible on chest CT disappeared and she was discharged 20 days after admission . A drug-induced lymphocyte stimulation test was conducted for tocilizumab but was negative. Because of a flare-up of polyarthritis associated with steroid tapering, etanercept (50 mg/week) was introduced 4 months after discharge in May of the following year. After introduction of etanercept, the patient’s polyarthritis improved. No recurrence of interstitial lung lesions has been observed as of October of the following year despite a reduction of her daily dose of prednisolone to 3 mg.