In February 2014, a 60-year-old woman with type 2 diabetes was referred to our hospital. She was diagnosed with cataract and severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR) in both eyes. On examination she had best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) 0.02 in the right eye and 0.01 in the left eye. She underwent uneventful phacoemulsification and hydrophilic acrylic IOL (Akreos Adapt AO, Bausch & Lomb) implantation in both eyes. Two weeks after cataract surgery the BCVA in the left eye improved to 0.4. Then she had fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) and received panretinal photocoagulation in both eyes.
In September 2014, the woman came back with complaint of blurry vision in the left eye. Fundus examination revealed vitreous hemorrhage in the left eye veiling the retinal detail. We performed a 23-gauge vitrectomy with endolaser treatment in the left eye.
Ten months after the vitrectomy (July 2015), the patient complained of decreased visual acuity in the left eye again (the BCVA was 0.1). On slit-lamp examination, we observed a well circumscribed centrally and paracentrally located opacification within the pupillary axis localized to the anterior surface of the IOL . Scheimpflug pictures taken by Pentacam (Oculus) showed increased light scatter on the IOL’s anterior surface .
The IOL was explanted from the left eye together with the capsular bag, and an iris-claw lens (Artisan Aphakia OPHTEC) was implanted . Three days after the operation, the BCVA improved to 0.2.
The explanted IOL was sent to research center of Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences. The unstained IOL was evaluated and photographed under a light microscope (Olympus Optical Co.,Ltd.). Then the IOL was rinsed in distilled water, immersed in 1.0 % alizarin red solution (a special stain for calcium) for 10 min, rinsed again in distilled water, and reexamined under the light microscope.
Light microscopy showed the presence of granular deposits distributed in an overall round pattern on the anterior surface of the IOL. The granules were stained positive for calcium (alizarin red method) .