The case involved a 44-year-old woman who admitted to our department for further treatment. She experienced sudden, severe dizziness and headache three months ago without any identifiable cause. The head computed tomography scan performed at local hospital revealed infarction in the left temporal and basal ganglia, as well as severe stenosis of both internal carotid arteries (ICAs). She was initially treated symptomatically and gradually improved. Three months later, she scheduled for further treatment in our department. The computed tomography perfusion (CTP) imaging showed old infarction and partial liquefaction in the left frontal and temporal lobe. Additionally, the computed tomography angiography (CTA) and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed a PTA arising from cavernous portion of the right ICA, and stenosis or occlusion in the bilateral anterior cerebral arteries (ACA), the M1 segment of bilateral middle cerebral arteries (MCAs), and the C5-C6 segment of bilateral ICAs, combining with many net-like vessels, but the anterior and posterior communicating arteries were patent . Following thorough preoperative examinations, it was determined that bilateral revascularizations were needed. Considering the characteristics of the disease onset, the left revascularization was performed first. During the surgery, however, we found that all of the potential recipient vessels had a diameter smaller than 0.5 mm, while the superficial temporal artery had a diameter greater than 1.5 mm, a direct bypass would pose a high risk of postoperative hemorrhage. Therefore, an indirect bypass procedure was performed on the left side, the patient recovered well and was discharged within a week. During the follow-up visit three months later, imaging examination revealed severe stenosis of the arteries. However, there were improvements in the intracranial vascular conditions, and collateral vessels had formed on the left side. For similar reason mentioned above, an indirect bypass on the right side was performed during this hospitalization. The patient experienced a smooth recovery and symptom improvement. The most recent CTA, CTP tests and DSA of the head indicated significant improvement in both intracranial and extracranial collateral vessels. However, there was still relatively low cerebral blood flow perfusion in the left frontal and temporal lobe .