A 48-year-old male patient presented following two days of fever and epigastric pain and was admitted to our department. His past medical history was significant for acute myeloid leukemia with a normal karyotype, 46, XY , and a 30 % bone marrow blast infiltration, for which he was started on cytarabine plus high-dose daunorubicin for three cycles. He had a high fever (39.3 °C), although blood pressure (127/89 mm Hg) and pulse rate (62 beats/min) were normal. The patient complained of severe epigastric pain, nausea, and persistent diarrhea. Physical examination showed markedly tender and positive rebound tenderness in the right lower abdomen. Laboratory tests showed Hb 6.2 g/dL, white blood cells 0.10 × 103/L (absolute neutrophil count 6/L), platelets 17 × 103/L, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 53.32 mg/dL. Vancomycin was parenterally administered as empiric therapy. Thoracic and abdominal x-rays showed no specific findings. Abdominal computerized tomography showed localized air bubbles in the peri-cecal and peri-appendiceal area with mild perilesional mesenteric infiltration . These findings were consistent with acute appendicitis, and the patient underwent emergency laparoscopic appendectomy. Laparoscopic findings showed a perforated appendix with focal abscess . A Jackson–Pratt drain was inserted following appendectomy. Abdominal pain and CRP improved slightly compared with before surgery, but fever (38.8 °C), and mild pain persisted. The pathology report, established on the seventh postoperative day, described an acute perforated appendicitis caused by invasive aspergillosis . A Gömöri methenamine silver stain revealed many fungal hyphae in the appendiceal lumen and mesoappendix . While receiving intravenous doripenem and voriconazole. The patient's symptoms gradually resolved by five days without postoperative complications. He was discharged on the eighteenth postoperative day in good general condition and continued antifungal therapy and hematological follow-up. Chemotherapy was resumed without further complications.