A 69-year-old man with a history of hypertension previously visited another hospital complaining of lumbar pain. He was referred to our hospital for further examination. At our institution, his serum PSA concentration had increased to 163 ng/mL (normal range: 0–4 ng/mL); a digital rectal examination revealed a stony hard nodule suggestive of prostate cancer. A CT scan revealed multiple sclerotic bone metastases and metastases at the intrapelvic lymph nodes. Bone scintigraphy also identified multiple bone metastases at the vertebrae, ribs, and pelvic bone (extent of disease 3). A prostate biopsy revealed a Gleason score of 5 + 4 adenocarcinoma, leading to a diagnosis of prostate cancer, clinical stage T3bN1M1b. The patient received ADT with gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist (degarelix) because first-line docetaxel or abiraterone acetate was not approved in Japan at that time. After the initial ADT, his PSA values declined to undetectable levels (<0.008 ng/mL) and his symptoms disappeared. Bone scintigraphy revealed improvements in the bone lesions with a decreasing trend in the BSI .
Although he was free from lumbar pain and his serum PSA concentration remained at undetectable levels, he noticed difficulty in urination 30 months after ADT. Bone scintigraphy revealed a stable disease with a BSI of 0.73, and there was no change in sclerotic appearance of bone lesions. As development of t-NEPC at the primary lesion was suspected, WB-DWI was performed with the measurement of serum neuroendocrine markers NSE and ProGRP. WB-DWI revealed an enlarged prostate with a high signal intensity, suggestive of progressive disease at the primary lesion ; however, the NSE and ProGRP levels were within normal range (<16.3 ng/mL and <81.0 pg/mL, respectively).
The patient remained on ADT; however, his serum neuroendocrine markers began to increase at 31 months. WB-DWI at 36 months revealed progression of the primary site and newly developed pelvic, abdominal, and mediastinal lymph node metastases, although the bone lesions had no abnormal signal intensity on WB-DWI and still showed sclerotic appearance on CT . A prostate rebiopsy was performed; histological analysis revealed small cell carcinoma. Immunohistochemistry analysis revealed positive staining for the neuroendocrine markers CD56, synaptophysin, and chromogranin A .
Docetaxel therapy was initially introduced; however, NSE (233.4 ng/mL) and ProGRP (128 pg/mL) further increased after one cycle of docetaxel and WB-DWI showed no improvement in lymph node metastases . The patient received EP therapy comprising etoposide (100 mg/m2) on days 1–3 and cisplatin (80 mg/m2) on day 1, every 21 days. After four cycles of EP therapy, the patient’s serum neuroendocrine markers normalized and the abnormal signals on WB-DWI disappeared completely , indicating a complete response. EP therapy was interrupted accordingly. The patient continued to receive ADT and denosumab and remained recurrence-free 10 months after the EP therapy was interrupted.