The patient is a 53-year-old woman with a complicated medical history including cirrhosis, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, morbid obesity and immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) . Her past surgical history is significant for gastric bypass with Roux-en-Y for morbid obesity, hernia repairs, hysterectomy and tubal ligation. The patient presented for repair of her symptomatic ventral hernia . Surgical repair of the hernia was performed laparoscopically and was achieved without apparent complications. The patient was extubated after surgery and moved to recovery.
Overnight, the patient complained of significant abdominal pain and tenderness and abdominal ecchymoses were noted in addition to concerning hypotension with systolic blood pressures of 60-70 mmHg and diastolic blood pressures of 40-50 mmHg. The patient was taken to the operating room emergently for exploratory laparotomy, which reveled acute hemoperitoneum. All blood was aspirated using Cell Saver. Careful inspection of the repaired hernia did not suggest it as the site of bleeding; the liver also did not appear to be damaged. Minor oozing of blood from the omentum was noted as the only site of active bleeding: prompting a partial omentectomy. The patient’s baseline thrombocytopenia , is the likely reason for continuous bleeding. Coagulation tests done on post-operative day one revealed a high partial thromboplastin time (PTT) of 36.9 s and low levels of fibrinogen (140 mg/dL). The international normalized ratio (INR) was normal at 1.1. Post-operatively, the patient remained intubated and was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit (SICU) for close observation. A massive transfusion protocol (MTP) was activated in the SICU, where within 24 h the patient received three units of platelets (one additional unit had been given in the operating room), three units of fresh frozen plasma, four units of packed red blood cells and ten units of cryoprecipitate. This measure was triggered by the patient’s drop in hemoglobin and hematocrit from pre-operative levels of 11.8 gm/dL and 36.7% to 5.2 gm/dL and 16.6%, respectively . Possible massive transfusion-related hemolysis was considered at this point; however, pre- and post-transfusion DAT were negative. The patient was positive for anti-E and anti-K antibodies, which was known from previous testing. Accordingly, all transfusions were phenotypically matched. Within 4 h of activating the MTP , the patient’s respiratory condition deteriorated, necessitating positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 14 with a fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) level of 100%.
The patient’s hemoglobin and hematocrit dropped precipitously following a brief increase after the massive transfusion. Moreover, the patient’s platelet count quickly returned to a level comparable to the pre-transfusion level, 50 K/mcL , which is only slightly below to the patient’s baseline (70-90 K/mcL). Due to the patient’s continuously low hemoglobin and hematocrit, relatively steady at 6-7 gm/dL and 19-21%, respectively, additional blood products were transfused: all with minimal apparent impact . The patient remained intubated and a post-operative chest X-ray four hours after the first transfusion of blood products showed mild to moderate reduction in lung volume and moderate diffuse airspace disease bilaterally; heart and mediastinum were within normal limits .
Based on the patient’s risk factors (high peak airway pressure with mechanical ventilation, possible shock and a positive fluid balance), the bilateral infiltrates on chest radiograph without evidence of left atrial hypertension and the significant persistent respiratory distress shortly after transfusion of blood products, a diagnosis of TRALI was made. CRP levels [, ] and interleukin levels [–] were not evaluated, two parameters of potential value for the assessment of TRALI.
Review of donor histories from the transfused products revealed one female donor with a pregnancy history . Subsequent screening of the donor identified positive HLA class I and class II antibodies, strongly raising the possibility of “true” antibody-mediated TRALI [, , ]. The donor refused additional testing to confirm a match with the patient’s HLA type.
Despite the frequent transfusion of blood products, the patient’s hematologic status remained unstable . Given the patient’s critical status, interventional radiology was consulted and performed Gelfoam embolization of the upper pole branch of the splenic artery, to treat the patient’s hypersplenism and severe thrombocytopenia . Additionally, 5 doses of IVIG were administered to treat the thrombocytopenia – several reports describe that IVIGs were administered to treat ITP [–] – also with very limited impact .
Even though initial pre- and post-operative DATs had been negative, on post-operative day 16 laboratory technologists noticed that the patient’s serum had changed in appearance from icteric to hemolytic . Follow-up laboratory studies indeed indicated in vivo hemolysis: lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels of 1,180 IU/L, haptoglobin of less than 5.8 mg/dL and a reticulocyte count of 4.38% . Total (2.1 mg/dL) and direct bilirubin (1.3 mg/dL) were marginally elevated. An extensive blood bank work-up was initiated at this point; antibody screening was positive, and, as expected, the anti-K and anti- E antibodies were identified. Serial DATs now began to show positive results. Several panels were run, but an additional known antibody could not be identified. Units that had previously tested as compatible were tested with newer specimens and were now incompatible. Based on these findings all transfusions were immediately halted and no additional blood products were given for the remainder of the patient’s hospitalization. A rare allo-antibody was suspected, and samples were sent to the Blood Centers of Wisconsin. Given the positive repeat DAT, “super-coombs” testing was unnecessary. At the reference center, extensive testing ruled out known uncommon antibodies, including: Vel, Cs(a), Yk(a), Cr(a), Lu-8, Yta, AnWj, Lua-b-, Ata, Ko, Lw(a-b+), Kna, McC(a), Sl(a), Ch, Ge-2, -3, Ge-2, In(b-), Tc(a-), Jr(a-), U-, Sc:-1, Ena-, Wrb, Lan. Overall, these blood bank findings are consistent with unknown, rare allo-antibody formation to a red blood cell antigen.
The patient’s hemoglobin, hematocrit and platelet levels continued to be low throughout the post-operative period, but were very stable with the administration of iron and epogen . The patient started to improve significantly as management was adjusted, including stringent restrictions of all transfusions. Laboratory values and vital signs started to normalize: LDH 513 IU/L, direct bilirubin 0.2 mg/dL, haptoglobin 51.7 mg/dL , and the patient’s blood pressure returned to her pre-operative levels of 120-130/60 mmHg with a heart rate of 80 beats per minute. Importantly, the patient started to tolerate trach collar and a regular diet and was quickly able to ambulate again. Subsequently, the patient was transferred to a rehabilitation center and appeared to be regaining her health. The slow and cumbersome healing process and the significant setbacks were extremely frustrating for the patient. During the worst part of her recovery, the patient felt quite emotionally drained and expressed feelings of deep depression. All possible complications had been discussed at length prior to surgery; nonetheless, the severity of her complications was unexpected, particularly following a routine hernia repair. Addressing the patient’s psychological needs was another critical step that had to be taken as the patient’s care was optimized.