A 76-year-old Japanese woman, who received palliative chemoradiation treatment for stage IV esophageal cancer, was referred to our Gynecology Out-patient Department for evaluation of high accumulation in the vagina, maximum standardized uptake value (SUVMax) of 39.1, on a positron emission tomography (PET) scan . She had no complaints of difficulty with urination, except that it took a long time to urinate. She denied pain while urinating and urinary frequency. A urine analysis did not reveal hematuria or bacteriuria. She had two vaginal deliveries and no history of major trauma in external genitalia at birth. She denied past history of pelvic trauma or infectious disease in the external genitalia. She was menopausal at 40 years of age, and had never undergone a Papanicolaou (Pap) smear for cervical cancer screening.
Inspection of her external genitalia showed that her clitoris was normal in size, and the labia majora and anus were visualized ; however, the urethral meatus and vagina orifice were not seen on careful inspection of her vulva . On palpation of her external genitalia, there was a pinhole opening at the midpoint between her clitoris and anus. A transrectal ultrasound revealed an atrophic uterus and large amount of fluid retention in her vagina . A cystoscopic examination was performed in an effort to define the anatomic structures in the closed vaginal cavity before an invasive procedure was undertaken (Additional file : Video 1). The pinhole was dilated and a fiber was inserted into the hole. The tip of the fiber reached her bladder, and we confirmed that the urethra, cervix, and urethral meatus within her vagina were filled with urine. Thus, surgical intervention was recommended. Under topical anesthesia, the labial adhesions were bluntly and sharply dissected . A Pap smear showed no cervical abnormalities. We gave our patient local hygiene recommendations and applied an estrogen ointment to prevent reformation of adhesions. She is currently healthy and has had no recurrence 3 months after surgery.