An 82-year-old woman presented to our emergency department with persistent pain in the upper-right quadrant of the abdomen.
The patient reported pain of 6 days duration, with associated nausea and vomiting, without any referred pain. She also complained of chills and her temperature was 38.5°C. There was no jaundice in the skin and sclera.
The patient had a history of hypertension for 10 years, pulmonary embolism 3 years ago and hysterectomy 27 years previously.
There was no personal history of tobacco or alcohol consumption, nor any noteworthy family medical history.
Height and weight of the patient were 155 cm and 42 kg, respectively. Physical examination revealed a longitudinal scar of 10 cm in the lower abdomen, and a fist-sized mass around the umbilicus that was tough, with clear boundaries, poor mobility and obvious tenderness . There were no positive signs in other areas of the abdomen, or a positive Murphy sign.
Laboratory data indicated that her leukocyte count was slightly elevated, C-reactive protein and procalcitonin level were 113.8 mg/L and 0.23 ng/mL, respectively, and liver function tests and pancreatic enzyme concentrations were within normal limits.
Ultrasonography (US) and computed tomography (CT) showed a cystic mass in the lower abdomen and upper pelvis with multiple nodules of high-density calcifications , suggesting an abnormally positioned gallbladder with multiple stones and thickening wall, multiple cysts in the liver and kidney, and a small amount fluid in the pelvis. There were no portal vein abnormalities or hepatic deformity. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also demonstrated a cystic mass in the middle of the abdomen with multiple low-intensity T2-weighted signals and edema of the adjacent abdominal wall, suggesting an ectopic enlarged gallbladder with multiple stones and inflammatory changes. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed a V-shaped distortion of the extrahepatic bile ducts and a particularly extended twisted cystic duct .