A 52-year-old man was admitted to a previous hospital for chemoradiotherapy for lung adenocarcinoma. He had no obvious history of gastrointestinal diseases and no family history of inflammatory bowel diseases. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed an 80 × 60 mm mass lesion at the left upper lobe, invading the second rib . Specimens obtained by transbronchial biopsy diagnosed a non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer. Immunohistochemical staining results revealed no gene mutations (EGFR, KRAS, ALK, BRAF, ROS1, and HER2) and low PD-L1 expression.
The clinical stage was T4N0M0 and stage IIIA, and concurrent chemoradiotherapy was initiated. Thirteen days after 2 cycles of cisplatin and vinorelbine, he experienced grade 2 abdominal pain, diarrhea, and hematochezia based on the National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria (version 3.0 of the toxicity scale). Although radiotherapy was completed (60 Gy/30 Fr), concurrent chemotherapy was discontinued. Intravenous antibiotics demonstrated poor efficacy in treating his symptoms. A CT revealed an edematous thickening of the bowel from the rectum to the transverse colon . He underwent a colonoscopy, which revealed an edematous bowel wall with ulceration and erythema extending from the rectum proximally to the transverse colon in a continuous and circumferential pattern . Findings of the colonoscopy were suggestive of UC, drug-induced colitis, or infectious colitis. Results from bacterial cultures of his stool and mucosa specimens were negative for the presence of the Clostridium difficile (CD) and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Immunohistological staining for cytomegalovirus (CMV) from a colon tissue biopsy was also negative. Pathological findings from rectal biopsy revealed infiltration of inflammatory cells including plasmacytes, but no crypt abscesses; therefore, it was still difficult to distinguish between drug-induced colitis and UC. Following 28 days of conservative therapy, he was transferred to our hospital, and blood tests showed elevated inflammatory biomarkers (white blood cell count, 12,880/μL; hemoglobin, 10.0 g/dL; C-reactive protein, 23.1 mg/dL; serum albumin, 2.3 g/dL). The CT scan showed pancolitis with extensive edema and a dilated lumen without haustra in the entire colon . Sigmoid colonoscopy showed extensive multiple ulceration revealing pseudopolyps in a continuous pattern . He was clinically diagnosed with pancolitis-type UC and treated with intravenous glucocorticoids (prednisolone, 90 mg). His symptoms gradually worsened, and an abdominal X-ray revealed megacolon . After 7 days of administration of prednisolone, total proctocolectomy with permanent end ileostomy was performed. Laparotomy revealed a significantly dilated colon. There were penetrations on some parts of the abdominal wall. The surgical duration was 229 min, and the total blood loss was 251 mL. His postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on the 14th postoperative day. The resected specimen revealed the appearance of pseudopolyps with multiple deep ulcerations . Histological examination demonstrated goblet cell depletion, crypt abscesses, and infiltration of polymorphonuclear cells . There were no other malignant findings or atypical lesions. UC was diagnosed based on the pathological findings and clinical manifestations and course of the disease. Ten months after the surgery, there were no signs of recurrence. Maintenance therapy with durvalumab was not initiated, considering the risk of enteritis and extraintestinal manifestations of UC.