A 45 year old Chinese lady with a six months history of bilateral nasal obstruction, tinnitus, associated headache and dizziness presented to the local hospital on November 3rd, 2009. Nasoendoscopy revealed a large mass in the nasopharynx, a biopsy of which confirmed non-keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma, WHO type 2.2 . Staging MRI and CT scans showed a large tumor measuring 5 × 3 cm occupying the roof and the posterior wall of the nasopharynx which invaded the inferior part of the clivus. Cross sectional images also revealed bilaterally enlarged lymph nodes in the upper neck. According to the 2002 AJCC staging system , she was diagnosed as a NPC patient of stage cT3N2M0. She was treated with 2-phase lateral opposed facial-cervical fields at a 2 Gy daily fraction , 5 times a week to a total dose of 70 Gy with concurrent cisplatin from November 10th to December 31st, 2010. Complete response was achieved after concurrent chemo-radiotherapy. 3 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy consisting of Cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil was given following concurrent chemo-radiotherapy.
However, 1 year after radiation therapy the patient developed moderate to severe headache and dizziness. She returned to the local hospital to seek medical intervention for her symptoms on March 2nd, 2010. There was no associated history of fever, blurring of vision, nausea or vomiting. Physical examination was unremarkable. No abnormal neurological signs were noted. Her hematological and biochemical profile as well as her liver function test results were normal. However, Brain MRI scan showed abnormalities in the white matter of bilateral inferior portions of the temporal lobes. A large heterogeneous lesion with circumferential rim enhancement surrounded by extensive edema was found in the inferior part of the right temporal lobe. Small homogeneous lesions with limited edema could also be seen in the left temporal lobe . However, these findings in the contralateral temporal lobe failed to hint the correct diagnosis at the attending physician. Moreover, the MRI also showed associated mild white matter demyelination and cerebral atrophy. Upon assumption that the patient was either a case of primary brain tumor or intracranial extension of NPC, she was referred to the neurosurgery department at local hospital where she was advised to undergo surgery.
The patient refused surgery or any further treatment. Subsequently, her clinical condition worsened with time. 2 months later she complained of more intense headache especially in the morning with accompanying dizziness, nausea and blurring of vision, which prompted her to return to the neurosurgery department at our hospital in May, 2010. Physical examination showed presence of papilloedema. There was absence of neck rigidity and other focal neurological deficits. Brain MRI re-scanning showed no other new lesions. In keeping with the initial diagnosis of temporal lobe malignancy, the attending neurosurgeon performed a maximal surgical resection of the lesion in the right temporal lobe on May 18th, 2010. However, histological examination confirmed the absence of neoplastic cells in the resected brain tissues. Instead, partial liquefactive necrotic tissue with lymphocytic infiltration was noted. Additionally, there was associated dilatation, congestion and hemorrhage of surrounding blood vessels which corroborated with a diagnosis of radiation induced TLN . Fortunately, her symptoms relieved significantly after resection of the right lesion. Postoperative MRI revealed a big cavity in the lower portion of right temporal lobe with surrounding edema, and several minor enhanced lesions in the counterpart of the left temporal lobe . She presented to our department to seek medical opinion about further treatment for the minor lesions in the left temporal lobe. She was prescribed anticoagulants and high dose vitamins. At present the patient remains well and is in close follow-up 3 months after the TLN resection.