A 60-year-old female with a past medical history of hypertension (HTN), diabetes mellitus type 2 (DM2), ulcerative colitis (UC), coronary artery disease (CAD), diastolic congestive heart failure (CHF) with ejection fraction of 60%, acute pancreatitis (1 episode, 2014), and cholecystectomy (in 1990s) presented in 2017 with severe epigastric pain for one day. It was constant, 10/10 in severity, was radiating to the back, and was associated with severe nausea, numerous episodes of nonbloody nonbilious vomiting and anorexia. Symptoms began three days after starting metronidazole for C. difficile colitis (developed after treatment with antibiotics for cellulitis). She had no history of alcohol use, hypertriglyceridemia, recent flu-like illness, travel to parasite endemic areas, direct trauma, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), vasculitis or other autoimmune diseases. She had no family history of pancreatitis. She had no recent history of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). She had a 20 pack-year smoking history. Home medications included inhaled albuterol, alprazolam, atorvastatin, clonidine, inhaled fluticasone-salmeterol, losartan, loratadine, montelukast, and omeprazole.
Her vital signs at presentation were stable. Her physical exam revealed distended abdomen with severe epigastric tenderness and diminished bowel sounds but no guarding or rebound tenderness. No other abnormal physical exam findings were noted. Labs on admission showed the following: white blood cells (WBC) count was 16,000/μL with neutrophilic predominance and no eosinophilia. Lipase was >396 U/L (amylase not measured). Liver function tests (LFTs) were mildly elevated with total bilirubin 0.7 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 59 U/L, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 135 IU/L. Calcium level was 8.6 mg/dL. Triglycerides level was 69 mg/dL. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) and anti-double stranded DNA (anti-ds DNA) were negative. Ultrasound of the abdomen revealed an 8 mm common bile duct (CBD) s/p cholecystectomy, with no obvious choledocholithiasis. CT of the abdomen and pelvis revealed peripancreatic fat stranding adjacent to the pancreatic tail . A diagnosis of acute pancreatitis was made, with Apache II score of 6 (on admission). The patient was made nil per os (NPO), and fluid resuscitation in addition to pain management was started. Metronidazole was stopped at admission. The symptoms improved rapidly, the lipase downtrended within 2 days (>396→200→134 U/L), and the patient was discharged home.
In 2014, the patient had a similar episode of acute pancreatitis with similar symptoms that developed 4 days after starting metronidazole for C. difficile colitis. Lipase at that time was elevated at 808 U/L, and CT angiogram (CTA) of the abdomen and pelvis at that time showed focal edematous pancreatitis of the pancreatic tail . Metronidazole was also stopped at that time, and the patient was made NPO with fluid resuscitation and pain management. Her symptoms improved rapidly, her lipase downtrended within 2 days (808 → 108 U/L), and the patient was discharged home.