A 44-year-old female was hospitalized on 25th January 2002 for shortness of breath and hemoptysis. Her past medical history consisted of pulmonary tuberculosis treated in 1983 and thyroid surgery for thyrotoxicosis in 1991. She had an episode of hemoptysis in 2001. She was labeled as recurrent acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in 2002.
On examination at the time of admission her respiratory rate was 30/min, pulse rate 120/min and blood pressure (BP) was 170/80. Chest X-ray (CXR) showed diffuse parenchymal lesions with fibrosis of both lungs. Her oxygen saturation dropped to 72% and she required mechanical ventilation. Sputum culture grew Klebsiella pneumoniae and hence she was treated with Amoxicillin clavalunic acid and Ceftazidime. Following this treatment her clinical condition improved and she was discharged.
She again presented in February 2003 with another episode of hemoptysis. This time a chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed diffuse interstitial fibrosis mostly in both apices. There was a ground glass appearance.
Her fourth episode of hemoptysis occurred when she presented to the hospital in July 2006 with shortness of breath. During this admission her pulmonary function tests showed combined obstructive and restrictive changes. Bronco-alveolar lavage showed hemorrhagic effluent with a large number of hemosiderin containing histiocytes, few lymphocytes and polymorphonuclear leucocytes.
Her investigations revealed a urine protein level of 2+ and a red blood cell count of 10–20/HPF, while blood examination showed a white blood cell count of 15.6 × 103/μl, hemoglobin at 12.4 g/dl and a platelet count of 301 × 109/l. Blood urea was at 2.4 mmol/l and S-creatinine was at 48 μmol/l. Rheumatoid factor test was positive at 32 IU, as was an autoantibodies test at 1/160. Anti-ds DNA negative C-ANCA was weakly positive. Her shortness of breath increased. A chest CT scan showed extensive ground glass appearance. Anti-GBM antibodies were negative.
An open wedge biopsy from the lower lobe of the right lung was carried out. This showed marked intra-alveolar hemorrhage with the presence of a large number of siderophages. A prominent proliferation of type 2 pneumocytes was also seen. Alveolar septae were inflamed, thickened and fibrotic with the formation of collagenous nodules. Immunoperoxidase staining showed linear deposition of IgG in the basement membrane of several alveolar capillaries with intra-alveolar hemorrhage and septal fibrosis.
In view of the recurrent pulmonary hemorrhage with proteinuria and microscopic hematuria despite normal renal function, the patient was offered a renal biopsy to which she consented in November 2006. Renal biopsy was assessed by light and immunoflorescence microscopy. The light microscopy showed eight glomeruli with minimal thickening of the basement membrane with increased cellularity. Immunoflorescence showed linear staining of IgG and C3 along the capillary walls. The pathology report was consistent with anti-GBM antibody disease.
The patient commenced treatment with oral Prednisolone 30 mg/day and oral Cyclophosphamide 100 mg/day. She has been on outpatient follow-up since August 2006 and is doing well on this treatment. Her latest investigations were: urine protein negative, red blood cell count 10/μl, white blood cell count 6/μl, hemoglobin 15.1 g/dl, platelet count 251/l, blood urea 2.5 mmol/l, Na 137.7 mmol/l, K 3.83 mmol/l, creatinine 68 μmol/l total protein 71 g/l, alb 34 g/l, and uric acid 312. She has had no relapse of hemoptysis and is free from respiratory symptoms.