A 55-year-old man was referred to the otorhinolaryngology department due to slight nasal discomfort that persisted for about 1 wk (timeline presented in Table ).
Four weeks before the consultation, the patient underwent dental root canal therapy (position 21) in clinic A. Two days after surgery, the patient had swelling and pain in the upper gum and lip, which were suspected to be caused by postoperative inflammation. He was then prescribed antibiotics and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. Yet, these problems persisted for 1 wk. The patient was then transferred to clinic B. A dental film was taken, revealing two hyperdense and pin-like masses at position 21 . The second dentist suspected a fishbone and referred the patient to hospital C. According to the dental film , the patient was diagnosed with a foreign body (the other hyperdense mass was an artifact). Consequently, a dental root foreign body removal surgery was performed under general anesthesia by labiogingival incision, and one piece of pin-like foreign body was successfully removed.
On the second day post-operation, the dental radiography was repeated, revealing a foreign body residue of 29.4 mm from the left incisor . A second foreign body removal surgery was performed under local anesthesia via original labiogingival incision; however, the foreign body was not found despite the long intervention.
After the second surgery, the patient developed slight nasal discomfort that lasted for about 1 wk, after which the patient consulted our department. He underwent a computed tomography (CT) scan of the nasal sinuses. The axial , sagittal , and coronal planes showed a pin-like foreign body with hyperdensity in the left side of the nasal septum; three-dimensional reconstruction reconfirmed the position.
The patient was otherwise healthy and had no record of previous surgical interventions or the use of medication.
The patient had no relevant personal or family history.
The patient was immediately admitted. At the intraoral examination, granulation tissues were not evident in area 21. No sign of the foreign body was found following careful digital palpation, except for mild edema in the nasal septum.
The patient’s general condition was good, with normal hemoglobin levels and slightly elevated white blood cell count.
An emergency operation was scheduled. Before the septal foreign body extraction surgery, a needle was used as the reference . A CT scan, which was performed to localize the foreign body and to avoid the same scenario from the last surgery, showed the needle pointing right to the pin-like foreign body .