In June 2003, a 22-year-old woman was diagnosed with a Ph + karyotype and chronic CML. Her physical examination results were normal upon hospital admission. Her peripheral blood test results were as follows: white blood cell count of 227 × 109/L with 2% blasts, 20% myelocytes, 10% metamyelocytes, 12% bands, 53% neutrophils, and 3% lymphocytes; hemoglobin concentration of 79 g/L; and platelet count of 201 × 109/L. Renal and liver test results were normal. The diagnosis of CML was confirmed based on detection of BCR/ABL mRNA transcripts and chromosome banding, which revealed a 46, XY, t(9;22) karyotype. She was first treated with hydroxyurea (2 g/day) and obtained a complete hematologic response (CHR) with no cytogenetic response within 6 months. After 6 months, she was presented to FUNDALEU hospital and began treatment with imatinib (400 mg/day) as a first-line treatment with good tolerance and adherence to the medication. She obtained a major molecular response (MMR) in 12 months. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification for the BCR/ABL sequence was checked every 6 months to confirm the persistence of the MMR. Although the patient had been advised to use effective methods of contraception during therapy, she reported having had amenorrhea for 2 months in July 2006. Ultrasonography revealed pregnancy at 5 weeks of gestation. Although no data were available to us regarding stopping TKI treatment during pregnancy, after being informed of the possible risks, the patient and her relatives chose to continue imatinib therapy during the first 5 months of gestation. At that point, the imatinib treatment was stopped and the patient was treated with interferon-alpha (IFN-α) at 3 million IU twice a week throughout the remaining pregnancy. All follow-up ultrasound scans during the course of the pregnancy were unremarkable. During pregnancy, the patient maintained the CHR (white blood cell count of <10 × 109/L without splenomegaly); karyotyping and molecular detection were not performed. On 14 February 2007, the patient delivered a healthy male infant at gestational week 39 via cesarean section. The infant weighed 3.2 kg with an Apgar score of 9 at 10 min. Moreover, the child was healthy and developed normally without any evidence of congenital malformations. Two months after delivery, the patient’s peripheral blood counts, mRNA transcripts of BCR/ABL by qualitative PCR, and karyotype were normal. Imatinib treatment (400 mg/day) was restarted to prevent the recurrence of CML. During the next 8 years of follow-up (until the time of this writing), the patient has been adherent to the imatinib therapy and has maintained the CHR and MMR. The child was breast-fed for 1 month, remained healthy, and developed normally without any evidence of congenital malformations. The child’s peripheral blood tests and BCR/ABL mRNA transcripts were assessed every 3 years and showed normal results.
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Third People’s Hospital of Yancheng. Informed written consent was obtained from the patient in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.