A 46-year-old male patient weighing 76.9 kg and measuring 1.781 m in height (body mass index (BMI), 24.24 kg/m2, overweight) was scheduled for laparoscopic nephroureterectomy. He had a history of hypertension (HTN), alopecia universalis, and alopecia areata. The patient had no other specific clinical symptoms. Left hydronephrosis (grade 3–4) was detected on ultrasound performed for health screening. Then, he first visited a local medical center (LMC) and a left middle ureteral mass with urinary obstruction, suggestive of left ureter cancer, was found on abdominal CT. To establish a treatment plan, he was transferred to the urology department of a certified tertiary hospital. Preoperative urinalysis and blood sample measurements, including blood count, serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, serum creatinine, liver enzymes, and an arterial blood gas study, yielded results that were within normal limits. The patient did not take any nephrotoxic medication.
On arrival at the operating room, initial vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 151/91 mmHg; heart rate, 77 beats/min; and arterial oxygen saturation, 100% by pulse oximetry. The total anesthetic time was 5 h 55 min and anesthesia was induced with 150 mg of propofol, 40 mg of 2% lidocaine, supplemental remifentanil continuous infusion, and desflurane, with rocuronium bromide as a muscle relaxant. The patient was first placed in the lithotomy position for ureterorenoscopy and then the position was changed to the right down flank position for laparoscopic left nephroureterectomy. Adequate padding with a sponge and gel pad was applied to the dependent parts of the body.
The patient was hemodynamically stable (heart rate (HR), 60–80 bpm, and systolic arterial blood pressure, 90–120 mmHg), with all ventilation and oxygenation variables preserved within normal limits. The total fluid input was 2550 mL and the total amount of urine over the procedure was not recorded but within the normal range.
At the end of surgery, the residual neuromuscular block was reversed with 200 mg of Sugammadex, the patient was extubated uneventfully, and he was moved to the recovery room where recovery was uneventful. Post-surgical examination revealed the following: aspartate transaminase (AST), 77 U/L; alanine transaminase (ALT), 38 U/L; blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 15.8 mg/dL; serum creatinine, 1.38 mg/dL; and Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate (MDRD eGFR), 55 mL/min/1.73 m2.
The next day, the patient complained of severe pain in his right buttock region, which was edematous. This region was the dependent portion during the operation. The following laboratory examination findings were noted: AST, 666 U/L; ALT, 210 U/L; BUN, 23.7 mg/dl; serum creatinine, 1.28 mg/dL; MDRD eGFR, 61 mL/min/1.73 m2; creatine kinase (CK), 35,118 U/L; lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 918 U/L; myoglobin, 5830 ng/mL; calcium, 8.1 mg/dL; and phosphorus, 1.7 mg/dL. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with rhabdomyolysis resulting from compartment syndrome of the dependent region due to prolonged surgery at a fixed position.
Although acute compartment syndrome was strongly suspected clinically, no definite neurologic deficit was observed in the early stages and the symptoms were relatively mild. Close monitoring and re-evaluation were performed at about 30 min intervals. At this time, since clear signs of worsening of clinical symptoms were no longer observed, it was decided to conduct conservative care and follow-up rather than immediately performing invasive fasciotomy. The patient was also informed about the possibility of performing emergency fasciotomy when symptoms worsened and, with consent, conservative care was continued.
Conservative care with massive hydration (0.9% normal saline, 100 cc/h), hepatotonic agents including Ursa (100 mg tid), and Pennel (25 mg/50 mg tid) were administered orally. Adelavin (3 mL) and Liveract infusion (15 g in 1000 mL of ‘Plasma solution A’) were administered through an intravenous line. Follow-up laboratory examinations were performed daily up to 7 days after surgery . Urinary output was monitored and was consistently 990–2750 mL each day.
Soft tissue ultrasonography (USG) and pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed on postoperative day 7. Generalized edematous swelling in the subcutaneous layer of the right buttock was found on USG with a geographic signal change of about 15 cm (longitudinal) in the right gluteus maximus, medius, and minimus muscles; edematous changes in these muscles and in the overlying subcutaneous layer were observed on pelvic MRI . These laboratory examinations and imaging findings were consistent with rhabdomyolysis from compartment syndrome.
Despite conservative treatment, the swelling and buttock pain persisted. Therefore, he received physical therapy and modality (hot pack, infrared irradiation) after consulting the Department of Rehabilitation Medicine. Laboratory findings gradually recovered as the days passed. On postoperative day 14, finally, measurements of the blood samples returned to a nearly normal range (AST, 15 U/L; ALT, 21 U/L; BUN, 8.8 mg/dL; serum creatinine, 1.02 mg/dL; MDRD eGFR, 79 mL/min/1.73 m2; CK, 100 U/L; LDH, 281 U/L; and myoglobin, 73 ng/mL).
Nineteen days after the diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis, he was referred to the Department of Rehabilitation Medicine for rehabilitation of the right buttock pain and for strengthening of the right hip flexor, extensor, abductor, and adductor muscles. On initial physical examination, the manual muscle test (MMT) showed mildly decreased motor ability, grade 4, in the right hip flexion, extension, abduction, and adduction. The Berg Balance Scale (BBS) was 55 and the Modified Barthel Index (MBI) was 98. The limitation of motion (LOM) of the hip joint suspected of originating from the pain was also observed. When passively moving the hip joint, the patient complained of pain in the gluteal area with a numerical rating scale (NRS) of 5. We interpreted that the patient’s muscle strength and functional level may have been underestimated due to the pain and deconditioning. Rehabilitation treatment was performed for the purpose of improving muscle strength and balance, recovering range of motion (ROM), and for reducing pain based on the patient’s symptoms. Then, we treated him twice a day using an ergometer, sliding rehabilitation machine, and active range of motion (AROM) exercises. Stretching exercises were recommended for strengthening and recovering ROM, and infrared irradiation (IR) and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) were performed for relieving pain and suspected posterior femoral cutaneous neuropathy. All physical therapy was performed under the supervision of a physical therapist and immediate feedback was provided to improve gait endurance and balance. In addition, the intensity of the exercise was gradually increased according to the performance of the patient. The patient was discharged after undergoing rehabilitation for 17 days. Right hip muscle strength (grade 4 to 5), gait balance, ROM (hip flexion 90′ to 110′; hip extension 5′ to 10′; and hip abduction 20′ to 40′), and pain (NRS 5 to 2) were significantly improved when he was discharged.