A 70-year-old white woman presented to my institution with severe pruritus. She had been diagnosed with stage IV adenocarcinoma of the ovaries with metastasis to the liver 1 year prior. She had undergone three rounds of carboplatin paclitaxel, followed by debulking surgery, followed by an additional six rounds of carboplatin paclitaxel therapy. After her last chemotherapy treatment, her carcinoembryonic antigen normalized. Four months later, she presented with jaundice, dark urine, and pale stools. A computed tomographic scan revealed the cancer had returned to the liver and was now obstructing her biliary duct. A stent was attempted several days later but was not successful. In collaboration with her oncologist, it was decided not to pursue further active treatment, and palliative care was initiated. She was otherwise healthy. The only medication she was taking was pantoprazole 40 mg daily for acid reflux. Her weight was 80 pounds.
One month later, she developed intense pruritus throughout her entire body. It was worse at night, and her sleep was significantly disturbed. She indicated her pruritus was 8/10 on a numerical rating scale (NRS), with a score of 0 reflecting no pruritus and a score of 10 reflecting the worst pruritus. She had no significant skin lesions or excoriations. She first tried over-the-counter moisturizers, with minimal effect. Benadryl was then suggested; it decreased her night waking, but she was too drowsy the following day. Loratadine was also attempted, to no effect. Cholestyramine was suggested, but she declined it due to the gastrointestinal side effects and longer time until onset of action.
The etiology of her pruritus appeared to be centrally induced, as opposed to prurioreceptive, neuropathic, or psychogenic . My colleagues and I decided to try paroxetine on the basis of its preferable side effect profile, particularly in that it is less sedating. She was started on 5 mg nightly, with the intention to increase the dose as tolerated. The first night, her pruritus was 50% improved (NRS 4.5/10), and she was able to sleep better. The second night, her pruritus had fully resolved (NRS 0/10). She reported no nausea or vomiting. She was gratified with the effectiveness of paroxetine. She continued on 5 mg of paroxetine nightly, with no pruritus until she died 1 week later.