A 56-year-old Nepalese man presenting with chief complaints of frequent wheezing, nausea, vomiting, joint pain and abdominal cramps was admitted to Sumeru Hospital on 15 November 2016. His past history revealed: COPD, systemic hypertension and formerly treated pulmonary tuberculosis. The patient had been under oral steroid therapy (prednisone 60 mg gl−1) 3 months previously, tapered to 5 mg with symptomatic improvement. Twelve days prior to presentation at Sumeru Hospital (3 November 2016), he was admitted to a local hospital with a diagnosis of acute gastritis with acute exacerbated COPD for 2 days. He was given intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g once daily, azithromycin 500 mg once daily, methylprednisone 40 mg three times daily, and salbutamol and ipratropium bromide nebulizer at that time. The prednisolone was given for a total of 8 days. Nonetheless, his pulmonary condition worsened with haemoptysis, chest tightness and increased cough.
On arrival at the emergency Intensive Care Unit, he was found to be hypotensive, hypoxaemic and febrile. Meanwhile, body temperature (37.78 °C), blood pressure (78/35 mmHg) and arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) (69 mmHg) were noted. Physical examination of the abdomen revealed epigastric tenderness but no hepatosplenomegaly. No oedema, cyanosis or clubbing was noted. Consequently, he was given a preliminary diagnosis of septic shock from an abdominal source and acute respiratory failure. Concurrently, mechanical ventilation, aggressive volume resuscitation and vasopressor support were rapidly begun. Piperacillin/tazobactam was administered empirically as an anti-infection treatment.
On radiological assessment, chest X-ray showed collapse consolidation with pleural effusion on the right lower lobe, hilar lymph nodes and cardiomegaly . Correspondingly, serology was negative for human immunodeficient virus (HIV), hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and hepatitis C virus (HCV); C-reactive protein had increased to 110 mg l−1 (normal, <10), white blood cell count to 16.5×109 cells l−1 (normal, 4.0–10.0), with neutrophil percentage of 92 % (normal, 50–70 %) and four eosinophils counted. However, haemoglobin concentration, coagulation-related test, platelet count, renal function tests (RFTs) and liver function tests (LFTs) were within the normal range.
A flexible bronchoscopy was performed on day 2 of admission; on bronchoscopy severe diffuse alveolar haemorrhage was seen. Therefore, microbiological examination of broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) was recommended. Upon examination of an acid-fast bacilli (AFB) stain preparation of BAL, filariform larvae of Strongyloides stercoralis were seen but no AFB were found . Neither fungal elements nor malignant cells were detected on subsequent fungal staining and cytological examination. With wet preparation of a stool specimen, numerous larvae of S.stercoralis were seen (Video S1 and Fig. S1, available in the online version of this article). Gradually, the physical condition of patient began to deteriorate and a few days after admission vancomycin-sensitive Enterococcus faecium was isolated from his blood sample. Therefore, treatment with piperacillin/tazobactam was stopped, and specific treatment was started for strongyloides hyper-infection syndrome.
He was then treated with ivermectin and albendazole for strongyloides with repeated daily stool examination to verify eradication and to exclude indwelling other parasitic infections. On day 1, the wet preparation of stool and sputum revealed actively motile larvae of S. stercoralis. After treatment with ivermectin (8000 µg po qd pc) and albendazole (400 mg po bid) larval counts reduced significantly to nil in the stool sample from day 4. Although the count reduced significantly, the species was found to be motile in sputum samples until day 5. The detailed treatment protocol, duration of treatment and parasite examinations of stool and sputum are shown in . Simultaneously, linezolid plus vancomycin was prescribed for two different strains of E. faecium.
On day 4 after admission, laboratory results revealed C-reactive protein level had doubled to 220 mg l−1. His white blood cell count had decreased to 2.9×109 cells l−1 but eosinophil count was elevated to 10. Similarly, his haemoglobin concentration decreased to 48 g l−1 and platelet count was 7×109 cells l−1. Furthermore, total bilirubin level increased to 103 mmol l−1. A brief blood investigation report is presented in .
Although the number of larvae was dramatically reduced, the patient developed a high-grade fever, vomiting, lower abdominal pain, abdominal distention and constipation, dyspnoea, wheezing and pleuric pain, and ARDS. He was therefore mechanically ventilated. However, his condition worsened and he died on day 6 after admission. The results of blood tests on the last day are presented in . Brief details from the patient’s history and diagnostic approaches are organized as a timeline in Fig. S2.