A 60-year-old male patient from a rural area presented to the outpatient clinic of our hospital with fever, night sweats, headache, dizziness, nausea, and vomiting as the chief complaints. In addition, the patient had some symptoms, such as migratory pain in the right hip joint, right knee joint, lower back, and back. With brucellosis being diagnosed 2 months ago, the patient had a 3-year history of herding sheep. The patient had a history of polio for 58 years, which was manifested by muscle atrophy of the right lower extremity. Upon admission, neurological examination indicated that the patient's mouth angle was oblique to the right and that his left nasolabial fold became shallow. The muscular strength examination revealed the strength of muscle was grade 4 in the left upper limb, grade 2 in the left lower limb, grade 5 in the right upper limb, and grade 4 in the right lower limb. The patient's body temperature was 37.5°C, and blood pressure was 125/78 mmHg. The Glasgow coma score (GCS) of the patient was 15 (E4V5M6). CT and MRA revealed that an intracerebral hemorrhage in the right basal ganglia had broken into bilateral lateral ventricles. Ultrasonography of cervical vessels revealed bilateral carotid medial thickening with plaque formation . A Brucella serology test showed that the Rose Bengal test and Wright agglutination test with a titer of 1/100 were positive. Findings of serological infection markers showed that procalcitonin had increased to 0.219 ng/mL (reference value, 0.000–0.046 ng/mL) and interleukin 6 (IL-6) had increased to 66.26 pg/mL (reference value, 0.00–7.00 pg/mL). Serum biochemical tests found that the level of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) had decreased to 0.75 mmol/L (reference value, 1.03–1.55 mmol/L). Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) examination showed that D-dimer had increased to 7.25 μg/mL (reference value, 0.00–0.50 μg/mL), and fibrinogen degradation products (FDP) had increased to 24.74 μg/mL (reference value, 0.00–5.00 μg/mL).
The patient was given bilateral lateral ventricle drilling with ventricular drainage in the emergency department of the intensive care unit. The bilateral puncture points were 2.5 cm next to the midline and 2.5 cm before the coronal suture. Along the line connecting the external auditory canals on both sides, toward the tip of the nose, the cranial cone was inserted into the brain for 2.5 cm, and then the cannula was inserted into the brain for 6.5 cm . At the same time, 5 million U of urokinase was injected through the drainage tube every 12 h for thrombolytic therapy. After 10 days of the treatment, as the patient's symptoms were relieved, the re-examination of cranial CT showed a significant decrease in the size of the bilateral lateral ventricular hematoma, but the right basal ganglia hematoma still existed. Therefore, the bilateral lateral ventricle drainage tubes were pulled out, and the right basal ganglia hematoma cavity was drained at the same time. The right puncture point was located 2.5 cm beside the midline and 3.0 cm anterior to the coronal suture. Toward the center of the hematoma, the cranial cone was inserted 2.5 cm into the brain, and then the cannula was inserted into the brain 6.5 cm . After about 7 days of treatment, the patient's symptoms were significantly relieved, and head CT showed that the hematoma disappeared, and the drainage tube was subsequently removed . The condition of the patient improved significantly after adequate treatment. The muscle strength of the right lower limb was grade 4, and the muscle strength of the other limbs was grade 5. When discharged, the patient was instructed to continue taking oral antiepileptic drugs. In addition, anti-Brucella treatment with oral rifampicin (900 mg/day) for 6 weeks and oral doxycycline (100 mg twice daily) for 45 days was persevered. After follow-up by telephone for 6 months, the patient had no symptoms related to intracerebral hemorrhage or brucellosis .