A 75-year-old man with a history of asbestosis and cirrhosis with thrombocytopenia presented to the emergency department with sudden-onset dyspnea and hemoptysis triggered by coughing. He had a history of asbestos exposure during his tenure as an air-conditioning engineer 30 years prior. He had no trauma history and was not on anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy. The patient was hemodynamically unstable and in respiratory distress with a blood pressure of 100/84 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), pulse rate 116 beats per minute, respiratory rate 24 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation level 90% on room air. Breath sounds were substantially decreased on the left side, and jugular vein distension was observed. Upon laboratory testing, the patient had a hemoglobin level of 12.4 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range: 13.5–17.5 g/dL), platelet count of 42,000 per microliter (μL) (13,000–37,000/μL), prothrombin time of 16.5 seconds (10–13 seconds), and activated partial thromboplastin time of 26.3 seconds (20.0–38.0 seconds).
Chest radiography revealed bilateral pleural plaques, complete opacification of the left thorax, and mediastinal shift toward the right . Computed tomography (CT) revealed massive hemothorax on the left and compression of the descending thoracic aorta . While undergoing CT, the patient’s systolic blood pressure dropped to 60 mm Hg. After draining 1,200 milliliters of blood by a chest tube insertion into the left thorax , his blood pressure increased to 98/62 mm Hg.
After transfusion of 20 units of platelets, surgical exploration was performed. Pleural adhesion tears and bleeding were detected. Histopathological examination of the torn parietal pleura with plaques revealed fibrinous pleuritis with massive fibrinosanguineous exudate. During postoperative mechanical ventilation, a severe reduction in pulmonary compliance was observed. After 26 days with delayed ventilator withdrawal and treatment of a urinary tract infection that developed during hospitalization, the patient fully recovered and was discharged. At one-year follow-up he was doing well without recurrence.