A 57-year-old woman with a negative family history of cancer presented at our Urology Department with a large left retroperitoneal tumor found by MRI during the health exam . Physical examination showed a soft abdomen and no palpable mass or tenderness. An abdominal CT scan showed an 8.3 × 8.5 × 6.8 cm heterogeneous tumor in the left para-aortic region with a mass effect on the left kidney . Imaging studies showed the tumor covered the entire left renal pedicle, but the left kidney, left adrenal gland, and pancreas appeared free of tumor. The tentative diagnosis was retroperitoneal sarcoma or liposarcoma. Therefore, surgical excision was indicated.
The patient consented to an exploratory laparotomy with tumor resection and left radical nephrectomy. Since the tumor tightly covered the entire renal pedicle , tumor excision with radical nephrectomy was advised. Consider renal artery control and ligation prior to ligation of the renal veins may not be feasible in this special case. Besides, significant collateral feeding vessels to this perivascular tumor might hamper the pedicle control and very likely increase risk of intraoperative bleeding. To reduce the bleeding risk and possible intra-operative complications, the patient received a single transarterial embolization of the left renal artery with 10 mg of Gelfoam pieces daily before surgical excision . The operation began with a midline incision, and exploration revealed a larger retroperitoneal mass invading the left renal pedicle that was tightly adhered and could not be separated. No direct aortic invasion was noted after careful tumor and aorta dissection. Since the left renal artery had been embolized, proper pedicle control was easily achieved with suture ligation. The entire tumor could be easily removed with adequate control of its blood supply. There was some adhesion between the tumor and the psoas muscle, which was negative for malignancy. Hemostasis was maintained, and the abdomen and skin were closed in the usual manner.
Post-operatively, the patient recovered well and was discharged on day 10. The final histopathological analysis showed a round blue cell tumor consistent with ES/PNET . Fortunately, the surgical margins were tumor free, so the resection was considered complete. Adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy were to be performed later by an oncologist.
The postoperative follow-up showed that the patient recovered well. The most recent clinic follow-up so far was 6 months after the operation, and the imaging studies showed no tumor recurrence. During this period, the patient has received complete radiation therapy (44 Gy/22fx, tumor bed and left kidney region) and is receiving chemotherapy (vincristine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide). No serious adverse effects other than mild leukopenia. The patient is still under follow-up and treatment in our hospital.