A 15-year-old female with history of mild depression presented to the emergency department with acutely worsening bilateral knee pain, rash, easy bruising, and fatigue. She noticed the bilateral leg rash seven years ago (which she kept hidden from her parents). In the preceding two months, a rash formed on her wrists, and her knees and ankles swelled painfully. She also had ten months of amenorrhea. Exam showed perifollicular petechial hemorrhagic rash with corkscrew hairs that extended from her ankles superiorly and multiple ecchymosis . She had bilateral knee and ankle edema without overlying warmth or rubor . Additionally, she had limited ankle range of motion with significant restriction of plantar dorsiflexion and plantarflexion as well as an antalgic gait. She weighed 48.6 kg (34th percentile) with height 172.7 cm (95th percentile) and BMI 16.3 (5th percentile). She had tachycardia with abnormal orthostatic vital signs. History revealed a restricted diet of bread, cereal, chips, and butter. We diagnosed her with avoidant restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID), and she was admitted for severe malnutrition.
Her perifollicular petechial hemorrhagic rash with corkscrew hairs was classic for scurvy, which was confirmed by dermatology. Unfortunately, vitamin C supplementation was started prior to obtaining baseline serum level. Despite knowing her findings were consistent with scurvy, we were concerned by the patient’s subsequent hospital course as she had recurrent symptomatic normocytic anemia (Hgb dropped from 7.1 g/dL on admission to 5.1 g/dL) requiring two blood transfusions, as well as recurrent fevers of unknown origin (39.7 °C). Hematology work up revealed a low iron level of 15 mcg/dL, and prolonged PT of 17.7 s and INR of 1.48. They attributed her anemia to iron deficiency, vitamin K deficiency, and anemia of chronic disease. Additional deficiencies included vitamin A, vitamin D, and folate, however vitamin B1 and vitamin B12 were normal. Inflammatory markers CRP and ESR were elevated at 30 mg/dL and 43 mm/hr respectively. Rheumatology serological workup was negative. Knee x-ray showed questionable osteopenia but no fractures. Chest x-ray showed mild scoliosis but otherwise no abnormalities. Neither x-ray showed any abnormalities of the growth plates. Ultrasound showing complex effusions was read by radiology as suggestive of septic arthritis, though this was disregarded as it was not clinically consistent. The effusions were not aspirated. Ankle and knee MRI showed patchy enhancement of the distal right metaphysis and calcaneal body with dark T1 and bright T2 signals .
Radiology reported the abnormalities on MRI as consistent with leukemia/lymphoma, chronic multifocal osteomyelitis, or Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Although malignancy was less likely due to the chronicity of her illness, due to her relatively recent deterioration (recurrent anemia, fevers, joint swelling) as well as our inability to explain the MRI abnormalities, the medical team including oncology decided a bone marrow biopsy was necessary. Bilateral knee bone marrow biopsy showed gelatinous transformation of the bone marrow (GBM), which is often seen in patients with malnutrition, especially in the setting of eating disorders . After two weeks of nutrition management including vitamin C supplementation, the patient’s vitals normalized, and she was discharged to an inpatient eating disorder program. Ultimately, the patient’s presentation was explained by malnutrition and vitamin C deficiency secondary to ARFID.