A 37-year-old man who had a past medical history of proteinuria (renal biopsy revealed no obvious abnormality) and was otherwise healthy visited our department with the complaint of a palpable lesion in the scrotum. He was suspected having left spermatocele by ultrasonography at another clinic 8 years previously but had undergone no further examination. A physical examination of the external genitalia demonstrated no abnormal findings. Laboratory blood tests did not detect any abnormal values, including serum total testosterone (6.71 ng/mL).
Ultrasonography of the scrotum showed bilateral spindle-shaped low-echoic lesions located above the respective bilateral testes and epididymides, which had blood-flow signals inside. It also detected normal but slightly small bilateral testes (right, 3.3 × 1.5 cm; left, 3.7 × 1.4 cm) . For further examination, the patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging of the scrotum, which revealed that bilateral spermatic cords crossed under the base of the penis and that the left spermatic cord was connected to the right (originally left) testis and vice versa. Overall, bilateral spermatic cords, epididymides, and testes were located within the scrotum . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed as “left-right reversal of the testes within the scrotum.” Ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging identified no other genitourinary abnormalities including the prostate, urinary bladder, and bilateral kidneys. In retrospect, the bilateral spindle-shaped low-echoic lesions detected by ultrasonography as well as the “palpable” lesion (the chief complaint of the patient) were considered to be the spermatic cords crossing above the testes and epididymides.
Screening semen analysis identified normal semen volume and sperm concentration and morphology but deteriorated sperm motility (both total and progressive), suggesting possible male infertility . However, he did not wish further examination and/or treatment and therefore decided to discontinue visiting our department.