A 69-year-old man who suffered from pain and swelling in the bilateral groin and from frequent voiding visited our clinic. He had undergone bilateral transabdominal preperitoneal repair (B-TAPP) three years earlier at another hospital. During his physical examination, bilateral inguinal swelling was observed before urination, and he complained about micturition when we tried to reintroduce the hernia contents. A CT scan revealed that his urinary bladder was herniating into the bilateral inguinal hernias with a typical “Mickey Mouse” shape . From these findings, we diagnosed a recurrent bilateral bladder hernia after B-TAPP. Then, we preoperatively planned to employ the bladder takedown approach to pull the urinary bladder from the orifice and to perform median TAPP.
With the patient in the supine position under general anesthesia, we inserted three trocars as shown in . Trocar placements were on the cranial side of the umbilicus compared to usual TAPP. At first, we confirmed that the lateral side of the mesh was appropriately covered by the prior mesh and that there were no recurrent indirect hernias. Then, we incised the peritoneum on the ventral side of the urinary bladder and took down the bladder to expose the hernia orifices . Both hernia orifices were located inside of both medial umbilical folds; therefore, we intraoperatively diagnosed a recurrent bilateral supravesical bladder hernia with no lateral recurrences . We introduced a laparoscopic self-fixating mesh (ProGrip™, Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) into the peritoneal cavity and unrolled the mesh as both hernia orifices were covered. The mesh was fixed with Cooper's ligament and the rectus sheath by a mesh fixation device (AbsorbaTack™, Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) to keep it from slipping . Finally, we sutured the urinary bladder with the ventral peritoneum to close the preperitoneal space and to screen the mesh using a barbed suture device (V-Loc™ 180, Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) . The operative time was 132 minutes, and the total blood loss was 2 mL. We included only median mesh repair for bilateral recurrent inguinal hernias as the name of the median TAPP procedure.
The patient was discharged on postoperative day 3 without any complications, and his preoperative symptoms disappeared. A postoperative CT showed no recurrence of the bilateral supravesical bladder hernias .