A 63-year-old Asian man who had positive fecal occult blood underwent colonoscopy, which showed an ulcer-shaped cancerous lesion in the sigmoid colon . Pathologic examination revealed moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. Based on the absence of obvious lymph node and distant metastases on computed tomography (CT), the assessment was clinical stage II colon cancer, and elective laparoscopic colectomy was planned for 2 months later. Routine preoperative blood tests, electrocardiogram, and chest X-ray showed no abnormal findings, except for mild diabetes mellitus (glycated hemoglobin of 6.4%).
However, 28 days before the operation, the patient tested positive for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR); this test was needed as the patient was a contact person of his wife, who had a fever and was diagnosed with COVID-19. Because the patient was asymptomatic, he was followed up at an isolation facility and was released from isolation 18 days before the scheduled operation. According to the rules of our hospital on elective surgery during the COVID-19 pandemic, he was instructed to wait at home and to observe physical distancing 14 days before surgery. Five days before surgery, a repeat nasopharyngeal swab (NPS) RT-PCR test for SARS-CoV-2 was negative. Considering the previous COVID-19 infection, a chest CT scan and a venous ultrasound of the lower extremity were performed 2 days before surgery. A chest CT scan at this time showed a small ground glass opacity (GGO) in the periphery of the right lower lobe; this was atypical of a metastatic lesion from colon cancer and was not found 2 months before surgery , thereby suggesting a scar secondary to COVID-19 infection. There were no abnormal respiratory findings upon physical examination, and ultrasound showed no lower extremity venous thrombosis. Therefore, we decided to operate on the patient as scheduled.
Laparoscopic colectomy was performed in the usual operating room and not in a negative pressure chamber. Surgeons, anesthesiologists, and surgical nurses wore third-level protective equipment, such as disposable surgical caps, N95 masks, disposable protective suits, disposable latex gloves, and protective glasses, in place of full-face respiratory protective equipment . Tracheal intubation, general anesthesia, and epidural anesthesia were performed as usual. Laparoscopic sigmoid colectomy was routinely performed using carbon dioxide insufflation to cause pneumoperitoneum and laparoscopic coagulation shears. A smoke exhaust device was attached, and frequent suctioning of smoke and mist was performed. Functional-end-to-end anastomosis with an automatic suture device and no stoma was constructed. For perioperative deep-vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism prophylaxis, elastic stockings and intermittent pneumatic compression were used instead of anticoagulant drugs. The patient had a good operative course and was discharged on the eighth postoperative day. A month after surgery, the patient showed a good course without complications. Two weeks after surgery, the SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR results of the surgical staff were negative.