A 42-year-old man presented to the Department of Ophthalmology with a 6-day history of blurred vision in the right eye. He was physically healthy besides having high blood uric acid. His blood pressure was 125/80mmHg. He had intermittent red eye and pain in both eyes in the past 3 years and was diagnosed to have primary angle closure (PAC) at another hospital. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) before YAG laser showed areas of ciliary body edema and partial superficial detachment in both eyes . Nanophthalmos, as well as abnormal UBM findings happened to be overlooked by his previous physician. YAG laser peripheral iridotomy was done in both eyes 6 weeks ago without any pretreatment. Four weeks after the laser, no changes in visual acuity were found. His IOP was 24mmHg in the right eye, and 16mmHg in the left eye. UBM test showed no worsening of the ciliary body edema and detachment in both eyes compared with previous results . No choroidal and retinal detachment was detected by the ultrasound B scan. Azopt (Brinzolamide eye drop,Alcon) was given in the hope to relive ciliary edema and fluid in the supraciliary space. One week later, a routine checkup was performed for the patient in another hospital, and he was given Alphagan (Brimonidine Tartrate Eye Drops,Allergan). After using Alphagan, he went to the tennis court to help with picking up balls for his daughter, and after the session, a sudden blurred vision happened. Choroidal and exudative retinal detachment in the temporal and inferior region involving the macula area was detected . The results of the ophthalmic examination were listed in Table . The patient was diagnosed as having uveal effusion in the right, bilateral nanophthalmos, and bilateral cataract (mild).
Conservative therapy was provided as follows: Terminate the use of Alphagan and use Azopt. Pred Forte (Prednisolone Acetate Ophthalmic Suspension,Allergn) od q1h, Pranopulin (Pranoprofen Eye Drops,Senju Pharmaceutical) od qid, os bid, DiShan(Atropine sulfate ophthalmic gel,Sinqi) od tid, and tapering dose of prednisolone acetate (Sine) 60 mg qd was given. The blurred vision gradually improved. The intraocular pressure was stable and the area of retinal and choroidal detachment was significantly reduced. One month later, UBM examination did not find signs of ciliary body edema or detachment in both eyes . Wide-angle fundus photography showed complete reattachment of the choroid and retina with the resolution of the serous fluid in the right eye . Macular OCT showed that the neuroepithelial detachment in the macular region of the right eye was greatly smoothed . At the last visit before the formulation of this paper, the patient’s condition was stable and there was no recurrence.