A 29-year-old male with a left wrist mass which he felt for the last 6 months before admission. The swelling began to appear noticeably when the patient fell to his left side while playing soccer. After the fall, the patient complained of pain in the left wrist and was brought to a traditional bone setter where he received several massage therapies. The mass was said to had been as big as marble at first. However, the patient did not seek for any medication until several months prior to admission. At that moment, the patient complained that the mass grew as big as baseball, and he started to feel pain. The patient was right-handed .
The general state was within normal limit. During the local examination of the left wrist, there was a visible mass in the distal ulna sized 9 × 7 × 3 cm. The mass was hard, immobile, and painful upon palpation (VAS 1–2). The patient was still able to move his left wrist, but the range of movement was limited due to the pain. The DASH score and PRWE score were 46.67 and 45.5 respectively, which indicated severe disability.
Conventional radiography revealed a multi-lobular and radio-lucent area with a clear margin in the distal ulna . There was no sign of fracture, but an osteolytic area in the ulnar metadiaphysis was found. Chest X-ray showed no sign of pulmonary metastases. Wrist MRI detected a lesion measured 8 cm in length and 4 cm in width, expanding and partially destroying the thin cortex. We sent the core biopsy speciment to histopathologic department and showed multinucleated giant cell with more than 20 nucleus. The patient was treated with en-bloc resection surgery by fully experienced orthopaedic surgeon who has more than 35 years in managing this special case (, ).
Three weeks after the surgery, the pain on the wrist has reduced significantly and the patient was able to do abduction, adduction, flexion, extension, opposition as well as the normal side. The DASH score and PRWE score were 13,33 and 8 respectively which indicated mild disability .
The DASH score was 4.17 after six months of surgery. The PRWE was excellent with score of 2. The patient might return to his normal daily activity without any disturbances. We encouraged the patient to take routine examination every six months for monitoring signs of recurrency as GCT has a high recurrency rate.