At 18 year old, a Caucasian female patient without any systemic diseases or drug use was presented for evaluation of gingival problems around her upper right premolar. Marginal periodontitis was diagnosed by her Dentist and the patient was referred to a Periodologist for root scaling. During the next two years, the patient was undergone perio-treatments under anti-inflammatory medications and had root canal treatment of her second premolar one year later. Biopsy of the lesion was not taken but the lesion was not gone but slowly progressed and therefore the patient was referred to a maxillofacial surgeon at our clinic. During her first consultation with the maxillofacial surgeon, the patient only complained about gingival recession in the palatal area of her upper-right-side teeth. The initial examination showed that the canine and both premolars had second-grade mobility . The probing depth of teeth 13, 14, and 15 was < 3 mm on the buccal side and 5 mm at the palatal side as the palatal gingiva were recessed leaving exposed the fist premolar and canine and less the second premolar whose exposed root surface was covered with dental plaque. The patient’s jaw underwent 3D computed tomography, which revealed bone destruction in the defect area reaching the maxillary sinus, whose mucosa was locally thickened . The condition of periodontium around other teeth was fine. The probing depth was < 3 mm around all other teeth. The chronic long-term lesion, with its unknown cause and unusual localization (defect in the palate side, while the marginal buccal surface bone was uninjured), caused confusion to the Oral Surgeon as the clinical findings were not characteristic of oncological tumors: such as the absence of induration of adjacent soft tissues, the boundaries were clearly visible, and the unpleasant smell characteristic of tissue collapse was not detected from the lesion. Moreover, no regional lymph nodes were palpable, and none of the patient’s close relatives were having similar lesions.
It was decided to remove all three teeth (13th, 14th and 15th), perform a removal of the altered soft tissues, and evaluate them histologically. After radical surgery of the defect, it was decided to reconstruct the area using allogenic bone transplant. Surgery was performed under local anesthesia. The initial prosthetic treatment plan was to insert dental implants in the area of teeth 13 and 15 about 6 months after the excision of the altered tissues and to make a fixed 3-tooth bridge on the dental implants afterward. However, after the diagnosis was histologically confirmed, prosthetic treatment was delayed for 12 months after excision in case relapse did not occur.
The teeth were removed during surgery, and the altered soft tissues were removed based on the clinical view, within the boundaries of healthy tissues. Soft tissues with granulations and teeth were easily separated from the bone. The bone relief was uneven but hard and was covered in a compact bone layer. The formed bone defect was more similar to uneven bone lysis than to destruction . All of the resected tissues were sent for histomorphological evaluation. After the teeth with altered tissues were removed, the bone window (uzura) to the sinus was visible, but the integrity of the membrane was intact. The membrane, as visible through the window, looked unchanged.
Soft tissue deficit was present from the crest to the hard palate. Tumor-free margins were about 20 mm wide mesiodistally and about 15 mm wide mediolaterally . Sticky bone graft with platelet concentrate made from venous blood according to the PRGF Endoret® method, in combination with demineralized freeze-dried bone allograft was chosen for restoration of bone defect . The soft tissue defect was covered with free gingival flap from the buccal to the palatal side. Antibiotic therapy (875 mg of amoxicillin with 125 mg clavulanic acid twice a day for 7 days) and painkillers (25 mg of Dexketoprofen according to the patient’s needs, no more than 3 times per day for 5 days) were prescribed after surgery. The wound healed without complications, and the sutures were removed after 10 days.
The excised gingivae and adjacent oral mucosa sent for histological examination were partially ulcerated while the underlying submucosa was consisted of complexes of atypical epithelial cells of different shapes in fibromycoidic stroma . These cells had eosinophilic cytoplasm, insignificantly polymorphic oval cores, and isolated mitoses. Part of the cytoplasm of the atypical cells contained vacuoles with erythrocytes in openings. Immunohistochemical staining with endothelial markers CD31, CD34, and ERG was positive for 100% of the tumor cells , and reaction with the epithelial marker PanCK was positive for 10% of the tumor cells. The proliferative activity of Ki-67 was about 5%. ''The included bone did not reveal any infiltration from tumor cells. The final histomorphological conclusion was epithelioid hemangioendothelioma pT1b of low malignancy in the periodontal tissues and palatal mucous membrane.
The further examination of patient after histopathtological results was set up during the consultation with oncologist, who indicated the need of thoracic X-ray and abdominal ultrasound to identify any possible distant metastasis. An ultrasound head and neck region examination revealed isolated II A group neck lymph nodes up to 0.5 cm in diameter, which were considered to be reactive. Suspicious lymph nodes were not found. Ultrasound of the abdomen and chest X-ray did not show any pathology.
After 31 months, there have been no clinical signs of relapse. Three-dimensional computed tomography of the jaws was carried out 5 months after surgery and showed that the augmented bone had retained its shape but without complete mineralization. Considering possible relapse, the patient was scheduled for additional consultations and examinations after 3, 6, and 12 months. Prosthetic treatment was started 12 months after the tumor’s excision. Two dental implants were inserted in the area of the 13th and 15th teeth. Six months after implantation, prosthetic implants were installed with a 3-unit zirconium ceramic bridge . The patient had no complaints about her condition 12 months after this prosthetic treatment.