The patient was 24 years-old male, born in Maua, Sao Paulo, Brazil. He was the eighth child of a 32 year-old woman, who had two miscarriages, did not do prenatal care and smoked during pregnancy. His parents were not consanguineous and he was delivered through vaginal delivery without perinatal complications, and born at term with adequate weight.
His neurodevelopment was normal until five years of age, when the patient, previously healthy, presented with vomiting and diarrhea lasting about a month, staying in hospital at the beginning of the clinical features to correct dehydration.
After this episode the mother told that he started to lose weight and ceased growth. He no longer understood commands and the difficulty to communicate worsened slowly. He had major mood swings, with periods of agitation, aggression and insomnia.
Since the age of six he used hearing aids. At the age of nine he was transferred to a “special school” where he remained for two years, however, he had no progress in learning.
He had several hospitalizations for diarrheal episodes and bronchopneumonia. He underwent bilateral orchiectomy at 12 years of age due to cryptorchidism.
He presented diagnosis of bilateral allergic conjunctivitis and myopia on the right eye. Dental agenesis was observed in the second premolar bilaterally and the right maxillary central incisor.
Absence of subcutaneous fat was noted on his general physical examination. Skin and hair were undernourished. He had dry and aged appearance with multiple nevi on the face and trunk (Figure ). His lips were thin and ears were prominent. He had teeth in bad condition. He had clinodactyly on hands and feet (Figure ). There were no pulmonary, cardiac and abdominal alterations.
Our patient could keep contact with the environment through sight and hearing (a hearing aid in use). He had poor language, speech difficult to understand, in a hoarse and high voice. There was little collaboration with the examiner and extremely childish behavior. Despite no formal neuropsychological assessment was made, the patient was considered to have intellectual impairment of moderate degree.
He had hypertrophy widespread in all muscle groups. Gait, balance, deep reflexes, muscle strength, tone and cranial nerves were preserved. Coordination was difficult to assess due to no collaboration.
Imaging tests such as Magnetic Ressonance Imaging (MRI) of skull and sella turcica and Computed Tomography (CT) were nonspecific. The X-ray revealed a bone age compatible with the age of ten.
The metabolic tests performed were total cholesterol and fractions, triglycerides, TSH, T4, serum GH, GOT, GPT, Gamma GT, amylase, blood glucose, blood gas analysis, screening of inborn errors of metabolism blood and urine. Were also analyzed blood count, electrolytes, renal function, ANA, RF, hemoglobin electrophoresis, serology for CMV, Rubella, Toxoplasmosis, Hepatitis B and Epstein Barr, CD3, CD4, CD8, IGF-1 and IGFBP.
His blood count revealed lymphocytosis, the dosage of growth hormone and IGF-1 were below the reference value. The CD4 counts were at the lower limit and presented a very high parameter of immunoglobulin G to infection with Epstein Barr VCA. All other metabolic tests results were shown normal.
A standard resolution karyotype was also normal, and no further genetic investigations were performed. The hypothesis was diagnosed based on clinical criteria.