A 40-year-old male presented to the ENT outdoor clinic with complaints of a foreign body sensation in the throat, progressive hoarseness of the voice and difficulty in breathing since the last 7 days. The patient developed the above mentioned symptoms after an acute episode of seizure. He also gave a history of five such episodes in the last two years, but he was not on any treatment for seizures. The patient was using an artificial denture for the upper jaw since one year. The patient became unconscious for 5-10 minutes after the last episode of seizure, after which he could not find his denture. He realized that he had accidentally lost his denture during the episode and ignored the whole event. Subsequently he had sudden onset of foreign body sensation in the throat and, later on, he developed progressive hoarseness and difficulty in breathing for which he consulted our hospital. The patient complained of throat pain, painful swallowing and difficulty in speaking associated with discomfort in the throat. There was no hemoptysis or chest pain. During clinical examination, the laryngeal contour was normal and crepitus was present. There was no stridor or chest indrawing. Examination of the oral cavity and oropharynx was normal. During auscultation, normal bilateral air entry was observed. A diagnostic laryngoscopy was performed, and revealed an inflamed edematous mucosa in the subglottic area with a whitish structure believed to be a foreign body (missing denture) or a growth in the subglottic region. The subglottic area had space to allow for breathing and vocal cords were mobile. A radiograph of the soft tissue of the neck (lateral view) was done, which showed a vague soft tissue shadow and narrowing of air columns .
A direct laryngoscopy was planned and consent for rigid bronchoscopy and tracheostomy was obtained in view of a large and impacted denture. General anesthesia was induced with Sevoflurane. Standard cardio- pulmonary monitoring and pulse-oximetry were used. Intubation was not possible with such a presentation. After induction, the patient was positioned and the laryngoscope was introduced. The denture was clearly observed to be impacted at the level of the subglottic region of the larynx and trachea .
An attempt was made to remove the denture through the laryngoscope but was not succesful due to edema and impaction of the denture in subglottic area. Keeping in mind the possibility of injury to the vocal cords and nearby vital structures by this large irregular sharp denture, forceful removal was not attempted. A tracheotomy was performed. Direct laryngoscope was introduced and the foreign body was gently pushed from above by an assisting surgeon and gradually pulled through the tracheostome . An impacted 3-toothed denture plate was carefully removed by using curved artery forceps .
Check bronchoscopy was performed and edema and mucosal injury was observed at the site where the foreign body was embedded. Spontaneous ventilation was maintained throughout the procedure. Post-operatively, the patient was closely monitored. The patient was kept on nasogastric tube feeding for 2 days and tracheostomy was successfully closed on the 4th day. A neurology consultation was performed for the seizure disorder and medical treatment was started. The patient was discharged on the 7th post operative day. During his last follow up, at 8 weeks, he had a normal voice without any breathing problems.