A 33 year-old female patient was admitted to our General Surgery Department in March of 2014 due to the presence of a palpable mass in her right abdominal flank and dyspeptic symptoms. She had been a smoker for about 15 years and was in good general status with a Body Mass Index of 20.5. She reported the 4 year presence of a painless mass which had been revealed upon a first abdominal wall ultrasonography (US) that showed in the right para-umbilical region a solid slightly hyperechoic mass of 1. 5 cm diameter, reported as consistent with a lipoma. She had an operative history of umbilical hernia repair without mesh. After 4 years of wellness, she repeated an abdominal US which revealed a defined solid lesion measuring 8.2 × 6.1 × 6.8 cm under the inferior hepatic edge and close to the inferior cava vein and the inferior pole of the right kidney . The subsequent abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a solid heterogeneous mass with inner calcifications measuring 9 × 7 x 6 cm, hypervascular and well circumscribed from the pancreatic head, liver and inferior pole of the kidney . No bowel obstruction and no other masses or lymphadenopathy were observed. A physical examination revealed the presence of a palpable, mobile mass in the right abdominal quadrant without tenderness. No other lymph node enlargements were found. Pre-operative blood tests only showed elevated the CA 125 marker (81,4 U/ml, with normal value < 35).
The patient underwent a laparoscopic procedure with three 11-mm ports in standard position for a right colectomy. Laparoscopic exploration showed a mass in the context of the transversal mesocolon, connected to the middle colonic vessels and ahead the duodenum. The procedure started with the opening of the gastro-colic ligament using Ultracision® (Ethicon Endo-Surgery Inc, Cincinnati, OH, USA). The hepatic flexure was mobilized respecting Gerota’s and Toldt’s Fascias. The entire mass was well isolated laparoscopically and completely removed through a xifo-umbilical incision. The procedure was conducted in 120 min with no intraoperative complications.
Macroscopically the mass measured 9 × 8 × 4 cm in size, surrounded by a thick whitish fibrous capsule. The histopathological report referred an enlarged lymph node with multiple lymphoid follicular, fibroblastic proliferation, multiple fibrotic septa and hyalinised vessels. An Immunochemistry study showed dendritic cells (CD 21+, CD 23+) and small mantle-zone lymphoid cells (CD20+, bcl-2+). The final diagnosis was of UCD, hyaline-vascular subtype (UCD-HV). The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on the 5th post-operative day. At this time no signs of recurrence are present by physical examination nor by total body CT scan 24 months after the operation.