A 45-year-old man with a history of myopia and had received cataract surgeries in both eyes at a local eye clinic 6 years ago without information of IOL material. After that, he had undergone focal photocoagulation in his left eye for a retinal break.
He suffered from a sudden onset of floaters with progressive visual field defect in his left eye for 4 days before he visited our hospital. He was referred from a local eye clinic where retinal detachment in his left eye was diagnosed. Under slit lamp examination, the 3-piece posterior chamber IOLs were in capsular bags in both eyes under status of post neodymium:YAG laser posterior capsulotomy. Indirect ophthalmoscopy showed bullous retinal detachment over the inferior area with foveal involvement in his left eye. An encircling scleral buckle and a standard 20-gauge 3-port pars plana vitrectomy with silicone oil instillation was performed successfully.
With retinal attachment for 7 months, he underwent removal of silicone oil in the left eye. However, an oval-shaped silicone oil droplet was found on the posterior surface of the IOL in the visual axis with complaints of distorted micropsia and poor vision a month later . His vision then decreased to 3/20 in his left eye. The refraction could not be measured by automatic refractometry. Another pars plana vitrectomy of a 20-gauge system (Alcon Accurus 400VS surgical system) was performed. A 20-gauge infusion cannula was placed in the inferotemporal site, and a 20-gauge vitreous cutter was passed through the superonasal site. The largest silicone oil droplet was aspirated with a higher aspiration setting of 300 mmHg as the opening of vitrector was totally buried inside the silicone oil droplets. The residual smaller ones at the center of the visual axis were swept peripherally by a 27-gauge bending tip cannula .
After the silicone oil was removed, the surface of the IOL was clear in the visual axis. The patient’s visual acuity returned to 20/20 without distortion and micropsia.