A three-year-old bed-ridden girl presenting a chronic neurologic condition (Zika syndrome) was admitted to treat an episode of tracheitis. She had been submitted to tracheostomy and gastrostomy two years before to treat chronic pulmonary aspiration, recurrent episodes of pneumonia, and swallowing incoordination. A plastic cuffed tube continually inflated at low pressure was prescribed, as the child needed intermittent positive pressure ventilation.
The patient presented two self-limited bleeding episodes through the tracheostomy in a 48h interval, initially attributed to aspiration trauma. A new episode 48 hours after the initial report with bright projectile blood suggestive of arterial bleeding was then described by the mother, requiring a surgical evaluation. The patient did not show physiological instability or severe anemia.
A provisional diagnosis of TIF was made by the pediatric surgery team. An immediate angiotomography confirmed the diagnosis and revealed a TIF affecting the bifurcation of the innominate artery (IA) and the right tracheal wall, with a small pooling of contrast next to the fistula.
The patient was treated by the endovascular placement of four expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)/nitinol stents (Viabhan®) in the right carotid (5×50 and 6×100 mm) and right subclavian arteries (5×25 and 5×100 mm), crossing the transition to the IA in Y configuration . A stent (5×25 mm) accidentally migrated, staying next to the iliac bifurcation. This dislocated stent was not retrieved, since the team considered that removal attempts implied an unfavorable risk-benefit ratio. No neurological worsening, right arm ischemia, or complications related to the migrating stent were detected after surgery. Angiographic control, including a new angiotomography four months after surgery, showed normal blood flow in the right carotid and right subclavian arteries.
Anticoagulants were prescribed for two months (subcutaneous enoxaparin 20 mg bid). Five months after surgery, the patient remains asymptomatic, without new bleeding episodes, as well as infectious, thrombotic, or ischemic complications related to the stents.