An 85-year-old lady presented with left-sided chest and arm pain associated with nausea and clamminess. Electrocardiography showed widespread inverted T-waves (see ). High sensitivity Troponin T levels were elevated at 1927 ng/L (0–14 ng/L), confirming a non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction.
Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated normal left ventricular function without regional wall motion abnormalities and no significant valvular disease. Transradial coronary angiography revealed an anomalous origin of the RCA arising from the mid LAD beyond a large first septal perforator. There was significant stenosis involving anomalous RCA/LAD bifurcation classified as Medina 1, 1, 1. Only mild atheroma of the left circumflex artery was seen (see ).
Following coronary angiography, this lady’s case was discussed at the heart team meeting on the basis that the LAD/RCA bifurcation lesion subtended such a large territory of the myocardium analogous to a left main stem bifurcation lesion. While the Syntax Score may not have truly applied in this case it was calculated. Even though it would not be considered conventional, we decided to classify the LAD/RCA lesion as two separate bifurcation lesions given the significance of the myocardium at risk. Even when we assumed this, the Syntax Score was only 12 making this low tertile disease. Given that she was a frail 85-year-old lady with low tertile disease, PCI was the chosen revascularization strategy. Percutaneous coronary intervention was performed using right radial access and a 7.5-Fr sheathless Judkins left 3.5 (JL 3.5) guide catheter. The LAD/RCA bifurcation was treated using a two-stent culotte technique. Sion blue wires were passed down the LAD and anomalous RCA. A 3.5 × 28 mm Xience drug-eluting stent (DES) was deployed to the RCA. A proximal optimization technique (POT) was then performed with a 4.5 × 8.0 mm non-compliant (NC) balloon. Wires were switched and a 3.5 × 23 mm Xience DES was deployed in the mid LAD. A POT was again performed using a 4.5 × 8.0 mm NC balloon. Optimization at the level of the bifurcation was performed using two 4.5 × 8.0 mm simultaneous kissing balloons. Overall the final angiographic result was very satisfactory without any complications (see ).
The patient was enrolled in a cardiac rehab programme and discharged home on aspirin, ticagrelor, bisoprolol, perindopril, and atorvastatin.
Follow-up computed tomography coronary angiography (CTCA) was performed which confirmed a benign course of the RCA anterior to the aorta and pulmonary artery, and patent stents in the LAD and RCA (see ).