The patient was a 77-year-old man who fell from the loading platform of a truck (height 1.5 m) and landed on the back of his head. He could initially walk without weakness or other symptoms. However, he gradually developed dyspnea and right hemiplegia and presented to the emergency department of another hospital. The physician found it difficult to diagnose and treat the patient, and he was immediately transferred to our emergency department by ambulance.
On arrival, his consciousness was alert and his vital signs were stable. He felt occipital and posterior cervical pain. There was no dyspnea or right hemiplegia. His medical history included paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, for which warfarin was prescribed. On physical examination, there was no external wound, with only spontaneous pain and tenderness at the back of his head and neck. A motor and sensory examination of the extremities and trunk was normal. After primary and secondary trauma surveys and X-rays of the chest and pelvis, whole body computed tomography (CT) was performed.
Head CT showed traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage in the right frontal area and basilar skull fracture of the occipital bone . Whole body CT showed pneumocephalus and air in the jugular vein and right ventricle. To prevent vascular air embolism, the patient was placed in the supine position in a state of absolute rest after admission and was treated conservatively.
On hospital day 3, head, neck, and chest CT were reperformed, revealing the disappearance of air in the right ventricle and decreased air in the head and neck veins. The patient’s activity level was gradually increased. On hospital day 4, CT was reperformed, revealing the complete disappearance of air in the veins. There were no signs of vascular air embolism, despite an increase in the patient’s activity level, including raising his head on hospital day 3 and standing up and walking alone on hospital day 5. He developed cerebral salt wasting syndrome (CSWS) on hospital day 6. We therefore administered adrenocortical steroids and the patient gradually recovered from hyponatremia. A long period was required to treat hyponatremia. He was discharged on hospital day 34 without sequelae.