A 61-year-old, 116kg, 71 inch Caucasian man presented to the emergency room with epistaxis and gingival bleeding of three weeks duration. Upon physical examination, no other gross bleeding was apparent and he denied a history of similar bleeding events. He was hemodynamically stable, alert and oriented, and in no acute distress. Results of his heart and lung examinations were unremarkable. Laboratory evaluation revealed a hemoglobin level of 144g/L, a leukocyte count of 16.2×109 cells/L (72.51% neutrophils, 20.1% lymphocytes, 6.8% monocytes, 0.4% eosinophils, 0.2% bands), and a platelet count of 15.0×109 cells/L. Flow cytometry of his peripheral blood showed normal CD4:CD8 ratio and no evidence of any lymphoproliferative disorder. A peripheral smear showed decreased platelets with a few areas of clumping. Four weeks before presentation, his losartan dose was increased to 100mg once daily due to continuously elevated blood pressure readings. He had been maintained on losartan 50mg once daily for five years and previous routine laboratory testing revealed a baseline platelet count of 248.0×109 cells/L.
The patient began receiving an oral prednisone taper and his platelet count returned to a stable value of >200×109 cells/L (Figure ). Because there was no other probable cause, he was thought to have developed immune thrombocytopenia from the increased losartan dose. Losartan was discontinued and one week later he was switched to valsartan 160mg once daily.
This patient’s past medical history was significant for primary hypertension, uncontrolled type 2 diabetes mellitus, gastroesophageal reflux disease, post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, bipolar disorder, and dyslipidemia. His past surgical history included splenectomy, right hand skin graft, ventral hernia repair, and a gunshot wound to the back of the neck. The patient had no prior history of hematologic abnormalities or vascular disease. His hepatic and renal functions were normal and stable. His medications included losartan 100mg once daily (increased from 50mg once daily four weeks before presentation), aspirin 325mg once daily, metformin 1000mg twice daily, atenolol 75mg once daily, simvastatin 20mg once daily, ranitidine 150mg twice daily, Novolin™ 70/30 insulin 75 units subcutaneously every morning and 85 units every evening, temazepam 15 to 30mg daily as needed at bedtime, and a multivitamin daily. He had been taking all of these medications for at least five years. He has no known drug allergies, but had a documented cough with lisinopril. The patient had no history suggestive of infection and no history of chemotherapy, radiation, or malignancy. He denied alcohol, tobacco, or illicit drug use and any sexually transmitted disease risk factors. He denied any family history of any bleeding diatheses.
Forty-seven days after starting valsartan, the patient presented once again to the emergency room with intermittent epistaxis and gingival bleeding while brushing his teeth of two weeks duration. Laboratory measurement revealed a platelet count of 37×109 cells/L. Valsartan was held and another prednisone taper was initiated. The patient’s platelet count recovered upon valsartan discontinuation and in four weeks, his platelet count improved to 214×109 cells/L (Figure ). To date, the patient’s platelet count has remained normal on follow-up evaluations.