A 31-year-old Korean male presented to our hospital with anal discomfort for more than one month due to a protruding mass. He had a history of BCR-ABL-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and had undergone an allogenic stem cell transplantation from a human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 1 locus-mismatched unrelated donor approximately 70 days prior. The conditioning regimen was busulfan, fludarabine, antithymocyte globulin (BU-FLU-ATG), and he had been tapered on cyclosporine for prophylaxis of graft versus host disease (GVHD). He was at an especially high risk of GVHD, therefore we used total 9mg/kg of ATG for strong immunosuppression. On post-transplant day 69, he complained of discomfort due to an anal mass, which gradually grew over the course of one month.Gross findings revealed a large perianal cauliflower-like mass over 7cm in size with invasion of the anal orifice . He was not married and did not have a history of anal intercourse, furthermore he had not any intercourse within one year due to induction and consolidative chemotherapy for ALL. He tested negative for HIV and venereal disease research laboratories test (VDRL). Based on the data, he was diagnosed with giant anal condyloma of anus occurring after an allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.He was initially treated with podophyllin and cryotherapy under the care of a dermatologist. Because of the unusual size of the mass, he was treated a total of six times per week . After treatment, the mass markedly decreased and was only present in the anal canal . The mass was removed by surgical excision using scissors and electrocautery under general anesthesia. Postoperative histopathologic examination confirmed a condyloma without malignant transformation or dysplasia . He tested positive for HPV 6 and negative for HPV 11, 16, and 18. Following removal of the condyloma mass, thereafter followed a bleomycin local injection into the small remnant lesion. We performed the irrigation twice with bleomycin mixed with 0.9% normal saline, at a final concentration of 1.0U/mL . On post-transplant day 90, cyclosporine treatment was stopped. After seven months, there was no mass present in the perianal and anal orifices, and there were no problems in defecation. He continues to have normal anal function. .
Successful treatment included a combination of topical podophyllin and cryotherapy and transanal surgical excision, followed by bleomycin irrigation.