A 54-year-old male patient with pneumonia prediagnosis referred to our hospital with such complaints as the shortness
of breath and fever (day 0). The laboratory study revealed the white blood cell count of 8.540 mm3, C-reactive protein level of 112 mg/L,
and hemoglobin level of 10.6 g/dL. Among the radiological examinations, positron emission tomography indicated parenchymal mass
in the left lung lobe. In addition, metastatic lymph nodes were detected in the left hilar region. The pathological examination
of the left lung as a result of bronchoscopic biopsy (day+7) led to the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma. Adenocarcinoma was found
to be at stage III, accompanied by the spread of the bronchoalveolar lavage. Following the diagnosis, the patient was put on
paclitaxel plus carboplatin chemotherapy and simultaneous radiotherapy.
The patient did not receive steroid treatment; however, he developed neutropenia during the chemotherapy (absolute neutrophil count: 279/µL, day +72)
and complained of coughing. The thoracic CT revealed 2.5 cm-thick pleural effusion in the left hemithorax.
In addition, a mass lesion reaching 3.5 cm in thickness was observed in the left lobe apicoposterior segment,
which resulted in the loss of calibration in the vascular structures. The comparison of the mass size with that
of the previous year was indicative of the regression of the lesion size. However, pleural effusion reaching up
to 7 cm was observed in the thickest area extending to the left apex ( & ).
While on the treatment, the patient's complaints of coughing and shortness of breath increased (day +92).
Accordingly, to drain pleural effusion, a chest tube was placed, and chemotherapy was continued. Fungal growth
was detected in the pleural fluid culture. Thoracic CT scan showed no changes in the basic mass lesion. Furthermore, changes
in lesion densities were consistent with those occurring at the beginning of cavitation. The recovery of a hyaline mold
by culturing a pleural mai was evaluated, and the patient was classified as a proven case according to the European Organization
for Research and Treatment of Cancer/Mycoses Study Group .
The duration of neutropenia was calculated for the patient with an absolute neutrophil count of < 500/μL, at least
once during the 3 months before the onset of invasive pulmonary disease. Voriconazole (in two doses of 6 mg/kg and a maximum of 250 mg)
was preferred for treatment according to the results of antifungal susceptibility testing.
Mycological examination
Pleural fluid was cultured on two Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA; Oxoid, England) media with cycloheximide and without cycloheximide
slants and then incubated at 25°C and 37°C for 7 days. This led to the detection of rapidly growing fungal colonies.
Initially, the colony appearance was cottony and velvety with the color being changed from white to grey .
Septate hyaline hyphae were observed in the culture by microscopic examination with lactophenol. Conidia were observed
to have an oval shape. They were placed onto conidiophore as small groups or solitarily .
Molecular Identification
The DNA analysis of the clinical species was performed at a private laboratory (Bioeksen) using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
products, primers, and ABI Prism 377 DNA Sequencer (Applied Biosystems, USA). The identification of S. apiospermum
complex was finally accomplished based on the sequencing of the PCR amplicons of the internal transcribed
spacer 1 and internal transcribed spacer 2 . The data of sequence analysis were analyzed using the “National Center for Biotechnology Information (Bethesda, ABD)” BLAST system
. The GenBank accession number was determined as MT338936.
Antifungal susceptibility
The stock solutions of amphotericin B, voriconazole, posaconazole (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), and caspofungin
(Merck Sharp & Dohme BV, Haarlem, The Netherlands) were prepared using the M38-A2 reference microdilution method . The serial two-fold dilutions of each antifungal were prepared in RPMI 1640 medium with L-glutamine and without sodium bicarbonate (Sigma Chemical Co., USA)
and then buffered to a pH of 7.0 with 0.165 M MOPS (Sigma Chemical Co., USA).
Fungal suspensions were adjusted spectropho- tometrically to an optical density of 0.15-0.17 (68-70% transmittance)
for S. apiospermum complex. These suspensions were diluted to 1:50 in RPMI. Each well of the microtiter
plates was inoculated with 0.1 mL of the inoculum fungal suspension and then incubated at 35°C. The minimum inhibitory
concentrations (MICs) were read at 48 h. Susceptibility testing revealed the MIC values of > 64, 0.06, 0.06,
and 0.03 μg/mL for amphotericin B, voriconazole, posaconazole, and caspofungin, respectively. Consequently, voriconazole
(administered in two doses of 6 mg/kg and a maximum of 250 mg) was preferred for treatment according to these results.
Ethical Statements
As this manuscript is a case report, ethical rules were not violated; therefore, there was no need to request any ethical certificate.