We report a case of a 45-year-old Syrian female who presented to our hospital due to a painless palpable mass in her left breast. The patient is non-smoker and non-alcoholic. Family history was unremarkable as well as medical and surgical history, and the patient mentioned noticing the mass one month prior to her presentation during self-physical examination, with no other symptoms and no previous radiological examinations. On presentation, physical examination revealed a painless palpable mass in her left breast, with no skin changes, and her laboratory findings were within normal limits. Mammographic scanning demonstrated a well-defined high-density mass measuring approximately 3 cm in diameter. Ultrasonography of the breast revealed a well-defined hypoechoic cyst with heterogeneous components . Abdominopelvic ultrasonography and chest X-ray scanning revealed no other lesions. Following radiological and clinical examinations, an excisional biopsy was.
performed and revealed an irregular-shaped mass measuring 5 × 4.5 cm including the tumor mass with the surrounding tissue of the breast. Cut section demonstrated an ill-defined white-greyish central nodule measuring 3 cm in diameter with central necrosis. Microscopic examination demonstrated the proliferation of large atypical cells with abundant granular eosinophilic cytoplasm, large atypical nuclei with condensed chromatin, and prominent nucleoli, in addition to foci of necrosis . Primary differential diagnoses included apocrine carcinoma and oncocytic carcinoma. Immunohistochemical examinations revealed positive expression of androgen receptor (AR), Gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 (GCDFP-15), and cytokeratin (CK) , whereas estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) were negative. Thus, we confirmed the diagnosis of a triple-negative apocrine carcinoma. Axillary lymph nodes were normal in appearance in clinical and radiological examinations, and no lymph nodes dissection was performed. Later, treatment decision was to schedule the patient for a chemotherapy regimen consisting of Carboplatin and Paclitaxel. The patient is undergoing chemotherapy. She will also be monitored with ultrasonography at periodic intervals of three months for the first two years. A timeline of the patient's case can be seen in Fig. .