A 72-year-old Caucasian female patient, with a history of 40 years of smoking without any comorbidities presented with a non-healing, ulcerated lesion on the inner canthus of the left eye at the ophthalmology clinic. Surgical excision of the lesion was carried out in April 2008, with limited excision margins. The histological diagnosis was follicular basal cell carcinoma. After being asymptomatic for 4 years, the tumor relapsed and the patient underwent a second surgical excision in August 2012. Resection was incomplete, with positive margins, so the patient underwent another surgery to have the tumor removed; however, histological diagnosis once again showed evidence of positive margins. Finally, radiation therapy was chosen as definitive treatment for the patient. Between December 2012 and January 2013, the patient received 50 Gys of irradiation in 2-Gy fractions on the left halves of the forehead, glabella, nose, and on the left inner periocular eye regions. The patient attended follow-up examinations by the dermatologist every 6 months. Physical examination of the patient and an MRI scan of the affected area were carried out. The patient remained symptom free until 2018.
Figure shows the main events of the patient’s illnesses and treatment.
In June 2016, the patient presented with hematuria and was subsequently admitted to the urology clinic for cystoscopy and transurethral resection (TUR) of urinary bladder cancer. Histological diagnosis confirmed non-muscle-invasive papillary urothelial carcinoma (G2 pT1). Following surgery, the patient did not attend regular follow-up at the urology clinic, only at the dermatology clinic. Until 2018 the patient remained symptom-free.
In February 2018, the patient once again presented with hematuria at the urology clinic. First cystoscopy, then TUR was performed, and the histological diagnosis confirmed muscle-invasive papillary urothelial carcinoma (G3, pT2), indicating the relapse and progression of the patient’s bladder tumor. Although both radical cystectomy and definitive radiochemotherapy were considered and offered as treatment options, neither was accepted by the patient.
In the weeks prior to surgery, once when the patient was blowing her nose, a cavity had spontaneously opened between the inner canthus of the patient’s left eye and the medial meatus of the nasal cavity. Therefore, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the facial skeleton, the cervical soft tissues, and the upper mediastinal regions was carried out in April 2018. The MRI scan showed evidence of the relapse of the basal cell carcinoma on the skin of the inner canthus of the left eye, with the tumor invading the ethmoidal air cells in the left regions of the inner canthus and nasal root, as well as spreading into the nasal cavity and frontal sinus, cranially destroying the rhinobasis For this advanced, locally invasive disease, the patient was given three cycles of vismodegib as first-line treatment without any adverse events. A follow-up MRI scan of the region, in September 2018, showed disease progression and the increased destruction of the skin in the left inner canthal region. To ascertain the histological type of the tumor, biopsy of the sinuses was carried out, which confirmed the presence of invasive follicular BCC. Based on the decision of the tumor board, the patient was given eight cycles of epirubicin-cisplatin (CDDP) chemotherapy between January and September 2019. Follow-up MRI showed stable disease. Throughout the treatment, the patient’s functional status remained ECOG 0, and no side-effects were noted. Having reached the maximum cumulative dose of epirubicin, treatment with this chemotherapeutic agent could not be continued. Approval for PD-L1 inhibitor avelumab therapy was requested by the tumor board but was denied.
Towards the end of her chemotherapy, in the summer, the patient felt a small lump appear in her left inguinal region, so computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis were performed in September 2019 at the urology clinic. Although local recurrence of the cancer in the bladder could not be found, lymph node conglomerates could be detected in the aortic and left parailiac regions, and a soft tissue lesion in the left adrenal gland raised the possibility of a metastasis . Ultrasound core biopsy was performed from the left suprainguinal lymph node conglomerates, with the subsequent histological diagnosis confirming the metastasis of the muscle-invasive papillary urothelial carcinoma (CK7+, CK20 focally+, CDX2−, p63, and GATA3+).
In November 2019, the patient was referred to the National Institute of Oncology for further oncological treatment. Taking into account the recently completed cisplatin-based chemotherapy for the patient’s advanced BCC as well as the metastasis of the muscle-invasive urothelial bladder carcinoma, the tumor board recommended the administration of atezolizumab.
Between December 2019 and 2020, the patient was given 17 cycles of 1200 mg atezolizumab. Although not a requirement for second-line atezolizumab therapy, PD-L1 staining was carried out for tissue samples from both types of cancer by applying the Ventana PD-L1 (SP 142) assay. The BCC sample tested positive for PD-L1, with a percentage of PD-L1 expressing tumor-infiltrating immune cells (% IC) of 20, while the sample from the lymph node metastasis of urothelial carcinoma showed 0 % IC.
The patient tolerated atezolizumab treatment well; she did not experience any adverse or side effects. Her blood tests were normal, and her performance status remained good (ECOG 0) throughout the treatment.
Follow-up abdominal, chest, and pelvis CT scans in both February and June 2020 showed the regression of the retroperitoneal and left parailiac lymph node conglomerates, while the lesion in the left adrenal gland remained stable, altogether indicating the regression of the patient’s metastatic bladder cancer. Response to therapy was evaluated according to the RECIST criteria . CT scans of these regions showed evidence of complete remission in September and later on in December 2020 as well. Follow-up MRI scan of the facial skeleton and cervical region in September showed evidence of stable disease of BCC.
On 30 January 2021, the patient presented with symptoms of dehydration and arrhythmia at the emergency department. She was diagnosed with atrial fibrillation with high ventricular rate, and was found to be COVID-19 positive. Over the next 2 days, the patient’s condition deteriorated, she developed bilateral pneumonia, became somnolent and died. The cause of her death was considered to be due to the complications of COVID-19 infection.