The patient was a 57 year-old woman who presented with the chief complaint of retrosternal foreign body sensation for 3 months. She visited a hospital near her home, and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a diverticulum 30 cm from the incisor line . She had a medical history of hypertension for 25 years. Upon admission, physical examination, chest X-ray study, lung function test and laboratory test were all normal. An upper gastrointestinal contrast examination revealed a diverticulum on the right wall, and barium remained in the diverticulum . Chest enhanced computed tomography revealed an epiphrenic diverticulum with a diameter of 35 mm .
VATS diverticulectomy was scheduled. The patient was placed in the left lateral position and under general anesthesia using double lumen intubation to collapse the right lung. The operation port and observation port were made in the fifth and seventh intercostal spaces, respectively. We first identified the esophageal diverticulum in the posterior mediastinum and incised the overlying pleura. We found that the diverticulum was slightly more adherent to the surrounding lung tissue, and the diverticulum wall was carefully dissected. We further dissected the neck region of the diverticulum with blunt and sharp dissection. With the aid of an endoscope, the diverticulum neck was identified bit by bit with the help of the endoscopic light. To better identify the diverticulum neck, we inserted the lens of the endoscope into the diverticulum and instilled approximately 30 ml ICG (2.5 mg/ml) into the diverticulum through the endoscopic channel. The wall and neck of the diverticulum were visualized immediately under NIR fluorescence, whereas the normal esophagus could not be seen due to the occlusion of the muscular layer . To avoid causing esophageal stenosis, we used the endoscope as a bougie. Then, the neck was resected with an endoscopic purple stapler (EndoGIA) exactly parallel to the longitudinal axis of the esophagus with the assistance of ICG . The overlying muscle layers were reapproximated over the stapler suturing with V-lock suture (Covidien, Inc.). An air-leak test was performed to rule out early leakage. A chest tube was placed, and the specimen was extracted. The operation time was 122 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 40 ml.
The postoperative course was uneventful. On postoperative day 3, the patients started oral intake, and the thoracic drain was removed. The patient was discharged on day 5. During the follow-up six months after the operation, there was no recurrence of retrosternal foreign body sensation.