A 67-year-old male patient suddenly developed numbness and weakness of the left lower extremity without an obvious origin 6 h ago, and he could not walk.
Six hours prior to admission, the patient suddenly developed numbness and weakness of the left lower extremity without an obvious origin, so he went to the emergency department of our hospital.
Although he had a history of hypertension and was treated with oral antihypertensive drugs, his blood pressure was well controlled. He denied a history of atrial fibrillation. In 2016, he had an arterial embolism in both lower extremities; he also had a history of bilateral femoral artery thrombectomy, and long-term treatment with oral Bayer aspirin.
The patient was not a descendant of a consanguineous marriage, and there was no family history of a similar disease.
During physical examination, the bilateral femoral artery and the right popliteal, posterior tibial, and dorsal pedis arteries were palpable, but the left popliteal, posterior tibial, and dorsal pedis arteries were not palpable. The skin temperature of the right lower extremity was normal, but the left lower extremity was cool and pale.
The laboratory results at admission were normal, including routine blood tests, coagulation function, liver and kidney function, tumor markers, and urine and stool tests, but the d-dimer results (670 µg/L) were not normal (0-500 µg/L).
Bedside echocardiography showed two abnormal echo groups in the left atrium (shown by the red arrow), which were 3.1 cm × 1.8 cm and 1.0 cm × 0.8 cm in size, and there was an acceptable range of motion . Computer tomography angiography (CTA) of the lower extremity vessels showed that the left popliteal artery was not visualized shown by the red arrow, so a lumen embolism was considered . The patient’s left lower extremity ischemic symptoms were severe, and there was a risk of lower extremity necrosis. The surgical indications were clear. After completing the preoperative examination and excluding surgical contraindications, an emergency left femoral artery incision was made, and a thrombectomy was performed.
The patient recovered well after the operation. The numbness and weakness of the left lower extremity disappeared, the skin temperature became warmer, and the left popliteal, posterior tibial and dorsal foot arteries were palpable.
Assessment of the pathological specimen was based on microscopic examination. Hematoxylin-eosin staining showed thrombi and many myxoid materials, and free clusters of round and polygonal cells were seen inside, which was consistent with the pathological characteristics of myxoma . Immunohistochemical studies showed that vimentin, calretinin, CD31, and CD34 were positive, while CD68, cytokeratin (CK), CK5/6, and factor 8-related antigen (F8) were negative. Alcian blue staining (AB) and periodic acid Schiff staining (PAS) were also positive . The above pathological findings were consistent with the pathological features of myxoma[-]. Combined with the results of preoperative echocardiography and postoperative pathological examination, it can be inferred that the acute lower extremity arterial embolism was caused by shedding of a left CM.