A 30-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital because of painless lymphadenopathy in the left neck. Computed tomography of neck and chest revealed multiple lesions up to 9.5 cm in diameter in the left supraclavicular region as well as in the mediastinum . Based on a supraclavicular lymph node biopsy the diagnosis of a papillary adenocarcinoma was confirmed . In the following abdominal sonography and contrast-enhanced abdominal computertomography identified a 4 cm in diameter inhomogeneous mass in the lower pole of the left kidney as well as numerous enlarged paraaortal lymph nodes. Partial nephrectomy of the left kidney revealed a tumor of 4 cm in diameter with a tan to gray cut surface. Paraaortal lymph nodes showed tumor infiltrations. Two weeks later a new hypodense lesion 2.2 cm in diameter was detected in the liver. A clinical check-up after 2 month demonstrated by thoracal and abdominal computertomography numerous suspicious mediastinal and paraaortal lymph nodes and further suspect lesions in the liver. The patient confirmed that her mother died from renal cell carcinoma at the age of 47. Medical records of the mother were not available. No further cases of RCC have been reported in the patient's family .
On macroscopical examination cross sections of cervical lymph node demonstrated a grossly white, partly cystic, and necrotic mass.
Microscopical examination of the cervical lymph nodes revealed a tumor consisting of papillary formations crossed by fibrotic areas. The papillae showed a monolayer of tumor cells with large nuclei and numerous nucleoli as well as atypical mitotic figures. The tumor cells displayed abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm . The immunhistochemical examinations confirmed a partial expression of cytokeratin 7- and RCC-antibodies. Vimentin, especially expressed in clear cell RCC, could only be demonstrated in the papillary stroma but not in tumor cells. A potential metastasis of a thyroid carcinoma could be excluded by the lacking expression of TTF-1 and thyreoglobulin. Based on the also lacking expression of estrogen- and progesteron-receptor a metastasis of an ovarian cancer was assumed to be unlikely. The tumor demonstrates no further specific antibody reaction. Thus, the lymph node metastasis seemed to be most likely caused by papillary RCC.
Macroscopical examination of the partial nephrectomy of the left kidney showed a tumor of 4 cm in diameter with a gray-tan and hemorrhagic cut surface. The tumor did not demonstrate a clear border to the surrounding normal kidney.
Microscopical examination of the partial nephrectomy revealed a papillary RCC type II with the same morphology as in the lymph node. Furthermore lymphangiosis and dissociated tumor islets could be detected. The immunohistochemical results of the renal tumor tissue were identical to the findings of the lymph node. In addition the tumor showed a proliferation rate of 80% by Ki67 staining .
Molecular genetic analysis did not reveal any mutation in the met-oncogene. The subsequent analysis of the FH gene revealed a missense mutation (c.539A > G) leading to amino acid substitution H180R at the protein level . This sequence variant has been classified as a pathologic mutation. Furthermore, this mutation could be shown to be associated with a reduced activity of FH by approximately 45% .