This patient was a 25-year-old male who presented with pale skin and sweating to our hospital. His blood glucose level was found to be in the range of hypoglycemia (52 mg/dL), and his symptoms resolved after intravenous dextrose administration. He had experienced this type of episode twice before he visited our hospital but did not have any problems during the previous few days. He had no family history of any endocrine metabolic diseases, and physical examinations showed no special findings. The patient was admitted on the basis of hypoglycemia for 2 weeks. Except for the blood sugar episode, laboratory results regarding complete blood count, routine blood chemistry, kidney function tests, urine analysis, and chest radiograph were all within normal limits. Fasting and oral glucose tolerance load tests were performed, and there were no evidences of the irregular secretion of insulin. Adding to the puzzle, blood glucose levels were within normal limits in the hospital.
However, enhanced computed tomography (CT) confirmed the presence of a solid mass measuring about 6 cm with well-defined and regular borders in the retroperitoneum. Peak contrast enhancement in a part of the tumor was seen in the delayed phase. The mass seemed to arise from the adrenal gland or kidney, and there were no metastatic lesions . An MRI study of the mass showed a low signal in T1WI and a high signal in T2WI. As a result of the CT, we made additional endocrinological studies, and the results revealed normal outcomes for serum aldosterone, metanephrine, and normetanephrine and also for 24-h urinary catecholamines and metanephrines. For the tumor located in the retroperitoneum, a tumorectomy was performed. In the course of this operation, there was no evidence of a tumor in the kidney or adrenal gland, but tumor turned out to be in the splenic parenchyma as found by intraoperative ultrasonography. As a result, a total splenectomy was performed.
Hypoglycemia-related symptoms disappeared after surgical resection was performed. The patient is still alive and well without evidence of local tumor recurrence 15 years after the operation.
Grossly, the resected spleen (130 g: 10 × 6.5 × 4 cm) was received. The solid tumor (3.5 × 2.7 × 2.5 cm) was encapsulated by spleen parenchyma, and the cut surface was a yellowish white . Microscopically, the tumor showed expansive growth and could be easily distinguished from splenic parenchyma; while fibrous capsule was absent, necrosis was present at the center of the tumor. A histological examination showed that the lesions consisted of many vascular channels that had a striking lobular appearance and were surrounded by fibrous tissue . Immunostaining shows a predominance of CD8− , CD31+ , CD34+ cord capillary , and with few sinuses. On the basis of these findings, we finally diagnosed this situation as a cord capillary hemangioma. Moreover, using immunohistochemistry, we found that some tumor cells were positive for IGF-II . Moreover, the tumor was negative for insulin synaptophysin, chromogranin A and less than 1% positive for Ki67 .