A 67-year-old woman from Romania presented to our Emergency Department for confusion and subacute ideomotor decline in the previous 5 days. Insomnia, nocturnal awakenings, urinary incontinence, and amnesia for recent events were reported in the last month. The patient had a past medical history of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, previously treated with amiodarone and apixaban, which were self-suspended 1 year ago, obesity, hypertension, and rectal carcinoma which was surgically treated with an enterostomy. The patient had no known history of seizures or other neurological diseases, recent illness, brain trauma, or recent surgical procedures. The chronic therapy encompassed olmesartan, bisoprolol, indapamide, furosemide, amlodipine, acetylsalicylic acid, and ranitidine. The vital parameters were normal, and the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 15. The general physical examination did not show pathological items, nor signs of trauma. The chest X-ray was normal, while the electrocardiogram was suggestive of atrial fibrillation. From a neurological point of view, the patient was disoriented in space and time and unable to denominate objects of common use. The pupils were isochoric and reactive to light. The posture was normal and there were no signs of meningism. The cranial nerve examination was normal, except for dubious absence of the menace reflex on the left, not confirmed by a subsequent evaluation. The global strength of the limbs was preserved, as well as tactile sensitivity and coordination. The osteotendinous reflexes were valid, symmetrical in the upper limbs, with a mild prevalence on the right, and weak and symmetrical in the lower limbs. Cutaneous plantar response was mute bilaterally. A stroke was initially suspected, and a neuroimaging study was performed with brain computed tomography (CT), CT angiography, and CT perfusion, which were unremarkable. Because of the persistence of the altered mental state, electroencephalography (EEG) was performed. EEG showed a broadly slowed trace, with a background theta rhythm, which was more expressed on the right. Fast paroxysmal bilateral activity of the type sharp wave was superimposed and more represented on the right and mainly frontotemporal areas. Herein, NCSE was suspected and 10 mg of diazepam was administered intravenously, with regression of the paroxysmal activity on the synchronous recording of the EEG. Furthermore, antiepileptic therapy with 4,000 mg of intravenous levetiracetam was started, and the mental state progressively improved. The next day, the EEG was repeated, and epileptiform activity did not reappear ; levetiracetam was switched to an oral dosage of 2,000 mg daily. The patient was admitted to our Neurology Department with the presumptive diagnosis of NCSE, and a 3 Tesla brain MRI with gadolinium was performed. Bilateral hyperintensity of the lenticular nucleus was detected on T1W sequences , while bilateral hyperintensity of the corticospinal tract signal was displayed on FLAIR . Neuroimaging ruled out an ischemic event and an expansive lesion, with findings suggestive of chronic HE. As a completion, a lumbar puncture with examination of cerebral spinal fluid was performed. It did not show any noteworthy findings, including the real-time polymerase chain reaction for an infectious agent or dosage of autoantibodies associated with autoimmune and paraneoplastic encephalitis. The patient was obese (body mass index = 38.3 kg/m2) but had no past history of alcoholic abuse. There were no signs of ascites and declining edema. She presented no signs of asterixis. Blood tests performed a few days later revealed: chronic coinfection of Hepatitis B (HBV) and D (HDV) virus, negative Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, ammonium 141 umol/L (11.2–48.2 umol/L), albumin 2.7 mg/dl (3.4–4.8), total bilirubin 1.33 (0.12–1.1 mg/dl), INR 1.25 (0.8–1.2), proteins 5.6 g/dl (6.4–8 g/dl), cobalamin 1,121 pg/ml (191–663 pg/ml), and normal levels of folate, transferrin, sideremia, and ferritin. Hepatic elastography recorded values compatible with cirrhosis. Hepatic cirrhosis from mixed etiology, chronic HBV-HDV co-infection, and metabolic syndrome was diagnosed. The clinical picture was considered to be an episode of HE, presenting as NCSE. Anti-HBV therapy with entecavir (0.5 mg daily orally) was started, as well as secondary prevention of HE with lactulose (10 g two times daily orally) and rifaximin (400 mg three times daily orally). On the day of discharge, her mental state was normal, and the patient noted improvement in her general health condition . Afterwards, she continued to receive levetiracetam for epilepsy, besides lactulose and rifaximine for secondary prevention of HE; relatives reported no other episodes of mental confusion. Three months later, a brain MRI was repeated, and radiological findings were stable.