A 25-year-old man with no past medical or drug history, presented to the emergency room with an acute pain of the right upper quadrant and flank evolving for three days associated with fever. The patient reported no chronic abdominal pain or transit disorders.
Physical examination showed that the patient had fever 39 °c. The abdominal examination revealed the presence of a 10 cm - regularly shaped, soft, and fixed mass in the right hypochondria and flank. The rest of the abdomen revealed no remarkable abnormalities.
Laboratory tests showed a high c-reactive protein level (173.5mg/l) but a normal white blood cell count (7553/μl). No anemia nor hemostasis disorders were noticed. Furthermore, urine culture was normal.
Firstly, we decided to perform an abdominal ultrasound that showed a cystic formation of the right pericolic gutter with a thick wall and several septa within. The mass had close relationships with the sixth liver segment and the ascending colon. At first, we suspected a hydatid cyst of the liver because Tunisia is an hydatid endemic area. However, a malignant tumor of the colon could not be ruled out.
Therefore, we indicated an abdominal CT scan to characterize the mass and determine its exact location. It revealed a regular 10-cm- intraperitoneal cystic mass independent from the liver but repressing the ascending colon with heterogonous internal density. Moreover, the mass was multilocular edged by thick walls showing low contrast enhancement after intravenous injection. Peritoneal effusion was detected on CT scan in the pericolic gutter and douglas pouch, to boot (, ).
An infected cystic lymphangioma was then suspected besides the diagnosis of intraperitoneal hydatid disease or infected malignant tumor of the colon. We decided then to perform open surgery for diagnostic and therapeutic purpose.
We found a 10-cm-cystic-mass containing a serous bloody fluid in the right pericolic gutter depending from the ascending colon. The colon was not distended. No liver metastasis nor peritoneal carcinosis were noticed. An ileocolic en bloc -resection was performed with an immediate ileocolic anastomosis. .
Macroscopically, the 10 –cm colonic cystic mass had many septas and contained serous fluid. It was obviously arising from the ascending colon. In addition, histopathological examination revealed dilated lymphatic and vascular components lined with attenuated endothelial cells. These findings were consistent with the diagnosis of a cystic lymphangioma. The patient's post-operative course was uneventful. He was discharged on the 5th post-operative day. A 6-months clinical and radiological follow-up showed no symptoms or recurrence with good tolerance to regular diet.