A-43-year-old female presented with a 10-year history of right knee pain of insidious onset. The problem began as an aching pain, had worsened in last 10 days, and was particularly noticeable when standing after squatting and while going up and down the stairs. The patient reported no history of trauma and no previous knee problems. She was 158 cm tall and 64 kg in body weight.
Physical examination revealed right-sided knee pain in the medial joint line, exacerbated by end range flexion and extension, and without swelling or bruising. No mass was palpable around the knee. The active range of movement was −10°-100°, and passive range of movement was −5°-110°. Atrophy of the right quadriceps was present. Anterior and posterior drawer and Lachmann tests were found to be negative, but the McMurray’s test, patellar compression test, and compression rotation test were positive. Plain film radiographs of the knee were performed and displayed no bone abnormalities or loose bodies .
An MRI revealed a grade 3 horizontal tear, according to Mink’s classification of the anterior segment of the medial meniscus, and a multi-lobulated cyst arising from the anterior horn of the medial meniscus to the lateral region of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) .
Arthroscopic surgery was performed under general anesthesia and a tourniquet was used. We shaved the cyst only without ACL reconstruction, and at the same time, we repaired the tear in the meniscus. The knee was flexed at a 90 degree angle, on the operating table, using a foot stopper. The ACL, PCL, and also both lateral and medial menisci were intact under arthroscopic examination. There was no evidence of neoplasia, and arthroscopy revealed both medial menisci were intact and cartilage was normal. A horizontal tear was located in the anterior segment of the medial meniscus and a cyst arose from the anterior horn of the medial meniscus to the lateral region of the ACL .
A histological examination of the resected cyst wall, by three pathologists, confirmed the cyst diagnosis. On hematoxylin-and-eosin staining, we can found a fibrous-walled, ganglion cyst associated with fatty cells .
Following surgery, the patient had an uneventful postoperative period, was able to return to her job within 3 weeks, and had no complaints. After the operation, the active range of movement was −0°-120°, and an MRI examination 6 months post-operative revealed that the ACL and meniscal cyst had disappeared. The patient’s pain also disappeared completely during the 3-year follow-up period.