A 75-year-old woman presented to the ED for evaluation of sudden onset of left lower quadrant abdominal pain. She reported that she began feeling the abdominal pain approximately four hours prior to arrival but did not come to the ED until she began to experience nausea and dry heaving with associated chills. She reported passing flatus but had not had a bowel movement in the preceding 24 hours. She denied any recent trauma to the abdomen or pelvis and did not report any abdominal surgical history. The patient reported a vague history of “abdominal infections” without a diagnosis by her primary care physician or gastroenterology. She denied drinking well water, traveling recently, or camping. She reported a history of pulmonary emboli 10 years prior, but held her warfarin dose that morning because her international normalized ratio (INR) was “high.”
On presentation the patient was in no acute distress but was clammy and tachycardic at a rate of 118 beats per minute. On exam, her abdomen was diffusely tender without distention or peritoneal signs. She had an elevated white blood cell count at 17 × 103 per microliter (K/μL) (reference range 4.5–11.0 K/μL), an INR of 5.5, and a lactic acid of 3.7 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (0.4–2.0 mmol/L). An abdomen and pelvis CT with intravenous (IV) contrast showed findings suspicious for closed loop, small bowel obstruction. The CT also demonstrated evidence of swirling of the mesenteric root, known as a whirlpool sign (, ). The findings of the whirlpool sign on CT suggested mesenteric volvulus as the cause of her bowel obstruction and prompted emergent surgical consultation.
The patient received fresh frozen plasma and vitamin K for reversal of her INR in preparation for emergent surgery. Intraoperatively, her mesenteric volvulus was reduced and eight feet (∼243 cm) of jejunum was resected due to ischemia. She remained nil-per-os for seven days post-surgery before beginning a clear liquid diet, and she remained in the hospital for a total of nine days before being discharged to acute rehabilitation. She continued to recover and returned to baseline activities over the following month.