A 7-year-old Japanese boy with no significant past medical history was referred to the emergency department (ED) of our institution from a primary and emergency medical center due to suspected appendicitis. He had lower abdominal discomfort and tenderness, which had persisted for 2 days. Due to the atypical symptoms, he was treated with laxatives and observed at home. Regarding his family history, his father tested positive for SARS-CoV-2. At the ED, he was febrile (39.1 °C), slightly tachycardic (heart rate 101 beats per minute) and normotensive (102/61 mmHg), O2 saturation of 99% (room air), and his respiratory rate was 15 breaths per minute. His abdomen was distended with diffuse mild tenderness at the lower abdomen, which was aggravated by movement. According to his family history, he was also tested and was found to be positive for SARS-CoV-2 by RT-qPCR. His initial laboratory values were normal, except for a high white blood cell (WBC) count (9900/µL) with a left shift (83.4% neutrophil count), and an elevated C-reactive protein level (12.3 mg/dL).
Chest X-Ray showed no acute cardiopulmonary disease, and abdominal X-ray showed a slightly dilated bowel, indicating hypoperistalsis. On abdominal and pelvic ultrasonography, the appendix could not be visualized. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen/pelvis was performed to confirm the diagnosis and revealed a swollen appendix with an intact appendicular base and the body , a fecalith in the lumen , and perforation on the apex side , accompanied by fluid collection in the peri-appendiceal region . These results were consistent with perforated appendicitis.
Laparoscopic appendectomy was favored at this point rather than non-operative management because of the patient’s stable physical condition, and perforated appendicitis with a fecalith. Additionally, the operating room was available because the day the patient visited our institution was a holiday and there were no scheduled surgeries.
All members of the surgical team, including the anesthesiologist and pediatric intensivists, wore enhanced personal protective equipment (PPE). The enhanced PPE included a surgical gown, head cover, face shield, two pairs of surgical gloves, shoe covers, and an N95 mask .
The operation was performed as follows: a 12-mm port was used for the navel, and a 5-mm port was used for the upper pubic area and the left paramedian plane . Pneumoperitoneum was induced with an abdominal pressure of 8 mmHg at a CO2 flow rate of 4 L/min. The swollen and perforated appendix with the intact base was severely adherent to the surrounding tissue, and purulent ascites was present in the rectovesical pouch . After careful adhesiolysis , the mesentery of the appendix was divided, and the intact base of the appendix was ligated . The appendix was placed in a plastic bag and removed. The purulent ascites was taken for culturing and sensitivity testing. Abdominal lavage and drainage were carried out, and a closed drain was placed in the right iliac fossa via the rectovesical pouch. The operation lasted 93 min, anesthesia was applied for 165 min. Through the operation, we minimally used ultrasonic coagulation and incision device, and the adhesiolysis was mainly performed by a general peeling forceps to reduce the surgical mist because it is known to contain bio-aerosols with viable and non-viable cellular material that subsequently poses a risk of viral infection . Awakening from anesthesia and oro-tracheal extubation were performed in a separated negative pressure intensive care unit to prevent the expansion of aerosol with PPE, and the patient was then moved to the infectious disease ward with a stable general condition.
Postoperatively, a minor intra-abdominal abscess that did not require surgical drainage was present. The culture from the appendiceal pus predominantly grew Escherichia coli, Streptococcus constellatus, and the post-operative blood culture grew Bacteroides fragilis. Then, we switched piperacillin-tazobactam to meropenem and metronidazole based on the results of sensitivity testing. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 17, after the disappearance of the intra-abdominal abscess. No respiratory symptoms related with COVID-19 infection (e.g., cough or sputum production) occurred postoperatively.
The patient received care from COVID-19-vaccinated staff members throughout the hospitalization period, and no staff members were infected.
The pathological findings were consistent with phlegmonous appendicitis. The fecaliths were found inside the appendix . Histological sections with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining showed a markedly inflamed appendix with mucosal ulceration and transmural neutrophilic inflammation extending through the muscularis propria to the serosal surface .
Next, to investigate the relationship between COVID-19 infection and appendicitis, we additionally performed RT-qPCR using an extracted cryopreserved appendix specimen. Briefly, the process was as follows: two tissue pieces from appendix (weight: approximately 15 mg) were homogenized, and total RNA was extracted. The detection of SARS-CoV-2 virus was performed using a SARS-CoV-2 Detection Kit-Multi (TOYOBO, Osaka, Japan). RT-qPCR was conducted, and was positive for SARS-CoV-2 (both the N1 and N2 regions).