On 8 November, 2021, a 52-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital (The Third Affiliated Hospital of Navy Medical University, Shanghai, China) with the chief complaint of “almost 1 month after palliative surgery for metastatic gallbladder carcinoma.” On 6 October, 2021, the patient experienced unprovoked pain and discomfort in the upper abdomen, accompanied by nausea, acid reflux, and vomiting. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed cholecystolithiasis, cholecystitis, and choledocholithiasis. On October 9, the patient was admitted to Gaoyou People’s Hospital (Gaoyou, Jiangsu Province, China) for further medical care. The results of the examination after hospitalization showed the following: alanine transaminase (ALT) 161 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 97 U/L, γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT) 246 U/L, and alkaline phosphatase (AKP) 200 U/L. No obvious abnormalities were found in the rest. Upper abdomen magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated cholecystolithiasis, cholecystitis, and cholangitis, as well as hemangioma-like changes in the left lobe of the liver . Chest computed tomography (CT) and gastroscopy revealed no abnormalities. The patient had no fever, weight loss, or other complaints during the course of the disease and denied a family history of cancer. Considering the possibility of cholecystolithiasis, cholecystitis, and cholangitis, the patient underwent laparoscopic common bile duct lithotomy, laparoscopic cholecystectomy, common bile duct incision, and liver biopsy under general anesthesia on October 11. The postoperative pathology showed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma combined with neuroendocrine carcinoma, with the cancer tissues invading the full thickness of the gallbladder wall . In addition, a poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma was also found in the liver biopsy, which was considered to be a metastatic malignancy .
For further diagnosis and treatment, the patient was admitted to our hospital on November 8. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score was evaluated as 1. Mild tenderness was found in the right upper quadrant without rebound tenderness. No obvious abnormalities were found for laboratory examination, except for the upregulation of neuron-specific enolase (NSE, 30.04 ng/mL). The immunohistochemistry results of the surgical specimens are as follows: insulinoma-associated protein 1 (INSM1) (+), chromogranin A (CgA) (+), synaptophysin (Syn) (+), cluster of differentiation 56 (CD56) (+), P53 (weakly positive), Ki-67 (80%+), cytokeratin 7 (CK7) (+), mucin 1 (Muc-1) (mostly +), cytokeratin 19 (CK19) (partially +), and S100P (partially +) , supporting the diagnosis of GB-NEC. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) revealed TP53 p.S99Pfs*24 mutation, microsatellite stability (MSS), and tumor mutational burden (TMB): 3.55 Muts/Mb, and PD-L1 negative was also observed.
A single intrahepatic metastatic tumor (approximately 5.0 × 4.8 cm in size) and portal lymph node metastases (approximately 2.4 cm in diameter) were found by contrast-enhanced MRI . According to the tumor–node–metastasis (TNM) staging of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), the tumor was classified as a clinical stage of pT3N1M1 (IVB).
The patient received tislelizumab (200 mg, d1) plus EP chemotherapy (etoposide 100 mg + cisplatin 30 mg, d1–3) every 3 weeks for 8 cycles from 12 November, 2021. The MRI results before the third cycle of treatment (6 January, 2022) showed that the intrahepatic tumor significantly reduced to approximately 2.0 × 2.0 cm in size, and the metastatic hilar lymphoma nodes (LNs) were missed . Tumor response was evaluated as partial remission (PR). The blood NSE of the case remarkably decreased to 13.36 ng/mL before the fourth therapy and remained at normal levels since then .
After the completion of 8 cycles of treatment (4 May, 2022), the patient was assessed as having a PR, with the size of the intrahepatic tumor further being reduced to 2.0 × 1.5 cm . The patient’s upper abdominal pain subsided, and the ECOG score was assessed as 0. During the 8 cycles of treatment, no serious adverse events (AEs) were observed .
Next, maintenance therapy using tislelizumab alone (200 mg, intravenous injection) was given every 3 weeks from 7 May, 2022 , and the therapeutic efficacy was re-evaluated as PR on 18 August, 2022. On 13 February and 17 May, 2023, the patient underwent physical examination with contrast-enhanced MRI, both results showed the disappearance of intrahepatic tumors, and the therapeutic efficacy was respectively evaluated as CR. Currently, the patient still receives regular maintenance therapy and remains alive with no complaints of discomfort at the last follow-up.