An active 24-year-old man, with no relevant or significant medical history presented with progressive left hip pain radiating to the left thigh for the past 1 year. There was no significant history of trauma. His initial symptoms were dull aching groin pain which worsened over weeks, associated with night cries, and loss of weight and appetite. Roentgenogram was done which was unremarkable . Initial work-up included an MRI of the hip which showed synovitis and marrow edema without fracture. Based on the clinical features and MRI findings, he was treated with 6 months of anti-tubercular therapy. Despite anti-tubercular treatment, his symptoms did not improve. When he presented to us, he had hip stiffness and pain in the groin, and anterior thigh pain which worsened when he walked.
Physical examination revealed antalgic gait and reduced hip range of motion in all planes associated with spasms and pain. There was tenderness on deep palpation in the left groin and the straight leg raising test is negative. Neurological examination found no abnormality.
Our initial differential diagnosis included intrinsic hip pathologies like avascular necrosis and tuberculous synovitis. Complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C reactive protein were within normal limits and an open synovial biopsy of the left hip was performed for obtaining samples for culture and tissue biopsy. All the cultures were negative and the biopsy showed mild to moderate chronic synovitis with lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates. To exclude immune-mediated arthritis, rheumatologic evaluation was done which included serologic studies and MRI of bilateral sacroiliac joints.
Serological studies were unremarkable and MRI showed a well-defined T1 hypo intense, short tau inversion recovery hyperintense lesion with a thick sclerotic hypo intense rim, in the anterolateral cortex of the left femoral head with marrow edema and no significant periosteal reaction. There was moderate left hip joint effusion with synovitis .
MRI was followed by limited computed tomography (CT) cuts through the hip joints which showed a well-defined lytic lesion measuring approximately 8 × 6 mm with peripheral sclerotic rim and partly calcified nidus consistent with intracapsular osteoid osteoma .
As the lesion was amendable for the radiological guided procedure, the patient underwent CT-guided Radio Frequency Ablation as an alternative to surgical excision as it avoids the complications associated with surgical exposure of the femoral head, and injury to the capsular vessels, chondral, or osteochondral damage from resection .