A 38-year-old mother with two previous normal pregnancies delivered vaginally a male neonate weighing 4500 g, at gestation age of 42w+5d with an Apgar score of 8 and 9 at 1st and 5th minute, respectively. The process of delivery was complicated by shoulder dystocia. Shortly after birth, the newborn developed progressively severe respiratory distress, requiring O2 application via head box. He received intravenous fluid and antibiotics. He was subsequently transferred to our hospital where he continued to require O2 therapy. His initial physical examination revealed tachypnea, nasal flaring, chest indrawing, asynchronized chest and abdomen motion and the absence of Moro reflex and absence of any spontaneous movement in the right hand. His right arm remained in adduction and internal rotation position. The grasp reflex was intact. Apart from respiratory distress no other abnormality was detected clinically. In the chest roentgenogram the lung field was normal, no sign of clavicle and homeruns fracture, but the right hemidiaphragm was highly elevated .
According to the history of shoulder dystocia and the findings on physical examination and chest X-ray diagnosis of brachial plexus (Erb) palsy accompanied with diaphragmatic paralysis was made and the neonate transferred to NICU. He was placed on his right side of the body and continued to require increasing concentrations of oxygen. Endotracheal intubation and ventilatory support (Bear cub infant ventilator, Bear Medical System) at 24 h of age was required because of respiratory failure, which was characterized by pH of 7.15 and PCO2 of 68 mmHg on arterial blood gas analysis.
Conventional ventilatory support to maintain oxygenation continued and weaned from ventilator after 6 days, but he started to have increasing respiratory distress and inefficient chest excursions. So he was re-intubated and ventilated for another 5 days because of extubation failure. Chest X-ray was the same as previous one and the inflammatory markers for sepsis like CRP and ESR were normal. The initial and the second blood culture were negative. No other cause of extubation failure, other than the thoracic and inefficient respiration was evident. He was weaned at this stage to the Nasal Continues Positive Pressure (N-CPAP) to manage the extubation failure. The chest X-ray at this stage showed an elevated right hemidiaphragm like the previous one without the radiologic signs of collapse or pneumonia. After a couple of hours he developed respiratory distress and hypoxemia requiring re-intubation and ventilation using the same conventional ventilator for the third time.
Besides, real-time ultrasonography (Model SSD-620) showed marked decrease in movement of the right hemidiaphragm when compared with the left hemidiaphragm. Cranial ultrasonography was normal. Although most of the authors recommend the plication at the end of the first month, we decided to operate earlier because of multiple extubation failures. Seventy two hours after operation the patient was extubated without extubation failure. Chest X-ray and real time ultra sonography showed normal position and function of the diaphragm .
The patient was handed over to newborn services on day 24 of life and discharged to home after 7 days. His mother did not show any signs of myotonia in physical examination. On follow-up examinations at 38, 45 and 62 days of life his muscle tone was normal. His growth and development was normal and the Moro reflex of right hand was significantly improved. He demonstrated the normal passive range of motion in his right arm and no respiratory symptom was seen on follow up examination in outpatient clinic at 12 and 18 months of age.