The patient was a 23-year-old woman (height 147.6 cm, weight 43.5 kg) with congenital nasal dysplasia (Binder syndrome). At the age of 3 years, the patient struggled to initiate walking and to climb the stairs; additionally, she exhibited grip myotonia and struggled to open her eyes and mouth after sneezing. Exercise and cold exposure induced symptom exacerbation. The patient’s mother and younger sister also exhibited similar symptoms. The patient was referred to our hospital, but after physical examination, she was not definitively diagnosed with a myotonic syndrome. She was followed up. At the age of 8 years, the patient underwent rhinoplasty with iliac bone graft under general anesthesia without complications. At the age of 10 years, the patient underwent posterior cervical fixation (C1–2) for traumatic atlantoaxial subluxation under general anesthesia. However, when the patient was extubated following surgery, she exhibited acute dyspnea in the operating room and was immediately re-intubated and transferred to the intensive care unit. After discharge, the patient visited our hospital again and genetic analysis revealed a mutation at V445M in the SCN4A gene, leading to a diagnosis of SCM. As the patient grew, the nasal deformity became conspicuous with increasing atrophy of the graft. Therefore, the patient was scheduled to undergo a second rhinoplasty with autologous costal cartilage.
Pre-operative test results, including those of blood screening, blood gas analysis, X-ray examination, respiratory function test, and electrocardiogram, were within normal limits. The patient’s SCM-related symptoms were stable. Mexiletine and eperisone were taken as needed. General anesthesia was induced with target-controlled infusion of propofol (5 μg mL− 1), continuous infusion of remifentanil (0.3 μg kg− 1 min− 1), and fentanyl (200 μg), without any muscle relaxants. Due to the posterior fixation of the patient’s cervical spine, a McGrath® video laryngoscope (Covidien, Japan) was used. Orotracheal intubation was performed without inducing a cough reflex. Anesthesia was maintained with propofol (2–2.4 μg mL− 1), remifentanil (0.1–0.25 μg kg− 1 min− 1), and fentanyl (300 μg). Arterial blood pressure and BIS® index (Covidien, Japan) were monitored in addition to standard monitoring. Body temperature at the bladder was maintained between 36.0 and 37.4 °C with a forced-air warming system.
As shown in Fig. and Table , the blood concentration of potassium ion rose during general anesthesia. After changing Ringer’s solution to a potassium-free fluid, the blood concentration of potassium ion returned to within the normal range without any additional therapeutic intervention. For postoperative analgesia, intercostal nerve block with 10 mL of 0.75% ropivacaine was administered through a catheter (Perifix® ONE catheter, B. Braun, Japan). Continuous infusion of 0.2% ropivacaine was started at 4 mL/h after the operation. Intraoperative cardiovascular and respiratory vital signs remained stable. After the operation was concluded, we exchanged the orotracheal tube for a supraglottic airway device (Air-Q™ #3.5, Intermed Japan, Japan). The supraglottic airway device was removed uneventfully after we confirmed that the patient had regained consciousness and initiated spontaneous breathing. The patient did not exhibit shivering or exacerbation of other symptoms related to SCM. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit overnight and was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 7.