A 41-year-old male with a history of recurrent bleeding from a left-sided facial AVM presented with massive hemorrhage in the oral cavity and decreased hemoglobin level from 11 to 9,9 g/dl in 24 h . Under conscious sedation, angiography of the supra-aortic trunks showed nidal arteries originating from the left vertebral artery and the right external carotid. Patient’s airway was protected by the presence of tracheostomy.
The left vertebral artery was catheterized with a 0.027″ Renegade HI-FLO microcatheter (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) and a first super-selective embolization of the branches directed to the AVM was performed, using a 1:5 mixture of Glubran®2/Lipiodol (GEM, Viareggio, Italy/Guerbet, France). The compound was created by connecting and vigorously flushing two 10 mL syringes via a two-way stopcock, one syringe filled with 1 mL NBCA-MS and the other with 5 mL Lipiodol, until a homogeneous suspension was achieved. The right external carotid was then catheterized. Diagnostic angiography showed hypertrophic pathological nidal arteries directed to the AVM; the expected vascular anatomy was no more recognizable. The microcatheter was positioned far from the carotid bifurcation (approximately 7 cm) and deep into the nidus to lower the chances of retrograde embolization . The operator then started injecting the embolizing compound. Short before completing the filling of the nidus, the patient coughed vigorously causing an abrupt pressure increase and a temporary blood flow stoppage which led to partial reflux of the embolic agent into the common carotid . The reflux was also likely favoured by the increased pressure in the nearly embolized nidus.
Although the oral bleeding was successfully stopped, the patient started complaining of weakness in the left arm. He was promptly transferred to the emergency room to perform a non-enhanced CT of the brain, which showed multiple cortical and subcortical punctiform hyperdense areas caused by the migrated embolic material all over the frontal, parietal and occipital lobes in the right hemisphere, and also in the left parietal and occipital lobes . Same-day non-enhanced MRI with DWI sequences confirmed the presence of small acute infarcts . No alterations were seen in the cerebellar parenchyma.
The patient was transferred to the Neurology Unit where the clinical presentation was evaluated through the standard tools for assessment of stroke, the NIH Stroke Scale (NIHSS) and the Modified Rankin Scale (mRS). Ideomotor apraxia, weakness of left upper limb (NIHSS = 3) and inability in left hand daily dexterity (mRS = 3) were noted. The next day, patient clinical conditions improved: he was able to move the left limb (NIHSS = 1) and to use objects with left hand (mRS = 2). On the third postoperative day, there was significant improvement both of the upper extremity weakness (motor drift of the left arm resulted in NIHSS = 1) and of the distal weakness (mRS = 2).
One week later, no focal alterations could be detected using both stroke clinical assessment tools. The patient was finally discharged and continued his neurological rehabilitation at home.
One month after the procedure, neurological examination showed no recurrence and confirmed complete symptoms regression. Nine months later, the patient remained asymptomatic and both CT and MRI showed the complete disappearance of the embolic agent and the relative ischemic areas .