A 25-year-old male bakery worker by occupation, presented to the outpatient department (OPD) of Tribhuvan University Teaching Hospital with a six weeks history of episodic weakness over bilateral upper and lower limbs. He initially noted numbness in his feet, followed by difficulties with walking, standing and unable to bear weight. A total of three similar episodes occurred during last six weeks. Two episodes were improved with potassium infusion in 7–8 hours in the local hospital but following third episode, the patient landed up in our OPD. There was no history of fever, headache, vomiting, trauma, loss of consciousness, trouble swallowing, weakness or difficulty in balance, speech and vision. The patient denied any loss of sensation, autonomic dysfunction, or changes in bowel or bladder habit. The patient didn't have a history of palpitation, weakness, weight loss, heat intolerance and anxiety. He did not give a history of surgery, medicine intake, vaccination, or exposure to toxins/heavy metals. The patient consumes a non-veg diet. The patient is an occasional drinker and chronic smoker with 1.5 pack years. There is no family history of similar complaints or any known neurological disease.
On admission, his general condition was fair with Glasgow coma score of 15/15. His vital signs were stable and there was no pallor, icterus, lymphadenopathy, edema, cyanosis, or clubbing. On neurological examination, his higher mental functions, cranial nerves, sensory and coordination tests were normal with no meningeal signs. Motor examination showed bilaterally symmetrical normal muscle bulk, normal tone, normal power (5/5) in the major joints and all groups of muscles of both upper and lower limbs and reflexes were also normal. The rest of the systemic examination findings were normal.
His hematological profile showed a normal blood count. His serum urea and creatinine levels were normal, sodium was 135 mEq/l and potassium 2.6 mEq/l. His fT3 level was 46 pmol/L(Normal range: 4.6–9.7 pmol/L), fT4 level 34.66 pmol/L(Normal Range:12–30 pmol/L), thyroxine stimulating hormone level 0.0013 μIU/mL (Normal Range:0.4–4.5 μIU/mL), serum ACTH levels 32.30pg/mL (Normal Range:10–60 pg/mL) and 3-am cortisol levels 14.60 μg/dL(Normal Range:5–25 μg/dL)
MRI scans of the brain had no abnormal finding. 99 m Tc Thyroid scintigraphy was done which showed diffuse toxic goiter. Based on symptoms, lab parameters and scintigraphy, patient was diagnosed as Graves’ disease (Thyrotoxicosis).
Hence, the presence of episodic muscle weakness along with hypokalemia and resolving of symptoms after potassium infusion in the background of Graves' disease (Thyrotoxicosis) while simultaneously ruling out other differentials pointed towards the diagnosis of Thyrotoxicosis periodic paralysis secondary to Graves’ disease.
During the course of hospital stay, the patient was treated in lines of thyrotoxicosis and hypokalemia. Acetazolamide, Carbimazole and propranolol were administered. The patient showed signs of improvement in his weakness. Patient's muscles power was completely recovered during discharged and was advised to continue the above stated medicines and intake of potassium chloride syrup if weakness reappeared. He was also advised to avoid high carbohydrate intake and heavy work. In follow-up after 6 weeks, patient was doing perfectly fine with no episodes of weakness after discharge.