An 89-year-old Caucasian woman presented to the emergency department with a one day history of acute onset abdominal pain in the upper right quadrant, with nausea and malaise. On presentation her vital signs were within the normal range and she had no fever. Her medical history included an abdominal rectopexy, retropubic bladder suspension surgery and an abdominal hysterectomy, all performed more than two decades ago. Physical examination showed an abdomen with a scar after median laparotomy with a palpable tender mass in the upper right quadrant with positive Murphy's sign and rebound tenderness. Laboratory blood tests revealed a leukocytosis of 22.7 × 109/L, C-reactive protein of 48 mg/L and normal kidney and liver function tests. Abdominal ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) scan showed a clearly enlarged gallbladder with a thickened wall of 7 mm , with fluid supra- and sub-hepatically . Free air within the gallbladder wall was not seen. She was admitted to our hospital with the diagnosis of acute cholecystitis.
Percutaneous drainage of the gallbladder was considered because of her age and comorbidity, but because of her rapid clinical deterioration we decided to perform a laparoscopic cholecystectomy instead. Laparoscopy was performed and revealed a strongly hydropic and fully necrotic gallbladder, with necrosis extending into the cystic duct . The gallbladder was not embedded in the liver, but was hanging from the cystic duct and artery. Further exploration showed a two-fold torsion of the gallbladder around the cystic duct . A cholecystectomy was performed. (See Additional file for further imaging of peroperative findings). As the critical level of safety was obtained, with both the cystic and hepatic duct clearly visible, leaving a drain was not considered mandatory. Pathologic examination revealed the gangrenous aspect of the entire gallbladder, extending into the cystic duct. No gallbladder stones were found in the specimen. Postoperatively the patient recovered well and she was discharged from the hospital on the fifth postoperative day.