A 75-year-old Syrian man presented to the emergency department with a chief complaint of abdominal distention, vomiting, and 3-day history of gas and stool constipation. His vital signs at the time of admission were as follows: Blood Pressure: 140/80 mmHg, Heart Rate: 83 pulse per min, Oxygenation: 93%. His general laboratory tests were within normal ranges. The patient had a medical history of diabetes mellitus type II, poor dental health as he wears a dental prosthesis, and had a surgical history of a right inguinal hernia repair ~40 years ago as he recalled. One day before admission, a physician prescribed laxatives (lactulose) to the patient, but his condition did not improve. On physical examination in our department, a severe abdominal distention was noticed.
We requested a simple abdominal X-ray (AXR) which revealed loops with air-fluid levels in the small intestine. For further investigation, an abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan was obtained, which revealed a transitional dilated zone in the small intestines followed by a constricted area . The patient was diagnosed with small bowel obstruction. However, radiological imaging did not identify the cause of impaction. Therefore, he was referred to conservative, nonsurgical, treatment with careful monitoring: nothing by mouth (NPO), intravenous fluids to correct the electrolyte imbalance, and antibiotics. After 2 days of conservative treatment, the patient’s state did not stabilize. Therefore, surgical intervention was mandatory.
The surgeons opened the abdomen with a midline incision below the umbilicus. The examination of intestines revealed a foreign body obstructing the terminal ileum, located ~100 cm proximal to ileocecal junction . Surgeons unsuccessfully tried to milk the bowels by pushing the foreign body into the colon. Therefore, a longitudinal enterotomy was performed to remove the foreign body which was a bolus of meat bezoar measuring (26.9 mm, 31.8 mm, 34.9 mm) . The patient’s condition stabilized after the successful surgical procedure. Four days subsequent to the surgery, he was discharged home. After 18 months of follow-up, our patient experienced neither recurrence of small bowel obstruction nor complications related to the surgery.