We describe a patient with papillary non-small cell lung adenocarcinoma who developed isolated acute onset rapidly progressive myoclonus with prominent palatal involvement as a paraneoplastic manifestation.
A 78-year-old male with past medical history of coronary artery disease, hypertension and hyperlipidemia was diagnosed with papillary variant stage IIIB NSCLC after developing multiple pulmonary embolisms and was based on PET imaging and cervical lymph node biopsy.
Five months after the initial pulmonary embolism and one week prior to first planned chemotherapy treatment, patient was admitted with nausea and tremulousness. On the first examination day, the patient had irregular, high frequency, low amplitude diffuse action and postural tremor of the arms. It is possible that surface EMG may have reclassified this movement as polymyoclonus , however by the following 24 hours, it evolved to high amplitude near-constant spontaneous and stimulus-induced rhythmic myoclonus involving all extremities with proximal and right sided predominance. His pectoral muscles and palate were also prominently involved. Mental status remained intact.
MRI with and without contrast of brain and entire spinal cord was unremarkable. Metabolic and infectious lab workup was unrevealing. Lumbar puncture was only significant for a mildly elevated protein (61mg/dL; high normal 45mg/dL). CSF oligoclonal bands, IgG index, cytology, lymphocyte/leukemia markers and paraneoplastic panel were unremarkable. Notably, a serum paraneoplastic panel revealed positive P/Q type Calcium channel blocker antibody (0.09nmol/L; reference normal value <0.02nmol/L).
After ruling out infection, patient received 1gm methylprednisolone daily for three days. After no improvement, he received his first dose of carboplatin and pemetrexed with dexamethasone. Myoclonus including palatal myoclonus continued to worsen such that he could not hold objects and could not protect his airway, resulting in an aspiration event requiring intubation. The patient was given another three-day course of 1gm daily IV methylprednisolone with concurrent propofol (30–40 mcg/kg/min), baclofen (max 10 mg tid) and clobazam (5 mg bid) without improvement. EEG showed diffuse background slowing with brief runs of generalized periodic discharges consistent with cortical excitability. He was titrated off clobazam and baclofen and placed on levetiracetam 1.5g BID. This resulted in improvement in both the EEG and patient’s myoclonus. At discharge only a mild action tremor in his upper extremities remained.