The previous pregnancy of a 37-year-old healthy Japanese woman (gravida 2, para 1) had been uncomplicated, and the resulting child was alive and well. She had no history of periconceptional tobacco smoking, alcohol intake, radiation exposure, or intake of other supplements and drugs. She had no clinical problems during the early period of the current pregnancy; however, she did not undergo an ultrasound examination during the first trimester. At 36 weeks of gestation of the current pregnancy, a routine ultrasound examination revealed an abnormal number of umbilical cord vessels. A fetal ultrasound examination was performed using a GE Voluson™ E10 ultrasound machine (General Electric Healthcare, Tokyo, Japan) with a 3.5-MHz convex-array transducer. The examination revealed the coexistence of a four-vessel part and a three-vessel part within the free loop of the umbilical cord . The fetal insertion site of the umbilical cord comprised four vessels (two arteries and two veins), whereas the placental insertion site comprised three vessels (two arteries and one vein). The blood flow was demonstrated in both veins by two sonographic specialists in maternal fetal medicine, and the flow was similar in each vessel. However, we were unable to prenatally detect the exact point at which the umbilical cord changed from a four-vessel to a three-vessel cord. The intra-abdominal umbilical vein was a single vessel that was connected to the ductus venosus and returned to the right atrium . No other sonographic congenital abnormalities were detected on fetal ultrasound screening performed in accordance with the recommendations of the International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology .
At 38 weeks of gestation, a healthy female neonate weighing 2726 g was delivered by spontaneous vaginal delivery. The infant’s Apgar scores were 9 and 10 at 1 minute and 5 minutes, respectively. The neonatal physical examination at birth was normal.
Ultrasonographic examination of the infant at the age of 54 days revealed normal anatomy and no congenital anomalies. The umbilical cord measured 40 cm in length; the four-vessel part continued to a distance of 18 cm from the surface of the infant’s body, and the remaining umbilical cord comprised three vessels. On histological examination, the fetal side of the umbilical cord had two arteries and two veins, and the placental side had two arteries and one vein. Microscopic examination of cross-sectional sections of the umbilical cord obtained at 1 cm intervals and stained with both hematoxylin-eosin and Elastica van Gieson revealed that the umbilical cord had a four-vessel part comprising two arteries and two veins, and that the two umbilical veins then fused, resulting in a three-vessel part comprising two arteries and one vein. The placenta had a trimmed weight of 430 g, and was both macroscopically and microscopically unremarkable.