A 17-year-old female presented with a 7-year history of the development of masculinity and a 2-year history of amenorrhea.
A 17-year-old female was admitted to our hospital for investigation of virilization syndrome for 7 years and amenorrhea for 2 years. The patient had normal growth and development during childhood, the secondary sexual signs of masculinity gradually appeared from 10-year-old, with the development of pubic and axillary hair, thick hair on the upper lip, facial acne, deepening of the voice, and clitoromegaly. Menarche occurred at the age of 15 years, and she then developed amenorrhea. She complained of a feeling of lower abdominal distention occasionally in the past month, without other clinical abnormalities.
The patient had no significant history of past illness.
The patient does not smoke or drink, and she denied a history of drug allergy.
The patient had hirsutism, acne, obvious laryngeal prominence, and deepening of the voice. Subcutaneous tissues were few, the skeleton was thick, and muscles showed a masculine distribution. Tanner stage was II for breast and V for pubic hair development, abdominal distention was obvious, palpation of a hard mass approximately 30 cm in size, up to the xiphoid process, was observed with a clear boundary, poor activity, and no tenderness. Gynecological examination showed a male suprapubic hair pattern and a 4.0 cm × 1.5 cm enlarged clitoris . The hymen was seen at the vaginal orifice, and the uterus and accessories were not obvious on anal examination.
Laboratory testing showed that the testosterone level was elevated to more than 15.00 ng/mL (normal range: 0.14-0.76 ng/mL), androstenedione level was more than 10.00 ng/mL (0.3-3.3 ng/mL), dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfate (DHEA-S) level was 309.00 μg/dL (35-430 μg/dL) and CA-125 was 49.7 U/mL (0-35 U/mL). Normal levels of beta human chorionic gonadotropin < 2.0 mIU/mL (0-10 mIU/mL), alpha fetoprotein 6.0 ng/mL (< 8.1 ng/mL), CA-199 19.3 U/mL (< 30.9 U/mL), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) of 1.0 ng/mL (< 2.5 ng/mL) were observed. Additional testing showed luteinizing hormone of < 0.1 IU/L, follicle stimulating hormone of 0.2 IU/L, and estradiol of 115.0 pg/mL. The chromosome evaluation revealed a 46, XX female karyotype.
Pelvic ultrasound identified a 30.0 cm × 20.0 cm mass in the pelvic cavity. For further evaluation of the mass and adnexa, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis was carried out and showed a large, solid and cystic, partly calcified pelvic mass in the right ovary measuring 27.1 cm × 20.0 cm × 11.0 cm, 15 cm above the umbilicus (to the level of the upper part of L1), and located in the bladder rectum depression, pushing the intestinal tube . The tumor had clear boundaries and showed non-homogeneous density with solid tissue at the periphery . The clitoris was approximately 4.3 cm × 1.5 cm in size, and there was a small amount of fluid in the abdominal cavity. Intravenous bolus injection of iodinated contrast medium yielded early ring enhancement of the peripheral portion of the mass . In the venous phase, the degree of enhancement was decreased, but the area of enhancement increased with centripetal progression . The cystic components of the inner region of the lesion were not enhanced in these phases. No discrete adrenal masses or evidence of mesenteric, retroperitoneal, or pelvic lymphadenopathy were noted. The patient was diagnosed with an ovarian tumor suspected to be a sex cord-stromal tumor.