During the spring of 2017, a 67-year-old man presented with a large painless and nonpruritic rash of approximately 10 cm in size on the left side of his chest below the clavicle. The rash lasted for 3 weeks, and it was accompanied by the swelling of his left knee joint. A 4-week course of oral doxycycline therapy at a dosage of 100 mg twice daily was administered shortly after the serum tested positive for LD using the Western blot (WB) immunoglobulin (Ig)G criteria . Shortly after the completion of the doxycycline therapy, this patient began complaining of gait difficulties and frequent falls, as well as intermittent painful cramps in his right thigh.
At the time of the neurological evaluation, this patient was taking tamsulosin (0.4 mg daily) for benign prostatic hypertrophy, atorvastatin (20 mg daily) for hyperlipidemia, and escitalopram (10 mg daily) for depression. He had taken furosemide (20 mg twice daily) to control the swelling in his left knee. Because the WB serology results were positive, the fluid from his left knee was not examined.
This patient had no history of diabetes, hypertension, coagulopathy, anticoagulant medication intake, traction injury to the hip or lumbar spine, femoral artery catheterization, or malignancy. His father, who suffered from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, died of renal failure at 85 years old. His mother died of ovarian cancer at 92 years old. One of his brothers had a history of melanoma and one of his sisters had breast cancer.
The physical examination showed weakness in the right quadriceps and psoas muscles (3/5 using the Medical Research Council scale), conspicuous atrophy of the vastus medialis and lateralis muscles , an absent knee muscle stretch reflex, and hypoalgesia over the anterior aspect of the thigh and medial aspect of the leg. The strength of the adductors and abductors of the hips, flexors of the knees, and dorsal and plantar flexors of the ankles was preserved (5/5 on both sides). There were no neurological deficits in the left lower and upper extremities, nor in the cranial nerves. His higher cortical functions were normal, and there were no signs of meningeal irritation or radiculopathy. His clinical pulmonary and cardiovascular examinations were normal, and there were no palpable masses, lymph nodes, or audible bruits in the inguinal region. The hemogram and blood chemistry values were normal. The antinuclear antibody titer (direct) was negative, and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (Westergren method) was 67 mm/hour (N=0–30).
The immunoscreening ordered by another physician for other tick-borne diseases (babesiosis and ehrlichiosis) and bartonellosis (an infectious disease caused by a bacterium belonging to the genus Bartonella) was essentially negative (test performed at IGeneX Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA).
A peripheral electrodiagnostic study using a Sierra 11 Wedge EMG NCV System (Cadwell Industries, Inc., Kennewick, WA, USA), with the standard technique for transcutaneous nerve stimulation, showed a markedly reduced right femoral nerve action potential (0.19 mV) when compared to the 2.5 mV amplitude measured on the left side. However, there were no temporal dispersions of the muscle action potentials (recorded over the rectus femoris muscle). The peroneal and tibial motor nerve and sural sensory nerve conduction values were normal on both sides. Monopolar needle electromyography (EMG) sampling showed signs of active denervation (fibrillation potentials and sharp positive waves) in the femoral nerve innervated muscles on the right side. The obturator, sciatic, peroneal, and tibial motor nerve innervated muscles, including the paraspinal muscles, showed no signs of denervation or muscle membrane irritability. Four months later, a repeat electrodiagnostic study showed a persistently reduced femoral nerve action potential, but the needle EMG showed signs of reinnervation, with fewer signs of muscle membrane irritability, in the quadriceps femoris muscles.
In view of the absence of radicular or meningeal symptoms, together with the peripheral location of the neurological deficits (as demonstrated clinically and electrophysiologically), it was deemed unnecessary to perform a spinal fluid examination. We did not attempt to culture the synovial fluid in view of the clinical history and positive serology results.
The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis showed no evidence of femoral neck fractures, hip dislocations, free fluid, or vascular necrosis. There were no retroperitoneal mass lesions or hemorrhages. The MRI of the lumbar spine showed mild disc desiccation and bulging discs, without disc herniation or nerve root compression.
A year after the onset of the disease, and following an extensive course of physical therapy, this patient was able to return to his full-time work as an attendant in a local store. As a practical matter, given his clinical history, laboratory findings, and favorable response to therapy, it was deemed unnecessary to repeat the serological studies.