We present a case of a 44-year-old female with a ruptured non-coronary SOVA diagnosed incidentally with a trans-thoracic echocardiogram (TTE) during a routine ambulatory evaluation for dyspnoea on exertion. At that time, the TTE revealed an ejection fraction (EF) of 55–60%, normal right ventricular (RV) size and function, and a lateral tricuspid annulus peak velocity (S’) of 17 cm/s. The SOVA was ill-defined on TTE. Therefore, a trans-oesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was done, which showed a 2.3 cm non-coronary SOVA with a small windsock communication with the right atrium . The narrowest part of the aneurysmal neck appears to be 5 mm. At that time, cardiac chambers were normal in size and function with normal pulmonary pressures. The patient refused repair of the rupture and was lost to follow-up.
Two years later, she presented to our hospital with dyspnoea on exertion, orthopnoea, and progressive bilateral lower extremity oedema. On examination, she was afebrile, with a blood pressure of 150/82 mmHg and a heart rate of 89 b.p.m. Jugular vein distension was noted, and she had a continuous murmur at the third left intercostal space and a systolic murmur over the left lower sternal border. Mild bilateral basal crackles were found on auscultation. She had three-plus bilateral pitting oedema up to the knee. A side by side comparative apical four-chamber view obtained two years apart is shown in . Her ECG showed sinus rhythm, right axis deviation, and an isolated PVC. A chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly. A repeated TTE showed an EF of 50–55%, new findings of a severely dilated and hypokinetic right ventricle, right atrial enlargement, and a S’ of 9 cm/s. It also showed an unchanged aneurysmal size, aorto-atrial fistula, and a continuous turbulent flow.
After agreeing to surgery, a pre-operative cardiac catheterization was obtained, which revealed non-obstructed coronaries. Right-sided catheterization measurements showed a significant left to right shunt with a pulmonary flow/systemic flow (Qp/Qs) ratio of 2.7, with a step-up of oxygenation in the right atrium and pulmonary artery, as well as an elevated pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 57 mmHg. Her pre-operative medications include aspirin, carvedilol, lisinopril, hydrochlorothiazide, and furosemide 40 mg daily. The patient had minimal response to the furosemide and was sent for a successful repair of the aneurysm with the closure of the aorto-atrial fistula via a bovine pericardial patch. Intra-operative TEE confirmed resolution of the left to right shunt. A repeated TTE showed an EF of 45–50%, along with an improvement in the RV size and function, with a S’ of 13 cm/s. It also demonstrated the resolution of the fistula between the coronary sinus and the right atrium . After an uncomplicated post-operative course in the surgical intensive care unit, the patient was discharged with an increased dose of furosemide from 40 to 60 mg daily, along with aspirin, carvedilol, and lisinopril. Upon the 1-month clinic follow-up, clinical signs of fluid overload have resolved, and the furosemide had been discontinued.