A 54-year-old Turkish man came to our clinic Department of Prosthetic Dentistry, 19 Mayis University, Faculty of Dentistry with the lack of esthetics and function of his teeth. In his medical examination he had gastroesophageal reflux disease history for about 4-5 years and had paid no attention because of any symptoms affecting his life. Also, brushing teeth behaviour was once a day and bruxism history was present. In his clinical examination there was generalize dental erosion including dentin on the occlusal, buccal and palatinal surfaces of maxillary teeth; occlusal and buccal surfaces of mandibular teeth and cervical lesions were seen (, and ) (Smith and Knight Wear Index, Score 3-4) . The questionnaire detailed the patient’s possible exposure to etiologic factors associated with dental erosion, including ingestion of citrus fruits, vinegar and carbonated drinks. The patient did not admit to ingest high consumption of acidic foods and drinks.
Impressions of both arches were made with irreversible hydrocolloid (Cavex Impressional, Cavex Holland BV: Haarlem, The Netherlands) and poured with a type V dental stone (Glastone 3000, Dentsply International Inc, PA 17405-0872, USA). After determining the occlusal vertical dimension with mounted diagnostic casts and face dimensions, there was decreased vertical dimension. Diagnostic casts were mounted on a semi-adjustable articulator (Stratos 300; Ivoclar Vivadent AG FL-9494 Schaan Liechtenstein, Austria) using a face-bow transfer (UTS3D; Ivoclar Vivadent AG FL-9494 Schaan Liechtenstein, Austria) and a centric relation record (Memosil 2, Heraues Kulzer GmbH Grüner Weg 11-63450 Hanou, Germany). First of all the patient was referred to a gastroenterologist. The epithelial irritation of esophagus was reported in the endoscopic examination and results confirmed GERD. The appropriate pharmacologic agent has been prescribed and the GERD was controlled. After the medical treatment, a maxillary acrylic resin (Vertex Orthoplast, Vertex Dental, Zeist, The Netherlands) splint was fabricated with flat occlusal scheme for the increase of vertical height and for protection of the teeth against further gastric acid and bruxism. Acrylic resin was applied in 1 mm and 2 mm increments to the occlusal surface of the splint over a 30 day period to establish a 3 mm increase in occlusal vertical dimension (OVD). No complaints like muscle pain or discomfort and difficulty in function occurred after the increase in OVD. After re-establishing the vertical dimension, maxillary and mandibular anterior and posterior teeth that were restored with resin-based composite restorations (Filtek Z250; 3M ESPE AG Dental Products, D-82229 Seefeld, Germany) were prepared for metal-ceramic restorations, and laboratory-processed provisional restorations (Luxatemp, DMG 22547 Hamburg, Germany) were fabricated at the new OVD and cemented with zinc-oxide eugenol (Temp-Bond; Kerr Corp). A full contoured wax-up on the mounted casts made it possible to evaluate tooth dimensions to achieve optimal esthetics. Definitive impressions of the prepared maxillary and mandibular teeth were obtained using polysiloxane impression material (Elite HD+, Zhermack 45021, Rouigo, Italy). Working casts were generated from Type IV die stone and mounted into the articulator using interocclusal records. Shade determination (Vita 3D; VITA Zahnfabrik, Bad Sackingen, Germany) was made. Metal-ceramic fixed partial dentures (Wiron 99; Bego,Bremen, Germany/Vitadur Alpha; VITA Zahnfabrik, Bad Sackingen, Germany) were fabricated as full mouth restorations for both maxillary and mandibular arches because of splinting all teeth, evaluated intra-orally, and adjusted (, , , and ). Because of the diurnal and nocturnal bruxism history of the patient, teeth restored with crowns could be subject to move. The adjacent crowns were splinted to give more support to individual teeth. On the other hand, the patient was clearly informed of the importance of oral hygiene by giving more attention using proximal brushes and dental floss. For lateral movements group disclusion achieved so that masticatory loads would be uniformly distributed on the reconstructed teeth. The full-mouth restorations were cemented with glass-ionomer cement (Meron, Voco, Cuxhaven, 274457, Germany). Also, for bruxism history a laboratory-processed maxillary stabilization splint prescribed for nighttime use was fabricated, adjusted and placed (Vertex Orthoplast, Vertex Dental, Zeist, The Netherland) . The patient was followed up for 2 years without any complaints. The patient’ s esthetic and functional expectations were also satisfied.