A 59-year-old man came to our observation for clinical and therapeutic evaluation after a diagnosis of HH carried out in another hospital 2 years before. Ferritin was reported close to 7000 ng/ml at that time. First-level genetic test had revealed a homozygous HFE p.Cys282Tyr (C282Y) mutation compatible with the diagnosis of HFE-related HH, thus phlebotomy treatment was started. The patient had a history of metabolic syndrome, type-2 diabetes on metformin treatment, autoimmune hypothyroidism on levothyroxine therapy and severe chondrocalcinosis. A previous brain-MRI performed for recurrent headache had shown the presence of bilateral T2*GRE hypointensities within globus pallidus (GP), substantia nigra, dentate nucleus and left pulvinar that were considered expression of cerebral siderosis. No neurological symptoms or family history of neurological disease were reported. Blood tests performed at our Centre showed normal complete blood count (CBC) results except for a slightly reduced platelet count (144,000/mm3, normal range (n.r.) 150–450,000/mm3); biochemical evaluation confirmed altered serum iron parameters (ferritin 4728 ng/ml, n.r. 25–300 ng/ml; serum iron 282 μg/dl n.r. 50–150 μg/dl; transferrin 223 mg/dl, n.r. 200–360 mg/dl; and transferrin saturation 90%); aminotransferases were slightly elevated (AST 55 U/L, ALT 103 U/L; n.r. 1–31 U/l), with normal serum bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, gamma glutamyl transferase; inflammatory markers and biochemical parameters of active haemolysis (LDH, haptoglobin and bilirubin) were negative; renal function and vitamin D-parathyroid hormone (PTH) axis were normal, while hypothyroidism was well compensated by hormone replacement therapy; serological screening for HAV, HBV and HCV was negative, and serum alfa1- antitrypsin level was normal. Further investigations showed: ceruloplasmin 21 mg/dl (n.r. 20–60 mg/dl) with normal plasmatic and 24-h urine copper, absence of Keyser-Fleischer ring and pigmentary retinopathy at ophthalmologic examination, and normal peripheral blood smear. Physical examination revealed an overweight Caucasian male (BMI, body mass index: 27) with mild hepatomegaly. Abdominal ultrasound and transient elastography (Fibroscan®) revealed diffuse liver steatosis and severe fibrosis (Metavir F4). Liver MRI showed severe hepatic siderosis, while biopsy confirmed the presence of severe hepatocellular iron accumulation and advanced fibrosis associated with features of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis . Heart MRI documented a mild iron overload. Based on the severity of clinical phenotype, the frequency of venesections was intensified, and analysis of other HH-associated genes (TFR2, SLC40A1, HJV and HAMP) was performed with negative results. Neurological examination revealed only mild right-sided hypokinetic-rigid syndrome. A brain computed tomography (CT) was performed to better characterize the suspected and unexplained brain iron accumulation. In the CT images, the hypointensity areas emerged at brain-MRI were partly hyperdense and compatible with bilateral brain calcifications . It is worth noting that even if the MRI hypointensity and CT hyperdensity involved the same brain areas, there was a slightly different pattern of signal distribution particularly in cerebellar and pallidal regions. In more detail, the dentate nuclei presented a bilateral hypointensity on T2*GRE and T2-weigthed images with only a slightly hyperdense peripheral rim on the CT scan, possibly related to “blooming” of iron deposits. On the contrary, the peridentate white matter is characterized by the absence of T2 or T2*GRE hypointensity but the presence of symmetrical bilateral hyperdensity compatible with calcification. The GP was bilaterally characterized by a central hypointensity with blooming effect on T2*GRE images, possibly related to iron accumulation. Instead, the CT scan showed an hyperdense peripheral rim within the lateral part of the external GP and the medial part of the internal GP with a relative sparing of the central portion of the GP. In dentate nuclei as well as in GP and pulvinar, hypointensity was more evident in T2*GRE images than in T2 images. Infectious, traumatic, or mitochondrial diseases, and hypoparathyroidism or pseudo-hypoparathyroidism were excluded on the basis of patient’s medical history and full clinical/biochemical examination, including endocrine tests. Also, the sequencing of primary familial brain calcification-associated genes (SCL20A2, PDGFB, PDGFRB, XPR1, MYORG) and NBIA genes (PANK2, PLA2G6, WDR45, FTL, C19ORF12, FA2H, COASY, CP, DCAF17, ATP13A2, FTH1, MECR, GLB1, PPCS, PPCDC, REPS1, ATP7B) was negative.