A 55-year-old Japanese female was hospitalized with right hypochondrial pain. Laboratory tests showed elevated hepatobiliary enzymes and C-reactive protein. Serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were 0.8 ng/ml and 3.2 U/ml, respectively. Enhanced computed tomography (eCT) imaging revealed a 49 × 47 mm mass at the neck of the gallbladder, with suspected invasion of the liver and right hepatic artery . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) demonstrated displacement of the upper bile duct. Intraductal ultrasonography (IDUS) showed irregular wall thickening and disappearance of the wall structure in bile ducts from the B4 branch to distal B2 and B3. Percutaneous transhepatic biliary biopsy revealed a poorly differentiated carcinoma . The patient was diagnosed with unresectable gallbladder cancer [GBC (T4N0M0 stage IVA)]. Cisplatin plus gemcitabine chemotherapy was initiated. After six courses of chemotherapy without severe adverse events, a CT examination showed that the mass in the neck of the gallbladder had shrunk to 30 mm, ERCP showed improvement of the hilar duct stenosis , and IDUS revealed localized wall thickening in the extra pancreatic ducts, starting at the branch of the left and right hepatic ducts. A biopsy of the bile duct mucosa showed no malignant cells in the branch of the left and right hepatic ducts, the left hepatic duct, or the intrapancreatic ducts . The patient was scheduled for conversion surgery. The right hepatic artery was in close proximity to the tumor and involvement was suspected; the left hepatic artery was distant from the tumor. In addition, segment 4a was included in the resection range for gallbladder bed resection. Right and segment 4a liver resection and extrahepatic bile duct resection was scheduled. The residual liver capacity was 40% according to the planned surgical procedure. The indocyanine green (ICG) 15-minute value was 4.6% and the plasma clearance rate of ICG (ICGK) was 0.162. The future liver remnant ICGK (ICGK-F) was 0.065, which met the standard hepatectomy range at our hospital, and the ICGK-F was > 0.05; thus, surgery was performed. We performed a right liver/S4a resection, extrahepatic duct resection, and cholangiojejunostomy. The surgical findings showed no retention of ascites, peritoneal dissemination, or liver metastases. After Kocher maneuver, #16 lymph node was not swelling and did not dissect. The # 13a lymph node was dissected from the posterior surface of the pancreatic head. The anterior surface of the hepatoduodenal ligament was dissected, and the # 8 lymph node was dissected. The common bile duct was dissected at the upper edge of the duodenum and the pancreatic stump was sutured. The stump of the common bile duct was examined by immediate frozen-section analysis, and no malignant cells were found. The right hepatic artery, which ran on the dorsal side of the bile duct, was fixed by the bile duct and could not be dissected. The right hepatic artery was ligated and dissected at the bifurcation. The #12b and 12p lymph nodes were dissected, and the right branch of the portal vein was ligated and dissected at the bifurcation of the left and right portal veins. After right and S4a liver dissection was performed, the left bile duct and jejunum were anastomosed. The histopathologic diagnosis showed that the tumor cells had shrunk to 2 × 1 mm, and that R0 resection of the T2aN0M0 stage II tumor was successful. Residual tumor cells were found in a small part of the gallbladder neck and gallbladder wall at the hilum of the liver. The perimeter of the tumor cells was highly fibrotic, obscuring the layered structure of the gallbladder wall, gallbladder bed, and extrahepatic bile duct. We reasoned that the change was due to the disappearance of tumor cells associated with chemotherapy. Most of the gallbladder wall was highly fibrotic, with no residual tumor cells. No tumor cells were found in the mucosal epithelium of the cystic duct and intrahepatic extrahepatic bile duct. A high degree of fibrosis was observed near the right hepatic artery in the hilar region, but no infiltration of tumor cells was observed. No exposure of tumor cells was observed at the left intrahepatic bile duct stump .
The patient was discharged from the hospital and there was no evidence of recurrence 12 months after surgery.