A 19-year-old male patient presented to the emergency department with a sudden loss of consciousness following a 3-week history of persistent vomiting and diarrhea. This patient had no significant medical history or comorbidities but faced social issues as an international student from China without health insurance. Upon admission, the patient was severely obese (height, 176 cm; body weight, 110 kg; body mass index, 35.5 kg/m2) and had a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 3 (eye-opening, 1; verbal response, 1; motor response, 1). His blood pressure was undetectable, pulse rate was 130 beats/min, and oxygen saturation was 96% on a 15 L/min reservoir mask. He was promptly intubated in the emergency department. Laboratory findings indicated liver dysfunction and hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin 2.8 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 296 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase 138 IU/L), renal impairment (blood urea nitrogen 55.6 mg/dL, creatinine 2.80 mg/dL), an elevated inflammatory response (C-reactive protein [CRP] 19.94 mg/dL, white cell count 30.98 × 10^3/μL), and coagulopathy (prothrombin time international normalized ratio 1.60, activated partial thromboplastin time 42 s, d-dimer 80.6 μg/mL). The hemoglobin level (12.0 g/dL) and platelet counts (22.5 × 10^4/μL) were within relatively normal ranges. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed an enlarged appendix, multiple bilobular ring-enhanced lesions in the liver, and a low-density area in the portal vein extending from the superior mesenteric vein . Despite aggressive rehydration and noradrenaline administration (0.18 μg/kg/min) that improved the circulatory failure, the patient's hypoxemia, attributable to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), worsened. Consequently, venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was initiated in the emergency department. The patient was diagnosed with severe appendicitis, multiple liver abscesses, and portal vein thrombosis, all of which were complicated by septic shock and multiple organ failure. After intubation and mechanical ventilation, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit, where antibiotic therapy with meropenem (MEPM) and anticoagulant therapy with heparin was initiated.
On day 6, the patient's respiratory condition improved sufficiently to facilitate weaning from the ECMO. However, by day 10, his CRP levels started rising again, and a subsequent CT scan demonstrated an intra-abdominal abscess extending from the inferior surface of the liver to Douglas's pouch, necessitating abdominal paracentesis. . Cultures of both the ascitic fluid and blood revealed Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Bacteroides fragilis (B. fragilis). The strains were identified as carbapenemase (cfiA) gene-positive using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI–TOF) mass spectrometry for protein spectrum analysis. They displayed resistance to a wide range of antimicrobials, including meropenem. Because the B. fragilis was susceptible to metronidazole (MNZ), this drug was added to the treatment regimen .
Despite ongoing antimicrobial therapy and drainage procedures, laboratory data revealed persistently elevated CRP levels . Therefore, on day 13, open abdominal cavity irrigation was performed for infection control. During laparotomy, the tissue was found to be extremely hemorrhagic owing to the continuation of the anticoagulant combined with the development of collateral blood vessels caused by portal vein thrombosis. After opening the intra-abdominal abscess, three drainage tubes were inserted into the bilateral paracolic gutters and Douglas's pouch . The operation lasted 69 min with an intraoperative blood loss of 2711 mL, necessitating the transfusion of 8 units of fresh frozen plasma. Severe intestinal edema prevented wound closure, and the patient returned to the intensive care unit for OAM. Heparin administration was resumed on the following day. Intra-abdominal washout was performed every 5 days, and the patient's general condition gradually improved. Treating multidrug-resistant B. fragilis and E. coli involved using MNZ as the primary drug, supplemented with beta-lactamase inhibitors. However, prolonged antibiotic use led to hepatic dysfunction, but a change in the MNZ dose was not feasible. Accordingly, treatment was conducted using a strategy of suitably adjusting and co-administering beta-lactamase inhibitors. In the weekly follow-up blood cultures, a consistent absence of microbial growth was confirmed beginning from the third week of therapy. On day 34, the wound was closed using the anterior rectus abdominis sheath turnover technique with a relief incision. Treatment was successful, and the patient was discharged on day 81. A CT scan upon discharge confirmed the resolution of the intra-abdominal abscess, liver abscesses, and portal vein thrombus .