A 72-year-old male smoker with no history of major illness presented with a ten-day history of remittent fever. He was previously admitted to a primary hospital in another district from which he was discharged with home therapy consisting of ceftriaxone 1 g qd and steroids. The home therapy did not improve his condition and, for this reason, on 4 August 2018, he was admitted to our hospital. On admission, the patient’s general condition appeared poor with confusion and drowsiness, he was also feverish and had generalized edema; the first assessment revealed a temperature of 38.7°, blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, a blood oxygen saturation level of 80% with rapid, frequent and superficial breathing using accessory muscles (28 breaths per minute), and an arrhythmia with a heart rate of 90 beats per minute. qSOFA score was 3/3. Chest CT revealed ground-glass pneumonia with massive pleural effusion. Petechial exanthema was present diffusely, including on the palms and soles, and a very little eschar surrounded by a violaceous halo was noted on the dorsum of the right foot . Awaiting the results of blood cultures, broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy with meropenem 1 g q8h, ciprofloxacin 400 mg q12h, and doxycycline 100 mg q12h was initiated. Doxycycline was included in the therapy because of the presence of petechial rash and fever, making us consider a diagnosis of rickettsiosis. This suspicion was confirmed by the positivity of polymerase chain reaction on whole blood for R. conorii subsp. israelensis. Rickettsial DNA was detected from full blood specimens with a highly sensitive real-time PCR assay for the detection of spotted fever and typhus group rickettsiae using previously published primers and the probe to the Rickettsia rickettsii citrate synthase gene, gltA . The CSisr-P probe (5′-FAM-TGT AAT AGC AAG AAT CGT AGG CTG GAT G-TAMRA-3′) was specifically designed from a highly conserved region of the citrate synthase gene to detect R. conorii subsp. israelensis in addition to SFG rickettsiae. To improve alveolar ventilation a thoracentesis was performed with clinical improvement. The fluid was sent to the laboratory for microbiological analysis and R. conorii subsp. israelensis was again identified with the PCR technique. Tests to detect specific antibodies to influenza A and B viruses, parainfluenza viruses, adenoviruses, respiratory syncytial virus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia spp., and Legionella pneumophila were all negative. On day 4, the clinical condition worsened. Blood exams showed the following results: fibrinogen (83 mg/dl), antithrombin III (39%), prolonged aPTT (37 s) and anemia (Hb 7.8 g/dl). These values and the infective trigger appeared suggestive of secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (sHLH) . In fact, 4 out of 8 diagnostic criteria were present (fever, cytopenia of 2 or more cellular lineages in peripheral blood, fibrinogenemia lower than 150 mg/dl, ferritinemia higher than 500 ng/dl). Notwithstanding, the patient did not consent for bone marrow biopsy. Hence, the suspicion led us to start empirical treatment with prednisone (25 mg twice a day); gradual improvement of general condition and hematic values was observed in the following days. After seven days, the antibiotic therapy was discontinued and on the 10th day from hospital admission the patient was discharged.