Our patient is a 19-year-old male who presented in 2010 with left arm weakness secondary to a left C4-C6 paravertebral mass with bony involvement of C6 and T1. There were no additional sites of disease on a chest CT and a whole body 18F-FDG PET-CT scan. A CT-guided core biopsy showed a tumour composed of uniform small round cells with hyperchromatic round nuclei and scant cytoplasm . The neoplastic cells showed positive staining in immunostains for CD99 (membranous; Fig. ) and FLI-1 (nuclear) and were negative in immunostains for desmin, myogenin and S-100. Intracytoplasmic glycogen was demonstrated in a PAS stain. The combined morphological and immunophenotypic features were consistent with EWS (the presence of EWSR1 rearrangement was confirmed on a subsequent biopsy). The patient received chemotherapy (vincristine/doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide/etoposide) and local intensity modulated radiation therapy (55Gy/25#) to his mid-cervical spine. At the end of treatment, there was no clinical or radiological evidence of residual or recurrent disease.
Fifteen months after diagnosis, surveillance imaging identified bony and pulmonary metastatic disease. Biopsy of a right humeral lesion was morphologically consistent with recurrent EWS and molecular testing for the EWSR1 rearrangement was positive. Over the next 4 years, he was treated with multiple chemotherapy regimens including irinotecan/temozolamide, high-dose ifosfamide, gemcitabine/docetaxel, a hedgehog signalling pathway inhibitor (LDE225) and carboplatin/etoposide. He had palliative radiotherapy to multiple bony sites including the right humerus, left ilium, thoracic and lumbar spine and bilateral whole lung radiation with additional stereotactic therapy to the largest pulmonary metastases. Over this period, there were short-lived responses and periods of stable disease but a clinical or radiological second remission was not achieved.
In May 2015, just over 5 years from diagnosis, restaging whole body 18F-FDG PET-CT demonstrated multiple pulmonary metastases and increased FDG uptake at T11, T12 and the left ischium . The peak standardised uptake value (SUV) in the T12 lesion was 14.0. Chest CT confirmed 43 nodules of varying sizes throughout both lung fields and thoracolumbar spine MR imaging demonstrated bony metastatic disease at T12, L1, L2, L4 and L5 with associated soft tissue mass at T12/L1 . He complained of low back pain but was otherwise asymptomatic with ECOG performance score of 0.
The patient commenced treatment with pembrolizumab (Keytruda, MSD) at 2 mg/kg intravenously every 3 weeks. The first cycle was complicated by fever without an identified source but there were no other immune-related adverse events. Restaging after cycle 3 showed a very good response to therapy with complete resolution of all but 4 of the pulmonary metastases. The largest nodule in the left lower lobe had reduced in diameter from 28 to 14 mm and peak SUV was 1.2 compared to 4.3 prior to treatment . The soft tissue component of the lesion at T12 had decreased in size and had a reduction in SUV from 14 to 6.1 . In addition, there was resolution of the soft tissue component anteriorly at L1, reduction in size of the lesion at L2 and better definition of the lesions at L4 and L5 . Clinically, his back pain resolved. After a further 6 cycles of pembrolizumab, progress imaging confirmed ongoing response to therapy, with complete resolution of active pulmonary metastases, a reduction in SUV at T12 from 6.1 to 4 and stable appearance on MR imaging (not shown). Treatment was ceased after a total of 9 cycles and at the most recent review 6 months since the last dose the clinical and radiological response has been sustained.
PD-L1 expression has been evaluated in a variety of sarcomas. The series reported by Raj et al. identified that 39 % of Ewing sarcomas expressed PD-L1 compared with 36 % of osteosarcomas and 97 % of leiomyosarcomas . Kozak et al. retrospectively analysed 36 tumour samples of patients with synovial sarcoma and found PD-L1 expression in 83 %, with expression associated with poorer outcomes . Kim et al. reported a similar association in a study of soft tissue sarcomas . Of note, there is evidence across most, but not all, tumour types of a relationship between PD-L1 expression and response rates to immune checkpoint blockade, however a lack of PD-L1 expression does not preclude a response to PD-1 inhibition [, –]. Despite the known expression of PD-L1 in sarcoma, the only report of immune checkpoint blockade is a small pilot study by Maki et al. of the CTLA-4 inhibitor ipilimumab in advanced synovial sarcoma, in which no objective clinical responses were seen . Another rationale for the possible utility of PD-1 blockade in EWS is the presence of genomic instability [, ]. Response to PD-1 blockade in colorectal cancer has been correlated with MMR deficiency; however, there are conflicting reports of MMR status and response in gastric cancer [, , ].
The explanation for the immune therapy response in our patient is unclear. Unfortunately, archival tissue was unavailable and hence we were unable to correlate response with PD-L1 expression (or lack of) in this case. His clinical course was relatively indolent for metastatic EWS and he had received extensive prior radiotherapy, which may have heightened the immune response. There is emerging evidence to suggest a role for radiotherapy in enhancing responses to immune therapy through a variety of mechanisms [, ].