A 55-year-old man who suffered from hematochezia for 3 mo consulted our hospital in July 2016 .
The pathological diagnosis following biopsy showed “moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the sigmoid colon” . Abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed mesenteric lymph node metastasis and multiple low-density lesions in the liver. The capecitabine plus oxaliplatin (XELOX) scheme was recommended for the neoadjuvant therapy regimen for three cycles. However, even with therapy, the evaluation was progressive disease (PD) given that lymph node and liver lesions continued to grow; thus, surgery was excluded.
From February 2 to October 14, 2017, folinic acid, fluorouracil, and irinotecan (FOLFIRI) plus bevacizumab was implemented for 12 cycles, and the classification was stable disease (SD); bevacizumab plus S-1 was offered as the maintenance treatment. On March 30, 2018, CT indicted disease progression. Due to intestinal obstruction, the patient underwent laparoscopic intestinal adhesion lysis and transverse colostomy on May 30, 2018.
The patient had no medical history of past illness.
The patient neither smoke tobacco nor consume alcohol. There was no notable family medical history, such as cancer.
The height and weight of the patient were 160 cm and 56.8 kg, respectively. On July 15, 2018, the performance status (PS) was 1 for this patient, with a body temperature of 36.3 °C, pulse rate of 86 beats/min, and blood pressure of 152/96 mmHg.
In July 2016, immunohistochemistry (IHC) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were performed to guide therapy at diagnosis. Kirsten rat sarcoma 2 viral oncogene homolog (KRAS), neuroblastoma RAS Viral Oncogene Homolog (NRAS), and v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) were wild-type, and mismatch repair proteins were proficient. On May 29, 2018, a peripheral blood sample was assessed for circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) using next-generation sequencing (NGS) with an array of 189 genes to determine whether ras-rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog/v-raf-murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (RAS/RAF) status changed during the past 2 years and EGFR monoclonal antibody could be used as the third-line therapy. The test results showed that KRAS, NRAS, and BRAF were still wild-type. Interestingly, high-level amplification of HER2 (absolute copy number: 63.67) was identified at the same time, which was reported as the resistance mechanism of anti-EGFR therapy previously[-]. Also, adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and tumor protein 53 (TP53) alterations were detected, with a mutant allele frequency (MAF) of 7.3% and 9.3%, respectively. IHC for HER2 showed a score of 3+ based on the tumor tissue biopsy obtained on July 22, 2016 , while fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) showed high-level amplification of HER2 ; thus, the two tests confirmed the results of ctDNA.
On March 30, 2018, CT showed that most of the liver lesions were increased compared to January 17, 2018, while new, multiple lesions were detected in the lung. Thus, the classification was PD, and the patient failed to respond to two lines of therapy.