A 20-year-old female came to our hospital because of repeated, gradually progressing severe abdominal distension over ten years. No obvious abdominal pain, diarrhoea, or fever occurred. The patient frequently visited the local hospital and was diagnosed with BCS with no abdominal distension relief. She denied any family history of genetic disease, and the marriage of her parents was not consanguineous. She had normal intelligence and demonstrated moderate academic performance.
Physical examination showed that the liver was enlarged 15 cm below the ribs, with a medium texture and no tenderness. The spleen was 20 cm, 20 cm, and -1 cm in size at the lines of I, II, and III, respectively, with medium texture and no tenderness. There were no exposed abdominal veins and no oedema in the lower limbs. Clinical laboratory testing results were as follows: leukocytes, 2.17 × 10^9/L; red blood cells, 3.53 × 10^12/L; platelets, 80 × 10^9/L; haemoglobin, 73 g/L; mean red blood cell volume, 72 fl; mean cell haemoglobin, 20.7 pg; aspartate-aminotransferase, 44 U/L; alanine-aminotransferase, 37 U/L; gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, 19 U/L; alkaline phosphatase, 119 U/L; total bilirubin, 43.0 µmol/L; indirect bilirubin, 36.5 µmol/L; triglycerides, 2.53 mmol/L; high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, 0.35 mmol/L; and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, 3.74 mmol/L. Abdominal ultrasonography with venous Doppler revealed rapid blood flow at the confluence of the hepatic vein and inferior vena cava. The inner diameters of the left, middle, and right hepatic veins joining the inferior vena cava were 3.5 mm, 2.1 mm, and 3.1 mm, respectively . The upper abdominal enhanced CT scan showed hepatosplenomegaly, and thinner hepatic veins merged into the inferior vena cava . Bone marrow examination confirmed the presence of sea-blue histiocytes . Based on the morphological findings, liver biopsy and gene sequencing were performed. Immunohistochemical staining revealed foamy cytoplasm in the hepatocytes surrounded by a large number of Kupffer cells. Periodic acid-Schiff staining further confirmed this finding . Pulmonary CT showed that the pulmonary interlobular septum was thickened in a grid shape, which was consistent with interstitial manifestations . Sanger sequencing of the SMPD1 gene revealed two heterozygous missense mutations, c.1805G > A (p.Arg602His) in exon 6 and c.829 T > C (p.Trp277Arg) in exon 2 . A parental study demonstrated allele segregation. p.Arg602His was of maternal origin, and p.Trp277Arg was of paternal origin .
Symptomatic therapies with liver function protection, diuresis, and iron supplementation were followed after admission. Warfarin was used for anticoagulant therapy of BCS, and the dose was adjusted according to the INR value. The patient was discharged after the abdominal distension and other symptoms were relieved. We have followed up with this patient thus far. The patient is now 24 years old.