A 62-year-old man was admitted to the neurology department complaining of an inability to see in the right eye for 2 days along with acute headache. He had a history of atrial fibrillation in rheumatic heart disease and suffered an ischaemic stroke in the left frontotemporal parietal lobe 4 years ago. The right limb of the patient was left with sequelae of mild paralysis, and he gradually developed mild vascular dementia; however, he could communicate with family members normally in daily life. He suffered symptomatic epilepsy due to ischaemic stroke 2 years ago, and effective antiepileptic drugs (500 mg levetiracetam bid and 500 mg valproic acid bid) were prescribed. At the first medical evaluation, the arterial pressure was 170/100 mmHg, and arterial blood lactic acid was 3.3 mmol/L. Liver function, renal function, electrolytes, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, procalcitonin, cerebrospinal fluid examination, syphilis antibody and HIV testing were normal. Neurological examination revealed a cognitive decline wherein the patient could not accurately answer questions or simply reply with short sentences or words. Ophthalmological examination found that when the patient’s eyes were unshielded, he needed to walk with help to distinguish orientations. Neither eye of the patient could read a visual chart clearly, but he could grasp a pen when shaken in front of both eyes, suggesting macular avoidance or partial visual field avoidance. The patient suffered sudden visual impairment, acute headache and progressive dementia, which suggested that the lesion may be located in the cerebral cortex. An MRI was then performed, which showed marked diffuse cortical hyperintensities in the left temporoparietal and occipital lobes on T2 and diffusion-weighted images. The apparent diffusion coefficient map demonstrated decreased signal intensity in the area of interest compared with the control region. Thus, the lesion was identified, while the differential diagnosis was relatively difficult. The patient had rheumatic heart disease and atrial fibrillation, which were risk factors for arterial cerebral infarction. However, CT angiography did not find corresponding vascular occlusion, and the lesion was not consistent with the vascular distribution. Thus, arterial cerebral infarction was excluded. The patient did not have drug or poison contact. Liver function, kidney function and plasma glucose were normal. Metabolism or toxic encephalopathy was less possible. Reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy syndrome (RPLS) was another possible diagnosis, as it could present with similar symptoms and the elevated blood pressure obtained at admission. However, the lesion was located on one side of the cortex, and the focus was a cytotoxic brain oedema. RPLS was less likely because its focus is often vasogenic oedema and symmetric. The lesion was located in the cortex of the left temporoparietal occipital lobes, and the lactate level was increased at admission. MELAS could not be completely ruled out. However, the patient did not have exercise intolerance in the past and had a rather older age. We found that the lactic acid level was normal. These clinical data did not suggest a diagnosis of MELAS. One day after hospitalization, the patient suffered limb twitches of the right lower limb lasting for approximately 1 min., and his wife told us that the patient was more taciturn than he had been in the past week, which she ignored at the beginning. Consequently, continuous EEG monitoring was performed, which found continuous sharp wave discharges, especially in the regions of the left temporal, parietal and occipital lobes. The patient had a history of epilepsy, acute headache, and visual and cognitive impairment. MRI found cytotoxic brain oedema in the left temporoparietal and occipital lobes, and EEG found sharp waves discharges mainly in the regions of the left central, parietal and occipital lobes. Taken together, these findings were most consistent with NCSE. Continuous intravenous administration of diazepam and oral addition of the antiepileptic drug topiramate (50 mg bid) were prescribed. After that, the patient recovered quickly, and follow-up EEG monitoring was normal. A follow-up MRI was performed 11 days later, which showed that the abnormal signal of the left parietooccipital occipital lobes was markedly attenuated . We concluded that the abnormal and reversible imaging on the MRI was TPMA.