A 66-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for marked hemorrhage in her ileal conduit stoma . She had previously received many blood transfusions. Eight years before this admission, she had been diagnosed with rectal cancer that had invaded her small intestine, uterus and urinary bladder, and had metastasized to her liver. She underwent a colostomy and intestinal bypass surgery to improve her ileus. After this surgery, she received nine sessions of oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy (mFOLFOX6) plus bevacizumab. We then performed a low anterior resection of her rectum, combined with resections of her uterus, both ovaries, fallopian tubes, and urinary bladder, and a further urinary diversion by ileal conduit. After this second surgery, she underwent eight cycles of mFOLFOX6 plus bevacizumab. We then performed a partial liver resection, and closure of the colostomy, which was followed by 6 months of adjuvant chemotherapy with capecitabine, after which she had no recurrence for 8 years. However, in the last 4 years, she had been admitted several times for bleeding from her ileal conduit stoma.
On her last admission, she had a Child–Pugh score of 8 (Child–Pugh class B) and her laboratory test results included hemoglobin: 5.6 g/dL, albumin: 2.4 g/dL, platelets: 106,000/μL, and prothrombin time: 82%. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed ileal conduit stomal varices (ICSVs) had developed as a part of the portosystemic shunt, which were supplied from the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) and drained by the numerous cutaneous veins connected to the left femoral vein . BRTO was not appropriate because of difficulties of cannulating numerous cutaneous veins; and percutaneous transhepatic catheterization has the risks linked to puncturing the portal veins. Therefore, we selected hybrid surgery with intraoperative obliteration for the ICSV.
Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a lithotomy position. The skin was incised on the upper and lower abdomen. Adhesions around her small intestine and ileal conduit stoma were very severe. After dissecting a dense peritoneal adhesion, we detected one of the two SMV branches in the ileal conduit mesentery, which were the ICSVs’ feeding veins. We tried to measure the portal vein pressure, but the adhesion in the abdominal cavity was severe and it is difficult to cannulate the SMV to the portal vein. We introduced a 4-Fr sheath (Create Medic, Tokyo, Japan) into the vessel . As angiography did not initially show sufficient opacification of the stomal varices, we blocked the blood flow of the feeding vein using a proximally placed vascular clip on the SMV. Angiography then showed sufficient opacification of the stomal varices, including the two SMV feeding veins and the numerous cutaneous drainage veins . While blocking the afferent blood flow to the stomal varices, we injected a 5% solution of ethanolamine oleate with iopamidol in an anterograde manner, with sufficiently opacified stomal varices and their feeding and drainage veins; the two SMV branches were then ligated. The lesion was treated with 15 mL of 5% solution of ethanolamine oleate with iopamidol.
Seven days after the hybrid surgery, CT showed that the ICSV had disappeared, and the feeding and drainage veins were occluded , but partial portal vein thrombosis had developed in the SMV. We administered anticoagulation therapy with antithrombin-III concentrates and danaparoid sodium [, ], and that portal vein thrombosis disappeared by 14 days after the surgery. She was then discharged from our hospital. She has had no bleeding from her ileal conduit stoma, and no worsening of her portal thrombosis or liver function for 1 year after the hybrid surgery.