A 42-year-old female patient, previously healthy, was referred to our hospital because of bradycardia complicated with sick sinus syndrome and severe mental disorders. Her chief complaint was “general edema with fatigue for 4 years, aggravation with mental disorder and blackness for 1 month”. The patient developed generalized edema and discomfort 4 years ago, with fatigue and poor spirit, with anorexia, abdominal distension, constipation, with chills, with memory loss, with swelling of the hands and feet, with chest palpitations. One month prior to admission to our hospital, the patient developed black haze, syncope, and serious mental problems, such as auditory hallucinations, persecution delusions, and violent behavior. And she was admitted to the local psychiatric hospital, and considered the acute transient mental disorder: schizophrenia. In the hospital, electrocardiography (ECG) showed severe sinus bradycardia. And then she was referred to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment.
On physical examination, her height, body weight, and body mass index (BMI) were 155.5 cm, 58.4 kg, and 24.1 kg/m2, respectively. The patient had a cold expression, slow response, and rough skin. The heartbeat was 49 beats per minute and the heart rhythm was irregular. The heart sound was weak. There was no pathological murmur in each valve area. The face and limbs were slightly swollen. On psychiatric examination, the patient’s orientation was normal and the answer was to the point. She has auditory hallucinations, relationship delusions, exaggerated delusions, and persecution delusions. No comprehensive perception barrier was introduced. The patient was emotionally indifferent, lacked interest in surroundings. Her intelligence and calculation abilities were normal.
Admitted electrocardiography (ECG) showed significant sinus bradycardia and sinoatrial block ( and ). During hospitalization, electrocardiographic monitoring showed that the patient had frequent cardiac arrest, with a maximum time of 4.5 seconds at 3:20pm on the day of admission . On admission to our department, laboratory findings revealed severe hypothyroidism with a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of higher than 98µIU/mL (normal range: 0.49–4.91), free T4 (FT4) of 0.12 ng/dL (normal range: 0.59–1.25), and free T3 (FT3) of 1.90pg/mL (normal range: 2.01–4.81). Antithyroglobulin antibody was negative (normal range: 0–75 IU/mL), thyroid peroxidase antibody was 993.70IU/mL (normal range: 0–18 IU/mL), thyroglobulin was 6.67ng/mL (normal range: 1.1–130.8) ng/mL, TSHR simulation-blocking antibody was >40IU/L (normal range<1.75 IU/L). Biochemical examination indicated that total cholesterol was 6.59mmol/L, triglyceride was 2.06mmol/L. Routine blood examination revealed that the patient had mild anemia, with hemoglobin 96g/L. Echocardiography showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 65% with pericardial effusion and left atrial enlargement. Chest CT showed enlarged heart shadow with a small amount of pericardial effusion and pleural effusion on both sides of the chest. Her clinical features along with laboratory findings strongly suggested that the patient had severe hypothyroidism with sick sinus syndrome and mental disorders, and subsequent treatment also supported this hypothesis.
From day1 to day 3, we kept giving the patient a dose of 25 ug of levothyroxine per day, and then gradually increased to100ug daily from the 14th day after admission. For the safety of the patient, a temporary pacemaker with a ventricular pacing rate of 60 beats/min was implanted on the first day of hospitalization. One week later, fT3 increased to 2.56μIU/mL. The number of episodes of mental and behavioral disorders decreased significantly during hospitalization. Because the patient’s heart rate was stable above 60 beats/min, the temporary pacemaker was removed on the 17th day. After two weeks of treatment with levothyroxine, the patient’s psychiatric symptoms improved significantly without another mental abnormality. After three months of subsequent follow-up, the ECG examination did not reveal severe bradycardia, and the patient no longer had symptoms of fatigue, dizziness, fainting, or any mental symptoms. And re-examination of thyroid function suggested that T3, T4, and TSH were returned to normal range. The patient’s clinical course is shown in .