A 41-year-old Asian man presented to our hospital after an automobile accident in which he sustained a severe crush injury to his right foot that resulted in formation of a soft-tissue lesion in the weight-bearing heel and instep area. After the debridement, the size of a full-thickness defect at the medial and anterior aspects of the heel measured 6cm in length and 4cm in width . Because the extensive zone of injury involved the proximal instep area, an ipsilateral instep island flap was not possible. Therefore, a plan was made to cover the defect using a free instep flap.The patient was placed in the prone position, and both legs were abducted for simultaneous flap elevation and preparation of the recipient site. The operation was performed under tourniquet control for better visualization. Debridement of the defect was performed, and the stumps of the posterior tibial artery and vein, as well as the tibial nerve, were indentified and dissected proximal to the defect. In harvesting the instep flap from the contralateral foot, the skin paddle was designed 7cm in length and 5cm in width and marked in the instep area , so that it was slightly larger than the defect to allow for flap-moulding. Flap dissection began with an incision along the distal border of the flap down to the fascia, which then was incised and dissected in a plane superficial to the abductor hallucis muscle. The distal branches of the medial plantar artery were carefully indentified and divided. The intermuscular septum between the abductor hallucis muscle and the flexor digitorum brevis containing the medial plantar artery, nerve and its fasciocutaneous perforators was raised in continuity with the flap. During flap dissection, the medial plantar nerve and the cutaneous branches of the first toe were preserved, but cutaneous nerve fascicles were retained within the flap. To obtain adequate length of these fascicles, we performed interfascicular dissection of the medial plantar nerve proximally. To facilitate flap harvest, the abductor hallucis muscle was divided at its origin, exposing the neurovascular pedicle deep into it. The neurovascular pedicle of the medial plantar artery and venae comitans was dissected proximally up to the common origin of the medial and lateral plantar artery from the posterior tibial artery . The abductor hallucis muscle was reattached, and the donor site was covered with a split-thickness skin graft taken from the thigh .
So as not to sacrifice an important artery in the traumatized foot of our patient, inset of the flap into the defect was followed by end-to-side anastomosis of its medial plantar artery to the recipient posterior tibial artery. The venous anastomosis was carried out end-to-end. One artery and two venae comitans were anastomosed. An epineurial window was meticulously made on the medial surface of the tibial nerve to ensure nerve-sprouting from sensory nerve fascicles. The cutaneous nerve fascicles of the flap were then anastomosed end-to-side with the recipient tibial nerve. When the tourniquet was freed, vascularization of the flap was noted .The donor and recipient sites healed without any complications during 3 weeks of follow-up . Two months after surgery, the patient was able to wear normal footwear and had a normal gait. At his 3-month follow-up examination, the patient subjectively reported an increase in sensation at the recipient site compared to immediately after surgery. Static two-point discrimination was 20mm compared to 18mm of the contralateral normal side at the 6-month follow-up visit. At 30 months after surgery, no ulceration in the flap due to poor contact with the shoe had occurred.