A 13-year old boy born in Albany was admitted to Santa Maria Hospital of Terni on 19 July 2017 for left renal colic. He had been an orphan at the age of three years and was entrusted and adopted to his uncles in Italy at the age of four years. His clinical history indicates no relevant medical problems until the age of nine when he underwent appendectomy for acute appendicitis. In the following two years, no disease occurred, and neuromotor and psychiatric development was normal as stated by the primary care paediatrician who visited him during annual health check-ups.
Approximately one year before admission to our hospital at 12 years of age, the boy began to suffer from severe pains in the left lumbar region. These painful crises were characterized by monthly cadence, sudden onset, extremely high intensity and spontaneous remission within a few tens of minutes. To assess whether the pain depended on the kidney and the urinary tract, renal ultrasonography and renal scintigraphy with technetium-m99 mercaptoacetyltriglycerine (MAG 3) were performed. Echography revealed a grade 3 hydronephrosis (20 mm) in the left kidney. Almost all calyces were observed, and a large renal pelvis without parenchymal thinning was noted. MAG3 revealed good renal function balanced between the two kidneys with only slight reduction of the ureteropelvic drainage on the left side. A ureteropelvic junction obstruction caused by abnormal polar vessels was suspected. A JJ stent was positioned. A few weeks later, laparoscopic robotic pyeloplasty was performed. However, no polar vessels were found.
Despite this procedure, two months later, he was admitted to a second hospital for left renal colic. Here, radiographic evaluation of the abdomen revealed that the stent was correctly positioned, and renal ultrasonography revealed reduction of the known left pelvic dilation to 17 mm. The abdominal pain was attributed to the prolonged stay of the JJ stent with a supposed coexistence of vesicoureteral reflux caused by the stent itself. No complication of the pyeloplasty was noted. The JJ stent was removed, and this procedure was associated with the apparent remission of pain.
However, new hospitalization in a third hospital was necessary on July 2017 for a new episode of renal colic. During this hospitalization, a further reduction of the pelvic dilation to 10 mm was noted through renal ultrasonography and abdominal magnetic resonance. Paradoxically, repeated urinalyses never evidenced blood or increased mineral excretion suggesting urolithiasis. Tests for the evaluation of renal function were in a normal range. The boy was discharged without any therapy but with the recommendation to return within two weeks for further assessments.
One day after discharge, symptoms of renal colic occurred, and he was admitted to our hospital. Physical examination did not reveal significant abnormalities. Only some small scars were noted on the mucous side of the prepuce. When asked, the boy could not provide an answer regarding the origin of these scars and how long they were present. All the laboratory tests already performed, including urinalysis, were repeated. In the repeated analysis, no abnormal results were observed. In particular, no blood was detected, whereas Mg, Ca, P, oxalate, citrate, sulfate and ammonia excretion levels were in the normal range. Radiopaque concretions were not noted in direct abdomen radiography. Ultrasonography was negative for calculi, and the previously observed slight pielectasia in the left renal pelvis was confirmed. The bladder was distended without appreciable endoluminal images. Despite these findings, on the morning of the second day of hospitalization, the boy indicated he expelled multiple stones from the urinary tract during the night. The stones were greyish-whitish with irregular margins and seven to eight millimetres in diameter . Laboratory evaluation revealed that the examined stone material was not related to lithiasis of the urinary tract.
Thus, the patient was observed during his following urinations by the nursing staff to monitor the possible expulsion of additional stones. After three days of close observation and surveillance of each urination event, the patient did not expel any additional stones.
Despite this, he continued to claim he experienced severe pains in his left flank. Suspicions about the factitious nature of his symptoms were raised. A placebo was administered, which led to the resolution of renal colic. Consequently, a psychological and psychiatric evaluation of the boy was performed. Regarding the neuropsychiatric evaluation, several specific tests and interviews were performed. The Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children: Fourth Edition (WISC: IV) was used to assess intelligence and cognitive function. From the evaluation, a cognitive level in the standard (QI of 80) emerged with a Verbal Comprehension Index (VCI) of 108, a Perceptual Reasoning Index (PRI) of 93, a Working Memory Index (WMI) of 103, and a Processing Speed Index (PSI) of 53. To examine the presence of anxious symptoms, Multidimensional Anxiety Scale for Children (MASC) was used. Clinically significant scores were noted in areas related to Performance Fears (T80) and Physical Symptoms (T72). To analyse the presence of depressive symptoms, Children’s Depression Inventory (CDI) was used, and clinically positive scores were found in areas related to Negative Self Esteem (T75), Interpersonal Problems (T80) and Anhedonia (T71). Overall, based on tests and interviews, socio-relational difficulties and a marked tendency for isolation emerged that was associated with relevant aspects of emotional and behavioural inhibition. Therefore, individual psychotherapy intervention was recommended. The paediatric psychiatrist confirmed the diagnosis of Munchausen syndrome according to the DSM 5 diagnostic criteria for this condition .
The patient’s uncle was not convinced of the diagnosis and pretended to demonstrate the real nature of the patient’s symptoms by showing some videos in which the patient expelled the stones from his urethra during urination. However, upon closer observation of the videos, it appeared clear that the boy was actually handling his prepuce to excrete the stones. This evidence explained the scars that were found on the mucous face of his prepuce. Despite this information, the patient’s uncles continued to refuse the diagnosis. Fortunately, a therapeutic plan with psychiatrist support was later accepted with a positive outcome. No further signs and symptoms of renal colic were reported.