Here, we report the case of a 32-year-old woman affected by RRMS with disease onset at 17 years. After 10 years of therapy based on immunomodulators, the patient was treated with Fingolimod (orally 0.5 mg/day) for one and a half years preceding admission to hospital. This drug was indicated since the patient had relapsed with partial recovery, registering a worsening of 0.5 on the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) . During this second line therapy, the EDSS was 5.0 and no side effects were signalled apart from the expected peripheral lymphopenia. Moreover, neurological evaluation showed only stable paraparesis with hyperreflexia in all limbs. In this period magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan evidenced a moderate lesion load, as shown in Fig. .
However, the lymphocytic count worsened in the weeks preceding admission (<200/μl) and Fingolimod was discontinued. About one month after this, the patient experienced sub-acute reduction in ambulatory autonomy (accumulation of disability with increasing paraparesis over 10 days) and underwent an initial cycle of intravenous 6-methyl prednisolone (IVMP) in pulsed high-doses (1 g/day for 5 days). Despite this, neurological condition rapidly worsened and the patient was admitted to the Multiple Sclerosis Centre at “F. Ferrari” Casarano Hospital. On the patient’s arrival in the Neurology Department, we detected subacute severe encephalopathy and multifocal neurological signs: serious spastic tetra-paresis, dysarthria, diplopia sustained by a divergent squint in OS, bowel and bladder disturbances and ideomotor slowdown with severe confusional state, amounting to an increase of 3.5 points in EDSS (8.5 total). No lymphopenia or fever was recorded and no infectious clinical/paraclinical signs were observed. MRI of the neuraxis demonstrated contrast-enhancing lesions (CELs) in the brain with ring enhancement, enlarging T2-lesions and an overall increase in lesion load with respect to the preceding radiological evaluation. The main locations were supra- and infra-tentorial white matter, hemispheric white matter, the cortical-subcortical junction, brainstem and periventricular white matter bilaterally . Corticosteroid treatment and a neuro-rehabilitation program were rapidly instituted.
Two days after a second cycle of IVMP (as previously, 1 g/day for 5 days) administered without results, the patient was treated by SIA with echo-guided major venous access (via the right femoral vein, given the unsuccessful attempts via the right subclavian vein) in accordance with the following protocol: one session every 1 day for a total of five sessions. After 1 week, two further SIA sessions at a distance of 1 week from each other were planned. Each of which involving treatment blood volume of 2.6 litres in 2 h. Anticoagulation was obtained using intra venous sodium heparin at a first bolus dose of 250 UI, followed by 1000 UI/h for 2 h.
Unfortunately, after the fourth session, the patient had fever due to thrombophlebitis of the femoro-popliteal axis contiguous to the venous access and SIA was suspended. However, after the remission of the fever, she experienced dramatic neurological improvement with recovery of three points on the EDSS. Thus, in 3 weeks the patient reached EDSS 5.5 and maintained it using a monthly administration of Natalizumab as second-line therapy, instituted about a month after the final SIA procedure.
The post-treatment MRI, performed 1 month after SIA, evidenced total regression of CELs comparison respect to the pre-treatment MRI scan.
Moreover, MRI post-analysis detected substantial differences in total brain volume (TBV) and cerebrospinal fluid volume (CSFV). Pre-treatment values were TBV = 1246 ml and CSFV = 94 ml, while post-treatment values were TBV = 1228 ml and CSFV = 114 ml, as assessed by the FSL software Siena tool. Specifically, a reduction of 1.8 % in TBV and an increase of 17.5 % in CSFV were noted .
From the clinical point of view, the patient improved her motor performance (“Pyr” EDSS sub-score from 4 to 3), recovered complete external eye motility (“Bs” EDSS sub-score from 3 to 1), sphincter control (“Sp” EDSS sub-score from 4 to 1) and lucidity, but had significant loss of walking coordination (dynamic ataxia) as a neurological result (“Cer” EDSS sub-score from 4 to 3). At present the patient exhibits a stable EDSS of 5.5.
During SIA, no alterations in clinical chemistry were observed, apart from slight variations in fibrinogen concentration.
Similarly, albumin concentration was constant throughout the treatment and replacement was not necessary. On the other hand, we noted a strong reduction in total gamma globulin concentrations (IgG) immediately after the first SIA session. This modification was transient and self-limited to the 20 h following treatment, a sawtooth-like behavior caused by pulsed induction of antibody redistribution. Throughout the SIA, gamma globulins never reached one third of baseline concentrations and their level was monitored to avoid immunedepression.
We also measured all the other globulins, but no alterations were detected, apart from a slight but stable reduction in total M and A classes during SIA. In contrast, we found a significant decrease in C3 and C4 complement components throughout SIA.
The lymphocyte count and lymphocyte sub-populations were normal at all times during hospitalisation. Specifically, the CD4+/CD8+ ratio stayed between 0.8 and 1.2 during SIA and underwent no substantial modifications during the SIA-free period.
Clinically, on only one occasion did we register transient hypotension and, on another, a cold sensation with transient chills. The global perception of the patient was of minimal discomfort.
We treated the thrombophlebitis of the right femoro-popliteal axis with rapid removal of the catheter immediately after onset of fever, broad-spectrum antibiotics for 7 days and anticoagulants for 6 months. The latter was stopped after the restoration of patency of the femoro-popliteal axis after 8 months.