A 65-year-old woman with no family history of endocrine tumors was referred to our General Surgery Unit with a presumptive diagnosis of MEN1. For the past 18 months, she had been experiencing increasing weakness, weight loss (up to 15 kg), angular cheilitis, and glossitis. In the meantime, due to a traumatic fracture of her left humeral head, she had undergone dual energy x-ray absorptiometry and laboratory investigations as an outpatient, which were suggestive of severe osteoporosis (t-score −4 at the lumbar spine and −2.4 at the femoral neck), pHPT, hypothyroid Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, and diabetes mellitus type 2. The patient had recently developed widespread itching and painful rashes involving the perioral skin, perineum, and groin folds . In view of these multiple findings she was admitted to an Internal Medicine Unit for further assessment. Her father had died at age 84 due to myocardial infarction and her mother at age 69 after colorectal cancer surgery. A 60-year-old brother suffered from arterial hypertension, and a 32-year-old daughter was affected by severe obesity. Menarche occurred at 12 years of age and menopause at 39 years following hystero-adnexectomy for post-partum uterine rupture. There were no other remarkable data in her medical history, and she was not taking any drugs. Biochemical studies showed iron-deficiency anemia and confirmed Hashimoto’s thyroiditis with mild hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and mild pHPT (Calcium: 10.4 mg/dl [nr 8.8-10.6], 24-hour urinary calcium excretion: 358 mg/dl [nr 130–300], iPTH: 147pg/ml [nr 8–87], Creatinine: 0.74 mg/dl [nr 0.84-1.25]). On 99mTc-sestamibi scan and ultrasound (US) of the neck, an inferior right hyperfunctioning parathyroid was identified. A 9 mm nodule was also detected by US in the left thyroid lobe. Endoscopic studies revealed mild antral gastritis and diverticulosis of the colon, while no pathological findings were detected by abdominal US. Based on skin culture, the skin rashes were interpreted as candidiasis secondary to Candida albicans with bacterial superinfection. The patient was then discharged with a prescription of oral antidiabetics, iron therapy, proton pump inhibitors, bisphosphonates, levothyroxine and antifungal/antibiotic agents.
After one month, as the rash had not improved the patient was referred to the Dermatology Unit, where a generic deficiency dermatitis was diagnosed based on histological examination of a skin biopsy . Oral zinc and vitamin supplements were introduced into her diet, but no improvement was observed over the following 2 months. Since the histological features of deficiency dermatitis were also consistent with necrolytic migratory erythema (NME), abdominal enhanced multidetector-row computed tomography (MDCT) was performed, revealing a low-density 2x3 cm mass between the body and tail of the pancreas, with intense contrast enhancement, compatible with a diagnosis of neuroendocrine neoplasia . No evidence of liver or lymph node metastasis or local infiltration was found. Therefore the patient was referred to the Endocrinology Unit with suspected glucagonoma syndrome. As glucagon testing was not available, only generic neuroendocrine markers were measured, and among these, only Chromogranin A was found to be above the normal range (urinary 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid excretion: 5.8 ng/24h [nr 2–9]; serum Neuron-Specific Enolase: 12 ng/ml [nr 4.7-14.7]; serum Chromogranin A: 24.9 nmol/L [nv <4]. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (OctreoScan) with SPECT acquisition showed an area of increased uptake between the body and tail of the pancreas corresponding to the tumor revealed by previous MDCT . Phospho-calcium metabolism assessment confirmed pHPT (Calcium: 11.8 mg/dl [nr 8.8-10.6]; Phosphorus: 2.4 mg/dl [nr 2.5-4.5]; 24-hour urinary calcium excretion: 212 mg/dl [nr 100–300]; iPTH: 120 pg/ml [nr 8–87]). All pituitary hormones were in the normal range and no pituitary tumor was detected by magnetic resonance imaging.
Owing to the joint presence of PET and pPTH and the absence of a family history of single or combined endocrine tumors, a presumptive diagnosis of sporadic MEN1 syndrome was made. Genetic testing was firstly focused on the MEN-1 gene; for this purpose, exons 2–10 were PCR amplified and subsequently submitted to direct sequencing according to standard protocols , but no mutation was identified.
The patient was then referred to our General Surgery Unit where she underwent distal splenopancreatectomy. Intraoperative US ruled out tumor multifocality and showed no liver or lymph node metastasis, nor any infiltration of the splenic and superior mesenteric vessels. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged 11 days after the operation in good condition. The resected specimen contained a tumor measuring 3×2×2 cm in diameter, corresponding to the lesion identified by imaging studies . On histopathological examination the tumor appeared encapsulated, well vascularized, and composed of polygonal cells with trabecular or ribbon-like proliferation. Four mitoses per 10 HPF (High Power Field) were observed. No lymphatic, blood vessel or perineural invasions were found. Immunohistochemistry showed a 5% Ki-67 index and intense diffuse staining for non-specific neuroendocrine markers (Chromogranin A, Synaptophysin, Neuron-Specific Enolase) and for glucagon , thus confirming the preoperative suspicion of pancreatic glucagonoma.
During the following 4 months, the patient had complete resolution of her diabetic-dermatogenic syndrome and gained about 10 kg in body weight. At the 1-year follow up, abdominal US and OctreoScan with SPECT acquisition revealed no signs of recurrence, while serum Chromogranin A remained slightly elevated (4.6 nmol/l [nv < 4]). Anterior pituitary hormone levels were normal and parathyroid function showed no significant change from the previous examination. However, a new hyperfunctioning parathyroid gland, in addition to that previously identified, was found behind the trachea on 99mTc-sestamibi scan with SPECT acquisition . US examination of the neck confirmed a 9-mm nodule in the middle third of the left thyroid lobe, but detected no enlarged parathyroid glands. Fine needle aspiration cytology allowed diagnosis of the thyroid nodule as Thy 4 (i.e. suspicious for malignancy), according to the BTA classification . Based on these findings, the patient was referred to the Endocrine Surgery Unit with indications for total thyroidectomy and subtotal parathyroidectomy (PTX). The procedure was performed via Kocher cervicotomy with the help of intraoperative nerve monitoring and iPTH assay. After bilateral neck exploration, two enlarged parathyroid glands were found respectively in the right para-tracheal space and behind the esophagus , as indicated by preoperative scintiscan. At 10 minutes from the first PTX, iPTH was higher than 50% (90 pg/ml) of the initial basal value (176 pg/ml), but fell below that threshold at 20 minutes (49 pg/ml). Ten minutes after the second PTX, iPTH dropped markedly to 32 pg/ml, and therefore it was decided not to resect the remaining two left parathyroid glands, which had a normal appearance. Total thyroidectomy was performed as planned. On histopathological examination, Hürthle cell adenoma of the thyroid and diffuse/nodular parathyroid hyperplasia were diagnosed. The patient was discharged 3 days after surgery in good condition. Calcium and vitamin D supplements were necessary only for a few days. Thirty-nine and 25 months after respectively the first and the second operations, the patient is well and shows no signs or symptoms of recurrence. Since mutations of CDKN complex have been recently described in MEN1 patients with negative MEN-1 mutations, a genetic study was first carried out on the CDKN1B/p27 gene by PCR amplification and direct sequencing of exons 1 and 2 [,], but no mutation was found. Analysis of other CDKN complex genes (CDKN1A/p15, CDKN2C/p18, CDKN2B/p21) was then carried out by the same technique [,], and again no mutation was found. To exclude large deletions of the MEN-1 gene which may be missed using the conventional PCR amplification and direct sequencing approach [,], multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis was carried out using the Salsa MLPA probemix P244-B1, but no deletions of the MEN-1 gene were identified. In line with the current indications [,], no AIP gene mutation search was performed, as the patient had no evidence of pituitary tumors.
Although the MEN1 syndrome had not been confirmed by genetic analysis, based on the new 2012 guidelines for MEN1 we recently proposed to the daughter of the patient that she undergo clinical and biochemical screening, but she has refused for the time being.