A 57-year-old female patient with no notable medical history who presented with acute dyspnea. One month prior to this presentation, she was diagnosed with bladder tumor revealed by macroscopic painless hematuria. Pathological assessment confirmed the presence of urothelial carcinoma with infiltration into the muscular layer . Initially admitted to the urological surgery department for therapeutic management, the patient subsequently developed acute dyspnea and was transferred to the intensive care unit. On admission, the patient exhibited (respiratory rate of 37 cycles per minute), tachycardia (heart rate of 135 beats per minute) and normotensive blood pressure (123/67 mmHg). Peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) measured at 94%. There were no signs of congestive heart failure, and cardiopulmonary auscultation was unremarkable. Peripheral pulses were palpable and symmetrical. The physical examination of the other systems, notably the neurological, pleuropulmonary and digestive systems, was unremarkable, and there was no evidence of active hematuria observed in the urinary output. Blood gas analysis showed a mild hypocapnia. Laboratory assessment showed anemia (hemoglobin level of 9 g/dL) and thrombocytopenia (12 × 104 /µL), while liver and renal functions remained within normal ranges .
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a hyperkinetic right ventricle, mild tricuspid regurgitation and the presence of multiple hypermobile echogenic elements, varying in size, with spherical and oval shapes. These elements were observed floating within the right heart chambers and pulmonary trunk , and systolic pulmonary artery pressure was estimated at 30 mmHg. Left systolic function was preserved, and filling pressures were normal. Abdominal CT scan revealed the presence of tumoral invasion of the bladder tumor into the right internal iliac vein , and chest CT angiography showed multiple pulmonary emboli in main pulmonary arteries, with no other metastatic localizations .
On the therapeutic level, thrombolytic therapy was deferred due to the hemodynamic stability, and the patient was considered at intermediate risk level. A variety of anticoagulant regimens were employed, with the initial use of the direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC) Apixaban at a dose of 10 mg b.i.d during the initial week, followed by a reduced dose of 5 mg b.i.d. for three weeks. Subsequent echocardiographic assessments revealed no regression of pulmonary or right heart emboli, prompting a transition to an Enoxaparin regimen of 80 mg every 12 h during the next four weeks. In the absence of observable regression on ultrasound examination, Rivaroxaban was introduced at a dosage of 15 mg b.i.d. To assess the impact of these emboli on pulmonary vasculature and gauge the extent of pulmonary hypertension, a right heart catheterization was conducted with aspiration cytology, revealing the presence of clusters of large atypical cells resembling urothelial carcinoma cells.
With the confirmed diagnosis of pulmonary tumor embolism secondary to urothelial carcinoma, patient initiated palliative chemotherapy in conjunction with anticoagulation. Patient exhibited favorable clinical recovery and was transferred lately to urology department for further management of the primary tumor. However, three days after her transfer, the patient experienced acute respiratory distress requiring orotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation. Unfortunately, her condition deteriorated, and she died on the fifth day.