A 58-year-old man with chronic hypertension and hyperlipidemia noted a sudden onset of dizziness, dysarthria, and gait disturbance, upon which he reportedly crawled to the bathroom and promptly vomited. Subsequently, he noted left facial weakness. Neurological examination revealed left peripheral-type facial weakness, characterized by a loss of the forehead crease and lowering of the eyebrow . Taste, hearing, and inner ear canal sensation were unimpaired. There was no limb weakness, but the ipsilateral limbs were ataxic. Diffusion-weighted image revealed scattered infarctions distributed in the vertebrobasilar system . Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) revealed a focal occlusion of the left vertebral artery . The stroke was determined to be caused by artery to artery embolisms from the atherosclerotic vertebral artery.
The patients with stroke involving pontine area were collected from the acute stroke registry of a tertiary hospital between 2005 and 2018. With a thorough review of their medical records, patients with evident peripheral-type facial paralysis of a clear onset affecting both the upper and lower face were selected, while those with insufficient alertness or awareness to properly cooperate with the examination were excluded. Eventually, we identified 10 patients who manifested a clear acute onset of peripheral-type facial palsy attributed to pontine stroke and investigated their clinical and radiologic characteristics. Radiologic findings, laboratory investigations, such as blood profiles (Hb A1c, lipid panel), echocardiography, and Holter monitor were reviewed. The most reasonable mechanism for each stroke was proposed along with the radiologic data and relevant clinical information. Cases of stroke were categorized into one of the following three types according to the TOAST classification system: large-artery atherosclerosis (type A), small vessel occlusion (type B), or hemorrhagic (type C) . Table summarizes the clinico-radiologic characteristics of 10 cases. Figure shows their important radiologic findings, except the representative case (Case A-1) which is already described in Fig. .
Five cases of patients (Cases A-1 to A-5) with diverse clinical presentations that included audiovestibular dysfunction, gaze evoked nystagmus (GEN), and cerebellar ataxia, were classified as type A. Lesions of type A were mainly localized in the lateral pons with occasional extension into the ipsilateral medulla, cerebellar hemisphere, or occipital lobes. In contrast, three cases of patients showing symptoms and signs limited to binocular diplopia or gaze disturbance along with facial weakness were classified as type B (Cases B-1 to B-3). The responsible lesions were focally located in the paramedian pons adjacent to the floor of the fourth ventricle. The remaining two cases presented with a single focal pontine hemorrhage at a relatively young age (at 40 and 49 years, respectively) without clear documentation of chronic hypertension. Considering the atypical involvement of the dorsal pontine tegmentum, the absence of hypertension, and the unremarkable MRA findings, these cases were categorized as type C (hemorrhagic), likely due to the presence of cavernous hemangiomas.