A 46-year-old Arabic man from Gaza was hospitalized in our ward due to abdominal pain and a weight loss of 20 kg during the preceding two months. His medical history did not contribute any useful information for the diagnosis and he denied fever or night sweats. His physical examination yielded normal results except for diffuse abdominal tenderness. His body temperature was 37.5°C during the first few days of hospitalization. Laboratory tests showed marked eosinophilia (30%), hyperglobulinemia (72 mg/l), and mild renal dysfunction (creatinine 1.7 mg/dl). There was no anemia (hemoglobin 13 mg/dl), leukocytosis, disturbance of liver function or elevation of C-reactive protein levels. Blood and urine cultures tested negative as did serologic tests for hepatitis, Rickettsiae and other zoonotic infections. PPD (tuberculin) tests were negative (twice) as was an HIV test, and we ruled out parasitic infection. The results of a complete panel of laboratory examinations for autoimmune diseases came back negative, and connective tissue disease was ruled out as well. A 24-hour urine collection ruled out nephrotic syndrome, and a microscopic examination of the urine was normal. The hyperglobulinemia was found to be polyclonal so the possibility of multiple myeloma was excluded.
At this point, the combination of weight loss, eosinophilia and hyperglobulinemia raised the possibility of neoplastic disease. A computerized tomographic (CT) scan of the abdomen showed huge kidneys measuring 22 cm in length. Numerous lymph nodes were found to be enlarged in the mediastinum, inguinal area and along the aorta. A positron emission tomographic CT (PET-CT) scan showed a diffuse nodular lymphoproliferative disease above and below the diaphragm, involving giant kidneys . A kidney biopsy showed effacement of the renal structure by diffuse leukocytic infiltrate, represented mostly by elongated cells with marked artifactual changes . A polymerase chain reaction analysis of the gamma T-cell receptor rearrangement showed monoclonality of the T cells, which raised the possibility of T-cell lymphoma. Infiltration by lymphocytes stained mostly for CD3 (T lymphocytes). A biopsy of an inguinal lymph node was remarkable for obliteration of the node architecture . The paracortical area was infiltrated by cells that were positive for CD3 and CD4 . Bone marrow biopsy showed eosinophilia without lymphatic aggregates. The constellation of eosinophilia, hyperglobulinemia, generalized lymphadenopathy, giant kidneys and the findings in the lymph node biopsy were consistent with the diagnosis of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma.
The patient underwent a five-session course of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone. After this, the patient experienced considerable improvement in the function of his kidneys. Creatinine levels dropped to 1.2 mg/dl, and a repeated CT scan showed that the kidneys had reduced in length to 13 cm . After 6 months, we re-examined the patient. He already appeared to be in good health and had no health-related complaints. Repeated laboratory tests showed decreased globulin levels, and his blood count showed no elevation in the eosinophil level.