A 75-year-old gentleman with a background of prostate cancer (treated with prostatectomy 8 years ago) was referred to the Cardiology services due to presyncopal symptoms during vigorous exertion. He did not have any traditional cardiovascular risk factors, apart from his gender and age. He denied any family history of premature coronary artery disease (CAD) and was not taking any regular medications. Prior to his presentation, he was an avid cyclist and used to cycle 14 km every day without any limiting symptoms. Over time, he started noticing presyncopal symptoms predictably beyond a certain distance, which would ameliorate within minutes of resting. He vehemently denied any history of chest pain, dyspnoea, or palpitations. His cardiac and systemic examinations were normal, specifically, he had normal heart sounds with no murmurs. His jugular venous pressure was normal and there was no evidence of peripheral oedema. Given his age, his absence of chest pain and dyspnoea, and his normal cardiac examination, the initial set of investigations focused on excluding a primary arrhythmic abnormality. His electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated sinus rhythm with normal PR, QRS, and QTc intervals. His 24-h ambulatory ECG showed sinus rhythm with adequate heart rate variability (61–112 beats per minute) and no evidence of AV block.
During his next clinic appointment, his symptoms of exertional presyncope had progressed significantly and he was now limiting his level of activity to avoid presyncopal episodes. He continued to deny symptoms of chest pain or dyspnoea. He underwent a transthoracic echocardiogram, which demonstrated normal biventricular systolic function and valves (Videos , ). In view of worsening symptoms and normal initial set of investigations, an exercise stress test was organized to exclude exertion-related dysrhythmias. He was able to exercise for over 9 min of the Bruce protocol, achieving metabolic equivalents of 11.1. During his exercise stress test, he denied any chest pain or dyspnoea. He developed 1 mm upsloping inferolateral ST depression and <1 mm ST elevation in V1 during peak exercise (Stage 4 Bruce protocol) . Interestingly, a significant drop in blood pressure was observed both during peak exercise (Δ −16 mmHg) and 2 min into recovery (Δ −52 mmHg). In view of the patient’s age and the reduction in blood pressure during peak exertion, we organized a computed tomography coronary angiogram (CTCA) to exclude obstructive proximal CAD. A CTCA, as opposed to an invasive coronary angiogram, was organized as obstructive CAD was thought to be an unlikely cause of his presentation in the absence of ischaemic symptoms and equivocal exercise ECG changes. Intriguingly, the CTCA demonstrated a severe focal lesion in the proximal LAD .
This was followed up with a prompt invasive coronary angiogram, which confirmed a functionally significant proximal LAD stenosis [fractional flow reserve (FFR) 0.71] (; Videos , ). The ensuing myocardial ischaemia was felt to be the mechanism driving the patient’s exercise-induced hypotension and his symptoms of exertional presyncope. Given the proximal nature of this functionally significant stenosis, it also potentially had prognostic implications. Therefore, after discussion with the patient, his CAD was treated by percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with intravascular ultrasound guidance using a single drug-eluting stent. Post-PCI invasive physiological assessment demonstrated FFR of 0.90 (; Videos 1–3, ). This represents a desirable physiological result, as post-PCI FFR ≥0.90 leads to best outcomes post-revascularization. During his 3-month follow-up, his symptoms of exertional presyncope had abated and he was returning back to his baseline level of function. His repeat exercise stress test did not demonstrate any ischaemic ECG changes and there was no reduction in blood pressure during peak exertion.