A 62-year-old Japanese man without coexisting disease initially presented to our hospital with a persistent fever of 38.0 °C, dyspnea, and hypoxia after close contact with a coworker known to be infected with SARS-CoV-2. His oxygen saturation (SpO2) on room air at the time of hospitalization was 94%, and CT showed peripheral ground-glass opacities with interlobular septal thickening consistent with a “crazy paving pattern” strongly indicative of COVID-19 . PCR results on the basis of a pharyngeal swab taken through the nostril were consistent with pneumonia and COVID-19. Because the patient’s SpO2 decreased to 88% 25 days after hospitalization despite 3 L/minute oxygen inhalation by face mask, he was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). He was intubated and put on a ventilator (Puritan Bennett 840, Medtronic, Tokyo, Japan; pressure control ventilation [PCV] mode, fraction of inspired oxygen [FiO2], 0.5, positive end-expiratory pressure [PEEP], 10 cmH2O; inspiratory pressure [Pi], 15 cmH2O; inspiratory time [Ti], 1.5 s; frequency [f], 12 per minute). Other therapeutic procedures included administration of favipiravir, and, given concerns regarding pneumonia due to other pathogens, broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy using tazobactam/piperacillin and levofloxacin was initiated. The results of blood cultures and a respiratory viral panel were negative. The patient recovered without further incident and was transferred back to a convalescence ward in an affiliated hospital after confirmation of SARS-CoV-2 negativity by PCR. However, on the same day as the transfer, the patient complained of shortness of breath and dyspnea, and his respiration rate increased to 20 breaths/minute. His SpO2 decreased to 86% under 10 L/minute of 100% oxygen inhalation by face mask, and he was again intubated. At this time, the finding of PCR was once again positive for SARS-CoV-2, and the patient was readmitted to our hospital and transferred back to the ICU to restart respiratory care on a ventilator (PCV, FiO2, 0.4; PEEP, 8 cmH2O; Pi, 15 cmH2O; Ti, 1.5 s; f, 12 per minute). Four days after readmission, his respiratory condition had improved, and his PCR results were again negative. Nine days after readmission, he was weaned off respirator care, extubated, and transferred to a COVID-19 ward in the same hospital. Over the remainder of his hospital course, the patient was treated by supportive measures and monitored for any worsening of respiratory function. Despite his respiratory condition not worsening, his PCR result again became positive 3 days after discharge from the ICU for the second time. At 8 and 11 days after this, his PCR results were negative once more. Following confirmation that his clinical condition and CT findings were stable, he was finally discharged from our hospital 54 days after his first admission.