A previously fit and well 48 year-old Caucasian male, with no significant past medical history, presented with a 3 month history of foot swelling. He reported no other symptoms. Physical examination demonstrated oedema to the knees, but no other findings of note. Urine dipstick showed blood +++ and protein +++.
He had impaired renal function with a creatinine of 186micromol/L, corresponding to an eGFR of 34 mL/min/1.73m2. CRP was 4 mg/L, albumin 27 g/L and Hb 113 g/L. His urine protein:creatinine ratio was 228.4 mg/mmol. An immunology screen showed a raised anti-GBM level of 32 units/mL. Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) and anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) were both negative. Serum protein electrophoresis showed a gamma paraprotein which was too small to quantify, and an elevated kappa band at 182 mg/L with a normal lambda band of 16.80 mg/L (ratio: 10.83). C3 and C4 levels were normal and a virology screen was negative for HIV, hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus. On computed tomography, there was neither evidence of pulmonary haemorrhage nor any lymphadenopathy within the neck, chest, abdomen or pelvis. Although light chains were noted, their raised values were interpreted as a result of renal impairment generally and atypical anti-GBM disease specifically . Therefore, clinical concern regarding atypical anti-GBM disease led to commencement of steroids, cyclophosphamide and plasma exchange. A biopsy was performed for histopathological confirmation.
Light microscopy showed ten glomeruli, with none being globally sclerosed. There was mixed nodular sclerosis with focal mesangial and endocapillary hypercellularity. Focal basement membrane duplication was seen on silver stain . There was no necrosis and no crescents. There was mild chronic damage with 10% interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy. Due to the need to transport biological samples between centres, detection of immunoglobulins, complement and light chain fractions was performed by immunoperoxidase staining on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. This showed linear glomerular and tubular basement membrane positivity for IgG. IgA and IgM were negative. C3 and C1q showed mesangial positivity in the sclerosing lesions. Kappa and lambda staining was negative in the glomeruli. Immunohistochemical and light microscopy features were felt to be in keeping with atypical anti-GBM disease, but the possibility of a monoclonal immunoglobulin deposition disease was considered in the differential diagnosis. Therefore electron microscopy was imperative.
The GBM level peaked at 43 units/mL and showed a limited response to plasma exchange, persisting at 25 units/mL. The gentleman’s creatinine deteriorated to 445micromol/L during this time. Electron microscopy demonstrated powdery electron dense deposits along the lamina rara interna of glomerular basement membranes and also along tubular basement membranes, in keeping with monoclonal immunoglobulin deposition disease. The Haematologists were consulted and a bone marrow biopsy showed a 10–20% infiltration by kappa-restricted plasma cells. A del 17 P clone was detected on plasma cell fluorescent in-situ hybridisation. He was started on bortezemib and dexamethasone and became haemodialysis-dependent for 4 months. Daratumumab was added to his myeloma treatment regimen and he achieved a complete remission. He subsequently had a stem cell transplant. His anti-GBM titre is now undetectable and his renal function stable with a creatinine of 108micromol/L corresponding to an eGFR of 69 mL/min/1.73m2.