A 81-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency room on January 19th, 2018 for fever and vomiting. Her medical history consisted only in mild cognitive disorders and she received no treatment. Her temperature was 39.2 °C, the oxygen saturation while breathing room air was 88%, and clinical examination was remarkable for rhonchi, extracellular dehydration, fecal impaction, and poor oral condition. Total white blood cell count was 12.7 G/L (PMN 11.2 G/L), serum creatinine, sodium and calcium were 179 μmol/L, 149 mmol/L, and 2.04 mmol/L, respectively. Serum C-reactive protein was 613 mg/L. Liver and pancreatic parameters were normal. Serum CPK and LDH levels were 490 IU/L and 1239 IU/L, respectively. Total body CT-scan showed bilateral basal pulmonary condensations associated with interstitial infiltrates in the upper lobes, as well as an excavated condensation in the right upper lobe and non-complicated colonic diverticulosis. Amoxicillin-clavulanate was started on an empirical basis and the patient was admitted to the pneumology department. Sputum smears were repeatedly negative for acid-fast bacilli. Several blood cultures drawn within the first 3 days remained negative. Urinalysis was negative as were antigenuria for Legionella pneumophila and Streptococcus pneumoniae. Serologies were negative for HIV, HCV, and HTLV-1/2 and positive for anti-HBs antibodies. Because of persisting fever after 10 days of antibiotic treatment, a bronchoscopy was performed, which found diffuse bronchomalacia and no visible tumor. Lavage fluid culture was positive for Staphylococcus aureus (104 CFU/mL) and Candida spp. (103 CFU/mL). The latter contained two populations that were first identified as C. albicans and a C. parapsilosis. The infection was not catheter related, and no other primary focus was identified. Oral fluconazole was started on February 1st. On February 6, while the patient remained febrile, an aerobic blood culture was positive for a yeast after 28 h of growth. Intravenous caspofungin was started. The yeast was identified as K. ohmeri with API 20C System, which led to re-identify the strain of Candida albicans that had been cultured from the BAL fluid as K. ohmeri. With E-test method, the strain was found to be resistant to fluconazole (MIC 4 mg/L) and caspofungin (MIC > 2 mg/L) but sensitive to voriconazole (MIC 0.05 mg/L) and amphotericin B (MIC 0.09 mg/L). Antifungal therapy was switched to voriconazole 4 mg/kg/day. All subsequent blood cultures were negative. Transthoracic echocardiography showed no image consistent with endocarditis. The patient became afebrile and was weaned from oxygen within a few days and voriconazole was discontinued after 10 days. The treatment was stopped by the physicians while the outcome was favourable.