A 52-year-old female presented to our surgical outpatient clinic with a lower abdominal tumor that had been gradually increasing in size. She first noticed a fist sized, painless tumor about four months ago. Clinical examination revealed a firm, irregularly surfaced, fixed, painless, child-head-sized tumor in her lower abdomen. Laboratory data showed that she had a white blood cell count of 5500/mm3, hemoglobin of 8.3 g/dl, hematocrit of 25.4%, platelets count of 429,000/mm3, normal electrolytes, as well as normal blood urea nitrogen levels and the liver function.
Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen demonstrated a large tumor in the lower abdomen which was 15 × 13 × 11 cm in diameter and encased the colorectum to the left back side . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lower abdomen indicated a polycystic tumor . A barium enema revealed that the tumor had encased the rectum toward left posterior, and some parts of the upper rectum had irregular mucosa . A colonoscopy revealed an encasement of the upper rectum and also round ulcers with a white coating, whose histological examination determined granulation tissue .
In 2001, this tumor was excised along with a low anterior resection of the rectum for the complete resection . The mesorectum including the tumor was well circumscribed from surrounding organs, with the exception of the rectum. Therefore, the origin of this tumor was thought to be the mesorectum. The uterus and the ovaries had no local lesions. The weight of the excised tumor was 1,500 g. This tumor included 800 ml of a brown fluid, whose cytological examination determined class I. A histopathological examination revealed proliferation of pleomorphic cells in a storiform pattern . Mitotic figures were also frequently observed. Immunohistochemical analyses indicated that many of the tumor cells were positive for vimentin , while tumor cells were negative for cytokeratins, desmin, S-100 protein, actins, c-kit, and CD34. These features are compatible with MFH of a common type.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and she left the hospital on the 15th postoperative day. A postoperative follow-up CT revealed no recurrence of the MFH in any organs since the resection was completed.