A 66-year-old Caucasian man presented with recurrent, metastatic MCC that involved several sites in liver, bones and disseminated lymphadenopathy. Primary MCC diagnosed 3 years before was located on the forearm without lymph node involvement and was treated with surgery and adjuvant radiation therapy. Serologic testing for antibodies to the Merkel cell polyomavirus T-antigen oncoprotein was negative . The patient’s past medical history included hypertension, hyperlipidemia, coronary artery disease treated with stenting, gastroesophageal reflux, and mild cerebral palsy that had been stable. His activities of daily living were not limited by his comorbidities. Medications included lisinopril, simvastatin, aspirin, omeprazole, and zolpidem. His ECOG performance status was 0 and his physical exam revealed a stable speech impediment. After a discussion of various systemic therapeutic options for his metastatic MCC, the patient decided to participate in a clinical trial investigating ICIs in virus-associated cancers including MCC (; NCT02488759). The patient provided informed consent for treatment and for information sharing as part of a research protocol approved by the University of Washington/Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center IRB. He received dual immune checkpoint blockade with one dose of ipilimumab (1 mg/kg) plus nivolumab (3 mg/kg) administered on day 1.
At the time of treatment on day 1, he had no concerning neurologic, GI or other symptoms. Seven days after the administration of first dose of combination immunotherapy, the patient reported diffuse muscle aches, urinary retention, abdominal distention and a sensation of ‘gagging’ with swallowing attempts. He began taking low doses of oxycodone 5 mg every 4-6 h with partial relief. Four days later (day 11 post-immunotherapy), he was hospitalized due to worsening symptoms and a need for supportive care. A CT scan showed air-filled loops of small and large bowel and an increased stool burden within the right colon consistent with pseudo-obstruction without clear signs of mechanical obstruction. Diverticulosis was present without pericolonic fat stranding suggestive of diverticulitis. Despite methylnaltrexone (given for treatment of possible opioid induced constipation) and escalating doses of laxatives, no bowel movement was produced. Abdominal distention and constipation persisted, together with recurrent bouts of emesis. On day 13 post-immunotherapy, the patient developed hypoxic respiratory failure, attributed to an episode of aspiration, and required mechanical ventilation. A CT scan showed mildly distended fluid filled small bowel loops, moderate to large stool burden in the right colon and fecalization of the terminal ileum contents. Microbiological blood and urine cultures were sterile. The patient was treated with supportive care for 5 days after which extubation was successful. Video laryngoscopy showed a widely patent airway, with severe aspiration due to swallow delay/discoordination, weakness of base of tongue, hyolaryngeal excursion, moderate to severely weak pharyngeal constrictors and cricopharyngeal dysfunction. The patient was also noted to have nasal regurgitation due to uncoordinated velar elevation. A fluoroscopic study of oral contrast (gastrografin) showed absence of contrast progression to colon 48 h following administration.
On day 22 post-immunotherapy, the patient’s respiratory status decompensated again and repeat intubation was required. A second CT scan of the abdomen showed partial regression of the MCC metastases in the liver and resolution of retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy. A fluid-filled esophagus and dilated loops of proximal small bowel, again without a transition point, was essentially unchanged from the prior scan. Placement of a nasogastric tube returned nearly 2 L of bilious and later feculent material. This clinical presentation of diffuse intestinal paresis and pharyngeal dysfunction following administration of immune checkpoint blockade suggested the possibility of immune-mediated neuropathy of the enteric nervous system or a similar irAE (based on our prior experience with a similar case published by our group) . Due to this concern, treatment with methylprednisolone 2 mg/kg daily was initiated on day 22 post-immunotherapy.
Evaluating whether this patient was suffering from an immune adverse effect of checkpoint immunotherapy on myenteric ganglia was challenging because the myenteric plexus, which lies within the muscularis propria, is evaluable only by a full-thickness biopsy. The feasibility of this endoscopic procedure was discussed extensively with the multidisciplinary team involved in the patient’s care, but was considered to pose a prohibitively high risk for perforation and poor wound healing. There was also concern that use of endoscopic cautery after biopsy could ignite bowel gases in the setting of obstipation. The patient’s three prior episodes of pulmonary decompensation resulted in increased risk for prolonged intubation following anesthesia. These considerations also placed the patient at prohibitively high risk for surgery. Thus, invasive diagnostic testing was not attempted. Serologic testing for antibodies to the acetylcholine receptor was negative. Additional serologic tests for anti-Hu antibodies as well as antibodies to P/Q type and N type calcium channels, neuronal (V-G) potassium channels, striated muscle, antineuronal nuclear antibodies, anti-glial nuclear antibodies, Purkinje cell cytoplasmic antibodies, amphiphysin antibodies and CRMP 5 were negative. The patient did not exhibit any arrhythmia during periods of cardiac monitoring.
Following 1 week of treatment with high dose steroids, there was no apparent improvement in gut motility and the patient continued to have no bowel movement or passage of flatus. On day 30, the patient was started on tacrolimus with a target trough of 5–15 ng/mL. Enemas were attempted to induce defecation, but were unsuccessful. Plasmapheresis to remove potential pathogenic autoantibodies was initiated on day 45 post-treatment and repeated every other day for a total of 5 treatments. A venting gastrostomy tube was placed on day 49 due to worsening abdominal distention. On day 51 post-treatment, a CT scan showed focal inflammatory stranding and air involving the transverse colon compatible with diverticulitis with contained perforation. The known MCC tumors had regressed further (see Fig. ). The percutaneous gastrostomy tube was noted in the appropriate position. Surgical consultants suggested that repairing the perforation was very high risk and would not correct the underlying suspected pathology. Therefore, best supportive care was continued for a further 5 days. Following absence of improvement, the patient and family decided to transition to comfort care. On day 58 post-treatment, the patient died from progressive sepsis complicated by multi-organ failure.
After obtaining permission from the family, an autopsy was performed. Findings upon gross examination included peritoneal fluid contaminated by stool and diverticulosis with two associated perforations. The spleen was enlarged with diffluent parenchyma, and the liver histology showed cholestasis and biliary pools, findings associated with sepsis. Extensive sampling of the gastrointestinal tract was performed to include esophagus, stomach, small and large bowel, with microscopic evaluation revealing severe hypoganglionosis along its entire length, with absence of ganglion cells within the myenteric plexus and only rare submucosal ganglion cells (see Fig. -). Within the myenteric plexus residual glial cells remained, however no conspicuous lymphocytic infiltrate was identified. Immunohistochemistry with appropriate controls was performed. Within the myenteric plexus, no immunoreactivity for neuron-specific anti-Hu antibodies was seen, consistent with complete absence of ganglion cells. Furthermore, while staining with antibody PFP9.5 demonstrated scattered residual neuronal processes, likely the projections from extra-enteric autonomic or sensory ganglia, no staining of myenteric ganglion cell bodies or intramuscular nerves was seen, again supporting extensive loss of ganglion cells within the myenteric plexus. Rare submucosal ganglion cells were identified with each neuronal marker , but were far fewer than normal. Immunostaining for SOX10 highlighted condensation of residual glial cells consistent with the death of nearby nerve cells . A trichrome stain demonstrated some fibrosis in the areas of residual glial cells, consistent with a chronic injury response (not shown). A search for other sites of injury revealed reduced numbers of nerves and ganglia in the urinary bladder and epicardium as well (not shown).
The area of radiologic abnormality associated with clinical suspicion for residual MCC within the right lobe of the liver was grossly identified as a pale-yellow discolored nodule within the hepatic parenchyma. Microscopic examination demonstrated fibrosis and necrosis without identifiable residual carcinoma. Representative lymph nodes in the areas of previous radiologic enlargement were similarly free of carcinoma by gross inspection as well as histologic examination (not shown).
To investigate the possible pathogenetic involvement of the humoral immune system, we stained histologic sections of colon tissue for C4d. C4d is a serine protease in the classical complement cascade that can be generated and deposited during complement activation by the antibody complexes, resulting in formation of multi-molecular complexes with immune effector and cytolytic activity . We found intense C4d immunoreactivity around and occasionally within the aneuronal ganglia of our patient , as well as in vessel walls and along probable intramuscular nerves in the muscularis propria. The perineuroglial pattern was observed around the patient’s myenteric plexus, but not around his residual submucosal nerves. No immunoreactivity was observed in sections for which the primary antibody was omitted. In contrast, sections from the colons of 4 controls (cadaveric samples with similar autolysis, but no history or intestinal dysmotility) showed only very weak immunolabelling of some vascular endothelial surfaces and no perineural C4d immunoreactivity . These results demonstrate local complement activation at the site of organ dysfunction (the myenteric plexus) and support a possible contributing role of antibodies in the pathogenesis of this patient’s myenteric plexopathy.