A 37-year-old primigravida Japanese woman presented to our hospital in her first trimester with a high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion found in a Papanicolaou smear examination during the initial evaluation of her pregnancy. She did not have any relevant family history and had not undergone a cervical smear for at least 15 years. Colposcopy showed a white condyloma-like lesion in the posterior half of the uterine cervix . Cervical biopsy at 8 weeks' gestation revealed invasive keratinizing-type squamous cell carcinoma . We performed cervical conization at 11 weeks' gestation. At the beginning of this surgery, in order to decrease blood loss, the whole circumference of the uterine cervix was sutured at 2 cm under the vaginal fornix using a 1–0 Maxon suture . Subsequently, deep conization was performed with only 5 ml of blood loss. The tumor diameter was 2 cm, and the depth of invasion was 1 mm with a positive surgical margin around almost the entire circumference . Histopathological examination revealed FIGO stage IB2 squamous cell carcinoma without any lymphovascular space invasion (pT1b2, ly0, v0) .
Several treatment plans were suggested as shown in the flow chart in Figure . Feasible treatment options were radical trachelectomy, neoadjuvant chemotherapy, or diagnostic pelvic lymphadenectomy. Following in-depth counseling with relevant specialists with emphasis on potential consequences of deviating from normal practice, the patient and her family chose pelvic lymphadenectomy and decided to continue with the pregnancy for as long as possible. Magnetic resonance imaging was performed at 14 weeks' gestation, revealing no evidence of cervical tumor or distant metastatic disease . Pelvic lymphadenectomy was performed using the laparotomic extraperitoneal approach at 16 weeks' gestation. Intravenous tocolytics were administered after lymphadenectomy for 3 days prophylactically. Histopathological examination showed no evidence of lymph node metastasis (n = 0/21). Of note, cervical cytology showed no atypical cells 2 weeks after cervical conization. Therefore, we decided to continue with the pregnancy until the fetus matured sufficiently. Cervical cytology was performed every month, and the results were negative for intraepithelial lesions or malignancy until 2 weeks before the cesarean section. The patient did not have any sign of threatened preterm labor.
An elective cesarean section and modified radical hysterectomy were performed at 35 weeks' gestation. We made an incision in the upper part of the lower uterine segment, not to bother the uterine cervix for the following hysterectomy. A baby girl weighing 2056 g was delivered with 1-and 5-min Apgar scores of 8 and 9, respectively, and the baby was discharged from the neonatal unit 2 weeks later without any medical problems. Following delivery, a modified radical hysterectomy was performed using the extraperitoneal approach. Since negative cervical cytology suggested no or slight remnant tumor found in the uterine cervix, we chose modified radical hysterectomy. Without any complication, the duration of surgery was 155 min, the specimen weighed 977 g, and blood loss was 970 ml, including amniotic fluid. No evidence of residual disease was detected on histopathological examination. Thus, no adjuvant therapy was administered. We successfully treated the patient without any adverse events until she could deliver a healthy baby. The patient is still being monitored and has remained disease-free for 5 years. In addition to the first child described herein, the parents welcomed an adopted baby into their family 5 years after treatment.