A 1-day-old male infant was transferred to our hospital for heart murmur and progressive hypercapnia. He was born via spontaneous vaginal delivery at 36 weeks and 3 days of gestation with a birth weight of 2700 g. He had no remarkable family history, and the pregnancy course was uneventful. He was noted to have a high prominent forehead, low-set ears, a thin upper lip, and retrognathia. There were no abnormalities in the central nervous system, digestive system, and urinary system. On admission, the following thrombocytopenia and coagulation abnormalities were found. Platelet count was 39 × 103/μL, prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) was 1.65, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was 48.8 s, and fibrinogen was 168 mg/dL. Aortic arch reconstruction and ductus arteriosus ligation were performed at 6 days of age. He developed intratracheal hemorrhage on postoperative day 4 and underwent emergency pericardial drainage for pericardial tamponade on postoperative day 11. He also had intraventricular hemorrhage and pancytopenia requiring regular transfusions of platelet concentrates (PCs) and red blood cells (RBCs). A bone marrow test was performed at 2 months of age to investigate the cause of pancytopenia. Genetic testing of bone marrow cells revealed a partial deletion of chromosome 11, leading to the diagnosis of JS. The levels of coagulation factors 8 and 9, von Willebrand, and proteins C and S were all within normal limits. Further close examinations of platelet function and morphology were performed in the fourth month of life after the diagnosis of JS was confirmed. A peripheral blood smear showed large platelets, and mean platelet volume (MPV) was 13 fL (normal: 7–11 fL). Platelet aggregation test showed no aberrant adenosine diphosphate (ADP) aggregation, but collagen aggregation was clearly decreased.
At 7 months of age (height 62.4 cm, weight 4998 g), VSD closure was planned for progressive pulmonary hypertension. Platelet count on readmission was 78 × 103/μL, and five PC units were transfused each of 5 days and 1 day before surgery. Immediately prior to VSD closure, platelet count was normal at 156 × 103/μL, and coagulation function tests were also normal with PT-INR 1.04, APTT 37.6 s, and fibrinogen was 159 mg/dL, slightly below normal. We planned to maintain a platelet count > 100 × 103/μL, also to monitor platelet function using TEG® 6s PlateletMapping® .
Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane, fentanyl, and midazolam after uneventful induction with inhalational sevoflurane and tracheal intubation. The platelet count at the beginning of surgery was 168 × 103/μL. Although the platelet function showed a normal clot strength as indicated by the maximal amplitude for heparinized kaolin with heparinase (HKH-MA) of 53.1 mm (normal value: 53–68 mm), clot formation time by HKH reaction time (HKH-R) was prolonged to 30.4 min (normal value: 4.2–9.8 min) (TEG 1; Table , Fig. ). After systemic heparinization, PCs were continuously administered during cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) at 0.5 U/h. Although platelet count was fewer and HKH-R was longer than the normal range before CPB (TEG 2), both have improved after completion of CPB and surgery (TEGs 3 and 4, respectively). We administered 50 mL of RBCs and 150 mL of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) after CPB until the end of the surgery. Surgery and anesthesia lasted 5 h 8 min and 7 h 32 min, respectively. Intraoperative hemorrhage was approximately 66 mL, and 50 mL of RBCs, 150 mL of FFP, and 150 mL of PCs were transfused. Extubation was performed on postoperative day 1, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 17. On postoperative day 22, the patient was readmitted to the hospital for subdural hematoma and underwent platelet transfusion.