A 78 year old Caucasian male referred to our department because of a history of recurrent jaundice and periodical appearance of right upper quadrant pain. The patient had undergone a post-Billroth II gastrectomy for peptic ulcer disease and cholecystectomy 48 and 7 years ago respectively. On admission, physical examination was unremarkable and laboratory evaluation showed no abnormalities with liver function tests being normal. Ultrasonography (U/S) of the liver revealed a common bile duct stone with no dilation of the common bile duct. Computed tomography (CT) showed the same findings as well. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed the existence of a common bile duct stone and confirmed the U/S and CT findings. The patient underwent an ERCP with the purpose to remove the offending stone and to perform endoscopic sphincterotomy. A long afferent limb of the Billroth II gastroenterostomy made locating the duodenal papilla technically difficult. After several attempts with no success, the procedure was abandoned for a few days later. The whole procedure had no obvious mediate complications. Immediately after the examination and for the rest of the day, there were no abnormal signs or symptoms. The morning after, the patient complained for crepitus in the soft tissues of the supraclavicular fossae and neck. Physical examination confirmed this finding. Plain radiographs of the chest and abdomen revealed subcutaneous emphysema, pneumomediastinum and pneumoperitoneum . An esophagogram with water-soluble contrast showed no evidence of perforation. Abdominal and chest CT-scan showed no evidence of retroperitoneal or peritoneal perforation but air was noted in the peritoneal cavity, the mediastinum and in the soft tissues of the neck . In the absence of revealing a site of free perforation, the patient was managed conservatively with gastric aspiration using a large-bore nasogastric tube, intravenous fluids and broad-spectrum antibiotics administration, and serial monitoring of hemodynamic parameters. After 48 hours of gastric aspiration, the patient started to drink fluids and he was on a light diet by the 5th day after admission. Progressively, the signs of subcutaneous emphysema resolved. The patient was discharged on the 10th hospital day without complains and without radiographic signs of pneumomediastinum and pneumoperitoneum.