A 73-year-old female presented to our clinic with a chief complaint of progressive right leg pain which localizes to the lateral hip and radiates down the side of her right leg. She also presented with low back pain and abnormal gait. The patient describes bilateral palpable masses/lumps in the anterior aspect of both legs which are bothersome and limit range of motion. Medical history is significant for hypertension, anxiety, chronic pain syndrome, right total hip, and total knee arthroplasties. Her right total hip arthroplasty procedure required revision due to a leg length discrepancy. She participated in body building with heavy weights while she was in her forties, and she recalls one specific event where she felt a tearing sensation in both thighs while squatting heavy weight.
On initial examination, the patient appeared to have a slightly longer right leg compared to left, and her lumbar spine was hyper lordotic. That patient was exquisitely tender over her greater trochanter and IT band. Examination showed symmetric palpable masses along the anterior aspect of bilateral thighs, consistent with the rectus femoris muscle. Her right knee had 2° of hyperextension and flexion to 120° when her hip was allowed to also flex. However, her right knee would only flex to 30º when her hip was kept at neutral extension. Her knee was stable to ligamentous examination. Her right hip was stable with minimum discomfort on motion testing. She did have an equivocal straight right leg raise test. She also had numbness along the right lateral thigh consistent with the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve distribution. The left leg was neurovascularly intact throughout and non-tender to palpation. The range of motion examination of her left knee was very similar with flexion to 120º when her hip was allowed to flex and 30º if her hip was held in neutral extension.
Radiographs of the right knee showed a stable total knee implant with no evidence of loosening, and the lateral radiograph showed linear calcifications in the anterior muscle compartment of the thigh .
Computerized tomography (CT) scan of the right leg showed a calcified fusiform mass with peripheral plaque-like calcifications linearly oriented throughout the entire course of the rectus femoris muscle. . The CT scan also demonstrated an avulsion of her anterior inferior iliac spine.
Axial and coronal magnetic resonance (MR) images of bilateral legs showed a heterogenous lesion that was predominantly dark on all imaging sequences representing a calcified mass that has replaced the entire rectus femoris muscle .
No mechanical issues were identified with the hip or knee arthroplasty implants. Initial treatment of trochanteric bursitis relieved her pain about her greater trochanter, but she continued to have significant limitations due to the masses and secondary effects on hip and knee motion. The option of removing a portion of the calcific myonecrosis and releasing the restrictive band was offered to the patient.
The patient initially had the right leg addressed with a proximal anterior approach to the hip with excision of a 3 cm portion of the calcific myonecrosis and avulsed AIIS with associated release of the proximal rectus femoris tendon ( and ). The author then moved to the distal third of the anterior thigh and excised a 4.5 cm portion of the calcified distal rectus femoris with distal rectus femoris tenotomy . In both instances, fluoroscopic guidance was used to identify the location of calcified fragments. The deep fascia in both operative sites was closed without filling the extra space left over from the mass excision, which is similar to a previous study by Chun and Shim . Intraoperatively, after completion of the proximal and distal portions of the procedure the patient’s range of motion improved from 30 º to 90° of knee flexion with her hip extended. Postoperatively, there were no complications, and the patient reported significant discomfort relief and maintained the range of motion gains.
Due to a successful outcome on the right leg, the patient elected to proceed with a similar procedure on the contralateral side. 2 months later the patient returned to the operating room and an incision was made 6 cm proximal to the patella and dissected down to the rectus femoris tendon. A tenotomy of the rectus femoris and underlying vastus medialis was performed without mass removal. Once both tendons were released, the patient could flex her knee to 90° with hips fully extended, and this was equal to the outcome on the contralateral side. The hip was not approached on this side as the patient did not have the same mechanical symptoms associated with the AIIS avulsion identified on the contralateral side. Postoperatively, there was no evidence of infection or wound healing problems. The patient maintained her range of motion gains.
The patient was followed postoperatively until the 1-year mark and was noted to subjectively be happy with her lack of pain and greatly improved level of function. Her intraoperative range of motion was maintained. She reported an improvement in her back symptoms as it was suspected the effects on the range of motion of her hips was leading to excessive lordosis and stress in her lumbar spine.