A 10-year-old female spayed domestic shorthair cat was presented for chronic sneezing, coughing and nasal congestion of 4 months duration. A treatment trial with amoxicillin trihydrate/clavulanate potassium (Clavamox; Zoetis), cefovecin (Convenia; Zoetis) and a tapering course of prednisolone did not yield clinical improvement. In the interim, the cat became lethargic and hyporexic and was presented for further evaluation to our Urgent Care service (day 1). Physical examination revealed increased upper airway sounds with mildly increased inspiratory effort, gingivostomatitis, bilateral ocular and nasal mucopurulent discharge, and exophthalmos OS with decreased retropulsion and marked pain, as well as an obese body condition. Complete blood count (CBC) revealed mature neutrophilia (23,000/µl, reference interval [RI] 2000–12,000/µl). Chemistry panel showed hyperglycemia (182 mg/dl, RI 68–140 mg/dl), hyperglobulinemia (8.0 g/dl, RI 2.7–4.2 g/dl) and hypocholesterolemia (75 mg/dl, RI 95–270 mg/dl). Urinalysis revealed a concentrated urine (urine specific gravity 1.064) with proteinuria (2+). Thoracic radiographs revealed a faint increased soft tissue opacity in cranial mediastinum but was otherwise normal. A point-of-care retrobulbar ultrasound was performed, showing a hyperechoic structure OS with no obvious foreign material. Fine-needle aspiration and cytology was performed, revealing suppurative inflammation with necrotic material. Culture and additional stains, such as acid fast and Grocott methenamine silver (GMS) stain, were not performed at this time. A bacterial retrobulbar abscess was suspected, so gabapentin (compounded from gabapentin; Camber), amoxicillin–clavulanate, mirtazapine (Mirataz; Dechra) and robenaxocib (Onsior; Elanco) were dispensed with the plan to follow up with internal medicine in 3 days. Amoxicillin–clavulanate was chosen because of its broad-spectrum coverage and information about previous antibiotic dosage and duration was unavailable at the emergency visit.
On day 3, a physical examination revealed resolving OS exophthalmos, stertor, decreased bilateral nasal flow (left worse than right) and mildly enlarged bilateral mandibular lymph nodes. A rapid immune-migration assay for feline leukemia virus (FeLV) and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) (Witness FeLV/FIV Rapid Test; Zoetis) were negative. CT of the head revealed marked soft tissue attenuating material within the nasal cavities bilaterally with no turbinate lysis or mass effect, mild lysis of the mid lateral aspect of the left frontal sinus, and marked bilateral medial retropharyngeal, mild lateral mandibular and mild right superficial cervical lymphadenopathy. Bilateral ultrasound-guided lymph node aspirates revealed marked mixed inflammation (eosinophilic, histiocytic and suppurative). Culture of lymph node fluid was submitted and showed no growth. Antegrade rhinoscopy did not reveal any fungal plagues or mass-like structures and was consistent with severe diffuse rhinitis. Retrograde rhinoscopy was not performed. Nasal cavity biopsies were submitted for histopathology and revealed severe, diffuse, chronic-active, erosive and eosinophilic rhinitis with no organism identified on Gram, GMS and acid-fast stains. An upper respiratory infectious PCR panel (feline herpesvirus/Chlamydia/Mycoplasma) on oral pharyngeal swab was performed and the results were negative. A presumptive diagnosis of idiopathic feline chronic rhinitis with a suspected secondary bacterial infection was made and amoxicillin–clavulanate (14.2 mg/kg PO q12h, [Clavamox; Zoetis]) for a total of 4 weeks was recommended, as well as an anti-inflammatory tapering dose of prednisolone (2.5 mg PO q12h for 14 days, 2.5 mg PO q24h for 7 days, 2.5 mg PO q48h for 7 days).
On day 39, the cat re-presented for a recheck. The owner reported resolution of exophthalmos but rapidly growing cervical masses causing obstructive breathing and dysphagia. Markedly enlarged retropharyngeal lymph nodes were noted bilaterally , as well as resolved exophthalmos OS, stertorous breathing and weight loss. Fine-needle aspiration of the retropharyngeal lymph node and cytology revealed pyogranulomatous inflammation with intra- and extracellular fungal hyphae . Owing to the significant negative impact on the ability to eat and breathe, bilateral medial retropharyngeal extirpation was performed on day 41. Histopathology of the retropharyngeal lymph nodes showed necrotizing, granulomatous and eosinophilic cellulitis. The lymph node was effaced by inflammation and necrosis with numerous fungal hyphae. Fungal culture grew Aspergillus species. Bacterial culture (aerobic and anaerobic) was negative. Clinical improvement occurred over the next 3 days with ampicillin and sulbactam (Unasyn; Mylan) before culture results, tapering dose of dexamethasone-SP (0.1 mg/kg IV q24h for 2 doses, 0.05 mg/kg IV q24h for 1 dose), intravenous fluids, maropitant (Cerenia; Zoetis), mirtazapine, gabapentin (compounded; Ascend) and itraconazole (compounded from Amneal Pharm, 100 mg capsules, 8 mg/kg, 50 mg PO q24h). The cat was discharged with mirtazapine, maropitant and itraconazole.
On day 62, serum (6 h after administration) was submitted for itraconazole levels (MiraVista) and the level was 3.1 µg/ml, which is within the reported therapeutic range (2–7 µg/ml). On day 83, bilateral decreased retropulsion was noted and OS had mild third eyelid thickening. Progressive bilateral exophthalmos and hyporexia developed in the following 2 weeks. Humane euthanasia was elected on day 103 and marked bilateral exophthalmos (left worse than right) with bilateral mucopurulent ocular discharge with protruding nictitating membrane was noted .
On necropsy, a fungal granuloma was found in the right pterygopalatine fossa contralateral to the more affected eye (left) in the oral cavity. The tracheobronchial lymph node was enlarged 4–5 times its normal size and had coalescing areas of purulent to caseous necrosis containing mats of fungal hyphae consistent with Aspergillus species. Different sections of decalcified skull at the level of nasal sinuses, periorbital and hard palate showed extensive granulomatous to eosinophilic inflammation. The brain and lung parenchyma showed no evidence of fungal invasion. Direct Sanger sequencing of the PCR product of the ITS1-5.8s-ITS2 region (Primers ITS4 and ITS5) was performed on the isolate sourced from post-mortem tissue. The product had a 99.68% nucleotide identity to Aspergillus udagawae strain CBS 114217 (GenBank OL711845). The species A. udagawae resides in the Aspergillus viridinutans complex clade. Antifungal susceptibility via Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute reference methods was performed by Cornell University Animal Health Diagnostic Center and the results are shown in .