A 55-year-old man was referred to our clinic for management of recurrent severe hypoglycemia with frequent emergency intervention. His medical history included T1DM diagnosed at 24 years old and no other known conditions. He was taking insulin therapy and no other medications. In the first 5 years of disease, he experienced hypoglycemic episodes approximately 3 to 4 times per week that were preceded by autonomic warning signs such as confusion, diaphoresis, and tremors. Over subsequent years he developed hypoglycemia unawareness and increasingly frequent episodes of hypoglycemia with loss of consciousness and seizures for which he received emergency assistance. By the time he was assessed in our clinic, the patient had experienced 56 presentations to hospital and >400 EMS responses in the prior 4 years. The nadir of blood glucose (BG) levels ranged between 0.7 and 2.4 mmol/L during these episodes, and the presenting Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) was 4.6% (28 mmol/mol). His insulin regimen consisted of 30 units (U) of insulin glargine nightly, with insulin aspart 5U with breakfast, 3U with lunch, and 5U with supper. He self-monitored with glucometer 2 times per day, and no data on glycemic trends, diet or adherence to insulin regimen were available. Investigations conducted identified no contributory comorbidities, endogenous hyperinsulinism, endocrinopathies, organ dysfunction, or other drugs or toxins.
On initial assessment, the patient expressed difficulty regularly documenting blood sugars, counting carbohydrates and applying insulin correction scale, had occupational uncertainty with diet irregularity, limited understanding on treating low blood sugars, and family uncertainty around glucagon administration. We made a referral for government-funded continuous glucose monitor (CGM) coverage to facilitate self-monitoring, setting of hypoglycemia alerts, and to gather longitudinal continuous glycemic data. A diabetes nurse educator (DNE) and dietitian provided education on BG documentation and insulin self-administration, dietary advice including meal timing and carbohydrate ratios, and strategies for insulin self-administration and hypoglycemia treatment. We scheduled biweekly follow-up given the severity of the presentation.
Over the subsequent 6 months the patient obtained a CGM, had monthly Endocrinologist appointments and weekly DNE follow-up. The insulin regimen was downtitrated to 28U glargine nightly, with 3U aspart with meals, targeting a fasting morning BG of 6 to 10 mmol/L and HbA1c of 7% to 8% (53-64 mmol/mol). The patient tracked hypoglycemic events and documented a food diary; however, did not obtain CGM sensors, share CGM data with the team, nor document insulin adherence, and did not attend multiple diabetes clinic appointments. Glycemic data available showed fasting morning BG was frequently in target range (6-10 mmol/L). Hypoglycemic events continued to occur daily in between meals, overnight, and sporadically throughout the day. After 6 months of follow-up, hypoglycemic events continued to occur daily and the patient had 65 EMS responses and 4 hospital presentations over 6 months . A repeat HbA1c was 4.6% (28 mmol/mol).
Eleven months after initial consultation, a multidisciplinary care plan was created including our team, the DNE, family physician, the head of the local Emergency Department (ED), the municipal paramedic service, and a community paramedic program. We reviewed the patient’s medical history, hospitalizations, hypoglycemic events and management to date. Management changes made included downtitrating insulin to glargine 15U every morning and aspart 0 to 3U every meal with a sliding scale targeting BG 8 to 14 mmol/L 2 hours postprandially. We broadened CGM alert thresholds, organized CGM data sharing from the home, expedited applications for financial coverage for diabetes supplies, and increased follow-up frequency back to every 2 weeks. We enlisted the patient with a Community Paramedic Program to receive regular education and assistance in the community, including supplies to manage hypoglycemia at home, access to remote EMS support by phone, weekly community check-ins, and technological support for diabetes devices. He was seen by a psychologist for neuropsychiatric assessment, who detailed low health literacy, diabetes-related anxiety, occupational uncertainty, and burnout from his wife, the primary caregiver. In addition, the patient reported feeling shame and stigma around his condition during health care interactions.
Over the subsequent 7 months the patient shared CGM data more regularly with our team and had increased appointment attendance. He reported hypoglycemic events 1 to 2 times per week, had 10 EMS visits, and a 3-month period without hypoglycemic events requiring emergency response . Follow-up frequency with our clinic was reduced to every 6 months. Two years after multi-disciplinary team (MDT) implementation, HbA1c was 7.2% (55.2 mmol/mol). The patient subjectively reported improved hypoglycemia awareness, had 2 hypoglycemic events with EMS visits and had zero presentations to hospital. There was ongoing follow-up with community supports.