A 37-year-old woman presented with headache, bilateral ptosis, and right proptosis. She denied a history of head trauma and hypertension, and her medical history was unremarkable. Her laboratory data were all normal. Physical examination revealed bilateral oculomotor nerve palsy. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging demonstrated varix in the right middle cranial fossa [ and ]. Cerebral angiography revealed a high-flow, multichannel fistula between the right MMA and a venous aneurysm wall at the right greater sphenoid wing, which drained into the left CS superior orbital vein (SOV) and inferior petrosal sinus (IPS). The petrosal outlets of the right CS were occluded on the way. On the venous side, retrograde venous drainage was observed from the right SWL to the right facial vein through a right SOV with venous ectasia. Second, the venous drainage from the DMCV drained into the right CS and then the left CS, through the inter-CS (ICS), and into the left IPS [-]. No connection between the SWL and the basal vein was observed. Given the remarkable ectasia of the draining vein, accompanied by the presence of headache and right abducens nerve paralysis, endovascular treatment was initiated.
Our approach was through the left IPS since the right IPS was occluded. A 6 Fr FUBUKI (ASAHI INTECC, Nagoya, Japan) guiding catheter was placed in the left internal jugular vein. A 4.2 Fr FUBUKI distal access catheter (ASAHI INTECC, Nagoya, Japan) was introduced through the left IPS and then placed in the right CS at the orifice of the sphenoparietal sinus. Excelsior SL-10STR (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA) and ASAHI CHIKAI (ASAHI INTECC, Nagoya, Japan) were advanced into the venous aneurysm of the SWL. Following the introduction of the microcatheter into the SWL, superselective angiography suggested a high-flow, multichannel fistula between the right petrosal branch of the MMA and a venous aneurysm wall . We assigned this area as the fistulous point, and the venous aneurysm was occluded using a Target 360 soft coil (Stryker Neurovascular) followed by the application of additional down sized coils. Complete obliteration of the venous aneurysm was achieved after the insertion of 10 coils . A final right external carotid angiography showed disappearance of the fistula [ and ]. The postoperative course was uneventful. After the procedure, the symptoms of headache and diplopia improved.
Postoperative cerebral angiography and time-of-flight MR image on the 3rd month showed disappearance of the venous aneurysm and fistula [ and ].