A 45-year-old multiparous Taiwanese woman had undergone abdominal total hysterectomy for adenomyosis and endometrioma at a local hospital 53 days prior to admission. Details of the surgery were not known. She had an uncomplicated postoperative course. One day prior to admission at Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou, Taiwan, she experienced lower abdominal pain and vaginal discharge after sexual intercourse. There was no history of fever, chills, dysuria, and fecaloid discharge from her vagina. She was evaluated at our emergency department where a pelvic examination showed bowel content protruding into her vagina with some purulent discharge. Her general condition was stable with normal results of hematology and biochemistry tests. With the clinical impression of complete VCD with cuff wound infection, she was planned for laparoscopic surgery.
A standard four-port laparoscopy was performed with the umbilicus as the primary entry site using an 11 mm primary port and three 5 mm lateral accessory ports. On intraoperative examination, there were moderate adhesions between the left pelvic side wall and colon. There was a short loop of ileum protruding through the cuff which looked viable with no signs of ischemia or perforation .
After a thorough survey of her peritoneal cavity, adhesiolysis was done and the loop was carefully extracted from the cuff using atraumatic graspers. There were pockets of pus collection in the cul-de-sac that were cleared after adhesiolysis of the bowel loops. Complete dehiscence of the vaginal cuff was noted measuring approximately 5 cm. The cuff margins appeared inflamed. Careful downward dissection of her bladder and posterior peritoneum was carried out to achieve an adequate margin of vaginal cuff. Approximately 0.5 cm of cuff margin was excised circumferentially leaving viable tissue for proper suturing .
The vaginal cuff was closed with a running Monocryl suture number 1–0 (poliglecaprone 25) with a depth of 1 cm vaginal cuff margin. Copious irrigation of her abdominopelvic cavity with saline solution was performed. A Jackson-Pratt drain was placed. Her postoperative course was uneventful. Intravenously administered antibiotics were completed and the drain was removed on the fifth postoperative day. She was followed up 2 weeks after discharge from our hospital: her pelvic examination revealed that the vaginal cuff was healing well. At a 1-month follow-up, her vaginal cuff was completely healed.