A 65-year-old man sustained a proximal humeral fracture in a previously healthy shoulder. X-ray examination upon arrival at the emergency department showed a three–four-part fracture . He was treated with a sling and scheduled for a CT scan in the outpatient fracture clinic. The scan revealed a multifragmentary four-part fracture with the shaft separated from the humeral head . The registrar at the fracture clinic scheduled the patient for surgery, informing him of possible shoulder replacement arthroplasty. The presence of an indentation was also observed in the lower part of the glenoid, believed to be caused by the trauma .
The surgical procedure was performed in the beach chair position under antibiotic prophylaxis. General anesthesia was complemented with a brachial plexus block for postoperative pain relief. A standard deltoid splitting approach was used. Once the tuberosities had been tagged and separated, the humeral head showed two horizontal fracture lines and was deemed inappropriate for osteosynthesis. The humeral shaft was found to pierce the subscapularis, resulting in only a fraction of the subscapularis tendon attaching to the lesser tuberosity. After removal of the humeral head, the exposed glenoid was clearly atypical in appearance. The lower two thirds of the glenoid were covered with what was first thought to be a loose layer of cartilage . However, closer inspection revealed that the thicker periphery of this tissue layer was in continuity with the labrum, but its thinner cranial edge crossing the glenoid surface was not attached to the underlying glenoid surface. Hence, a pocket was formed between the glenoid and the cartilaginous tissue, similar to geniculate discoid meniscus . In preparing for a reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA) the “meniscus” was removed, exposing an underlying glenoid that was dysplastic and without cartilage.
After the central guide pin was positioned by the metaglene guide, symmetrical reaming was performed. The central peg exited anteriorly in the scapula, fixing the metaglene component in a slightly retroverted position. Good purchase of the locking screws was achieved, although optimal screw trajectory was difficult to obtain because of the dysplastic nature of the glenoid which had been overlooked preoperatively in the presence of the humeral fracture. Using the standard technique, a Delta Xtend RTSA was implanted, with the tuberosities sutured to the humerus and prosthetic stem.
Examination of the excised tissue layer revealed a separate layer of tissue without any bony undersurface. The inferior part was approximately 2-mm thick, gradually becoming thinner towards the cranial edge. This discoid meniscus-like tissue was only attached to the labrum. The uncovered glenoid was dysplastic, with the absence of a glenoid neck resulting in a steep vertical scapula lateral border . In the preoperative radiological examination, the glenoid displayed features of dysplasia: absent inferior glenoid neck, 30° inferior inclination of the glenoid surface, and type C glenoid retroversion .
At the 2-month clinical follow-up visit, the patient reported almost no pain and satisfactory active assisted range of motion. Active flexion and abduction were just over 90° in the supine position. The patient could reach the top of his head in posterior external rotation and the lumbar spine in posterior internal rotation.