Our patient, a 66-year-old Caucasian man, was diagnosed with MF 4 years ago. He was a high-risk patient according to the Dynamic International Prognostic Scoring System-plus classification because of a platelet (PLT) count of <100 giga/L, transfusion-dependency, hemoglobin (Hb) <100 g/L, circulating blood blasts >1 %, complex karyotype, leucocyte count <25 giga/L, and no constitutional symptoms . His medical history was unremarkable except for peripheral artery disease treated with acetylsalicylic acid. He had neither a personal nor a family history of spontaneous bleeding.
At diagnosis, for MF-related anemia, we started a therapy with recombinant human erythropoietin that was stopped after 3 months for lack of efficacy. He was not considered fit enough for bone marrow transplantation by a specialized center because of his age and a lack of a suitable donor. He received regular red blood cell transfusions, without chelation therapy. Ruxolitinib was contraindicated due to thrombocytopenia.
In order to ameliorate the anemia an indication for splenectomy was given and performed by our regional referral center. The preoperative tests showed a prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT; 43.8 seconds, normal range 26.8 to 42 seconds). No further investigations were done at that time. Immediately after the intervention he experienced hemorrhagic shock due to bleeding of his phrenic artery which needed a second surgery for hemostasis.
He presented significant abdominal pain 35 days after splenectomy that led to a CT scan which showed a hematoma in his pancreatic loge. We referred him to our regional center for a percutaneous drainage. He was finally readmitted to our Department for the postoperatory phase. Repeated laboratory tests found a gradual elongation of APTT: 52 seconds on day 51 and 114 seconds on day 61 from splenectomy (normal range, 26.8 to 42 seconds). A physical examination detected a large ecchymosis on his left arm. The same day we completed coagulation tests that showed a deficiency in FVIII coagulant activity (FVIII: C): <1 % (normal range, 50 to 150 %). Prothrombin time (PT), von Willebrand factor and other clotting factors (II, V, VII, IX, X, and XI) were all normal. FVIII inhibitor (AAFVIII) was positive at a titer of 17.3 Bethesda units (BU). He was diagnosed as AHA based on the above findings (day 0).
Moreover, hematological examinations showed leukocytosis (white blood cell count 24×109/L) with marked leukoerythroblastosis (blasts cells 25 %), Hb of 113 g/L, and thrombocytopenia (PLT count 57×109/L). These findings were consistent with the diagnosis of leukemic transformation according to the World Health Organization (WHO) criteria . A bone marrow examination was not performed due to the excessive bleeding risk.
Immunosuppressive therapy with methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg body weight was promptly started. Due to the apparition of deep muscle hematomas of his arms and legs we added recombinant activated factor VII (rFVIII; NovoSeven®, Novo Nordisk) 90 mcg/kg every 2 hours. On day 4 from AHA diagnosis we associated rituximab (MabThera®) 375 mg/m2 weekly for 4 weeks to the ongoing steroid therapy. Due to a lack of response, on day 6 we stopped the rFVIII and started activated prothrombin complex concentrate (aPCC; FEIBA®) intravenously at a dose of 80 unit/kg every 12 hours. aPCC was subsequently decreased to 80 unit/kg every 24 hours on day 10, then stopped at day 18.
To treat the leukemic transformation of the MF that probably was associated to the AHA, on the sixth day our patient started chemotherapy with azacytidine (5-AZA) administered subcutaneously at 75 mg/m2/day for 7 days . Red blood cell and PLT transfusion were also carried out as supportive therapy. After 10 days of treatment his edema and ecchymosis showed a marked improvement. The AAFVIII rose to 179 BU on day 12 and descended to 25 BU on day 33.
During the post-chemotherapy phase he presented Staphylococcus hominis bacteremia treated with intravenous vancomycin. Subsequently he was healed for a probable Pneumocystis pneumonia by co-trimoxazole and atovaquone. He was referred to our out-patient care department on day 40.
On day 57, before his second cycle of 5-AZA, his FVIII: C was elevated to 30 % with no additional bleeding episodes; his APTT was decreased to 72 seconds. AAFVIII was decreased to a titer of 6.6 BU. Evolution of rates of FVIII (VIII: C), rates of AAFVIII, and therapy administered are summarized in Fig. .