A 56-year-old white man with history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and hypertension presented to an outside hospital with complaints of yellowing of the skin and eyes, right-sided abdominal pain, and dark urine for 3 days. Relevant physical examination was significant for scleral icterus, jaundice, and diffuse abdominal tenderness to palpation, worst in the right upper quadrant. Pertinent laboratory work revealed white blood cell count of 9000/mm3, total bilirubin of 24 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 1104 U/L, aspartate transaminase (AST) of 200 U/L, and alanine transaminase (ALT) of 236 U/L. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed intra- and extrahepatic biliary dilatation with an HAA compressing the common bile duct (CBD). He was transferred to our hospital. Patient underwent an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) with cholangioscopy. This revealed a CBD stricture approximately 2.5 cm in length at the level of cystic duct takeoff with massive biliary dilation proximally . A plastic stent was deployed traversing the stricture. Biopsies were obtained, and pathology only identified inflammation. Computed tomographic angiography with three-dimensional reconstruction confirmed location of an extrahepatic fusiform HAA compressing the CBD ( and ). He then underwent coil embolization of the hepatic artery . Stent grafting could not be attempted secondary to discrepancy in the size of proximal (10 mm) and distal (5 mm) entry into the aneurysm. Patient tolerated the procedure well. On follow-up at 2 weeks post discharge, patient was asymptomatic with remarkable improvement in hepatobiliary chemistries—AST, 59 U/L; ALT, 52 U/L; ALP, 239 U/L; and total bilirubin, 2 mg/dL. Patient underwent a repeat ERCP (6 weeks after the initial ERCP) for removal of the biliary stent. This revealed improvement in the biliary tree dilatation . A CT scan performed 18 months after aneurysmal coiling was limited by metallic artifacts, in its assessment of vasculature. However, poorly characterized biliary system dilatation was improved . Ultrasound performed at the same time revealed a normal caliber (0.47 cm) CBD .