We present the case of a 40 year old female patient, a housewife of good socio-economic status who attended the outpatient department (OPD) of Orthopedics & Trauma at NEIGRIHMS, Shillong with the complaint of swelling in the lateral aspect of elbow since last 6 months. Initially, the swelling was approximately the size of a pea, and it remained so for about 6 months. However last 2 weeks, it gradually increased in size and became diffused. It was associated with mild pain. On examination, the size of the swollen area was 6 x 4 cm. It had diffuse margins with a palpable pea sized firm area within this diffuse swelling. It was mildly tender with slightly increased local temperature. No cross fluctuation, transillumination or pulsations were noted. It was attached to the underlying common extensor muscle group at the elbow and was confirmed by its movement on wrist and finger extension. The overlying skin was freely mobile with no venous prominences. The patient was a non-vegetarian and a teetotaler with no history of trauma, abnormal bowel habits, weight loss, fever, cough, urinary complaints, seizures, vomiting, loss of appetite, eye problem, xanthalesma, other joint involvement or distal neurovascular deficit. Plain radiographs showed enhanced soft-tissue shadow in the lateral aspect of elbow. Musculoskeletal ultrasonographic (USG) examination of the elbow region showed hyper echoic lesion (shown by arrow ) surrounded by fluid (shown by arrow in ). Subsequently, MRI of the elbow region was done which the diagnosis of infestation of Extensor carpi ulnaris muscle by Cysticercosis cellulosae . MRI study revealed a thick walled cystic lesion seen in the posterolateral aspect of left elbow joint within extensor carpi ulnaris & abutting extensor digiti minimi muscle in proximal third of left forearm (marked by arrow) associated with extensive pericystic hyperintensity in subcutaneous tissue with enhancement. The final Impression given by the radiologist was of a cystic lesion in intramuscular location (extensor carpi ulnaris) in posterolateral aspect of left elbow & with a likelihood of inflammatory granuloma (cysticercus cellulosae) with secondary infection.
A hemogram showed eosinophilia (17% of the WBC’S) with increased Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) of 30mm/1hr, without leucocytosis (Total leucocyte count-TLC: 6800/mm3.). Rheumatoid factor was <5 IU, random blood sugar was 90mg% & serum uric acid levels was 3.2mg%. Stool examination was done for ova of Taenia Solium. However, it was found to be negative. To confirm the presence of antibodies against Taenia Solium in the serum, Indirect Hemagglutination test (IHA) using cysticercal antigens was advised. Eosinophilia, positive IHA test along with the USG & MRI results helped us to make the definitive diagnosis of Cysticercosis. Subsequently, the patient was given Albendazole (a benzimidazole derivative) at a dosage of 400 mg twice daily for a month. The swelling regressed and patient became asymptomatic after 2 months.