A 65-year-old Chinese man presented with gradually worsening cough and shortness of breath for 1 year. Throughout the course of the disease, the patient had no symptoms of hemoptysis or chest pain. He occasionally experienced dry mouth and dry eyes but no itchy skin, desquamation or joint pain. He was admitted to the respiratory department on July 19th, 2019, for further diagnosis and assessment. The patient had normal skin and mucosa, with no rash or scaling. No special past histories and family inherited diseases were reported. Velcro rales could be heard in both lower lungs on physical examination. An initial chest CT scan was taken and indicated interstitial inflammation and fibrosis in the basal segment of the bilateral lower lobe . In lung function tests, DLCO suggested a moderate diffusion disorder (54.6 % predictive value).
The full blood count, basic metabolic panel, ECG and echocardiography were all normal in this patient. Anti-endothelial cell antibody (AECA) was positive (1:100), but other vasculitis-related self-antibodies were negative. Antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-CCP, anti-SSA, anti-SSB, Ro-52, anti-nRNP, anti-Sm, anti-Jo1, anti-PM-Scl, anti-Scl-70, and anti-dsDNA antibodies were all negative. However, the myositis antibody panel showed a positive test for the anti-TIF1γ self-antibody.
According to the patient’s positive anti-TIF1γ self-antibody findings and NSIP chest CT manifestation without any clinical signs of DM, such as rash or skin lesions, we diagnosed this patient with IPAF. Subsequently, this patient underwent PET-CT scans and serum tumor marker analysis to search for evidence of potential solid tumors . However, no evidence of any tumor was found. After excluding contraindications, the patient was given oral prednisone (30 mg) once a day and pirfenidone (600 mg) three times per day, respectively.
The patient’s symptoms were not significantly aggravated after these treatments. However, the patient did not return to the hospital for follow-up reviews because of the COVID-19 epidemic in China at the end of 2019. Nearly 1 year later, the patient was admitted to the respiratory department on August 6th, 2020, presenting with aggravated shortness of breath over the previous 3 months. An enhanced chest CT scan showed an irregularly shaped nodule located on the anterior segment of the right upper lobe. Enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes were visible in the right hilum and mediastinum . Enhanced CT of the abdomen revealed bilateral adrenal nodules, and brain MRI revealed multiple metastatic nodules in the bilateral cerebral hemispheres . These imaging findings suggested the possibility of malignant lung tumors with multiple metastases. Following CT-guided percutaneous lung biopsy of the right lung nodule and needle aspiration of mediastinal lymph nodes under endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA), this patient was definitively diagnosed with right lung squamous carcinoma with mediastinal lymph node, brain and adrenal glands metastasis .