A 20-year-old man without any medical history of alcohol or drug abuse was hospitalized at a local hospital with a 3-week history of fever, chills, weakness, night sweats, and vomiting. He denied respiratory and urinary symptoms. On physical examination, his temperature was 38.4°C, pulse rate 101 bpm, respiratory rate 21 breaths/min, and blood pressure 105/60 mmHg. Cardiac and pulmonary examinations were unremarkable. No skin or oral cavity lesions were observed, nor inflamed cervical or inguinal lymph nodes.
Laboratory investigations are summarized in the legend of the Timeline. Brain computed tomography (CT) showed signs of acute sinusitis, treated with amoxicillin 1500 mg/day orally and paracetamol 500 mg every 6 h. He was discharged after 1 week and advised to maintain prescribed treatment for another week.
Three weeks later, he was readmitted at this institution with fever, chills, fatigue, headache, and significant weight loss (11 kg). Laboratory tests are summarized in the Timeline. A chest CT scan revealed pulmonary thrombi and infarcts . A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated multiple mobile masses in the RV that appeared to arise from the moderator and other RV muscular bands, with the largest measuring 20 mm × 10 mm (; , and ). The tricuspid valve was morphologically normal with mild regurgitant jet. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) revealed a structurally normal heart, besides confirming the presence of RV contrast-non-enhancing masses that were thought to be thrombi attached to a subendocardial hyperenhancement area, suggesting an underlying inflammatory process ( and ; , and ). Pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) was diagnosed secondary to RV thrombi of unknown origin. The patient received anti-coagulation therapy with low-molecular-weight heparin subcutaneously, plus warfarin starting on that day. Heparin stopped when the international normalized ratio reached therapeutic levels. A myxoma of unusual location was considered as a differential diagnosis. During the following 4 weeks, the patient developed intermittent fever, usually vespertine with no significant changes in the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), or white blood cell (WBC) count results. A second TTE showed an increase in the number and size of the RV masses and a chest CT scan revealed extensive PTE with signs of RV overload. During cardiac surgery, the tricuspid and pulmonary valves appeared normal, whereas RV masses resembling vegetations were removed. Despite the macroscopic appearance of the excised tissue suggesting vegetations, the pathologist considered that it could correspond to an inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour . Based on a suspicious diagnosis of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus IE, empirical intravenous antibiotic (AB) therapy with vancomycin, amoxicillin/sulbactam, and moxifloxacin was started. Soon the patient felt better, the fever disappeared and TTE showed only a small RV mass.
Two weeks after surgery, the patient’s fever, chills, and vomiting reappeared. A TTE showed new large RV vegetations and a chest CT scan revealed signs of recurrent septic pulmonary emboli. Bacterial and fungal blood cultures remained negative. The patient underwent a second cardiac surgery, due to uncontrolled infection with recurrence of PTE, new large mobile RV vegetations, and suspected fungal IE. The vegetations were removed, and the pathologist's histology report was consistent with IE . Treatment concerned a combination of ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, and amphotericin B because fungal endocarditis was considered likely in view of the negative blood cultures and poor response to previous AB therapy. After 1 week, amphotericin B was replaced by caspofungin as fever persisted. Subsequent recovery was satisfactory and treatment was maintained for 30 days. TTE before discharge showed a normal RV without vegetations. At this moment, the patient reported that 1 month before his first hospitalization he received a tattoo on his right arm . Because of presumed infection, he was prescribed AB treatment but he did not complete the course. Bacteraemia related to this event was probably the reason for the initial development of non-valvular RVME. He was discharged as asymptomatic and prescribed oral fluconazole for 4 weeks. At a 5-year follow-up (FU), he was asymptomatic and living a completely normal life.