A 27-year-old white South African male presented at a periodontal practice complaining of painful "gums" particularly in the anterior part of the mouth, and halitosis. His general health was satisfactory; he was a non-smoker and other than grinding his teeth was not aware of any etiological factors, such as mouth breathing, that could have contributed to his problems.
After examination a diagnosis of necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis (NUG) was made, based on the classical punched out papillae, combined with the patient's symptoms of pain and halitosis.
The clinical picture was, however, more complex. In addition to the classical punched out papillae seen with NUG, there was inflammatory gingival hyperplasia, and marked occlusal wear (probably due to his grinding habit), and short clinical crowns, all of which, in the presence of plaque could contribute to the gingival inflammation .
An intra-oral radiograph showed that the incisor teeth were not fully erupted. While the short clinical crowns could be due to occlusal wear or delayed tooth eruption, another possibility was that altered passive eruption (APE) was present, which is a predisposing factor to NUG . Metronidazole 200 mg tablets three times a day were prescribed at the first visit and combined with palliative treatment, consisting of scaling, home care instruction and a mouthwash.
One week later, there was some resolution of the gingival inflammation . Possible gingival and periodontal surgical correction of the apparent gingival overgrowth was discussed with the patient who chose not to have this treatment. Thereafter he was seen intermittently; three years after the initial consultation he presented with synthetic crowns on the maxillary incisors, placed there by another practitioner. The associated gingivae were red, shiny with rolled margins and marked inflammation . Clinical examination also showed the presence of APE which we have defined as "when a tooth has reached the occlusal plane and the gingival margin in the mid-line of the tooth is at the junction between the cervical and middle third of the clinical crown; or in the middle third or coronal third of the clinical crown in the absence of inflammation, hypertrophy or hyperplasia of the gingiva" . A periodontal probe showed clinical crown length and an intra-oral radiograph confirmed, that the crowns were not placed at or adjacent to the cemento-enamel junction (CEJ), but markedly coronal to it, as one would expect if APE is not recognized.
The synthetic crown margins were just apical to the gingival margin, a long way from the CEJ, on the convex facial surface of the clinical crowns, in a position conducive to trauma from "food impaction" and the accumulation of plaque, contributing to chronic inflammation .