A 41-year-old man who had undergone surgical resection of an ASPS of the anal region 10 years earlier presented to our hospital in 2012 because of a tumor of the pancreatic head detected via computed tomography (CT) during follow-up. In 2009, during follow-up, CT indicated lung metastasis. The patient underwent surgical resection of the lung, and in 2011, resection of the head skin was related to the metastasis. The abdominal ultrasonography (US) revealed the presence of isodense masses of 34 mm in the pancreatic head and 60 mm in the spleen. US with contrast revealed solitary lesions with enhancement . Contrast-enhanced CT revealed solitary lesions with enhancement located in the pancreatic head, spleen, and liver . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed no stenosis of the pancreatic duct. Blood examinations revealed low hemoglobin (Hb) (12.3 g/dl), low hematocrit (Ht) (24.3%), and low total protein levels (6.6 g/dl). No further laboratory tests, including those for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), showed abnormal values. The patient was diagnosed with a neuroendocrine tumor or pancreatic metastasis of ASPS. Subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (SSPPD) of the pancreatic head mass, resection of the spleen, and partial hepatectomy were performed. The operative time was 616 min, and the blood loss was approximately 1070 g. Gross examination revealed that the excision cut of the tumor was gray, and 40 mm in size, with a clear border between the tumor and pancreas. The excision margin of the spleen tumor was gray, 60 mm in size, and showed a clear border between the tumor and spleen. The excision cut of the liver tumor was yellow, 10 mm in size, and showed an unclear border between the tumor and liver. The pathological examination showed that atypical cells with eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules proliferated to form solid alveolar nests in both pancreas and spleen . Further examination showed focal nodular hyperplasia in the liver; immunohistochemistry analysis in primary ASPS and pancreatic and splenic metastases . Primary ASPS, pancreatic, and splenic metastases had Desmin-positive foci. The antigen Ki-67 proliferation index was < 10% in primary ASPS, pancreatic, and splenic metastases. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 22. However, the patient showed recurrence of multiple lung metastases at 18 months after metastasectomy. Twelve years after primary resection and 2 years after metastasectomy, the patient died as a consequence of multiple metastases.