Our patient is a 54-year-old female with a history of chronic back pain, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), depression, hypertension and hyperlipidemia, visual impairment requiring corrective lenses, and worsening headaches who was found to have papilledema on a routine ophthalmologic exam. She additionally has a family history of stroke in both maternal grandparents and aneurysms in both paternal grandparents. On presentation she reported 2 years of progressive headaches and subjective cognitive decline. Physical examination revealed no neurologic deficits except for mild give away weakness in bilateral lower extremities secondary to back pain. A brain MRI was obtained which demonstrated diffusely engorged cortical veins and a severely dilated left superior ophthalmic vein which was concerning for a dAVF or cavernous carotid fistula. A timeline of events from initial presentation through treatment and follow-up can be found in .
A cerebral angiogram (–) was obtained which demonstrated a complex dAVF with the fistulous connections at the vein of Galen (Lawton et al. Type 1). The arterial supply of the dAVF came from several arteries including bilateral superficial temporal arteries, bilateral occipital arteries, bilateral tentorial branches of the meningohypophyseal trunk, and bilateral branches of the posterior cerebral artery. There was a complex deep venous drainage pattern with retrograde venous drainage from the vein of Galen anteriorly to the left superior ophthalmic vein through a severely dilated basal vein of Rosenthal, and corticovenous reflux through the internal cerebral veins to several dilated medullary veins. The straight sinus was occluded and there was partial occlusion of the left transverse sinus. It is possible that the occluded straight sinus was the inciting event leading to this complex dAVF.
The treatment options were discussed including: transarterial embolization, transvenous embolization, open surgical ligation, radiosurgery, and continued observation. After a thorough discussion with the patient and her family, we decided to proceed with transarterial embolization, knowing that this dAVF would likely require multiple embolizations or a different approach for complete treatment.
We began the transarterial embolization with superselective angiograms of the superficial temporal and occipital arteries. The most significant arterial supply to the fistula was from the left occipital artery. We were able to pass the transosseous point of the left occipital artery with the microcatheter but unable to achieve advance distally to fistulous point. Using Onyx-18 we were able to achieve partial penetration of the fistulous connection before significant reflux and cessation of antegrade Onyx penetration prevented further embolization. Follow-up superselective and external carotid angiograms demonstrated a minor reduction in arterial venous shunting –). At this point, we decided that further transarterial embolization would not be successful. She tolerated the procedure well and was discharged home the following day.
We again discussed the treatment options and ultimately recommended a transvenous approach given the diffuse arterial supply, complexity of venous drainage, largely unsuccessful transarterial embolization, morbidity of surgery, rupture risk, and delayed occlusion time with radiosurgery. Various transvenous access routes were discussed, including via the superior ophthalmic vein, but the navigation to the vein of Galen was thought to be challenging with a high risk for complications. We decided that access to the vein of Galen through the occluded straight sinus would carry a lower intra-operative risk if we could navigate a catheter through the occlusion.
Approaching the VoG via the right transverse sinus was attempted using a Navien 058 guide microcatheter over a headway duo 156 and Asahi 14. However, despite several attempts, the microcatheter could not be advanced into the VoG to the level of dAVF. Further attempts were made using a headway duo 167 advanced over an Asahi 008 microguidewire, and then with a Marathon microcatheter over the Asahi 008 microguidewire. However, each time the microcatheter could not track over the wire through the occluded straight sinus to reach the VoG. At this time, with no immediate complications, the procedure was aborted.
Two weeks later, transvenous embolization was attempted again via the contralateral (left) transverse sinus. A 6-French × 80 cm long shuttle sheath (Cook Medical LLC, Bloomington IN) was placed in the left Internal Jugular vein via a transfemoral approach. A 5F Glidecath (Terumo, Somerset NJ) was placed in the right external carotid artery through a transfemoral approach for roadmap guidance. We felt that the configuration of the left transverse sinus into the straight sinus had a more favorable angle for catheterization. A Navien 058 intermediate catheter was advanced via the shuttle into the left transverse sinus over an Excelsior SL-10 microcatheter and Asahi 14 microwire. The microcatheter and wire were advanced through the occluded straight sinus to the level of the vein of Galen (,). Superselective venograms were obtained via the microcatheter to determine the level of the vein of Galen. Once through the occluded straight sinus, we were able to find an opening in the occluded connection between the vein of Galen and the straight sinus. The microcatheter and wire were then advanced distally to the level of the fistula (,). Superselective venograms and right external carotid arteriograms were obtained confirming the appropriate positioning of the microcatheter just distal to the level of the fistula. Embolization was then performed in a retrograde fashion using Microplex Coils (MicroVention, Aliso Viejo CA) and Axium Coils (Medtronic, Minneapolis MN). Intermittent angiograms were obtained to evaluate for occlusion of the fistula . Final follow-up arteriograms were obtained from the right external carotid artery , left vertebral artery and left common carotid artery which demonstrated no residual arteriovenous shunting. Intravenous heparin boluses were given throughout the procedure. Given the significant reduction of overall flow through the venous system and the history of venous thrombosis, we decided to maintain a heparin infusion out of concern for cortical vein thrombosis.
The patient tolerated the procedure well and was observed in the Neuro-ICU for 24 h. We elected to convert the heparin infusion to Eliquis for 30 days. She was able to be discharged home on post-embolization day 1. Unfortunately, she presented to the emergency department on post-embolization day 2 with complaints of severe headache, nausea, and vomiting and was found to have a moderate volume intraventricular hemorrhage involving predominately the left ambient cistern, third and lateral ventricles. She was admitted to the Neuro-ICU, the Eliquis was reversed, and an external ventricular drain was placed due to progressive lethargy with an opening pressure of 28 mmHg. After a prolonged ICU course due to intracranial hypertension, the external ventricular drain was able to be removed and she was discharged to acute inpatient rehabilitation. She has since returned home and has no new neurologic deficits.
A follow-up angiogram was obtained 6 months after the transvenous embolization which demonstrated significantly improved venous drainage pattern with greatly reduced venous congestion (–). There was minimal residual arteriovenous shunting from the falcine artery and posterior choroidal artery with venous drainage through the basal vein of Rosenthal and left superior ophthalmic vein . Clinically, she is doing remarkably well. The severe progressive headaches have resolved, and her cognitive function has improved. She is no longer experiencing “brain fog.” Given the significant angiographic and clinical improvement, we plan to repeat an angiogram in 1 year to follow the residual fistula.