A 49-year-old male oil field worker from West Texas with a history of gastroesophageal reflux disease, hypertension, obstructive sleep apnea, and obesity presented with a painful right knee effusion for at least 1 year. He had a history of coccidioidomycosis pneumonia 15 months prior, which presented as left lower lobe nodular infiltrates on radiographs, along with fever, chills, dyspnea, and malaise. The patient’s pulmonary coccidioidomycosis was treated with fluconazole for 12 months without much response, and he concurrently developed worsening the right knee pain. Infectious disease consultants subsequently placed the patient on itraconazole for 3 months for disseminated coccidioidomycosis infection, which abated his pulmonary symptoms but not his knee pain. At the time of presentation to orthopedics, the lungs were clear, with no infiltrates or pleural effusions present on imaging.
Physical examination demonstrated right knee effusion and palpable soft-tissue mass in the lateral supra-patellar and lateral infra-patellar regions (, ). The patient tolerated an axial load and was able to ambulate with an antalgic gait. His knee range of motion with discomfort was from full extension to 110 degrees of flexion. He had no pain with an examination of his hip or his other joints at the initial presentation. Knee joint aspirate demonstrated a yellow hazy fluid, elevated white blood cell count (12,579/mm3) with 56% polynuclear cells, and 44% monocytes. Fungal culture was positive for C. immitis and C. posadasii. Serum serologies demonstrated positive Coccidioides IgG (9.0) and IgM (2.8) antibodies. Serum complement fixation was elevated at 1:1024. Cerebrospinal fluid demonstrated positive Coccidioides IgG (2.9), and negative IgM (0).
Radiographs of the right knee showed a large joint effusion without underlying osseous abnormality (-). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the knee confirmed extensive synovial thickening and enhancement throughout the right knee joint compatible with synovitis (-). In addition, subcutaneous abscesses superficial to the quadriceps and patellar tendons were identified.
The patient provided informed consent to undergo a right knee open synovectomy, biopsy, arthrotomy, and drainage. During surgery, superficial abscesses (measuring 4 cm × 4 cm and 2 cm × 2 cm) with extensive synovial thickening were found with no knee joint involvement. The patient tolerated surgery well and encountered no intraoperative complications. The wound was primarily closed with an incisional vacuum placed.
Histopathologic examination of drained fluid from surgery revealed spherules with endospores suggestive of coccidioides (, ).
Post-operatively, an infectious disease consultant placed the patient on liposomal amphotericin B (AmB), vancomycin, metronidazole, and cefepime. The incisional vacuum was removed on the post-operative day 2. At discharge, the wound was healing well, and there was no evidence of surgical site infections. The patient was given a hinged knee brace but was advised to spend time without it to work on increasing his range of motion. The patient was also put on 200 mg itraconazole twice a day at discharge.
The patient continued following up with orthopedics at 3 months and 6 months. At the 6-month follow-up visit, the patient endorsed improved functional status and was ambulating without assistance. Physical examination showed a well-healed surgical scar with no signs of reinfection or drainage. Knee range of motion had returned to greater than 90 degrees flexion and full extension (, ). Infectious disease specialists decided to continue the itraconazole regimen indefinitely, periodically following the patient for his chronic coccidioidomycosis infection.