A 26-year-old white woman with hereditary cystinosis and multiple medical comorbidities was referred to us for newly developed pancytopenia. At 13 months she presented with nausea, vomiting, failure to thrive, and renal failure and required in-patient hospitalization. During this initial work up she was found to have hereditary cystinosis by detecting elevated levels of cystine in her peripheral blood leukocytes. It was determined that her cystinosis caused her to develop a secondary renal Fanconi’s syndrome, which had led to the symptoms of nausea, vomiting, failure to thrive, and renal failure. As a result, she was then started on cysteamine treatment as a young child. She then progressively developed worsening nephropathy secondary to her cystinosis and underwent a renal transplant at age 16. Three years later she unfortunately developed rejection of her transplanted kidney and required a nephrectomy. She was then put on chronic hemodialysis for end-stage renal disease (ESRD) three times a week. Due to her ESRD she developed chronic anemia secondary to chronic kidney disease (CKD). She eventually required several blood transfusions and had to be placed on weekly injections of erythropoietin. Over the next 4 years she then developed other medical conditions such as hypertension, hypothyroidism, esophagitis with esophageal ulceration status post-Nissen fundoplication, gastric outlet obstruction status post-Roux-en-Y surgery, and multiple deep vein thromboses requiring chronic anticoagulation with Coumadin (warfarin). Later she developed thrombocytopenia with platelets fluctuating between 40×103/μl and 80×103/μl. She was then referred to our clinic for a consult after a recent hospitalization found her to be pancytopenic with leukopenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia.
At the time of the consult, she had stable vital signs and no clinical signs of bleeding. She denied any hematuria, melena, blood in her stools, or vaginal bleeding. Her physical examination was unremarkable with no signs of ecchymosis or contusions. Her complete blood count (CBC) showed white blood cell (WBC) count was 1.7×103/μl with an absolute neutrophil count of 714/μl, a hemoglobin level of 10.0g/dl, hematocrit of 29.8%, and a platelet count of 38×103/μl. Her mean corpuscular volume (MCV) was 84.8fl (normal range, 81.5 to 97.0fl). Her reticulocyte count was 2.4% (normal range, 0.9 to 2.5%) with a reticulocyte index of 1.18. Her vitamin B12 was 1298pg/ml (normal range, 180 to 1241pg/ml) and folate 8.9ng/ml (3.0 to 18.2ng/ml). She was taking Coumadin (warfarin) due to a history of recurrent deep vein thrombosis (DVT) so her prothrombin time and international normalized ratio (INR) were elevated at 28.2 seconds (normal range, 10.0 to 11.3 seconds) and 2.74 (target range, 2.0 to 3.0 for DVT treatment) respectively. She had been receiving erythropoietin for her anemia secondary to CKD so it was not measured. Her hepatitis B and C, parvovirus B16, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) assays were all negative. Her Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) antibody titers were positive but she did not have clinical signs of active mononucleosis such as fatigue, myalgia, fever, or sore throat. We then performed a peripheral blood smear which found her red blood cells (RBCs) to be hypochromatic and normocytic. Polychromasia was not increased while her WBCs and platelets were moderately decreased in numbers but normal in appearance. No circulating blasts or abnormal cells were visualized.
We then performed a bone marrow biopsy. The bone marrow biopsy showed that the cellularity was 5% with active trilineage hematopoiesis with only a moderate amount of fat and stroma present. No circulating blasts or abnormal cells were visualized in the bone marrow biopsy aspirate or core. No immature cells were visualized and the myeloid to erythroid ratio was estimated to be 3 to 4:1. The megakaryocytes that were visualized appeared to be normal in appearance. The quantity of observed megakaryocytes were found to be decreased but adequate in number when one accounted for the overall panhypoplasia present in the examined biopsy specimen. Flow cytometry revealed no abnormalities and iron staining revealed increased iron stores. However, much to our surprise there were extensive sheets of deposits of rhomboid and rectangular shaped, birefringent cystine crystals visualized under polarized light, which occupied about 30% of the marrow components . Since other causes of pancytopenia had been ruled out (infectious, gastrointestinal malabsorption, rheumatologic, and hematologic disorders), we were left with the most likely possibility being that she had myelosuppression/marrow replacement from deposition of cystine crystals as the cause of her pancytopenia. On further interview the patient revealed that she had been having difficulty taking her cysteamine on a consistent basis for the past few months due to multiple hospitalizations for other medical reasons. After our consultation, her medical condition remained stable for the next few months without any prolonged hospitalizations and she was able to continue her out-patient cysteamine treatment with minimal interruptions. On our next follow-up visit we observed an improvement in her thrombocytopenia with platelets increasing from 38×103/μl to 60×103/μl over the course of the next few months. Unfortunately, during the course of the next 2 years she had repeated hospital admissions for other medical problems and had much difficulty again maintaining consistent cysteamine treatment. Her thrombocytopenia worsened again to about 30×103/μl. A repeat bone marrow biopsy was done (about 3 years after the initial bone marrow biopsy) and showed increased deposits of cystine crystals making up approximately 40% of her bone marrow components.