A 21-year-old Caucasian male was admitted to a hospital (collaborating institution) in Southern Germany in late summer with newly manifested jaundice as well as a seven-day-history of myalgia, retro-orbital headaches, fatigue, recurrent fever, and nausea. Since the beginning of his illness, myalgia — especially in the calf region — intensified, causing the patient an increasing difficulty in walking. He reported an episode of gum bleeding after cleaning his teeth. There was no history of traveling abroad in the last months and no recent contact with animals. Two weeks prior to the onset of his symptoms the patient sustained a minor knee injury resulting in a skin abrasion while bathing in the river Isar close to Munich, Germany.
The patient works as a computer scientist and has no relevant medical history. Weight and height upon admission were recorded to be 90 kg and 189 cm, respectively (BMI = 25.2 kg/m2). Alcohol, nicotine, or drug anamnesis was negative. No medication or allergies were reported.
On examination, the patient appeared tired, but he displayed no neurological abnormalities. Body temperature was 36.8 °C, pulse 90 bpm, blood pressure 114/75 mmHg, respiratory rate 16 bpm, and oxygen saturation 99% while breathing ambient air. The lungs and heart auscultation was unremarkable, the abdomen was soft and non-tender. The skin and scleral inspection revealed jaundice and a slight gum bleeding was observed during the examination of the oral cavity. Upon pressure, tenderness in the thighs and calves was reported.
Abdominal ultrasound upon admission to the hospital revealed hepatosplenomegaly and no signs of intra- or extrahepatic cholestasis. White-cell count was 9.9 G/L (87% neutrophils and 3.5% lymphocytes), platelet count 39 G/L, and hemoglobin 13.3 g/dl. Serum sodium level was 123 mmol/l, potassium 3.15 mmol/l, and creatinine 2.8 mg/dl (248 μmol/l) with glomerular filtration rate of 31 ml/min/1.73m2. C-reactive protein was 15.4 mg/dl, procalcitonin 2.86 ng/ml, and interleukin-6 was 66.4 pg/ml. Aspartate aminotransferase was 92 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 65 U/l, total bilirubin 17.3 mg/dl (with direct bilirubin reaching 14.7 mg/dl), gamma-glutamyltransferase 47 U/l and alkaline phosphatase 108 U/l. Creatine kinase was 1197 U/l, prothrombin time international normalized ratio 1.2, and partial-thromboplastin time 33 s. Urinalysis revealed a pH of 8, 3+ protein (6.3 g protein/12 h), 5–10 leukocytes per high power field, and 0–2 erythrocytes per high power field. An overview of laboratory test results with the corresponding reference ranges is shown in Table .
On day 1 upon admission an empiric intravenous antimicrobial regime with doxycycline (100 mg every 24 h) and ceftriaxone (2 g every 24 h) was initiated while a selection of tests in search for microbial and viral agents was pending. The patient received intravenous fluid and electrolyte replacement. Within 48 h upon admission, hypokalemia (2.32 mmol/l) and hyponatremia (113 mmol/l) worsened significantly without signs of acid-base dysregulation in blood gas analysis. Creatinine increased to 4.37 mg/dl (386 μmol/l), and a polyuria with up to 7.2 L urine output /24 h was documented. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) at the initial collaborating institution and — approximately 48 h later — transferred to the ICU at our university hospital. Starting from day 4 since the initial admission creatinine levels started to decrease, polyuria was in regress and potassium and sodium levels normalized. In addition, platelet count improved and C-reactive protein decreased. The patient remained afebrile. Despite the gradually improving general condition of the patient, serum bilirubin levels were constantly rising starting from day 1 since admission, reaching its maximum on day 4 (54 mg/dl total bilirubin, 39 mg/dl direct bilirubin). Aspartate and alanine aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase and gamma-glutamyltransferase remained normal or mildly elevated .
Urine and blood cultures revealed no growth. Screening tests for hepatotropic viruses (hepatitis A, B, C, and E) as well as HIV, Epstein-Barr virus, and cytomegalovirus were negative. Elevated IgG antibodies to herpes simplex virus (HSV 1 and 2) were detected while IgM antibodies remained within the normal range, suggesting an earlier or latent infection with HSV virus. Quantitative serology assays for hantavirus, Chlamydia, Brucella, and Rickettsia (rickettsii/conorii) showed no evidence for infection with these pathogens. Urine test for Legionella antigen was negative. Within normal range were: antinuclear antibodies (ANA), antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA), anti-liver/kidney microsomal antibodies type 1 (anti-LKM-1), anti-soluble liver antigen antibody/liver-pancreas (a-SLA/LP), anti-liver membrane antibodies (LMA), anti-liver specific protein antibodies (LSP), and perinuclear- and cytoplasmic-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA and c-ANCA) whereby autoimmune hepatitis could be ruled out. Normal levels of serum copper (110 μg/dl, reference range: 70–140 μg/dl) as well as serum ceruloplasmin (0.44 g/l, reference range: 0.2–0.6 g/l) allowed to dismiss Wilson’s disease from diagnostic consideration.
The presumptive diagnosis of icteric leptospirosis was strengthened by detection of antileptospiral IgM antibodies with the use of ELISA in the acute phase serum specimen (38 U/ml, reference range: < 15 U/ml, SERION ELISA classic Leptospira IgG/IgM, Virion Serion, Würzburg, Germany) and confirmed by an accredited PCR method using proprietary primers at the Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene at the University of Regensburg, Germany. The therapy with doxycycline was discontinued (total duration of 3 days) and the regime with ceftriaxone carried on as a targeted monotherapy (total duration of 12 days).
The patient was discharged home after a total of 12 days of hospitalization (3 days at the ICU). The general condition upon discharge was reported as good; fatigue was declining and the remaining symptoms, with the exception of jaundice (total bilirubin 6.2 mg/dl), subsided.
Throughout hospitalization and a 3-month follow-up period, indocyanine green plasma disappearance rates were recorded multiple times. For each measurement, 25 mg of the ICG dye were dissolved in 5 ml of distilled water, and a dose of 22.5 mg (0.25 mg/kg body weight) was injected intravenously. ICG-PDR was determined via non-invasive, transcutaneous pulse dye densitometry with the use of the LiMON device (Pulsion Medical Systems SE, Feldkirchen, Germany). Initial concentration at time “0” was set to be 100% and plasma disappearance rate was calculated as percentage change over time (%/min) . Normal values for ICG-PDR are considered to be 18–25%/min [, ]. The measured ICG-PDR values, total bilirubin and alanine aminotransferase serum levels are displayed in Fig. .
Initially severely reduced ICG-PDR (2%/min on day 5 upon initial admission) gradually improved within several days to reach almost normal level on day 10 upon initial admission to hospital (17.4%/min). Approximately 7 weeks after initial hospitalization, ICG-PDR was recorded to be within normal range (23.7%/min) and reached 33.4%/min on day 85. While ICG-PDR values rapidly normalized in parallel with clinical improvement, serum bilirubin levels were slowly decreasing (44.4 mg/dl on day 5 and 9.0 mg/dl on day 10 upon hospitalization), and it was only until 7 weeks upon admission that they reached normal levels . Mild elevation of serum alanine aminotransferase was at its peak of 124 U/l on day 12 upon hospitalization and reached close to normal levels by week 7 upon admission . Within the 3-month follow-up period, fatigue resolved and the patient reported no remaining symptoms.