A 46-year-old female patient visited Sun Yat-sen University Affiliated Cancer Hospital because of advanced NPC with synchronous breast metastasis.
On 28 September 2020, the patient visited the Guangdong Chinese Medicine Hospital Zhuhai Branch because of a breast mass.
Breast ultrasonography revealed a solid mass (57 × 25 × 51 mm) in the right breast with a breast imaging reporting and data system score of 4C (suspicious of breast cancer)[,] and an enlarged and abnormal structure in the right axillary lymph node. A core needle biopsy (CNB) was performed for the right breast lesions and right axillary lymph nodes. Subsequent pathological examination revealed that the tissue within the right breast mass was consistent with invasive breast carcinoma. Immunohistochemical results were as follows: ER (-), PR (-), HER-2 (-), Ki67 (approximately 60% +), CK (+), GATA3 (-), P63 (partial +), Calponin (deletion of myoepithelium), CD68 (-), E-cad (+), P120 (cell membrane +), and CK7 (-). Metastatic cancer was detected in the biopsy sample of the right axillary lymph node tissue. Immunohistochemical results were as follows: GATA3 (scattered/weak +) and S-100 (scattered +). Given these findings, right invasive breast cancer with right axillary lymph node metastasis was considered.
Since the breast tumor was accompanied by lymph node metastasis, a detailed general examination was subsequently performed. Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head revealed thickening of the nasopharyngeal lateral wall and a shallow pharyngeal recess on the right side . Breast MRI and breast ultrasound revealed suspicious bilateral masses. Based on the MRI results, nasopharyngeal endoscopy plus biopsy , in situ hybridization Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) examination of the breast tumor specimen obtained via CNB, and whole-body positron emission tomography/computerized tomography (PET-CT) were performed. Nasopharyngeal endoscopic biopsy of tissues obtained from the top of the right nasopharynx revealed undifferentiated non-keratinizing carcinoma and a positive in situ hybridization result for EBV in some cells of the breast and lymph node tissue, while immunohistochemical examination for Ki67 indicated 80% positivity. Whole-body PET-CT revealed thickening of the right nasopharyngeal wall.
Based on these findings, stage IV NPC with bilateral breast and axillary metastases was the primary diagnosis. The investigators recommended chemotherapy and follow-up radiotherapy. However, the patient visited Guangzhou for further diagnosis and treatment after being discharged for personal reasons.
The patient had no history of infectious diseases, family history of breast cancer, or history of other malignancies.
Physical examination revealed that the patient’s right supraclavicular lymph node was swollen, with a hard mass (approximately 1.0 cm × 1.0 cm in size, clear boundaries, and poor activity). There was no palpable mass in the left breast or axillary area. Furthermore, there were no palpable masses in the neck lymph nodes, and general physical examination revealed no obvious abnormalities.
The breast mass, bilateral axillary lymph nodes, and right cervical lymph nodes were re-biopsied. The pathological findings were consistent with those of nasopharyngeal undifferentiated non-keratinizing cancer metastasis to the breast. In addition, in situ hybridization of EBV was positive in all examined tissues.