A 69-year-old female suffering from chronic pancreatitis of unknown etiology since the year 2018 experienced sudden weight loss, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Her medical history includes diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and pancreatic insufficiency. She is also a heavy smoker. She underwent medical testing to evaluate her sudden onset of symptoms. Blood tests revealed no signs of inflammation, with normal liver functions, a normal rheumatological panel, and a normal IGG4 level. A gastroscopy showed an ulcerative lesion covered with mucus . CT scans revealed signs of chronic pancreatitis with calcifications. The main pancreatic duct (MPD) was dilated to 1.3 cm, with the presence of a fistula between the main pancreatic duct and the stomach . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) images showed no additional findings when compared with the CT scan . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) showed a non-homogenous pancreas with diffused calcifications and the MPD with a diameter of approximately 1.3 cm . Multiple biopsies from the edges of the fistula via a gastroscopy yielded main-branch IPMN.
Since both chronic pancreatitis and IPMN are considered risk factors for pancreatic malignancy, and also considering the high rate of malignancy due to main duct IPMN (MD-IPMN), a total pancreatectomy was proposed after a multidisciplinary discussion. An en bloc total pancreatectomy with wedge resection of the stomach including the fistula, splenectomy, and Roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy and gastrojejunostomy were performed . During the operation, there were no signs of peritoneal metastasis, and the surgery was uneventful. The postoperative course was complicated with bleeding from the stapler line of the gastric wedge resection that was treated with adrenaline injections via a gastroscopy. The neoplasm involved the head, body, and tail of the pancreas with a fistulation between the stomach and the MPD . Pathological results revealed (1) a ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas that is G2 moderately differentiated and (2) IPMN with an associated invasive carcinoma. All margins were tumor-free, with no lymphovascular invasion (0/30) (pT3 pN0) (,). The patient was discharged 2 weeks after the procedure. During a follow-up visit 10 days later, the physical examination was normal. The patient was referred to our oncology department and was scheduled for chemotherapy (the FOLFIRINOX regimen). No further complications were noted.