A 2.5-month-old boy presented to our emergency room with icterus for the previous two days. He had a history of esophageal atresia and imperforate anus, that had been treated with thoracotomy, esophagostomy, gastrostomy and colostomy placement on the second day of his life. No associated symptoms such as fever or respiratory distress existed upon presentation.
On physical examination, sclera icterus and stool leakage from colostomy were the only positive findings. The infant appeared otherwise normal.
The laboratory examination revealed elevated liver enzymes (Alkaline phosphatase: 836IU/L, Gamma-GT: 1020IU/L, Aspartate aminotransferase: 201IU/L, and Alanine aminotransferase: 124IU/L) and direct hyper-bilirubinemia (total bilirubin: 9.7 mg/dl and direct bilirubin: 5.8 mg/dl). Klebsiella pneumonia was isolated from the colostomy culture.
Left-sided SVC, mild tricuspid regurgitation, and mild pulmonary insufficiency were noted on echocardiography.
On abdominopelvic ultrasound mildly dilated central with normal-sized peripheral intra-hepatic biliary ducts were visualized. The proximal cystic duct (5 mm) appeared dilated and contained a sludge ball within. Layering sludge inside the gallbladder and common bile duct was seen. Otherwise, the exam was unremarkable considering abnormal ultrasound findings with suspicion of biliary tree anomaly, Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) was performed which revealed trifurcation of the right anterior, right posterior (RPD), and left hepatic duct (LHD) anterior to the portal venous bifurcation. The intrahepatic biliary ducts appeared mildly dilated. Common hepatic duct was not visible in the expected location after the confluence of RAD, RPD, and LHD. Instead, an aberrant cholecystohepatic duct was noted as the only connection draining bile from the right anterior hepatic duct towards neck of the gallbladder. A mildly dilated cystic duct drained bile from the gallbladder into CBD, which was normally tapered until termination in the ampulla of Vater. The patient was treated with Cefotaxime and Amikacin due to positive colostomy culture and Ursodeoxycholic acid. The symptoms and laboratory data improved, and the patient was discharged in seven days.
He remained symptom-free in the next 6 months when he was recalled for the final surgery at which colon interposition was performed and during this surgery, portahepatis was explored as well, no fibroproliferative tissue was present at the anatomic site of CHD indicating biliary agenesis rather than atresia. The post-operative days were uneventful, and he was discharged with no symptoms, including icterus.
Concerning the patient’s biliary anomaly, and as he remained symptom-free on medical treatment (Ursodeoxycholic acid), close follow-up was preferred upon surgery. He did well in the next 15 months and is yet to be followed.