A 24-year-old primigravida with an unknown last menstrual
period presented to the emergency room with a 3-month
history of lower abdominal and lower back pain that radiated
into her right thigh. The pain occurred two to three
times daily, lasting 5 minutes with each episode and worsening
during the few days prior to presentation. During the
three previous months the patient described irregular vaginal bleeding and watery vaginal discharge. She was evaluated two months previously at another hospital and was diagnosed as
having a “cyst.” She was discharged with a narcotic prescription
that she noted had improved her pain, but did not relieve it.
Her medical history revealed no prior surgeries or any
history of assisted reproduction. Coitarche began at 14 years
of age and she noted a minimum of 15 previous sexual partners.
Hospital medical records listed positive toxicology
screen results for illegal drugs on multiple emergency room
visits. During the previous 6 years, culture and serology results
documented four prior separate infections with Chlamydia
trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, herpes simplex virus
2, and Treponema pallidum, respectively. The patient reported
that she completed treatment for all four infections. Current
testing for C trachomatis and N gonorrhoeae by DNA
probe was negative for both species. Serum testing for rapid
plasma reagin (RPR) was also negative. The patient did not
demonstrate any clinical sequelae of herpes simplex virus
and thus testing for this STI was not performed on the current
admission.
On physical exam, the patient was afebrile, and her vital
signs were stable. Abdominal palpation elicited tenderness in the right lower quadrant. Pelvic examination revealed blood
in the vagina, a closed cervical os, uterine tenderness, and a
palpable right adnexal mass. Rectovaginal exam concurred
with the pelvic exam and stool guaiac testing for occult blood
was negative.
Diagnostic testing showed a quantitative serum β-HCG
titer of 263 mIU/mL, a hematocrit of 38%, and a serum progesterone
level of 2.2 ng/mL. Additionally, ultrasonographic
examination displayed a 10 × 10 × 8 cm right adnexal mass
containing a nonviable twin pregnancy with each fetal
crown-rump length corresponding to a gestational age of 9.3
weeks. A separating linear echo was seen in the mass between
the two fetuses .
An exploratory laparotomy revealed a hemoperitoneum
containing 300 mL and a 10 cm right-sided pelvic mass incorporating
the right fallopian tube and ovary. Small intestine
and the appendix were adherent by fibrous adhesions to
the mass. The contralateral ovary and fallopian tube had numerous
adhesions distorting their normal anatomy. A right
salpingoophorectomy, an appendectomy, and an extensive
lysis of adhesions were performed. The patient's postoperative
course was uncomplicated.
Pathological evaluation of the surgical specimen showed
a twin pregnancy within the fallopian tube . During
more detailed histopathologic examination, the finding
of a dividing membrane established the pregnancy to be
monochorionic diamnionic, and measurement of the twin
fetuses estimated their gestational age at 7 weeks.