A 60 years old man affected by diabetes mellitus, Leriche syndrome, with ileostomy after emicolectomy for ulcerative colitis (RCU), was admitted to our Emergency Department with fever, acute pain, oedema, dyschromia of right hemiscrotum, penis, and perineal region . At the level of the scrotum a visible suppuration was present and vivid pain was evocable.
The blood exams revealed a neutrophilic leukocytosis with 19.1 × 109 white blood cells 83.2% of which neutrophiles, hemoglobin 9.3 g/dl, glucose 314 mg/dl, creatinine 1.2 mg/dl, C-reactive protein 42.7 mg/L, procalcitonin 29.44 ng/ml. The modified Laboratory Risk Indicator for Necrotizing Fasciitis score (LRINEC score) was 7, suspicion for necrotizing fasciitis . The Charlson Comorbidity Index score was of 6, the Fournier’s Gangrene Severity Index was 9 with a risk of death > 75% [, ].
The emergency ultrasound exam revealed a marked thickening of the scrotal wall associated with intrafascial anechogen film and multiple hyperechoic spots with posterior echoes as for aerial component.
Computed Tomography revealed an abundant air-gas content in the context of the soft and peripheral tissues at the level of the right scrotal lodge reached the cutaneous plane at the lower pole and more cranially, further gas was localized at the base of the root of the penis, in the paramedian perineum homolaterally up to floor below the ischium pubic branch . A marked fluid-edematous thickening of the tunics and scrotal walls were present bilaterally but more evident on the right side of the scrotum.
Intravenous fluid resuscitation and broad-spectrum antibiotics such as Piperacillin/Tazobactam (4.5 gr iv q8h), Imipenem/Cilastatin (500 mg iv q8h) and Daptomycin (700 mg iv q24h) were administered.
A prompt surgical debridement of genitalia and perineal region with an accurate necrotic tissue removal up to exposure of healthy tissue was performed . A Penrose drain was left in place anterior to the rectum where a more destructive debridement was performed. It was removed on the 4th postoperative day after daily withdrawal due to granulated tissue formation. A single blood transfusion was performed for anemia.
Based on intra-operative scrotal ulcer swab, positive for Escherichia coli, Enterococcus faecium, Streptococcus oralis, Candida albicans, Bacteroides fragilis e Staphylococcus lugdunensis, on the 5th postoperative day, the antibiotic therapy was switched to Piperacillin/Tazobactam (4.5 gr iv q8h), Teicoplanin (600 mg iv q24H) and Fluconazole (400 mg iv q24h). Hemocultures and urinocultures were negative.
High-intensity care was carried on in the next days with a bedside daily surgical wound medications with fibrine debridement, normal saline and povidone-iodine solutions irrigation, iodoform and fatty gauze application, until discharge on the 40th postoperative day .
Plastic surgeons decide to not perform a skin graft due to an excellent wound improvement with local medication. Every 3 days office-based medication with silver dressing, after normal saline and povidone-iodine irrigation and fibrinous tissue debridement, was performed until complete re-epithelialization of the scrotum on the 60th postoperative day.