A 45-year-old female patient presented at our hospital on March 11, 2020 due to numbness in both lower extremities without obvious inducement, which gradually spread to the waist.
The patient experienced weakness in her lower extremities and walked with difficulty which she described as “stepping on cotton”. In addition, the patient also complained of transient acupuncture-like pain in the chest and back, although she could control defecation and urination. A head computed tomography scan showed subdural effusion on both frontal sides. The patient was then admitted to the Neurology Department of our hospital on March 16, 2020. On the second day after admission, the weakness in her lower limbs worsened and the sensation of a “banding” pain in the chest and back became more tangible. There was also difficulty in urination but not in passing stool. Once the patient’s condition stabilized, she was transferred to the Department of Rehabilitation Medicine on March 27, 2020. At the time of admission, her lower limbs were still weak but not swollen, with obvious chest and back banding, urinary catheter retention and self-dissolving stool.
The patient was diagnosed with Sjogren's syndrome more than 2 years previously, and had been taking 0.2 g hydroxychloroquine sulfate tablets once daily for 1 year, which had been discontinued for about 6 mo before the onset of NMOSD. The patient denied a history of hypertension, diabetes and heart disease.
There was no similar medical history in her family. She also denied previous exposure to toxins, smoking, drinking, or any food and drug allergies.
Physical examination showed hypoesthesia from the T5 plane, with retention of sacrococcygeal sensation. The patient did not have any sensation in the T6-T11 plane but experienced a pronounced corset-like pain in her chest and abdomen. In addition, although the muscular strength of the lower limbs had decreased, the muscle tension was normal. The patient's bilateral eye movements, vision and visual field tests were normal, which ruled out optic neuritis. Her Berg Balance Scale (BBS) score was 4/56, bilateral Fugl-Meyer assessment (FMA) score for lower extremities was 15/34, and the modified Barthel index (MBI) score for activities of daily living (ADL) was only 48/100.
The routine laboratory tests for blood, urine, and liver, kidney and thyroid function did not show any obvious abnormalities. The D-dimer level was 4.13 μg/mL (the normal range is 0.5 μg/mL) in the coagulation test. The patient’s serum was positive for antibodies against rheumatoid factor, Sjogren's syndrome antigen A (SSA), Sjogren's syndrome antigen B (SSB), Ro-52 (an antinuclear antibody of 52 kDa peptide fragment), AQP4 (IgG) and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG; IgG), and negative for anti-myelin basic protein (MBP) IgG . The CSF was colorless and transparent, with an abnormally high leukocyte count and protein levels, which indicated an inflammatory response. However, the CSF was negative for the anti-AQP4, MBP and MOG antibodies .
Thoracic and lumbar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an abnormal signal involving more than 3 spinal segments in the medulla (T4-T9) . Somatosensory evoked potential on electromyogram suggested central impairment, probably originating from the spinal cord. The patient’s electrocardiograph was normal, while deep vein ultrasound of the lower limbs indicated thrombosis of the left calf intermuscular vein.
The patient was given intravenous shock therapy with 1 g methylprednisolone for three days during the acute stage. However, the treatment was switched to daily intravenous administration of 20 g gamma globulin for five days due to her poor response and severe electrolyte imbalance. During the rehabilitation period, the patient took 40 mg of prednisone daily and one tablet of mecobalamin and vitamin B1 thrice daily. At the same time, Rabeprazole enteric-coated capsules were given to protect gastric mucosa, and 2 g potassium chloride sustained-release tablets per day were administered to treat hypokalemia. In addition, the patient took 0.25 g mycophenolate mofetil capsule (CellCept) daily to relieve inflammatory symptoms. Given the thrombosis of the left calf intermuscular vein and the high risk of bleeding due to hormone therapy, the patient received daily subcutaneous injections of 4100 IU low molecular weight heparin calcium as an anticoagulant.
The patient underwent training for 20 min to 30 min twice daily during the rehabilitation phase to improve mobility of the trunk and key lower limb muscles. Stretching exercises for the hamstring, adductor and Achilles tendon, passive movement training of the hip, knee and ankle joints, as well as body support and transfer training in the sitting position were performed to improve sitting posture and balance. As the limb function gradually increased, standing and gait training was started with the aid of walkers . In addition, neuromuscular electrical stimulation (Type J48A; Jinhao Trading Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) was used to improve the muscle strength of the lower extremities, mainly that of the right quadriceps femoris and tibialis anterior muscle . The frequency, pulse duration and intensity of the electrical stimulus were 25 Hz, 0.2 ms and 30 mA, respectively, and was performed twice daily for 20 min. The patient only felt a pleasant tingling sensation. The left lower extremity could not be treated with neuromuscular electrical stimulation due to intermuscular venous thrombosis. The urinary catheter was removed on the third day of rehabilitation, and the patient was able to control urination as ultrasound detected less than 50 mL residual urine in the bladder. The patient showed no obvious symptoms of anxiety and depression and actively cooperated with the rehabilitation treatment. Nevertheless, we established a good rapport with the patient during the rehabilitation stage, and explained her condition and the importance of rehabilitative treatment. We also prepared the patient to cope with this condition in the future.