A 44-year-old man with a history of obstructive sleep apnoea, mild asthma, and obesity (BMI 30.9 kg/m2) presented to the hospital with severe chest pain radiating to both arms, associated with acute dyspnoea. The patient was in his usual state of health prior to getting the second dose of mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine (Moderna, Cambridge, MA, USA) 4 days earlier. Following vaccine administration, he had experienced malaise, myalgias, headache, and a dry cough. There was no family history of cardiovascular or autoimmune disease, and he was a former smoker. The patient’s home medications were albuterol and fluticasone-salmeterol. In the emergency department, the patient’s electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST-segment elevation in the lateral limb and precordial leads . Vitals signs in the emergency department were: temperature of 36.9 degrees Celsius, heart rate of 79 beats per minute, blood pressure of 90/72, respiratory rate of 12 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 95%. Physical exam showed minimal lower extremity swelling. The patient was taken for an emergent coronary angiogram which showed very mild coronary artery disease (, Videos 1 and 2). Left ventriculogram showed a mildly reduced ejection fraction of 40% with global hypokinesis that was most severe at the apex (Videos 3 and ). Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure was markedly elevated at 29 mmHg.
Laboratory blood test confirmed evidence of myocardial injury and systemic inflammation . Troponin T levels decreased to 675 ng/L the day after admission. COVID-19 nasal swab testing using polymerase chain reaction was negative. Chest X-ray showed findings consistent with mild pulmonary oedema . Transthoracic Echocardiogram demonstrated borderline enlarged left ventricle with an estimated ejection fraction of 40–45%, mild-moderate generalized left ventricular hypokinesis, slightly worse at the apex, borderline enlarged right ventricle with mildly-moderately decreased systolic function, and no significant valve disease. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was compatible with acute myocarditis with patchy linear mid-myocardial enhancement of the septum and inferior walls at the base to mid-ventricle, sub-epicardial/mid-myocardial enhancement of the lateral wall at the mid-ventricle and apical lateral wall . There was associated myocardial oedema involving most of the myocardium and mild pericardial enhancement. Endomyocardial biopsy was not performed as the patient experienced mild symptoms, had no haemodynamic or electrical instability, and responded promptly to initial management.
The patient was started on supportive therapy for his symptoms, including a brief course of intravenous diuretics for mild symptoms of congestion. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and a beta-blocker therapy were commenced to treat systolic dysfunction. He was also initiated on colchicine to treat mild persistent chest pain, which was thought to be related to pericardial inflammation that resolved 4–5 days after presentation. He was discharged home after 5 days of monitoring without evidence of electrical or haemodynamic instability and with NYHA Class I symptoms. One month later, repeat echocardiogram showed normalization of the left ventricular ejection fraction (56%) and size, no regional wall motion abnormalities, and normal longitudinal peak systolic strain. He remained asymptomatic and off diuretics.