A 71-year-old Asian Japanese woman was admitted to our hospital complaining of cough, dyspnea and peripheral edema that had lasted for several weeks. On physical examination, she had a low-grade fever, an irregular heartbeat and hypertension, and an oxygen saturation of 92% with 2L/min via a nasal cannula. Peripheral lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly were absent.
Our patient’s white blood cell count was 9.4 × 109/L, with 92.0% neutrophils, 3.5% lymphocytes, 4.0% monocytes and 0.5% basophils. She had elevated levels of C-reactive protein (11.6mg/dL; normal range <0.2 mg/dL), soluble interleukin-2 receptor (2,220U/mL, normal range: 145 to 519U/mL) and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (2,795.0pg/mL; normal range <125.0pg/mL).
Virological tests related to myocarditis were negative and her angiotensin-converting enzyme level, associated with sarcoidosis, was normal. Electrocardiography showed atrial fibrillation but no evidence of any ischemic changes. Furthermore, echocardiography showed normal systolic function of her left ventricle (ejection fraction of 65%) though the diastolic function was moderately impaired (pseudonormal) due to an impairment of myocardial relaxation : the ratio of the peak early diastolic filling velocity to the peak atrial filling velocity (E/A ratio) was increased to 1.6 in spite of the advanced age of our patient. The deceleration time did not decrease (174msec). The peak early diastolic velocity (e’) did decrease to 8.2cm/s, while the ratio of the peak early diastolic filling velocity to the peak early diastolic velocity (E/e’ ratio) increased to 11.0. In addition, echocardiography revealed a diffuse and high echoic mass outside of the ventricular wall with pericardial effusion, which was originally thought to be a fibrin clot .
Chest X-rays showed bilateral pleural effusion with mediastinal widening. A CT scan of her body trunk was performed to better characterize the lesion anatomically, and this revealed a mediastinal mass and pericardial nodules, as well as pericardial and pleural effusion . Additionally, three-dimensional CT reconstruction showed the presence of a rough surface over the whole epicardium. These CT imaging findings showed no mass-like lesions on bilateral lung fields or within the thoracic wall.
We next performed gallium-67-citrate (67Ga) scintigraphy to test for the existence of lymph nodes in order to make a tissue diagnosis. The 67Ga uptake was observed in the mediastinal lymph nodes, but not in other lymph nodes. Interestingly, 67Ga uptake was diffusely seen in the heart .
Pericardial and bilateral pleural effusions were drawn and found to be bloody, with an exudate pattern and no malignant findings on cytology. A bacterial culture revealed no microorganisms. Additionally, a flow cytometric analysis of both types of effusions showed predominant lymphocytes (B-cell to T-cell ratio of 1:4); however, there was no monoclonal pattern.
A surgical biopsy of the mediastinal mass was considered to achieve a pathological diagnosis. However, because our patient’s respiratory condition was extremely poor, neither the surgical biopsy, including thoracoscopy, nor the transarterial catheter biopsy could be performed. The most probable diagnosis was a malignant lymphoma because of the presence of a mediastinal mass and an elevated soluble interlukin-2 receptor level, which is elevated in patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma . Furthermore, differential diagnoses, such as myocarditis, tuberculosis and other malignant tumors, bronchogenic carcinoma, mesothelioma and melanoma were extremely unlikely based on the results of the laboratory and imaging tests. Our patient was treated with only 25mg of prednisolone, which is one of the antitumor medicines for a malignant lymphoma, due to her poor performance status and undiagnosed condition. However, the corticosteroid therapy failed to reduce the tumor size at least until day 16, when our patient’s condition gradually deteriorated and she subsequently died of cardiac failure. An autopsy was performed after permission was obtained from her family. The macroscopic evaluation during the autopsy revealed that the mediastinal mass consisted of a cluster of enlarged lymph nodes. A number of disseminated masses were found on the pericardial membrane. These involvements had encircled the ventricle walls and penetrated through the cardiac layers to her endocardium .
On microscopy, the mediastinal lymph nodes demonstrated a complete effacement of the normal architecture because of the dense proliferation of large blastoid cells. These cells resembled normal centroblasts, and showed large and non-cleaved cells with vesicular chromatin . The immunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor cells were positive for cluster of differentiation (CD)20, CD79a, paired box 5 and B-cell lymphoma 2, and negative for CD3, CD4, CD5, CD8, CD45RO, CD56, multiple myeloma oncogene 1 and cyclin D1. Accordingly, the final diagnosis was established as mediastinal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. The presumed cause of death was the impairment of cardiac function due to such lymphomatous involvement of the heart.