A 67-year-old male patient diagnosed with stage IV pulmonary adenocarcinoma was first treated with 6 cycles of carboplatin and pemetrexed followed by a maintenance regimen. Progression occurred within fourteen month after the start of the initial treatment. Consequently, second-line nivolumab was initiated at a dose of 3 mg/kg every two weeks.
After thirteen doses of nivolumab, the patient complained of irritated red eyes without visual impairment. He did not exhibit skin involvement, arthralgia or urinary tract or digestive symptoms. The conjunctiva swab test was negative, and no improvement was observed with antibiotic ocular drops. The ophthalmologist’s examination revealed bilateral sterile conjunctivitis with no signs of uveitis or retinal lesions . The patient was treated with topical steroids with partial improvement.
A few days later, he developed fatigue and progressive dysphagia which became severe after two months followed by rapid 10-kg weight loss without symptoms of associated colitis or gastritis. At that point, the main differential diagnosis was esophageal infection, tumor progression with gastrointestinal (GI) upper tract involvement, paraneoplastic syndrome or an atypical checkpoint inhibitor-related adverse event. Of note, the patient had no history of personal or familial autoimmune disease, conjunctivitis or upper digestive tract abnormality prior to nivolumab treatment. The oral examination initially revealed evidence for oral candidiasis, but treatment with a 7-day course of fluconazole did not improve dysphagia despite the resolution of the stomatitis. Bacterial culture of the oropharyngeal swab was negative, and PCR results for herpes simplex 1 and 2 infection were also negative. A blood sample revealed a discrete increase in the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) with no eosinophilia or leukocytosis. Liver and kidney function panel tests were normal. Thoracoabdominal CT scan reported no evidence of disease recurrence. Due to patient fatigue, a therapeutic break was implemented for one month with the introduction of prednisone at 30 mg per day with rapid tapering over 1 month. Although the patient initially experienced a partial resolution of dysphagia, a quick recurrence of symptoms was noticed as the prednisone dose was tapered. One month later, nivolumab was restarted, and the patient noticed a rapid deterioration of his dysphagia and mucositis. The clinical situation deteriorated despite the introduction of nystatin and steroid mouthwash, and the patient continued to lose weight. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy was done, which revealed diffuse mucositis with a scar-like stenosis immediately below the upper esophageal sphincter . Unlike the upper esophagus, the lower part and the stomach were of normal appearance.
Biopsies of the oropharynx were performed, but esophageal dilatation was not performed due to the highly inflammatory mucosal status and patient anticoagulation. Faced with this significant loss of weight and the impossibility of an oral diet, a nasogastric tube was placed. Biopsies of the oropharynx displayed marked lymphocytic inflammation and several foci of monocellular necrosis in the squamous epithelium. Morphologic evidence of adenocarcinoma and signs of mycotic, bacterial or viral infection were not observed. Immunohistochemical stainings were performed in an automated stainer (Benchmark XT; Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, AZ) using 3 μm-thick sections and the following antibodies: CD45 (monoclonal, clone 2B11 + PD7/26, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), CD19 (monoclonal, clone BT51E, Novocastra, New Castle, UK), CD20 (monoclonal, clone L26, Novocastra), CD3 (monoclonal, 2GV6, Ventana), CD4 (monoclonal, SP35, Ventana), CD8 (monoclonal, C8/144B, Dako), CD68 (monoclonal, clone KP1, Dako), and PD-1 (polyclonal, R&D System, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA). Immunohistochemistry revealed a florid immune infiltrate, predominantly with T cells (90% CD45+CD19−CD20−CD3+), with only 10% of B cells (CD45+CD19+CD20+CD3−). Among T cells, the majority (80%) were CD4+. Few T cells expressed PD-1+. Rare macrophages were also observed .
Based on these results, esophageal stenosis was considered a severe irAE secondary to an important mucosal inflammatory infiltrate. This severe dysphagia required enteral feeding, and nivolumab was permanently discontinued after seventeen doses. The patient was treated with 125 mg methylprednisolone followed by 1 mg/kg oral prednisone (total dose: 80 mg). After 3 days of treatment, the patient reported significant improvement, enabling him to eat solid food. Prednisone was tapered by 20 mg every two weeks until reaching a daily dose of 40 mg after 45 days of prednisone tapering, when he again presented increasing symptoms of severe dysphagia.
The patient was treated a second time with 125 mg methylprednisolone for 3 days followed by 1 mg/kg oral prednisone (total dose: 80 mg) with amelioration of dysphagia. Three weeks later, after the reduction of prednisone to 60 mg/daily, the patient noticed a new severe dysphagia deterioration, remaining aphagic. In this context, quick endoscopic esophageal dilatation was attempted. The laryngeal margin and hypopharyngeal mucosa appeared highly inflamed with fibrinous deposits on the direct laryngoscopy with no sign of salivary stasis or tumor invasion. Rigid esophagoscopy revealed erythema of the oropharynx with friable nonulcerative mucosa and an inflammatory aspect of the entire esophagus. Concomitant high-dose steroids at a dose of 125 mg of methylprednisolone for 3 days followed by 1 mg/kg prednisone again allowed transient symptomatic improvement.
One month later, recurrent dysphagia did not permit steroid tapering under 50 mg/d. Furthermore, the long course of high-dose corticosteroid treatment was complicated with severe osteoporosis and several spontaneous compression fractures of thoracolumbar vertebrae. Pathologic fracture due to metastases was ruled out by bone biopsy.An enlarged T10 to L5 vertebral cementoplasty was carried out. One month later due to a new episode of recurrent major dysphagia, the patient received a new bolus of 125 mg of methylprednisolone for 3 days followed by 1 mg/kg prednisone. The serum level of IL-6 was 3.10 pg/ml (normal range < 1.5 pg/ml), measured the same day before tocilizumab administration. Serum levels of IL-6 were assessed by electrochemiluminescence (ECL) Elecsys® IL-6 (Roche; Switzerland) according to the manufacturer instructions.
At this point, a second line of immunosuppressive treatment was considered. Based on the oropharynx biopsy, histological analysis and the presence of a predominantly T-cell infiltrate, a single intravenous administration of the interleukin 6 receptor (IL-6R) neutralizing antibody tocilizumab at a dose of 8 mg/kg was given. This led to rapid amelioration of the symptomatology, with successful prednisone tapering without recurrent dysphagia. At the present time, 3 months after the administration of tocilizumab, the patient has experienced no relapse of dysphagia. A recent rigid endoscopy confirmed complete resolution of orolaryngopharyngeal and upper esophageal inflammation .
During immunosuppressive therapy we observed no tumor progression. Eight months after discontinuing nivolumab treatment, the patient remains in complete remission with no radiographic evidence of tumor relapse.