A seven-year-old girl presented to our specialized pediatric dentistry office referred from her dentist for a persistent firm swelling localized at the upper right maxillary region.
Medical and physical examinations revealed a healthy girl with no extra-oral findings except the facial asymmetry. Intra-orally, a painless tumefaction of hard consistency obliterating the vestibule of the right maxilla and extending from the tooth # 53 to the distal of the tooth # 16 was detected .
The overlying mucosa was normal in color and texture. On palpation, no regional lymphadenopathy was noticed.
The panoramic radiograph, done previously by her dentist, showed a well-defined radiolucent lesion in the right maxilla and absence of the tooth # 54 which was extracted as an attempt of treatment for her condition .
In order to assess the bone and to evaluate the extension of the lesion, a cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) radiography was requested.
The CBCT radiograph showed a well circumscribed mixed image, starting distal to the tooth #53 till the mesial of the # 55, and from the crestal edge till the germ of the permanent canine with a diffuse border containing fine radio-opaque trabeculae with a buccal, palatal, and crestal expansion of the bone; a disruption of the buccal bone was also noticed. The image of the right sinus was normal .
An incisional biopsy was performed and sent for histopathologic assessment.
Microscopic examination showed a proliferation of fusiform cells with regular nuclei arranged in bundles and storiform pattern associated with multinucleated giant cells. Within these irregular strands, mineralized pieces in the form of trabeculae were found. The stratified squamous epithelium surface showed moderate acanthosis and hyperkeratosis .
The histological diagnosis of trabeculae juvenile ossifying fibroma was made.
The tumor measuring approximately 1.8 x 2.5 cm was surgically excised under general anesthesia via intra-oral approach. During the procedure, the teeth # 53 and # 55 were removed .
Post-operative recovery was without complications, and the patient was discharged from the hospital 48 hours following the surgery.
Histopathological results of the excisional biopsy were consistent with that of the incisional one.
The patient was followed for two years, once every six months. She remained recurrence-free clinically and radiologically .