A previously healthy Asian 18-year-old male patient presented to our hospital with recurrent pain in his upper extremities and back. He had no family history of note. A total of 2 years previously, he had experienced a minor soccer collision and a sudden subsequent onset of severe left-sided back pain and left upper limb muscle weakness. His symptoms improved within 4 weeks of receiving nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs from his nearest clinic. In the 2 years that followed, symptoms had reappeared 10 times, but each episode resolved within a few weeks.
Vital signs were normal; however, physical examination revealed severe spontaneous pain in the left upper back and left side of the chest that was inconsistent with the dermatome. Weakness was also observed in the left trapezius muscle and the entire left upper extremity. Muscle strength was approximately 3 on the Medical Research Council grade scale. Additionally, there was a hyperesthesia in the proximal left upper extremity that did not conform to the dermatome. Deep tendon reflexes in both upper and lower limbs were unremarkable, and there were no rectal disturbances.
Blood tests were performed for adrenal insufficiency, hypothyroidism, and electrolyte and trace element effects; however, no abnormalities were found. Under the suspicion of thoracic outlet syndrome, Adson and Wright tests were performed, both of which yielded negative results. Although the symptoms were not in line with the dermatome, this patient was considered to have back muscle or spinal cord dysfunction, and thus magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical and thoracic spine was performed. The cervical MRI was clear; however, the thoracic MRI showed passage of the spinal cord through the upper and lower vertebrae at the shortest distance, a tiny herniation of thoracic disc 4–5, and spinal fluid loss anterior to the spinal cord . These findings were initially considered normal by the general medicine department alone. Although other differential diagnoses were reviewed again, no other diagnoses could be made. However, since the disease onset was triggered by trauma and other diseases had been properly ruled out, the orthopedic surgeon was consulted owing to the suspicion of the possibility of spinal disease, which led him to reach the present findings.
These findings suggested a combination of TFT and disc herniation. To diagnose TFT, we performed the finger–floor distance test, which showed a distance of 30 cm between the floor and fingers when bending forward. The TFT-evoked test, induced by forward-bending of the trunk and forward hyperflexion of the neck in a sitting position, was also positive. Subsequently, lumbar MRI was performed in the prone position, revealing a rising sign and leading to a diagnosis of tethered spinal cord syndrome . At 2 weeks after surgery, the pain almost resolved and the finger-front distance had improved to less than 20 cm. At 2 months after surgery, the pain in the back and upper extremities completely disappeared. Moreover, muscle strength returned to normal. The filum terminale was then surgically removed, and post-surgical follow-up at 7 months confirmed no symptom recurrence. In addition, MRI 4 months after surgery showed increased spinal fluid in the anterior spinal cord . The fact that the symptoms improved in the absence of any specific treatment for thoracic disc herniation indicated that the symptoms were not caused by thoracic disc herniation alone.