A 72-year-old Japanese man had a 12-year history of ALS. He was bedridden and had been on mechanical ventilation and percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube feeding at home for the previous 10 years. He was fed 1000mL (1000kcal) of a commercial product (Ensure liquid®; Abbott Japan, Tokyo, Japan) containing <1nmol/mL of carnitine per day. He was also sometimes given homemade products such as miso soup and coffee with milk, all via the PEG tube. Over one year, his ability to communicate using facial expressions gradually deteriorated. He was still able to flex his left toe to control the communication device, but his energy appeared to diminish when attempting to focus on communication. He did not have muscle cramps, and his diabetes mellitus was well controlled with 25mg of alogliptin without renal insufficiency. His medical history included a colonic polyp, which was resected via endoscopy four years previously, and pneumothorax, which was treated conservatively one year previously. He had no history of rhabdomyolysis.
Laboratory evaluations performed to determine the cause of his altered mental state showed that his electrolytes, hematological parameters, including HbA1c, and liver and renal function parameters were within normal ranges . However, his serum total carnitine was abnormally low, at 26.7μmol/L (normal range, 45 to 91μmol/L), as were his free carnitine (20.6μmol/L; normal range, 36 to 74μmol/L) and acylcarnitine ester (6.1μmol/L; normal range, 6 to 23μmol/L) levels. However, his ammonium level was normal (48μg/dL; normal range, 12 to 68μg/dL).
Within two weeks of starting carnitine supplementation (600mg twice daily via the PEG tube), our patient’s mental state improved to the level noted the previous year. His serum total carnitine recovered to 172.3μmol/L (normal range, 45 to 91μmol/L) one year after starting carnitine supplementation. His free carnitine (140.6μmol/L; normal range, 36 to 74μmol/L) and acylcarnitine ester (31.7μmol/L; normal range, 6 to 23μmol/L) levels had also recovered at this time. Our patient’s mental state has been maintained since starting carnitine supplementation.