A 66-year-old woman with a history of systemic lupus erythematosus, deep vein thrombosis, and lumbar compression fracture was admitted for the evaluation of sudden onset dyspnoea, while in the sitting position that was relieved when lying supine. She had become frail as a result, having spent most of the day lying in bed due to the above-mentioned symptoms. As long as she was recumbent, her condition was stable, and her physical examination did not reveal any cardiopulmonary signs. Her general laboratory results were within the normal limits, except for a relatively high brain natriuretic peptide value which was 35.4 pg/mL (0–18.4 pg/mL). The electrocardiogram was normal, although her chest X-ray revealed mild dilatation of the upper mediastinum. However, in the sitting position, her blood gas analysis revealed marked hypoxaemia with low partial pressure of arterial oxygen (PaO2) and oxygen saturation (54.1 mmHg and 75%, respectively) in room air, which quickly recovered to the normoxic status with normal PaO2 and oxygen saturation (102.6 mmHg and 100%, respectively) in the supine position. While transthoracic echocardiogram showed preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (67%) and failed to detect any specific findings, her transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) revealed a patent foramen ovale (PFO) with a positive microbubble test but without obvious right-to-left shunting in the supine position (, , Videos S1 and S2). In the sitting position, TOE further revealed a deformity in the structure of the PFO with a wide gap due to aortic compression that was markedly different from that observed in the supine position. Massive right-to-left shunt flow caused by redirected venous return could be observed due to the persistent Eustachian valve ( and , Video S3). Therefore, POS was diagnosed. Latterly, the maximum diameter of the ascending aorta was measured to be 57 mm on contrast-enhanced computed tomography . The elongated ascending aorta expanded to pressurize the right atrium. Finally, the presence of an intra-atrial shunt was confirmed on the right atrial angiogram (, Video S4). After the heart team conference, she received surgical prosthetic vascular graft replacement of the ascending aorta and patch closure of PFO at the interatrial septum under cardiopulmonary bypass. Immediately after the surgery, her blood gas analysis normalized even in the sitting position, and her symptoms disappeared completely. A post-operative TOE revealed no residual intracardiac shunt in the sitting position ( and , Video S5). She was discharged without any events, and no recurrence occurred up to the present.