A 20-years-old Caucasian male, presented to a district hospital with acute right lower quadrant pain from six hours before. Physical examination revealed abdominal pain, localized right lower quadrant abdominal tenderness, body temperature slightly elevated (37.7°C), blood pressure 120/90 mmHg and heart rate 110/min. Blood tests showed leukocyte count at 12600/μL, the differential white account showing 75% neutrophils and hematocrit 35.9%. Abdominal and chest radiographs were normal. The primary diagnosis was acute appendicitis and appendectomy was decided. Entering the peritoneal cavity from a McBurney incision, the surgeon found large amount of blood and the surgery was transformed to exploratory laparotomy through a midline incision. The findings were enormous hepatomegaly and bleeding due to spontaneous rupture of the IV lobe of the liver. Active bleeding was managed with direct suture of identifiable vessels and absorbable gauze mesh. Postoperative course was uneventful, except of a continuous elevated body temperature (up to 38.5°C). The patient, five days after surgery, was referred to us in order to undergo further examinations for the nature of the liver abnormality. His medical history was unremarkable. He was previously in good health. His family and past history were not contributory. The patient weighted 65 Kg with 1.75 m height. He was in his right senses and well nourished. Yellow skin, icteric sclera, spider naevi and palmar erythema were not founded. Cardiopulmonary examination was unremarkable. Chest radiograph revealed no pulmonary pathology. The abdomen was swollen with the liver palpable. Laboratory tests showed liver function tests normal (before the initial surgery however, after the surgery SGOT, SGPT, LDH were altered three times the normal range) hepatitis markers of HAV, HBV, HCV, and HIV were negative and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) was 35 ng/ml. The patient underwent computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen that showed hepatomegaly and a large hypodense lesion of the liver with multicystic appearance with septations and solid portions . Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) in T2-weighted and Short Time Inversion Recovery (STIR) sequences revealing hyperdense areas with intermixed hypodense septa , and a thrombus in the inferior vena cava . The differential diagnosis by the CT and MRI findings was giant hemangioma or cystic malignant lesion. Due to the size of the lesion and the previous history of spontaneous bleeding, it was decided that the patient must undergo surgery. In order to prevent pulmonary embolism, an inferior vena cava filter was inserted and fixated just below the renal veins. Two days later the patient underwent surgery. Primarily, thrombectomy and reconstruction of the inferior vena cava with removal of the filter was performed, followed by hepatectomy of I–IV and VIII lobe of the liver. Intraoperative biopsy demonstrated malignancy or sarcoma of the liver. Frozen section on the remaining liver was performed and showed normal liver tissue. The patient after surgery presented with life threatening bleeding and protean coagulation abnormalities, symptoms of disseminated intravascular coagulation, due to massive blood transfusion. The patient died the second postoperative day due to uncontrolled bleeding caused of the developing of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Pathologic review of the specimen revealed a 1580 gm left and part of right hepatic lobe, with a 30 × 14 × 9 cm tumor mass and the histological examination showed malignant sarcomatous tissue with spares giant neoplastic cells (head arrow) and residual hepatocytes (arrow) suggestive of undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma . Sarcomatous tissue with severe atypia of the neoplastic cells and focal presence of giant cells partially with myoblastic characteristics was also present . Residual hepatocytes stained positive in immunohistochemical stain for cytoceratinin 8–18, and showed infiltration by the sarcomatous tissue (DAB technique).