A 52-year-old female patient admitted to the emergency department with fall from height. She had developed paraplegia. Her heart rate was 70 beats/min with blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg. Magnetic resonance imaging was performed emergently and it revealed spondylolisthesis at C6–C7 level (Additional file ). She was immediately taken into surgery room. During preoperative evaluation and preparation for anesthesia, tall R wave in aVR lead and widespread ST segment depressions were noticed on ECG. Urgent cardiology consultation was requested with pre-diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome. At the bedside evaluation of the patient, we determined that there was positive QRS complex, upright P and tall R wave in aVR lead and widespread ST segment depressions at all derivations with prolonged corrected QT (QTc) interval (522 ms) on ECG .First, we excluded incorrect lead placement by repeating the ECG on our witness. Then, we also excluded dextrocardia by auscultation and palpation of strong heart beat at normal anatomic localization in the precordium at the level of 5th left intercostal space, medial to the left midclavicular line. Right after that, we had mentioned the difference in the ECG display format. Later, we had performed ECG at standard display format using another machine. It revealed normal QRS axis with negative P and T waves in aVR. This time, ST segment elevation in leads V1 and aVR attracted our attention . Other evident abnormalities at the patient's ECG were prolongation of the QTc interval and widespread ST segment depression in all leads. Although, there were ST segment elevations in leads aVR and V1 on the preoperative control ECG, acute coronary syndrome requiring emergency intervention was not considered, since the patient was hemodynamically stable.
It was decided to start surgery considering the patient’s stable hemodynamic and the necessity of an urgent intervention to spondylolisthesis. Surgical correction was achieved successfully. Postoperative control computed tomography showed correction of the displaced vertebra (Additional file ). On the postoperative control ECG, evident ST depressions were recovered and QTc interval was narrowed but still prolonged (500 ms) . Since the patient had cardiovascular-risk factors and previous ECG changes, coronary angiography was performed after the procedure and normal coronary arteries were observed (Additional file ). At follow up, successful extubation and spontaneous breathing were achieved but paraplegia continued.