A 27-year-old male presented to hospital in 2013 with a new onset of seizures. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) demonstrated a 3 cm mass within the left ventricular trigone with surrounding oedema . He underwent a left occipito-temporal craniotomy and resection with the histology reported at this time as haemangiopericytoma, World Health Organization (WHO) grade 2. He received post-operative adjuvant radiation therapy (RT) 54 Gy in 30 fractions using a 3D conformal technique. At the time, given the histological diagnosis, no further staging scans were requested.
Follow up included an MRI brain every 6 months for two years then yearly MRI brain scans. Surveillance MRI 7 years after completion of treatment showed a 4 mm contrast enhancing lesion within the left ventricular trigone in the previous surgical bed . The patient was asymptomatic at the time. The radiological features were thought to be consistent with recurrence and an early follow up interval scan was requested. MRI brain and spine was repeated 3 months later and demonstrated an increase in size of the intraventricular lesion to 8 mm .
Given the scan findings, the patient underwent resection of the recurrence with immediate post-operative MRI brain showing no residual tumour. Histological examination of the resection specimen showed a tumour consisting of short haphazard fascicles of monotonous basophilic spindle cells. Mitotic activity was readily identifiable with up to 24 mitoses per 10 high power fields. The tumour had a vaguely lobular architecture but no convincing meningothelial whorls or staghorn vessels were seen . The tumour showed patchy positivity for EMA, bcl-2 and CD99. However, immunohistochemistry for STAT-6 and SSTR-2 were negative. On the basis of the morphology and immunohistochemical profile, fluorescent in-situ hybridisation (FISH) for SS18 (SYT) gene rearrangement was performed using an 18q11.2 SS18 (SYT) break-apart probe. This confirmed the presence of an SS18 gene rearrangement consistent with synovial sarcoma . On this basis, the FISH was repeated on the original 2013 tumour which also showed an SS18 gene rearrangement consistent with the diagnosis of synovial sarcoma in the original tumour.
Systemic staging showed no evidence of primary underlying malignancy or any sites of metastatic spread, and so the tumour was classified as a primary synovial sarcoma of the CNS. The patient was discussed at both the neuro-oncology and sarcoma tumour board multi-disciplinary meetings with recommendation for adjuvant radiation treatment. He proceeded with VMAT (Volumetric modulated arc therapy) retreatment to brain, 54 Gy in 30 fractions (see Figs. and ).