A 37-year-old Caucasian female patient sought treatment at the Faculty of Dentistry, Alexandria University because of a large palatal lesion causing difficulty in breathing. She was referred to the Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Department of our faculty.
No relevant medical history.
The patient had extracted upper right first and second premolars.
The lesion was bilateral, presented on the hard palate, about 5 × 2 cm each and started to appear 10 years ago. It was pedunculated, firm in consistency with normal overlying mucosa . The patient did not mention any history of trauma and there was no pain. Differential diagnosis included peripheral giant cell granuloma, odontogenic myxoma, neurofibroma, minor salivary gland tumor, and desmoid tumor.
There was no bone invasion.
Excisional biopsy was done under general anesthesia .
The two excised masses were fixed in 10% formalin solution and sent to the Oral Pathology Department in our faculty for histopathological examination.
On gross examination, the lesion was yellowish white and firm on cut surface. The specimens were embedded in paraffin blocks and stained using hematoxylin and eosin.
Histopathological examination revealed a well-circumscribed connective tissue mass lined by keratinized stratified squamous epithelium . The connective tissue was heavily collagenized, formed of dense collagen bundles with sparsely distributed stellate and spindle-shaped cells . The nuclei were oval to elongated. Some cells were binucleated or trinucleated . No mitotic figures were present. Numerous blood vessels and few chronic inflammatory cells were noted. Myxomatous degeneration was detected in some areas of the stroma .
The histopathological picture suggested a benign mesenchymal tumor.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed diffuse strong cytoplasmic staining of cells with vimentin . The cells were negative to pan cytokeratin, S-100, beta-catenin , smooth muscle actin (SMA), and CD34. SMA stained the smooth muscle cells in blood vessel lining and CD34 showed positive staining of endothelial cells of the blood vessels in the tumor .
Diagnosis of bilateral collagenous fibroma was reached.
After six months of surgical intervention, the patient came to the faculty hospital for follow-up. There was no sign of a developing lesion . She was satisfied with the outcome of surgery and was feeling comfortable because of the removal of the huge mass that had been annoying her.
We reviewed the literature for collagenous fibroma. We searched for “collagenous fibroma in the oral cavity,” “desmoplastic fibroblastoma in the oral cavity,” and “bilateral collagenous fibroma” in PubMed and Web of Science databases. All English articles were selected. There were 15 articles and one of them was of a bilateral case.
Clinical data of the oral cavity cases are presented in Table .