A 63-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with severe headache for 15 d.
The patient had a headache for 15 d and worsened for 2 d.
About 4 mo ago, the patient was admitted to our hospital with a complaint of “subcutaneous nodules and fever for 8 mo.” Physical examination of the patient showed subcutaneous nodules of different sizes in the extremities, positive tenderness, and normal muscle strength but decreased muscular tension. Routine blood tests showed that the number of white blood cells had decreased to 2.21 × 109/L (normal range 3.50 × 109/L to 9.50 × 109/L). He had a history of hypertension grade 2 (middle risk group). No other obvious abnormalities were found. The subcutaneous nodules of the right upper arm and right thigh of the patient were resected. The hematoxylin-eosin staining of the specimens revealed a large number of atypical lymphocytes had infiltrated the fibrous connective tissue and adipose tissue, which distributed in a typical flower-ring-like pattern around the fat cells . Immuno-histochemistry revealed positive staining for CD3, CD8, Gram-B, and T-cell restricted intracellular antigen-1 but negative for CD4 and CD56 . The Ki-67 labelling index was approximately 20% to 30%. The results of T-cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangement showed TCR-β clonal rearrangement. The patient was diagnosed with SPTCL.
The results of the positron emission computed tomography examination indicated that the bilateral upper arm, left chest wall, bilateral abdominal wall, bilateral hip, and bilateral thigh had multiple subcutaneous lesions involving > 3 regions; the tumor was stage T3. The peripheral lymph nodes were not involved; the stage was N0. There was no visceral organ involvement; the metastasis stage was M0 . No bone marrow invasion was found in the bone marrow puncture. He was clinically diagnosed with SPTCL with stage T3N0M0.
The patient was treated with the cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisolone (COP) regimen; each course lasted for 21 d for a total of four courses. The COP regimen included prednisone, cyclophosphamide, and vincristine. The specific doses were: Prednisone (50 mg) taken twice a day from day 1 to day 5; cyclophosphamide (1350 mg) intravenously administered by drip only on the first day; and vincristine (4 mg) administered intravenously only on the first day. At the beginning of the third chemotherapy cycle, chidamide (30 mg, orally) was added twice a week to the original COP regimen. At the end of the fourth chemotherapy cycle, the subcutaneous nodules of the extremities almost disappeared, and body temperature stabilized within the normal range. However, the white blood cells were below normal levels, and the muscle strength of the patient was still decreased.
The patient had no previous or family history of similar illnesses.
Shortly after the end of the fourth chemotherapy session, the patient had a severe headache. The patient’s physical examination was generally normal.
No other obvious abnormality was found.
A head magnetic resonance imaging showed a large mass in the region of the right temporal lobe .