A 2-year-old Caucasian female patient affected by Pfeiffer syndrome (de novo heterozygous mutations in FGFR2) and cloverleaf skull developed hydrocephalus and underwent a CSF shunting procedure (right VP shunt with a proximal programmable valve) at the age of 3 months. G-tube for dysphagia and tracheostomy for upper airway obstruction due to midface hypoplasia without other airway abnormalities were also needed. At the age of 9 months a fronto-orbital advancement with temporo-parietal osteotomies and cranial remodeling was carried out together with a permanent tarsorrhaphy.
She was admitted to our Unit for irritability, tachypnoea needing mechanical ventilation and increased baseline oxygen requirement of about 4 l per minute (LPM). She was afebrile and cardiovascular examination was unremarkable. Normal lung sounds were detected on thorax auscultation and good ventilation was noted bilaterally; no dullness to percussion was reported. Her abdomen was soft, non-distended and non-tender. Her neurological state, characterized by marked neurocognitive impairment, didn’t change and the permanent tarsorrhaphy made eyes’ position and pupillary reflexes’ evaluation impossible. The remainder of physical examination was unremarkable.
At the time of admission, results of venous blood gas and routine blood tests, including kidney and liver function, were normal. Although thorax auscultation was negative, described symptoms led us to request chest X-rays showing a complete opacification of the right hemithorax associated with mild compressive atelectasis.
A large right-sided pleural effusion was detected performing a chest CT scan 12 h after the admission. In addition, abdomen CT scan indicated the dislocation of the distal tip of the VP shunt located onto the diaphragmatic cupola within the pleural cavity .
Because of the huge amount of the pleural effusion, diagnostic and therapeutic thoracentesis was immediately performed and a clear and colorless pleural fluid suspicious for CSF was aspirated and collected for analysis. Physical and chemical examination of the pleural fluid showed normal count of nucleated leukocytes (20/mm3) with content of glucose, protein and LDH respectively of 80 mg/dl, 0.40 g/dL and 79 IU/L; normal values of cholesterol (3 mg/dl) and triglycerides (6 mg/dl) were also detected. Beta-2 transferrin – a protein specific for CSF and perilymph – was found confirming a CSF leakage into the pleural cavity.
Since right pleural effusion recurred 7 days after and the hydrocephalus was not suitable for an endoscopic treatment, VP shunt was revised and shortened while a VA shunt was placed on the left side in order to serve as the main shunt and to prevent pleural effusions (Additional file ). The decision of insertion of VA shunt on the left side was made because the right jugular vein was completely occluded. The valve system of the right VP shunt was also set to a very high opening pressure in order to start working only in case of VA shunt malfunction.
A new chest radiograph revealed the resolution of the pleural fluid collection and the expansion of the right lung. After thoracentesis, patient’s clinical condition immediately improved with normalization of respiratory rate and good oxygen saturation in room air.
Durable radiologic and clinical disease stability was obtained after neurosurgical procedures.