The patient was a 41-year-old, nulliparous woman with a body mass index (BMI) of 21.4 kg/m2. She had no known medical history and no history of abdominal surgery. A left-sided, multilocular ovarian cyst that measured 10 cm in diameter was detected on transvaginal ultrasonography, and the patient’s cancer antigen 125 was 13.6 U/ml. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging revealed a high-signal, left adnexal mass that measured 10 cm in diameter on the T2-weighted images . Preoperatively, the patient was diagnosed with a mucinous left ovarian tumor and a laparoscopic left salpingo-oophorectomy under general anesthesia was scheduled. The Veress needle technique was used, and a 10-mm umbilical port was introduced using a 10-mm bladed trocar (Karl Storz SE & Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany). The patient’s abdomen was insufflated with carbon dioxide (CO2) to a pressure of 10 mmHg. The following three accessory port techniques were used: two 5-mm bladed trocars (Karl Storz SE & Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany) were inserted into the patient’s lumbar region bilaterally and the third port was inserted into the lower abdominal quadrant, lateral to the right inferior epigastric artery using a 10-mm bladeless trocar (VersaOne™ Bladeless Optical Trocar: Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, United States of America [USA]; Fig. shows the port placements). All of the ports were successfully inserted on the first attempt, with one trocar pass for each port. None of the port sites were stretched during the procedure. During the laparoscopic surgery, a left ovarian cyst was detected with no adhesions to the abdominal cavity . The left adnexa, including the ovarian cyst, was excised using an ultrasonic scalpel (Harmonic Scalpel; Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH, USA) and retrieved using an endobag (Endopouch Retriever; Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH, USA) through the right lateral 12-mm port . The excision caused no further elongation of the wound. After the procedure was completed, the peritoneum was closed and coagulated using bipolar forceps to ensure adequate peritoneal closure under direct vision . The umbilical port was removed after complete evacuation of the CO2. The skin over the umbilical and lateral ports was closed using interrupted sutures and 4–0 polydioxanone (PDS). The operative time was 34 min and there was minimal blood loss. The immediate postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the third postoperative day.
On the fifth postoperative day, she presented to the emergency department with the following symptoms of intestinal obstruction: persistent abdominal pain, vomiting, and inability to pass stool or flatus. Her general condition was average, and she was conscious. Taking the patient's complaints into account, we performed an abdominal X-ray on the suspicion that the patient had developed ileus . An abdominal computed tomography scan was performed after the appearance of air-fluid levels on the scan, and a herniated loop of small bowel was detected under the skin from a defect that was created by the right lateral 12-mm trocar entry site . The patient exhibited symptoms of intestinal obstruction and was subsequently diagnosed with a strangulated hernia.
The general surgical and gynecological teams collaborated to perform the operation. The previous right lateral incision was reopened using blunt dissection, and the surgeons discovered that the small bowel loop had herniated directly through the right lateral port . The right lateral port site was enlarged to 5 cm externally. A finger was used to gently reduce the herniated bowel through the fascial defect, while downward pressure was applied from the skin incision on the right side. The herniated bowel loop appeared dusky following the reduction; however, it was still well perfused and viable after irrigation with warm saline and observation for 20 min. The rest of the bowel and pelvis appeared normal. As the herniated loop was not necrotic, bowel resection was deemed unnecessary. The fascial port sites were closed using 2-0 polyglactin (Vicryl) for the sheath and 3-0 polyglactin for the skin. The total operative time was 1 h and 23 min with minimal bleeding. The patient recovered well postoperatively. Her initial symptoms resolved, and she was discharged 10 days postoperatively with normal bowel function.