An 11-year-old girl presented to our paediatric ophthalmology clinic for an ophthalmic evaluation in November 2018. The patient had a history of nephrotic syndrome that was diagnosed at 16 months of age, had undergone kidney transplantation in other country at age 5 (no pathology study reports were available), and had been receiving dual immunosuppression with mycophenolate and tacrolimus (250 and 500 mg and 2 mg, in the morning and evening, respectively along with vitamin B complex and folic acid and thyroxin for her hypothyroidism). The patient had nystagmus since birth, bilateral high myopia (-7 -2 *180), and had undergone cataract extraction with posterior chamber IOL implantation at age 2 in our ophthalmology centre.
On examination, the bilateral ocular findings were as follows: vision 20/200 unaided, nystagmus, full ocular motility, posterior chamber IOL, band keratopathy, normal pupillary reflex on examination, tessellated fundus with macular hypoplasia and retinal thinning, optic nerve atrophy, and intraocular pressure of 18mmHg; cycloplegic refraction values were − 1.75*25 for the right eye and + 1.25*155 for the left eye.
Accordingly, full-field ERG and genetic counselling were advised. The patient did not appear for a follow-up visit for 16 months but was referred from the emergency department with a complaint of pain in her left eye. Visual acuity examination showed no light perception in the left eye. Other findings for the left eye included spontaneous subtotal hyphaemia and intraocular pressure of 25mmHg, an ultrasound of the left eye was done and showed vitreous haemorrhage but without retinal detachment. Optical coherence tomography for the macula and the optic nerve was done for the other eye . The patient had no history of trauma to the left eye, and was hospitalised and put on topical steroid drops, cycloplegics and aqueous suppressants. During her hospitalisation, a consultation to the retina service for the left vitreous haemorrhage; after careful discussion with the family and considering the visual prognosis, her family decided not to undertake surgical intervention due to her poor visual prognosis. However, despite treatment, her intraocular pressure increased to 55mmHg; an anterior chamber wash was performed, iris showed neovascularisation and the intraocular pressure decreased to the 24–26 mmhg range, but without any improvement in the visual acuity; though she experienced another episode of hyphema, the intraocular pressure remained stable.
Bloodwork-up coagulation profile of INR 1.06, APTT 29.4 s, and PT 15.7 s, tacrolimus level of 5.3 µg/L, Urea 4.6 mmol/L, Creatinine 114 mol/l, Alb 41 g/L, TSH7.1 mU/L, her Glomerular Filtration Rate 49 ml/min/1.73m2.