A 49-year-old man presented to our hospital with recurrent intermittent low fever for over a month and high fever for a week. He had a history of HBsAg, HBeAb and HBcAb test positive, and lumbar disc herniation. He told us that he had been experiencing recurrent intermittent low fever for the past month and that his self-treatment with antibiotics was ineffective. One week ago, he developed a high fever in the afternoon with a body temperature as high as 39.9–40.3 °C. He underwent CT scans in the local hospital suggesting bilateral pleural effusion and scattered nodules in both lungs, some close to the subpleural, bronchial wall thickening in the upper lobe of the right lung, patchy nodular shadows along the bronchus and bilateral pleural effusion. After receiving cefoperazone and sulbactam for treatment, his body temperature failed to drop. The possibility of tuberculosis was considered, and he came to our tuberculosis unit for treatment.
On admission, the patient had enhanced body temperature(39.30 °C), a heart rate of 126b.p.m., a respiratory rate of 23 breaths/min and blood pressure of 157/90 mmHg at physical examination. He was listless of spirit, with obvious hyperemia in the skin of the face, neck and chest; Fine wet rales can be heard in the left lung, and breathing sounds in both lower lungs were low, especially on the right side. Combined with imaging analysis, he was diagnosed with tuberculosis and received initial anti-tuberculosis therapy as well as hepatoprotection. Several obvious abnormal infection indicators were observed the next day, including white blood cell count 8.13*109/L, procalcitonin 0.67 ng/mL, and C reaction protein 181 mg/L. HbA1c was significantly higher, with fasting plasma glucose above normal range. Blood gas analysis of the patient indicated hypoxemia (PH 7.49, PO2 70 mmHg, PCO2 34 mmHg, oxygenation index 140 mmHg). Meanwhile blood culture drawn upon admission at the local hospital showed bilateral aerobacteria: B.pseudomallei infection.
Due to exacerbation of asthma, the patient was given high-flow oxygen therapy and thoracentesis drainage. The breathing condition improved after 2 days. All laboratory data were negative for tuberculosis but the sputum culture suggested candida albictica infection, and reexamination of chest CT showed ground glass shadow around the original lesion and pulmonary interstitial edema, scattered nodules in both lungs unaltered. Consistent with standard care for uncontrolled fever in the presence of undiagnosed diabetes, broad spectrum antibiotics were initiated pending blood culture results. Once the admission blood culture results came back as B.pseudomallei infection, the same as the earlier result, the diagnosis of bloodstream infection of B.pseudomallei and migratory pulmonary nodules was considered and the patient was given treated with meropenem. The question was, where did the bloodstream infection come from? The patient continued to complain of low back pain repeatedly, and MRI of the lumbar spine was arranged, which showed large patches of long T1 and long T2 signal in the subcutaneous soft tissue of the lumbar spine with high signal in the compression lipid phase .
After further investigation of the medical history, the patient said he had received lumbar acupuncture treatment in the local clinics one week prior to the onset of the disease. Therefore, we inferred that the acupuncture had led to the development of a paravertebral abscess, which eventually entered the blood and caused bloodstream infection, and that multiple migrating lesions were formed in the lungs. The patient then underwent surgical treatment to remove the abscess from the paravertebral area.
Surgeons made two longitudinal incisions along the median incision in the lower lumbar region, and incised the skin, subcutaneous tissue and muscle layer by layer and saw little purulent fluid, a large amount of inflammatory granulation existed inside the spine muscles with unclear boundary . They completely excised the granulomatous lesions and pus for pathological examination and culture, and then flushed the wound with a large amount of physiological saline, set built-in drainage tube wound irrigation. Postoperative pathology showed large proliferative granulation tissue with massive acute inflammatory cell infiltration, acid fast staining (−). Anti-infective treatment with meropenem was continued. Postoperative pus culture remained B.pseudomallei, which was meropenem with blood culture results. After two weeks of continuous anti-infective treatment with meropenem, the patient’s infection indicators normalized, the MRI of the lumbar spine was reviewed and the patient was discharged from hospital . It was a pity that oral antibiotics were terminated due to his poor adherence.
However, the patient was readmitted five and a half months after discharge for urinary culture suggesting B.pseudomallei. Admission vital signs were stable and no fever was found. Blood glucose tests suggested poor recent blood glucose control (HbA1c 6.5%, reference value 4.0–6.5%; Fructosamine 315 umol/L, reference value 205-285umol/L). Blood routine examination showed WBC 7.02*109/L, N 76.3%, CRP 66.35 mg/L, urine routine examination showed protein 1+, white blood cell 2+, urine ketone body (+−), microscopic examination of 665 white blood cells /uL, microscopic examination of 15 red blood cells /uL, and detection of B.pseudomallei growth. Chest CT was normal. According to previous drug sensitivity, he was given meropenem for anti-infection treatment for 12 days, and his blood glucose was controlled for symptomatic supportive treatment. After the infection control, reexamination of urine routine, urine culture and blood culture showed no obvious abnormality, then the patient was discharged and given oral levofloxacin for anti-infection treatment. The patient was followed up after three months of oral levofloxacin and was clinically cured with no abscess formation elsewhere.