The patient was a 59-year-old woman with chief complaints of nausea and vomiting. Four months prior to presentation, malaise and anorexia manifested but were left untreated. She had been free of signs of diabetes, eg, thirst, polydipsia, and polyuria, and signs of Graves' disease, eg, hyperhidrosis, tremor, neck swelling, and exophthalmos. Two days before presentation, she developed nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. At that time, acute gastroenteritis was suspected, and oral medication was prescribed. However, frequent vomiting persisted thereafter. At that time, a high blood glucose level and positive urinary acetone were noted. She was thus suspected of having DKA and was brought by ambulance to our hospital. When first examined at our hospital, the patient was 159 cm in height, weighed 64.0 kg, and had a body mass index of 25.3 kg/m2, blood pressure 140/62 mm Hg, heart rate 170/min (regular), and temperature 38.2°C. Consciousness level was E3, V3, M6 and total 12 points according to the Glasgow Coma Scale. The skin showed low turgor and was not moist. No tremor was observed. Upper eyelid edema was present, but there was no marked exophthalmos. Slight erosive swelling of the thyroid was noted. There were no chest abnormalities. Borborygmus was enhanced but no other abnormalities were noted in the abdomen. There were no neurological abnormalities.
Biochemically, blood glucose and glycosylated hemoglobin were markedly elevated (336 mg/dL, 10.9%), while total cholesterol (126 mg/dL) and neutral fat (72 mg/dL) were at the lower limits of their normal ranges. Mild hepatic dysfunction, hyperuricemia, and mild hypoproteinemia were noted. Urine acetone was strongly positive. On blood gas analysis, acidosis (pH 7.257) was noted, accompanied by an expanded anion gap, and blood ketone body elevation (predominantly β-hydroxybutyric acid) was also seen (β-hydroxybutyric acid 5920 mmol/L, acetoacetic acid 2101 mmol/L). Anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody and anti-insulinoma-associated protein-2 antibody were negative, and normal reaction of insulin was observed to glucagon loading. Chest X-ray disclosed only mild cardiomegaly, and electrocardiography revealed sinus tachycardia. After heart rate improvement, echocardiography disclosed no evident abnormalities.