A 49-year-old asymptomatic woman underwent ERCP to investigate asymptomatic focal dilatation of the MPD. During ERCP, a guidewire possibly penetrated the pancreatic parenchyma. Although a prophylactic pancreatic duct stent was placed at the end of the procedure, the patient developed post-ERCP pancreatitis on postoperative day (POD) 1, as demonstrated by upper abdominal pain, fever, and a high serum amylase level (1959 U/L). A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed peripancreatic fluid collection, and the pancreatic stent tube was dislocated in the peritoneal cavity at the neck of the pancreas . We speculated that this dislocated tube injured the MPD and induced massive PL. On POD 2, we attempted to replace the pancreatic stent tube to bridge the damaged point of the MPD via an endoscopic approach. Even after successful bridging of the MPD stent tube, the nonlocalized PL worsened, and the patient developed SIRS and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
On POD 3, an open laparotomy was performed for the peritoneal lavage. The MPD penetration point could not be visualized because the peripancreatic tissue was severely damaged. We completed the procedure by placement of 12 external drainage tubes. Although continuous peritoneal lavage was performed, SIRS worsened and became life-threatening, and fluid with a high amylase concentration (> 30,000 U/L) spread to the right side of the peritoneal space.
We then performed a second operation on POD 9, which involved central pancreatectomy with necrosectomy . The proximal incision margin was closed using manual sutures. The damaged distal surface was fragile; therefore, only an external drainage tube was inserted into the distal MPD instead of performing pancreatojejunostomy. At the end of the surgery, five external drainage tubes were placed around the two damaged parenchymal surfaces. After the second operation, the patient’s SIRS showed immediate improvement; however, the PL was still not controlled. On POD 70, the patient again developed SIRS and complained of severe abdominal pain. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed pancreatic fluid spread throughout the retroperitoneal space .
A third surgery was scheduled on POD 80 to remove the remnant pancreas, which might have caused the PL due to DPDS. Laparotomy showed that both edges of the pancreatic remnants were heavily damaged; thus, we could not determine which edge was the origin of the PL. We attempted to remove both remnants; however, the highly inflamed tissue and collateral venous plexus made the procedure difficult and finally led to massive bleeding from the superior mesenteric-portal vein confluence. We terminated pancreatic resection and performed pancreatojejunostomy. The distal MPD and pancreatic parenchyma were anastomosed to the Roux-en-Y (R-Y) jejunal limb with an external pancreatic duct stent . Additionally, we closed the proximal MPD and the pancreatic surface using manual sutures. We were not confident in the success of either procedure because both surfaces were severely damaged and fragile; thus, the recurrence of persistent leakage was highly suspected.
Consequently, we decided to generate an intentional internal drainage route during the operation . This “intentional internal drainage tube method” was designed to collect possible persistent PL from both margins of the pancreas. A 22-Fr single-lumen silicone drainage tube (Fuji systems Co., Tokyo, Japan) was placed in a trans-jejunal orientation. The tip of the tube was located in the peritoneal cavity to collect the possible PL from both sides. The middle part of the tube ran along the inner lumen of the R-Y jejunal limb, and the distal end protruded toward the outside of the body . The jejunal fistula, through which the tube passed, was tied with an absorbable tobacco suture to prevent jejunal fluid from leaking into the peritoneal space.
Immediately after surgery, we connected a thin suction tube inside this intentional internal drainage tube to a continuous suction device to collect PL mainly from this tube. The device was set up for periodic suction with a pressure of − 30 cm (water column) to avoid tissue injury. Necrosed deposits were effectively excreted from this “intentional internal drainage tube”, and we continued peritoneal lavage around the pancreas with saline for more than 3 weeks. SIRS gradually resolved in the patient. Within 2 months after the third surgery, we gradually removed the peripancreatic external drainage tubes, and only the intentional internal drainage tube remained. Repeated contrast radiography of the intentional internal drainage tube demonstrated that the PL cavity gradually localized and decreased in size . On POD 140 after the initial ERCP, we verified that the PL was localized to a size of 2 × 1 cm and removed the intentional internal drainage tube. Thus, an internal drainage route, i.e., communication between the PL and R-Y jejunal limb, was established. The patient was discharged on POD 147 after the initial ERCP. Over the subsequent 5 years to date, the patient has recovered well without any further hospitalization and has resumed her healthy social life.