An 87-year-old female patient presented with a one-month history of skin ulcer of the medial side of the left lower leg with unbearable local pain. Before being admitted to our hospital, she had two weeks of outpatient wound care in the outpatient department. The wound exudation was reduced, and local infection was controlled, but the wound still showed no signs of healing, and the local pain did not improve significantly. She had a medical history of essential thrombocytosis by bone marrow cytology in our hospital ten years ago. She was treated with oral hydroxyurea (Three times a day, 0.5 g each time.). She denied any history of trauma, diabetes, or allergy to particular drugs. Physical examination showed a skin ulcer above the medial ankle of the left leg, about 6 cm × 5 cm in size; no oedema or pigmentation was found in both lower extremities; bilateral dorsalis pedis arteries and posterior tibial arteries can be palpated. She was subsequently diagnosed with a possible venous ulcer and was advised to be hospitalised for an ultrasound examination. However, the bilateral great saphenous veins and deep vein systems of lower limbs showed normal findings. The arteries of both lower extremities were mild to moderately calcified, no apparent stenosis was found, and the blood flow velocities of the femoral artery, popliteal artery, and lower leg arteries were average. Laboratory examination: WBC: 13.60 × 109/L, PLT: 1096 × 109/L; Liver and kidney function, blood sugar, and lipids were normal. Considering the size of the ulcer, the wound is difficult to heal. She was advised to use a free medial up-thigh skin graft for skin grafting. After successful wound skin grafting, she recovered well and was discharged with the wound healed. However, four months after the discharge, the ulcer reoccurred at the same site. She has been admitted again. A wound biopsy revealed dermal microvascular hyaline degeneration with lymphocytic infiltration . After multidisciplinary consultation, it was believed that the recurrent ulcer had a great relationship with the long-term use of hydroxyurea. Considering drug tolerability and family economic considerations, the patient decided to continue taking oral hydroxyurea treatment instead of discontinuing or switching medications. The possibility of ulcer unhealing was still high when free skin grafting was performed again. Considering that the repair of the flap with the vascular pedicle was more likely successful, an ultrasound examination of the right posterior tibial artery was performed, which showed that the diameter and position of the perforating branch met the surgical requirements. After communicating with the patient and the plastic surgeon, it was decided to use the posterior tibial artery perforator propeller flap to repair the ulcer. Before the operation, the perforating branch of the posterior tibial artery above the ulcer was detected with a Doppler blood flow detector (A). The perforating unit with the best blood flow signal was selected and marked (B). The operation was performed under epidural anaesthesia. Firstly, the ulcer and its base were resected along the 2 mm range around the ulcer. The flap was designed according to the size of the wound (A), the perforator vascular pedicle was freely mobilised (B, C), and the flap was rotated so that the long axis of the flap completely covered the resected ulcer area (A). Then, the flap and the edge of the incision were sutured with interrupted sutures. A drainage tube was placed under the wound (B). The wound healed well after the operation (C). After two years of follow-up, the patient developed a new ulcer on the contralateral calf over the medial condyle. No immediate treatment is required as the ulcer has already healed under the scab (D). It is worth mentioning that no new ulcers were observed at the site where the perforator flap graft was placed, and the patient did not report any local pain (C).