A 69-year-old female with a background of paroxysmal AF and typical type I atrial flutter presented to the clinic with worsening exertional breathlessness and periodic palpitations. Despite flecainide and bisoprolol her symptoms continued to deteriorate. She was referred for a cavotricuspid isthmus (CTI) and PVI ablation procedure and placed on sotalol in the interim. Other past medical history included hypertension and hypothyroidism. Atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter had been diagnosed in 2012 as was followed up regularly in the cardiology outpatients. Medication history included losartan 12.5 mg OD, ramipril 10 mg OD, sotalol 40 mg TDS, levothyroxine 75 µg OD, and warfarin 3 mg OD.
The elective combined procedure utilized the CARTO-3 system for mapping and ablation. A decapolar catheter was placed in the coronary sinus and quadrapolar catheter was positioned by the His bundle; during catheter manipulation the patient went into AF. Double transeptal puncture was uncomplicated with a circular Lasso mapping catheter delivered through a LAMP-90 sheath and a ThermoCool SmartTouch ablation catheter with contact force sensing placed through the second LA access. During PV mapping the Lasso catheter became entangled within the MV apparatus but was subsequently freed up using sheath advancement; obvious damage to the catheter was noted on withdrawal. The mapping catheter was replaced, and all PVs were silent at the end of the procedure with the patient in sinus rhythm. The CTI line was then performed in the right atrium but was complicated by a further episode of AF requiring cardioversion. The patient remained haemodynamically stable throughout the procedure and on-table transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated no significant mitral regurgitation (MR) or pericardial effusion. The patient was admitted overnight and discharged the following morning with normal physical observations and in sinus rhythm.
Following discharge, she reported increasing shortness of breath on exertion, a non-productive cough and general lethargy. A course of oral amoxicillin and steroids was prescribed by her General Practitioner for a suspected lower respiratory tract infection. Her breathlessness continued to deteriorate, and she presented to our hospital 12 days following her ablation procedure.
On examination, her venous pressure was raised to the tragus. Stony dullness and decreased air entry at the right base was consistent with a moderate pleural effusion. A new 3/6 pansystolic murmur at the apex radiating to the aortic region suggested a fault with the posterior mitral valve leaflet (PMVL). There was no peripheral oedema or stigmata of infective endocarditis. The blood counts showed an elevated white cell count of 18.36 × 109/L (normal: 4–11 × 109/L) due to a neutrophilia and a mild anaemia at 112 g/L (normal: 120–150 g/L). There was mild renal impairment with a creatinine of 115, baseline 67 µmol/L (normal: 50–90 µmol/L), the C-reactive protein was 3 mg/L (normal: <11 mg/L), and troponin-T measured 42 ng/L (normal: <14 ng/L).
Resting 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated sinus rhythm and partial right bundle branch block with T-wave inversion in leads III, aVF, and V1–V3 ; the anterior T-wave inversion was new when compared with a historical ECG . Chest X-ray showed a moderate right and small left pleural effusion . Urgent bedside TTE demonstrated vigorous left ventricular (LV) systolic function, a flail PMVL causing severe eccentric MR with a vena contracta of 0.7 cm and PV flow reversal. Biatrial dilatation was noted with an LA indexed volume of 36 mL/m2. There was also moderate tricuspid regurgitation, no obvious vegetations in the left or right heart, and a small rim of posterior pericardial fluid with no haemodynamic compromise (Video 1).
Iatrogenic trauma to the MV was the initial working diagnosis. The alternative diagnosis was coronary artery embolization during the ablation procedure with subsequent myocardial infarction (MI). The patient was commenced on intravenous loop diuretics (furosemide 80 mg BD) and continued on her angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor whilst awaiting transfer for surgery. A diagnostic coronary angiogram demonstrated unobstructed coronary arteries with LV angiogram demonstrating the broad jet of MR (Video 2).
The patient was transferred to the regional cardiothoracic centre 2 weeks following admission to our hospital. On-table transoesophageal echocardiogram demonstrated a P1 prolapse and she underwent an MV repair via a midline sternotomy with a tricuspid valve annuloplasty, Cox-maze procedure, and LA appendage ligation. Inspection of the MV intra-operatively confirmed a P1 prolapse due to avulsion of the associated chords attached to the posteromedial papillary muscle. Triangular resection of P1 was undertaken with plication of the annulus and remodelling with a 30 mm Physio-2 annuloplasty ring. Good MV opening and competence was confirmed on the table and she was discharged 5 days later following an uncomplicated post-operative period.
Our patient was reviewed in the clinic 2 months later where she was symptom free with an unrestricted exercise tolerance and TTE demonstrated a preserved LV systolic function with a trace of MR (Video 3 and ).