A 39-year-old woman, with no co-morbidity, underwent a left-sided saphenofemoral junction ligation, long saphenous vein stripping and multiple avulsions at another institution for recurrent thrombophlebitis. She presented three days post-operatively with a three day history of fever, rigors and swelling of the left leg. On examination she was noted to be pyrexial at 38.0°C, tachycardic and hypotensive. She had a very tender, swollen left groin and thigh with a blister anteriorly. Her white cell count was initially normal (8.4 × 109/L). She was in acute renal failure (urea 17.7 mmol/L, creatinine 326 mmol/L) with a metabolic acidosis (pH 7.30, lactate 5.9, base excess -10.3, bicarbonate 16.9). Amoxicillin 1 g with flucloxacillin 1 g was administered intravenously. Further examination revealed progressive skin necrosis, see figure . A diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis was made and she was taken to theatre.
At operation her groin wound was explored and pus was noted to be tracking down the site of the stripped vein. A large area of necrotic tissue, including necrotic fascia, was debrided, see figure . Tissue was sent for urgent microscopy, culture and sensitivity. Clindamycin 900 mg tds and imipenem 1 g tds was commenced. Post-operatively, she required ventilatory and inotropic support. She was coagulopathic (international normalised ratio 2.0) and required four units of fresh frozen plasma. Her white cell count dropped to 1.4 × 109/L but normalised the following day. Overnight her acidosis worsened (pH 7.19), despite a good urine output. Sodium bicarbonate was given and continuous veno-venous haemofiltration begun. The wound was examined 12 hours post-surgery on the intensive care unit. The wound edges were healthy with bleeding and, therefore, no further debridement was undertaken.
She was extubated on day two and did not require further haemofiltration. Inotropic support continued for three days. A wound review in theatre on day two revealed a clean wound and plans were made for skin grafting the following week. A group A streptococcus was isolated from the debrided tissue. It was sensitive to penicillin, so imipenem was converted to benzylpenicillin 1.2 g qds on day three. Only one set of blood cultures were taken on admission and no growth was isolated from them. A vacuum assisted closure device was fitted to the clean thigh wound on day four.
Split-skin-grafting was performed on day eight using the right thigh as a donor site. On day 13 her wound was inspected, revealing that >90% of the graft had taken and there was no clinically apparent infection. Oral antibiotic therapy with clindamycin 300 mg tds and amoxicillin 500 mg tds was begun. All antibiotics were stopped on day 20 and she was discharged on day 22. Significant scaring has resulted, see figure . It has taken three months for her to get back to work full-time and for her mobility to return to normal.