A 69-year-old male who had undergone left-sided hemi-hepatectomy for HCC was diagnosed with multifocal hepatic recurrence of the tumor 1 year later. His cardiovascular risk profile consisted of smoking (38 pack years), arterial hypertension, insulin-dependent diabetes, obesity, and dyslipoproteinemia. His medical history additionally comprised bilateral carotid artery disease and stenting of the right internal carotid artery, chronic renal impairment, and chronic obstructive lung disease. Chronic occlusion and good collateralization of his left anterior descending artery (LAD) had been described 5 years previously when he underwent PCI for myocardial infarction with stent implantation in the RCX.
After recurrence of the HCC, he suffered a posterior NSTEMI and underwent stenting of a subtotal stenosis of the RCA. In addition to the chronically occluded LAD, coronary angiography now showed 80 and 90% stenosis of the distal RCX and a posterolateral branch, respectively, which were not addressed in the course of the intervention.
In the weeks after the coronary intervention, he suffered from increasing angina and developed ventricular arrhythmia. Echocardiography, MRI (Siemens Magnetom Prisma, 3 Tesla), and CT (256 Multisclice Philips ICT) showed a tissue mass of 72 × 45 × 56 mm infiltrating the myocardium of both ventricles and the interventricular septum . When his cardiac symptoms became so debilitating that they limited his quality of life more than the cancer and he expressed an urgent desire for treatment despite his dismal prognosis, he was referred to our department to evaluate surgical treatment options.
As the RCA lesion had already been addressed, the LAD had been occluded with good collateralization for at least 5 years, and we agreed with the cardiologist that it was highly unlikely that such severe symptoms were caused by the remaining RCX lesions alone, we assumed the metastatic tumor to contribute to the patient’s deterioration by stealing perfusion from, compressing, or infiltrating coronary vessels. The imaging performed by this date, however, had not shown large tumor vessels communicating with the coronary arteries so that these phenomena were supposed to be caused by a multitude of small tumor vessels rather than large communicating vessels that would be amenable to interventional treatment such as embolization.
Assuming that a sufficient reduction of the tumor size would not only palliate the patient’s angina but also reduce the frequency and severity of his ventricular arrhythmia, and given both the surgical risk of an aggressive procedure (Euroscore 14.02 for a combined procedure including CABG) and his palliative situation and limited life expectancy, he was offered a restrictive surgical approach consisting of debulking of the metastatic tumor with an option for subsequent coronary intervention, should the surgical procedure not achieve sufficient palliation of his symptoms.
After median sternotomy and opening of the pericardium, the apex of the heart appeared plump and enlarged with an even surface that showed no visible tumor growth. The large metastasis seen on MRI and CT was palpable on and infiltrating the apex. Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established in customary fashion because exposition of the apex was not possible without provoking severe arrhythmia and hemodynamic instability. Felt strips were placed along the edges of the palpable tumor mass using 12 pledgeted 4.0 prolene sutures that were snugged down after application of French glue. Without entering the ventricular cavities, a portion of the tumor measuring 27 × 27 × 12 mm was removed in toto . Additionally, an approximately equal quantity of fragmented tumor tissue was removed so that only those sections of the tumor that had grown deep into the ventricular walls and septum were left. This resulted in considerable bleeding from a multitude of small vessels within the tumor. After careful hemostasis, the edges of the crater that was left within the area delimited by the felt strips were approximated by tying down two pledgeted 2.0 prolene sutures that were spanned across the crater through two of the felt strips. Following this, the remaining 4.0 sutures were tied down, and the defect was finally closed by a mattress suture followed by an over-and-over suture. The patient remained hemodynamically stable throughout the procedure, and weaning from CPB, decannulation, and sternal closure were performed in customary fashion.
Histopathologic examination of the removed tissue showed a mostly solid tumor consisting of medium-sized to large cells with a wide eosinophilic cytoplasm surrounding enlarged vesicular nuclei with prominent eosinophilic nucleoli. Further findings consisted of atypical mitotic figures and local invasion of blood vessels. Immunohistochemical examination yielded a profile that was also compatible with a diagnosis of metastatic HCC (co-expression of Hep-Par1, positive for CK8 at least in some sections, cytoplasmatic positivity for TTF1, negative for CK7).
The patient was extubated 5 h after the procedure and discharged from the ICU on postoperative day 2. He took an uneventful further course and was discharged on postoperative day 9 with his symptoms palliated. One and a half months later, he presented for a follow-up examination, this time complaining not of cardiac symptoms but of headaches. MRI of the head showed no cerebral metastases. MRI of the heart showed a mass of felt strips and organized hematoma on the apex as well as the change in configuration of the apical region brought about by the surgical procedure. This made it difficult to assess the size of the tumor which appeared, however, to have regained much of its previous size. Nevertheless, the patient survived five and a half months after the procedure with his cardiac symptoms alleviated.
The patient provided written approval of the publication of his case including any pertinent images for scientific purposes.