A 31-year-old Caucasian man, suffering from dizziness, sensation of imbalance, weight loss of 10kg, night sweats, cough, fever, and general weakness which lasted for several weeks was admitted to the neurology unit of a local regional hospital. On admission, he presented a wide-based gait, a positive Romberg sign, hyperesthesia of the feet, symmetrically diminished plantar reflexes, and right eye blindness (due to injury 4 years prior to the current admission). Routine laboratory tests revealed leucopenia (white blood cell count of 2.01 103/μL with 12% of lymphocytes) and macrocytic anemia (hemoglobin concentration of 10.8g/dL, red blood cells count of 3.37mln/mm3, hematocrit of 34.07%, mean corpuscular volume was 96.9fL). His platelet level was also below the normal range (72,000/mm3).
Computed tomography of his head demonstrated cortical-subcortical atrophy and malformation of his right eyeball. Neither intracranial bleeding nor malformation of his ventricular system was observed. Abdominal ultrasonography did not reveal any organ impairment.
He was referred to the clinical university hospital for further diagnosis of pancytopenia. In the Emergency Room, he was initially diagnosed with dizziness, imbalance, and gait disorder along with leucopenia and was admitted to the internal medicine ward.
He confirmed a 10kg weight loss during the last several weeks that was supported by a physical examination. His arterial pressure, heart rate, and body temperature were 130/80mmHg, 70 beats per minute and 38°C, respectively. In addition, he presented hyperesthesia of the abdominal wall and both feet.
A chest X-ray revealed the presence of several inflammatory-like opacities in his left pericardial area and right upper lobe. The complete blood cell count revealed macrocytic anemia, leukopenia (720 cells/mm3) and mild thrombocytopenia (104,000/mm3; Table ). His liver function was impaired with an increased aspartate and alanine aminotransferase along with gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) activities (351IU/mL, 167IU/mL, 281IU/L, respectively). Further laboratory tests revealed mild hypomagnesemia, hypoalbuminemia, elevated levels of beta- and gamma-globulins, and D-dimers. His level of complement 3 was below normal range (745mg/L) and 50% hemolytic complement activity of the serum was critically low. None of the anti-nuclear antibodies were found to be positive. His vitamin B12 levels were normal.
The patient was consulted on by an ophthalmologist and neurologist. Following the consultation, a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was performed. The examined sample was colorless and clear, with cytosis of one cell and total protein concentration of 21mg/100mL. The result of a Nonne–Apelt test was negative.
Tests for toxoplasmosis, syphilis, and Lyme disease returned negative results. Tests for cytomegalovirus infection revealed enhanced antigen-specific immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies. A throat swab culture revealed the presence of Escherichia coli. Cultures of his CSF and sputum revealed the presence of Kocuria varians/rosea and Staphylococcus aureus, respectively.
For the first 2 days of hospitalization, the patient denied any past risky behavior and he refused HIV testing. Nonetheless, following repetitive supportive advice, he eventually provided consent to conduct an HIV test. The results of two consecutive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay tests were positive along with further Western Blot testing. He reluctantly admitted his only risky behavior was intravenous illicit drug use 3 months prior to hospitalization. His CD4 cell counts were found to be significantly decreased (24 cells/mL). The overall clinical pattern indicated advanced-stage acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), the diagnosis that stayed in contrast to the information provided by the patient.
He was referred to the Department of Infectious Diseases and Hepatology for further treatment, where he admitted having used intravenous drugs for 5 years prior to the development of the symptoms.
On admission, his viral load was 703,475 copies/mL and his CD4+ T-cell count was 24 cells/mL. In addition to previous findings, he was anti-hepatitis C virus (HCV) positive and HCV ribonucleic acid was detectable (HCV genotype 3). Further, antibodies against Mycoplasma pneumoniae were also present in the serum. Highly active antiretroviral treatment (HAART), zidovudine/lamivudine and nevirapine, was introduced without delay and resulted in clinical improvement along with CD4 normalization. Currently, 3 years later, the patient remains under ambulatory care. A family epidemiological investigation revealed HIV (the same subtype) and HCV infection of his wife and gave negative results in their 5-year-old daughter.