A 68-year-old woman was seen at the Division of Mastology, Department of Gynecology of the Federal University of São Paulo (Universidade Federal de São Paulo, UNIFESP) with a non-palpable tumor that had been detected through screening mammography. The patient presented controlled hypertension and minor degenerative osteoarticular alterations. She reported having had three pregnancies and two deliveries, with thirty months of breastfeeding. She said that she did not have any other symptoms such as papillary flow or cutaneous lesions. She reported having had routine annual mammograms and that she had not had any previous surgery or biopsies. The mammogram performed two years earlier did not show any abnormalities. The physical examination was unremarkable, with no evidence of any palpable mass, skin changes or axillary lymphadenopathy.
Mammographic images showed an isodense circumscribed oval mass measuring 1.8 x 1.0 cm that was located at the junction of the upper quadrants of the left breast. Sonographic images of the left breast showed a hypoechoic homogenous oval mass measuring 1.4 x 0.7 cm that was horizontal and parallel to the skin. It had two lobulations and circumscribed margins, and was coincident with the location described through mammography . The lesion did not present any posterior acoustic shadow, hyperechoic halo or other associated abnormal features. The mass was classified as being in Breast Imaging-Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) category 4.
An ultrasound-guided breast core biopsy with a 12-gauge needle was performed and five fragments were obtained. The pathological evaluation showed a mesenchymal neoplasm with muscle differentiation. The patient underwent surgical excision of the lesion. The histological findings revealed a circumscribed lesion with a pattern of fusiform proliferation and formation of interlaced bundles and fascicles . No cellular atypia, necrosis or mitotic figures was found. Immunohistochemical stains for CD34 and S100 were positive, and negative for desmin and smooth muscle actin. A diagnosis of smooth muscle tumor, and specifically mammary parenchyma leiomyoma, was established. There was no recurrence of the lesion after follow-up of 60 months.