A 48-year-old male presented to the ED with sudden onset abdominal pain commencing 45 minutes prior to arrival. The pain was described as sharp, non-radiating, and severe and was poorly localized. He had no shortness of breath or chest pain and denied any fevers. He had a history of protein C deficiency with prior arterial thrombi including a chronic aortic thrombus for which he was prescribed warfarin. The patient’s past medical history was also significant for hypertension, and he was known to be non-compliant with his medications. He previously underwent a right iliofemoral embolectomy, bilateral above knee amputations, and placement of an abdominal infrarenal aortoiliac stent graft. He reported regular use of tobacco, cannabis, and methamphetamines.
On examination he was afebrile, with a heart rate of 98 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute, and blood pressure of 189/108 millimeters of mercury. He was in severe distress secondary to his abdominal pain, diaphoretic, and moaning. His abdomen was soft and diffusely tender without guarding or rebound.
Laboratory evaluation was remarkable for white blood cell count 23 × 103 per microliter (μL) (reference range: 4.5–11.0 × 103/μL), hemoglobin 15.5 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (13.8–17.2 g/dL), international normalized ratio of 1.02 (<1.1), lactic acid 2.8 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (0.5–2.2 mmol/L), bicarbonate of 17 milliequivalents (mEq)/dL (22–29 mEq/dL), normal anion gap, and creatinine of 2.13 milligrams (mg)/dL (0.67–1.17 mg/dL) with the patient’s baseline creatinine 1.14 mg/dL. Computed tomography (CT) angiogram of the abdomen and pelvis showed significant thrombus burden from the suprarenal aorta down to the femoral arteries, with near complete occlusion at the level of the renal arteries. Hypodensities of the renal cortices bilaterally indicating bilateral renal infarcts were also noted (–).
While in the ED, the patient required several doses of hydromorphone, and a dose of sub-dissociative ketamine. Vascular surgery and interventional radiology were consulted, and both recommended against surgical or endovascular intervention citing questionable benefit with significant risk. Anticoagulation with a heparin infusion was started, and the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit. During the patient’s hospitalization protein S deficiency was also diagnosed. The elevated lactic acid normalized by the following day, and his creatinine peaked at 5.28 mg/dL on day 5 of hospitalization. He did not require dialysis and was discharged on day seven of hospitalization.