An 87-year-old man was referred to our department for dysphagia that had started 2 months before. He presented hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia as comorbidities, in addition to a history of smoking 20 cigarettes per day until the age of 45 years and drinking 1 unit of alcohol per day. The patient did not receive any antithrombotic therapy and was not taking any anticoagulant medication. He was 160 cm tall and weighed 70 kg. Blood tests revealed a mildly impaired renal function (creatinine, 1.01 mg/dL; creatinine clearance, 51.02 mL/min), impaired glucose tolerance (hemoglobin A1c level, 6.6%), and mild anemia (hemoglobin, 12.0 g/dL).
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed an elevated lesion 31–36 cm from the incisors, and advanced esophageal cancer was suspected, with a biopsy revealing a squamous cell carcinoma. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed wall thickening of the lower thoracic esophagus. Involvement of the surrounding organs was not evident, and the tumor invasion depth was determined to extend until the esophageal adventitia. One enlarged lymph node was found near the left main bronchus; however, no distant metastases or other non-resectable factors were identified, and the lesion was deemed resectable. Cardiac and respiratory functions were within the normal range, and the patient had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0; therefore, we opted for esophagectomy as the treatment modality. Owing to the patient’s age and renal impairment, neoadjuvant therapy was not administered.
The patient underwent McKeown operation with subtotal thoracic esophagectomy (with a thoracoscopic right thoracic approach), two regional lymph node dissections, hand-assisted laparoscopic narrow gastric tube creation, reconstruction with a retrosternal narrow gastric tube, and jejunostomy (for nutrition). The operation time was 12 h 20 min, with a blood loss of 100 mL. The retrosternal pathway was sharply dissected from the abdominal wound with an electrocautery scalpel using an endoscope, followed by blunt dissection cephalad along the back of the sternum with a spatula and continued to the cervical wound, creating enough retrosternal space for the narrow gastric tube with a width of 3.5 cm. The retrosternal pathway was created without hemorrhage or other complications, and no intraoperative changes in circulatory dynamics were observed. No intraoperative complications were observed. Postoperatively, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit unextubated and unawakened.
The time course on the first postoperative day is shown in Fig. . The patient's initial postoperative course was stable and he was extubated on the morning of the first postoperative day. His first postoperative ambulation occurred 2 h after extubation. However, approximately 5 h after extubation, a gradual increase in heart rate, decrease in blood pressure, and increase in central venous pressure were observed. After 1 h, his blood pressure dropped significantly, requiring catecholamine administration. Imaging studies were then performed approximately 7 h after extubation, and echocardiography revealed a pericardial effusion—due to the presence of the gastric tube, only the apex of the heart was observable. Contrast-enhanced CT showed a collection of high-concentrate pericardial fluid, suggesting a cardiac tamponade caused by the intrapericardial hematoma leading to obstructive shock . Echo-guided pericardiocentesis via the subxiphoid approach was not possible because of the presence of the retrosternal reconstructed gastric tube, which prevented the access route. Approximately 8 h after extubation, while the treatment modalities were being debated by the medical staff, circulatory disturbance due to atrial fibrillation occurred, and cardiac extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was initiated. Heparinization was not performed because of the possibility of exacerbating intrapericardial hemorrhage. Because puncture drainage was not possible, surgical drainage was performed.
Because the patient presented a retrosternal gastric tube between the sternum and heart, a median sternotomy was avoided to preserve it. A small left anterior thoracotomy in the fourth intercostal space and subsequent pericardiotomy were performed. Upon opening of the pericardium, approximately 600 mL of bloody effusion was drained, resulting in instant hemodynamic improvement. No bleeding points were detected inside the pericardium on endoscopic observation. No persistent bleeding from the pericardium remained, and the surgery ended with the placement of a pericardial drainage tube in the pericardium. However, his blood pressure dropped again the following day, and CT revealed an enlarged residual hematoma in the pericardium around the right ventricle . We decided to perform another surgical drainage to improve the patient's hemodynamics and wean him off cardiac extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. In this second procedure, we approached the pericardium through a small right anterior thoracotomy in the fourth intercostal space to remove the hematoma around the right ventricle. After pericardiotomy, approximately 100 mL of the hematoma was removed from the right ventricular perimeter. Endoscopic observation was performed again and observation of the anterior aspect of the right ventricle, which could not be evaluated during the first surgical drainage, revealed injuries to the fatty tissue, epicardium, and myocardium of the right ventricular wall near the root of the pulmonary artery, with persistent oozing being detected . Such sites were suture-repaired and hemostasis was confirmed . The injury sites were located intermittently along the posterior side of the sternum, in the craniocaudal direction. As no intraoperative procedure other than the creation of the retrosternal pathway could have caused such injury, we considered that it occurred bluntly during that procedure. After the second surgical drainage, the patient’s circulation improved and he was weaned off cardiac extracorporeal membrane oxygenation on the fourth postoperative day. Thereafter, due to the presentation of right heart failure, surgical drainage was performed again, but there were no bleeding points, and the remaining hematoma was removed as much as possible. Hemostasis was considered achieved during the second surgical drainage procedure. Then, the patient did not present with any symptoms of cardiac tamponade.
Acute renal failure, pleural effusion associated with circulatory changes, and postoperative atrial flutter requiring ablation therapy occurred, and improvement in the respiratory status was slow. Although tracheotomy was performed on the 10th day after esophageal cancer surgery, the patient was weaned from the respirator nearly a month after the operation. No anastomotic leakage was observed. After swallowing training, the patient started oral intake on the 31st postoperative day. Although he was hospitalized for a long time because of a pyothorax, his general condition gradually improved, and he was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation on the 120th postoperative day.
The histopathological diagnosis of the esophageal tumor was a spindle cell squamous cell carcinoma with invasion of the lamina propria mucosa—most of the lesion was thought to have detached at the time of the operation because of necrosis—and no lymph node metastasis was detected. Resection margins were negative. Adjuvant therapy was not administered. The patient had a recurrence-free course, but died 18 months after surgery due to pneumonia.