A 73-year-old man was admitted in emergency to the general surgery department with a neck mass, sudden dyspnoea, stridor, dysphonia, and progressively worsening dysphagia. His medical history included a multinodular goiter ans right radical nephrectomy performed 8 years prior due to renal cell carcinoma. At annual follow-up, a CT of the thorax and abdomen was performed and the thyroid mass was also evaluated by ultrasonography and thyroid function tests. Five months earlier, the patient had undergone fine-needle aspiration consistent with multinodular goiter. Three days before admission the patient underwent a total-body CT scan that revealed a thyroid mass with substernal extension involving and obstructing the upper airways, right vocal cord and jugular vein and showed carotid artery compression and displacement, in addition to diffuse lymphadenopathy .
Physical examination revealed a large, painful, diffuse, and predominantly right-sided thyroid tumour. Thyroid function tests were normal. A flexible laryngoscopy revealed right vocal cord palsy and left vocal cord paresis, with a nearly total reduction of the laryngeal lumen. Emergency endotracheal intubation was performed, followed by total thyroidectomy using loupe magnification with lymph node dissection. The surgery was completed by a tracheotomy, given the evident tracheomalacia. The thyroid gland was found to have been fully replaced by a soft yellow mass weighing 40 g and 8.5 × 5.5 × 4.5 cm large, with indistinct borders infiltrating peri-thyroid muscles and involving three lymph nodes. Histological examination revealed a carcinoma composed mainly of clear cells with scanty oxyphil cells. Neoplastic cells showed large pleomorphic nuclei and frequent mitoses. Lymphatic and vascular invasions were common findings. Immunohistochemistry revealed strong and diffuse expression of CD10 antigen was positive for Vimentin and negative for thyroid transcription factor-1 staining. Histology and immunohistochemistry were characteristic of metastatic clear renal cell carcinoma.
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged after 10 days. Despite palliative chemotherapy, the disease progressed and the patient died 7 months later.