A 19-year-old girl visited our clinic due to generalized jerks and dystonia. Her birth, perinatal, growth, and development histories were unremarkable. She was a single child of nonconsanguineous parents. Her 51-year-old father had experienced fine, jerky, postural tremor of both hands for 40 years, but the tremor did not disturb his activities of daily living. At the age of 5 years, the patient's parents noticed jerks of their daughter's left foot. When she started to walk and run, she frequently fell due to twisting of the left foot. The jerks and dystonia progressively worsened up to the age of 13 years, spreading to involve the neck, trunk, and all four limbs. Thereafter, her symptoms stabilized for the following 6 years. The jerks and dystonia were aggravated by emotional stress and disappeared while she was sleeping. Her eye movements were normal. Detailed cognitive function tests revealed no abnormalities. She exhibited retrocollis and backward and right-side tilting of the trunk as well as generalized jerks and dystonia that severely affected the left arm . Her left arm took a dystonic posture with flexion at the elbow, wrist, and metacarpophalangeal joints. She had no dysarthria or dysphagia. The dyskinesia improved markedly with the ingestion of small amounts of alcohol. Her motor and sensory function tests were normal. Deep-tendon reflexes were normoactive bilaterally, and plantar reflexes were flexor bilaterally. Cerebellar function tests were normal. Routine laboratory tests, measurements of serum ceruloplasmin, serum creatine kinase, and serum lactate levels were all normal. Her EEG, median somatosensory evoked potential studies, and brain MRI were normal. DNA analyses of the patient and her father showed the same mutation in the SGCE gene [deletion in exon 6 (c.771_772delAT, Cys258X)]. Genetic studies of the mutation of DTY1 and GCH-1 were negative. She did not respond to levodopa/carbidopa (100/25 mg t.i.d.) or clonazepam (0.5 mg t.i.d.). Her dystonia and myoclonus responded markedly to trihexiphenidyl (2 mg t.i.d.). She stopped taking the medication many times, which resulted in recurrence of the dystonia and myoclonus. When trihexiphenidyl was discontinued at 7 years after the initiation of treatment , neither the myoclonus nor dystonia recurred, and the spontaneous remission persisted for more than 1year.