An-84-year-old female was referred to our unit after the Urologist encountered large volume pulsatile bleeding from the left ureter during routine stent exchange. The hematuria was initially managed by rapidly exchanging for a new stent; however, the patient went into hypovolemic shock due to acute blood loss. The patient had a history of urinary retention due to retroperitoneal fibrosis caused by immunoglobulin G4-related disease 2 years ago. Ureteral stents were placed in the patient’s bilateral ureters. To prevent ureteral infection, occlusion of the stents and stone formation, the stents were exchanged every 6 months. After the hematuria, computed tomography (CT) scan did not show the injury of the left kidney and ureter; however, revealed contact between the ureter and common iliac artery (CIA) . Therefore, UAF was suspected. In order to facilitate the need for ongoing exchanges of the ureteral stent in the future, endovascular therapy (EVT) was performed. A 6.0-Fr sheath was placed via the left common femoral artery and a 4.5-Fr guiding sheath with a length of 120 cm was inserted via the left radial artery. Baseline angiography did not show blood flow into the ureter from iliac arteries (Das et al. ). The CIA and EIA were too large for OPTICROSS IVUS™ compatible with 0.014-wires (Boston Scientific, MA, US) to identify the connection of the UAF. Next, we considered that angiography via a micro-catheter could evaluate the connection between the internal iliac artery (IIA) and the left ureter. We attempted to advance a 0.014-in. Gladius guidewire™ (Asahi Intecc, Aichi, Japan) to the IIA; however, the wire proceeded from the EIA to the left ureter unintentionally . The diagnosis of UAF was confirmed. IVUS allowed to visualize the stent in the ureter and the subintimal lumen of the EIA without evidences of a definite tract and aneurysm in the connection . As mechanical stimulation of the ureteral stent could enlarge the subintimal space of the iliac arteries and cause a new UAF to the ipsilateral IIA in the future, coil embolization of the IIA was performed using three Interlocking Detachable Coils™ (two 2.0 mm × 4.0 cm and one 3.0 mm × 6.0 cm; Boston Scientific, MA, US) via the 4.5-Fr guiding sheath. The ureter did not contact directly to the inner lumen of the iliac arteries according to the IVUS findings; therefore, we considered that the risk of stent-graft infection might not be high. Then, after replacing the 6.0-Fr with a 9.0-Fr sheath, a Viabahn covered stent™ of 9.0 × 50 mm (W.L. Gore & Associates, Flagstaff AZ, US) was implanted from the common iliac artery (CIA) to the entry of the subintima in the EIA . Because angiography revealed type I endoleak into the EIA, an Assurant balloon-expandable stent™ of 10 × 30 mm (Medtronic, Frauenfeld, Switzerland) was implanted in the proximal portion of the CIA to press the covered stent to the arterial wall. Final angiography showed closure of the IIA, subintimal lumen, and endoleak . The left ureteral stent was exchanged immediate after the EVT, and hematuria did not occur. The patient had no major post-operative complications and was discharged from the hospital. The ureteral stents were exchanged three time during 1 year after the EVT, and the patient had no further episodes of any gross hematuria on dual anti-platelet therapy. The left ankle brachial index was within normal limit at 1 year after the EVT.