A 69-year-old Filipino man with history significant for hypertension and hyperlipidemia presented to his primary care physician with hematuria with weight loss of 1 month’s duration. He did not have any flank pain, burning on urination, or increased urinary frequency. He did not endorse any symptoms of fatigue or night sweats. His only medication was atenolol for his hypertension. He did not smoke tobacco, drink alcohol, or do any recreational drugs. He was unemployed at time of interview. He did not have any family history of cancer. His vital signs were within normal limits. On physical examination, he was well appearing and in no acute distress. He had no palpable mass and had an otherwise normal cardiovascular, respiratory, and neurologic examination. Laboratory work showed normal cell counts and normal electrolytes; the results of his kidney and liver function tests were normal. A computed tomography (CT) – intravenous pyelogram was performed as a diagnostic work-up for his hematuria, which demonstrated a large mass in the left collecting system and proximal ureter. He was seen by urology with plans for surgical resection 1 month later. Three weeks later he was admitted to the Emergency Department with nausea and vomiting. He was tachycardic to 110 beats per minute but maintained a normal blood pressure. His laboratory results were notable for hemoglobin to 12.1. His sodium was 134. At that time, a CT scan of his abdomen and pelvis showed interval enlargement of the left renal mass. An ureteroscopy with biopsy was performed, which showed necrotic tissue with rare crushed degenerating atypical cells. A screening chest CT scan was also obtained which showed a small 3 mm nodule in the lower lobe of his left lung. A follow-up interventional radiology-guided left kidney biopsy showed a cellular neoplasm with sheets of pleomorphic round cells with hyperchromatic nuclei, irregular nuclear outlines, and inconspicuous nucleoli with scant and delicate cytoplasm which is consistent with SCC. The tumor cells were positive for the neuroendocrine markers synaptophysin and CD56 with focal staining for chromogranin and dot-like positive staining for cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), supporting the diagnosis of SCC . A bone scan did not show any metastatic lesions. Shortly afterwards, he developed dizziness and an MRI of his brain was obtained revealing a 1.6 cm partially hemorrhagic round mass with surrounding edema in the midline superior vermis potentially representing metastatic disease. An additional 4–5 mm hemorrhagic metastatic focus was seen in the right occipital convexity. The cerebellar mass was resected and probably represented a renal origin due to the absence of lung masses along with clinical and radiographic correlation. He was started on whole brain radiation therapy during his in-patient stay. An out-patient oncology referral was made but he was unable to establish care due to frequent hospitalizations. He had several hospital admissions for nausea and vomiting and continued to decline functionally. He developed chronic hyponatremia during these hospitalizations which were attributed to SIADH. He originally presented with sodium of 119 and was stabilized to a sodium level of 128 with the use of salt tablets. He declined chemotherapy when it was offered by the oncology team during in-patient consultation due to poor quality of life and functional status; he died within 8 months of presentation at his nursing facility. The cause of his death was unknown. An autopsy was not performed.