A 56-year-old Iranian male (right-handed) presented with left elbow pain that lasted for three months. In addition to feeling pain, the patient also complained of a palpable lump.
Following the physical examination, he revealed that he has been unable to fully extend his elbow since last month, and that he has tenderness on the medial epicondyle of his left elbow. There was no previous history of elbow injuries. His family history was unremarkable. The patient also revealed no medical or surgical history. The orthopedic surgeon examined him and found that he had a tender site as well as a non-tender lump over the medial epicondyle region of the humerus. An MRI was taken, which showed a lipoma and non-specific inflammatory change at the site of marker placement. The patient was referred to us by a radiologist for an ultrasound to further investigate the MRI findings as a probable explanation of the patient's chief complaints. Sonographic imaging at the site of pain and complaints with a linear probe was done. Matrix linear-array transducers with a peak frequency of 4 to 15 MHz were used for this case (with the GE Voluson E6 Ultrasound Machine). The origin of the concern was examined with ultrasound. There was a 10 mm round-shaped well-defined hyperechoic subcutaneous lesion that was congruent with the location of the lump sensation but with no pain, consistent with subcutaneous lipoma, adjacent to the left medial epicondyle of the elbow . Further examination with ultrasound at the site of pain revealed a thickened and diffusely heterogeneously hypoechoic pronator teres tendon, with calcific deposition (arrow) and notably uneven underlying bone . On color or power Doppler imaging revealed no evidence of hypervascularity in the region of calcification at the origin of the pronator teres tendon . These characteristics were consistent with the diagnosis of calcific tendinosis and subcutaneous lipoma at the same time and site. An X-ray scan of the patient's left elbow was obtained based on this suspected diagnosis. The plain radiograph revealed heterotopic bone density in both the medial and lateral humeral epicondyles, but predominantly in the lateral epicondyle, which conflicted with the patient's clinical complaints . These imaging modalities validated the diagnosis of calcific tendinosis, and no additional assessment was required. The patient was referred to his orthopedic surgeon for treatment based on the results of the US examination and X-ray findings. The orthopedic physician recommended conservative treatment for him as well as a two-month follow-up visit with a physical examination.
Considering the heterotopic bone density on both sides of the epicondyles, which could be indicative of calcific tendinosis on both sides, an X-ray of additional probable sites, as well as blood testing to rule out any endocrine abnormalities, was ordered.
Upon the follow-up appointment, the patient’s laboratory testing indicated no abnormalities, such as hyperparathyroidism or other endocrine disorders that may cause hypercalcemia. Other X-rays (Knee/Shoulder/Other elbow) showed no other abnormalities and mainly no calcific tendinosis.