A 70-year-old man was admitted to the Second Affiliated Hospital, Army Medical University on 27 December 2019, with the chief complaint of pollakiuria and urgent urination for half a year and dysuria for 13 days. The patient had urinary incontinence, nocturia, and intermittent hematuria but did not have other clinical symptoms or signs. The patient received transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) at the local hospital 6 months prior, and the postoperative pathological diagnosis was uncertain. Urinary tract computed tomography (CT) on 14 December 2019, revealed a mass with mixed density in the pelvic region, unclearly displayed prostate and bladder, enlarged pelvic and retroperitoneal lymph nodes, and mildly dilated bilateral renal pelvis and ureter . The prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level of the patient was 198 ng/mL. An enlarged prostate and a hard enlarged mass were palpated by digital rectal examination (DRE). The personal history, family history, and physical examination of the patient were not exceptional.
On 30 December 2019, the patient underwent TURP plus transperineal biopsy of the prostate, and invasion of the left wall of the bladder was observed during the operation. The postoperative pathological diagnosis showed prostate adenocarcinoma, Gleason score (GS) 5 + 4 = 9 .
Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) on 7 January 2020, revealed that the mass in the pelvic region was considered a malignant tumor, and enlarged pelvic and retroperitoneal lymph nodes were considered metastatic carcinoma. The patient was eventually diagnosed with PCa (pT4N1M1a). Because of worrying about the adverse events of docetaxel chemotherapy and the high economic burden of NHA, at the beginning, the patient received ADT (goserelin, 3.6 mg, subcutaneous injection, per 28 days plus bicalutamide 50 mg, oral administration, once daily). To his disappointment, the reduction in the PSA level was unsatisfactory, dropping to only 7.04 ng/mL. Prostate-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on 18 June 2020 revealed an enlarged prostate with a maximum cross-sectional size of 50 × 37 mm, PCa with invasion of the left pelvic sidewall and left side of the bladder, unclearly displayed bilateral seminal vesicles, and enlarged left external and internal iliac lymph nodes . According to the official definition of mCRPC by the European Association of Urology (EAU) guideline as well as Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) (, ), the patient showed radiological progression (an enlarged soft tissue lesion using RECIST), while the PSA level was more than three times as high as 2 ng/mL. The patient has become resistant to ADT with progression to mCRPC, despite serum testosterone remaining at castrate levels (< 50 ng/dL).
From 18 June to 23 October 2020, the patient accepted and started six cycles of docetaxel (75 mg/m2, Day 1, intravenous injection, every 21 days) combined with prednisone (5 mg, oral administration, twice daily) plus goserelin. After six cycles of chemotherapy, the PSA level of the patient dropped to 0.97 ng/mL. Prostate-enhanced MRI on 15 March 2021, suggested an enlarged prostate with a maximum cross-sectional size of 50 ×3 7 mm and a significantly reduced volume of the prostate and left pelvic sidewall lesions compared to before treatment . The patient had good lower urinary tract function and clinical efficacy and safety. However, he was still afraid of the adverse events of docetaxel chemotherapy and refused to accept chemotherapy sequentially. After 6 months of follow-up and maintenance ADT, the PSA level of the patient rose to 19.48 ng/mL. Prostate-enhanced MRI on 24 May 2021 revealed a significantly increased lesion volume in the left pelvic sidewall and new metastasis in the left femoral neck, sacrum, and bilateral iliac crest .
We further analyzed the homologous recombination repair (HRR) gene panel of the patient by genetic testing of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA), and the presence of HRR gene mutations (HRRm) was not found. Therefore, from 25 May to 7 December 2021, the patient accepted and started 10 cycles of docetaxel combined with prednisone (the first DR) plus goserelin and the addition of abiraterone acetate (1,000 mg, oral administration, once daily). Prostate-enhanced MRI on 17 November 2021 revealed a prostate with a maximum cross-sectional size of 37 × 29 mm and a significantly reduced lesion volume in the prostate and left pelvic sidewall. Except for the left femoral neck, no bone metastases were found in the other parts of the body . After 10 cycles of chemotherapy, the PSA level of the patient dropped to 0.61 ng/mL again. Unfortunately, after less than 3 months of follow-up and maintenance goserelin plus abiraterone combined with prednisone, the PSA level of the patient rose to 21.78 ng/mL. In addition, prostate-enhanced MRI on 23 March 2022 revealed that the volume of the lesion on the left pelvic sidewall was significantly increased, and rectal invasion was not ruled out .
After multidisciplinary team (MDT) discussion regarding the worries about the high economic burden of multigene molecular testing by tissue biopsy and PARP inhibitors as well as repeated prostate needle biopsy, on 30 March 2022, the patient accepted and started eight cycles of docetaxel combined with prednisone (the second DR) as well as maintenance goserelin plus abiraterone. Although the PSA response cannot reach a 97% PSA reduction as the first DR, the PSA level of the patient can still be maintained at 19–27 ng/mL. Full- body bone scan and prostate-enhanced MRI of follow-up did not show new confirmed progression of imaging. The changes in the PSA and serum testosterone levels throughout the treatment are shown in .