A 59-year-old male with a history of hypertension and prediabetes presented to the ED in the morning with diffuse, crampy abdominal pain associated with vomiting and profuse diarrhea. His symptoms began five hours prior to arrival. He reported that the previous night he had eaten a dinner of fish and vegetable curry which tasted “off.” Initial vital signs showed a blood pressure of 153/94 millimeters of mercury, pulse of 83 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18 respirations per minute, a temperature of 98.2° Fahrenheit, and an oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. Physical examination was unremarkable. He lacked any abdominal tenderness, appeared to be euvolemic, and was in no acute distress.
Treatment began with a one-liter bolus of intravenous (IV) normal saline, 8 milligrams (mg) of IV ondansetron, and 15 mg of IV ketorolac. Initial blood analysis is noted in the . Outpatient blood analysis from the month prior showed normal liver function testing (LFT) and creatinine (Cr) of 0.8. Right upper quadrant ultrasound was ordered and showed hepatic steatosis, as well as cholelithiasis with biliary sludge, but no evidence of cholecystitis. Six-hour repeat basic metabolic panel (BMP) after fluid hydration did not demonstrate any significant change. The patient was tolerating fluids but complained of persistent abdominal pain and watery diarrhea. He was placed in the ED observation unit pending a computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis (CTAP) with contrast and continued IV hydration.
Overnight, the patient’s symptoms continued. The CTAP showed nonspecific fatty stranding of the left adrenal gland, nonspecific fatty liver disease, and partial visualization of cystic lung disease. The morning laboratory analysis at 24 hours began to show significant and worsening abnormalities in BMP and LFT . The patient remained hemodynamically stable, with an unchanged exam. Arrangements were made for admission, and general surgery was consulted for acute liver injury.
On repeating his diet history to the consulting team, the patient revealed he used to forage for mushrooms in his home country. In fact, two days before symptom onset, he had eaten several mushrooms from his yard. He felt well afterward; so he consumed additional mushrooms in a fish curry that he later thought was the cause of his symptoms. Upon reevaluation, he reported 8/10 abdominal pain, 15–20 episodes of watery stools, profuse vomiting, anxiety, diaphoresis, and insomnia. Vital signs remained within normal limits, but his repeat abdominal exam showed mild, diffuse tenderness. He had anicteric sclera but lacked jaundice. Medical toxicology service was consulted for management of liver injury secondary to mushroom ingestion, and the patient was able to provide a photograph of the species he had consumed. While the mushroom itself was unavailable for testing, the photograph was reviewed with a mycologist and suspected to be A phalloides .
Treatment for mushroom toxicity was initiated with N-acetylcysteine (NAC) 21-hour IV protocol (150 mg/kg loading dose over 60 minutes followed by 50 mg/kg over four hours), high-dose IV penicillin at one million units per kg per day (U/kg/day) every four hours, activated charcoal (1g/kg by mouth), and IV hydration. His acetaminophen level, ordered when his worsening transaminitis was identified, was negative. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s emergency criteria for silibinin, an amatoxin antidote, were met, and it was initiated on day two as a 5 mg/kg loading dose over one hour followed by a continuous infusion of 20 mg/kg/day. The patient remained without encephalopathic changes. Over the course of several days, his laboratory abnormalities peaked, and their values can be seen in the table. After evaluation by the hepatobiliary service, he was transferred to a regional liver transplant center. Following transfer, treatment with NAC was continued. As LFTs continued to decline, the patient was discharged on hospital day seven without the need for transplant.