A 72-year-old Japanese man underwent distal gastrectomy with D2 lymph node dissection for advanced gastric cancer 3 years ago. According to the Union for International Cancer Control tumor, node, metastasis classification, the stage of cancer was T3N2M0 (stage IIIA). After surgery, he received adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 (TS-1®; Taiho Pharmaceutical Company, Tokyo, Japan) at 120mg/day (4 weeks on, 2 weeks off). Six months after the completion of adjuvant chemotherapy, follow-up computed tomography (CT) revealed ascites and enlarged para-aortic lymph nodes, and his serum carcinoembryonic antigen level was elevated at 10.9ng/mL. Staging laparoscopy was then performed and revealed peritoneal metastasis of his gastric cancer. Then, weekly paclitaxel (Taxol®; Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, NY, USA) at 80mg/m2 (3 weeks of administration followed by 1 week of withdrawal) was begun as first-line treatment of the peritoneal and lymph node recurrence. After four courses of chemotherapy, his serum carcinoembryonic antigen level normalized and CT showed reduction of his para-aortic lymph nodes and disappearance of the ascites.
He developed general fatigue and anorexia soon after completion of seven courses of the above-described chemotherapy. He was then transferred to the out-patient department for a thorough examination. On admission, he was alert with a blood pressure of 110/53mmHg, heart rate of 64 beats per minute, and high body temperature of 38.5°C. His height was 178.5cm, body weight was 60.2kg, and body mass index was 22.3kg/m2. No pigmentation was noted in his skin or oral mucosa. The pubic and axillary hair were normal. No abnormal findings were elicited by the chest and abdominal physical examination.
Hematological examination showed leukopenia (white blood cell count, 1.97 × 103/μL), neutropenia (neutrophil count, 350/μL), a hemoglobin level of 11.4g/dL, and a platelet level of 199 × 103/μL. Biochemical examination showed a slightly elevated C-reactive protein level (3.1mg/dL) and a normal blood glucose level (101mg/dL). His serum electrolyte levels were normal at the time of admission . Chest and abdominal CT showed no progression of the lymph node metastasis or ascites and no obvious focus of infection.
He was admitted to our hospital with a diagnosis of febrile neutropenia. The neutropenia was immediately improved by the administration of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, and his fever decreased 3 days after admission. By contrast, his anorexia and general fatigue gradually worsened. He was unable to take any oral medications and became bedridden. One week after admission, his Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status deteriorated from 2 to 4. In addition, on the fifth day of hospitalization, his serum sodium level abruptly decreased to 122mEq/L, serum osmolality was 239mOsm/kg, and serum creatinine was 0.69mg/dL. His urine osmolality (482mOsm/kg) was greater than that of plasma . We initially restricted his fluid intake to 1000mL/day because we suspected syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) as the cause of the hyponatremia. However, his serum sodium level did not normalize despite these treatments. We concurrently performed endocrinological studies in the rest position to investigate the cause of the hyponatremia and plasma hyposmolality. As shown in Table , his early morning plasma ACTH level (<5pg/mL) and cortisol level (4.6μg/mL) were very low. However, the plasma levels of all other anterior pituitary hormones, including follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, prolactin, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and growth hormone, were slightly elevated. His serum-free triiodothyronine and serum-free thyroxine levels were also normal. Because the endocrinological findings led us to suspect that his hyponatremia and plasma hyposmolality were caused by ACTH deficiency, we performed a acorticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) test, which showed that his plasma ACTH and cortisol levels did not respond to CRH stimulation. Antipituitary, antithyroid peroxidase antibodies, and antinuclear antibodies were negative in the immunological examinations.
CT and magnetic resonance imaging showed no space-occupying lesion or atrophic change in his pituitary gland or hypothalamus .
Because we definitively diagnosed IAD based on these findings, hydrocortisone replacement therapy was commenced at 20mg/day and gradually increased to 30mg/day, resulting in a marked improvement of his anorexia and general fatigue within a few days. His serum sodium level was also normalized immediately after the administration of hydrocortisone. His performance status returned to the prehospital state, and he was discharged from our hospital on the 50th day of hospitalization . He then underwent out-patient chemotherapy with hydrocortisone replacement. He remains alive without progression of the metastatic lesions 6 months after discharge.