An 8.5 kg, 9-month-old female infant was referred by a general dental practitioner to the Department of Pediatric Dentistry for evaluation of a slowly enlarging mass on the patient's maxillary anterior alveolar ridge. The mass had first appeared 15 days after birth and evolved gradually to its present size. The mass bled easily during breastfeeding and the mother was concerned if it was a tumor. There was a history of trauma 1 month back and since spontaneous bleeding was seen from the mass. Parents gave no history of the natal tooth at birth. The infant was first-born by an uncomplicated full-term pregnancy with normal delivery. The patient's medical history was unremarkable and non-contributory.
During the physical examination, no other similar lesions were evident on the skin. Intraoral examination demonstrated a 1 × 0.5 cm pedunculated soft tissue mass on the maxillary alveolar ridge adjacent to the midline. The solitary exophytic mass appeared multilobulated, circumscribed, with a well-defined border overlying primary maxillary left central incisor alveolar mucosa . The overlying mucosa was reddish-pink and smooth with no ulceration. The mass was firm-rubbery, friable, non-tender, and blanching could not be confirmed due to profuse bleeding on palpation. A presumptive diagnosis of hemangioma was made.
In view of the unprecedented bleeding and to avoid a double visit to the operating room for biopsy, it was decided to perform an excisional biopsy under general anesthesia using electrocautery with complete precautions. The surgical procedure was explained to the parents and informed consent was obtained for the same. After vitamin K prophylactic injection, the mass was removed en toto using electrocautery, and curettage of the underlying tissue was done. On excision, the incisal edge of the primary maxillary left central incisor was visible.
Microscopic examination of the tissue revealed the presence of abundant dilated capillaries with RBCs and dense mixed inflammatory cell infiltration in the fibrovascular connective suggestive of hemangioma with capillary network and an inflammatory component . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for GLUT1 which was detected in the endothelial cells, stromal cells, and microvasculature identified as brown staining .