A 58-year-old male patient presented to our Emergency Department (ED) complaining of recurrent episodes of syncope in the previous hours. Few days before ED admission the patient complained of sore throat, fever, and flu-like symptoms. One year before admission, he had already experienced a syncope during a febrile episode, associated with haemoconcentration (haemoglobin value 18.7 g/dL) and oedema of lower extremities. Moreover, his past medical history included a previous hospital admission (3 years before) for suspected myopericarditis, not confirmed by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI). He had no personal nor family history of immune diseases. He was not taking any regular medication at the time of admission.
On arrival, he was normotensive (blood pressure 115/70 mmHg), with normal heart rate (80 beats per minute) and normal oxygen saturation of 98%. Physical examination was negative, without any sign of peripheral or pulmonary congestion. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm without conduction disorders and with normal ventricular repolarization. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed decreased left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (LVEF) of 40% with normal LV volume, mild concentric remodelling (basal interventricular septum and inferolateral wall of 11 mm), and a diffuse mild pericardial effusion. Chest X-ray was negative. Initial laboratory tests showed moderate leukocytosis (16.170 × 109 L), polyglobulia (haematocrit 57%), decreased serum albumin concentration (2.85 g L, normal range 4.02–4.76 g L), mildly increased C-reactive protein (CRP—2.0 mg dL, normal range 0.0–0.5), elevated high sensitivity troponin T (hs-TnT 400 ng/L, normal values 0–14 ng L), and NT-pro-B natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP 14 343 ng/L, normal value 0–155 ng L). Based on the evidence of decreased LV function with mild pericardial effusion, raised troponin, NT-pro-BNP, and CRP values, and a recent history of flu-like symptoms, he was then hospitalized for suspected myopericarditis.
Within 48 h from admission, the clinical status deteriorated, with rapid development of hypotension (systolic blood pressure of 60–70 mmHg), pulmonary oedema, and signs of hypoperfusion (cold extremities, oliguria, and raise of blood lactates to 4 mmoL/L). Repeated echocardiography showed LVEF of 20%, increased LV wall thickness (basal interventricular septum of 14 mm, basal inferolateral wall of 12 mm), and a restrictive transmitral filling pattern, without increase of the pericardial effusion (see , and ). The patient was then admitted to ICU with a diagnosis of cardiogenic shock. Once in ICU, mechanical ventilation was started and high dosage of vasoactive drugs (epinephrine and norepinephrine) was necessary to maintain a mean arterial pressure of >60 mmHg. Due to the acute ventricular dysfunction with further raise of hs-TnT to 3066 ng L, a coronary angiography and an endomyocardial biopsy were performed. The former showed normal coronary vessels, while the biopsy was diagnostic for active myocarditis, with evidence of localized inflammatory infiltrates and areas of myocardial necrosis . The polymerase chain reaction assay on the histological sample was positive for parvovirus B19 (PVB19).
Moreover, blood cultures were obtained (based on haemodynamic instability and elevation of CRP, despite the absence of fever or other clear signs of sepsis) and were negative.
Despite initial resuscitation, the haemodynamic status remained severely impaired. Therefore, mechanical support with intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was started and a pulmonary artery catheter was inserted to better monitor the haemodynamic status and treatment responsiveness. Right heart catheterization showed ongoing mixed hypovolemic-cardiogenic shock: right atrium pressure was 10 mmHg, pulmonary artery pressure 25/14 mmHg, capillary wedge pressure 12 mmHg, cardiac index 1.77 L min m2; both pulmonary (PVR-I) and systemic (SVR-I) vascular resistance index were high: PVR-I 3.4 WU/m2, SVR-I 41.8 WU/m2.
Because of the refractory shock and the histopathological diagnosis of acute myocarditis, we administered high doses of i.v. methylprednisolone (i.e. 1 g on the first day followed by 500 mg od for the next 2 days).
Based on the concomitant presence of the typical triad of hypotension, hypoalbuminaemia, and haemoconcentration, the diagnosis of SCLS triggered by PVB19 infection was suspected.
Despite circulatory support, shock persisted and the patient developed rhabdomyolysis (creatine kinase 9297 U/L, normal range 0–200 U/L) and acute kidney injury, which was treated with continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT). Based on previously reported data about a possible role of soluble factors on vascular hyperpermeability in SCLS, we added a cytokine adsorber haemofilter to CRRT treatment.
Twenty-four hours after starting CRRT, the patient significantly improved: LVEF raised to 35% and he was progressively weaned from IABP on Day 7 and from inotropes and vasopressors on Day 11. Haemofiltration was stopped after 72 h. Ventilatory weaning was postponed due to ventilatory-associated pneumonia, and was finally accomplished on Day 12.
A CMRI performed 20 days after admission showed improvement of biventricular performance (LVEF 50%) and complete resolution of myocardial oedema . Late gadolinium enhancement images showed intramyocardial mild, widespread enhancement (non-ischaemic pattern). Pre-discharge echocardiography confirmed restored LVEF of 52% and reduced LV wall thickness (basal interventricular septum and inferolateral wall of 12 and 11 mm, respectively; , and ).
Tests for autoimmune diseases were all negative. Further investigations on polyglobulia excluded JAK 2 mutation. Eventually, infection and organ failure resolved, and the patient was discharged 30 days after admission. At discharge, restoration of normal haematocrit values and renal function was confirmed (Hb 10.4 g/dL, HcT 32.2%, creatinine 0.95 mg/dL). Total serum proteins and albumin values took several weeks to return to the normal range.
Five months later, the patient experienced a new ISCLS flare during a flu-like syndrome: he presented to the ED complaining of hypotension and syncope, accompanied by haemoconcentration (Hb 16.4 g/dL, HcT 49%). Viral search on nasal swab revealed rhinovirus infection. In that occasion, the patient was prudentially admitted to ICU, but he remained haemodynamically stable and myocardial dysfunction did not occur. A prophylactic regimen of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 1 g/kg administered monthly was started, without any new syncopal episode for the next year. At now, 3 years after the index hospitalization, the patient is in good clinical condition and he has not experienced any new SCLS flare.