A 55-year-old female patient was referred to the Dermatology Department with erythematous, infiltrating plaques of the lower extremities and concurrent relapsing fever up to 38,5°C of two-months duration. The patient had already received several courses of antibiotic treatments (penicillin/cefuroxim plus ciprofloxacin) for "recurrent erysipelas" without substantial improvement. She was otherwise healthy, with unremarkable medical history and without receiving any medication.
On admission she showed a two-month-old morphea-like lesion at her right thigh and a recent inflammatory plaque at left popliteal region/left distal thigh . Morphea and EC were considered as differential diagnoses. Skin biopsies of both lesions revealed histologic findings characteristic of late and early phase EC correspondingly . Laboratory evaluation showed blood eosinophilia (44.2% of total WBC, absolute number of eosinophils 2930 cells/μl) and modest anaemia (Hct 35%, Hb 11,5 g/dl). The CRP, ASOT, ESR, serum tumor markers (alphafetoprotein α-FP, carcinoembryonic antigen CEA, Ca 19-9, Ca 15-3, Ca 125), routine liver and renal function tests, routine urine analysis were all within the physiological range. Increased titer of specific IgG antibodies (patient's sample to control ratio = 1.82) against Toxocara canis were determined with a commercial ELISA kit (Cypress Diagnostics, Langdorp, Belgium; test diagnostic for Toxocara infection for titer-ratio ≥ 1.10). Stool microscopy was negative for parasites or parasitic eggs. Chest X ray, brain CT (to exclude subclinical CNS involvement) and duplex ultrasound of the lower extremity veins were unremarkable. Abdominal ultrasound revealed modest hepatosplenomegaly. The patient lived in a rural area and reported housing several dogs.
The diagnosis of toxocariasis (visceral larva migrans) presenting as EC was suspected and two courses, four days apart, of oral thiabendazole (Mintezol, Merck: 3 × 500 mg b.i.d for two days) were conducted. Two weeks latter skin lesions resolved and on the occasion of a follow-up examination eight months later, T. canis antibody titer normalized too. The patient remains relapse-free for meanwhile 3 years without serological evidence of reinfection.