A 20-year-old woman, 157 cm tall, weighing 49 kg, complained of hoarseness after extraction of four wisdom teeth under general anaesthesia at another hospital 1 month earlier. She visited our hospital for consultation and treatment because the frequency and duration of the hoarseness had increased, causing intermittent, complete loss of vocalization. She had no symptoms of dyspnoea or discomfort in the larynx and no history of smoking, alcohol abuse, or other significant issues. She presented without trismus and was assessed as Mallampati Class I. Laryngeal endoscopy, performed at the otolaryngology department of our hospital, demonstrated a laryngeal tumour with a diameter of approximately 10 mm . Tumour resection by laryngomicrosurgery was scheduled for the day after the outpatient consultation. Propofol 80 mg and remifentanil 0.33 μg/kg/min were administered intravenously for anaesthesia induction. Based on the size of the tumour, the possibility of complete tumour-induced tracheal and vocal cord obstruction was considered extremely low. Therefore, to suppress patient movement during intubation, 50 mg rocuronium bromide was administered after verifying that mask ventilation was possible, and positive pressure mask ventilation was performed for three minutes using 5% sevoflurane. During the first minutes of positive pressure ventilation, auscultation of the larynx revealed wheezing sounds. Using an Airway Scope® fitted with a single-use thin blade for adults (ITL-T, Pentax, Tokyo, Japan), the laryngeal tumour was found partially lodged in the glottis . Only the neck of the tumour was visible on the vocal fold. Intubation was attempted by advancing a spiral tracheal tube with a 5.5 mm inner diameter and 7.5 mm outer diameter (Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals, St. Louis, MO, USA) from the right corner of the mouth using a stylet. The tumour was seen positioned partially between the tube and the trachea. The cuff was inflated with a cuff pressure of 30 cm H2O. Because it was not feasible to perform tumour resection using a laryngomicroscope under these conditions, otolaryngologists were consulted, and extraction of the tumour to the supraglottic area was attempted. To obtain an adequate visual field of the right vocal fold, the tracheal tube was first moved to the left side of the mouth, and laryngoscopy was performed using the Airway Scope® from the right side of the tracheal tube. The tube was slowly withdrawn along the left side of the mouth, 1 mm at a time, until the cuff was visible distal to the vocal fold, while maintaining cuff inflation. With this manoeuver, the tumour was successfully repositioned supraglottically . Next, to prevent dislocation of the arytenoid cartilage by the repositioned cuff, the tracheal tube was slowly advanced 2 cm with the cuff deflated and fixed to the left of the mouth at a depth of 18 cm, while monitoring to ensure that the tumour did not re-invaginate. Surgical excision of the tumour was then performed. Intraoperative direct laryngoscopy showed that the tumour had a smooth surface with a wide neck, and its stalk adhered to the posterior part of the right vocal fold . We saw no bleeding due to tumour involution by the tracheal tube. Postoperative histological examination led to a diagnosis of laryngeal granuloma. Laryngeal endoscopy performed the day after the procedure showed that although tissue protrusion remained at the posterior right vocal fold, no residual tumour was present and vocal tests demonstrated the absence of hoarseness.