A 17-year-old male patient was referred to the Department of Radiology for imaging of a focal swelling over the volar aspect of left hand. Initially, the swelling was peanut-sized which progressed to involve the entire palm region, extending from the distal forearm of wrist to the nar eminence and base of 2nd, 3rd and 4th fingers of left hand as depicted in . The patient complained of periodic episodes of tingling and parasthesia over 2nd, 3rd and 4th fingers of right hand. There was no past history of trauma over the hand. On examination, an irregular-shaped, fusiform swelling was noted over the volar aspect of left hand, proximally extending from the ulnar aspect of left wrist to the thenar eminence and base of 2nd, 3rd and 4th digits. The swelling had a variable consistency on palpation, being softer over the ulnar aspect and firm over the 3rd and 4th metacarpals. The overlying skin was pinchable and non-adherent. On neurological examination, no motor weakness or sensory loss was elicited. The movements of left wrist revealed terminal restriction of palmar and dorsiflexion. No other cutaneous or soft tissue lesions were present.
Non-contrast multiplanar, multi-sequence MRI of the left hand was performed. MR showed gross thickening of the median nerve. Diffuse presence of lipomatous tissue (hyperintense on T1W and T2W sequences, hypointense on SPAIR sequence) was noted inter-digitating between the prominent thickened nerve fascicles (hypointense on T1W and T2W sequences), in a coaxial cable-like pattern, extending from the level of distal forearm up to the distal metacarpal regions of 2nd-4th digits. The thickened nerve was seen causing compression and displacement of the flexor tendons and convexity of the carpal tunnel retinacular sheath. The extension of the lipomatous tissue was seen extending to the 2nd and 3rd inter-metacarpal space. No evidence of any focal osseous lesions was noted. The tendons of the hand appeared normal in signal intensity (-). The MR features were suggestive of fibro-lipomatous hamartoma of the median nerve with adjacent mass effect.
Under general anesthesia, the patient underwent surgical decompression of carpal tunnel. On extensive dissection, the grossly thickened median nerve was identified as two giant fascicles adherent with fibrolipomatous structures around . Biopsy of fibrolipomatous structures was taken and care was taken not to injure the giant median nerve bundles. The patient reported absolute pain relief after the surgical decompression of carpal tunnel without any neurological deficit. Histopathological examination of the lesion showed a uniform pattern consisting of lobules of mature adipocytes, separated by fibro-collagenous septae, interspersed with perineural elements as demonstrated in .
The patient recovered completely from paresthesia after 12 weeks of surgical decompression of the carpal tunnel and he was neurologically stable. The patient performed his activity of daily living without any difficulties. The patient was followed up for 24 months.