A 63-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with intermittent right lumbar pain, without other symptoms such as fever, weakness, weight loss, and other joint-related symptoms (swelling, joint stiffness, etc.). The patient had a history of right lumbar trauma 2 years prior and hypertension and multiple lacunar infarcts for 6 months. The patient was treated with rosuvastatin calcium (5 mg once daily), compound Danshen tablets (0.96 g once daily), and benazepril hydrochloride (2.5 mg once daily). The patient denied a history of tuberculosis and a related family or consanguinity history of tumoural calcification. Clinical examination revealed no swelling, tenderness and percussive pain in the right lumbar region and no nodules or masses on each joint. Serum phosphate, total calcium, ionized calcium, urea, creatinine, alkaline phosphatase, arterial blood gas analysis, albumin, and uric acid levels were within the normal range , and the tuberculin or purified protein derivative (PPD) test result was negative. Computed tomography (CT) scanning and spiral CT 3-D imaging revealed a large cystic lesion on the lateral side of the right kidney, with the circular calcified wall around the lesion, which compressed, deformed and displaced the right kidney. In the annular calcified wall, a low-density circular mass with a size of 11.5 × 6.9 × 5.1 cm and a CT value of 15 HU were identified . The density of the circular lesion did not increase in the enhanced CT scan . Plain X-ray film of the kidneys, ureters and bladder (KUB) showed a high-density shadow in the right waist area measuring 10.2 × 7.5 cm . In addition, intravenous urography (IVU) revealed that the size of the right kidney decreased, a large cystic lesion was found on the lateral side of the right kidney, and only a few minor calyces were found .
To relieve the symptoms of soreness on the right side of the lumbar region, the patient underwent surgical resection of this lesion under general anaesthesia without partial removal of the renal parenchyma. During the operation, a hard and fluctuant cystic mass measuring 11.5 × 6.9 × 5.1 cm was found on the lateral side of the right kidney, which contained approximately 400 mL of chalky white fluid . Before incising the renal mass, 70 mL cystic fluid was aspirated using the syringes and tested during the operation. No cancer cells or Mycobacterium tuberculosis were found in the smear test, which excluded the possibility of tumour and tuberculous abscess and indicated that the lesion was benign. Therefore, the cystic wall was opened by incision, and chalky calcifications were found in the inner layer of the cystic wall. The cystic wall was removed, and the cyst was not connected with the renal collecting system . Postoperative culture of M. tuberculosis, aerobic bacteria and anaerobic bacteria in the cystic fluid was negative. The pathological observation showed the presence of fibrosis, calcification, infiltrated inflammatory cells, ossification and bone marrow formation in the cystic wall, so the patient was diagnosed with right renal cystic TC with ossification and bone marrow formation . No recurrence was detected 1 year after surgery, and the patient’s quality of life was greatly improved.