A 31-year old, fit, healthy male, an occasional smoker, suffered acute severe right thorax pain during a bicycle tour. Clinical examination and chest X-ray revealed an important right-sided pneumothorax, which was treated with single-needed aspiration and was fully deployed after aspiration of 510 ml. However, a control X-ray after 36 h revealed a full recurrence with on expiration film a slight deviation of the trachea and upper mediastinum. Therefore, and because many of the sports activities the patient participated in involved atmospheric pressure changes (skiing, diving, flying), it was decided to proceed to surgical pleurectomy. This was performed with a classic three-channel VATS, in the 6th and 8th intercostal space. The parietal pleura was surgically stripped from the first rib, along the sympathetic nerve chain, to the diaphragm and along the internal mammary artery. No blebs or bullae were visualized. The suction drain was clamped on the 5th postoperative day, but because of a small apical loosening, suction was resumed for another 5 days. At that point, a control X-ray was normal and the suction drain was removed at day 10. The patient was able to fully resume working activities after 1 month. Pulmonary function tests were performed after 3 months and showed normal values (Vital Capacity 110%, FEV1 at 115%, DLCO 90% and Transfer Coefficient (DLCO/Alveolar Volume) of 99%.
Six years later, at rest, he again experienced some discomfort in the right chest cavity, which manifested mostly as dyspnea and some physical limitation during running. In retrospect, this chest discomfort may have started after having attended a pop concert a few days earlier. After a few days (because of the weekend) he sought a medical consultation and a chest X-ray again showed a complete collapse of the right lung.
A CT-scan confirmed a complete right-sided pneumothorax, with no adhesions in the pleural space, compression of the right lung and deviation of the mediastinum towards the left. A small subpleural bulla was identified in the superior and inferior lobes .
A new thoracoscopic intervention was performed, with resection of the right apex, and prelevation of biopsies, prior to complete parietal surface scarring and chemical (talcum powder) pleurodesis. The postoperative course was uneventful. Examination of the biopsies showed the presence of reactive hyperplastic mesothelial cells on the parietal side, compatible with neo-pleura.