A 77-year-old male patient presented with a history of diabetes mellitus under oral diabetic agent treatment and was seen as an outpatient. He had symptoms of right axillary lymph node swelling and low back pain since 3 weeks. Except for the axillary adenopathy, findings on physical examination were unremarkable. Findings on contrast CT of the body showed generalized lymphadenopathy (bilateral supraclavicular, mediastinal, and abdominal paraaortic lymph nodes) and multiple bone lesions. The patient was afebrile, and other vital signs were unremarkable. Biopsy of the axillary lymph node was performed due to suspicion of malignant lymphoma. Granulomatous change and a marked necrosis were observed in the tissue. Although lymph node tuberculosis was suspected, Mycobacterium was not isolated from the tissue and there were no lesions in the lungs. Since he was of advanced age, the patient was taken under progressive observation without invasive study.
Two months later, he suffered higher brain dysfunction following head injury and was admitted to our hospital. Bone biopsy was carried out on a thoracic vertebral body with multiple bone lesions. Histopathology showed granulomatous inflammation in the medullary cavity. Based on histology of the lymph node and the bone lesion, he was diagnosed with bone and lymph node tuberculosis and was started on a combination treatment of isoniazid (300 mg/day), rifampicin (450 mg/day), and ethambutol (750 mg/day). Since he was of advanced age, he was not prescrived pyrazinamide.
One month after the start of medical treatment, findings on the contrast CT showed a comminuted fracture of the L1 vertebral body and abscess into the bilateral psoas major muscle at the level of L1 to L2 . Furthermore, findings on contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the psoas abscess was exerting pressure on the dural sac at L1/2. The left psoas was aspirated by percutaneous CT-guided drainage. About 15 mL of grayish white pus was drained. Gram staining showed multiple white blood cells, but no organisms. The smears were positive for acid-fast bacilli. Results of the tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction (TB-PCR) assay were positive. The culture eventually yielded Mycobacterium tuberculosis 2 months later, which was sensitive to all antituberculous medications except pyrazinamide. After drainage, the abscess cavity was reduced and the pressure against the dural sac resolved. After this intervention and 6 months of antimycobacterial therapy, contrast CT revealed no evidence of psoas abscess without bone fragment .
To evaluate disease activity, PET-CT was performed and the images before treatment and after percutaneous abscess drainage and 9 months of antitubercular drug treatment were compared . Before treatment, accumulation of FDG was observed in many lesions, including those in the sternum, ribs, vertebrae, and lymph nodes. These lesions improved after treatment; the average maximum standardized uptake value (SUV max) decreased from 18.8 (before treatment) to 2.1 (after drainage and 9 months of drug treatment) (11.1%). In these lesions, the highest accumulation was observed in the manubrium, and the SUV max decreased from 21.3 to 2.0 (9.4%). However, there was protracted accumulation of FDG in the region of vertebral body destruction and tuberculous psoas abscess formation (SUV max, from 15.8 to 4.82) (30.5%), which suggested incomplete resolution of the tuberculous inflammation . We have also provided unenhanced CT and FDG-PET non-fusion images that confirmed hypermetabolism in the abscess.