A 51-year-old female patient first visited the Traditional Chinese Medicine Cancer Treatment Center in our hospital on September 13, 2021. She mainly complained of frequent diarrhea (5-6 times per day) and bloody purulent stools for over 10 d.
The patient presented mainly with frequent diarrhea (5-6 times a day), loose stool with blood and mucus accompanied by tenesmus and pain, and mild pain in the lower abdomen. We observed that her tongue was thin and red, with a thin, yellowish, and greasy coating. Her pulse was rapid and thready.
In her past medical history, she was diagnosed with cervical cancer and received intensity-modulated radiation therapy and brachytherapy with a total dose of 93 Gy 15 d after hysterectomy and bilateral adnexectomy from October 30, 2020, to November 23, 2020. Due to the presence of residual disease, she received six additional cycles of chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel on November 14, 21, and 28 and December 5, 12, and 19, 2020. Two-dimensional conventional radiotherapy was performed 5 times from December 4 to 30, 2020.
The patient had no significant personal or family history.
On admission, the patient’s temperature was 36.2 °C, heart rate was 86 bpm, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 108/65 mm Hg and body mass index was 20.5 kg/m2. The patient presented with a soft abdomen, and no mass was palpated. There was no tenderness in the abdomen and no rebound pain. Bowel sounds occurred 4 times/minute.
A routine fecal occult blood test yielded positive results. No abnormalities were found in tests for cytomegalovirus antibody, Clostridium difficile antigen, or coagulation function or in the tuberculous infection of T cell spot test (T-SPOT.TB) test for tuberculosis. The routine blood examination showed a minimum hemoglobin concentration of 121 g/L.
The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination of the pelvic cavity showed no obvious tumor recurrence or metastasis. The walls of the rectum were significantly thickened and swollen, which was considered to have occurred after radiotherapy . A colonoscopy was also performed and revealed a giant ulcer (ulceration area > 2.0 cm2) covered with necrotic tissue and patchy telangiectasias in the rectum . The colonoscopy diagnosis was radiation proctitis. Biopsies also confirmed changes consistent with radiation-induced proctitis and ruled out malignant lesions.