A previously healthy Caucasian 32-year-old gravida two, para one was admitted to our obstetrics service at 40 weeks gestational age (GA) for elective induction of labor. Her pregnancy was complicated by mild anemia diagnosed in the second trimester, chronic constipation that worsened around 36 weeks GA, and excessive weight gain of 17.3 kg (upper limit of normal for this patient’s BMI is 16 kg). Her medical, obstetrical, gynecological and surgical history were non-contributory.
She underwent a transabdominal ultrasound (TAUS) at 9w1d GA that showed fetal growth consistent with GA. Both ovaries were visualized and determined to be normal appearing with a post-ovulatory-appearing right ovary . Standard anatomy scan at 19w1d showed a fetus with bilateral choroid plexus cysts but no other abnormalities. Adnexae were unable to be completely visualized. . Her palpated fundal height throughout the pregnancy remained within normal limits; therefore, she did not undergo any additional imaging per our institutional standard.
On admission, the patient was well-appearing with normal vital signs. Fetal heart tracing (FHT) was reactive. Lab studies obtained on admission were notable for a hemoglobin of 8.6 g/dL and platelet count of 131 × 109 /L. Cervical exam was extremely difficult initially, with the cervix located anterior and shifted toward the patient’s left. Fetal station was −2. Her induction began with vaginal misoprostol followed by mechanical dilation with a Foley balloon. After Foley expulsion, the fetal station persisted at −2 despite a uterine contraction frequency of 1–3 min. An epidural catheter was placed for neuraxial anesthesia. Artificial rupture of membranes was deemed inappropriate due to disengagement of the fetal head. Intravenous (IV) Pitocin was initiated around 15 h after admission. Soon after initiation of oxytocin, she developed a fever (Tmax 38.0 °C), right upper quadrant pain, as well as an intermittent Category II FHT with late decelerations. An evaluation for fever of unknown origin was initiated. Lab studies were obtained at this time and notable for large blood on urinalysis, 51–100 white blood cells on urine microscopy, hemoglobin of 7.8 g/dL and platelet count of 118 × 10^9 /L. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), which was obtained due to concern for atypical HELLP syndrome (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets), was markedly elevated at 1518 U/L. AST was 78 U/L, and total bilirubin was normal at 0.3 mg/dL. In addition to atypical HELLP syndrome, urinary tract infection (UTI) and chorioamnionitis were considered as diagnoses. One dose of ceftriaxone was administered for suspected UTI before the decision was made to broaden antimicrobial coverage to ampicillin and gentamicin such that any possible intraamniotic infection was treated.
At hour 25 of induction, a bedside TAUS was performed due to the unusual and unchanged cervical examination characteristics. It demonstrated a fetus in cephalic presentation as well as a poorly defined mass in the posterior cul-de-sac without flow on color Doppler imaging. The differential diagnosis was broadened to include adnexal mass, cervical fibroid or stool from ongoing constipation. At this point, the FHT deteriorated to persistent Category II with repetitive late decelerations and moderate variability with a normal baseline , necessitating primary cesarean birth for non-reassuring fetal status remote from delivery.
A primary cesarean delivery via Pfannenstiel incision was performed resulting in the delivery of a vigorous female infant with a weight of 3030 g. Hemoperitoneum was identified upon abdominal entry. After delivery of the placenta and hysterotomy closure, uterine atony was noted requiring the use of multiple uterotonic agents. Once uterine hemostasis was achieved, the pelvis was explored.
Arising from the right ovary was a solid fibrous mass with associated bleeding from a vascular pedicle. A gynecologic oncologist was enlisted for the procedure. The patient was placed under general anesthesia and an abdomino-pelvic survey was performed. There were no visual signs of metastatic disease on the pelvic peritoneum, viscera, or infracolic omentum and no palpable masses in the upper abdomen. A right salpingo-oophorectomy was then performed as well as biopsies of the posterior cul-de-sac and left ovarian surface. Given the limited availability of frozen pathology, concern for provoking disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, and the uncertain nature of the mass, the procedure was then concluded. Specimens were sent for permanent pathology. The patient’s quantitative blood loss was 4.3 L by the conclusion of the procedure, with 1.5 L attributed to preexisting hemoperitoneum and 2.8 L due to bleeding from uterine atony and continued bleeding from the vascular pedicle of the tumor. She received two units of packed red blood cells (PRBC) intraoperatively. Massive transfusion protocol was not initiated as bedside point-of-care hemoglobin measurements and serial intraoperative measures of prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, and fibrinogen remained stable.
Postoperatively, the patient was placed on ampicillin, gentamicin, and clindamycin for 24 h given her previous fever of unknown origin, and she remained afebrile for the rest of her hospital course. Postoperative alpha fetoprotein (AFP) and inhibin A and B were obtained and were within the reference range (56 ng/mL, 25 pg/mL, and < 10 pg/mL, respectively). She required a third unit of PRBCs on postoperative day one for symptomatic anemia but had an otherwise uncomplicated postoperative course. Her neonate suffered no apparent birth complications, and both were dismissed to home without prolonged hospitalization. She was subsequently evaluated in the outpatient setting for postpartum endometritis and was treated with oral amoxicillin/clavulanate.
Final pathology of the mass demonstrated a 26 × 18 × 9 cm solid mass with histologic features consistent with a dysgerminoma . All biopsies were negative for tumor. The patient underwent CT imaging of the chest, abdomen and pelvis on postoperative day seven which was negative for signs of metastatic disease. The final tumor stage was assigned IA and the patient received no adjuvant therapy. She entered a period of surveillance with good adherence to care and serial follow up visits. LDH on postoperative day seven was 420 U/L, and approximately 1 month later had returned to normal levels at 190 U/L. At 6 months, she is without evidence of disease.