B is a 59 year-old man living in Rome with his wife, with no prior psychiatric history but whose mother had been treated by a specialist for a major depressive disorder. The couple lives in a residential suburban area of the Italian capital, and they both come from middle-low income families. B does not have any brothers or sisters, and he inherited the house where the couple lives. They got married after many years in a relationship, and they do not have any children. The couple runs a Shiatsu center that is their only source of income. They have a professional staff working with them, and this, in addition to the bills and the rent, makes the management costs of their business high. Thus, they have to work long hours in order to preserve their economic stability. They are both shy, and they have few friends.
B is described by his wife as a meticulous person with a strong sense of duty, concerned with orderliness and very emotional. His concern with orderliness affects his interpersonal relationships, especially with his family members. He finds it very difficult to express disagreement with his parents and with his wife. His greatest concern is his wife’s satisfaction and happiness in order to maintain harmony in their relationship, and this manifests itself in his work. For him, there is peace and serenity when things occur as expected. When unpredicted events occur, he becomes anxious and tries to resume his life as planned.
His sense of duty is illustrated by his way of relating to other people. For him, it is crucial to not do anything wrong and always to be correct and not in debt to others. At work, his main goal is to keep his clients satisfied and avoid any quarrel with them. If any problem occurs, he feels guilty, and he focuses on solving the problem.
All these pre-morbid elements belong to the Typus Melancholicus described by the German psychiatrist Hubertus Tellenbach (1914–1994) as a type of personality related to unipolar depression [, ].
On March 11th, they were obliged to close their center as a consequence of the COVID-19 lockdown. B became very concerned about their economic situation and, as reported by his wife, he could see no end to this epidemic and no future opportunity to restart their business and overcome COVID-19 related economic issues. He began to show a severe and rapidly progressive depression and to develop mood-congruent delusions related to pauperization and ruin, as well as hopelessness, anhedonia, apathy, starvation and insomnia. In the 10 days preceding his hospitalization, he slept only a few minutes each day, and he did not eat at all. Furthermore, his wife reported that the patient seemed unable to perceive and reply to environmental stimuli. The only words he uttered were about his hopelessness, ruin and financial crisis, and he was unable to see himself in the future. He had undergone a narrowing of the field of consciousness, as described by Janet in 1909, in both sensory perception and behavior , in his case, focused on financial problems related to COVID-19.
In the 2–3 days prior to his admission, he was reported as lying on the bed all day in a catatonic-like state, without speaking or replying to his wife. The only thought he was able to verbalize was his desire to die. He begged his wife to end his life, which led her to call an ambulance.
After his admission to the emergency room, he remained in a state of mutism. He would shake his head to reply to the psychiatrist’s questions. When he was asked by the doctor, “Do you think I can help you?” he shook his head to indicate “No” and moved his eyes. As listed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth Edition, there were three or more symptoms in order to diagnose catatonia ; more specifically, B displayed stupor, mutism and waxy flexibility. He cooperated for the nasopharyngeal swab to tested for COVID-19. A brain CAT scan indicated no organic lesions. A 4 mg Lorazepam vial and a 5 mg Olanzapine tablet were administered. The patient was then moved to our psychiatry ward for further observation and treatment.
Once in our psychiatry ward, Mr. B was assessed with several psychometric scales. We used the Columbia – Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS), the Physical and Psychological Pain Scale, the Orbach Mental Pain Scale (OMMP), the Psychache Scale (PAS) and the Beck Hopelessness Scale (BHS) in order to evaluate his suicide risk, ideation and intention. Moreover, we tested for the presence of anxious-depressive disorders using the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D), the Beck Depressive Inventory (BDI-II) and the Hamilton Rating Scale for Anxiety (HAM-A). Furthermore, we administered the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) for a global psychiatric evaluation of the patient, the Childood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ) to assess any traumatic history, and the Insight Scale (IS) to measure his level of insight.
He was discharged after 15 days, during which he showed slow improvement. He was diagnosed with “Major depressive disorder, single severe episode with no psychotic behavior”, and the following therapy was prescribed: Sertraline 50 mg 2 tablets at 8.00; Olanzapine 5 mg 1½ tablet at 22.00 and Lorazepam 2.5 mg 1 tablet at 20.00.