A 66-year-old female patient presented with firm, slightly warm peri-oral swellings of 2 months duration. Examination revealed palpable, tender, indurated and fixed subcutaneous masses in the upper lip, both the nasolabial folds and especially the buccal aspect of the angle of the mandible. The overlying skin appeared normal, yet intra-orally the buccal mucosa was erythematous. Ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy from the upper left lip showed abundant extracellular pale pink staining mucinous-type matrix material with interspersed foamy cells, reported as being suggestive of a mucoepidermoid carcinoma or pleomorphic adenoma. She was a non-smoker, with no allergies nor significant family history. There was no history of trauma, difficulty with filler placement, prior dental procedures, local or generalized infection, including COVID-19 infection prior to the development of the inflammatory response nor vaccination. In the absence of a history of dermal filler placement, the presence of multiple indurated nodules, which appeared clinically infiltrative, the rapid development of the lesions, the FNA findings and the frequent and similar occurrence of salivary gland neoplasia at this site the clinical differential diagnosis was that of a salivary gland neoplasm.
An incision biopsy of the left side of the upper lip done under local anesthesia comprised three portions of soft tissue measuring 25 × 10 x 5 mm. Histologic examination showed fibrous connective tissue with bundles of skeletal muscle fibers and lobules of adipocytes, devoid of surface epithelium/epidermis and almost entirely effaced by large pools of pale staining eosinophilic material that elicited a prominent foreign-body giant cell granulomatous response . Numerous multinucleated foreign-body giant cells with associated lymphocytes, plasma cells and macrophages, and marked eosinophilia surrounded the pale pink stained material . The chronic non-necrotizing granulomatous inflammation infiltrated between bundles of skeletal muscle fibers and in a perineural pattern. Caseation was not evident. Special stains (periodic acid Schiff/Ziehl–Neelsen) showed no specific infective etiological agent. A salivary gland neoplasm was not identified.
The diagnosis was that of a foreign-body granulomatous response to dermal fillers. The patient had Juvéderm VOLIFT™ (17.5 mg/ml hyaluronic acid gel, 0.3 mg/ml lidocaine) Allergan Pharmaceutical (Pty) Ltd. placed 10 months prior, to the midface and peri-oral areas. The midface filler remained soft and impalpable with no adverse reaction to this area. The reaction was treated with a combination of hyaluronidase (Hyalase®, Mylan Epd, LLC), betamethasone (Celestone Soluspan®, Organon LLC) and 5-flurouracil (Fluracedyl®, Teva, LLC) by intra-lesional injection using a fanning technique with a 30G needle (Boulle and Heydenrych ; Artzi et al. ). The area was treated monthly for 11 consecutive months to achieve total clinical resolution.
The local Human Research Ethics Committee (Medical), WITS, Johannesburg, South Africa, granted ethics clearance (M220282) in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (2013).