A 62-year old male with a history of metabolic syndrome including arterial hypertension, diabetes type 2, hyperlipidemia, obesity and sleep apnea syndrome was initially admitted to our hospital due to acute coronary syndrome. ST-elevated myocardial infarction was diagnosed followed by primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) including angioplasty treatment and application of a singular drug-eluting stent in the right coronary artery. Post-interventional, dual anti-platelet therapy (DAPT) using ticagrelor and aspirin was initiated as well as thrombosis prophylaxis with LMWH. Initial blood testing was normal, particularly erythrocytosis, thrombocytosis and coagulopathy were excluded. As the patient remained instable, at day 3 a second PCI was performed and six drug-eluting stents placed in the left anterior descending artery. At day 10, the patient complained about severe pain in both legs. A thoracoabdominal CT scan showed several acute arterial thrombotic emboli, including incomplete occlusion of the right common iliac artery, the left femoral artery, several arteries of the lower leg and a main branch of the upper mesenteric artery . Incidentally, the CT scan also showed a left renal tumor highly suspicious for a renal cell carcinoma, accompanied by a large renal cyst . Platelet count was 149 Gpt/l and acute heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) was considered very unlikely .
Therapeutic anticoagulation using unfractionated heparin was started in addition to the ongoing antiplatelet therapy. As this did not result in improvement of the leg perfusion arteriectomy was performed removing most of the occluding material. Histo-pathology confirmed fresh thrombotic emboli. Due to the radiologic suspect of an RCC, a PNS as cause of the massive coagulopathy was suspected.
In a multidisciplinary conference including cardiology, thrombosis consult, vascular surgery and urology, following issues were defined:
The risk for in-stent thrombosis of the seven drug-eluting coronary stents was considered very high in the absence of effective DAPT.
Minimally invasive, surgical total nephrectomy was considered as the intervention with the lowest bleeding risk, which however could not be performed on triple therapy with heparin, ticagrelor and aspirin.
The triple therapy had resulted in a decrease of the D-dimer and stabilization of the platelet count. It was therefore decided to keep the patient on triple anticoagulation therapy for four weeks to allow beginning of endothelialization of the coronary stens and of the altered limb arteries. Ticagrelor is a reversible P2Y12 inhibitor, which is present in the circulation in high concentration. Although the half-life of the drug is only 8 h, it takes about 72–96 h until the high drug levels are decreased to a level, which allows platelet transfusion without inhibition of the transfused platelets . We therefore switched ticagrelor to clopidogrel. Clopidogrel is a direct P2Y12 inhibitor. When it binds to platelets, platelet ADP receptor is irreversibly inhibited for the life span of the platelet, but the active metabolite of clopidogrel has a short half-life of only 1–2 h.
DAPT and LMWH (enoxaparin 1 mg per KG body weight b.i.d) were maintained for 4 weeks and platelet counts, D-dimer and anti-factor Xa were monitored on a weekly basis to assure sufficient anticoagulation. Aspirin, clopidogrel and LMWH were stopped 24 h before surgery. According to the Greifswald bridging protocol, two platelet concentrates were transfused immediately before surgery . Laparoscopic surgery was then performed without bleeding complications. Aspirin and LMWH in prophylactic dose (dalteparin 5000 aFXaU) were restarted six hours after surgery and clopidogrel 48 h after surgery. On the second postoperative day dalteparin was escalated to 5000 aFXa b.i.d. (half therapeutic dose) and therapeutic dose LMWH resumed at day 5. Pathology confirmed clear cell renal cell carcinoma pT3a L0 V0 R0 G2. After an uneventful postsurgical course, the patient was discharged at day eight after surgery. In the post-hospital setting, clopidogrel and aspirin were maintained for one year as indicated after myocardial infarction, while LMWH was stepwise reduced under control of repeated D-Dimer blood testing to prophylactic dose and could eventually be terminated after 6 weeks.