A 50-year-old male patient presented with ocular pain and redness in the right eye for two weeks. The best-corrected visual acuity was 7/10 and 9/10 in the right and left eyes, respectively, without afferent pupillary defect. Extraocular movements were within normal limits in both eyes. Except for controlled diabetes mellitus, the past medical and surgical history were unremarkable. Slit lamp examination revealed “1+" cells in the anterior chamber and fine keratic precipitates on the corneal endothelium. There was a lobulated, nodular, amelanotic, and highly vascularized mass measuring about four clock hours of the iris nasally, disrupting the normal iris structure [Figures 1 and 2]. The IOP was 16 and 15 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Dilated fundus examination and optical coherence tomography images revealed moderate non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy without diabetic macular edema in both eyes. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) determined diffuse iris thickening (2.02 mm) and tumoral involvement of the iris with minimal spread to the ciliary body [Figure 3]. Systemic work-up tested negative for metastasis, granulomatous diseases, or any extraocular primary tumor. Two weeks later, ocular pain and redness increased, the IOP peaked at 30 mmHg, and the mass grew and involved the six o'clock region of the iris [Figure 4]. With the provisional diagnosis of iris tapioca melanoma, incisional biopsy of the iris and brachytherapy with ruthenium-106 CIA radioactive plaque (Eckert & Ziegler BEBIG GmbH, 100 Gy, Berlin, Germany) were performed simultaneously [Figure 5]. Microscopic examination of the biopsied tissue demonstrated atypical epithelioid and spindle cells with large nuclei and prominent nucleoli with melanin pigments [Figure 6]. There was a strong immunoreactivity to S-100 and Ki-67 and patchy immunoreactivity to HMB45 and melan-A. All examinations revealed a rare subtype of iris malignant melanoma called tapioca melanoma. No metastasis was found in the systemic work-up. One week after treatment, the tumor regressed, and IOP decreased to 14 mmHg. Five months after brachytherapy, there was no sign of tumor recurrence or metastasis. Slit lamp examination and UBM demonstrated complete tumor regression with iris atrophy and mild lens opacity [Figures 7 and 8].