A 69-year-old married man who suffered from “involuntary daytime tooth grinding” for a period of 2 mo presented to the Department of Prosthodontics of the Sun Yat-sen University Hospital of Stomatology.
He reported involuntary tooth grinding and jaw tenderness during the day after taking venlafaxine 150 mg/d, quetiapine 100 mg/d, and lorazepam 2.0 mg/d for 4 mo to treat his major depressive disorder. The bruxism occurred during the daytime and subsided when asleep. And in the 2 mo that followed, the patient’s DB became aggravated and he had his mandibular posterior tooth extracted after a crown fracture. Thus, the patient turned to us for help.
The patient had a history of ischemic stroke decades ago. Antithrombotic agents (clopidogrel/cilostazol) combined with atorvastatin/rosuvastatin and butylphthalide were routinely used to lower the risk of stroke and heart complications. Eight months prior, the patient was admitted to the Psychology Department of the Huifu Xi Branch of Guangdong General Hospital for “insomnia for 20 years and exacerbation in 20 d”. An initial diagnosis of insomnia was made. Routine blood work and biochemical and thyroid function examinations were within the normal range. Head MRI and MRA showed multiple remote ischemic areas at the bilateral frontal lobe and parietal cortex. Sleep monitoring tests indicated no abnormal limb movements or sleep apnea syndrome, but poor sleep quality with an efficiency of only 76.7%. While hospitalized, duloxetine 60 mg/d, lorazepam 2.5 mg/d, and zopiclone 7.5 mg/d were given, but the patient was unable to comply with medication usage instructions. Thus, a combination of physical and psychological therapy was started. After therapy, the patient had improvement in sleep quality and remission of stress and anxiety. A discharge diagnosis of “depressive disorder” was reached and duloxetine 60 mg/d, lorazepam 3.0 mg/d, and quetiapine 100 mg/d were prescribed after the patient left the hospital. Two months later, the patient began to complain about headaches, dizziness, insomnia, feelings of worthlessness, and decreased energy. He was diagnosed with major depressive disorder at the Department of Psychiatry of Guangdong General Hospital. Subsequently, venlafaxine 150 mg/d, lorazepam 2.0 mg/d, and quetiapine 100 mg/d were started for the treatment of depression. After 4 mo of therapy, the patient had a partial remission from depression.
He had no previous personal or familial history of movement disorder.
He seemed to be depressive and numb, but he could answer our questions consciously and clearly. Daytime involuntary tooth grinding occurred while resting, but paused when he spoke. Dental examination showed the following findings: (1) No facial asymmetry; (2) No evoked pain or tenderness was noticed when palpating the bilateral temporomandibular joint (TMJ) regions (the anterior wall of external auditory canal and the region anterior to the tragus); (3) Examination of mandibular movement revealed a normal mandibular opening (maximum opening 35 mm) and closing pattern without pain or noise. Mandibular lateral, protrusive, and retruded movements were also within the normal range; (4) Intensified bilateral temporalis and masseter in resting position; and (5) Further intraoral study indicated no stable intercuspal position due to the involuntary tooth grinding. Multiple molar teeth (#45, #17, #27, #37, and #47) were lost. All of the residual teeth of the patient were dramatically worn down (the palatal cusps of #24 and #25 and buccal cusps of #34 and #35 were missing). Cervical wedge-shaped defects could be found in the buccal side of #25, #34, #35, and #44.
Panoramic radiograph showed a fresh extraction socket in #45 and suspected root fracture in #26 . Cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) examination of the TMJ indicated no significant change of bone substance, but a change of the right joint space .