A 17-year old female with no previous medical history was admitted to the emergency room of a general hospital due to a deterioration of her general condition, with fever, dyspnea and a paroxysmal severe cough. Two weeks previously, she had presented with an acute pharyngitis, which was treated with amoxicillin for 8 days. At admission, she presented with persistent lateral cervical pain, hyperleukocytosis (leukocyte count of 13,300/m-3, including 90% neutrophils) and a CRP at 450 mg/L, combined with an X-ray shadow on the bottom left lung. This led to a diagnosis of community acquired pneumonia. Blood samples were collected for culture and the patient benefited from treatment with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and erythromycin.
After 48 hours in hospital, the blood cultures were positive for anaerobic Gram negative bacilli. Her antibiotic therapy was modified, to a combination of cefotaxime, gentamicin and metronizadole. Following the appearance of pain in the two hypochondria, a thoraco-abdominal CT scan was performed, which revealed a voluminous build-up of air and fluid in the left thorax and a heterogeneous hepato-splenomegaly. Within a few hours, the patient presented with a body temperature of 39°7, respiratory failure with hypotension and awareness disorders, requiring the use of mechanical ventilation and vascular filling with crystalloids followed by the administration of norepinephrine (1 μg/kg/min). She was diagnosed with Lemierre's syndrome and transferred to the intensive care unit of a university hospital center.
At admission to the intensive care unit, the patient presented with severe ARDS, with a PaO2/FiO2 ratio at 65 mmHg, PEEP14, bilateral alveolo-interstitial syndrome, left pyopneumothorax on chest x-ray and septic shock. Biologically, her CRP was 475 mg/L and her procalcitonine was 92 mg/L. A left thoracic drain was installed, which removed 350 ml of the purulent liquid. Mechanical ventilation was implemented according to the recommendations of the National Institutes of Health. Her antibiotic regimen was modified to a combination of imipenem/cilastatin (3000 mg/day) and metronidazole (1500 mg/day). An ACTH test was performed, which showed 840 nmol/Lat baseline and 895 nmol/L 1 hour after injection, and she was started on treatment with 300 mg/day hydrocortisone.
Four days later, a second set of thoracic, cerebral and abdominal CT scans was performed. In addition to the abscess of thelingula and the drained pyopneumothorax, these scans revealed a large number of small abscesses of the upper and median lobes of the right lung , a stable appearance of the hepato-splenomegaly and a partial thrombosis of the left internal jugular vein, without any appearance of stroke.
The anaerobic Gram negative bacillus was identified as a Fusobacterium necrophorum sensitive to penicillin, and she was treated with penicillin G for 15 days. The patient improved, becoming apyretic and with normal blood pressure. Withdrawal of ventilation was started and the patient was weaned from the the respiratory asssitance after 3 days. She was discharged from the intensive care unit 12 days after admission.
Her DNA was assayed for SNPs previously incriminated in the detection of the pathogen, the inflammatory response and the coagulation cascade . We observed functional variations in her TLR 5 gene and two coagulation variations (heterozygous TF603 and PAI-1 4G-4G homozygosity) associated with thrombotic events.