A 48-year-old male, with no co-morbidities presented in July, 2016 with pain in pelvic region radiating to bilateral lower limbs for one year. Imaging with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a large lobulated soft tissue mass in the pelvis. A computed tomography (CT) guided biopsy of soft tissue mass showed lobulated architecture composed of tumor cells having clear to bubbly cytoplasm arranged as cords and embedded in abundant extracellular myxoid matrix with mild atypia. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of tumor showed membranous positivity for Epithelial Membrane Antigen (EMA) and nuclear positivity for S100; suggestive of chordoma. He underwent partial sacrectomy along with gluteus maximus rotational flap reconstructions in September, 2016. On gross inspection, the specimen measured 6.5 × 5.5 × 3.5 cm. There was a solid gelatinous tumor on cut surface of size 5.5 × 4.5 × 3 cm. On histological examination, the tumor was homogenous in appearance and predominately composed of chondromyxoid stroma with embedded tumor cells arranged in cords and focally in nesting pattern. The individual tumor cells showed moderate cytological pleomorphism with small nuclei and moderate to abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. There were a few tumor cells with abundant vacuolated cytoplasm which are also called as physaliferous cells. On IHC, tumor cells were diffusely positive for S100 protein and EMA. There was nuclear positivity for brachyury . Following surgery, post-operative radiotherapy was given by three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy (3D-CRT) technique at a dose of 60 Gray (Gy) in 30 fractions over 6 weeks. He was kept under regular follow up. In November 2018, a follow up MRI scan revealed poorly circumscribed 9.9 × 5.3 × 5.2 cm lesion with lobulated outline adjacent to ischium, infiltrating gluteus muscle and extending along the pelvic wall and infiltrating obturator internus muscle. There was another lobulated soft tissue lesion in anterior abdominal wall infiltrating internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscle. He presented to our center in May, 2019. An fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET) scan in May, 2019 revealed an FDG avid enlarged left axillary node measuring 4.7 × 3.3 cm, multiple mesenteric and peritoneal deposits with largest mesenteric deposit measuring 5.3 × 5.0 cm, FDG avid 6.6 × 6.0 cm soft tissue deposits noted in anterior abdominal wall and 2.7 × 4.7 cm deposit in right external/internal oblique muscle . The patient received palliative radiotherapy to hemipelvis at a dose of 20 Gy in five fractions over five days. He was started on imatinib at a dose of 400 mg per day from May, 2019. After a brief period of clinical response, he started to have increased local pain in August, 2019. A repeat FDG PET scan done at this time was consistent with disease progression . In August 2019, patient was started on erlotinib at a dose of 150 mg per day. He showed good response with improvement in general condition and reduction in pain. He developed grade 1 trichomegaly and grade 1 diarrhea on erlotinib. An FDG PET Scan done on October, 2019 showed significant reduction in disease burden consistent with a partial response as per RECIST 1.1 . Subsequent response assessments at six and twelve months from start of erlotinib therapy revealed stable disease. Immunochemistry on tumor specimen was positive for EGFR expression . EGFR (exon 18–21) sequencing by real time polymerase chain reaction showed no mutation. MET gene amplification was positive by Fluorescence in Situ Hybridization. Currently the patient is on regular follow-up, and is tolerating therapy well.