An 81-year-old man, former smoker, was admitted to our cardiology department for congestive heart failure with the complaint of recent onset of dyspnoea. He had a history of ischaemic heart disease with stenting of the mid-left anterior descending artery. Two months before his admission, the patient received an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) for sustained ventricular tachycardia.
Upon arrival, blood pressure was 130/70 mmHg, heart rate 72 b.p.m., and oxygen saturation 95% with 3 L/min of oxygen. Physical examination demonstrated signs of decompensated heart failure with no evidence of any heart murmur.
The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a sinus rhythm with abnormal R-wave progression and ST-segment elevation in leads V2–V5 and II, III, aVF, suggesting a late presentation of an acute myocardial infarction. The previous ECG, performed 2 months before, showed only negative T-waves in V2–V3 with normal R-wave progression .
Blood tests demonstrated mild elevation of cardiac enzymes with ultrasensitive troponin I at 83 ng/L (normal <26 ng/L) and brain natriuretic peptide at 1400 pg/L (normal <100 pg/L). A moderate systemic inflammatory response syndrome was noted with an elevated C-reactive protein at 93 mg/L (normal <4 mg/L) and white blood cell counts at 14 G/L (normal <10 G/L).
As coronary angiography 2 months before, prior to his ICD implantation, had shown no new significant stenosis, it has been decided not to perform an emergency coronary angiography.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) was performed and showed a known impaired left ventricular ejection fraction of 40% due to inferior and posterior wall akinesia. Transthoracic echocardiography also demonstrated a thickening or a mass of the apical and median portion of the interventricular septum (IVS) (Video 1, Figure ) measured 5 cm × 3 cm, associated with moderate pericardial effusion. Contrast-enhanced TTE using low mechanical index (MI) imaging settings (MI at 0.23) revealed a myocardial mass involving the apex of both left and right ventricles (Video 2, Figure ). Mechanical index was then decreased to 0.07 with an intermittent flash of a high mechanical index to assess the vascularization of the tumour (Video 3), demonstrating a peripheral contrast enhancement suggestive of a necrotic centre with peripheral hypervascularization, consistent with a myocardial malignant tumour .
To better characterize the cardiac mass, cardiac CT was preferred as a second line exam to CMR, considering the recent ICD implantation. An ECG-gated cardiothoracic contrast-enhanced CT-scanner was performed demonstrating an important thickening of the apical part of the IVS at the arterial phase and moderate pericardial effusion. Delayed acquisition at 2 min confirmed an intra-septal apical mass of 6 cm × 4 cm × 8 cm with a hypodense centre and peripheral enhancement consistent with the diagnosis of a malignant tumour with a necrotic central area .
Interestingly, cardiac-CT also revealed a voluminous mass of the lung’s left lower lobe (LLL) measured at 9 cm × 6 cm with multiple mediastinal lymph nodes and a possible left adrenal gland involvement. Computed tomography-guided percutaneous biopsy of the LLL mass demonstrated a squamous cell lung cancer .
The final diagnosis was a Stage IVB (according to the Union for International Cancer Control) large squamous cell lung cancer possibly spreading to the heart and the left adrenal gland.
The signs of decompensated heart failure resolved after low-dose intravenous furosemide therapy and the patient was discharged home before chemotherapy with Carboplatin and Paclitaxel. He unfortunately died 2 days later at home from an unknown cause. We could not perform autopsy nor device interrogation because of the family’s opposition to further investigate the cause of death.