A 24- year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our department with refractory epilepsy. Her history included a normal birth and normal psychomotor development. The seizures started at the age of 11, and were of the complex partial atonic type. The moment of mental decline and change of behavior appeared a few months after the onset of seizures. Computer tomography (CT) showed a left temporoparietal diffuse hypodense area, quite inhomogeneous without mass effect . Cerebral MRI performed four years later confirmed the diagnosis of brain tumor. Over this time, the pattern of the seizures changed, becoming partial, complex, sometimes evolving to secondarily generalized seizures, with premenstrual flare-ups in intensity and frequency. Surgery or brain biopsy were constantly refused by the patient's mother. She was treated with carbamazepine, phenytoin, valproic acid and topiramate in diverse doses and combinations without effect on seizures, which continued once or several times a day.
On admission to our clinic, 13 years after the disease onset, neurological examination revealed no positive findings other than neuropsychological abnormalities. Mnesic activity, general cognitive index (GCI), vocabulary and operational effectiveness of thinking had decreased by 35% (mean range) compared to the previous examination at disease onset.
Biological tests appeared to be normal. A chest X-ray and cardiology examination were normal. MRI revealed a 32.3 mm (anteroposterior)×43.1 mm (transverse)×28.3 mm (craniocaudal) multicystic cortico-subcortical parietal lesion, divided by septations, without edema or mass effect, and no enhancement . As our patient refused to have a cerebral biopsy, we decided to perform a complementary imaging exploration, which could offer us more details about the tumor. Tomoscintigraphy (single-photon emission CT) with Tc99m MIBI indicated no tumor metabolic activity. Standard electroencephalogram (EEG) showed interictal abnormalities like spikes and polyspikes. One minute of hyperventilation activated a tonic-clonic generalized seizure, accompanied by specific EEG recording . The long history together with the clinical and imaging data led us to the diagnosis of DNP. One year later, our patient died during sleep. At that time she was on topiramate 400 mg/day in two divided doses, without seizure control.