A 73-year-old man with no family history of any cancer visited our hospital for screening colonoscopy. Six years ago, he had undergone endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) for early gastric cancer, and the pathological diagnosis was a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma extending into the mucosa, but without lymphovascular invasion. On admission, physical examination was unremarkable, and all blood tests were within the normal ranges. Colonoscopy revealed a flat elevated lesion with a slightly depressed area, 20 mm in diameter, in the cecum . After the application of 0.2 % indigo carmine dye, the lesion could be observed more clearly . Magnifying endoscopy with NBI revealed that the surface pattern was slightly irregular and that the microvessels were regular in terms of diameter and distribution in the margin of the lesion . In contrast, in the central part of the lesion, irregularity in the tumor surface pattern and form as well as in the diameter and distribution of microvessels was observed; however, due to mucus, avascular areas were also observed . Magnifying endoscopy with 0.05 % crystal violet staining showed IIIL and VI pit patterns in the margin of the lesion , while a VI pit pattern was seen in the central part; however, this finding could not be fully corroborated due to the presence of mucus exudate in the central part of the lesion . In addition, abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed no lymph node or distant metastasis. We judged that the lesion was a primary adenocarcinoma, invading the mucosa and even slightly infiltrating the submucosa. After receiving written informed consent from the patient, the lesion was successfully removed en bloc using ESD without complications. The resected specimen then measured to be 25 × 20 mm, and the tumor size was 21 × 13 mm . The tumor was mainly composed of signet ring cell carcinoma , partially mixed with moderately differentiated (tub2) and well-differentiated (tub1) adenocarcinomas . In the immunostaining for the mucin phenotype, MUC2 and MUC5AC were positive, MUC6 was focal positive, and MUC1 was negative. These results confirmed signet ring cell carcinoma of the colon. The tumor cells infiltrated 250 μm into the submucosal layer and invaded lymphatic vessels , but there was no vascular invasion. The distribution of intramucosal and submucosal tumor tissue is shown in Fig. . Furthermore, the patient underwent an additional laparoscopic ileocecal resection for a radical operation. The resected specimen revealed no residual carcinoma and no lymph node metastasis. At the 26-month postoperative follow-up, the patient was in good health, with no evidence of recurrence.