A 6-year-old female presented with a history of a nontender scalp mass that was first noticed as a single nodule at approximately 2-3 years of age. She was initially being monitored by her pediatrician, and was noted to have waxing and waning erythema and enlargement. She was thus referred to the pediatric hematology/oncology clinic for further workup. An ultrasound (US) of the scalp obtained in May 2021 showed a hypervascular lesion measuring 2.7 x 0.5 cm x 2.1 cm that was consistent with a hemangioma. Multidisciplinary referral to dermatology was done for clinical monitoring and the case was discussed in vascular tumor board. Upon frequent follow up and repeat US the lesion continued to enlarge, which was unusual for a hemangioma. Thus, a punch biopsy was obtained which demonstrated a mature B cell lymphoma of follicular germinal center origin; atypical cells were positive for CD10, CD20, BCL2, and negative for CD3, CD4, CD5, CD8, CD30, CD56, MUM1, TIA1, BCL-1, and BCL6. She had no other systemic symptoms and denied fever, weight loss, night sweats, or other lymphadenopathy. Staging was subsequently done which included MRI of the disease site, PET/CT, and CXR to evaluate for mediastinal mass. MRI showed 4.0 cm x 2.7 cm x 2.9 cm soft issue scalp mass overlying the left frontal lobe, inseparable from the outer table and replacing the subcutaneous fat. The lesion enhanced, showed restricted diffusion, and had areas of susceptibility representing calcification and punctate hemorrhage possibly secondary to a recent biopsy . PET/CT showed increased uptake in the scalp mass, and tonsillar and thymic uptake, but no other avidity suggesting additional disease. She was classified as stage 1; surgery was discussed as a curative option, so she was referred to neurosurgery for surgical excision.
At the time of our evaluation, the lesion was about 4 cm, eroding the scalp with a firm consistency and minimal mobility over the skull. Given the large size of the lesion and the expected defect which would result from complete removal, we planned to coordinate care with our plastic surgery team. The excision of the left frontal scalp lesion was performed under general anesthesia. The skin was opened circumferentially around the tumor, and it elevated without issue with clean bone underneath. All skin edges were hemostased without issue and no palpable tumor remained. This excision left an approximate 4 cm diameter circular defect in the left anterior scalp with no bony defect . Once the mass was excised, the plastic surgery team performed a large fasciocutaneous flap from posterior scalp with supply from the left occipital artery. A large flap rotated off the posterior vessels was mobilized with another flap from the right frontoparietal region adjacent to the defect, allowing transfer of the tissues over the defect in the subgaleal plane. The flap was elevated and well vascularized with these rotational components both posteriorly and contralaterally. The entire defect was closed with excellent attention to cosmesis. The patient was stable postoperatively and had an uncomplicated course before being discharged home in 2 days.
The excision specimen was a 5.5 x 4.3 cm, unoriented skin with the underlying lesion . Microscopically, it showed a dense neoplastic lymphocytic infiltration in the surrounding adnexal and perivascular regions, to the deep and superficial dermis. The neoplastic cells were small to medium in size with irregular nuclear contour. In some areas, the neoplastic cells had increased mitosis and relatively fine chromatin. Immunophenotypically, the neoplastic cells were positive for CD10, CD19, CD22, CD34, CD99, TdT, and Bcl-2, and negative for Bcl-1, Bcl-6, cMYC, MUM-1, CD30, or P53. CD20 was partially positive in the neoplastic cells, and CD21 highlighted a residual follicular dendritic cell meshwork. Ki-67 was about 70-90%. Therefore, this was an immature B cell lymphoma, consistent with B-lymphoblastic lymphoma, rather than a mature B cell lymphoma which was diagnosed on a small punch biopsy due to the positivity of CD20. Immature markers, such as CD34, TdT were performed on the skin punch biopsy retrospectively and, they were positive. Unfortunately, these two markers were not evaluated initially, therefore, a mature B cell lymphoma diagnosis was rendered. A lumbar puncture (LP) was performed, and no neoplastic cells were identified. Subsequently, a staging bone marrow was evaluated, which only showed a mildly hypocellular bone marrow and no morphologic or immunophenotypic evidence of B-lymphoblastic lymphoma involvement.
Unexpectedly, pathology revealed the lesion to be consistent with B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma. The biopsy showed that the neoplastic cells were positive for CD10, CD19, CD22, CD34, CD99, TdT, and Bcl-2, and negative for Bcl-1, Bcl-6, cMYC, MUM-1, CD30, or P53. CD21 highlighted a residual follicular dendritic cell meshwork. Ki-67 was about 70-90%. A lumbar puncture (LP) and bone marrow evaluation was performed, which was negative for CNC or marrow disease. The patient underwent placement of a central venous access device (left subclavian vein subcutaneous port placement) and was initiated on treatment for Low Risk B-lymphoblastic lymphoma with a 2-year course of chemotherapy including vincristine, dexamethasone, pegasparaganese, doxorubicin and cytarabine per standard of care Children’s Oncology Group trials. She completed induction chemotherapy with minimal complications. At the end of induction, PET/CT was negative for residual disease, and she was considered in remission. Currently, she continues treatment and is clinically doing well. Cosmetically, her scalp healed well without any wound healing issues. She has a few areas of alopecia; however, the appearance of the scalp overall is excellent given her preoperative appearance . Consent was obtained from the family for the presentation of this case.