We present the case of a 67-year-old male patient. Initially, he was admitted to the Department of Neurology because of secondary generalized seizures after presenting with aphasia. An anticonvulsive medication with levetiracetam was initiated. Blood tests did not show increased inflammatory parameters, merely a mild leukocytosis. In initial cranial imaging using cranial computed tomography (CCT) with CT angiography a metal-dense, wedge-shaped foreign body in the range of frontal sinus on the left side was detected, which braked through the frontal sinus and created a connection to the frontal cerebral lobe. There was no defect of the skull. In addition, the left frontal lobe showed a hypodense area . Administration of additional contrast agent showed minimal enhancement of the lesion. A concomitant inflammatory response could not be excluded in cranial imaging. A cerebral magnetic resonance tomography (cMRT) could not be performed because of the existing, presumably, metallic foreign body. For further diagnosis, lumbar punction was performed. However, in CT-controlled punction, no liquor could be attained. Prophylactic antibiotic therapy was inducted (Rocephin).
The patient was alert and reported that there had been no traumatic injuries. However, he could vaguely remember being told as a boy that there was “something” in his nose. In a cMRI (approximately 20 years ago), the foreign body arguably could be observed, however, no inspection was conducted at the time. In clinical examination the patient showed no focal deficit. Further seizures did not occur during his stay in the hospital under anticonvulsive therapy.
Because of the assumed infection (a concomitant intracerebral abscess could not be excluded) and the existing connection to the frontal cerebral lobe, surgery was recommended. Thereby, removal of the foreign body and the frontobasal covering was planned. In addition, inspection of the left frontal lobe, smear tests, and eventual clearing of the suspected intracranial abscess was planned.
We chose a small left frontobasal, paramedian (3 × 3 cm craniotomy) access path across a bifrontal cut. Thereby, the frontal galea periost was conserved for the later planned frontobasal covering. After retracting the left frontal lobe, a frontobasal lesion (1 × 1 cm) with cerebral infiltration appeared . Resection followed . There were no signs of an acute intracranial infection or abscess. Swab tests for microbiological testing were taken. Looking in the direction of the frontal sinus, several small, metal-like foreign body fragments could be detected and removed. Furthermore, the frontobasal part of the dura was removed and sent for histological examination. Inspection of the left frontal sinus followed. Inspection showed signs of a chronic infection. After identification and resection of the foreign body (1 × 0.5 cm) [Figure and Figure ,], the chronic inflammatory suspected material in the frontal sinusal area was resected and sent for further histopathological examinations. Frontobasal covering by a frontal stemmed galea periost was performed. Patient was postoperatively supervised in our intensive care unit.
Postoperatively, the patient fast recovered from the operation. Intravenous antibiotic therapy was continued for at least 3 weeks. Microbiological examination of the intraoperatively obtained material from the frontal sinus resulted in the detection of Klebsiella pneumoniae. Antibiotic therapy was adapted corresponding to antibiotic recommendation. A systemic inflammatory response did not occur at any time during the patient's stay in our hospital. Also, no further seizures occurred. There were no signs of a postoperative frontobasal fistula. The patient was transferred to a rehabilitation center.
Histopathological examination showed intracerebral granuloma presenting parts of an acute granulocytic inflammatory reaction. Examination of the removed frontobasal dura showed an inflammation reaction with the detection of leucocytes. The material resected from the left frontal sinus showed connective tissue and a necrotic cell detritus with a lymphatic, plasma cellular, and monozytic infiltration [Figure –].