A 40-year-old premenopausal HIV-positive female presented to the outpatient department with left hip pain for 2 days following a trivial fall while going to the bathroom in May 2021. She was unable to bear weight on the left lower limb after the fall.
She was diagnosed with HIV infection during routine pre-natal blood investigations at the time of her second pregnancy in 2015. She was otherwise asymptomatic for the HIV infection and had a baseline CD4 count of 146/µL. Antiretroviral therapy (ART) was initiated which included lamivudine (300 mg), tenofovir (300 mg), and efavirenz (600 mg), a fixed-dose combination once daily at night. Cotrimoxazole (Sulphamethoxazole 800 mg and Trimethoprim 160 mg) prophylaxis therapy was given along with ART. She was advised calcium, vitamin D3, and folic acid supplementation. The patient was compliant in taking ART with >95% adherence to therapy and was under regular follow-up at the ART center at our tertiary care center. She had virological suppression with no viral load detected at the last testing on May 7, 2021, and a CD4 count of 146/µL.
Before this presentation, she had a history of fall at home 1.5 years back following which she had pain near the right hip region. She did not seek any medical advice at the time and the pain gradually resolved over the next 2–3 months. Apparently, she was not compliant in taking calcium and vitamin 3 supplements for the past few years. Radiology of the pelvis at the time of presentation shows healed superior and inferior pubic ramus fracture on the right side and healed superior pubic ramus fracture left side . There was no history to suggest other comorbid illnesses (apart from HIV infection) or the use of systemic glucocorticoids in the past. She had regular menstrual cycles.
On physical examination, there was tenderness present over the proximal left thigh. The movements of the left hip joint could not be performed due to the pain whereas the same side knee and ankle showed a normal range of movements (ROMs). The right hip, knee, and ankle showed a normal ROM. The distal neurovascular status of both lower limbs was normal. Radiographs showed a left-sided transverse subtrochanteric (ST) closed femur fracture and an old right superior and inferior pubic rami fracture . Skeletal traction was given with proximal tibial Steinman’s pin to stabilize the fracture. On presentation, the laboratory findings showed severe anemia (hemoglobin-6g/dl), hypophosphatemia (1.58 mg/dL), mild hypocalcaemia (8.41 mg/dL), vitamin D3 deficiency (5.8 ng/mL), normal PTH level (63.7 pg/mL), and an elevated alkaline phosphatase level (239 U/L). Her renal function parameters such as serum urea (19.8 mg/dL) and creatinine (0.71 mg/dL) were normal. Serum electrolyte levels such as sodium (135.2 mmoL/L), potassium (4.3 mmoL/L), and chloride (106.5 mmoL) were normal as well.
Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan showed normal BMD at the lumbar spine (T score of + 1.9) and right hip (T score of −0.1). Her body mass index (BMI) was normal (21.4 Kg/m2). Closed reduction and internal fixation of the left-sided ST femur fracture was planned and she has been transfused a total of four units of packed red blood cells in the perioperative period. She was started on oral vitamin D3, calcium, and phosphorous supplementation and continued in the post-operative period.
Open reduction and internal fixation with intramedullary proximal femoral nail anti-rotation (PFNA) was done and the post-operative period was uneventful. She was encouraged to do full weight-bearing on the operative limb with help of a walker from day 1 onward. Subsequently, she was discharged on day 3 postoperatively. At the 2-week follow-up visit, she was pain-free and could walk with help of a walker comfortably. The wound was healthy, and sutures were removed. We requested our ART center to change the ART therapy to a non-tenofovir regimen, but somehow it could be only started after 4 months postoperatively. The patient was given a regimen consisting of azidothymidine, lamivudine, and dolutegravir. She continued calcium and vitamin D3 supplements.
At the 4-month follow-up, she presented to us walking pain-free without any support. She was able to squat and sit cross-legged. On physical examination, the left hip had a normal ROM. Fresh radiographs showed callus formation, and the fracture was healing well, as shown in . Her laboratory investigations revealed mild anemia (11.1 g/dL), normal serum calcium (8.64 mg/dL), serum phosphate (3.02 mg/dL), vitamin D3 (29.8 ng/mL), raised PTH level (155pg/mL), and raised serum alkaline phosphatase (417 U/L) level.
At 6 months follow-up, the patient is walking pain-free with a full ROM of hip and knee. Radiographs showed healed fracture . Laboratory values are mild anemia (10.7 g/dL), normal serum calcium (9.09 mg/dL), serum phosphate (2.78 mg/dL), vitamin D3 (21.1 ng/mL), raised PTH level (252 pg/mL), and raised serum alkaline phosphatase (252 U/L) level.
At 12 months follow-up, radiographs show solid union . Laboratory values are mild anemia (10.4 g/dL), normal serum calcium (9.78 mg/dL), serum phosphate (2.89 mg/dL), vitamin D3 (13.8 ng/mL), raised PTH level (111 pg/mL), and raised serum alkaline phosphatase (201 U/L) level. She is pain-free and able to perform routine day-to-day activities without any difficulty. Her DEXA score at the final follow-up improved (T score of the lumbar spine is 4.1 and that of the hip is 2.0).