A 40-year-old Japanese primigravida nullipara underwent fetal ultrasound at 39 weeks and 3 days gestation that revealed a left cervical mass and polyhydramnios. This had not been noted in fetal screening during the first or second trimesters and was only identified in the third trimester. Fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning was performed the same day , and the mass was found to consist of a massive solid component located at the base of the tongue adjacent to the airway. Given that postnatal airway obstruction or stenosis was a concern, the patient was transferred to a high-level children’s general hospital, which also included a department of obstetrics, to perform EXIT.
The infant was delivered by a planned cesarean section, and a simple tracheostomy was conducted using EXIT. The infant was a girl born at 39 weeks and 5 days gestation, with Apgar scores of 2, 3, and 4 (1, 5, 10 minutes, respectively). After the airway had been secured using EXIT, she was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit, sedated, and placed on artificial ventilation. On physical examination, her birth weight was 2870 g [– 0.3 standard deviation (SD)], head circumference was 33.5 cm (+ 0.1 SD), and body length was 51 cm (+ 1.0 SD). In addition to the left cervical mass and the mass at the base of the tongue diagnosed on fetal MRI, multiple subcutaneous lesions were also noted on the limbs and trunk. Blood tests showed that lactate dehydrogenase level was elevated at 2470 IU/L, alpha fetoprotein level was 42,580 ng/mL, human chorionic gonadotropin level was 19.3 mIU/L, and vanillylmandelic acid and homovanillic acid test results were negative.
Cervical and surface ultrasound scanning conducted on postnatal day 0 revealed that the left cervical mass was an internally heterogeneous solid mass measuring 40 × 32 × 49 mm, with an abundant blood flow signal. A hyperechoic region was evident and considered to represent calcification. The multiple subcutaneous lesions included some with abundant blood flow and some with little blood flow containing hypoechoic regions.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography conducted on postnatal day 5 revealed that the interior of the mass was severely necrotic. Masses were also present in the lower lobe of the right lung and the thymus and were considered to be metastases. There was no invasion of the cerebral parenchyma. A tumor biopsy was performed from a subcutaneous mass in the inner left thigh on postnatal Day 1. Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed a dense proliferation of undifferentiated tumor cells with round nuclei. Sites of hemorrhage and necrosis were present, and numerous mitotic figures and karyorrhexis were apparent. On immunostaining, the tumor cells were negative for CD3, CD20, CD45, CD99, desmin, myogenin, Nkx2.2, PHOX2B, tyrosine hydroxylase. Intranuclear expression of SMARCB1(INI1) was also absent . From these results, MRT was diagnosed.
Chemotherapy with vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, and etoposide was initiated for the MRT on postnatal day 12. Mild myelosuppression occurred, but this was not sufficiently severe to warrant treatment discontinuation. Renal impairment and tumor lysis syndrome did not occur as chemotherapy side effects, and it was possible to continue treatment. At 2 months of age, the left cervical mass had clearly regressed , and the infant was successfully weaned from artificial ventilation. She was discharged home at 6 months of age. Neonatal follow-up was performed, and at 9 months of age the patient had a recurrent cervical mass and intracranial metastasis, and radiotherapy was initiated.