A 58-year-old woman presented with a 2-year history of a non-productive cough and progressive shortness of breath. She had a history of renal insufficiency and persistent proteinuria, without any extra-renal involvement. She was diagnosed with IgA nephropathy for 15 years and had received immunosuppressive therapy for 6 years.
Her vital signs were stable at initial examination; the patient was afebrile and oxygen saturation was 95% in ambient air. On physical examination, auscultation of the lungs detected slight coarse crackles at the bilateral bases. The remainder of the examination was unremarkable.
Her hemoglobin was 95 g/L but renal function and calcium level were normal. The patient was negative for antinuclear and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies in immunofluorescence assays. Repeated exams of sputum smear did not yield any pathogenic micro-organisms. Serum free light chain analysis showed measuring lambda light chain of 2.59 g/L. Serum protein electrophoresis revealed low IgG, IgA, and IgM levels, with reported immunoelectrophoresis (IEP) showing monoclonal lambda light chain peak with the monoclonal protein. A 24-h urine contained 5521 mg of protein. High-resolution chest CT revealed disclosed ground-glass opacities (GGOs) with interlobular septal thickening in bilateral lungs . Chest and abdominal CT shows soft tissue infiltration of the subcutaneous fat layer with asymmetric bulging of the chest and abdominal wall . Pulmonary function tests revealed a moderately restrictive ventilation disorder, with a forced vital capacity (FVC) of 1.76 L (69.0% of predicted) and severe reduction of diffusion capacity (DLCO SB 20.8% of predicted). Cardiac biomarkers, such as natriuretic peptides, particularly B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) and cardiac troponin-T were normal. Echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular ejection fraction of 61% and there were no features of cardiac amyloidosis. A VATLB was performed, which showed marked thickening of the alveolar wall deposition of amorphous eosinophilic amyloid at the bronchial mucosa, pulmonary vessel wall and interstitium. Congo red staining display apple-green birefringence in polarised light . The immunohistochemical stain for protein A was negative for secondary amyloid. Following the VATLB results, bone marrow examination was performed. Bone marrow examination showed 11.5% plasma cells with lambda light chain restriction. Bone marrow cells by flow cytometry exhibited a typical phenotype for plasma cells, expressing monoclonal cytoplasmatic CD138, CD38, and cLambda instead of CD19, CD56 and cKappa, which are characteristic of the typical immunophenotype of MM. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was carried out to check on the bone marrow aspirate. The most frequent abnormality in the patients was 1q21 amplification (25%), followed by 14q32 (IGH) translocations (29.5%), without 13q14 (RB1) deletion, 13q14.3 (D13S319) deletion and p53 deletion. No lytic bone lesions were detected with positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT). This confirmed the diagnosis of MM, λ light chain type, stage I. Surgical biopsy of abdominal wall skin and subcutaneous fat was also performed, which showed the apple-green birefringence with polarized light on Congo red stain was demonstrated in dermis .
She was therefore diagnosed with diffuse parenchymal pulmonary amyloidosis accompanied by MM. The patient was referred to the hematology department, where the patient started chemotherapy with bortezomib and dexamethasone, and her symptoms relieved 2 months after the initial presentation. No adverse effects were observed and the laboratory results were stable.