A 49-year-old woman (152 cm, 33.5 kg, blood albumin concentration 1.9 g/dL) who had received peritoneal dialysis needed to undergo dialysis catheter replacement. She had been diagnosed with RDEB in childhood and developed IgA nephropathy as well as severe mucocutaneous disorders. She had begun receiving hemodialysis via central venous catheterization 7 years previously; however, her central veins had been damaged because of repeated catheterizations. Consequently, conversion to peritoneal dialysis had become necessary 4 years before. Although the initial peritoneal dialysis catheter placement had been performed under local anesthesia by surgeons, this technique should be limited because there is potential risk of accidental injection of local anesthesia between the lamina densa and the epidermis following severe skin lesioning . Moreover, alternative forms of anesthesia need to be considered because of the patient’s experience of unbearable pain.
Preoperative evaluation revealed Mallampati class IV, limited mouth opening, and severe adhesion in the oral cavity. Considering the potential upper airway blistering following critical airway obstruction as well as difficult airway, general anesthesia was deemed problematic. Neuraxial anesthesia was precluded because of an existing skin lesion at the potential puncture site. After careful consideration, we planned anesthetic management with ultrasound-guided subcostal TAPB as the primary analgesia modality, based on previous reports [, ].
In the operating theater, after carefully fitting a pulse oximeter and blood pressure cuff, as performed in previous studies [, ], a single shot of fentanyl 25 μg, ketamine 5 mg, and propofol (target-controlled infusion 1.0–1.5 μg/mL) was administered. Subsequently, left-sided ultrasound-guided subcostal TAPB was performed. After infiltration with a small dose of lidocaine, a 20-gauge, 12-cm needle was inserted via an in-plane technique. After excluding intravascular injection, 20 mL of 0.5% lidocaine combined with epinephrine was injected. In patients with RDEB, particular caution is required to avoid causing new bulla formation through friction caused by the ultrasound probe . To this end, we used sufficient amounts of gel and avoided performing sliding movements for as long as possible to minimize shearing force. Contrary, as vertical force to the skin is relatively tolerable , we could obtain a clear ultrasound image using the technique of pressing the probe against the skin.
The surgery was initiated after confirming loss of cold sensation from T7 to T12 in the left anterior abdominal wall. The postoperative image is shown as Fig. to illustrate the incision points and coursing of the catheters. First, the surgeons removed the original catheter. The catheter had been inserted from point A and reached to point B via a subcutaneous tunnel, subsequently penetrating the peritoneal cavity. Although adequate analgesia was provided for point B, the patient complained of moderate pain when point A was incised after local lidocaine infiltration, at the non-blocked side. We managed the pain with additional lidocaine infiltration and intravenous fentanyl and ketamine administration. After removal of the original catheter, the new catheter was placed in her left abdominal wall. Although this side was blocked, she complained of mild pain when the surgeons incised point D, which was controlled with supplemental lidocaine infiltration and intravenous ketamine administration.
The duration of anesthesia was 128 min, and the total dose of anesthetics was composed of fentanyl 200 μg, ketamine 50 mg, and local-infiltration 1% lidocaine 4.4 mL. The patient did not develop serious respiratory depression, unbearable pain, or any serious complication associated with anesthetic management.