A 62-year-old retired female nurse from Urumqi, Xinjiang, who had lived in the city since childhood, experienced intermittent pain in her right lower limb and numbness in the sole of her right foot for over ten days. No significant abnormalities were found in electromyography and lumbar MRI. The physical examination revealed that the patient’s right calf was slightly swollen, with noticeable tenderness, but no foreign body was detected; the patient dismissed the issue of calf swelling, attributing it to obesity.
A hematological examination showed that the patient’s liver and kidney function, and blood cell indicators, were within the normal range. Only the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (76.00 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (70.70 mg/L) were outside the normal range. An ultrasound examination revealed a mass approximately 4.5 cm in depth, 20.3 cm in length, and 3.0 cm in width in the patient’s right calf posterior tibial muscle, soleus muscle, and other muscle bundles. The mass had clear boundaries and was divided internally by a hyperechoic light band, with cyst-like structures of varying sizes. The small sac demonstrated good sound permeability and changed in a “honeycomb” shape.
The patient’s calf X-ray showed no evident abnormalities; the right lower limb MRI showed irregular columnar long T1 and long T2 signal changes in the posterior tibialis and soleus muscle spaces behind the right calf. The size was approximately 24.76 cm*3.56 cm*3.82 cm, and it displayed multiple vesicle-like changes. Multiple lines of slightly longer T1 and short T2 signal separation and vascular void signals existed. Slightly high signals were visible in the muscle groups and subcutaneous soft tissues of the upper right calf during the fat suppression sequence .
The patient was initially diagnosed with echinococcosis of the right calf and decided on a treatment plan that combined surgery and postoperative medication. The surgical plan involved the gentle separation of the outer capsule, aiming for complete resection while keeping the outer capsule intact to ensure that the capsule fluid does not spread in the surgical area . Postoperative microscopic histopathological examination confirmed hydatid cyst . Two days post-operation, the patient began resuming bed-based exercises, and two months later, she was able to slowly walk with the aid of crutches. After the operation, the patient began taking albendazole tablets (15 mg/kg) and regularly reviewed liver and kidney function. After two years of follow-up, no recurrence was detected on MRI . Additionally, the patient conveyed contentment with the outcome of the treatment.