A 57-year-old woman presented to the outpatient department of our hospital complaining of an irritating cough accompanied by chest distress on December 23, 2017.
In November 2017, the patient developed an irritating cough without obvious inducement, progressive chest tightness and shortness of breath with loss of body weight, no fever and no obvious headache.
Her past medical history was unremarkable.
No specific personal or family history of disease was recorded.
Her mental state was not good. Superficial lymph nodes were not affected, heart auscultation was normal, but breath sounds disappeared in the right lower lung. Liver and spleen were not enlarged and edema in the lower limbs was not observed.
Routine blood examination, liver and kidney function and electrolyte test indicators were normal. The levels of serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 199 (CA199) were 143.02 ng/mL (reference value < 5 ng/mL) and 363.77 U/mL (reference value < 40 U/mL), respectively. Blood gases were normal.
A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed irregular high-density lesions in the upper lobe and middle lobe of the right lung, along with multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum and effusion in the right thorax. The boundary of the largest lesion, which measured about 37.2 mm × 17.8 mm, was not clear . Furthermore, an enhanced head magnetic resonance imaging scan showed a metastatic neoplasm on the right parietal lobe of the brain .
Her right thorax was punctured, and approximately 500 mL of pale-yellow pleural fluid was drained. On December 28, 2017, liquid-based thin layer cytology of pleural fluid found abnormal cells consistent with adenocarcinoma. The patient refused a needle puncture biopsy. Proof-of-principle studies have demonstrated the translational potential of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) for molecular profiling, thus gene analysis using the amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS) method was performed and an EGFR L858R mutation was found in pleural fluid.