A previously healthy 38 years old Caucasian female presented to the outpatient allergy clinic in the fall of 2014 with self-diagnosed adult-onset lactose intolerance and a suspected allergy to a commercial available lactase enzyme tablets. She reported sudden onset of bilateral orbital swelling and facial urticaria, and rapidly worsening throat constriction and shortness of breath after her first oral ingestion of a supplemental lactase tablet. She took two tablets of diphenhydramine and 4 puffs of a salbutamol puffer which relieved her throat constriction and shortness of breath within 20–30 min. The bilateral orbital swelling slowly decreased within next 24 h with additional doses of oral diphenhydramine. She had avoided ingestion or handling of the supplemental lactase tablets since this reaction. Upon careful review of the history, patient had experienced recurrent itchiness and urticarial lesions in her hands and face after having been in contact with the supplemental lactase tablets she handed to her kids. She had no history of prior ingestion of any commercial supplemental lactase-containing foods.
Patient’s past medical history included well-controlled mild intermittent asthma, oral allergy syndrome to raw fruits and vegetables, allergic rhinitis, GERD, and hypertension. She reported a self-diagnosis of lactose intolerance approximately twelve months prior to her reported episode of anaphylaxis. Her medication list included ranitidine, fluticasone nasal spray, and salbutamol as needed. She reported that her children were diagnosed with lactose intolerance and she was handling supplemental lactase tablets for years with no reactions, prior to the initiation of her skin symptoms a few months earlier.
Upon assessment in clinic, physical examination was unremarkable. Skin prick testing (SPT) to environmental and food allergens was performed using allergens from Omega Laboratories, Montreal Quebec. SPT was positive for dust mites, trees, grasses, ragweed, and molds of Alternaria and Cladosporium, but it was negative for cow’s milk, egg, wheat, soy, sesame, inhalant Aspergillus species and subspecies of Aspergillus niger. SPT to subspecies of Aspergillus oryzae was not performed due to lack of allergenic extract. SPT to a saline slurry of the crushed lactase tablet (approximately 10% weight/volume) revealed a positive wheal and flare reaction, longest diameters of wheal and flare were 10 and 60 mm, respectively, with adequate controls . After skin testing was completed, patient reported sudden onset of throat tightness which resolved after treatment with oral cetirizine 20 mg and 2 puffs of inhaled salbutamol. During a subsequent office visit, the patient underwent skin testing to ingredients of the lactase tablet provided by the manufacturer. Skin testing was strongly positive for a slurry of approximately 10% weight/volume of the lactase enzyme (4000 FCC lactase units) and negative for the other non-enzyme ingredients of the tablet including dextrose, microcrystalline cellulose, calcium stearate and natural mint flavour. Skin testing to the crushed lactase tablet and its ingredients was performed in similar fashion in two healthy volunteers and it was entirely negative with appropriate controls.
Patient was diagnosed with anaphylaxis caused by supplemental lactase tablet due to synthetic lactase enzyme IgE mediated allergy. She was advised to avoid handling and ingestion of all products containing lactase enzymes as an ingredient and to carry an epinephrine auto-injector. She has had no further accidental exposures. Subsequently, patient was gradually introduced to regular dairy products and has remained asymptomatic, without the need for further investigations.