A Tunisian 3 month-old-girl presented in our pediatric intensive care unit with severe dyspnea causing acute respiratory failure. She suffered from dyspnea and wheezing since the age of 20 days and was treated unsuccessfully by corticosteroids. On physical examination, the patient was agitated and had irregular respiratory rhythm with sibilants in the auscultation. The remainder of the physical examination was normal. The chest radiograph showed thoracic distension without any other abnormalities. The patient was immediately intubated and mechanically ventilated. The diagnosis of severe asthma was suspected and the patient was treated by intravenous corticosteroids and continuous perfusion of salbutamol without any improvement. A right percutaneous jugular central venous catheter was inserted to administer sedation and salbutamol. During the insertion, the puncture of the cervical region returned 20 ml of a yellow exsudative liquid. A cervicomediastinal ultrasonography was performed and showed a large hypoechogenic solid mass of the superior mediastinum. The chest computed tomography scan (CT-scan) demonstrated an anterior mediastinal multiseptated cystic mass extending from the inferior face of the thyroid gland to the left cardiophrenic angle. β-human chorionic gonadotropin and alpha-fetoprotein markers were within normal limits. Human immunodeficiency virus serology was negative. Sternotomy and excision biopsy were planned urgently because of the critical respiratory state of the child. At surgery, we found a large extrapericardial polylobulated cystic mass contiguous with the thymus and lying laterally on the lungs that she compresses. The cystic mass was excised completely and didn't show any adhesions to the adjacent mediastinal structures. Macroscopically, the specimen measured 7 × 6 × 2.5 cm. On cut section, the cyst showed multiloculated cavities with thick gray walls, and was filled with turbid and blood-stained fluid. The histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of MTC and showed several cystic spaces separated by thick walls containing dense lymphoid tissue and foci of cholesterol cleft deposition. Close high-power examination of these foci showed scattered small squamous epithelial pearls consistent with Hassal's corpuscles . No postoperative complications occurred. The infant was weaned from ventilation on day 7 after surgery. She was discharged 5 days after extubation and was moderately dyspneic at discharge. Five months later, she was asymptomatic with a normal chest magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).