A 32-year-old unmarried man was admitted to our hospital due to repeated rupture of a wound on the right thigh after a skin graft.
In October 2018, the patient’s inner right thigh was accidentally scratched by sharp objects, causing wound rupture and liquid discharge. After routine wound dressing and antibiotic treatment, a sinus appeared in the wound after 2 mo. In January 2019, he successively underwent debridement of the right thigh wound + VSD and debridement of the right thigh suture + VSD . At 1 mo after the operation, the surgical incision was ulcerated and a wound surface area of 1.5 × 1 cm2 appeared, with granulation tissue, edema, and pale yellow liquid discharge. There was swelling, redness, high skin temperature, and tenderness at the wound site . In March 2019, debridement of the right thigh wound was performed. The wound dressing was changed after surgery. After 2 wk, the wound surface area was about 15 × 8 cm2. The granulation tissue was pale, with a large amount of purulent discharge . Pathological examination of the wound indicated inflammatory granulation. Debridement was performed again, and VSD was conducted. After granulation tissue formed, autogenous skin grafting was performed . At 1 mo after skin grafting, the skin graft ruptured and multiple lesions appeared with sinus formation; the upper sinus was located at the root of the thigh, with a depth of about 6 cm. There was a little necrotic granulation tissue after curette scraping, and the lower sinus was about 2 cm. The granulated tissue in the wound was still fresh, with a large amount of exudate . The patient did not experience symptoms of low fever, night sweats, or weight loss.
The patient was physically healthy without a history of hypertension, heart disease, diabetes, drug or food allergy, or infectious diseases such as hepatitis, TB, and typhoid fever. He had appendicitis and abdominal wall fistula 6 years prior.
The patient had no family history of TB.
Physical examination showed the following: Body temperature, 36.6 °C; pulse, 98 beats/min; heart rate, 20 beats/min; blood pressure, 108/68 mmHg. Neither dry nor moist rales were heard from the lungs. The skin grafting area ruptured and multiple lesions appeared with sinus formation; the upper sinus was located at the root of the thigh, with a depth of about 6 cm. There was a little necrotic granulation tissue after curette scraping, and the lower sinus was about 2 cm. The granulated tissue in the wound was fresh, with a large amount of exudate. No swollen lymph nodes were found in the groin area.
Laboratory testing showed T-cell spot of TB test (T-SPOT) > 400 pg/mL; culture of pus from the wound, purified protein derivative (PPD), blood routine, liver and kidney function, procalcitonin, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and immune indicators were all normal.
Chest computed tomography showed no obvious abnormalities in both the lungs and mediastinum. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the soft tissue of the right inner thigh and right groin area showed abnormal signals involving the right internal and external muscles of the pelvic floor. Combined with the medical history, the changes caused by surgery were considered. TB focus and sinus formation could be seen around the obturator muscle .