A 68-year-old Asian male has significant medical history of hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, coronary artery disease requiring percutaneous coronary intervention, right lower extremity deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism and peripheral vascular disease. The patient was a former long-time smoker but quitted cigarette smoking about 20 years ago. His family history was non-contributory. In 2009, patient was diagnosed with stage IA adenocarcinoma of the lung , and he underwent a video-assisted thoracoscopic left upper lobe segmentectomy. At the same time, he was noted to have worsening leukocytosis and thrombocytosis. A complete blood count (CBC) at the time showed white blood cell count (WBC) 28,500/μL with a neutrophil predominance of 86.2 %, a hemoglobin of 14.7 gm/dL, and a platelet count of 737,000/mL. The patient was found to be JAK2 V617F mutation positive and BCR/ABL negative in his peripheral blood. At one point, his platelet count peaked at 1,054,000/mL. A bone marrow biopsy in October 2010 demonstrated markedly hypercellular marrow with marked megakaryocytes and mild myeloid hyperplasia consistent with MPN . The patient was started on hydroxyurea with close monitoring of the blood counts. Of note, since around April 2011, patient's white blood cell monocyte percentage persistently ranged between 20-40 % and the absolute monocyte count ranged between 2,000/μL and 5,000/μL, meeting the criteria for CMML . His thrombocytosis had markedly improved by that time.
In December 2013, the patient was admitted for proximal small bowel obstruction after presenting with multiple episodes of bloody bowel movements and abdominal pain. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed erythematous and thickened duodenal folds. Biopsy was consistent with DLBCL and patient was staged as stage IE. Bone marrow biopsy in January 2014 did not show evidence of lymphoma but did show hypercellular marrow with myeloid hyperplasia with left shift and trilineage dyspoiesis and increased kappa restricted clonal plasma cells by flow cytometry (1 %). Given this new lymphoma diagnosis, hydroxyurea was held and chemotherapy with R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone) for 6 cycles were administered and completed in May 2014. His course was complicated by respiratory symptoms (coughing, shortness of breath) with pulmonary infiltrates and hilar/mediastinal lymphadenopathy noted on imaging and positive acid-fast bacillus culture for mycobacterium avium intracellulare (MAI). Fine-needle aspiration of lymph nodes showed reactive bronchial cells.
In September 2014, the patient was noted to have a WBC of 57,800/μL (manual differentiation showing 68 % neutrophils, 4 % bands, 3 % metameylocytes, 3 % myelocytes, 2 % lymphocytes, 8 % promonocytes, 10 % monocytes, 2 % basophils), a hemoglobin of 11.8 gm/dL, and a platelet count of 243,000/mL. Given these findings, a bone marrow biopsy was performed, which demonstrated hypercellularity approaching 100 %. There was a prominent population of mature and immature/atypical monocytes comprising 77 % of analyzed WBC. These cells uniformly expressed CD11c, CD13, CD33 and CD64, with partial aberrant CD56 and variable HLA-DR consistent with left-shifted/dyspoietic maturation. These findings were consistent with acute myeloid leukemia with monocytic differentiation (AML-M5) . CD34 positive myeloblasts comprised 1-2 % of cells. There was no evidence of lymphoma. Cytogenetics showed 2 of 22 metaphases had translocation of chromosome 4 and 11, loss of chromosome 9, and an additional copy of chromosome 11. Mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene rearrangement was noted in 57.5 % of cells. Nucleophosmin1 (NPM1) and FMS-like tyrosine kinase-3 (FLT-3) mutations were not sent as the cytogenetics placed him in the high risk AML category.
The patient was subsequently admitted in September 2014 for initiation of induction chemotherapy and considerations for allogeneic stem cell transplantation. At the time of admission, he reported night sweats and nonspecific weight loss for a few weeks. He was started on standard "7 + 3" induction chemotherapy with idarubicin 12 mg/m2 on days 1-3 and cytarabine 100 mg/m2 on days 1-7. His course was complicated by tumor lysis syndrome, cytopenias, and elevated liver enzymes. A repeat bone marrow biopsy after induction therapy in October 2014 was performed, which unfortunately showed hypercellular marrow 90 % with 13 % promonocytes/monoblasts, consistent with residual acute myeloid leukemia with monocytic differentiation. Between November and December 2014, patient had received 2 cycles of decitabine while a search for a match-unrelated donor was going on.
In January 2015, the patient developed symptoms of hyperviscosity from thrombocytosis with a platelet count greater than two million. He underwent thrombocytapheresis with an improvement in platelet count and symptoms. In March 2015, patient was admitted again with thrombocytosis to platelet count over two million. He was started on hydroxyurea to control his counts, then received haploidentical allogeneic stem cell transplant from his daughter with fludarabine/melphalan/anti-thymocyte globulin conditioning. His course was complicated by neutropenic sepsis, acute kidney and liver injuries, gastrointestinal bleed, atrial fibrillation, cardiomyopathy, volume overload and skin graft-versus-host disease. In July 2015, repeat engraftment studies showed only 9 % donor engraftment. His subsequent decreasing blood counts and monocytosis confirmed on flow cytometry were also consistent with leukemia relapse. The patient expired in September 2015 while he was on best supportive care alone.