A 62-year-old male with known bicuspid aortic valve, and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (AF) presented for SAVR and Maze procedure following a diagnosis of severe aortic valve stenosis. His past medical history included hypertension treated with oral Telmisartan 80 mg daily and Moxonidine 400 mcg daily. He further had paroxysmal AF following an episode of infective endocarditis eight years prior sustained at the time of a dental extraction. He was anticoagulated with Apixaban 5 mg BD and was treated with oral Amiodarone 200 mg daily which provided some intermittent reversion to sinus rhythm (with a chronic left bundle branch block) in the community. Non-cardiac past medical history includes obstructive sleep apnoea requiring a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine, and a bladder diverticulum managed conservatively. He was a non-smoker, with a history of social alcohol consumption (with occasionally heavy consumption on weekends). Referral for cardiac surgery was made, whilst the patient was asymptomatic, due to worsening aortic stenosis on routine follow-up transthoracic echocardiograms (TTE), which reported a low-normal left ventricular (LV) systolic function (no ejection fraction was provided) and the presence of concentric LV hypertrophy, with posterior wall thickness 1.2 cm and septal thickness of 1.2 cm. His aortic valve was bicuspid, sclerotic, thickened , and had severely restricted aortic valve leaflets, a flow velocity of 5.1 m/s, a mean gradient of 63 mmHg (maximum 104 mmHg), and an LVOT diameter of 2.8 cm. Unfortunately, the preoperative TTE was performed at an external site to the operating hospital, with only the report and no images provided. Notably, the septal thickness measurement was significantly lower than was recorded on the TTE studies from our institution. Review of the images shows that the septal thickness was undermeasured and the septal hypertrophy was underappreciated on preoperative imaging when compared with current guidelines . Chordal SAM was further noted during this review and was not commented on by the reporting cardiologist ( and Video 1).
Preoperative examination revealed a well-looking, 98 kg Caucasian male with an ejection systolic murmur heard maximally in the aortic region consistent with aortic stenosis. Lung fields were clear. His vital signs preoperatively showed a regular heart rate of 59 b.p.m. with electrocardiogram showing a left bundle branch block, blood pressure of 152/87 mmHg, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute with an oxygen saturation of 97%. He was afebrile with a body temperature of 35.8°C. A preoperative coronary angiogram performed 1 week prior to surgery revealed normal coronary arterial flow with no plaque disease, and a concomitant right heart catheterization revealed normal pulmonary arterial and pulmonary capillary wedge pressures with no intracardiac shunt. The pre-bypass transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) confirmed marked concentric LV hypertrophy, severe aortic stenosis, and both trace aortic and trivial mitral regurgitation . The left and right ventricles demonstrated normal systolic function. No SAM was evident.
The procedure was completed uneventfully. Radiofrequency clamp was used to perform a left-sided maze procedure. An Atriclip (Atricure, OH, USA) was then deployed across the base of the atrial appendage. A true bicuspid aortic valve was identified. Surgical aortic valve replacement was completed with antegrade and retrograde cardioplegia. Following intraoperative sizing of the annulus, a 27 mm bioprosthetic, bovine, sutured Inspiris Resilia pericardial valve (Edwards LifeSciences, CA, USA) was sited. This type of valve was selected to facilitate a future in-valve TAVR if required. As there was no sign of dynamic LVOT obstruction preoperatively or intraoperatively no surgical myectomy was performed. Total bypass time was 87 min, with a total cross-clamp time of 70 min. Intraoperative photography was not available.
The post-bypass TOE showed a marked improvement of the aortic gradient at 7 mmHg over the valve, with a normally functioning bioprosthetic valve in situ . No signs of patient–prosthesis mismatch were encountered, and no paravalvular leak was identified.
Mild chordal SAM was evident when the left ventricle was underfilled and was seen to resolve with fluid bolus and 0.5 mg of metaraminol. A cardiac index (CI) of 2.5 (L/min/m2) was measured following the weaning of bypass, with pulmonary arterial pressures of 30/17 mmHg.
The patient remained stable in the intensive care unit (ICU) with good cardiac indices for the first few hours postoperatively, requiring only 1 L of 4% albumin fluid resuscitation, until he was extubated. Subsequently, his initial CI of 2.4 L/min/m2 continued to fall steadily to 1.7 (equivalent to a cardiac output of 3.7 L/min), with pulmonary arterial pressures increasing up to 50/30 mmHg. The patient developed a first-degree atrioventricular block alongside his previously present left bundle branch block and was switched to a dual-chamber pacing mode (DDD). No ST changes or new T-wave inversions developed during this time. Given the LV hypertrophy noted intraoperatively, a metoprolol infusion was commenced to aim for a heart rate <65 b.p.m., and further fluid was administered.
An urgent TTE was performed showing marked SAM, resulting in severe dynamic LVOT obstruction ( and Video 2). On this study, the septal wall thickness was recorded at 1.8 cm (parasternal long-axis view). The measured peak gradient was 170 mmHg, with a max velocity of 6.5 m/s. Left ventricular systolic function was preserved.
Medical therapy was continued in the form of a phenylephrine, metoprolol, and a prophylactic amiodarone infusion to prevent AF. Unfortunately, his CI worsened to 1.6 L/min/m2 with a repeat echocardiogram revealing persistent, severe SAM with a moderately dilated left atrium (28 cm2) and a peak LVOT gradient of 86 mmHg. Given the absence of any new segmental hypokinesis on TTE or acute ischaemic electrocardiogram changes, and with pre-operative coronary angiogram showing plaque-free coronary arteries, an acute ischaemic event was not considered to be the likely causative pathology. As a result, cardiac enzymes were not sent at this time as it was felt that they would not aid in overall diagnosis.
Septal myectomy was considered. Due to the risks of a second cardiopulmonary bypass run and aortic cross-clamp, in addition to explantation of the aortic prosthesis to perform the resection, an alcohol septal ablation was decided to be a more appropriate intervention. It was completed without complication approximately 30 h post-initial operation, with accompanying coronary angiography confirming a large calibre left anterior descending artery, free of disease. A subsequent TTE showing an akinetic basal septum, mild persistent SAM, a mild residual outflow tract gradient of 23 mmHg, and aortic valve mean gradient of 7 mmHg ( and Video 3).
Despite the improvement in LVOT obstruction, the patient had progressive end-organ deterioration with ischaemic changes on liver function tests an acute kidney injury and a rising lactate level. Monitoring of troponin levels was also commenced following alcohol septal ablation until improvement was observed .
Vasopressin was commenced to maintain an appropriate mean arterial pressure (MAP), and a Milrinone infusion was trialled to assist with inotropy. Given the ongoing poor cardiac indices peripheral veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) was instituted to optimize systemic perfusion whilst awaiting improvement of the patient’s cardiac function. After 72 h, end-organ dysfunction had improved, and a TOE weaning study was performed with measurement of LVOT gradient at decreasing VA-ECMO flows down to 1.0 L/min, with no SAM or mitral regurgitation observed.
No formal, regular TTE monitoring was performed, whilst the patient was on VA-ECMO, with a single scan performed D1 post-commencement, and otherwise, a subsequent scan performed just prior to a formal TOE weaning study . Haemodynamic monitoring in this setting was achieved with cardiac output readings from the pulmonary arterial thermodilution catheter, and regular arterial and mixed venous blood sampling.
The formal weaning study was commenced after VA-ECMO flow had demonstrably been weaned to approximately half of initial flow (2.81 L/min) with no need for vasopressors/inotropes. At this time a TOE probe was inserted and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) flow was decreased steadily over a 40 min period to 1.0 L/min. Throughout this time haemodynamic parameters such as MAP, central venous pressure, end-tidal CO2, were monitored, with cardiac output measured by both thermodilution pulmonary artery catheter technique, and calculated via TOE measurements (with documented LVOT VTI, LVOT gradient, and stroke volume). Once ECMO flow had been decreased to 1.0 L/min, only minor chordal SAM was noted and no need for vasopressors/inotropy was confirmed, then ECMO flow was brought back to ∼2.8 L/min and the patient’s case was discussed with the Cardiothoracic Surgeon. A formal decision was then made to decannulate from ECMO in the operating theatre.
The patient was decannulated and subsequently achieved a CI of 2.5 L/min/m2, requiring only a further 24 h of vasopressor support .
A final inpatient TTE was performed 3 days post-wean of ECMO, showing a cardiac output of 8.0 L/min, persistent mild SAM with a residual LV gradient of 18 mmHg, dyskinetic basal septum consistent with prior alcohol septal ablation, and aortic valve gradient mean of 9 mmHg with no paravalvular leak identified .
The patient’s ICU stay was prolonged by intermittent episodes of AF and delirium. He was discharged from the ICU at D13 postoperatively, and from the hospital at D19 postoperatively. At 2 months postoperatively, the patient had essentially returned to baseline function. Echocardiographic follow-up post-discharge was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and at the time of writing is not available.