A 41-year-old female was admitted to the emergency department due to 2 weeks of dyspnoea at rest with a history of 1 year of exertional dyspnoea and atypical chest pain. She denied syncope, palpitations, ankle oedema, fever, cough, weight loss, malaise, fatigue, or other constitutional symptoms. She had a history of diabetes mellitus. Her baseline medications included metformin 850 mg daily. She denied other diseases or familiar history of heart disease or oncologic diseases.
At initial physical examination, she was found with hypotension, sinus tachycardia, jugular venous hypertension, apex displaced at 6th intercostals space, cardiac auscultation revealed intense second heart sound with an apical mild mid-diastolic murmur, intensified in left lateral decubitus position and irradiated to the anterior left axillary line, and a systolic mitral murmur at the supine position. No irradiation of the murmur was heard at another heart auscultation point. Electrocardiogram was in sinus rhythm with left atrial enlargement pattern, and chest radiography demonstrated pulmonary congestion, Grade III cardiomegaly, and double contour image suggestive of LA dilatation . Laboratory results showed mild microcytic hypochromic anaemia (Hb 11.6 g/dL), elevated C-reactive protein, and 2236 pg/dL NT-proBNP, rest of the blood tests were unremarkable. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 48%, estimated systolic pulmonary pressure of 66 mmHg, and a heterogeneous mass of 7.5 × 8.3 cm, which occupies the entire LA (LA volume 176.2 mL/m2), which was displacing interatrial septum, caused severe eccentric mitral secondary regurgitation due to annular dilatation, and lack of leaflets coaptation with a Vena Contracta width of 7 cm, and dynamic pseudo-mitral stenosis. Right ventricle was not dilated, and function was preserved (TAPSE 21 mm and tricuspid annular systolic velocity 10.3 cm/s). Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging confirmed a giant left atrial mass adhered to the interatrial septum (87 × 88 × 65 mm), obstructing the mitral annulus and severe mitral regurgitation with mild pericardial effusion . She was taken to surgery for resection of the mass by transseptal approach and conservative management of mitral valve with annuloplasty due to mitral valve annulus dilatation, as planned previously in the Heart Team Session, and the intraoperative course was uneventful. Histopathologic findings showed lepidic cells without atypia, polyhedric cells, and pseudo-glandular structures surrounded by a myxoid extracellular matrix compatible with atrial myxoma. The patient continued post-surgical recovery at the Coronary Care Unit, where she evolved to recovery. The patient was discharged with symptomatic improvement after 1 month of admission, with a New York Heart Association functional Class II, and scheduled outpatient follow-up post-hospitalization .