A 75-year-old male, with a history of hypertension, coronary heart disease and atrial fibrillation, presented at our hospital (Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, China) on May 23, 2019, with fever, anorexia, and fatigue for > 1 month. Since April 22, the patient had developed a recurrent fever for unknown causes, accompanied by anorexia and fatigue. His temperature peaked twice daily at a maximum of 38.5 °C. The symptoms worsened gradually after 10 days, and at a community hospital, high white blood cells and low blood sodium were detected. He was administered electrolyte supplements and cephalosporins for 3 days. The fever was controlled, hyponatremia was not corrected, and anorexia and fatigue were aggravated. Slowly, he was unable to walk without assistance. On May 16, the patient developed unresponsiveness, lethargy, and dysuria, and was sent to several hospitals afterward. Physical examination revealed that the tendon reflexes of the lower limbs were weakened, and Romberg’s sign was positive;cranial nerve function,sensory function, muscle force and tension were all normal,bilateral Babinski signs and Kernig’s sign were negative. Laboratory tests showed that the white blood cell count fluctuated between 8.49 and 14.85 × 109/L (predominantly neutrophils), and serum electrolyte levels were 128 mmol/L for sodium (Na+), 86 mmol/L for chloride (Cl−), and 3.2 mmol/L for potassium (K+). Other liver and kidney indexes, ESR, CRP, immunoglobulin, complement, myocardial enzymes, and BNP were unremarkable. The 24-h Holter test revealed sustained atrial fibrillation. Lung computed tomography (CT) showed bronchiectasis with slight inflammatory exudation and emphysema. Brain MRI revealed multiple abnormal signals in the brain stem, the bilateral basal ganglia, the thalamus, the corpus callosum, the left frontal lobe, and the left semi-oval center, leading to a preliminary diagnosis of pulmonary infection with cerebral lacunar infarction. The patient was then catheterized and given sodium supplements and ceftazidime for 7 days, followed by levofloxacin for 3 days and low molecular weight heparin 5000 U once daily. Consequently, there was no visible improvement, and the patient was transferred to our hospital for further investigation and treatment on May 27. The patient had been in a feeble condition during the disease course. He had poor sleep and reduced appetite and had lost 15 kg in weight. During hospitalization at other hospitals, he had a history of nausea and vomiting. He also had experienced diarrhea but defecated only once or twice a day. Nonetheless, his urine volume and color were normal. On admission, the patient was afebrile but still unconscious. He had a blood pressure of 114/86 mmHg and a heart rate of 103 beats/minute. His body mass index (BMI) was 19.4 kg/m2. The superficial lymph nodes were not palpable. No rales or rhonchi were heard. Arrhythmia, short pulse, and cardiac auscultation were generally normal. The liver and spleen were not palpable below the ribs. Also, no limb edema was detected. Ataxia and suspicious neck resistance were noted. He had normal muscle tension, knee reflexes were elicited, and negative Babinski signs were observed. The patient was unable to cooperate for further examination.
The patient’s blood electrolytes test documented that the Na+ was 129 mmol/L, and K+ was 3.1 mmol/L; therefore, sodium and potassium were supplemented. Blood and urine osmotic pressure was normal. Thyroid and adrenal functions were also normal. Therefore, the SIADH was suspected and potential causes were investigated. The following tests were either normal or negative: anti-HCV, anti-HIV, and anti-syphilis antibodies; Legionella pneumophila antibodies; blood Cryptococcus antigen (qualitative) test, and Brucella agglutination test; T-spot. TB test; inflammatory markers; anti-nuclear antibodies; Lupus anticoagulant; antiphospholipid antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies; blood tumor biomarkers and serum immunofixation electrophoresis; positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT).
Lumbar puncture revealed normal opening pressure. The total white blood cell count of the CSF was 34 × 106/L, consisting of all mononuclear cells (LY% 90, MONO% 10). Total protein was 1.58 g/L, and glucose was not decreased. IL-6 and TNF-α were elevated, while IL-8 and IL-10 were normal. Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-DNA was 500 copies/mL, and Cytomegalovirus (CMV)-DNA and next-generation sequencing (NGS) were unremarkable. Anti-LGI1, anti-CASPR2, anti-NMDA and Hu.Yo.Ri antibodies in the blood and the CSF were negative. Brain contrast-enhanced MRI + diffusion-weighted MRI (DWI) + fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) + SWI displayed multiple abnormal signals in both thalami, the basal ganglia, the left cerebellum, the pons, and the white matter of the bilateral cerebrum .
After excluding the potential infections or malignancies, multiple autoimmune leukodystrophy of the nervous system was considered, and since June 18, after explaining the current condition to the patient, he agreed to be on intravenous infusion of immunoglobulin (IVIG) 20 g daily for 5 days and intravenous methylprednisolone 40 mg daily. The patient began to gain strength in the legs on day 3 and could stand with assistance. On June 25, using the tissue based indirect immune-fluorescence test, we detected that anti-GFAP antibody was positive for CSF, while anti-GFAP and anti-MOG antibodies for serum were negative, thereby leading to the diagnosis of autoimmune GFAP astrocytopathy. The patient was given intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g daily for 3 days, followed by an oral taper with prednisolone 50 mg daily. After the first 3 days, his blood sodium was maintained with oral supplements. The patient was conscious and had good orientation, and thus, was therefore discharged on June 28.
The patient’s symptoms improved gradually, and hence, the use of prednisolone was reduced. The patient was on 40 mg daily prednisolone during the subsequent follow-up and no sodium supplements; his blood electrolytes were within the normal range (K+ 4.2 mmol/L and Na+ 141 mmol/L). CSF analysis revealed that white cell count dropped to 22 × 106/L, and the protein level was lowered to 0.67 g/L. Nonetheless, on August 9, anti-GFAP antibody in CSF and serum were both positive on a repeat testing, and head contrast-enhanced MRI + SWI showed a wide afflicted region . Given that the disease was not well-controlled, 20 g daily intravenous immunoglobulin was administered for 5 days along with 0.5 g MMF twice daily. Consequently, the patient reported improved strength of the upper and lower limbs and could walk for 2 km on plain ground. In the subsequent follow-ups, he was on a continual gradual reduction in prednisone that was finally maintained at a 5 mg daily dosage plus 0.5 g MMF twice/day.