A 53-year-old Greek woman, with a history of coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), presented to a local hospital complaining of angina at rest. At initial evaluation, electrocardiographic abnormalities were absent and troponin levels were within normal limits. Regarding her past medical history, patient suffered from a myocardial infarction 21 years ago. Her CA at the time was indicative of LMCA bifurcation disease , and thus she was subsequently treated with CABG [left internal mammary artery (LIMA) to left anterior descending (LAD), right internal mammary artery (RIMA) to second obtuse marginal branch]. She also had a history of breast cancer treated with surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy 8 years ago, active smoking, and dyslipidemia. She was occasionally on carvedilol and aspirin.
On the basis of her worrisome symptoms and aforementioned medical history, patient was transferred to a university hospital with availability of a catheterization laboratory. Transthoracic echocardiogram did not reveal any regional wall motion abnormalities. A diagnostic coronary angiography (CA) revealed no significant stenoses in native coronary arteries (Additional file : Video 1, Additional file : Video 2, Fig. ) as well as nonfunctional, degenerated left internal mammary artery (LIMA) and right internal mammary artery (RIMA) grafts . During the procedure, patient complained of chest pain, accompanied by hemodynamic instability. Repeat evaluation of the left coronary system revealed a type B dissection of left main coronary artery (LMCA) (Additional file : Video 3). An effort for bail-out percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was unsuccessful. Thus, an intraaortic balloon pump was inserted and patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for further management. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed apical akinesis, electrocardiogram showed dynamic T wave changes and peak troponin levels rose to 530 pg/ml. Chest pain was sustained for a couple of hours but patient was soon stabilized and remained mildly symptomatic (with chest discomfort and mild dyspnea) during her ICU stay until she was eventually weaned off the pump and vasopressors.
Patient was discharged 25 days later and admitted to our department for further management. At presentation, she was mildly symptomatic; blood pressure was 117/63 mmHg, and heart rate was 89 beats per minute. Brief physical and neurological examination did not reveal any pathologic findings. Electrocardiographic evaluation revealed poor progression of R-wave and T-wave inversion in precordial leads; high sensitivity troponin levels were mildly elevated [32 pg/ml (upper normal limit 13 pg/ml)]. Renal and hepatic function were normal. Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), assessed via echocardiography, was 50% with apical akinesis. Careful evaluation of her previous CA revealed deep “sitting” of the Judkins Left (JL) diagnostic catheter, with its tip pointing against the upper LMCA arterial wall, a probable cause of iatrogenic dissection . A new CA confirmed the previously diagnosed LMCA dissection but of greater extent, from ostial LMCA to mid left anterior descending artery (LAD). True lumen of LAD was severely compressed by the false lumen, resulting in a thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) II flow distally (additional file : video 4, additional file : video 5, additional file : video 6 and Figs. , ).
We decided to perform PCI to LMCA and LAD. A 6 Fr JL3.5 Launcher (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) guiding catheter was advanced to LMCA and a 0.014 in Asahi Sion blue support guidewire (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) was passed through the true lumen of LAD (additional file : video 7). Following predilatation with a 3 × 20 mm NC Solarice balloon (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA), a 3 × 24 mm Synergy stent (Boston Scientific) was implanted to LAD and a 4 × 26 mm Resolute Integrity RX (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) stent was implanted proximally to the LMCA . Post-dilatation up to 20 atmospheres was performed with a 3.5 × 12 mm NC Solarice balloon (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA). The final angiographic evaluation revealed improved flow in LAD without compromising the ostium of left circumflex artery (additional file : video 8, additional file : video 9, Fig. ). Patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged the following day on ticagrelor 90 mg twice daily, aspirin 100 mg once daily, carvedilol 12.5 mg twice daily, rosuvastatin 40 mg once daily, and ramipril 2.5 mg once daily.
At follow-up visit at 6 months, patient was asymptomatic and in good functional status, with an LVEF of 50% assessed by echocardiography.