A 13-year-old boy visited the dermatology outpatient department on 8
th September 2023 with a raised lesion on his scalp since birth and a lesion that had spread to the left side of the face over ten years. The ophthalmological, neurological, or cutaneous systems did not exhibit any abnormalities during physical examination. These skin lesions had not previously occurred in the family. The results of all laboratory tests, including the kidney function test, liver function test, urine examination, and complete blood count were within normal ranges. The patient had no other complaints.
On cutaneous examination, a well-demarcated hyperpigmented verrucous plaque with a size of 8 × 4 cm was present on the frontal area of the scalp extending down to involve the forehead and a 7 × 3 cm plaque was present on the temporoparietal area and left preauricular area . Based on the patient’s medical history and physical examination, the possible differential diagnoses were identified as congenital melanocytic nevus, giant seborrhoeic keratoses, and verrucous epidermal nevus. However, a thorough examination through dermoscopy and histology conclusively ruled out these possibilities. In seborrheic keratosis, other than ridges and fissures multiple milia and comedone-like openings will be there. In acanthosis nigricans, there will be papillary projections with hyperpigmented dots and perifollicular pigmentation. We confirmed on clinical grounds that there were no clinical signs in the lesion to undergo a malignant transformation like ulceration, bleeding from the lesion or sudden increase in the size of the lesion. On dermoscopic examination, ridges and fissures were present in a cerebriform pattern with yellowish-grey globules and a papillary appearance . Histopathological examination revealed acanthosis, papillomatosis, and mild hyperkeratosis. There were immature and mature sebaceous glands with sebaceous hyperplasia and primitive hair follicles . The diagnosis of nevus sebaceous was established based on clinical presentation, dermoscopic findings, and histological analysis. The patient was referred to a plastic surgeon on 8
th September 2023 for a staged surgical excision of the nevus sebaceous. Our dermatology department does not offer plastic surgery services, hence the referral. Unfortunately, the patient was lost to follow-up after the referral, and we do not have any further information available.