A 16-year-old male was admitted to the Department of Infectious Diseases at the Children’s Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, P. R. China, on June 30, 2014 with a history of fever, skin rash over hand and feet, headache, and weakness in lower limbs over the past 4 days. The patient also had intraoral and throat pain, and non-projectile vomiting 3 days prior to admission. Two days prior to admission, the patient developed drowsiness, startle, hand tremor, urinary incontinence, and progressive deterioration in consciousness. He reported recent contact with a HFMD. Medications were limited to recent use of over-the-counter analgesics. The patient’s body temperature was 36.8 °C, respiratory rate was 25/min, pulse rate 98 beats/min, and blood pressure was 124/76 mmHg. Vesicular lesions and ulcers were present in the oral mucosa, and macular and vesicular lesions were present on palms and soles.
The patient was drowsy and non-verbal, but was responding to painful stimuli. He showed left-sided facial paralysis. The left nasolabial fold was flat and there was drooping of the mouth to the left side. The pupils were equal in size (diameter: 4 mm) and the pupillary light reflex was bilaterally symmetrical. Neck resistance was normal. The left upper and lower limbs showed reduced muscle strength (grade III–IV). The muscle strength in right limb was normal. Abdominal reflex and cremasteric reflex were normal. Pathological reflexes (e.g., Babinski, Chaddock, Oppenheim, Gordon) were negative. The rest of the physical findings were unremarkable.
Results of blood test were as follows: White blood cell count, 10.82 × 109; neutrophils, 92%; C-reactive protein, 80 mg/L, and blood glucose, 7 mmol/L. Findings of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination were as follows: Total number of cells, 188 × 106/L; nucleated cells, 44 × 106/L; monocytes 37 × 106/L; multinucleated cells 7 × 106/L; protein, 0.65 g/L; glucose, 5.74 mmol/L, and chlorides, 120.4 mmol/L.
IgM levels were quantified using ELISA kit (Cat No. 20143400198, Wantai Biopharm Inc., China). The CSF and serum tested positive for IgM antibody to EV71, but negative for IgM antibodies against Enterovirus, Herpes simplex virus, Cossack virus, and measles virus. EV71 RNA, but not CVA16, was detected in the patient’s faeces by reverse-transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) (Cat No. 20133400621, SANSURE Biotech Inc., China). All tests were performed in the clinical laboratory at the Children’s Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, P. R. China. Eight hours after admission, the patient showed progressive loss of consciousness and was transferred to the paediatric intensive care unit (PICU). He was in a coma and exhibited shallow breathing (30–40 breaths per minute). Pupils were sluggishly responsive to light with mild anisocoria (OD = 3 mm and OS = 4 mm). The patient showed no response to painful stimuli, and thus the muscle strength was not detected. The status of abdominal, cremasteric, and pathological reflexes was identical to that at the time of hospital admission. Based on the above clinical symptoms, a diagnosis of severe HFMD with brain stem encephalitis was established by specialists in the Department of Neurology and the Department of Infectious diseases.
The patient was administered mannitol (5 mL/kg/dose, q4h) to reduce the intracranial pressure, ganglioside for neurological recovery, creatine phosphate sodium for providing heart muscle energy, methyl prednisolone for reducing inflammation and cerebral edema, and potassium sodium dehydroandroan drographolide succinate as antiviral therapy. The patient was also administered midazolam (5 mg) twice daily on days 1 and 2 after admission to prevent agitation. From day 2, the patient received gamma immunoglobulin therapy (25 g/day) for 2 days.
Head CT performed on day 3 following admission showed signs of pineal calcification; no other obvious abnormality was observed in other parts. The patient was unconscious and comatose during EEG examination performed on day 3. The results were indicative of diffuse encephalopathy with mixed delta and theta wave activity in the range of 1–4 Hz, which indicated abnormal brain function.
The patient showed improvement and was transferred back to the Department of Infectious Diseases on day 4 following admission, and the same treatment was continued, except for gamma immunoglobulin therapy. On day 5, the patient regained consciousness, but showed paroxysmal increase in muscle tension in the limbs (mainly on the right side).
Head MRI performed on day 9 was normal. The patient showed progressive improvement and was able to walk with an unsteady gait; he was discharged from the hospital on day 10 following admission.
Two weeks after discharge, the patient still walked with an unsteady gait, but showed full recovery 1 month after discharge (normal limb muscle strength and tone, movement, and intelligence).