A 43-year-old female patient referred to our hospital’s emergency department in August 2014 with complaints of fever and severe pain in right breast. She noticed a soft lump and mild pain in her breast a week back. The intensity of pain increased gradually and for the last 2 days and her temperature increased. The patient had a history of 5 years of RA. The patient was not pregnant or lactating. She had three children with the last one delivered 6 years back.
On physical examination, the right breast was tender and swollen. A mobile, sensitive, soft, fluctuating mass of around 4 by 5 cm located in the right lower quadrant was palpable. The mass was not fixed to the upper skin. The upper skin was warm and erythematous. There was no nipple retraction or discharge from the nipple. Axillary lymph nodes were not palpable. The patient’s respiratory, digestive, nervous system physical examinations were normal. Physical examination of the musculoskeletal system revealed swelling in 2nd and 3rd proximal interphalangeal joints of the right hand and swelling and limitation of motion in the right knee.
Ultrasonography (USG) of the right breast revealed a heterogeneously hypoechoic deep-seated irregular collection of approximately 40×38 mm size. The patient was diagnosed with a breast abscess. The abscess was drained by USG guided drainage, and oral amoxicillin clavulanic acid 625 mg bid therapy was started empirically.
The drained fluid was sent to medical microbiology laboratory in a tightly capped, sterile container. On macroscopic examination, it was observed that the material had yellowish cream colour and dense consistency. Gram staining of the material showed abundant polymorphonuclear leukocytes and gram-negative bacilli. The material was inoculated on 5 % sheep blood and eosin methylene blue (EMB) agars plates. One of the sheep blood agar plates was incubated under anaerobic conditions. After incubation at 37 ° C for 24 h smooth, straight-edged colonies without hemolysis grew on sheep blood agar. On EMB agar, lactose-negative colonies were detected which tested negative for oxidase production. These colonies were identified as Salmonella species by Phoenix BD (Becton, Dickinson, USA) automated system and Salmonella group by Maldi-TOF MS (bioMérieux, France). The microorganism was identified as Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium according to the Kauffmann-White scheme by using specific antisera (Difco, Becton, Dickinson, USA). No anaerobic bacteria were isolated. The microorganism was found susceptible to ampicillin, ciprofloxacin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, erythromycin, chloramphenicol, ceftazidime, and ceftriaxone by antibiotic susceptibility testing with Phoenix BD (Becton, Dickinson, USA) automated system.
The patient was called back to the surgical outpatient clinic to obtain a detailed history. It was learned that 2 months ago she had diarrhoea for approximately 3 days and did not receive any antibiotic treatment. The patient had RA for 5 years and was on prednisone therapy. There was no history of contact with animals or trauma to breasts. There was no history of similar swelling in the other breast; no history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, bronchial asthma, and tuberculosis. When the patient’s laboratory tests were examined leukocyte count was 12,400/mm3 (83.9 % neutrophils), hemoglobin was 13.3 g/dL, fasting blood glucose was 108 mg/dL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 31 mm/h, CRP was 32 mg/l, RF was 28 IU/ml and anti CCP was 267.9 U/mL. Alkaline phosphatase, amylase, aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, bilirubin levels were within normal limits. HBsAg, anti-HCV and anti-HIV (ETI-MAX 3000 analyzer; DiaSorin S.p.A., UK), anti-HBc (Cobas 6000 analyzer, Roche Diagnostics, USA) tests were found to be negative. Chest X-ray was normal. Stool, urine, and blood samples were obtained for culture and found negative for Salmonella spp. Gruber Widal test was also found negative. Figure shows a timeline of events.
The patient was fully treated with the surgical draining of the breast abscess under general anaesthesia and oral ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily. At the end of 2 weeks, the patient was fully healed with no clinical signs of abscess. The control examination with USG after 4 months showed no sign of recurrence of the abscess.