A 71-year-old female patient presented with a mass in the left forearm for 3 years. When the patient sought medical attention 1 year ago, the doctor considered a diagnosis of fibroma and did not proceed with surgical treatment. The mass began to enlarge and harden significantly more than 5 months ago, accompanied by pain and numbness from the left upper arm to fingers. The patient had no family history of a similar condition. Physical examination revealed an 8 cm × 6 cm tender fixed mass on the patient’s left forearm with an unclear boundary. Laboratory tests showed no obvious abnormalities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to further assess the lesion. The pronator teres, flexor carpi radialis, flexor digitorum superficialis, flexor carpi ulnaris and intermuscular space showed patchy and irregular isointense signals on T1-weighted image and high signal intensity on T2-weighted image (–). The boundary of the lesion is not clear, with intermuscular edema (–).
The patient subsequently underwent a resection of the left forearm mass with a size of 8 cm × 6 cm × 6 cm. Intraoperative findings showed the mass borders were indistinct from surrounding muscle fibers and tendon. The trunk and branches of the dorsal interosseous nerve were also tightly adhered to the tumor and the nerve branches surrounded by tumor tissue were removed. Postoperative histopathology showed alternating myxoid and fibrous areas and that the tumor cells were predominantly spindle-shaped cells arranged in bundles with uneven proliferation. Moderate cytologic atypia and up to 11 mitoses per 10 hpf in the most active part of the tumor were observed (,). By immunohistochemistry (IHC), the tumor cells were diffusely positive for vimentin, focally for SMA, KP1, MSA, and negative for S−100, CD34, EMA, HMB-45, desmin, LCA, AE1/AE3, ALK (1A4), SOX10, TLE1 and ß-catenin. Ki-67 staining showed the proportion of the positive tumor cells was about 20%. Upon pathologic examination with immunohistochemistry, low-grade soft tissue sarcoma was diagnosed. Using the French Federation of Cancer Centers Sarcoma Group (FNCLCC) guidelines for the histopathologic grading, the final scores were 4 and the tumor was graded as 2. The tumor cells infiltrated surrounding skeletal muscle tissue. Presence of tumor cells at the surgical resection margin can also be observed. Genetic test was performed to differentiate between low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma and low-grade/well-differentiated myxofibrosarcoma. In situ hybridization (ISH) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) detected FUS gene rearrangement, which was consistent with the diagnosis of LGFMS .
Two months after the primary surgery, MRI revealed multiple subcutaneous and intermuscular soft tissue nodules in the left forearm (–). The patient subsequently had a wide resection of the local recurrent tumor with a 2 cm margin in all directions to the mass or the scar from the previous surgery. The postoperative histopathological findings reveal a proliferation of spindle-shaped tumor cells, with some arranged in a fascicular pattern. These cells exhibit moderate to severe cytologic atypia, and up to 31 mitoses per 10 hpf in the most active regions were observed. A mucinous background is evident in certain areas of the stroma. Three months after the second surgery, the patient found a mass in the left forearm again. MRI also showed multiple intermuscular and subcutaneous soft tissue nodules and abnormal signals at the left ulna and proximal radius. Then, the patient underwent another larger-scale resection. The postoperative histopathological features exhibit resemblances to those observed in the preceding recurrence. After the wide resections, the follow-up MRI showed multiple masses in the left forearm muscle (–) and abnormal signals in the T8, T11 vertebral body and accessory of T11 . To assess the patient’s whole-body situation, 18F-flurodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) examination was further performed. It revealed increased metabolic uptake with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 11.2 within the left forearm mass (–) and increased FDG uptake in the T8 and T11 vertebral body (SUVmax 3.3, 4.1) where slightly lower bone mineral density was observed (,). Then, her left arm was amputated 5 cm above the elbow and the mass was about 10 cm from the incision, protruding from the skin with a necrosis surface. The histopathological characteristics of the tumor manifest similarities to those observed in prior recurrences. IHC assessment demonstrated diffusely positive for vimentin, focally for CD34, CD31, and negative for S−100, SMA, desmin, AE1/AE3. Ki-67 staining showed the proportion of the positive tumor cells was 90%.
Two years after amputation, the patient was found to have a mass on the back. MRI showed a mass in the right back muscle and the adjacent right 7th rib . PET/CT revealed increased FDG uptake at the extremity of the left stump (SUVmax 5.4; –), irregular thickening of the right chest wall and bone destruction of the adjacent right 8th rib . Resection of the metastases in the right chest wall and the 8th rib was performed on the patient. She was also treated with radiotherapy and particle therapy. The patient is currently undergoing follow-up and has no PET/CT evidence of recurrence.