A 9-month-old female neutered domestic shorthair cat presented with a recent history of post-prandial episodic behavioural change characterised by apathy, weakness and ptyalism. No neurological abnormalities were noted at clinical examination. Serum biochemistry was normal apart from raised fasting bile acids (135 µmol; reference interval [RI] 0.1–5 µmol). A subsequent bile acid stimulation test demonstrated raised pre- and post-prandial bile acids (fasting 9.3 µmol; RI 0.1–5, post 92.4 µmol; RI 0.5–10 µmol). The reported neurological signs, together with evidence of hepatic dysfunction, were considered consistent with hepatic encephalopathy (HE). The cat was stabilised using a combination of a proprietary liver diet (Prescription Diet L/D Feline; Hill’s) and a home-cooked, protein-restricted diet, lactulose (0.75 ml orally q12h) and metronidazole (10 mg/kg [22 mg/lb] orally q12h for 14 days) and episodic signs resolved. At abdominal ultrasonography at a referral centre a congenital portosystemic shunt (PSS) could not be identified. Further investigation of the hepatic dysfunction by CT angiography (CTA) and liver biopsy were declined on financial grounds.
At 19 months of age the cat presented for vomiting and diarrhoea of 24 h duration. At physical examination the cat weighed 3.3 kg with a body condition score 7/9 and was considered to be 5% dehydrated. Mild hepatomegaly and cranial abdominal discomfort were evident on abdominal palpation. Profuse watery haemorrhagic diarrhea was produced over a period of 48 h during hospitalisation. Haematology and serum biochemistry demonstrated haemoconcentration (haematocrit 58%; RI 28.2–52.7%), mild neutropenia (2 × 109/l; RI 2.62–15.17 × 109/l), mildly raised alanine aminotransferase (119 IU/l; RI 5–60 IU/l), aspartate transaminase (93 IU/l; RI 10–50 IU/l) and bile acids (fasting 11 µmol; RI 0.1–5 µmol).
Two days after hospitalisation abdominal ultrasound demonstrated that the liver was subjectively normal in size, but an extrahepatic portal vein could not be identified. The mesenteric and splenic veins were tortuous and appeared to communicate with the caudal vena cava (CdVC) at the level of the left kidney together with multiple tortuous retroperitoneal vessels. The stomach was hypomotile containing a strongly shadowing, non-obstructing, 15 mm diameter foreign body. The bladder contained a small amount of shadowing crystalline sediment. Small intestinal ileus was present, but there was no evidence of mechanical obstruction.
Dual-phase CTA of the abdomen was performed under general anaesthesia to confirm absence of the portal vein, demonstrate portal tributaries and exclude acquired portosystemic collaterals. CT images were acquired using a 16 slice scanner (Siemens Scope) using the following parameters: 120 kVP, 100 mA, 0.6 mm slice thickness, spiral pitch of 0.8 and 0.8 s rotation. In the arterial phase the coeliac artery and hepatic arteries were increased in diameter and there was conspicuous patchy enhancement of the hepatic parenchyma. In the portal phase the splenogastric and mesenteric trunks did not converge to form a portal trunk. There was no portal vein at the level of the porta hepatis and intrahepatic portal branches were not recognised . Instead the extrahepatic portal tributaries communicated separately with a large, 25 mm × 8 mm diameter, aneurysmal vessel located between the CdVC and left kidney. This paracaval vessel merged with the CdVC at the level of the second lumbar vertebra. The prehepatic CdVC cranial to the paracaval vessel was segmentally dilated. The cranial mesenteric vein was paired with the cranial mesenteric artery, returning to the mesenteric root. It entered the cranial aspect of the paracaval vessel ( and ). The proximal splenic vein was paired with the splenic artery to the level of the left limb of the pancreas, there received a tributary from the pancreas and was then joined by the left gastric vein. The splenic vein distal to these tributaries looped ventral to the CdVC to enter the left side of the caudal aspect of the paracaval vessel. Several systemic veins also drained into the aberrant paracaval vessel. The left gonadal vein drained into the most caudal aspect of the paracaval vessel and the left renal vein entered its left side immediately dorsal to the termination of the splenic vein. The left phrenicoabdominal vein was a large varicose vessel draining a tortuous left adrenal artery arising directly from the coeliac artery, as well as draining a caudal adrenal branch arising directly from the aorta. The enlarged phrenicoabdominal vein passed ventral to the left adrenal entering the mid-segment of the paracaval vessel on the left.
Following CTA the signs of haemorrhagic diarrhoea gradually resolved over a 72 h period with continued supportive care of intravenous Hartmann’s solution (Aquapharm 11), maropitant (1 mg/kg [2.2 mg/lb] IV q24h), famotidine (1 mg/kg [2.2 mg/lb] PO q24h) metronidazole (10 mg/kg [22 mg/lb] PO q12h) and analgesia (buprenorphine 0.03 mg/kg [0.066 mg/lb] SC q6h). Lactulose was reinstituted once faecal consistency firmed. The owner declined liver biopsy owing to financial limitations. The cat was discharged and managed on lactulose and a combination of a proprietary liver diet (Prescription Diet L/D Feline; Hill’s) and home-cooked, protein-restricted diet. Episodic gastrointestinal signs associated with scavenging, but no further episodes of HE, were reported during the 18 months following discharge.