A 48-year-old woman presented to the outpatient clinic with complaints of abdominal pain associated with weight loss.
The patient’s symptoms started 2 mo prior with recurrent episodes of abdominal pain without any specific aggravating or relieving factor(s).
She had no documented history of fever, jaundice, liver disease(s), blood transfusion, tattooing, or alcohol abuse.
Her co-morbidities included diabetes, hypertension, and obesity. She had no family history of carcinoma.
On examination, there was a palpable mass in the epigastrium. The rest of the clinical examination was unremarkable, without any signs of disease elsewhere in the body.
Complete blood count, serum biochemical profile, coagulation profile, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were normal. Viral serology was nonreactive.
An initial imaging evaluation with a contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed an ill-defined heterogeneous contrast-enhancing and hyper vascular mass in the left lobe of the liver with extension up to the middle hepatic vein and compression effect on the left hepatic vein. The approximate measurement of the mass was 9.9 cm × 7.8 cm with central necrosis in the mass and partial wash-out on delayed images. The tumor encased the left portal vein branch at its point of bifurcation; however, the main portal vein and its right branch were not involved. No signs of hepatic cirrhosis were identified on imaging studies .
Positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) scan showed a maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) of the left hepatic mass of 6.4. The remaining liver had a standard baseline hepatic SUV (hepatic parenchymal baseline reference activity was up to 2.96 SUV).
No significant abnormality was seen above or below the diaphragm. In addition, the lungs, gastrointestinal (GI) tract, adrenal glands, kidneys, ovaries, and uterus did not show any evidence of primary disease or metastasis. No metastasis was found elsewhere in the body.
Ultrasound-guided biopsy was done, which showed cores of liver tissue with a proliferation of tumor cells having spindled-shaped nuclei with features of pleomorphism, up to 10 mitosis/10 high-power fields (HPFs), and necrosis. These findings suggested a spindle cell neoplasm raising a differential diagnosis of GI stromal tumor (GIST) and leiomyosarcoma. A panel of Immunohistochemical stains were applied that depicted a desmin-positive/caldesmon-negative/discovered on GIST1-negative (DOG1-)/cluster of differentiation 117-negative (CD117-) profile, thereby supporting the definitive diagnosis of PHL.