An otherwise healthy 17-year-old male, with a height of 178 cm, a weight of 60 kg and a body surface area (BSA) of 1.75 m2, presented to the emergency department with a traumatic brain contusion, subarachnoid hemorrhage, multiple bone fractures, and blunt chest trauma following a motorcycle collision. Computed tomography and transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed no finding of aortic dissection and aortic valve regurgitation. The patient was treated at the department of neurosurgery and successfully recovered from his brain injuries. The patient was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital 44 days later, with no murmur detected at that time.
Three months later, the patient had acute heart failure caused by AR after ventriculo-peritoneal shunt operation for hydrocephalus. One month after, he was transferred to our department due to a surgical indication for AR. Upon physical examination, he was bedridden with a grade 4/6 diastolic murmur at the left lower sternal border. His electrocardiogram was essentially normal . Chest X-ray revealed an increased cardiothoracic index and pulmonary congestion with a cardiothoracic ratio of 57% . TTE revealed left ventricular (LV) dilatation (LV end-diastolic diameter of 64 mm), diffuse LV hypokinesis (LV ejection fraction of 27%), and severe AR through a slit in the right coronary cusp (RCC) into the anterior leaflet of mitral valve . No vegetation was seen. Laboratory data revealed evidence of heart failure with increased N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) (7884 pg/ml), and hypothyroidism due to hypopituitarism with low free thyroxine (FT4) (0.09 ng/dl) and low thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) (2.61 μIU/ml).
Despite the uncorrected hypothyroidism, urgent aortic valve replacement was indicated because of the severity of his symptoms. After median sternotomy, aortic cross-clamping, and cardioplegic arrest, the ascending aorta was opened on total cardiopulmonary bypass. Intraoperative inspection of the aortic valve revealed a traumatic tear in the RCC , with no evidence of endocarditis or calcification. The valve was replaced with a 21-mm INSPIRIS RESILIA (Edwards Lifesciences LLC, Irvine, CA, USA) bioprosthesis with aortic root patch enlargement for the small sinotubular junction. Pathologic analysis revealed myxomatous degeneration of the leaflets without findings suggestive of inflammation or malignancy. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was referred to the rehabilitation hospital 26 days after surgery. Six months later, the patient was ambulatory, and TTE showed a normally functioning aortic valve prosthesis and preserved LV function (LV ejection fraction of 58%).