The patient was a 67-year-old Japanese man, with hypertension, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, diabetes mellitus, liver dysfunction, hyperlipidemia and was on medication with vildagliptin, voglibose, ursodeoxycholic acid, pravastatin sodium, β-blocker, digoxin, febuxostat. There was no previous history of surgery or syncope episodes, and the patient had been asymptomatic for illnesses including paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Paroxysmal atrial fibrillation was not noted on scheduled examination or laboratory tests.
In July 2014, while getting out of his car, he lost consciousness, fell down, and injured the left side of his face. He regained consciousness quickly, had examination at neurology department after he was found to have pain in the left side of his cheek, difficulty in opening his mouth, and dizziness. A close examination of imaging revealed a fracture of the zygomatic bone, and the patient was referred to our department for an initial consultation on the same day.
At initial examination, he was conscious and able to walk independently. He did not have chest pain or dyspnea, complained of dizziness and palpitations. Extraoral examination revealed diffuse swelling and subcutaneous hemorrhage in the left buccal region. Dysesthesia of the left suborbital nerve area was observed. There was no left-sided ocular injury, no diplopia, and no loss of visual acuity. Intraoral examination revealed no damage to the teeth was observed. The denture was damaged as a result of the injury, and no occlusal abnormality was found. The amount of opening was 18 mm (the distance between the upper and lower mandibular crests at the maximum opening). Computed tomography (CT) revealed fracture line was observed at the left zygomatic maxillary suture, the left zygomatic arch was depressed, and the zygomatic bone was displaced medially and interfered with the left muscular process . Chest X-ray showed no abnormalities. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed a heart rate of 63 beats per minute with no bradycardia and normal sinus rhythm . Echocardiography revealed moderate aortic regurgitation, mild mitral, tricuspid, and pulmonary regurgitation, and mild left atrial enlargement, but left ventricular ejection fraction was 65.1% and no abnormalities in cardiac function were observed. Preoperative head CT and electroencephalography revealed no evidence of central nervous system disease. Holter electrocardiogram showed tachycardic atrial fibrillation and sinus arrest consistent with vertigo symptoms . A clinical diagnosis was zygomatic fracture. The attending cardiologist at our hospital concluded that the patient was taking beta-blockers and digoxin, which may have inhibited the function of the sinoatrial node and induced syncope. He indicated that surgery could be performed under drug withdrawal, and since we found that the patient had difficulty in opening his mouth due to dislocation of the zygomatic bone, we scheduled a zygomatic fracture contemplative repair and fixation procedure under general anesthesia.
Isozol (100 mg) was used as the induction drug for general anesthesia, and sevoflurane (17.6 ml), fentanyl (0.1 mg), remifentanil 0.1 γ (4.2 ml/h) and Eslax (40 mg) were used as maintenance drugs. During induction of anesthesia, there was no abnormality in vital signs and no abnormal waveforms in electrocardiogram. The patient was repositioned and immobilized using the intraoral approach according to the usual technique. The gingiva was incised through the oral vestibule, and the mucoperiosteal valve was detached and elevated to expose the fracture line. Until this point, the electrocardiogram was in normal sinus rhythm. However, when the buccal elevator was used for the preparation of the bone fragment, sinus arrest continued for 20 s, and the systolic blood pressure dropped to 30 mmHg. The surgery was immediately interrupted and chest compressions were started, and the patient achieved normal sinus rhythm without drug administration or defibrillation . The surgery was resumed and completed without any sinus arrest or ECG abnormality. Although no sinus arrest was observed during extubation, tachycardic atrial fibrillation was observed . The patient was managed in the intensive care unit (ICU) in the postoperative period. From the day of surgery to the third day, atrial fibrillation and supraventricular tachycardia followed by sinus arrest were observed . Just before the arrhythmia occurred, dizziness and subsequent syncope were observed. Although the patient had stopped taking beta-blockers and digoxin before the surgery, the diagnosis of sick sinus syndrome (bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome) was made instead of drug-induced arrhythmia because of the abnormal electrocardiogram.
The patient was diagnosed as a candidate for pacemaker implantation due to the continued presence of postoperative arrhythmia, and pacemaker implantation was performed on the third postoperative day. After the pacemaker implantation, symptoms of dizziness and palpitations disappeared, and he discharged on the 13th postoperative day. The patient was followed up for 8 years with no symptoms of mouth opening disorder, dizziness, or palpitations.