A 9-month-old male patient from Angola presented to the Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital, South Africa, in February 2019, with a 3–4-week history of progressive bilateral proptosis and scalp masses. The computed tomography scan identified bilateral occipital and temporal scalp masses with extracranial extension into the orbital cavities and sinuses, and extradural extension into the anterior cranial fossa. There was no hepatosplenomegaly or lymphadenopathy. A fine needle aspiration sample of the soft tissue scalp mass was submitted for flow cytometry, and a Tru-Cut biopsy (manufacturer unknown) for histological assessment at the National Health Laboratory Service. As part of the staging work up, bone marrow aspiration and a trephine biopsy were performed to exclude infiltration of the marrow.
Flow cytometry was performed on the fine needle aspiration sample from the scalp mass on a FACS Calibur instrument (BD Biosciences, San Jose, California, United States), using the PAINT-A-GATE (Becton Dickinson, BD Biosciences, San Jose, California, United States) and MODFIT (Verity Software House, Topsham, Maine, United States) software. The following antibodies were used: CD19 FITC (Becton Dickinson, BD Biosciences, San Jose, California, United States), CD10 PE (Beckman Coulter Inc., Brea, California, United States), CD45 PERCP (Becton Dickinson, BD Biosciences, San Jose, California, United States), CD34 APC (Becton Dickinson, BD Biosciences, San Jose, California, United States), CD117 PE (Beckman Coulter Inc., Brea, California, United States), HLA-DR FITC (Becton Dickinson, BD Biosciences, San Jose, California, United States), CD13 PE (Beckman Coulter Inc., Brea, California, United States), Kappa FITC (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), Lambda PE (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) and cytoplasmic TdT FITC (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark).
Immunohistochemical work up was performed on the Tru-Cut biopsy from the scalp mass using the following stains: CD20 (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), PAX5 (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), CD10 (Leica Biosystems, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom), TdT (Cell Marque, Rocklin, California, United States), CD34 (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), EBER ISH (Roche, Mannheim, Germany), BCL2 (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), and Ki67 (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark).
Fluorescence in-situ hybridisation for the detection of translocation t(8;14) was performed using a Vysis LSI MYC/IGH/CEP8 tri-colour dual fusion probe (Abbott, Chicago, Illinois, United States), with orange, green and aqua signals reflecting the MYC, IgH and centromere 8 regions.
Histological examination of the Tru-Cut biopsy of the scalp mass revealed intermediate-sized tumour cells with irregular nuclear contours, a high nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio, dispersed nuclear chromatin, and one to four inconspicuous nucleoli present within a prominent background of tingible body macrophages . The tumour immunophenotype based on flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry was that of a precursor B-cell, with the expression of TdT, absence of surface light chains and a high Ki67 index (, and ). Contrastingly, the high S-phase fraction detected was in a range that is typically seen in Burkitt leukaemia. Given the latter, Fluorescence in-situ hybridisation analysis was requested and found to be positive for the translocation t(8;14)(q24;q32) .