A 31-year-old male police officer (and bodybuilder on his free time) visited our emergency department after an open injury of his left great toe. The patient was overweighted (body mass index: 28.7), but in other respects, he appeared to be healthy. He experienced an acute pain while he was playing football ½ h ago. The possible underlying mechanism was impact of the left great toe against the ground and subsequent hyperdorsiflexion of the distal phalanx. In his clinical examination, he appeared to have an open dislocation of the great toe’s IP joint. The distal phalanx was dislocated plantarly, whereas the proximal phalanx was protruding out the dorsal skin of the toe ( and ).
The patient underwent standard radiographic control (anteroposterior and lateral X-rays), which confirmed our clinical diagnosis .
An oral explanation of the proposed surgical intervention and its possible risks was given to the patient and an informed consent was obtained. Within 1 h after his arrival in the emergency room, the patient underwent an open exploration of the injury through his wound. The operation was carried out under local anesthesia on ambulatory basis. We performed a slight expansion (Z shaped) of the incision for better visualization and meticulous purification of the anatomic structures. The dorsal IP joint capsule was ruptured, whereas the hallucis longus tendon was intact and medially dislocated.
After careful high-pressure lavage, and use of local antiseptics and antibiotics, an open reduction was performed and the tendon was repositioned properly over the joint axis. Free range of motion (RoM) without any mechanical blocking was obtained. The capsule was closed with absorbable sutures (Vicryl 2-0) and the skin with typical non-absorbable sutures (Prolene 3-0) ( and ).
The IP joint was evaluated after the closure and was found to be stable. Immediate post-operative X-rays confirmed the successful reduction of the joint, but they also revealed a non-displaced, minor linear fracture of the proximal phalanx . To avoid post-operative infection, antibiotics (ciprofloxacin and clindamycin) were provided intravenously for the first 3 days and then per os for 5 more days.
The patient was followed up at the outpatient clinic at 3 weeks, 6 weeks, and 6 months postoperatively with serial radiographs to ensure enlocation of the IP joint and to monitor possible complications. An aluminum zimmer-type splint of the 1st ray was utilized for 3 weeks, while the two first toes were bandaged together during the 4th post-operative week. Gradual mobilization was deployed after the 1st month. As a result, the patient gained full RoM 6 weeks after injury and remained with that RoM and free of pain till his follow-up end point.