A 59-year old male had high fever around 38–40℃ for more than 10 days. In local hospital, the hematological parameters were as follows, WBC 3.88 × 109/L, NEU 85.3%, Hb 77 g/L, PLT 157 × 109/L, CRP 92.05 mg/L. He was treated with cefoperazone/sulbactam sodium, imipenem/cilastatin sodium and linezolid for 5 days. However, his symptoms were not relieved. He had a history of WM for more than 1 year, and received 6 courses of Bendamostine plus Rituximab regimen.
Then he came to our hospital, and the hematological parameters here were as follows, WBC 4.3 × 109/L, NEU 80.7%, Hb 86 g/L, PLT 221 × 109/L, CRP 57.4 mg/L, PCT 0.25ng/mL, IgA 19 mg/dl, IgG 258 mg/dl, IgM 1673 mg/dl. The result of blood culture was negative. No RNA of influenza A and B, parainfluenza I, II and III, and respiratory syncytial virus was detected in sputum. No DNA of respiratory adenovirus and mycoplasma pneumoniae was detected in sputum.
Although no pathogen was found in blood and sputum, and he had no symptoms of frequency and urgency of micturition, we noticed that the urine routine test showed WBC 843/µl and bacteria 155.8/µl. We then performed the urine culture test and the ultrasound examination of bladder. The result of the urine culture was negative. The ultrasound examination showed the thickening of the anterior wall of the bladder, with a range of about 4.2 × 1.4 cm. The thicken wall partially protruded outside the bladder, with a range of about 1.5 × 1.1 cm. To assess the progress of WM and the lesions in the bladder, we performed 18F-FDG-PET/CT. Figure A showed the frontal image of bladder, and there was a large accumulation of FDG. The SUVmax was up to 36.1 in the anterior wall . In addition, the left anterior wall and the left posterior wall of the bladder were slightly thickened. The SUVmax was 11.5 . The red arrows in Fig. show the FDG accumulation sites. With a suspicion of malignancy, histopathological examination was performed after cystoscopy. The white arrow in Fig. B shows the biopsy site. The result turned out to be the infiltration of inflammatory cell . Since the expression of CD20, CD19, Kappa and Lambda were negative, we believed there were no WM cells (Supplementary Fig. 1A). Moreover, we used shotgun metagenomics for metagenomic sequencing. The bioinformatics pipeline is showed in Fig. B, and the results of blood and urinary both showed the Mycoplasma hominis infection . After using tigecycline and piperacillin/tazobactam sodium, his temperature was finally under control.
One year later, he came to our hospital for recheck. The ultrasound examination showed no thickening of the anterior wall of the bladder. The cystoscopy showed that some mucous membranes were rough, but no new organism was found. The metagenomic sequencing of urinary showed no Mycoplasma hominis infection .