A 50-year-old Chinese man was referred to our hospital due to abdominal discomfort for approximately 2 mo.
Approximately 1 mo previously, this patient was admitted to a local hospital due to elevated blood amylase. He denied jaundice, vomiting, and gastrointestinal bleeding. He was diagnosed with acute pancreatitis, but CT revealed an enlarged pancreatic head and suspected liver metastases. Thus, he was referred to our hospital for further management.
The patient had no remarkable medical history.
This patient had a 30-year smoking history (half a pack per day) and has not quit smoking. He denied any family history of cancer.
After admission, the patient’s physical examination revealed no abnormality.
Blood analysis revealed elevated CA19-9 [106 U/mL (0-27 U/mL)], amylase [450 U/L (0-110 U/L)], and lipase [3795 U/L (0-300 U/L)]. Alpha-fetoprotein was within normal limits.
After admission, PET/CT detected increased soft tissues with elevated metabolic activity in the pancreatic head and multiple liver nodules with increased metabolic activity , and therefore the initial diagnosis was primary pancreatic cancer with multiple liver metastases.
EUS confirmed an enlarged hypoechoic pancreatic head and multiple hypoechoic liver masses . A linear Pentax echoendoscope (Hoya Co., Tokyo, Japan) and color Doppler flow imaging were employed to determine the puncture site. No malignant cells were detected in the fluid inside the peripancreatic cystic lesion extracted by EUS-FNA. EUS-FNA biopsy was performed with two 19-gauge needles (Boston Scientific Co., Natick, United States). EUS-guided liver aspiration unexpectedly revealed signet-ring cells with a high Ki-67 positive rate (20%), while EUS-guided pancreatic aspiration with another aspiration needle detected pancreatic neuroendocrine cells with a relatively low Ki-67 positive rate (1%). Three senior pathologists at our medical university confirmed that the considerable differences in immunohistochemical results indicated that the pancreatic mass and multiple liver nodules were not metastatic lesions from the other.
The gastric mucosa punctured by the EUS-guided liver aspiration needle was further inspected by magnifying endoscopy. No abnormal microsurface or microvessel was identified, and no malignant cells were found in deep excavation biopsies. The possibility of gastric signet-ring cell carcinoma was excluded. The patient’s colonoscopy was negative.