On April 29, 2020, a 51-year-old man presented to the Emergency Room (ER) with palpitations and chest pain. He was in a rehabilitation center after being discharged five days earlier from the hospital, where he had been hospitalized for COVID-19 pneumonia, complicated by right PE. He was initially treated with unfractionated heparin (UFH) and warfarin, and, once improved and hemodynamically stable, warfarin was replaced with dabigatran 150 mg twice a day. After three consecutive negative COVID-19 swabs, the patient was discharged on curative regimen of DOAC. In addition to dabigatran, his therapy included betablockers, corticosteroids, levothyroxine, benzodiazepines.
Examination findings at that ER admission were as follows: blood pressure (BP) 90/60 mmHg, heart rate 97 beats/min, respiratory rate 20 breaths/min, temperature 37.1 °C, normal oxygen saturation (SaO2) on room air. On physical examination, he had an irregularly irregular heart rate, normally transmitted vesicular murmur, no findings suggestive for heart failure (HF). The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed atrial fibrillation, and intravenous amiodarone bolus plus infusion was started. Suddenly, he started to complain shortness of breath. He was found to be in respiratory distress, with hypotension (BP 85/55 mmHg) and SaO2 85%. Oxygen 4 l/min was placed and, due to persistent desaturation, non-rebreather oxygen mask (15 l/min) was started.
Laboratory investigation revealed an increase of high-sensitive troponin (90 ng/L, normal range < 54 ng/L), an elevated D-Dimer (3499 ng/ml), an increase of the white blood cell count (26,000), and a normal C-reactive protein (0.2 mg/L). Chest x-ray showed bilateral interstitial infiltrates with accentuation of the vascular plot, in the absence of pleural effusion . Arterial blood gas at the time of the onset of dyspnea showed PH 7.38, PaCO2 22 mmHg, PaO2 48 mmHg, and bicarbonate 20 mmol/L. A reservoir 15 l/min was placed. On 70% FiO2, arterial blood gas showed PH 7.44, PaCO2 37.8 mmHg, PaO2 151 mmHg, and bicarbonate 16 mmol/L. An ECG showed a tachycardia, with a new onset right bundle branch block, S1, and Q3. At the transthoracic echocardiography, right-sided chambers were severely dilated. Due to the sudden clinical deterioration, thrombolysis with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) was immediately performed in the suspicion of recurrent PE. The patient had a rapid beneficial effect with restoration of stable hemodynamic parameters.
After infusion of tPA, a computed tomography angiogram was performed, which documented marked defect of endoluminal filling of the right and left pulmonary artery with extension to their main branches referable to acute PE, more extensive than the previous one . The patient was than admitted to the Intensive Care Unit and UFH was started intravenously. During the in-hospital stay, the patient remained hemodynamically stable, in sinus rhythm, and apyretic. His COVID19 swab test resulted negative. To exclude venous thromboembolism (VTE), a venous echo-Doppler ultrasound was performed, which resulted negative. After collegial discussion, it was decided to continue for one month with LMWH and then, if there will be more clearer data on the matter, to start warfarin.