A 33-year-old woman fell from the third floor to attempt suicide three months before and received a decompressive craniectomy. She came to our department in a comatose state, and her vital signs were unstable.
After the patient was wounded, she lost consciousness immediately and was sent to the emergency room of a nearby hospital. By the time came to that hospital, she was in deep coma and the Glascow score (GCS) was 3, her bilateral mydriasis was fixed, the light reflex was disappeared .She was diagnosed as severe open craniocerebral injury, traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage and occipital fracture. The patient received a decompressive craniectomy several hours after being wounded. She was transfer to intensive care unit (ICU) after surgery, remained in deep coma and GCS was 3. Several days after the operation, the intracranial pressure increased significantly, and operative incision disunion occurred due to the high pressure. Brain tissue flowed from the incision, and intracranial infection occurred. The doctors cleaned infectious brain tissue gradually from the incision leakage. The patient had diabetes insipidus treated with continuous intravenous use of antidiuretic hormone. And vasopressor was needed to maintain normal blood pressure. Three months after the trauma, she was transferred to our hospital to receive further treatment. The transfer path was from the city of Zhengzhou to Beijing with a distance of over 700 km by highway, and the transport vehicle was an ambulance equipped with a ventilator and microbump.
She was healthy before being injured.
She and her family has no specific history.
Her body temperature was 36.5 °C, and her pulse was 79 beats/min. She had no spontaneous breathing, and the ventilator-controlled breath rate was 18 breaths/min through a tracheostomy cannula. Her blood pressure was maintained at 125/75 mmHg by continuous bumping with 10 µg/kg/min dopamine. The oxygen saturation monitoring was 100%. She was in deep coma, and the GCS was 3 (E1V1M1). She was mydriasis and had no pupillary light reflex. The right temporal surgical incision was not healed and had a cranial defect of 10 cm × 10 cm. There was a small amount of purulent secretion exuded from the incision surface. The intracranial cavity was observed from the skull defect, and the brain tissue was largely lost. In addition, no brain tissue was observed by visual inspection .
Her liver and kidney functions were basically normal with alanine aminotransferase, total bilirubin, and creatinine levels of 180 U/L, 13.8 µmol/L, and 54 µmol/L, respectively. Her blood sodium, potassium, calcium, and glucose levels were 132.5 mmol/L, 3.34 mmol/L, 2.13 mmol/L, and 11.9 mmol/L, respectively.
The ECG report was normal with a heart rate of 79 beats/min and a sinus rhythm .
Cranial CT indicated postoperative changes of the right craniectomy. A large amount of gas was visualized in the intracranial and paranasal sinuses, and only a small amount of brain tissue density shadow was compressed in the cerebellum and brainstem. Moreover, the sulcus, fissure, cistern, ventricle, inferior mourning, and midline structures were not shown .