A 38-year-old male presented to our outpatient department with a 7-month history of
left limbs weakness. He had no history of smoking, hypertension, diabetes, or any
other risk factors for cerebrovascular diseases. Physical examination upon admission
revealed paralysis of the left limbs and slight paralysis of the face. Babinski and
Chaddock signs on the left side were positive, whereas other nervous system
examination results were negative. Brain CT showed multiple high-density shadows,
which indicated a tendency for calcification . For further diagnosis, MRI was
performed, and more lesions were found with MRI compared with CT. The brain lesions
were partly hypo-intense on T1-weighted imaging, whereas they were significantly
more intense on T2-weighted imaging. The other lesions were hyper-intense in the
center and surrounded by a hypo-intense rim on T1/T2-weighted imaging. SWI displayed
more hypo-intense lesions, indicating hemorrhage . Investigation of the family
history showed that his relatives also suffered from physical disorders, albeit to
different degrees. His mother suffered from progressive limb paralysis, and had been
bedridden for a long time. Her brain MRI showed leukoaraiosis and multiple
hypo-intense lesions on T2/T1 and diffusion weighted imaging (DWI), indicating
hemorrhage. His older brother had suffered from headache for several years without
any symptoms of limb paralysis. His younger brother was asymptomatic. Although his
brothers had different symptoms, we noted similar findings on the brain CT and MRI scans. All
observations indicated that the patient probably had a genetic disease.
To examine the genetic cause of the disease, after obtaining written informed
consent from the family members, DNA sequencing was performed. Genomic DNAs were
extracted from the peripheral venous blood of all the family members using a
blood DNA extraction Kit (CWE9600). DNA was prepared in the laboratory using a
KAPA Library Preparation Kit; sequencing was then performed using Illumina
NovaSeq. Sequence analysis of the CCM1, CCM2, and
CCM3 genes identified a novel heterozygous deletion in the
CCM3 gene (c.165delT, p.N55fs) . The 165th nucleotide in the
coding region of the CCM3 gene had a heterozygous deletion,
which resulted in a frameshift mutation leading to prematurely terminated
translation of the protein. The same mutation in the CCM3 gene
was found in the proband’s brothers and mother, indicating that the mutation is
associated with the disease in the family, and has not been reported before.
So far, no medical therapy has been proven to be useful for CCM, especially for
small multiple lesions. Symptomatic treatment, such as controlling blood
pressure and relieving headache, is the treatment of choice for the proband and
his relatives at present.