A 65-year-old Japanese man presented with increasing edema of the lower extremities, which he noted for about one year. In a routine medical check-up two years previously, no proteinuria was identified. He had no remarkable family history, and had a medical history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia which were treated with olmesartan medoxomil, amlodipine, and pravastatin sodium. His blood pressure control was good. Two weeks before presentation, he had cerebral infarction. Although the infarction was mild, general edema was exacerbated and pleural effusion appeared. Therefore, he was transported to our hospital.
On admission, his blood pressure was 162/92 mmHg and pulse rate was regular at 80 beats/min. Marked edema of the lower extremities, articular disorder and a positive Barré’s sign, a diagnostic sign indicating a disease of the pyramidal tracts, were noted on physical examination. Urinalysis showed proteinuria of 14.3 g/day and 23.8 red blood cells/high-power field with hyaline casts. Serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, total protein and albumin levels were 138 mmol/dL, 7.4 mmol/L, 43 g/L and, 19 g/L, respectively. Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), which was calculated by Japanese equation for eGFR , was 36.0 ml/min/1.73 m2. Severe hypokalemia (2.43 mmol/L) was observed under the treatment with furosemide (10 mg/day) and spironolactone (50 mg/day), while the urinary potassium level was 17.6 mmol/L. Arterial gas analysis showed metabolic alkalosis (pH, 7.54; pO2, 64 mmHg; pCo2, 41 mmHg; and HCO3−, 35.1 mmol/L). Despite both hypoalbuminemia and the use of two diuretics, the plasma renin activity (PRA) and plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC) were suppressed to undetectable levels . Urine cortisol was slightly increased, but adrenocorticotropic hormone, plasma cortisol and plasma 11-deoxycorticosterone levels were within the normal ranges .
A renal biopsy showed findings of diffuse thickening of the glomerular capillary walls with spikes and moth-eaten appearance but not mesangial or endocapillary proliferative changes . On immunofluorescence examination, marked IgG granular deposits were observed along the capillary walls . On electron microscopy, numerous subepithelial dense deposits were found. These deposits were closely approximated with intervening spikes or encircled and incorporated into the capillary walls by spikes . The interstitium was edematous and increased slightly. Foamy changes of paroxysmal tubules were patchy, but no remarkable changes of the distal tubules were noted. These finding were comparable to stage II to III MN.
The patient was first treated with oral prednisolone (30 mg/day) for MN, and then, triamterene (50 mg/day) was added after considering a diagnosis of Liddle’s-like syndrome. The dose of triamterene was increased to 100 mg/day 5 days after the start of administration. Although proteinuria did not decreased, blood pressure, serum potassium levels, and edema were remarkably improved. In parallel with these treatments, screening examinations for cancer as a possible cause of MN were conducted, and advanced gastric cancer (type V) was found. Although proteinuria of over 5 g/day was still observed, prednisolone was quickly tapered to 10 mg/day, and total gastrectomy was performed. Two weeks after the gastrectomy, proteinuria was decreased to approximately 2 g/day. As the patient began to display hypotension (systolic blood pressure < 100 mmHg), triamterene was discontinued. After the cessation of triamterene, neither hypotension nor hypokalemia was observed. Prednisolone at 10 mg/day was continuously administered. Proteinuria continued to decrease gradually and disappeared 8 months after the operation. Finally, nephrotic syndrome showed complete remission, and laboratory data showed normal serum levels, PRA, and PAC , and no metabolic alkalosis even without triamterene treatment.
After obtaining informed consent, genetic mutations of the β and γ subunits of ENaC were assessed using a direct sequence approach as previously described . However, no genetic mutation was detected in either of the subunits.