This study describes a 57-year-old man who presented with abdominal pain for two weeks. This was the sequence of events in the hospital . Physical examination revealed a massive mass measuring approximately 10cm×10cm in the left upper abdomen. The mass exhibited a hardened texture and limited mobility. Laboratory tests revealed a gradual increase in NLR, PLR, and CRP over time, accompanied by a gradual decrease in Alb. This was the trend of these indicators over time . Surprisingly, the patient did not exhibit any other discomfort. CT imaging revealed a massive tumor near the splenic hilum in the greater curvature of the stomach (162.9×113.2×217.7 mm³), exerting pressure on nearby vessels and organs. Meanwhile, the tumor invaded both the splenic hilar vessels and surrounding lymph nodes. Ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy confirmed it is a mesenchymal spindle cell tumor, GIST . Due to the extensive volume and local invasion, neoadjuvant chemotherapy was initially considered.
After 6 months of IM 400 mg/day, tumor volume was reduced by 81.68% (93.8×70.2×111.7 mm³) compared to previous CT results, calculated using the clinical volume formula v = 1/2abc . Meanwhile, tumor heterogeneity was markedly altered . Laparoscopic resection was subsequently performed. Postoperative pathological examination confirmed a spindle cell tumor of mesenchymal origin, GIST. The mitosis was 6/50 high power field . According to the NIH classification , Modified NIH classification , AFIP classification , Glasgow Prognostic Score , it is classified as a high-risk GIST. Immunohistochemical revealed CKP(-); Vimentin(+); Desmin(-); SMA(+); CD34(+); CD117(+); DOG-1(+); S-100(-); SDHB(+); Ki-67(index:20%) . No C-kit 9/11/13/17 and PDGPRA 12/18 mutations were detected by the genetic test. The patient recovered well and was discharged on the 6th day after surgery, with continued oral IM (400 mg/d) after discharge. No recurrence was observed during follow-up until the publication of this report. The patient was compliant and well tolerated throughout the course of treatment with no adverse events. The upcoming article will refer to the CARE report list for further discussion.