The proband marked III-7 , a 45-year-old pre-menopausal woman and her elder sister, a 51-year-old premenopausal woman marked III-6 , presented with abnormal vaginal bleeding. Pathological examination revealed endometrioid adenocarcinoma and imaging examination revealed that the disease was confined to the endometrial cavity. They underwent staging operations including total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, pelvic/paraaortic lymph node dissection, and washing cytology. Her niece marked IV-5 , a 28-year-old woman, was diagnosed with endometrial carcinoma and received 500 mg medroxyprogesterone acetate daily for 3 months to preserve fertility. However, the disease progressed and the aforementioned staging operations were performed for the niece. Histological examination revealed carcinosarcoma with lymph node metastasis. She received chemoradiation therapy with cisplatin-ifosfamide. All three women were healthy without evidence of relapse for over 4 years.
Their family history revealed a typical clustering of cancer. Five first- and second-degree relatives had also died of colon, pancreatic, or uterine cancer and four other relatives had also developed stomach, colon, or uterine cancer . Ten of her relatives were diagnosed with Lynch syndrome-associated cancers across four generations. Therefore, this family meets the Amsterdam II criteria.
Immunohistochemical analysis of MMR protein was performed in biopsy specimens of patients. MLH1 and PMS2 expression were negative in the proband shown and her niece, indicating the loss of these proteins . Furthermore, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 were deficient in the proband’s elder sister . To identify Lynch syndrome, MLH1 (reference sequence: NM 000249) and MSH2 (reference sequence: NM 000251) variants were evaluated using genomic DNA from peripheral blood of the proband. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification and Sanger sequencing were performed for genetic analysis (Seoul clinical laboratories, ABI veriti for PCR amplification, ABI 3500DX for Sanger sequencing). A c.1367delC variant was detected in MLH1 ; however, no variant was detected in MSH2. We performed genetic analyses for the MLH1 variant among the proband’s relatives and III-2, III-6, IV-5, and IV-11 displayed the same MLH1 variant .