A 52-year-old woman with rheumatoid arthritis, Sjogren’s syndrome, and systemic lupus erythematosus presented to my clinic with severe hallux valgus and deformity of the second toe on the left foot. The patient’s height was 142 cm, and body weight was 47 kg (body mass index, 23.3 kg/m2). The roentgenograph demonstrated an 80° HVA and a 22° IMA. She underwent the surgical treatment described below.
The patient was placed in the supine position, and a thigh tourniquet was applied to the left leg. The leg was placed on the leg holder such that the plantar foot was placed on the operating table. A fluoroscopic monitor and a C-arm were placed on the operating side, and the surgeon stood on the non-operating side . The first metatarsal and proximal phalanx axes were marked with a surgical pen using fluoroscopic guidance.
A 2-cm skin incision with a 60° inclination to the metatarsal axis was made over the medial aspect of the first metatarsal neck, and blunt dissection was performed to expose the metatarsal neck [, ]. The periosteum was then incised and denuded . Wedge osteotomy was performed at the metatarsal neck; the distal cut was perpendicular to the metatarsal shaft, and the base of the wedge was 7-mm wide . A 2-mm K-wire was used to penetrate the medial side of the skin at the level of the first metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint, which was advanced retrogradely and subcutaneously toward the osteotomy site . The metatarsal head was abducted and pushed laterally using the K-wire such that the first ray was as straight as possible . As the reduction of the hallux was insufficient, the end of the proximal fragment of the first metatarsal was resected and shortened by 6 mm , which made the abduction and lateral pushing of the metatarsal head somewhat easier; however, a complete reduction was not accomplished due to the severe deformity . To avoid transfer metatarsalgia, further resection of the first metatarsal was not performed. Keeping the metatarsal head abducted and pushed laterally as much as possible, the K-wire was advanced retrogradely from the metatarsal shaft to the base. The metatarsal head and second metatarsal were fixed using a 1.8-mm K-wire .
A 2-cm skin incision with a 75° inclination to the proximal phalanx axis was made over the medial aspect of the proximal one-third of the proximal phalanx, and blunt dissection was performed to expose the bone [, ]. The periosteum was incised and denuded, and wedge osteotomy was performed at one-third of the proximal phalanx, which was at the same level as the first web space; the base of the wedge was medial and 2-mm wide . A 1.8-mm K-wire was used to penetrate the skin over the lateral hallux, which was subcutaneously advanced retrogradely to the osteotomy site of the proximal phalanx . After adjusting the position of the hallux such that the first ray was approximately straight, the K-wire penetrated the proximal fragment of the phalanx and metatarsal head .
After the two wounds were washed with saline, they were sutured using 5-0 nylon sutures.
The second toe was corrected with closed wedge osteotomy at the proximal phalanx and fixed with a 1.6-mm K-wire. Finally, a postoperative roentgenograph was obtained .
Walking with shoes that restricted forefoot bearing was initiated 1 day after surgery . The K-wires were removed 6 weeks after surgery and subsequently, range of motion exercises and full weight bearing were initiated . Unrestricted activities were permitted 3 months postoperatively. After 4.1 years of follow-up, the HVA and IMA were 16° and 13°, respectively. The patient was highly satisfied with the results.