A 17-year-old female presented with chronic epigastric pain, nausea, intermittent vomiting, and food intolerance for 2 years. Along with the family history, her past medical history was negative for any chronic GIT disease. She was taking proton pump inhibitors, antacids, and prokinetic drugs.
On physical examination, there was no pallor, jaundice, or skin lesions. However, she had mild tenderness in the epigastric region without abdominal distention, organomegaly, or striae. The blood examination results were normal.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (OGD) showed non-significant findings apart from mild antral erosions. Transabdominal ultrasound (U/S) revealed a well-defined, hypoechoic left adrenal cystic lesion measuring 40 × 35 mm. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed an oval-shaped cystic lesion on the left adrenal gland measuring 33 × 26 mm . Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a well-defined T1 hypointense 21 × 22 mm left adrenal cystic lesion . All indications pointed to an adrenal lesion, prompting referral to an endocrinologist for further assessment. Hormonal evaluation, including a dexamethasone suppression test (9.51 nmol/L) and metanephrine (30.7 pg/mL), were all normal.
Considering the investigation results and the benign radiological features of the cyst, conservative treatment was initiated. However, the parents of the patient preferred surgical excision. A laparoscopy through three ports was performed in the right lateral position. The surgeon observed that the cyst did not originate from the left adrenal gland but instead arose from the greater curvature of the stomach . After an intraoperative consultation with a gastrointestinal surgeon, a wedge resection of the cyst was performed. The cyst contained thick, gelatinous, and white-yellowish mucus. Histopathology confirmed a gastric duplication cyst .
The postoperative outcome was satisfactory, and the patient was discharged on the first postoperative day. A follow-up U/S 2 months postoperatively revealed a small collection at the surgical site, managed conservatively.