A 60-year-old woman with past medical history of diabetes mellitus prescribed insulin and metformin developed total vision loss. She was transported to the emergency department (ED) after being discovered at home confused, somnolent, and hypoglycemic, and last seen normal two days prior. The patient reported vomiting, diarrhea, and a recently treated urinary tract infection (UTI). She was never able to provide an exact history, but her sister reported to the ED staff that she had developed a UTI treated with an unknown antibiotic approximately one week prior to the current visit. The patient also reported to her sister diarrhea and weakness for one day prior to arrival to ED. Per emergency medical services (EMS), her initial blood glucose was 42 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (reference range: 70–100 mg/dL) and improved after IV administration of 25 grams of glucose in a 50-cubic centimeter prefilled syringe (50% dextrose). No suspicion of surreptitious ingestion of medications was described by either EMS or family.
In the ED the patient’s vital signs were as follows: temperature 31.1°C (88°F); heart rate 58 beats per minute; respiratory rate 22 breaths per minute; blood pressure 90/43 millimeters mercury; and oxygen saturation 100% on room air. On physical examination, she was awake but ill-appearing and confused, demonstrating neither any vision perception nor blink reflex. Notable laboratory results are listed in the . Rewarming measures, IV fluids, and IV infusions of sodium bicarbonate, vasopressors (norepinephrine and vasopressin), folic acid, thiamine, 4-methylpyrazole, and empiric antibiotics (vancomycin and cefepime) were all administered. The patient received 4-methylpyrazole due to initial diagnostic uncertainty and significantly low bicarbonate concentration; it was discontinued when toxic alcohol ingestion was eliminated. The patient was moved to an intensive care unit (ICU) at a tertiary care referral center
In the ICU the patient received continuous renal replacement therapy due to anuria. Continuous renal replacement therapy was initiated instead of hemodialysis due to persistent hypotension despite multiple vasopressors. She also was treated with IV sodium bicarbonate given her profound and persistent acidemia. Her vision improved, and she was able to track movement and perform extraocular movements. Eventually she had total resolution of her visual deficits. However, she developed pulmonary edema requiring intubation and, despite some improvement in acidemia and kidney function , she required maximal vasopressor support including IV infusions of epinephrine, norepinephrine, vasopressin, angiotensin, methylene blue, and steroids.
Admission and subsequent daily serum metformin concentrations measured 57 micrograms per milliliter (μg/mL), 42 μg/mL, and 13 μg/mL (therapeutic 1–2 μg/mL; MALA typically associated with more than 5 μg/mL). Serum liquid chromatography and mass spectroscopy toxicology screen did not include metformin concentrations and detected no other xenobiotics. Blood cultures, viral panels, chest radiograph, and chest, abdomen and pelvis computed tomography were unrevealing other than “minimal enterocolitis.” The patient unfortunately expired on hospital day three.