A 55-year-old woman presented with neck pain for many years since a motor vehicle accident twenty-one years ago. Additionally, patient presented with paresthesia and pain in the right arm with a burning sensation near the shoulder girdle. Intermittent numbness in the toes and bilaterally hands was also reported.
Physical examination reports revealed restricted range of motion of the neck when turning the body to the left. Long tract signs were positive for Babinski and Hoffman signs with hyperreflexia in the lower extremities and the right arm. Weakness was presented in the right wrist extensor and the right hip flexor.
A magnetic-resonance-imaging scan showed deformity of the cervical spine with kyphotic angulation and spinal cord compression. At C5-C6, there was grade 1 retrolisthesis present and at C3-4 there is grade 1 anterolisthesis. Severe canal stenosis with cord compression and severe bilateral foraminal stenosis with abnormal signal in the spinal cord at C5-C6 and C4-C5, suggest myelomalacia. At C6-C7, there was right-sided disc herniation causing cord compression on the right side.
Surgical intervention included cervical laminectomy from C3 to C7 with lateral mass fusion from C3 to C7. Neurophysiological monitoring (SSEP and EMG) was stable throughout the duration of the surgical procedure, satisfactory signal response was also obtained from all four extremities before and during the surgery. No complications developed during surgery and in the recovery room the patient was conscious and neurologically unchanged as preoperative exam.
Twenty-four hours following the surgical procedure, the patient presented with significant pain in the left para-cervical and shoulder area going into the arm. There was numbness in the entire arm in no particular dermatome. The next day she had more pain in the left arm with newly developed weakness in the deltoid, biceps, triceps, wrist extensor, grip and intrinsic muscles. The patient had difficulty using the arm both proximally and distally. An MRI was conducted post-operatively which shows the well decompressed cervical spine . An MRI scan of the brain was also conducted which showed negative findings. Post-operative MRI scan of the brachial plexus revealed edema within the three trunks of the brachial plexus . The diagnosis of acute brachial plexus neuritis was thus made, based on the pattern, chronology and findings of the patient’s symptoms and on the MRI scan of the brachial plexus. Physical and occupational therapy was recommended for the left arm. During a two-week follow-up postoperative visit the patient presented increased strength in the left arm as an indication of noteworthy progress. In a later two-month follow-up visit, the symptoms improved and strength in the left arm also improved by 80%. The patient had complaints of residual pain within the posterior neck region and upper trapezius area. In a final six-month follow-up visit, the patient presented occasional neck pain, but very good range of motion of the neck. The strength and numbness in the left arm had recovered more, however there was still residual numbness in the thumb, index and the middle finger on the left hand. The patient demonstrated normal coordination and motor strength. Bilateral arm strength was also significantly improved with a 5/5 rate of strength. After six-months of efficient physical therapy and treatment, the patient has presented significant postoperative improvement and has displayed complete recovery from the brachial neuritis.