A 27-year-old Mongolian man from the central hilly region of Nepal presented with a 10-day history of pain in his left upper abdomen. Pain was acute in onset, crampy, nonradiating, and increasing in severity for the previous 3 days. He had had three episodes of vomiting during the last 2 days with no history of altered bowel habit or stool color. A systemic review was normal. He did not have significant past medical, surgical, or family history. Apparently, he had been managed at a local hospital in his home district with a diagnosis of acute peptic ulcer disease (APD) that did not relieve his symptoms, and he went to a teaching hospital in the capital. Again reassured it was APD and advised to follow up on an outpatient basis, he made frequent visits with similar complaints. Our patient’s symptoms increased in severity and he presented in the emergency department of the same hospital where investigations were carried out with normal hematological, biochemical, ultrasonography (USG), and upper gastrointestinal (UGI) endoscopy findings. With diagnostic uncertainty, an abdominal and pelvic CECT scan was done which revealed: complete occlusion of the superior mesenteric vein and its tributaries due to acute thrombus extending into the main portal vein narrowing its lumen; complete occlusion of the left portal vein and anterior division of the right portal vein without significant collaterals around its tributaries; a thickened edematous wall of 20 cm mid-jejunum , and ischemic changes to liver segments VII and VI. With the diagnosis of acute mesenteric ischemia secondary to portomesenteric vein thrombosis, our patient was referred to our hospital and we admitted him into the surgical intensive care unit for further management.
At admission, our patient was agitated but his vital signs were stable. His abdomen was soft with mild tenderness on the left hypochondrium and with normal bowel sounds. Other systemic examinations were normal. Routine investigations showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 11,290/mm3 (N70), and a hemoglobin (Hb) level of 14.7 gm/dL, His platelet count was 366,000/mm3, and prothrombin time/international normalized ratio (PT/INR) was 16 sec/1.33. His liver function test, renal function test, and amylase level results were normal. Arterial blood gas analysis showed a lactate acid level of 0.5 mmol/L (ref, 0.7–2.5 mmol/L). Abdominal/pelvic X-rays showed no dilated bowel loops and no features of obstruction or pneumoperitoneum.
Owing to the young age of our patient, the unusual location, and absence of acquired risk factors of venous thrombosis, investigations to find possible prothrombotic disease were started. Clot-based coagulometer results showed plasma protein S activity of 17 s (ref. 77–143) and protein C activity of 114 s (ref. 67–195), whereas a chromogenic assay showed plasma antithrombin III activity of 75 s (ref. 70–122). A final diagnosis of acute mesenteric ischemia following acute superior mesenteric and portal vein thrombosis due to protein S deficiency was made.
On admission, we immediately started anticoagulation therapy with intravenous infusion of unfractioned heparin (UFH) monitored 6 hourly with activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT). The therapeutic target range of 60–80 s of aPTT was achieved by the second day. We kept our patient on nil by mouth, prophylactic intravenous antibiotics, regular monitoring of his vital signs and routine investigations. Plasma lactate level and clinical features were used as markers for progression to extensive bowel ischemia and bowel infarction, which were maintained within normal limits. During the course of treatment, our patient developed episodes of malena for 4 days. Our patient’s symptoms gradually improved, he started tolerating an oral diet and developed no other significant issues. Warfarin bridging with heparin for 2 days with a target INR of 2–3 was done. We discharged our patient after 10 days with warfarin 5 mg taken orally twice daily, advised him to avoid exertion, any physical trauma, and strenuous work, and to follow up with a PT/INR report. After 2 weeks and subsequent 5-monthly follow-ups, our patient was comfortable, had normal bowel function, and maintained an INR of 2–3. We advised him on lifelong anticoagulation therapy with warfarin and regular PT/INR monitoring.