A 72-year-old male patient was definitively diagnosed with MDS with excess blasts-1 (MDS-EB-1) based on an increase in the percentages of myeloblasts and cluster of differentiation (CD)34+ hematopoietic progenitors and the identification of myeloid neoplasm-associated somatic mutations in bone marrow samples. The patient was treated with hypomethylation therapy and was able to maintain a steady disease state for 2 years. In the treatment process, the advanced MDS patient experienced an episode of progressive pancytopenia and bone marrow aplasia. During the aplastic crisis, the bone marrow was infiltrated with sparsely distributed atypical lymphocytes. Surprisingly, the leukemic cells disappeared. Immunological analysis revealed that the atypical lymphocytes expressed a high frequency of CD3, CD5, CD8, CD16, CD56 and CD57, suggesting the activation of autoimmune cytotoxic T-lymphocytes and natural killer (NK)/NKT cells that suppressed both normal and leukemic hematopoiesis. Elevated serum levels of inflammatory cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-6, interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), confirmed the deranged type I immune responses. This morphological and immunological signature led to the diagnosis of severe aplastic anemia secondary to large granule lymphocyte leukemia. Disseminated tuberculosis was suspected upon radiological examinations in the search for an inflammatory niche. Antituberculosis treatment led to reversion of the aplastic crisis, disappearance of the atypical lymphocytes, increased marrow cellularity and 2 mo of hematological remission, providing strong evidence that disseminated tuberculosis was responsible for the development of the aplastic crisis, the regression of leukemic cells and the activation of CD56+ atypical lymphocytes. Reinstitution of hypomethylation therapy in the following 19 mo allowed the patient to maintain a steady disease state. However, the patient transformed the disease phenotype into acute myeloid leukemia and eventually died of disease progression and an overwhelming infectious episode.