On December 30, 2014, a 51-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital with complaints of intermittent painless gross hematuria for the preceding week. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed wall thickening in the left ureter's upper segment, while a CT urography revealed a left renal pelvis tumor. A successful laparoscopic radical resection of the left renal pelvis tumor was subsequently performed at Shanghai Zhongshan Hospital in January 2015. The pathological findings after the surgery revealed a low-grade papillary urothelial carcinoma of the renal pelvis. The final pathological tumor stage was pT1N0M0. After surgery, this patient received 6 cycles of intravenous chemotherapy with gemcitabine and carboplatin, as well as bladder infusion therapy with gemcitabine. On December 18, 2017, the patient was admitted once again to our hospital with a one-day history of painless gross hematuria. A CT scan showed the presence of a space-occupying lesion on the posterior wall of bladder. Cystoscopic examination revealed multiple tumors in the bladder and right cutaneous ureterostomy was performed under general anesthesia on December 29, 2017. The postoperative pathological findings disclosed multifocal papillary urothelial carcinoma of the bladder (maximum size 3.7 cm × 2.6 cm). The bladder cancer was considered a metastasis of the renal pelvis cancer after surgery. The pathological tumor stage was pT1N0M1. The patient refused chemotherapy after surgery. After another six years, the patient returned on February 28, 2023, complaining of periumbilical pain that had lasted six days. This time, a CT scan of the abdomen showed a tumor in the ascending colon, but a subsequent colonoscopy examination indicated a tumor in the descending colon. On March 12, 2023, a subtotal colectomy and an ileosigmoidal anastomosis were carried out under general anesthesia. Postoperative pathological findings revealed that all three tumors were adenocarcinomas. The final pathological tumor stage was pT3N0M0. The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery and was discharged without complications.