A 73-year-old man was found to have early-stage sigmoid colon cancer by colonoscopy during a medical examination, and endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) was performed. The lesion was a 7-mm-sized sessile polyp, and the pathological diagnosis was well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, pT1 (submucosal invasion of 400 μm), with no lymphovascular invasion, low budding grade, and negative horizontal and vertical margins. Therefore, the patient was observed without postoperative treatment. One year later, a computed tomography (CT) scan showed multiple liver metastases. After five courses of preoperative chemotherapy with folinic acid, 5-fluorouracil and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) and panitumumab, liver metastases were reduced. The patient underwent extended right hepatic lobectomy. The pathological finding was well-to-moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, and immunohistochemistry findings were consistent with liver metastases from sigmoid colon cancer. Postoperatively, the patient received five courses adjuvant chemotherapy with FOLFOX. Although the patient had been recurrence-free for 5 years after liver resection, a CT scan revealed a nodular lesion in the sigmoid mesentery. Positron emission tomography (PET) showed abnormal accumulation in the same lesion. Therefore, the mesenteric nodules diagnosed as lymph metastasis and recurrence of sigmoid colon cancer and performed laparoscopic sigmoid colon resection with lymph node dissection. The pathological findings showed that the recurrent lesion in the mesentery formed a nodular infiltrate with venous, lymphatic, and neural invasion, but lymph node structures were not found, and it was assumed to be metastasis or recurrence due to lymphovascular invasion. The pathologic specimen of the sigmoid colon had no neoplastic lesions, which are considered to be a local recurrence on the mucosal surface. After sigmoid colectomy, adjuvant chemotherapy with CapeOX was conducted, and the patient has been recurrence-free for 13 months at present.