We present a case report of a 78-year-old white man with alcoholic cirrhosis and multifocal HCC with ascites and portosystemic encephalopathy. In his past history (2 years before) he had a wedge resection of segment II for HCC (G2). Since then he was followed-up annually, including a computed tomography (CT) scan, by our medical department. He was not considered for LT due his advanced age. He presented to our emergency room for ascitic decompensation with abdominal tension and lower limb edema. During his recovery, his hematocrit suddenly dropped (hemoglobin from 9.3 g/L to 6.7 g/L in 3 hours); an abdominal CT scan showed multiple and bilateral foci of HCC with evidence of acute bleeding from one of them . His Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score was 19; his Child–Pugh score was C11; total bilirubin was 8 mg/dl and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) 604 ug/L. He was hemodynamically unstable and compromised so he was urgently transferred to our operating room (OR) for hemorrhagic shock. A middle line laparotomy was performed and a massive hemoperitoneum was found (4 L). His liver was cirrhotic with recanalization of umbilical vein and collateral vessels. His liver was completely subverted by a tumor and there was bleeding from two lacerations on segments II and IV, which was uncontrollable with conventional hemostatic techniques (argon beam, oxidized regenerated cellulose, and fibrin glue). Due to his condition, his poor liver function reserve, and the multifocal tumor it was decided to carry out the coagulation of the multiple vascular afferents of each single mass by RFA. Multiple RFA cycles were performed circumferentially on both nodules for a total of 40 minutes. Hemostasis was achieved; the RFA controlled the bleeding from our patient’s ruptured HCC . Operation time was 90 minutes. During the operation he needed transfusions of three packed red blood cells (PRBC) transfusions and drug support with noradrenaline 0.4 gamma/Kg/minute and dopamine 2 gamma/kg/minute. He was transferred to our intensive care unit (ICU) for postoperative monitoring. On postoperative day (POD) 2 he was discharged and reassigned to our medical floor, without vasopressor therapy. His peak postoperative transaminase levels were aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 659 UI/L and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 260 UI/L but he did not develop liver failure. The main problem was the hepatorenal syndrome that occurred on POD9 due to the progression of his underlying liver disease; he did not need renal replacement therapy. He was discharged from our medical department; his general condition was satisfactory. He was followed-up in our clinic by our palliative care team, but unfortunately he died 2 months later due to a progression of his disease.