A 36-year-old female with a history of untreated hypertension presented to the emergency department with severe headache and a decreased level of consciousness. Computed tomography (CT) of the head demonstrated a large cerebellar parenchymal hemorrhage [Figure , ], but CT angiogram was negative for a vascular malformation, aneurysm, or venous sinus thrombosis. A right frontal EVD was inserted, and the patient underwent suboccipital decompression and clot evacuation, with clinical improvement. Subsequent vascular imaging, including magnetic resonance (MR) and digital subtraction angiography was negative for pathology [Figure –]. A thorough hematological workup was also negative. As such, this was considered a hypertensive hemorrhage.
Five weeks following admission, the development of communicating hydrocephalus required the insertion of a VP shunt [Figure , ]. Following burr hole placement, the dura was coagulated and monopolar cautery along a forceps was used to puncture the dura and cauterize the pia. After a single pass, good CSF egress was observed, and the ventricular catheter was gently advanced to approximately 10 cm. The surgery was well tolerated and the hydrocephalus and level of consciousness improved.
On day 15 following VP shunt insertion, the patient developed a dilated and fixed right pupil. An emergent CT scan demonstrated acute intraparenchymal hemorrhage into the right parietal lobe along the ventriculostomy tract with extensive intraventricular hemorrhage, acute hydrocephalus, and midline shift [Figure , ]. An EVD was inserted through the previous right frontal burr hole, and a CT angiogram followed by a four-vessel angiogram revealed a pseudoaneurysm of a right distal middle cerebral artery (MCA) branch immediately adjacent to the entry point of the ventricular catheter in the right parietal region [Figure –]. A right parietal mini-craniotomy was performed for coagulation of the right distal MCA pseudoaneurysm and removal of the VP shunt. Repeat VP shunt placement was performed 2 months following pseudoaneurysm resection. The patient was discharged to a rehabilitation facility and continued to make cognitive and functional improvement. She has since been discharged home with in-home nursing and physiotherapy assistance.