In November 2017, an asymptomatic 14-year-old boy referred to the authors’ hospital for management of right lateral chest wall mass discovered incidently one month earlier. There was no history of trauma. Clinical examination was unremarkable. Plain chest radiography showed a smooth-walled 6.0 × 3.5 cm homogenous right lateral chest wall mass (A). Computed tomographic (CT) scan revealed right lateral extrapleural soft-tissue mass 6.5 × 4.0 × 5.6 cm in size abutting 5th and 6th ribs and filling the 5th intercostal space (B). There were neither cavitation nor calcification within the mass, and the adjacent ribs were not eroded.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed right extrapulmonary and extrapleural chest wall soft tissue mass. Tl-weighted MRI demonstrated a solid mass with a low signal intensity (C), while T2-weighted MRI demonstrated a homogeneous mass with high signal intensity similar to that of fat tissue (D). Early phases after administration of contrast, showed characteristic heterogeneous enhancement of the tumor that became more uniform during the delayed phase (E and F).
The angiogram showed a sizeable vascular mass supplied by a branch of the internal mammary artery. That branch was subsequently embolized with Gelfoam pledgets with no further filling on the post-embolization arteriogram.
The patient underwent an exploratory video-assisted thoracoscopy (VAT) through the right 8th intercostal space anterior axillary line (A and B). Posterolateral thoracotomy revealed well-demarcated mass abutting the 5th and 6th ribs filling the right 5th intercostal space. En bloc resection of the mass involved ribs and the intercostal muscles were performed (C). Chest wall defect was reconstructed using polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) patch (GORE-TEX®, DUALMESH®, W. L. Gore & Associates) (D).
The surgical specimen measured approximately 6 × 4 × 3.5 cm, which included a hemorrhagic, highly vascular, mass that extended from the intercostal muscles to the extra-pleural space (E). Cut section revealed whitish homogenous material. Microscopically, there were homogeneous thick and thin-walled blood vessels with proliferating vascular spaces of capillaries of the cavernous type with intervening fibrous stroma (F). There was no evidence of recurrence at 3 and six months of follow-up.