A 35-year-old woman from Haryana presented with generalized tonic-clonic seizures. She was treated with antiepileptics and became seizure-free. She had also noticed swellings all over her body which had gradually increased in number and size over the previous year, and there was proptosis of her right eyeball. She also had fever and arthralgia. On examination there was symmetrical generalized hypertrophy of the limbs, most prominent in the calf muscles, and also affecting trunk, neck and facial muscles. There was muscle tenderness with increased pain on movement of the joints.
Investigations revealed hemoglobin of 12.5 gm%, total lymphocyte count (TLC) of 12,800 and differential leucocyte count (DLC) of P80%:L20%. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 40 mm/hour. The level of serum creatinine phosphokinase was 150 (normal value 200). In addition, urine tests showed the presence of proteinuria without any active sediment on microscopy. Routine biochemical investigations revealed normal glucose, renal and liver function tests. The tests for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) factor and antinuclear antibodies were positive but the patient did not have any other symptoms to suggest a diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis or lupus. Tests for HIV using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) were negative for both HIV 1 and 2. Electrocardiogram (ECG) examination revealed a right bundle branch block and a right axis deviation. An echocardiogram failed to show cysticerci in the heart. X-rays of the skull and extremities were normal. There was no radiographic evidence of calcification in the muscles. Ultrasound examination of the orbit and neck was performed, revealing multiple swellings in the orbit, thyroid gland and strap muscles of the neck. Fundus examination was normal. Perimetry was also within normal limits. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed multiple cysts in the brain, scalp tissue, orbit and neck muscles. There was no evidence of hydrocephalus. Biopsy of a subcutaneous swelling was taken from the right forearm. Cysts poured out as soon as the skin was incised. Histopathological examination confirmed that the cysts were of C. cellulosae.
The patient was treated with prednisolone 1 mg/kg of body weight 1 week prior to the initiation of albendazole therapy instituted at a dose of 15 mg/kg. The patient was observed for 5 days prior to discharge. The symptoms improved and albendazole was continued for a total duration of 30 days. There was objective evidence of improvement with reduction in the size of the swellings. There was no deterioration in neurological or intellectual status and no appearance of new crops of cysticerci. To our surprise her fever and arthralgia disappeared without the use of anti-inflammatory agents. This improvement lasted for 6 months, at which time there was an increase in the size of existing swellings plus development of new crops of swelling. The fever and arthralgia reappeared. The patient was again primed with steroids and given praziquantel therapy. The patient responded and was discharged after 10 days of observation in hospital. Antiepileptic treatment was continued.
On followup after 1 year, no new swellings or any apparent increase in the size of the residual swellings were reported, there was no further fever or arthralgia and the patient remained seizure-free.