A 53-year-old man with a history of hepatitis B virus infection was admitted to our hospital owing to sudden vision loss in his left eye. On ocular examination, the best-corrected visual acuity was 20/30 in the right eye and hand motion at 60 cm in the left eye. Fundoscopic examination demonstrated near-total rhegmatogenous retinal detachment with breaks at the 4 and 7 o’clock positions in the left eye. The patient underwent placement of an encircling scleral silicone sponge (#506G; MIRA Inc.) and pars plana vitrectomy with silicone oil tamponade An incidental lens contact with posterior capsular damage was noted intraoperatively. Cataract gradually matured and obscured the fundal view; thus, phacoemulsification was performed two weeks later. During the operation, a fragmatome was used through the sclerotomy to remove the dropped lens with suction pressure of 400 mm Hg, flow limit 20 ml/min and an ultrasonic power output of 70% with pulse rate 5 pulse/second. The followability of the lens was poor in silicone oil and lens material was also difficult to be grasped and pulled out. Lens materials were usually pushed into the peripheral vitreous cavity by the fragmatome tip. Because the room lighting and illumination of the microscope were turned off and both the surgeon and the assistant concentrated on the fundal view under the microscope, so change of the eyelid or sclera were ignored. After the dropped nuclear materials were removed and illumination of the microscope and room lighting were turned on, a whitish wound with scorch and tissue defect on the nasal aspect of the left upper eyelid were noted . Examination of the superonasal sclerotomy site, which was created for the passage of fragmatome, also revealed a focal avascular area that resemble the scleral tissue following electro-cauterization. . An area of focal greyish necrosis was noted surrounding the whitish avascular area. Afterwards, the sclerotomy was closed with 7–0 vicryl sutures, and there was no postoperative leakage. We prescribed tobramycin and dexamethasone ointment (Tobradex®, Alcon, Rijksweg, Belgium) twice a day for the suspected thermal wounds on the eyelid and sclera. Because of the posterior capsular tear, the Sensar® 3-piece Intraocular Lens (AR40E, Johnson & Johnson, CA, US) was inserted and placed into the ciliary sulcus. The retina was attached under silicone oil tamponade. After following-up for one month, both eyelid and scleral wounds healed gradually with scar formation . The patient was then lost to follow-up.