A-39-year old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital for repeated oral ulcers and headaches for 8 years, chest pain for 7 months. He had no diabetes, no relevant medical family history, and no external genital ulcer. The laboratory test results: C-reactive protein of 32.3 mg/L (normal value:<5 mg/L), anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) was positive (normal value: negative), ESR of 55 mg/h (normal value: male: 0-15 ml/h, female: 0-20 ml/h). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated: aortic sinus was 35 × 57 mm, ascending aorta diameter was 37 mm, at the junction of right and left coronary sinus there was a 12 × 14 mm cystic structure was formed outside from aortic wall, and a 40 × 23 mm cystic structure was formed at the junction of orifice of coronary sinus, as shown in Fig. . CTA scan indicated that the aortic sinus was outwards, the large cross-section area about 4.4 cm × 2.6 cm, as shown in Fig. . After admission to the hospital, he was treated with Glucocorticoid, Thalidomide, and Atorvastatin in the rheumatic immunology department until the inflammatory markers returned to a normal level, then he received modified Bentall surgery and continue to take medicine as pre-operation. After 8 months follow-up, the patient recovered well: TTE indicated artificial blood vessel has no apparent abnormalities and artificial heart valve is functioning well, no perivalvular leakage (PVL), eject fraction is 62%.
Surgery process: median sternotomy and establish total cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), myocardial protection with cold blood cardioplegia. Open the ascend aorta, cut the brachiocephalic artery, the native root including the annulus was excised, aortic root replacement with the modified Bentall technique was performed: The valved conduit procedure was a modified Bentall operation where the aortic mechanical valve prosthesis was sutured into the graft at 1 cm from the end of the graft with a continuous 3–0 polypropylene suture, forming a composite graft, which was directly sutured to the left ventricular outflow tract with a continuous 3–0 polypropylene suture other than to annulus, and then the composite graft was fixed by outside the aortic wall with a belt-like Teflon felt. The coronary buttons were anastomosed to the composite valve graft end-to-side with continuous suture used a 5–0 polypropylene suture without any tension, at last, the distal end of the conduit was anastomosed to the distal ascending aorta with continuous 3–0 polypropylene sutures. The CPB and aortic cross-clamp times were 117 min and 60 min respectively. During this procedure no difficult bleeding encountered. There was no obvious abnormality in the function of artificial mechanical valves, and artificial ascending aortic blood flow was smooth, TEE suggested the aortic valve mechanical valve worked well, as shown in Fig. . Postoperative pathological indicated that the inner layer of the arterial wall was uneven, with partial fibrous hyperplasia, focal mucus degeneration, and a few lymphocytes infiltration. Immunohistochemical: smooth muscle cells were positive, CD3 + lymphocyte infiltration. Web dyeing: elastic fibers were positive, which suggested aseptic inflammatory changes in the aorta.