A 74-year-old woman presented with a painless anterior neck swelling since 2 months. It was progressively increasing in size and was associated with dysphagia, which was non-specific to fluid or solid. A gradual reduction in the appetite and oral intake with worsening dysphagia lead to a significant weight loss within this short period of time. A few weeks prior to the presentation, the patient noticed that her voice started to become hoarse with occasional noisy breathing and shortness of breath. She had no history of neck irradiation or family members with thyroid cancer or any kind of malignancy. During physical examination, she appeared to be cachexic and mildly tachypnoeic with audible biphasic stridor. There was a palpable multilobulated thyroid mass that was hard in consistency. The largest mass was located on the right lobe measuring about 5 cm x 4 cm and extending retrosternally. The trachea was not deviated; however, the normal laryngeal crepitus sign was absent. Nasoendoscopy finding was unremarkable, while laryngoscopy revealed right vocal cord palsy in paramedian position. A panendoscopy was carried out with a negative finding.
Fine needle aspiration for cytology (FNAC) revealed a colloid goiter with the presence of malignant cells. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed the presence of a thyroid mass involving bilateral lobes and isthmus with bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy with evidence of lung metastases .
Otherwise, no other features from the imaging could suggest the primary site of the lesion. While the treatment plan was carried out, the patient developed progressively worsening obstructive airway symptoms requiring an emergency tracheostomy. Total thyroidectomy was successfully performed in the following week once her general medical condition had been optimized. Intraoperatively, there were multiple, locally invasive thyroid nodules mainly of the left lobe infiltrating the anterior wall of the trachea into the lumen and laterally to the right lobe with tracheal ring defect. Selective neck dissection was performed to remove the paratracheal and jugulo-omohyoid groups of the lymph node bilaterally.
Histopathological analysis of the lesion showed a moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) whereby the tumor tissue was composed entirely of malignant squamous cells .
These cells were cohesive and arranged in sheets, nests, cords, islands and trabeculae pattern. These malignant cells exhibited large, pleomorphic, hyperchromatic to vesicular nuclei with large, prominent eosinophilic nucleoli and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. Individual keratinization and intercellular bridges were noted as well as tumor cell spindling . Mitotic figures were brisk, including the atypical form, and tumor necrosis was also noted. This tumor was seen infiltrating the surrounding skeletal muscle bundles and destroying the thyroid gland parenchyma.
The patient was closely observed in the intensive care unit (ICU) post operatively and showed good progress. However, 2 weeks post operatively, she contracted a hospital-acquired pneumonia which put her oncological treatment on hold. The infection unfortunately progressed into sepsis and eventually claimed her life a week later.