On April 26th, 2020, a 68-year-old man presented to the emergency department with symptoms of acute progressive symmetric ascending flaccid tetraparesis. Patient medical history included dyslipidemia, benign prostatic hypertrophy, hypertension, and abdominal aortic aneurysm in follow-up. Ten days before admission, dry cough associated with fever, dysgeusia, and hyposmia appeared. Neurological manifestations started 5 days later with progressive acute weakness of distal lower extremities.
On admission, oxygen saturation was 96% on room air, with a respiratory rate of 17 breaths/min, and the body temperature was 37.2 °C. Chest computed tomography highlighted a bilateral basilar ground glass opacity, with oropharyngeal swab positive for SARS-CoV-2 on reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay. No pathological findings were auscultated on pulmonary objective examination.
The patient was then isolated and antiviral drugs have been started. Neurological examination showed bifacial nerve palsy (House-Brackmann grade 3) and muscular weakness, with a Medical Research Council scale of 1/5 in proximal and 2/5 in distal of the lower limbs. The osteo-tendon reflexes were hypoactive with bilateral areflexia to the Achilles tendons. No sensory deficit was recorded. Upper motor neuron disorder or meningeal irritation signs have not been found.
Baseline laboratoristic analysis showed thrombocytopenia (101 × 109/L, reference value: 125–300 × 109/L) and lymphocytopenia (0.48 × 109/L, reference value: 1.1–3.2 × 109/L). Cerebrospinal fluid assessment showed an albuminocytologic dissociation with increased protein level (98 mg/dL, reference value: 8–43 mg/dL) and normal cell count (2 × 106/L, reference value: 0–8 × 106/L). Additional serological tests (i.e., ANA, anti-DNA, c-ANCA, p-ANCA, Campylobacter jejuni, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Salmonella enterica, Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, herpes simplex virus 1 and 2, Varicella-Zoster virus, influenza virus A and B, human immunodeficiency virus) were negative. Normal serum vitamin B12 level and serum protein electrophoresis were found.
Four days after neurological symptoms and signs onset, motor nerve conduction studies showed delayed distal latencies and absent F waves in early course, supporting demyelinating pattern in accordance with GBS diagnostic criteria . Sensory nerve conduction showed nerve action potentials; the recorded values were all in range, in line with the patient clinic.
A diagnosis of Guillain-Barré syndrome was then made. Intravenous immunoglobulin was administered at a dose of 0.4 g/kg for 5 days. Thrombocytopenia and lymphocytopenia progressively returned in the following days, with complete resolution of the admission radiological pulmonary findings. The improvement of the respiratory and laboratory clinic was followed by a progressive recovery of limb strength and a return to osteo-tendon normoreflexia. Thirty days after hospitalization, following the negative result of the oropharyngeal swab for SARS-CoV-2, the patient was discharged to continue the rehabilitation program at home.