A 49-year-old man was admitted to Jiangxi Provincial People’s Hospital (the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang Medical College, Nanchang, China) with a mass in his right buttock for 4 mo.
There was nothing significant about the patient’s present medical history.
The patient had a history of sacrococcygeal trauma 3 years before admission, and there were no other abnormalities.
In terms of personal and family history, there was nothing of note.
There was no abnormality except the fullness in the right rectal wall found during the special anal examination.
No obvious abnormality was found in the serum tumor markers.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a large, well-defined mass located slightly to the right in the center of the pelvic cavity between the left and right obturator muscles . The mass appeared predominantly positioned in the area deep to the gluteus maximus, posterior to the pubic symphysis, underneath the bladder, and above the urogenital septum . It displaced the prostate and seminal vesicle glands to the upper left and pushed the rectum and anal canal close to the left pelvic wall . The mass displayed predominantly isointense T1 signal, which was related to the surrounding musculature and heterogeneous on fat-suppressed T1 (T1FS; Figures , , and ) and T2 (T2FS; Figure ) imaging. There was intralesional focal necrosis and perilesional edema .
The mass was surgically excised. During surgery, it was found to be well-circumscribed and with an incomplete capsule and poor mobility, giving a clinical impression of a malignant tumor. Its upper margin reached the seminal-vesicle gland, and the outer edge closely adhered to the right part of the external rectal sphincter, levator ani, and puborectal muscles, but no nerve, vessel, or inguinal lymph node invasion was found.
On gross examination, the mass was 13 cm × 12 cm × 8 cm in size, and covered by an incomplete capsule and the remnants of adipose tissue . The cut surface showed a solid, firm-to-elastic, and yellow-pink appearance, with focal cystic degeneration and necrosis within the mass . Histologically, the tumor had a definite capsule ; it was composed of short spindle- to oval-shaped cells and admixed with varying thick bundles of collagen and variable numbers of adipocytes . The cells had eosinophilic cytoplasm with indistinct cell borders and had elongated nuclei with fine chromatin . Hyaline and mucoid degeneration were visible within the tumor. Atypic and bizarre cells could be seen in some areas . It is worth noting that mitotic figures , even atypical mitosis , and multiple necrotic foci and nuclear debris could be seen in the tumor. In addition, smooth muscle and skeletal muscle were invaded within and at the edge of the tumor. These morphological features are often reminiscent of malignant tumors and therefore pose a severe diagnostic challenge to pathologists.
IHC staining showed that these neoplastic cells were strongly positive for both CD34 and Des , and had lost expression of Rb1 protein . In addition, they showed positive expression of estrogen receptor, epithelial-membrane antigen, human homolog of murine double minute 2 (MDM2), and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) . However, they were negative for S100, smooth muscle actin (SMA), signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6), and CD117 . The proliferation index of these neoplastic cells was about 5%, as shown by Ki-67 IHC staining . Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) confirmed the monoallelic and biallelic deletion of the Rb1 and no amplification of MDM2 in these neoplastic cells.
The preoperative clinical diagnosis was malignant mesenchymal tumor of the pelvic cavity.