A 90-year-old female with atrial fibrillation treated with therapeutic apixaban and aortic stenosis status-post TAVR with a 29 mm self-expanding Medtronic core-valve placed 7 years prior presented to the clinic for the evaluation of acute onset chest pain and elevated blood pressure on home monitoring of 190/90 mmHg. The patient described the chest pain as substernal, severe, radiating posteriorly, and lasting for 45 min before resolving spontaneously.
The patient had a routine echocardiogram performed 2 months prior showing a properly functioning bioprosthetic aortic valve with normal haemodynamic performance . The Doppler measured peak transaortic gradient was 4 mmHg and the mean transaortic gradient was 2 mmHg.
Vital signs in the clinic (blood pressure of 110/41 mmHg, heart rate of 76 beats/min, oxygen saturation of 95% on room air) and physical examination were noted as unremarkable.
The patient was referred to the emergency department for assessment of the coronary anatomy and to rule out aortic dissection . During imaging, the patient developed acute respiratory failure with severe pruritis and urticaria and was admitted for inpatient management.
Evaluation in the emergency department was notable for the absence of hives, stridor, or other associated signs or symptoms of anaphylaxis.
Lab evaluation in the emergency department demonstrated a troponin-I value of 0.22 ng/mL (reference <0.04 ng/mL), B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) of 514 pg/mL (reference <100 pg/mL; patient baseline of 22–71 pg/mL), and a positive COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction rapid test.
Chest x-ray was notable for diffuse interstitial pulmonary oedema. Electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus tachycardia with the left bundle branch block unchanged from prior. Computed tomographic (CT) angiography of the chest demonstrated trace bilateral pleural effusions, enlarged pulmonary arteries, and ruled out acute aortic dissection and pulmonary embolism.
The patient was hospitalized for acute decompensated heart failure and treated with non-invasive positive pressure ventilation, nitroglycerine infusion, and intravenous furosemide 40 mg twice daily. The patient’s respiratory status improved by Day 1 of the hospital admission. The peak BNP was 1649 pg/mL.
Point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) performed with a handheld device on hospital Day 2 was suggestive of a significant diastolic flow across the TAVR valve and directed further investigation for the diagnosis of prosthetic valve failure .
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) on hospital Day 3 revealed severe aortic regurgitation with an eccentric and anteriorly directed jet and holodiastolic flow reversal in the descending thoracic aorta . A peak measured transaortic gradient was 9 mmHg and the mean transaortic gradient was 5 mmHg. At the time of the patient’s hospitalization, the hospital system where the patient was admitted was experiencing staffing shortages and resource limitations related to an ongoing community COVID-19 surge. This served to delay access to the patient’s echocardiogram. The hospital policy at the time was to delay routine transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) until patients were designated as COVID-19 recovered.
During hospitalization, the patient was treated for COVID-19 with intravenous remdesivir 100 mg for 4 days and intravenous dexamethasone 6 mg for 7 days. Initially, the patient was managed for 2 days with continuous heparin infusion for presumptive treatment of acute coronary syndrome but was restarted on therapeutic apixaban 5 mg twice daily. The patient was discharged after 7 days and was transitioned from intravenous furosemide to oral torsemide 20 mg twice daily.
Three days after hospital discharge, TEE confirmed proper positioning of the bioprosthetic stent-valve with leaflet thickening, abnormal cusp mobility, restriction of the non-coronary cusp prosthetic leaflet, and an eccentric regurgitant jet consistent with severe aortic regurgitation . The acute TAVR valve regurgitation was subsequently treated with a valve-in-valve TAVR 17 days post-discharge.
The patient was seen in the clinic 30 days after valve-in-valve TAVR. The patient denied chest pain and dyspnoea. A TTE demonstrated bioprosthetic stent-valve in the aortic position with normal leaflet mobility and without paravalvular aortic regurgitation.