A 44-year-old man who presented with shortness of breath on effort was admitted to our hospital. He had no history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or cardiovascular diseases. His blood pressure was 106/78 mmHg, pulse rate was 108 bpm, and blood oxygen saturation was 97% on room air. A Levine 3/6 holosystolic murmur and the third heart sound at the apex and bilateral rales were audible. Jugular venous distention and moderate pitting edema of the bilateral pretibials were noted.

Chest radiography revealed cardiac enlargement (cardiothoracic ratio 66%), pulmonary congestion, and mild pleural effusion. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm and complete left bundle branch block (QRS width: 132 ms). Regarding laboratory data, serum aspartate transaminase, serum creatinine, and serum uric acid were mildly elevated. The brain natriuretic peptide level was 885 pg/mL, and the troponin T level was 0.057 ng/mL (Table). Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated LV dilatation [LV end-diastolic diameter (LVDd): 70 mm], global hypokinesis with an ejection fraction of 25%, prominent and deep intertrabecular recesses, increased noncompacted (NC) endomyocardial layer depth compared to the compacted (C) epicardial layer (NC 28.5 mm, C 8.3 mm, NC/C ratio >2.0), and apical aneurysm with spontaneous echo contrast and 2 thrombi (10×13 mm in the inferior wall, 15×8 mm in the anterior wall).

The NC region was localized at the mid-inferior and posterolateral LV and adjacent to the apical aneurysm. These thrombi were relatively highly echogenic and immobile and were detected in the apical aneurysm, not the NC region. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) showed late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in the endocardium in the apical anterolateral wall, an increased NC/C ratio (>2.3), and 2 thrombi in the apical aneurysm. Coronary angiography revealed no significant obstructive stenosis, but a left ventriculogram showed an aneurysm in the apex. A pathological analysis demonstrated no evidence of secondary cardiomyopathy, such as myocarditis, sarcoidosis, amyloidosis or hemochromatosis. Based on these findings, he was diagnosed with LVNC complicated with apical aneurysm.

To determine the link between gene mutations and LV aneurysm in this case, we performed a genetic test to diagnose the LVNC. However, we detected no genetic mutations associated with LVNC or other cardiomyopathies. This patient did not have a family history of LVNC or a history of other congenital, acquired, significant valvular heart disease or neuro-muscular disease. This patient was therefore thought to be an isolated case of LVNC with LV dysfunction.

Carvedilol, enalapril, furosemide, and warfarin were started to manage HF and prevent stroke or systemic thromboembolism. Although the multiple apical thrombi disappeared without clinical signs of embolism after four weeks of anticoagulation, computed tomography (CT) revealed right cerebellar infarction. Eight months after medical therapy, despite the improvement in the LV dimension (LVDd: 63 mm) and systolic function (LVEF: 34%), the thicknesses of the NC and C layers were not markedly changed (NC: 28.8 mm, C: 8.2 mm).