A 61-year-old Caucasian man underwent a chest CT due to unclear right-sided thoracic pain. In addition our patient complained of abdominal cramps. Examination suggested a retroperitoneal mass seen on the most caudal CT slices. He was referred to our hospital for abdominal ultrasound, showing a 11 cm large retroperitoneal tumor located right and ventral to the abdominal aorta . The craniocaudal dimension extended from the head of pancreas to the aortic bifurcation. The tumor consisted of two different components: the cranial component was well delineated and heterogeneous with hyperechoic and anechoic compartments. The caudal tumor component was poorly delineated, homogeneous and hypo-echoic. The tumor led to a ventral displacement of the duodenum and a compression of the inferior vena cava. Due to an obstruction of the right ureter, there was a right-sided hydronephrosis.
A subsequent abdominal CT confirmed these findings . As seen by ultrasound, the tumor consisted of two different parts: (1) a well-perfused heterogeneous part with cystic lesions and (2) a less-perfused, homogeneous part. The two parts were well delineated from each other. The tumor partially encased the inferior vena cava, the right common iliac artery and right ureter. In addition the pancreas and the duodenum could not be delineated from the tumor. Due to the obstruction of the right ureter, the right kidney showed delayed enhancement.
Laboratory analyses found elevated levels of normetanephrin (4411 nmol; normal 570 to 1930 nmol) in a 24-hour urine test, clinically proving a neuroendocrine tumor of the pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma family. Unaware of this differential diagnosis, an endosonographic-guided transduodenal fine needle aspiration was performed confirming the diagnosis. Fortunately no hypertensive crisis occurred.
In addition, intra-hepatic metastases were seen on the initial CT scan and a subsequent octreoscan also revealed the presence of intra-osseous metastases. On contrast-enhanced CT the liver metastases had a slight early arterial enhancement with a reduced wash-out during the venous phase. On ultrasound the liver metastases were not well delineated, but appeared slightly hypo-echogenic compared with the surrounding liver tissue. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound was not performed. The CT findings, in particular, would be consistent with metastases from a neuroendocrine tumor.
The presence of metastatic disease precluded a curative resection. However, local resection of the tumor was undertaken for symptomatic relief.
Macroscopically the partially resected tumor reflected the radiological results. The cranial component was well defined and encapsulated and displayed red, brown and black hemorrhagic and cystic areas consistent with the appearance of paragangliomas. Meanwhile the caudal part, corresponding to the neuroblastoma, was macroscopically less well demarcated with a white-gray-tan and solid cut surface.
Microscopically, the encapsulated paraganglioma showed the typical Zellballen growth pattern, an elevated mitotic activity (Ki-67) of up to 50%, necrosis and vascular invasion. The small blue round cells of the neuroblastoma component displayed a highly proliferative (around 90%) and broadly infiltrative growth pattern and lymphovascular invasion was seen . Immunohistochemically, both components were positive for synaptophysin and somatostatin receptor 2 with the latter one being consistent with the positive octreotid scan. In contrast to the neuroblastoma, the paraganglioma expressed the typical markers chromogranin A and vimentin.
There was no evidence for an amplification of the prognostic oncogene N-myc. Tumor metastasis of the neuroblastoma component was histologically confirmed by lymph node and skin biopsies.
Subsequently, our patient was treated with palliative chemotherapy and radiotherapy beginning with three cycles of carboplatin aqueous solution and etoposide phosphate. On tumor progression palliative radiotherapy with 10 × 3 Gray at multiple locations followed. Subsequently chemotherapy with CHOP (cyclophoshamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, oncovin, prednisone) was started and finally (after two months) changed to a weekly dose of docetaxel with prednisone. Ten months after the initial diagnosis our patient died of cancer-related pulmonary embolism and pneumonia.