A 61-year-old woman presented with pain in her chest wall for two months, and had no significant medical history, such as trauma, infection, or tumor. The pain was located in the left lower chest in a band-like pattern overlapping the T10 dermatome. The pain was intermittent and occurred several times a day, continuing for 10–20 min each episode and alleviated when lying down. The pain was considered to be intercostal neuralgia.
To identify the cause of the neuralgia, we performed MRI, which revealed multiple cysts at the T9–T11 nerve roots bilaterally . No other causal abnormality for the chest wall pain was found other than the cysts. The interior of the cysts showed similar intensity to the CSF on imaging. The largest cyst was at the level of the left T10 vertebra and had a linear shadow that suggested the presence of nerve root fibers. Computed tomography (CT) with myelography was also performed to study CSF communication between the thecal sac and the cysts. After 10 mL of 240 mg I/mL iodinated contrast medium (Omnipaque 240, Daiichi Sankyo, Inc., Japan) was injected into the thecal sac at L4/5 in the lateral recumbent position, the first CT image was taken immediately (left and middle columns of Fig. ), and revealed multiple cysts from T6–L2, including small cysts. The cysts were enhanced by the contrast medium and most showed the same intensity as that of the thecal sac at the corresponding level; however, the largest cyst at left T10 and another at left T9 showed much higher concentrations of the contrast medium. Three hours after the injection, the intensities of the cysts and the thecal sac were equal on the second CT (right column of Fig. ). The next day, another CT examination showed no detectable contrast enhancement. Based on these findings, we suggested a diagnosis of multiple perineural cysts.
The patient was treated with an intercostal nerve block at T10 with 50 mg of mepivacaine hydrochloride (Carbocain, AstraZeneca, Inc., Japan) and 4 mg of dexamethasone sodium phosphate (DEXART, FujiPharma, Inc., Japan), and the pain subsided. Nine months later, the neuralgia recurred and another nerve block again relieved the pain. There was no recurrence 22 months after the last nerve block.