A 33-year-old gravida 1 para 1 with a past medical history of seasonal rhinitis and severe AD dating back to early childhood, presented in the setting of worsening AD refractory to high potency topical corticosteroids, systemic corticosteroids, antibiotics for staphylococcal superinfection, methotrexate, cyclosporine as well as ultraviolet phototherapy. Her initial diagnosis and care were directed by a different healthcare provider 4 years prior to examination at our institution. Her examination at that time revealed periorbital hyperpigmentation, erythematous lichenification of the anterior chest, arms, and neck. The back was spared. She was subsequently started on hydroxyzine, clarithromycin and triamcinolone cream which resulted in mild improvement, but on discontinuation her AD flared. Three years after multiple therapies she sought treatment in the United States. Her Investigator Global Assessment for Atopic Dermatitis score of 4 was indicative of severe disease with greater than 10% total body surface area involvement. She was subsequently initiated on dupilumab 300 mg every 2 weeks with significant improvement in her skin disease and quality of life. She became pregnant 12 months later. Discussions about continuing dupilumab during pregnancy were held with both her allergist and dermatologist reviewing the risks and benefits of therapy during pregnancy as well as concerns regarding maternal antibodies crossing the placenta. She decided to remain on dupilumab 300 mg every 2 weeks. During her pregnancy, the patient had routine monitoring including regular bloodwork and guideline-based ultrasounds which were normal during the first 2 trimesters. The patient continued use of lubricating eye drops and thus, did not develop ocular symptoms during her pregnancy. At 27 weeks gestation, the patient self-discontinued dupilumab. Unfortunately, she experienced a self-reported severe flare of AD only 2 weeks after discontinuation that was refractory to topical treatments and the patient self reinitiated dupilumab at 29 weeks gestation. The patient was not assessed in clinic at this time and therefore there are no severity scores available for this flare. The patient remained on dupilumab until 36 weeks of gestation. At 38 weeks gestational age, ultrasound imaging revealed concerns for intrauterine growth restriction as well as breech position. The patient underwent urgent Caesarean Section with delivery of a healthy female infant (Weight 2480 g). Surgical pathology revealed normal umbilical cord vasculature, normal villous maturation compatible with a third trimester placenta with no evidence of villitis or infarct, and no chorioamnionitis. There were no issues postpartum. The patient was reassessed 6 weeks postpartum and had opted to breastfeed. The patient did not develop any further flares of AD despite self discontinuation of dupilumab. To date post-partum, the infant continues to meet age appropriate milestones.