A 77-year-old Japanese woman was diagnosed with malignant melanoma in the right sinonasal cavity using biopsy approximately three years ago. She complained of nasal bleeding at that time. She underwent proton beam radiation therapy with sequential chemotherapy; however, she experienced double vision, and 1.5 years later, MRI revealed a local recurrence. After several courses of additional chemotherapy, the disease remained stable for the last 1.5 years. She underwent follow-up PET–CT and FDG uptake was detected at the gallbladder . Hematological examination revealed no specific findings. Contrast abdominal CT revealed an early enhanced mass in the gallbladder, and the enhancement persisted in the equilibrium phase . On MRI, the tumor showed low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and slightly high intensity on T2-weighted images . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) showed no apparent tumor infiltration to the liver.
The patient did not present with any symptoms. Because of the remaining nasal melanoma, surgical indication for the gallbladder tumor was controversial. We, however, recommended surgical treatment and she agreed for fear of its malignant potential. The primary preoperative diagnosis of the lesion was gallbladder cancer, and the secondary assessment was metastatic melanoma. Her general condition was good. After obtaining informed consent, which included advisement of the risk of relapse of nasal melanoma, we performed laparotomy and cholecystectomy with partial liver resection. In addition, lymphadenectomy of the hepatoduodenal ligament was performed. No ascites or macroscopic peritoneal dissemination was observed, and the tumor was localized in the gallbladder. The distal margin of the cystic duct was cancer free and the common bile duct was preserved. The tumor was soft, whitish, and measured 7.5 cm × 5 cm . Microscopically, it was diagnosed as a poorly differentiated malignant melanoma. Immunohistochemical examination revealed that the tumor was not similar to nasal melanoma, i.e., HMB-45 staining was far less positive in the gallbladder tumor than in the nasal tumor . The tumor cells reached the subserosal layer with mild vascular involvement, and the lymph nodes gave negative results for metastasis. No gallstones were observed. The postoperative course was uneventful. No distal recurrence has been detected for more than 13 months after surgery.