Our patient was a 43-year-old man with a weight of 93 kg and height of 174 cm. He had been undergoing hemodialysis for 20 years because of chronic renal failure. He had been taking cinacalcet, calcium carbonate, montelukast, loratadine, and nalfurafine before the surgery. There were no preoperative symptoms of suspected pheochromocytoma and no history of hypertension. His blood pressure was 140/82 mmHg, heart rate 76 beats/min, body temperature 36.2 °C, and normal respiratory rhythm with an O2 saturation of 96% on room air. Blood tests demonstrated BUN of 60.2 mg/dL and creatinine of 13.3 mg/dL, but coagulability, liver function, and electrolytes were normal.
A close examination of hematuria revealed a tumor in the right renal pelvis, and retroperitoneal total right nephroureterectomy was scheduled. The tumor in the right adrenal gland was followed up because there was no clear malignant finding on CT. On the day before surgery, 5100 mL of body fluid was removed by hemodialysis. Propofol and remifentanil were used for the induction and maintenance of anesthesia. After tracheal intubation, periodic systolic blood pressure fluctuations within the range of 70–260 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure fluctuations within the range of 40–90 mmHg, and heart rate of 80–110 beats/min were observed at intervals of approximately 8 min . Intermittent and continuous administration of nicardipine was not effective for suppressing the fluctuation, which lasted for approximately 3 h and disappeared spontaneously after completion of laparoscopic surgery. Intermittent and continuous administration of nicardipine was performed because of this circulatory fluctuation; however, it could not be suppressed. Periodic blood pressure fluctuations disappeared spontaneously at the end of laparoscopic surgery. Blood samples were collected during the cycle of circulatory fluctuations. The catecholamine levels of the blood samples were as follows: first blood pressure fluctuation: adrenaline 3.22 ng/mL, noradrenaline 1.98 ng/mL, and dopamine 0.02 ng/mL; second blood pressure fluctuation: adrenaline 6.32 ng/mL, noradrenaline 3.12 ng/mL, and dopamine 0.02 ng/mL; and at the end of blood pressure fluctuation: adrenaline 0.36 ng/mL, noradrenaline 0.47 ng/mL, and dopamine 0.02 ng/mL. A postoperative examination revealed that the highest blood catecholamine levels were adrenaline, with 0.03 ng/mL (normal value: 0–0.10 ng/mL); noradrenaline, with 0.52 ng/mL (normal value: 0.10–0.50 ng/mL); and dopamine, with 0.03 ng/mL (normal value: 0–0.03 ng/ml). In addition, scintigraphy identified an increased uptake of 131iodine-metaiodobenzylguanidine corresponding to the left adrenal gland, suggesting pheochromocytoma . After the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma, oral treatment with doxazosin 2 mg/day was administered, and left adrenalectomy was performed 4 months after the initial surgery.
Before surgery, his blood pressure was 170/92 mmHg, heart rate 80 beats/min, body temperature 36.5 °C, and normal respiratory rhythm with an O2 saturation of 96% on room air. Blood tests demonstrated Hb of 10.4 g/dL, BUN of 46.9 mg/dL, and creatinine of 11.6 mg/dL, but coagulability, liver function, and electrolytes were normal. Echocardiography showed left ventricular hypertrophy and mild left ventricular wall hypokinesis. On the day before surgery, 4300 mL of body fluid was removed by hemodialysis. Pheochromocytoma resection was performed under general anesthesia with propofol and remifentanil. As with the initial surgery, periodic circulation fluctuations occurred after tracheal intubation at the time of anesthesia induction, but the fluctuations were approximately 10 min apart, and the degree of fluctuation was smaller than that of the first surgery. Intermittent and continuous administration of nicardipine and landiolol was performed for circulatory fluctuation; however, once again, the fluctuations could not be suppressed. Dopamine was administered to maintain circulation after tumor removal. The periodic fluctuations disappeared after the ligation of the left adrenal artery and did not occur thereafter. The intraoperative course of the second surgery is shown in Fig. .