A 48-year-old Japanese man presented with symptoms of right-sided facial asymmetry and right hand palsy that had lasted for 10 days. He had a past medical history of syphilis, gonorrhea, varicella, hepatitis B viral infection, and chronic use of tobacco (1–2 packs of cigarettes per day for 28 years). Laboratory examinations revealed positivity for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antigen/antibody, a CD4 positive lymphocyte count of 84 cells/μL, and an HIV-1 RNA viral load of 180,000 copies/mL. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of the head showed three mass lesions in the brain, and the specimen biopsy from these lesions revealed diffuse large B cell lymphoma. He was diagnosed with AIDS-associated primary brain malignant lymphoma. The patient was administered emtricitabine/tenofovir disoproxil combination therapy and raltegravir as the antiretroviral therapy. Atovaquone and azithromycin were also used for prophylaxis of pneumocystis pneumonia and nontuberculous mycobacterial infections.
A PICC was implanted, and he received five courses of R-CHOP chemotherapy (, , , , and prednisone). Five days after the last R-CHOP chemotherapy course, he suddenly developed a fever with shivering chills. His white blood cell count was 4300/μL, and his neutrophil count was 4200/μL. The CD4-positive lymphocyte cell count was 228 cells/μL, and the HIV-1 RNA viral load was 20 copies/mL. We administered 2 g cefozopran hydrochloride, which is a fourth generation cephalosporin, and vancomycin on day 1 (every 12 h) and on day 3, respectively, and the PICC was removed. The patient’s condition improved and become afebrile within 48 h after the initiation of cefozopran hydrochloride. Cultures obtained from blood and revealed gram-positive rods, which were identified as T. pulmonis using 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing. The colony count of T. pulmonis grown from PICC culture was 103 colony-forming units. Thus, he was diagnosed with T. pulmonis bacteremia resulting from a PICC-related bloodstream infection. Because of the results of the susceptibility test , we continued cefozopran hydrochloride for 16 days. Follow up blood culture on 5 days after treatment was negative and clinical relapse was not observed. He remains in complete remission as of this report.