A 28-year-old man presented with a relapsing–remitting course of distal-predominant limb weakness and numbness for 10 years. Ten years earlier, he had gradually progressive weakness and numbness in the distal limbs. He was unable to write, button his clothes, or open jars, but had no difficulty in climbing stairs or rising from a seated position. He was treated with intravenous dexamethasone and subsequent oral prednisolone for 1 month in another hospital, although the specific dosage was unknown. His symptoms disappeared after treatment. However, 7 years ago, the same symptoms relapsed and were gradually progressive. He presented at our hospital because of persistence of the aforementioned symptoms. He was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin at 0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days, and intravenous methylprednisolone at 500 mg per day for 3 days, followed by 240 mg per day for 1 day and 120 mg per day for 1 day. Subsequently, he received 55 mg of oral prednisolone for 1 month, after which it was gradually tapered off. He also took cyclosporine at 50 mg twice per day. In addition, he was subjected to another two 5-day courses of intravenous immunoglobulin, at 6 years ago and 5 years ago. He began to gradually recover after treatment and achieved remission, and he stopped all treatment 5 years ago. However, his symptoms relapsed 10 months ago, with gradually progressive asymmetrical weakness and numbness in his distal arms and legs. His left upper limb was most affected. He had no known comorbid conditions and no relatives with a similar condition.
On neurological examination, the patient had mild bilateral facial paresis, asymmetric atrophy of the tongue muscle, and tongue fasciculations . No dysarthria or dysphagia was observed. Pinprick and vibration sensations under the wrists and ankles were significantly decreased, while sensation of the trunk was normal. No marked atrophy of the limb muscles was observed. The arms and legs were asymmetrically weak, with a Medical Research Council scale strength of 1–4, and predominant involvement of the upper distal extremities (Supplementary Materials Table ). Tendon reflexes including bilateral biceps, triceps, brachioradialis, knee and ankle tendon reflexes were absent, and the Babinski sign was negative. An inverted Beevor's sign was also observed, characterized by a downward movement of the patient’s umbilicus while attempting to stand from a recumbent position .
Laboratory evaluations, including a complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, antinuclear antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, fasting serum glucose, thyroid function studies, serum and urine protein electrophoresis and immunofixation, and angiotensin-converting enzyme, were all unremarkable. Anti-ganglioside antibodies, myelin-associated glycoprotein, neurofascin 155 and 186, and contactin 1 were all negative. In addition, cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed a normal protein content, cell count, and glucose level. Electrodiagnostic testing revealed severe, diffuse, asymmetric sensorimotor polyneuropathy that fulfilled the criteria for primary demyelination in CIDP. This included prolonged distal motor latencies, delay and disappearance of F waves, and conduction block in the radial and ulnar nerves . The nerve ultrasonography showed segmental hypertrophy in the bilateral median and ulnar nerves (Supplementary Materials Table ). Magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbosacral plexus revealed that the L5 and S1 spinal roots were mildly enlarged (Supplementary Materials Fig. ). A biopsy of the left sural nerve was almost normal and vasculitis was excluded.
The patient was diagnosed with CIDP, and was again treated with intravenous immunoglobulin at 0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days, intravenous methylprednisolone at 500 mg per day for 3 days, and then oral prednisolone at 60 mg/day for 1 month before it was gradually tapered off. The patient was followed up by telephone. After 3 months of treatment, his numbness was completely relieved, his limb strength was recovered about 70%, he had no difficulty in daily life, and he returned to work.