An 88-year-old white woman with a history of vascular dementia and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) presented with a 4.5 cm left-sided level III anterior cervical lymph node . Prior to her onset of dementia and IPF, she was otherwise healthy. Her family history was not relevant for hematologic malignancies or cancer. She denied tobacco smoking. In addition to her neck mass, she developed night sweats and 1.8 kg (4 pound) weight loss. No lymph nodes were detected in her right supraclavicular, axillary, and inguinal regions. Auscultation of her lung bases revealed dry crackles. Hepatomegaly and splenomegaly were not observed. A computed tomography (CT)-guided core needle biopsy was done on September 16, 2014. A core, rather than excisional biopsy was considered given her severe lung disease and inability to tolerate general anesthesia. Tissue examination showed B cells of follicular origin, admixed with high-grade large cells . Flow cytometry showed clonal B cell population (36% of total cellularity) positive for CD10, CD19, and CD20 . Cells were Kappa-restricted associated with < 1% natural killer (NK) cells. Examination of her tumor biopsy showed a CD4:CD8 ratio of 9:1 without aberrant T cell antigen expression. EBV in situ hybridization was not performed. Positron emission tomography (PET-CT) revealed single uptake above the clavicle on the left side with standardized uptake value (SUV) of 4.9 confirming stage 1B disease. Her International Prognostic Index (IPI) was 2 points: low intermediate risk group; age > 60 years, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 599, stage 1, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) of 0. In addition, given her history of dry coughing and shortness of breath, a chest CT was obtained, which revealed honeycombing, bronchial wall thickening, and subpleural ground glass opacities suggesting interstitial pneumonitis . Her symptoms were controlled with inhaled β-agonists without administration of orally administered or systemic steroids. Her peripheral blood flow cytometry detected increased proportion of cells with cytotoxic potential including human leukocyte antigen-antigen D related (HLA-DR) + T cells (57%, normal 9–36%; absolute count of 884/mm3, normal 177–692/mm3) and double positive (DP) CD4/CD8 T cells (4%, normal 0–2%; absolute count of 62 mm3, normal 0–50 mm3) . After discussion of treatment options, she opted for best supportive care. Three months later, during a routine follow-up examination, it was noted that the lymph node had completely regressed. Ultrasonographic and clinical remission were documented in October 2016, 25 months after her initial CT-guided biopsy. She died with progressive respiratory insufficiency attributed to IPF without evidence of lymphoma in December 2016.