The patient was a man in his 60s who visited the Department of Gastroenterology for the treatment of autoimmune pancreatitis and had been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer with liver metastasis (T2N0M1, stage IV) two years previously. Subsequently, he consulted the Department of Medical Oncology and started chemotherapy, which included four courses of FOLFIRINOX, 10 courses of GEM + nab-PTX, and two courses of nal-IRI + 5-FU/LV. As his case was judged to be a progressive disease one year prior, the hospital focused on palliative care. At that time, he was referred to the Department of Supportive Medicine and Care for Cancer because of severe abdominal pain, which was considered cancer-related, and administration of 10 mg/day of oxycodone was started. Thereafter, he continued outpatient visits, and the oxycodone dose was adjusted according to the pain level. However, three months prior, he was admitted to the Department of Neurosurgery because he developed a brain abscess associated with infection after surgery for a cerebral aneurysm. After subcutaneous irrigation and drainage, his symptoms improved, and he was discharged from hospital. He continued to receive LVFX 500 mg/day to prevent recurrence of brain abscess. Subsequently, the dose of oxycodone was increased to 50 mg/day for worsening abdominal pain by the outpatient clinic, but it was still difficult to control the pain; therefore, he was admitted to the Department of Supportive Medicine and Care for Cancer for pain control. At the time of admission, his height was 169.0 cm and body weight was 63.5 kg; he was ambulatory and capable of all self-care but unable to perform any work activities (performance status 2; denoting the day of admission as day 1).
Upon admission, hepatic dysfunction and exacerbation of inflammation were observed. In addition, CT examination indicated exacerbation of the primary tumor, enlargement of the liver metastases, and appearance of multiple lung metastases; therefore, the primary disease was judged to have aggravated rapidly. At the time of admission, he complained of severe pain with a numerical rating scale (NRS) score of 7/10 . Therefore, he was switched to an injection of oxycodone 40 mg/day, and the dose had to be adjusted to 100 mg/day by day 10. However, the pain persisted, with an NRS score of 5/10, and ketamine 30 mg/day was initiated because of the poor response to increasing opioid doses. Several hours after the start of the ketamine treatment, the patient complained of nausea. Therefore, the oxycodone dose was reduced to 70 mg/day and the nausea improved. The day after the start of the ketamine treatment, an improvement to NRS = 3–4/10 and a decrease in the number of rescue doses was observed; methadone was introduced because the patient and his family wanted him to be discharged. Methadone treatment (15 mg/day) was initiated on day 14. The doses of oxycodone and ketamine were tapered and terminated . In addition, we considered that LVFX, which carries a risk of QT interval prolongation, has to be discontinued or changed; however, the neurosurgeon recommended the continuation of LVFX because it showed no evidence of the recurrence of brain abscess. Additionally, bacterial culture showed that the causative bacteria of the brain abscess were very sensitive to LVFX. Therefore, the patient’s QTc was carefully monitored, along with his respiratory rate .
Oxycodone was reduced to 50 mg/day and ketamine was reduced to 15 mg/day when methadone was started on day 14. Ketamine was discontinued on day 15 because he did not feel worsening pain. The oxycodone dose was subsequently reduced to 40 mg/day on day 16. On the same day, although it did not meet the diagnostic criteria for long QT syndrome, an increase in QTc of approximately 10% compared to baseline was observed. Therefore, we asked the neurosurgeon to change LVFX to sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim (ST). On day 17, QTc improved, and the pain subsided (NRS = 2–4/10); therefore, the oxycodone dose was reduced to 20 mg/day. On day 18, oxycodone dose was further reduced to 15 mg/day; on day 19, it was again reduced to 7 mg/day and ended on day 21. Further, no recurrence of the brain abscess was observed by continuing with ST. As he did not experience pain exacerbation (NRS = 1–3/10) on day 22, he was discharged with a dose of methadone of 15 mg/day. Figure shows the changes in the NRS and the number of rescue doses during hospitalization. In addition, Table shows the changes in laboratory values after methadone treatment was initiated, and Table shows a list of the drugs used during hospitalization.