A 63-year-old man complaining of discomfort in the upper right abdomen was referred to our hospital because of a liver tumor diagnosed by another hospital.
Previously, he had undergone an appendectomy, and had a history of untreated chronic hepatitis C and a daily habit of drinking. His physical examination revealed no notable abnormalities. The abnormal values in his blood test findings were as follows: aspartate transaminase, 71 IU/l; alanine transaminase, 108 IU/l; alpha-fetoprotein, 5626.0 ng/ml; and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II, 642 mAU/ml. Other blood counts, biochemical laboratory findings and coagulation factors were within the normal ranges. The retention rate of indocyanine green at 15 min was 10%.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a 40-mm tumor in segment 8 (S8) of the liver, which was enhanced in the early phase and washed out in the delayed phase, suggesting hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) . His portal vein was lying ventral to the pancreas and dorsal to the duodenum (hence called PPPV), and ventral to the common bile duct . In the hepatic hilus, the portal vein was dilated, forming an inverted L-shape, and was branching while winding with an irregular caliber . In addition, there were some porto-portal communications . No anomalies were detected in the common bile duct, gallbladder, hepatic artery, and there were no esophageal or gastric varices, thrombus, and portosystemic collaterals.
Because of this anomalous configuration, the Glissonean approach at the hepatic hilum or anatomical resection was judged to be dangerous; therefore, we performed partial resection of S8. During the operation, the liver had a chronic hepatitis pattern and ascites was not observed. No morphological malformations were detected in the liver or in other organs. Intraoperative ultrasonography showed worm-like meandering of the intrahepatic portal veins, but no occlusion findings due to a thrombus . We performed liver resection with a margin of 2 cm from the tumor without the Pringle maneuver . The operative time was 431 min, and the amount of blood loss was 785 ml. The final pathological diagnosis was moderately differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma with an UICC classification of pT2N0M0, Stage II. The fibrosis stage and inflammatory grade of the resected liver were both F3A2 according to the New Inuyama classification. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 14 days after the surgery.