A 62-year-old woman came to our center with extremely severe hydronephrosis and multiple right renal calculi found by annual physical check. She reported no renal colic, nausea or fever and had no current use of any medications. Her temperature was 36.7 °C, pulse 89 bpm, respiratory rate 18 bpm, and non-invasive blood pressure 130/57 mmHg. Unenhanced CT scan demonstrated extremely severe hydronephrosis and multiple right renal calculi with the largest diameter of 2 cm . Urine routine was positive for nitrites and leukocyte esterase, and microscopical examination showed + + + for leucocyte.
After thorough examination, we performed prone-position mini-percutaneous nephrolithotomy under spinal anaesthesia. A single tract was created under the guidance of ultrasound to directly reach the median calyceal group. After the insertion of a guidewire, the channel was dilated to 16Fr with a fascia dilator. During the operation, swollen mucosa could hardly be seen through turbid purulent urine. Multiple golden stones embedded in the renal pelvis were fragmented with holmium laser and flushed out, and a considerable number of the stones were removed. After 2 h’ lithotripsy, the operation finished after successful indwelling of a 6Fr double-J stent and a 16 F nephrostomy tube.
Two hours postoperatively, the patient complained of chilly and shiver. Her blood pressure dropped to 85/60 mmHg, and blood tests showed C-reactive protein 31.4 mg/L, White blood cell 9.55 × 109/L, D-dimer 570.0 ng/ml. Symptoms were relieved after empirically intravenous infusion of 300 mg biapenem bid and micro-pump injection with dopamine.
Three days later during the CT scan, the patient abruptly developed respiratory distress and loss of consciousness. Her blood pressure dropped to 76/45 mmHg, and oxygen saturation decreased to 85% under nasal catheter inhalation of oxygen. Clinical findings indicated the possibility of PE with shock. Supported by multi-channel intravenous rehydration, micro-pump injection with norepinephrine and mask oxygen inhalation, her blood pressure fluctuated between 108–124 and 65–78 mmHg. However, the patient still complained of dyspnea and chest pain, and her blood oxygen saturation remained unstable at an average of 92% under mask oxygen inhalation. Emergency laboratory tests showed a D-dimer of more than 3300 ng/ml. Considering the rising level of D-dimer and the patient’s clinical manifestation, we decided that PE might be the most likely diagnosis. Thus, we administrated anticoagulant therapy with 4000 U low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) at once and offered emergency CTPA, which revealed multiple embolisms in her left pulmonary artery and its branches . Meanwhile, doppler echocardiography showed that the patient’s left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 52% with severe tricuspid regurgitation, and experienced sonographers estimated that pulmonary arterial systolic pressure was about 40 mmHg (mild pulmonary hypertension). Doppler ultrasonography of lower limbs revealed intermuscular venous thrombosis in her left leg.
It was a contradictory situation with both the urgent need for thrombolysis therapy and the high vulnerability of surgery field bleeding. In order to solve the life-threatening problem first, our multi-disciplinary team administrated 50 mg of Alteplase ivgtt which was completed within 2 h for thrombolysis, and then transferred the patient to intensive care unit (ICU) for further life-supporting therapy. In order to prevent venous thromboembolism (VTE), 0.4 ml LMWH was subcutaneously injected every 12 h in ICU. Routine re-examination of the lower limbs venous ultrasonography and echocardiography was ordered to monitor the patient’s condition. Sonographers reported the remission trend of tricuspid regurgitation and pulmonary hypertension. Intermuscular venous thrombosis in her left leg could no longer be detected 6 days after the thrombolysis treatment.
On the 6th postoperative day, the patient suddenly developed unconsciousness and anhelation in ICU, and her blood oxygen saturation progressively dropped to 85%. Urgent intubation, mechanical ventilation and blood transfusion were applied to correct the patient’s anemia. Gradually, her oxygen saturation rose to 98%, but crimson and opaque drainage fluid kept flowing through her nephrostomy tube without any sign to stop even after clamping the catheter for 30 min. Her hemoglobin (Hb) level was still decreasing progressively . All the above clues were indicative of post thrombolysis bleeding. Diffused contrast medium in the middle and lower part of the right kidney was seen during DSA . SRAE was then performed under general anesthesia. The patient reported no obvious discomfort and generally recovered after conventional symptomatic treatment and blood transfusion. Anticoagulant treatment method was gradually changed to oral application of Warfarin 3 mg qn, and the patient was approved to be discharged 26 days postoperatively. She returned to her daily activity and reported no obvious discomfort, and during re-examination, the echocardiography showed LVEF of 70% with no obvious abnormality.