A 36-year-old Caucasian woman, gravida 3, para 2, presented to our antenatal outpatient clinic in the 10th week of gestation complaining of uterine prolapse and amenorrhea. Five years earlier, at the age of 31 years, she had her first spontaneous vaginal delivery, after 39 weeks of clinically unremarkable gestation and after a seven-hour labor. A living male baby weighing 2950 g, with Apgar scores of 10/10, was delivered. After that, a total uterine prolapse (POP-Q IV) was observed and, therefore, a pelvic reconstruction operation was scheduled. However, she missed the appointment and she was lost to follow-up.
Four years later, at the age of 35 years, the patient had her first pregnancy in a prolapsed uterus and the delivery was performed by an elective caesarean section after 38 weeks of gestation. During this second pregnancy follow-up she experienced symptoms of heaviness, but no pelvic pain or urinary incontinence. Pelvic examination showed that the uterus persisted in the pelvis because of increased volume. The cervical os was closed, while the entire cervix was lying outside the vulva during the first three months and after week 18 it appeared completely inside. When the cervix was outside the vulva, it appeared enlarged and edematous with marked ectropion but it was not ulcerated. A live male baby weighing 3150 g, with Apgar scores of 10/10, was delivered with elective caesarian section. After that, a total uterine prolapse persisted but she refused any procedure for pelvic reconstruction; neither was a vaginal pessary used.
One year later, at the age of 36 years, she presented again in our clinic with a 10-week pregnancy in a prolapsed uterus. A vaginal pessary was applied to keep the uterus inside the pelvis after manual reposition. The pessary was removed at the 24th week. The gravid uterus persisted in the abdominal cavity because it was increased in volume . She did not show any symptoms of heaviness or urinary incontinence. The cervix was lying at the os of the vulva (POP-Q II) without signs of dessication or ulceration. It was enlarged and edematous but showed no evidence of cervical incompetence.
Serial transabdominal ultrasonograpic examinations showed a normally developing fetus in longitudinal position in the uterine cavity. Elective caesarean section was performed at the 38th week. A living, healthy female baby weighing 3030 g, with Apgar scores of 10/10, was delivered.
The postnatal period was uneventful and she was discharged home four days later in good health. Normal postpartum uterine involution was observed. After that, a total uterine prolapse (POP-Q IV) was still observed .
She is scheduled for follow-up examination and pelvic reconstruction surgery.