A 14-year-old iTaukei (indigenous Fijian) girl presented to our hospital with a 1-month history of abdominal pain. Two days prior to her admission, her abdominal pain became worse, especially after movement, and was relieved by lying down. She also developed a high-grade fever and nausea and had one episode of vomiting. She gave no history of cough, diarrhea, vomiting, or dysuria. Her last menstrual period was on 28/9/2017. She denied any history of sexual intercourse.
She was referred to a nearby hospital, where ultrasonography showed a cystic structure measuring 4.9 cm × 4.4 cm at the right adnexal region. Minimal free fluid was seen in the pouch of Douglas. No obvious appendix abnormality was seen, and other structures, including the uterus, were normal. She was then transferred to one of the main hospitals in Fiji for further investigation and management.
The patient’s past medical history was unremarkable. She had no record of previous admission. She had not been receiving any regular medication and had no known allergies.
The patient resides in a village that is approximately a 45-minute drive from the nearest town. She lives in a two-bedroom corrugated house with her parents and three younger siblings. Her usual diet consists of boiled root crops (such as cassava and taro), local vegetables, and fish. The water source is a spring that supplies the whole village. The family uses a water seal toilet. She gave no history of travel outside her village in 2017.
On examination at the main hospital, the patient looked unwell. Her pulse was 116 beats per minute, blood pressure 114/60 mmHg, respiratory rate 21 breaths per minute, and temperature 38.8 °C. The results of her chest and cardiovascular examinations were normal. Abdominal examination revealed generalized tenderness on light palpation. However, there was no guarding or rebound tenderness, and no mass was palpable. The result of the per rectal examination was normal, as was the remaining examination.
Blood tests revealed a hemoglobin of 9.8 g/dl (normal range [NR] 11.5–18.5 g/dl) and white blood cell count of 14,100 cells/mm3 (NR 4000–11,000 cells/mm3). Two blood cultures revealed no growth after 48 hours. The patient’s full blood count, liver and renal function, and serum electrolyte test results are shown in Table . The results of her chest and abdominal x-ray were normal.
Exploratory laparotomy revealed serosal appendicitis with erythema and abundant fibrinous peritoneal fluid; hence, an appendicectomy was performed. It was noted that the right ovary was enlarged and had ruptured because of pus collection. The right ovary was incised, and pus was drained. This pus was cultured and yielded a pure growth of Salmonella Typhi , which was identified by using Microbact™ 12A/12B identification kits (Oxoid Microbiology Products, Altrincham, UK). This identification was later confirmed by Salmonella-specific antiserum testing (Difco™; Becton, Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). The antimicrobial sensitivity test was performed using a disk diffusion method on Mueller-Hinton agar. The organism was susceptible to all tested antibiotics (ampicillin, chloramphenicol, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, gentamicin, cephalothin, ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, and nalidixic acid). Histopathology of the resected appendix revealed reactive lymphoid follicle in mucosa and acute inflammation on the serosal layer, compatible with periappendicitis.
The patient was treated with intravenous ceftriaxone 1 g twice daily, cloxacillin 1 g four times daily, and metronidazole 500 mg three times daily for 5 days. She made an uneventful recovery and was discharged to home on the sixth postoperative day to complete a further 8 days of oral cotrimoxazole. Patient was reviewed 1 week after her discharge from the hospital. She did not have any complaint; her surgical wound was clean; and there were no remarkable physical findings. The result of her stool culture after completion of treatment was negative for Salmonella.