A 74-year-old man working as a car washer visited our cardiology department for chest discomfort and hypoxaemia. He had no previous medical history and was not taking any medications. On arrival, his temperature was 36.8°C, his blood pressure was 94/76 mmHg, his pulse rate was 117 beats/minute (regular rhythm), his respiratory rate was 24 breaths/minute, and his oxygen saturation was 89% on room air. Despite the presence of hypoxaemia and tachypnoea, we could not detect any other abnormal findings from his physical examination suggesting any disease related to hypoxaemia. Electrocardiogram on admission suggested right ventricular strain pattern with complete right bundle branch block and S1Q3T3 pattern. Echocardiography on admission revealed that remarkably enlarged right ventricular suppressed left ventricular contraction . Hence a contrast CT scan was performed, revealing bilateral pulmonary embolisms to be the underlying cause of the symptom . Despite other examinations, such as ultrasonography of the inferior limb deep vein, the source of the thrombosis could not be found. Laboratory findings revealed congenital coagulation disorders, including protein C/S deficiency, anti-thrombin III deficiency, and anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome to be negative.
After admission, the patient was initially administered systemic thrombolytic therapy with monteplase (1,200,000 unit) and heparin. Contrast CT scan performed 7 days after admission revealed complete disappearance of the thromboembolisms and symptoms were mitigated as well.
Three months later, the patient was referred to our hospital because of recurring chest discomfort. Another contrast CT scan was performed, revealing a new pulmonary embolism despite continuous anticoagulation therapy with warfarin. PT-INR during treatment period was in the standard treatment range [PT-INR (1.6–2.6)] and PT-INR on second admission was 2.1. A giant thrombus (43 × 50 mm) located in the right axillary vein, which we could not find during previous hospitalization, was pointed out . Vein angiography was also performed, revealing a giant thrombus with no collateral vessels. Since ultrasound echography showed sufficient blood flow around the thrombus, swelling, and pain of his right arm were not observed before the operation.
We were finally able to identify that the source of his recurrent pulmonary embolism was a giant thrombus located in the right dilated axillary vein. Eventually, the huge thrombus was removed surgically , and the symptoms were subsequently alleviated. Anticoagulation with warfarin was continuously prescribed and chest discomfort completely resolved. The patient retired his job due to this experience and his old age, and reported no post-operative complication during 2 years after the operation.