A 61-year-old gentleman admitted 3 months ago because of multiple pulmonary nodules which had been found in health examination. HRCT showed that there were two nodules, including one solid pulmonary nodule (SPN) that was located at the right upper lobe and one GGO at the right lower lobe . Other preoperative examinations showed no contraindications. A right upper lobectomy and right lower lobe wedge resection by single-port video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) were performed, and about 3 h before the operation, a CT-guided hook wire localization of the GGO was performed in radiology department. According to the CT scan, the hook wire was inserted 3 cm deep into the pulmonary parenchyma and the hook-shaped tip was fixed 1.8 cm away from the GGO . There was no pneumothorax or hemothorax during this procedure.
General anesthesia was performed and then a 4 cm incision was made at the pivot of the fourth intercostal space and the anterior axillary line. While entering the thorax, the hookwire was found still attached to the right lower lobe and the tail outside the thorax was cut off to avoid bacterial contamination. As we planed before, the first step of the operation was wedge resection of the right lower lobe. After several attempts to search for the GGO by manual palpation, the hookwire was submerged in pulmonary parenchyma and could not be touched. A 1 cm incision at the pivot of the eighth intercostal space and the midaxillary line and a 3 cm incision at the pivot of the eighth intercostal space and the posterior axillary line were added but still helpless. Then the patient was sent to the radiologist department where a CT scan was performed and the hookwire was found in the artery of apical segment of right upper lobe, which was planned to be removed . When the patient was sent back to the theater, the operation continued from right lower lobe wedge resection, then right upper lobectomy. After successfully dissecting pulmonary vein and superior bronchus of the right upper lobe with endoscopic stapler (Ethicon), we ligatured and cut arteries of right upper lobe one by one manually but did not find the hookwire. Afterwards, a second CT scan was performed and the hookwire was found in the artery of apicoposterior segment of left upper lobe . Since this foreign body could not be reached through right thoracic cavity, the vascular surgery department was consulted after the incisions were closed. Following the suggestion of consultation, the patient was prepared to receive interventional therapy under digital substraction angiography (DSA).
As shown on the DSA images, the hook wire was still in the artery of apicoposterior segment of left upper lobe . A guide wire was inserted through right femoral vein to the target artery, subsequently, an endoloop was inserted to hitch the hookwire and extract it out . During the process of DSA, there was no bradycardia, tachycardia or arrhythmia.
The patient was eventually discharged 15 days after surgery. Low molecular weight heparin was injected in subcutaneous tissue two times a day from the second day after surgery to discharge day. The pathological results indicated that the SPN in right upper lobe was an invasive adenocarcinoma, while the GGO in right lower lobe was a minimally invasive adenocarcinoma, and there was no metastatic lymph node. The patient received follow-up CT scan 3 months after surgery, which showed no obvious abnormality.