A 60-year-old female had progressive HV and bunion deformities for many years. Despite increasing pain in the bunion area initially and then the crossover deformity between first and second toes, she could still manage for several years by wearing increasingly more accommodating shoes with wider forefoot region and roomy toe box made of soft materials. Due to her daily required walking activities, she developed thick and painful metatarsal calluses despite wearing mostly thick-soled shoes only. She could hardly tolerate the metatarsalgia of her feet in walking due to the constant feeling of walking on a pebble in her shoes. She found that walking was becoming an exhausting chore to avoid. She felt losing balance easily on uneven ground and walking down stairs. She had fallen several times already. Her mother had also HV deformity but not as severe and she got by without surgery. Physical examination revealed bilateral HV deformity that could only be partially corrected. The passive range of motion of her right foot first MPJ was 45° in both extension and flexion and 60° and 45°, respectively, of her left foot first MPJ. Her right second toe had severe varus deformity that was crossing over the hallux but without any remarkable clawing deformity. Her left second toe varus deformity was not as severe. The second toe varus deformity of her left foot could be manually realigned completely but not her right foot second toe. Both second MPJs were moderately tender and had reduced passive flexion movement due to pain. First metatarsals were hyper mobile in both sagittal and frontal planes. There were large and thick calluses under the forefoot region of both feet . Dorsoplantar standing x-rays of her feet revealed a right foot first intermetatarsal angle (IMA) of 17.5° and metatarsophalangeal angle (MPA) of 33.7° and 16.8° and 27.9°, respectively, of her left foot. IMA and MPA are usually considered normal within their upper limits of 9° and 15°, respectively. All first and second MPJs were incongruent and the right second MPJ subluxated in dorsomedial direction. Both tibial and fibula sesamoids were dissociated from their first metatarsals. Pre-operative walking plantar pressure study by F-Scan (Tekscan, USA) revealed poor weight bearing and reactive force under the first ray and obvious lateral shift of functional area of her forefeet to the second and third metatarsal heads where she had large and thick metatarsal calluses. This patient agreed to undergo a simultaneous bilateral syndesmosis procedure [, ], a non-osteotomy soft tissue technique, for her HV deformity correction and possible additional surgery and pinning if necessary for the varus deformity correction of her second toes.
An initial one-inch incision was made along the distal dorsal medial border of the second metatarsal. After blunt dissection, the interosseous muscle was retracted laterally and partially resected to help expose the lateral soft tissue structures for the release of the lateral collateral and metatarsosesamoid ligaments. The adductor hallucis tendon was preserved and the fibular sesamoid was not resected. The distal third of the first and second metatarsals was then exposed subperiosteally and roughened in a fish-scale fashion with an osteotome. Three drill holes of 2 mm diameter were made in dorsoplantar direction in the distal half of first metatarsal shaft about 5 mm apart. Double-strand number-onepolydioxanone dissolvable sutures (ETHICON, Johnson & Johnson, USA) were then passed through the drill holes and around the second metatarsal, binding the two together. Intraoperative anteroposterior (AP) view X-ray was then taken to assess the MPV deformity correction and first metatarsal alignment with a needle holder temporarily locking the intermetatarsal cerclage suture before it was tied later. However, to our surprise that, not only the HV and MPV deformities were corrected but also the severe right second toe varus deformity was also mostly corrected spontaneously without any surgical intervention to it yet. The same phenomenon also was happened to her left second toe but with complete spontaneous correction. The residual varus deformity of right foot second toe was then further corrected by capsulorrhaphy and collateral ligaments release of its MPJ. A medial horizontal elliptical incision was then made to remove redundant skin, bursa, capsular tissues, and exostoses. The combined single ligament tendon capsular layer was then approximated with interrupted 2-0 Vicryl sutures (Ethicon, Johnson & Johnson, USA) without plication.
The patient worea forefoot cast for protected walking for 3months. She was allowed only to return to unrestricted activities and shoes about 6months after surgery.