A 50-year-old man with a medical history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia presented to our emergency department complaining of recurrent resting chest pain (Canadian Cardiovascular Society Class III). A physical examination revealed that the patient’s blood pressure was 80/40 mmHg, his pulse rate was 61 beats per minute, and that he displayed an absence of any abnormal cardiac or respiratory sounds. An electrocardiography showed normal sinus rhythm without significant ST-T wave abnormality, and chest X-ray findings were unremarkable. His serum troponin I peaked at 0.09 mcg/L (ULN ≤0.05 mcg/L) within 24 h of presentation. Under the clinical diagnosis of unstable angina, he was treated in accordance with acute coronary syndrome guidelines [, ].
While using the femoral approach with a 6-Fr sheath, no luminal stenosis was apparent at the right coronary artery (RCA) in RCA angiography. Left main coronary artery could not be engaged with conventional diagnostic catheters, such as Judkins Left 4 and Amplatz 1.0, and nonselective angiography using pig-tail catheter raised suspicion that the left coronary artery (LCA) was originating from the right coronary cusp (RCC) with an up-to-90% occlusive lesion present at the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD) . After a Judkins right 4 guiding catheter was placed around the left coronary ostium, a .014″ coronary long wire (RG3, Asahi-Intecc, Nagoya, Japan) was successfully introduced into the left circumflex artery (LCx). Because the Judkins right guiding catheter was too short to reach the left coronary ostium, it was exchanged with a Judkins left 3.5 guiding catheter instead, which was deeply intubated into the left main coronary artery with ballooning support on the LCx wire. Following guiding catheter stabilization, angiography clearly revealed a tubular eccentric proximal LAD with 90% stenosis . After passing an .014″ coronary guide wire (Runthrough®, TERUMO Inc., Japan) through the lesion, balloon angioplasty was performed with a 3.0 × 15-mm balloon. A 4.0 × 18-mm drug-eluting stent (XIENCE Alpine®, Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA) was then implanted with adjuvant ballooning performed with a 4.5 × 10-mm balloon. After successful proximal LAD revascularization, final angiography showed no residual stenosis or complications . The patient tolerated the procedure well, and appeared in good condition postoperatively. Two days later, computed tomography coronary angiography to establish the LCA system course revealed an anomalous origin of LAD and LCx from the right sinus of Valsalva .