A 51 year old right hand dominant Caucasian female with history of hypothyroidism (microsomal and thyroid antibody positive), celiac disease and SS (seropositive for SSA, ANA, hypergammaglobulinemia, intermittent parotid swelling with mild oral/ocular sicca) experienced right C5 dermatomal varicella zoster infection seven weeks previously and then presented with right upper and right lower extremity weakness of one week duration. The symptoms got progressively worse to the point that she had difficulty with ambulation. She had associated burning dysesthesias of left thigh. The patient’s neurological examination was remarkable for hypertonia, decreased power (3/5), hyperreflexia along with sensory loss in the right upper and lower extremity and hyperesthesia in the entire left lower extremity.
Gadolinium contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head was normal but MRI of the cervico-thoracic spine revealed an enhancing intramedullary lesion from C2 to C4, centrally into the right of the midline with signal changes at the T1 level without enhancement or expansive appearance . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was abnormal for a mild lymphocytic pleocytosis, marked elevation of IgG and prominent oligoclonal bands . Comprehensive infectious workup including blood cultures for bacteria, polymerase chain reaction for varicella zoster, herpes simplex virus, and serologies for Lyme disease and syphilis were negative. Differentials for non-infectious inflammatory myelitis were considered; including paraneoplastic myelitis and myelitis with Sjogren’s syndrome. NMO antibodies were not obtained during this presentation. The patient was treated with 1 gram of intravenous (IV) methylprednisone and 800 mg of oral acyclovir for 5 days for presumptive diagnosis of transverse myelitis secondary to varicella zoster infection with improvement in her symptoms. She was discharged on oral prednisone with instructions to taper and discontinue the drug over the next 1 week.
Two months later, she developed left upper and lower extremity weakness, bilateral lower extremity dysesthesias and urinary incontinence. Examination confirmed 4/5 left hemiparesis with brisk reflexes, bilateral ankle clonus along with pinprick loss in both lower extremities. Repeat MRI of the spine revealed worsening enhancement at lower cervical cord region (C5-7) with extension to T1 level . Repeat CSF analysis showed a lymphocytic pleocytosis, increased IgG synthesis index and positive oligoclonal bands . Immunological work up was abnormal for NMO-IgG/AQP4 antibody . An ophthalmologic evaluation was negative for optic neuritis. The patient’s relapsing neurological illness was felt to represent NMOSD from underlying long standing SS. She was treated with 1 gram of IV methylprednisone and started on 1 gram of IV cyclophosphamide (CTX) therapy for worsening motor-sensory deficit. She was discharged on high dose oral prednisone and continuation of monthly CTX infusions.
After her second monthly CTX infusion, patient had a relapse with right upper and lower extremity weakness, dysesthesias in the parieto-occipital scalp region and right leg along with urinary incontinence. The patient was placed on 5 days of pulse IV steroids with improvement in her symptoms. She was discharged on 60 mg of daily prednisone which was slowly tapered over 6 months. She continued to show clinical improvement despite persistence of NMO-IgG antibodies. After 5 infusions of monthly CTX therapy, maintenance treatment with Mycophenolate Mofetil (MMF) was started. She has remained on MMF without recurrence of symptoms for over 18 months. She has no residual motor or sensory deficits. Repeat MRI of the cervico-thoracic spine 6 months after her last CTX infusion, prednisone and MMF showed near complete resolution of previous abnormal cord signal changes .