A 19-year-old Japanese woman presented with a left temporal headache. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed a well-defined, heterogeneously enhanced tumor in the left temporal lobe, approximately 10 mm in size, showing high-intensity on T2-weighted images . The patient underwent a left frontal-temporal craniotomy and total resection. These tumor cells had less than 1 mitosis per 10 high-power fields. The primary histopathological diagnosis at that time was low-grade glioma. The patient was discharged after treatment and followed up without any additional treatment. No clear local recurrence was detected during 3 years of follow-up and the patient subsequently elected to stop further medical examinations.
However, 12 years after the initial treatment, the patient returned with a left temporal headache, diplopia and tinnitus. MRI showed a local recurrence of the tumor around the surgical cavity with prominent perifocal edema and a second resection was performed. Intraoperatively, the tumor was prominently hypervascular, with many feeding arteries from the dura, and a part of the tumor was weakly positive for 5-aminolevuinic acid-based photodynamic diagnosis (PDD). Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining showed an astrocytic tumor lesion with necrosis, microvascular proliferation, invasion and multiple mitoses (5 mitotic counts per 10 high-power fields). No EGBs were observed. . Immunohistochemical (IHC) stains were positive for oligo2, and tumor cells were retained for INI1 and ATRX staining. Approximately 21% of these cells were positive for Ki-67 but negative for IDH1-R132H. Furthermore, the specimen from the initial surgery was revisited and the diagnosis was changed to PXA of WHO grade II based on histology showing spindle shaped cells, pleomorphic nucleated cells and EGBs . Reticulin fibers were not stained and CD34 staining was negative in both tumor resections . As recurrence happened after the PXA resection, APXA was expected due to poorer histological findings; however, the tumor had no characteristic feature of PXA such as EGB, leading to a diagnosis as GBM by histological classification because of nuclear atypia, mitotic activity, a diffuse growth pattern, microvascular proliferation and necrosis . The patient received chemotherapy (temozolomide) and conformal radiation therapy accordingly and outpatient follow-ups have detected no obvious symptoms for over 1 year after surgery.
Additionally, specimens of each resection were sent to the National Cancer Center Research Institute and MLPA (Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification) was performed for 1p, 19q, CDKN2A, IDH1 R132H (c.395G > A), R132C (c.394C > T), IDH2 R172K (c.515G > A), R172M (c.515G > T) and Pyrosequence for IHD1 R132, IDH2 R172, BRAF V600E, H3F3A K27, H3F3A G34, HIST1H3B, TERT C228T, FGFR1 N546, and FGFR1 K656. The analysis detected a BRAF V600E mutation in both the initial and recurrent tumors, with mutant allele findings at 16 and 49%, respectively. Both 1p/19q and CDKN2A were intact in the initial specimen, but a 19q deletion and CDKN2A homozygous deletion were detected in the recurrent specimen. IDH1/IDH2, H3F3A, HIST1H3B, TERT, and FGFR1 were intact in both specimens. From this analysis the tumor was assumed to have been derived from pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma.