A 28-year-old Nigerian woman of Igbo ethnicity presented with a 6-week history of neck pain associated with paroxysmal tonic spasms of the left upper and lower limbs. She had no sphincter dysfunction or constipation. There was a positive Lhermitte's sign with neck flexion and severe burning sensation of the right lower limb. There was no prior neck trauma, cough, night sweats or weight loss and she did not complain of visual blurring. She was not hypertensive or diabetic but her father was hypertensive and her mother had diabetes. She was para 1 + 2 (1 alive) and had recurrent pregnancy losses twice in the mid-trimester period. She delivered a live male neonate 4 months before presentation and had a tetanus toxoid injection 3 days before presentation in addition to the three doses she had during antenatal care. She had a previous history of anterior neck swelling a month after delivery.
General physical examination showed a young woman with frequent paroxysmal tonic flexor spasms lasting 2 minutes each and involving the left upper and lower limbs. Higher mental function was normal. The Lhermitte's sign was elicited by forward neck flexion. The pupils were 3 mm in size and she had a relative afferent pupillary defect in the right eye. Initial fundoscopy was normal. She had a spastic quadriparesis with a power of grade 4 [Medical Research Council (MRC) grading] and bilateral extensor plantar response and absent abdominal reflexes. Light touch, vibration and joint position sensations were impaired up to the C7/C8 dermatome. Romberg's sign was present. Her cerebellar system was normal and there was no spinal tenderness. Her pulse rate was 80 beats/minute and regular. Her blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg with normal heart sounds. Chest and abdominal examinations were normal.
The cranial MRI showed normal T1 and T2 weighted images. The initial cervical T2 weighted MRI showed patchy ill-defined central linear hyperintense focus in the intramedullary portion of the spinal cord between C1 and C5 in keeping with transverse myelitis . Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) on admission was 67 mm/hour and she had positive lupus erythematosus (LE) cells. Antinuclear and anti double-stranded antibodies were negative. Cardiolipin IgM was 15.0 MPL/ml (reference range 0.00–3.5 MPL/ml) while Cardiolipin IgG was within normal limits at 2.8 mGPL/ml (reference range 0.00–15.0 GPL/ml). Her prothrombin time (PT) was prolonged -PT 18.4s, control 12.9s, prothrombin time ratio (PTR) 1.4, international normalized ratio (INR) 1.6.
Her thyroid, liver function test, blood glucose and electrolytes were normal. The results were: serum calcium 2.4 mmol/liter, potassium 3.9 mmol/liter, sodium 135 mmol/liter, bicarbonate 26 mml/liter, chloride 98 mmol/liter and urea 4.5 mmol/liter. She was retroviral negative.
Her cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) test was normal: CSF protein 21 mg/dl, CSF glucose 2.8 mmol/liter, microscopy <5 WBC/mm3; CSF Immunoglobulin and serum NMO IgG assays could not be done.
An initial assessment of transverse myelitis was made and she was placed on intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g daily for 5 days, thereafter oral prednisolone 70 mg daily which was gradually tailed off. Although her serum potassium level fell to 2.9 mmol/liter, she did not receive additional potassium supplement with the therapy. She was however advised to take foods high in potassium. Her drug therapy included diazepam 15 mg 6 hourly and Baclofen 10 mg at night given for relief of the spasms. Gabapentin 400 mg at night and carbamazepine 400 mg thrice daily were also administered for the neuropathic pain. She also had regular physiotherapy.
The patient gradually improved with gradual resolution of the muscle spasms, weakness and rigidity. Muscle power increased to 5 globally and the repeat ESR reduced to 17 mm/hour.
Ophthalmic examination done 4 weeks after admission revealed impaired visual acuity which was worse in the right eye (right eye – counting figure, left eye – 6/9). The corneal sensitivity was intact with a relative afferent pupillary defect. There was bilateral temporal pallor with slight blurring of the optic disc margins nasally. There were also nerve fiber defects along the superotemporal vascular arcade with moderate perivascular sheathing.
A repeat MRI was done a month after the initial one and showed resolution of the earlier noticed signal intensity at the spinomedullary junction . A final diagnosis of Devic's NMO syndrome was made and she was discharged after 5 weeks to be followed up in the outpatient clinic. She has been seen many times at the clinic and there has been sustained clinical and neurological improvement. However, she did not receive additional immunosuppressive therapy after completing the intravenous methylprednisolone, neither was there a repeat confirmatory test done for her antiphospholipid status. She was followed up in the clinic for 8 months after her discharge.