A 5.5-year old girl had undergone surgical patch closure of a large secundum atrial septal defect with valvotomy of a moderate pulmonary stenosis at the age of 2 months; a mild aortic stenosis with a thickened tricuspid aortic valve was not corrected. She was born as the first child to non-consanguineous parents. The family history was negative for sudden cardiac death, but the maternal grandfather had epileptic seizures without fever in his youth. At the age of 12 months the girl suffered from a first afebrile seizure and at the age of 23 months from a first febrile seizure. Four months later she suffered from a series of afebrile seizures. Therefore valproic acid was started and maintained for 2 years. During this treatment she was seizure-free with normal electroencephalogram (EEG). After tapering valproic acid over a period of 2 months, short generalized paroxysmal discharges appeared on the EEG for the first time without clinical correlate. One year later she suffered from two further uncomplicated febrile seizures. Since then she is seizure-free without anticonvulsive treatment but the 24 h-EEG persistently shows subclinical absences. Since the intellectual and physical development of the patient is normal it was decided together with the parents not to restart the antiepileptic medication but to follow her up closely. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging was normal. Clinical cardiologic, echocardiographic and neurologic examinations of the first degree relatives were normal except for the mother who showed epicanthic folds and hypertelorism. Unfortunately, the maternal grandfather did not consent with any investigations.
At inspection, she had bilateral epicanthic folds; broad eyebrows, a broad nasal tip and hypertelorism, however no ptosis or low-set ears (Figures and ). Her body weight was 18 kg (25th percentile), head circumference 51 cm (50th percentile) and height 115 cm (75th percentile). She did not complain about any cardiac symptoms and did not suffer from heart failure. Twelve-lead electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm alternating with an atrio-ventricular-nodal rhythm and an incomplete right-bundle-branch-block. Twenty-four-hour electrocardiogram showed sporadic ventricular and supraventricular ectopic beats. Echocardiography revealed a mild residual valvular pulmonary stenosis with moderate pulmonary valve regurgitation and mild aortic valve stenosis with mild aortic regurgitation. Left ventricular function was normal, however, extensive hypertrabeculation resulting in a two-layered structure of the myocardium was visible in the mid-ventricular and apical segments of the left ventricle, consistent with the diagnosis of LVHT (Figures and ). Review of previous echocardiographic examinations disclosed that LVHT had been present already at age 2 years. As a primary prophylaxis for cardiac embolism aspirin 50 mg/d was started. Since she was symptom-free, no further cardiac medication was prescribed. At the latest follow-up investigation in September 2011, she was in a good cardiac and neurologic condition, no seizures had recurred and her intellectual development was normal. Echocardiography was unchanged.
Molecular genetic analyses of the PTPN11, KRAS, RAF1 and SOS1 genes were negative. Array CGH using a 1 M oligonucleotide microarray platform (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) was performed to screen genome-wide for submicroscopic deletions and duplications . Genomic positions are given according to genome-build hg18. Array CGH detected five previously not described CNVs as listed in Table . FISH analyses were not carried out because of the size of the CNVs. Regarding the duplications it could not be assessed whether they were tandem-duplications on the same locus or whether the duplicated fragment was inserted or translocated in another chromosome. By application of quantitative Real-Time PCR (qPCR) we could show, however, that none of the changes had developed de novo. All five CNVs are currently not listed in the Toronto Database of Genomic Variants (DGV), therefore, have to be considered as non-frequent variants in normal controls. Follow-up and testing of the index patient and her parents by qPCR revealed that all CNVs were inherited from one of the unaffected parents (maternal: deletion 1q42.3, duplication 3q26.32q26.33; paternal: duplication 14q32.11, deletion and duplication 20q13.33). We thus conclude that these changes are most likely not clinically significant CNVs but rare benign variants, although a reduced penetrance of inherited CNVs cannot be excluded.