An asymptomatic 41-year-old man underwent evaluation for employment health assessment and was accidentally discovered to have significant aortic dilatation. He reported a history of total repair of TOF with transannular patching at 2 years of age. Postoperatively, he underwent ambulatory follow-up for 21 years without any difficulty until he discontinued follow-up on his own because he was asymptomatic. Last transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) reports in his pediatric medical records at that time showed only trivial aortic regurgitation (AR) without any aortic root abnormality. On physical examination, he was 173 cm tall, weighed 65.6 kg, and his blood pressure was elevated to 165/60 mmHg; however, he had not received any medication. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed significant aneurysmal aortic dilatation (maximum diameter of 88 mm at the sinus of Valsalva) . TTE revealed severe AR, without significant pulmonary regurgitation or residual VSD, and transesophageal echocardiography showed a slight shortening of the noncoronary cusp and poor coaptation of leaflets of the aortic valve at the central portion where a massive AR, which had 0.9 cm2 of regurgitant orifice area, could be seen. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed that significant pulmonary regurgitation flow and residual VSD could not be detected and that right ventricular (RV) ejection fraction was 37%, end-diastolic RV volume index was 201 ml/m2. He was referred to our department for surgical treatment of aortic root dilatation and AR.
The procedure was performed through a midline sternotomy, after taping the left femoral artery and vein. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established after femoral arterial and bicaval cannulation. Left ventricular venting was initiated using a venting tube inserted through the right upper pulmonary vein. Exacerbation of AR and onset of ventricular fibrillation were observed after initiation of cooling, necessitating aortic clamping, and antegrade cardioplegic arrest. Inspection through the aortotomy revealed a dilatated aortic annulus (diameter 35 mm) and floppy aortic annulus and leaflets. All leaflets were thin and flail, and had irregular thickening which implied myxomatous degeneration. There was a stiff portion in the left ventricular outflow tract under the noncoronary and right coronary sinus, as a result of the VSD patch. Because we considered that valve-sparing aortic root replacement (VSARR) could be difficult, we performed the Bentall procedure using a 27-mm SJM Masters series Aortic Valved Graft (St. Jude Medical, Cardiology Division Inc., Minnesota), using felt strips in order to reinforce the aortic annulus. After cooling below 20 °C, we performed distal aortic anastomosis using a 28-mm J-Graft Shield Noe (27 mm ) (Japan Lifeline Co. Ltd., Japan) under deep hypothermic circulatory arrest with antegrade cerebral perfusion. After graft-to-graft anastomosis was performed, the patient was easily weaned from the bypass and showed an uneventful course except for the onset of ventricular fibrillation, which was controlled after short-termed assisted circulatory support.
Histopathological examination of the ascending aorta specimens revealed cystic medial degeneration with some areas of mucopolysaccharides accumulation, collagen deposition, fragmentation, and loss of elastic lamellae across large areas of the media . The aortic valve showed mucoid degeneration with fragmentation of elastic fibers . The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on the 26th postoperative day.