A 9-week-old male infant presented multiple diffuse red skin lesions. These swellings gradually increased in number and size and were associated with subcutaneous harder blue lesions . Neurological examination revealed progressive macrocrania associated with irritability and vomiting. A total body angio-MR study showed multiple diffuse vascular lesions in the brain, spinal cord, bones, muscles, and viscera. Brain lesions were disseminated, involving both supra- and infratentorial regions, with intense and homogeneous contrast enhancement. The largest lesions were deep within the cerebral and cerebellar hemispheres, particularly the one located in the right lenticular nucleus, which showed acute hemorrhage with vasogenic edema, leading to compression of the mesencephalic aqueduct and resulting in triventricular hydrocephalus . An endoscopic ventriculocisternostomy (ETV) was performed on the same day. Surgical approach had included a transfontanellar access on the right, with navigation references to select the entry point and define the route for the 0° Gaab rigid endoscope. Fenestration was achieved between the mammillary bodies and the infundibulum of the pituitary gland using only a Fogarty balloon. During the procedure, we noted that the ventricular ependyma had a petechial appearance, but no significant hemorrhage occurred, and only minor bleeding was controlled with continuous irrigation. A post-operative MRI showed adequate flow signal through the stoma . A biopsy was performed during hospitalization to study some ulcerated and bleeding lesions, which revealed papillary endothelial hyperplasia with no pathognomonic features of a specific entity. Genetic mutations (EIF2AK4, ACVRL1, BMPR1B, BMPR2, CAV1, ENG, KCNK3, SMAD9, NOTCH3, and WES sequences) were investigated with no evidence found. Therapy was initiated with Prednisone (2 mg/kg/day) and Propranolol (1 mg/kg/day). However, due to further massive epistaxis requiring a blood transfusion and no improvement, the therapeutic scheme was modified to combine Prednisone and Vincristine. After 3 weeks of therapy with no improvement, Vincristine was replaced by Rapamycin (0.8 ml/day) with ethical committee consent. The therapy was effective, with no more bleeding observed, and the lesions gradually became smaller and clearer with some desquamative features. The patient was discharged, and therapy continued at home, with Rapamycin doses adjusted based on blood levels, while corticosteroids were gradually decreased. Follow-up over 5 years confirmed the absence of new lesions .