Mr OI is a 44-year-old black African patient of Burkinabè origin. He is a smoker with 10 packs a year and has sickle-cell anaemia, who has been followed for about ten years and is taking 5 mg of folic acid daily. He has no notion of tuberculosis infection or particular pathological history. He was admitted to the rheumatology department for chronic inflammatory lower back pain associated with inflammatory left knee pain that had been going on for about seven months. He had apparently taken a drinkable decoction with no effect on the symptoms. The symptoms were accompanied by a cough with phlegm in the context of evening fever, moderate physical asthenia, anorexia and significant weight loss. On physical examination, clinical anaemia was observed that was not decompensated, a spinal syndrome and bilateral psoitis. On examination of the right shoulder, a soft, purulent swelling of 4x5 cm was observed in the sterno-clavicular joint and normal mobility of the right shoulder. On examination of the knee, a monoarthritis was found, the puncture of which revealed a purulent, fluid liquid. The respiratory tract examination showed a condensation syndrome in the left pulmonary field and a purulent pleural effusion on the right. A right inguinal lymphadenopathy with pus was observed. The examination of the other joints and other organs was without particularity. On biology, a biological inflammatory syndrome was observed with a microcytic hypochromic anaemia of 8.1 g/dl and a C reactive protein (CRP) of 98 mg/l, without hyperleucocytosis.

The renal and hepatic findings were unremarkable. The serology for retroviral HIV was negative. The intradermal reaction (IDR) to the tuberculin was positive at 18 mm. The cytobacteriological examination, the GeneXpert MTB/RIF test and the search for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) in the pus from the different sites (pleura, knee, inguinal lymphadenopathy and sterno-clavicular cold abscess) did not find any germ. On the imaging, the thoracic computed tomography showed a right sterno-clavicular arthrosis with anterior muscular and mediastinal extension associated with a pyothorax and a right lung abscess. The thoracic computed tomography (CT) showed a L3-L4 spondylodiscitis with calcifying abscesses of the psoas and paravertebral muscles. The standard radiography of the left knee showed signs in favour of arthritis. The diagnosis of tuberculosis with multifocal, pleuropulmonary and lymph node involvement was retained in the face of this clinical and biological picture. The patient was put on rifampicin 600 mg daily, isoniazid 300 mg daily, pyrazinamide 2000 mg daily and ethambutol 1600 mg daily for two months. The same doses of rifampicin and isoniazid were continued for 10 months. The patient also received thoracic drainage of the pyothorax in the operating theatre and a joint lavage of the left knee, as well as a drainage of the cold abscess in the sterno-clavicular joint. Finally, local care with antiseptic was applied to the fistula of the inguinal lymphadenopathy and the cold abscess until complete healing. Folic acid treatment was continued in the context of sickle cell anaemia. The immediate evolution was marked by a clinical and biological improvement with disappearance of the inflammatory syndrome and reduction of the fever. The evolution at three months was characterised by an improvement of the psoitis and lower back pain, and a weight gain estimated at 5%.
