A 16-year-old woman treated with adjuvant Nivolumab presented with vomiting, nausea, and weight loss.
The patient was diagnosed with stage IIIb malignant melanoma (T3bN1aM0). Both the primary melanoma and sentinel lymph node were radically removed. The patient was offered adjuvant treatment with Nivolumab (anti-PD-1), with 6 mg/kg administered every 4 wk. Initially, the patient tolerated the treatment well with only a small rise in plasma alanine transaminase compatible with a grade 1 hepatitis. An ultrasound examination of the liver was performed without any abnormalities observed.
After the sixth series of Nivolumab, the patient presented with anorexia, vomiting, nausea, upper abdominal pain, and a weight loss of approximately 3 kg . The patient was admitted and received a short low-dose prednisone treatment for 4 d (40 mg methylprednisolone on the first day followed by 25 mg prednisone for 3 d) with a little initial symptomatic effect. The patient was discharged after 3 d, but readmitted 10 d later because of worsening of her symptoms with dehydration, vomiting, and stomach pain.
The patient had no comorbidities. There was no history of prior gastroenterological symptoms.
The patient did not smoke or consume alcohol. There was no noteworthy family medical history.
Physical examination showed a pale and dehydrated patient with a weight loss of 3 kg. The abdomen was soft but revealed tenderness in the epigastrium.
Blood tests showed a slight elevation in alanine transaminase (91 U/L; reference range 10-45 U/L) compatible with grade 1 hepatitis. Additional blood tests, including thyrotropin and cortisol, were in normal range.
At first admission after the sixth Nivolumab dose, a cerebral magnetic resonance imaging was performed to rule out metastases to the brain. In the following week a positron emission tomography with computed tomography (PET-CT) was performed. Abnormal fluorodeoxyglucose uptake was demonstrated in the gastric wall, especially around the corpus antrum . Linitis plastica was suspected and an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) with supplementary endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) was performed. The EGD showed a vulnerable mucosa with a white fibrine-like membrane in the antrum, corpus, and fundus. EUS demonstrated increased thickening of the gastric wall to 13 mm. No focal malignant lesions were suspected, and the finding was interpreted as inflammation. Macroscopically, the mucosa was erythematous with severe fibrinous erosions .
The initial endoscopical examination was compatible with chronic active pangastritis . Biopsies from fundus, corpus, and antrum ventriculi showed severe changes with ulceration, crustation, and only scattered glands. The glandular epithelium showed very reactive changes, apoptosis, neutrophilic inflammation, and crypt abscesses, as well as intraepithelial lymphocytosis (45 per 100 epithelial cells). The lamina propria showed a diffuse, full thickness lymphoplasmacytic inflammatory infiltrate. Epithelial granulomas, thickened subepithelial collagen layer, or prominent eosinophils, were not observed. There were no signs of malignancy, CMV infection, or Helicobacter pylori. Epstein Barr virus serology showed positive Epstein Barr virus nuclear antigen IgG corresponding with a previous infection.