A 47-year-old Asian woman was admitted to our hospital with a 1-year history of worsening leg numbness and urinary dysfunction. She first noticed her bilateral 3rd and 4th toe numbness for 5 years. Her symptoms worsened, and her whole toes became numb a year ago. She had also been experiencing frequent urination for a year. She visited her previous physician and was referred to our hospital after magnetic resonance imaging was taken. On physical examination, her motor function was intact, but she had sensory disturbance around the anal region. Deep tendon reflexes were normal. Her finger–floor distance was 10 cm, and her straight leg raise test result was 80 degrees; this indicated that her hamstrings were not tight. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a low-lying conus medullaris extending to the level of S2 and surrounded by fat tissue at that level . The spinal MRI did not point to any other abnormalities that could explain her symptoms. We diagnosed her condition as adult tethered cord syndrome, and spine-shortening vertebral osteotomy was planned. After the patient provided informed consent, she underwent shortening osteotomy.
After induction of general anesthesia, the patient was positioned onto a Jackson Spinal Table (Mizuho Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Neurophysiological monitoring was performed using motor evoked potentials. A midline incision was made from the T11 to L4 spinous process level. The target level for the osteotomy was L2. The L2 segment was extensively exposed, in turn exposing the posterior element and transverse processes bilaterally. Bilateral pedicle screw implants were placed at L1 and L3 using an anterior–posterior image intensifier. In this procedure, it is essential to use monoaxial screws inserted exactly parallel to the rostral endplates of each vertebral body; this ensures appropriate alignment between the L1 caudal endplate and the L2 osteotomy surface. The osteotomy was started after insertion of the pedicle screws. First, the lower half of the L1 lamina and bilateral inferior articular processes of L1 as well as the bilateral L2 superior articular processes were resected. Second, the upper one-third of the lamina of L2 was resected, and the bilateral two-thirds of the pedicle of L2 was removed with a surgical air drill. Resection of the upper one-third of the lamina of L2 is very important to prevent postoperative neurological deterioration due to epidural hematoma formation. Although bone union can effectively occur without resection of the lamina, the dural space will be so tight that only a small hematoma will be symptomatic. After exposure of the lateral side of the L1–2 disc, discectomy was performed with a knife and curette. Following complete discectomy of L1–2, the upper vertebral body of L2 was removed with a surgical air drill. The surgical air drill was inserted from the pedicle parallel to the upper endplate of L2, and the posterior wall of the vertebral body was thus removed. After thinning of the lateral vertebral cortex, the lateral surface of the vertebral body was carefully exposed, and the lateral cortex was removed with a punch. After thinning of the anterior vertebral cortex, a Kerrison rongeur was used to remove the anterior cortex. Because the anterior longitudinal ligament protects the vessels and anterior organs, little bleeding occurred when the anterior body was removed. After complete removal of the vertebral body, a straight rod was connected to two screws and applied pressure between the screws. Two polyethylene tapes (Alfresa Pharma Corporation, Osaka, Japan) were applied to the L2 lamina and bilateral rods. A drawing of the surgery is shown in Fig. . The operation time was 5 h 13 min, and the estimated blood loss was 108 ml. In this case, there was less degeneration, and the epidural venous plexus was less developed, which may have been the reason for the small amount of blood loss.
The tips and tricks of this procedure are as follows. (1) Carefully develop the sides of the vertebral body and intervertebral disc with hemostasis; (2) use the endplate of the vertebral body as a guide and insert an air tome parallel to the endplate to resect the vertebral body; (3) leave the lateral wall of the vertebral body like an eggshell and complete the resection by resecting the shell at the end.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The postoperative radiograph showed 18-mm shortening from the L1 upper endplate to the L2 lower endplate . The patient’s leg numbness improved immediately after surgery, and her urinary disturbance improved 1 year after surgery, although magnetic resonance imaging did not show evidence of untethering. Computed tomography 1 year after the operation showed complete bone union ; therefore, we removed the instrumentation. She had developed no recurrence at 2 years after surgery.