A 19-year-old woman noticed blurred vision with photopsia of the left eye. The patient had no notable medical or family history. Her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 1.0 OD and 0.9 OS with myopia of −9.0 diopters OU. Visual examination of the right eye showed no abnormality. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy revealed mild cells in the anterior vitreous OS. Funduscopic examination revealed multiple punctate yellow-white exudates at the level of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) in the posterior pole but not the midperiphery OS (Figure A). These exudates appeared as initial hyperfluorescence with late staining on fluorescein angiography (FA, Figure B) and hypofluorescence during the initial phase of ICGA (Figure C). SD-OCT images showed a loss of photoreceptor inner/outer segment junction (IS/OS) integrity corresponding to the nasal fovea (Figure D), accompanied by a moderately reflective, nodule-like lesion extending from the outer nuclear layer to the choroid, which corresponded to the exudates described above (Figure E). Humphrey threshold 30–2 perimetry showed an area of decreased sensitivity corresponding to the lesion area. Multifocal electroretinography (mfERG) showed decreased amplitudes at the posterior pole wider than the lesion area OS and normal amplitudes OD. The patient received a diagnosis of PIC OS. A regimen of oral prednisolone (30 mg/day) was initiated then gradually tapered for 4 months. Three months after treatment, BCVA increased to 1.2 OS. The areas of exudate scarred as IS/OS line integrity recovered. Twelve months after treatment, some of the scar lesions developed hyperpigmentation (Figure F), whereas BCVA and OCT findings remained stable.Twenty months after the initial visit, the patient complained again of central blurred vision in the left eye. Her BCVA was 1.2 OS. A punctate subretinal yellowish-white lesion nasal to the fovea OS (Figure A, F) appeared to have increased in size (Figure A, arrow), although the number of PIC lesions remained unchanged. The area of hyperfluorescence on late-phase FA (Figure B, arrow) or hypofluorescence on initial-phase ICGA (Figure C, arrow) corresponding to the lesion had expanded since the patient’s initial visit (Figure B, C). The patient was diagnosed with recurrent PIC. Treatment with oral prednisolone (30 mg/day) was restarted and continued for 3 months with tapering. Three months after this second round of treatment, BCVA remained unchanged, and the recurrent lesion had scarred with an associated improvement of the patient’s subjective symptoms.