A 50-year-old female with a history of well-controlled focal epilepsy presented to her neurologist with new symptoms of recurrent ‘sudden collapse’. At the age of 30, the patient had been diagnosed with non-lesional temporal lobe epilepsy characterized primarily by episodes of tonic–clonic seizures preceded by a sensation of déjà vu. She had been started on carbamazepine at that time with excellent seizure control. Her medical history was positive for hypertension and dyslipidaemia. She also maintained a family history of cardiac disease, unspecified. The patient had not suffered from any seizures or syncopal events until 5 months before her presentation. She complained of ‘unusual’ episodes, witnessed by her husband, of sudden drop attacks with brief loss of consciousness and postural tone associated with urinary incontinence. The syncopal episodes occurred without warning and without an associated trigger. She sustained no significant injuries from her syncopal events. Her clinical examination and biochemical profile on blood work were unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging of the head did not reveal evidence of acute changes to explain her presentation. Her carbamazepine dose was escalated in an attempt to control these episodes but failed to result in any improvement. Her antiepileptic medication was then changed from carbamazepine 200 mg p.o. t.i.d. to brivaracetam 75 mg p.o. b.i.d., again with no improvement. The patient underwent a continuous video-electroencephalographic study to characterize these events further.
During observation in the epilepsy unit, the patient was observed to have an episode of sudden of loss of consciousness and urinary incontinence without any tonic–clonic activity or a prominent post-ictal state. Continuous electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring revealed a concurrent episode of asystole lasting ∼20 s, followed by sinus bradycardia at a rate of 20–30 beats/min . There was no evidence of seizure activity on the electroencephalogram (EEG) preceding, during or following this event. The patient recovered and was subsequently admitted to the coronary care unit. On examination, her heart rate was 82 per minute, blood pressure was 128/74 mmHg, 86 kg, body mass index 32.1, and the systems examination was normal. She was recorded to have two episodes of symptomatic Mobitz type I atrioventricular (AV) block. Overall, her findings were consistent with isolated symptomatic bradyarrhythmia rather than ictal bradyarrhythmia or seizures. An echocardiogram was completed, which did not reveal any abnormalities. She underwent the successful implantation of a dual-chamber pacemaker. Her device was programmed to AAI-DDD with lower and upper rates of 50–130. Paced AV delay was set to 220 ms, and sensed AV delay 200 ms. Rate drop response was programmed ‘on’ to both low rate and rate drop. At 13-month follow-up, the patient was symptom free with no recurrence of her presenting events. Interrogation of her pacemaker revealed atrial pacing at 15.2% and ventricular pacing at 11%, suggesting a bradyarrhythmia of atrial aetiology.
The patient was maintained on brivaracetam as her antiepileptic and was well tolerated. A decision was made not to switch back to her original anticonvulsant, carbamazepine, despite the non-ictal aetiology of her event. Carbamazepine exerts its therapeutic function through sodium channel blockade and can therefore theoretically affect depolarization currents within cardiomyocytes. Its use has been reported by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to be associated with AV block. As such, given the patients bradyarrhythmia, she was maintained on the alternative agent.