In January 2021, a 20-year-old male presented with swelling over the right hand for 5 years, insidious in onset, progressive in nature, located over the medial border on the palmar side ( and ). The swelling was associated with dull aching minimal pain, aggravated with excessive activities and relived on rest. However, the swelling was not associated with night pain, fever, and restriction in daily routine activities.
On clinical examination, the swelling was of size 4 cm × 3 cm × 2 cm ( and ), bony hard, irregular surface, adherent to the underlying bone with no coronal or sagittal plane movement possible. It was palpable on the ulnar aspect of the hand. There was no local rise of temperature, and the patient has no regional lymphadenopathy, scars, sinuses, dilated veins, and skin changes on and around the swelling. There are no similar swellings elsewhere in the body.
Radiographs (X-ray) showed a pedunculated bony lesion arising from the distal metaphyseal region of the fifth metacarpal .
In magnetic resonance imaging, there was evidence of 2 × 2.5 × 3 cm (AP × TR × SI) sized bony overgrowth seen arising from distal metaphyseal region of 5th metacarpal bone showing continuity with a medullary cavity in growing away from epiphysis . This lesion is seen displacing the 5th flexor digitorum profundus tendon laterally and causing compression over flexor digiti minimi and abductor digiti minimi muscles. In addition, there was evidence of the formation of bursa with inflammatory collection within the bursa. A provisional diagnosis of osteochondroma was made based on clinical and radiological findings.
Osteochondroma excised under general anesthesia and tourniquet control, the bony swelling was approached through the posteromedial incision . Tumor of size approximately 3 × 2 cm was excised from the root of the pedicle . The excised specimen was then sent for histopathological examination.
The histopathological report (HPR) showed a cartilaginous cap with underlying bony tissue with bony trabeculae. The cartilaginous tissue is lined by perichondrium and is composed of clusters of chondrocytes. At foci, the chondrocytes are organized into cords and show endochondral ossification, which is continuous with bony tissue. HPR did not show any mitotic activity or necrosis in the sections studied .
Post-operative period was uneventful, check x-ray of the hand was taken on day 1 with satisfactory findings , regular dressing was done and sutures were removed on post-operative day 12. The patient had minimal pain at the operative site with a complete and painless range of motion at the wrist and metacarpophalangeal joint. At 1 year of follow up patient was evaluated radiologically and clinically with satisfactory outcome.