A 62-year-old woman was confirmed to have liver dysfunction due to HCV in other hospitals and was referred to our hospital for the treatment of HCV. Here, she was treated by interferon/ribavirin therapy for 24 weeks and achieved a SVR. Two years after SVR, a liver nodule that was not pointed out previously was detected in routine abdominal ultrasonography, and the size of the nodule was 11.9 × 6.1 mm. Six months later, the nodule size grew to 12.5 × 7.8 mm, as detected using ultrasonography. Laboratory data on liver function were nearly normal, and the levels of tumor markers such as alpha-fetoprotein, prothrombin induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were also normal. HCV-RNA remained negative.
Computed tomography (CT) showed a small tumor in the left lobe of the liver. The tumor size was approximately 1.5 cm in diameter , and the tumor showed low density on conventional CT . Dynamic CT revealed early marked enhancement at the periphery of the tumor . From portal to late phase, the tumor showed prolonged enhancement at the periphery and gradual enhancement inside the tumor, revealing slightly lower density relative to the normal parenchyma . Furthermore, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed FDG accumulation inside the tumor and the standardized uptake value maximum (SUV max) was 4.7. Capsule formation and vessel penetration within the tumor were not evident. In addition, there were no findings of lymph node swelling and distant metastasis.
With magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the tumor exhibited low and high intensities in T1- and T2-weighted images, respectively . On the other hand, diffusion-weighted (DW) imaging showed remarkably high intensity, and the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) value was 1.11 × 10− 3 mm2/s (b value = 1000 s/mm2) . Dynamic MRI using the contrast agent gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid showed ringed enhancement in the early phase and became lower in intensity gradually relative to the normal parenchyma in the late phase similar to dynamic CT findings . The tumor exhibited defects in enhancement in the hepatobiliary phase .
On the basis of these findings, we considered that this hepatic nodule was a malignant tumor and diagnosed this tumor as a CCC or HCC that showed atypical imaging findings. Although we discussed the possibility of it being a metastatic liver tumor, there were no findings to suspect malignant tumors in other organs. Then, laparoscopic lateral sectionectomy of the liver was performed.
The macroscopic findings of the tumor revealed a white color and a maximal diameter of 1.1 cm. Capsule formation was not observed . The tumor was composed of small cuboidal cells with clear nucleoli and showed irregular anastomosis small grand. The inflammatory cells showed remarkable infiltration, and vascular proliferation and ductular reactions were also seen at the peripheral lesion. . Immunohistochemical findings showed that the tumor cells were negative for Hep-par 1 and positive for cytokeratin (CK) 19 and NCAM . Epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) staining was positive for the membranous side of the lumen . According to these pathological findings, the tumor was diagnosed as a CoCC. There were no events after operation, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 8 and is alive without recurrence at the time of this report.