A 61-year-old man was affected by rectal cancer and underwent a robotic, high-anterior resection with lymph node dissection. Histopathologically, well-differentiated adenocarcinoma was suggested. The pathological stage was evaluated as I (pT2N0M0) according to the 8th edition of the Union for International Cancer Control. He presented with a 1-month history of a growing mass in his right abdomen, at the surgical port site, 1.5 years after the robotic surgery. This mass was asymptomatic and non-tender. When first noticed 1 month prior to his complaint, the mass lesion was soft and mobile. He had a medical history of an appendectomy for appendicitis and a procedure for inflammation of the paranasal sinuses. There were no overlying skin changes, the swelling was firm, and the mass was not tethered to the overlying skin. An abdominal CT examination revealed a tumor in the upper right abdominal wall, at the surgical port site, that measured 45 mm .
An MRI was performed, which showed a solitary lesion measuring 39 mm within the right straight muscle of the abdomen . The mass was hypo-intense to muscle on T1 imaging, and hyper-intense on T2 imaging. Some restricted diffusion was seen around the lesion. This lesion was believed to represent a malignancy process, such as a recurrence of rectal cancer. Due to the malignancy appearance on both the CT and MRI, a decision was made to perform an excisional biopsy of this lesion.
Due to a suspicion of port site recurrence following the robotic surgery for rectal cancer, an ultrasound-guided, fine-needle aspiration (FNA) was performed. The examination revealed this lesion as either a low-grade myofibroblastic tumor or a benign neoplasm, but was inconclusive.
The patient decided to undergo surgery to excise the lesion. Through laparoscopic surgery and a pedicled flap at the right fascia lata, the defect was covered with mesh to create an artificial fascia from the intraperitoneal side . The patient recovered without any complications at 1 month, and continues to be monitored for recurrence. He has no functional deficits or signs of recurrence.