An 86-year-old man with a history of hypertension, Type 2 diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, and permanent atrial fibrillation visited our hospital and presented with transient deterioration of mental status and mildly sluggish responsiveness, continuous since the previous day. At examination time, his consciousness level was almost clear, without obviously abnormal neurological findings. Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging of the brain revealed a new-onset cerebral infarction of the right putamen . MR angiography showed total occlusion of the right internal carotid artery (ICA) and severe stenosis of the left ICA at its cervical portion . T1-weighted black blood MR imaging of the neck showed a markedly bright and massive plaque at the proximal portion of the left ICA with a very high plaque/muscle ratio (3.39), suggestive of its vulnerability . Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) using N-isopropyl-p-[123I] iodoamphetamine (123I-IMP) at a resting state and after an acetazolamide challenge revealed extensive declines in cerebral blood flow (CBF; 22-29 mL/100g/min) and cerebrovascular reactivity (CVR; 7-26%) within bilateral ICA territories [-]. Transthoracic echocardiography to screen for cardiac diseases showed a severe narrowing of the aortic valve area (0.82 cm2) and dobutamine stress echocardiography findings were compatible with a true-severe AS. He was diagnosed with acute ischemic stroke due to total occlusion of the right ICA, asymptomatic severe stenosis of the left ICA, and a concomitant true-severe AS. We then started oral dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT; a loading dose of 300 mg clopidogrel on admission day followed by 75 mg/day plus 200 mg/day aspirin) and intravenous anticoagulant therapy using a systemic infusion of argatroban, a direct antithrombin agent approved for acute atherothrombotic stroke in Japan, before switching to oral anticoagulant therapy using apixaban (5 mg/day) 5 days later.
In this case, patient status under medical treatment was considered poor because of misery perfusion in the bilateral cerebral hemispheres but the periprocedural complication risk of extracranial-intracranial bypass surgery for the right cerebral hemisphere was deemed too high. In addition, endovascular revascularization for the totally occluded right ICA was considered to be at very high risk for both ischemic complications and CHS. Since increased blood flow in the leptomeningeal collaterals in the right cerebral hemisphere through the anterior communicating artery would contribute to stroke prevention, we decided to perform a revascularization procedure for the left carotid stenosis. To avoid CHS after the carotid revascularization procedure and periprocedural stroke (resulting from a pronounced CBF decrease during the TAVI procedure), we decided to undergo a staged treatment strategy consisting of SAP for the left carotid stenosis and TAVI.