A 41-year-old young healthy male entered the retina clinic with complaints of seeing a black spot, blurred vision and metamorphopsia involving the right eye for the past 4 months. He was on treatment for androgenic alopecia with topical 5% Minoxidil application on scalp two times a day for a total time period of 10 months. He noticed the symptoms 8 months after starting the treatment. He was not seen by any other ophthalmologist previously and had stopped the medication on his own since the past 2 months. The patient denied using other medications or a history of previous treatment with corticosteroids. On examination, best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes. Intraocular pressure was 15 mmHg in both eyes. Anterior segment was unremarkable. Fundoscopic examination of the right eye with +78D lens on slit lamp revealed central swelling located over the macula with presence of subretinal fluid (SRF) and few focal spots of retinal pigment epithelial alterations. Left eye fundus was normal. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) scan evaluation showed the presence of SRF with an irregular retinal pigment epithelium. On enhanced depth imaging OCT, dilated pachy choroidal vessels compressing the overlying Sattler’s and choriocapillaris layer was noted nasal to the fovea. Subfoveal choroidal thickness measured was 425 μm. Fluorescein angiography did not show any classic smoke stack or ink-blot pattern of leaks. Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) revealed dilated hyperpermeable choroidal vasculature on the nasal side of the fovea in the early and later phases of the angiogram corresponding to the pachy choroidal vessels seen on enhanced depth imaging OCT . The patient was diagnosed with CSCR as a possible consequence of his topical minoxidil solution. Patient was asked to avoid future use of Minoxidil and was started on oral eplerenone therapy 50 mg/day for 4 consecutive weeks. Serum electrolytes and renal profile were done prior to starting the therapy. Blood investigations were normal. One month later, he was found to have complete resolution of his symptoms. OCT examination revealed complete resolution of SRF and reduction in the subfoveal choroidal thickness (391 μm). Oral eplerenone was discontinued and patient was asked to follow up the next month. No side-effects were reported following the intake of oral eplerenone. At the final follow-up visit, 2 months after starting the therapy, there was no recurrence of SRF and the subfoveal choroidal thickness further decreased to 344 μm . Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for utilising his clinical details for this manuscript. Permission for using the patient data for this report was obtained from institutional review board and ethics committee (C/2019/06/03).