A 55-year-old female was admitted to the hospital’s emergency department with the chief complaint of a painful mass located in the right thigh and perineal area and with progressed pain and paresthesia to the right thigh and right shin. The patient seemed ill but not toxic. No history of fever, abdominal pain, digestive dysfunctions, chest pain, cough, hemoptysis, urticarial were found. The vital signs were in a normal range, and there was no family history.
Physical examination showed that the skin over the mass had no discoloration, and the size of the mass was around 5.7 cm long. The blood tests were normal, and the lab results showed no eosinophilia. The result of the ultrasonography examination was a cystic mass with suspicion toward femoral hernia. After a CT scan, the result of secondary workups was a multi-lobular cystic mass with no connection to the abdominal region , which suggested a hydatid cyst.
The patient underwent surgery under spinal anesthesia in the next step, and the right thigh was opened up. A cystic mass with ecto- and endocyst with clinical similarity to a hydatid cyst was removed with wide margins and without penetration of the cyst wall. The removed specimen was sent for histological examination with the first impression of cystic hydatidosis.
Received specimen in formalin consist of a creamy-whitish colored cyst M = 7 * 5 * 3 cm filled by multiple variable-sized creamy cysts . The cyst consists of three layers; the outermost fibrous pericyst layer, the middle laminated ectocyst layer, and the inner hyaline and acellular endocyst as the germinative layer, which encompasses daughter cysts and brood capsules with scolices. There may be granulomatous palisading reaction and pseudocyst formation as seen in cutaneous lesions .
Following the surgical removal of the cyst, the patient underwent recovery. Besides, Post-surgical Abdominal and thoracic Ultrasonography screening were used to exclude recurrence. Albendazole 400 mg PO BID was prescribed for 3–6 months. An 18-months follow-up demonstrated no reoccurrence or any other site of cystic hydatidosis.
After a year of routine follow-up, the patient did not demonstrate any signs of recurrence of the adverse effect of surgery, and she was entirely well.