An 8-year-old boy (height, 122 cm; body weight 26.9 kg; ASA physical status class I) with Perthes’ disease was scheduled for osteotomy. He had no significant medical history other than amblyopia. He had no family history of metabolic diseases and none of his family members had received general anesthesia. His blood pressure in the ward was approximately 100/60 mmHg.
Anesthesia was induced using a propofol bolus of 2 mg/kg, followed by rocuronium 0.8 mg/kg and fentanyl 0.2 μg/kg. After intubation, a radial artery catheter was placed to monitor blood pressure and hemoglobin (Hb). The patient was placed in the right-lateral recumbent position. Anesthesia was maintained with 40% oxygen and 2% sevoflurane in combination with the continuous infusion of 0.2–0.4 μg/kg/min of remifentanil. The intravenous fluids administered included Ringer’s solution with acetate, bicarbonate Ringer’s solution, and a colloidal solution; lactated Ringer’s solution was not used. Blood loss was recorded as 150 mL, and 200 mL of autologous blood was used intraoperatively. Blood gas parameters including pH, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2), bicarbonate (HCO3), Hb, and lactate levels were closely monitored. Throughout anesthesia, there was a progressive increase in lactate levels, indicative of high anion gap metabolic acidosis . The duration of surgery was 5.5 h, and the duration of anesthesia was 8 h. No intraoperative tourniquet was used, and the systolic blood pressure remained at 80–100 mmHg. There was no increase in partial pressure of exhaled carbon dioxide and no muscle rigidity, and the patient’s temperature remained around 37.5 °C. The lactate dehydrogenase level measured intraoperatively was 116 U/L. The intraoperative fluid balance was + 2050 mL, and the urine output was maintained at 1.8 mL/kg/h (400 mL).
The postoperative arousal was uneventful, and the patient was extubated without complications. His laboratory data showed lactate levels within reference limits, with pH 7.4 and lactate 0.94 mmol/L the day after the surgery.
The patient was referred to the pediatric department for a thorough examination of his metabolic disease. Blood samples were collected on postoperative day 49. Laboratory analyses included fasting blood glucose, lactate/pyruvate (L/P) ratio, ketone and amino acid fractions, urinary lactate, and vitamin B1 levels. None of the differences were significant. Laboratory data suggested that the patient was unlikely to have congenital metabolic abnormalities and that it could be drug-induced or as a result of surgical invasion. We suggested muscle biopsy and genetic testing for a close examination of malignant hyperthermia and mitochondrial disease, which remained differential diagnoses; however, his parents did not wish to do so.
The patient was scheduled for nail extraction 6 months after the initial surgery. Hyperlactatemia due to hypoperfusion could not be completely ruled out; however, because it could be drug-related, an anesthesia plan was discussed in our department.
Hyperlactatemia, an initial symptom of malignant hyperthermia and PRIS, is rare, but can be fatal. Therefore, we decided not to use propofol or inhalational anesthesia. Midazolam could be a choice, but its long half-life can cause delayed emergence and respiratory depression . To avoid its disadvantages and avoid the use of propofol and inhaled anesthesia, induction and maintenance of anesthesia with remimazolam were planned.
The appropriate dosage of remimazolam in pediatric patients is yet to be established, and dosages differ in each report [, ]. Based on these reports, we determined the dosage based on the per-body weight dosage for adults indicated in the package insert.
Remimazolam 12 mg/kg/h until sleep onset, remifentanil, and rocuronium were administered to induce general anesthesia. After intubation, the patient was placed in the right-lateral recumbent position. Anesthesia was maintained using remimazolam 1 mg/kg/h and remifentanil 0.2–0.5 μg/kg/min. Intraoperative infusions included Ringer’s acetate and bicarbonate Ringer’s solutions; no lactate Ringer’s solution was used. The duration of surgery was 82 min and the duration of anesthesia was 153 min. The intraoperative fluid balance was + 740 mL, and the urine output was 4.22 mL/kg/h (230 mL). Although the operative time was shorter than that of the initial surgery, increased lactate levels were observed . The day after surgery, the patient’s lactate level was within the reference limits, and he was discharged from the hospital without any postoperative problems.