On December 2016, a 55-year-old, non-smoker Chinese male with an ECOG score of 0 underwent chest X-ray due to fracture of the left clavicle. The chest X-ray incidentally revealed a space-occupying lesion in the left lower lobe of the lung. Except for persistent coughing for a month and mild hemoptysis, no other clinical symptoms were reported by the patient. Thoracic computed tomography (CT) scans confirmed the chest X-ray results showing a tumor volume of 41x44mm with a relatively clear margin. The disease was pathologically staged as T2aN0M0 (stage IB) after left lower lobectomy and mediastinoscopy. Further histologic examination of the surgical tissues revealed adenosquamous lung carcinoma with predominantly papillary adenocarcinoma pattern (Additional file : Figure S1). Adjuvant chemotherapy was also administered to the patient with a total of 4 cycles of chemotherapy regimen including 2 cycles of 40 mg vinorelbine plus 80 mg nedaplatin and 2 cycles of 100 mg docetaxel plus 80 mg nedaplatin administered every 3 weeks. On August 2017, chest CT revealed no disease recurrence in the lungs ; however, colonic polyps were discovered during his physical examination. Initial biopsy revealed tubulovillous adenoma with low-grade intraepithelial neoplasia. Complete endoscopic resection was scheduled and removed three polyps in the transverse colon with sizes between 6 to 8 mm. Histopathologic analyses revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with submucosal invasion. No systemic therapy was administered to the patient. On December 2017, after being disease-free for about 5.4 months, the patient returned to the clinic due to pain and discomfort in the right waist. Ultrasonography and CT urography revealed moderately increased renal echogenicity and a 51x60x68mm obstruction in the right kidney, respectively, which are highly suggestive of renal carcinoma . In addition to revealing an elevated 2-[18F]-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) uptake of the right kidney that is indistinguishable from the liver, positron-emission tomography (PET)/CT scanning also revealed mediastinal lymphadenopathy and slightly elevated FDG uptake of the sigmoid colon, suggestive of malignancy and metastasis . No sign of disease recurrence or relapse was detected in the thoracic region . Right radical nephrectomy and inferior vena cava thrombectomy were performed to remove the 55x53x35mm tumor. Further examination revealed renal pelvis invasion with renal vein involvement and presence of a 13 mm nodule in the renal hilum. No growth was found in the renal capsule and ureteral muscle. Histopathology results revealed poorly differentiated tumor cells. The new malignancy was suspected to be squamous cell urothelial carcinoma, but with the possibility of kidney metastasis considering a history of lung cancer. However, the lack of immunoreactivity of the kidney tumor sample with thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and cytokeratin 7 (CK-7) antibodies did not support pulmonary origin . To rule out the possibility of the tumor in the kidney being another primary site, we explored the use of capture-based targeted NGS to understand its biology compared to the two earlier malignancies. The three archived surgical tissues, as well as paired white blood cell samples, were sequenced using a targeted panel with 520 cancer-related genes, spanning 1.64 Mb of the human genome (OncoScreen Plus, Burning Rock Biotech). A total of 16, 15 and 7 mutations were detected in the lung, kidney and colon tumor samples, respectively . Interestingly, comparative analysis revealed a similar mutational signature between the lung and kidney tumors, sharing 67% (10/15) of the mutations. Except for the FANCC W113X and KMT2C S321 N common to the three tumor samples, no other mutations were shared between the colon and either the lung or the kidney tumor samples . These sequencing results indicate that both the lung and colon tumors were primary tumors; while the kidney tumor originated from the lung . Consistent with the detection of FANCC W113X in all the three tumors, the pathogenic mutation was also detected in his germline as a heterozygous mutation . In addition, FANCC W113X was also detected in the son of the patient (III, Fig. ). Further investigation of the family history revealed that the father of the patient was previously treated for colon cancer with no recurrence reported (I, Fig. 3). After the nephrectomy, the patient did not receive further systemic treatment due to persistent fever and infection. The patient passed away on August 2018 due to severe infection, with an overall survival of 20.4 months. His son is still currently cancer-free.