A 78-year-old male was admitted to our hospital with sudden onset headache and left-sided motor weakness. He was a well-educated retired engineer with a medical history of hypertension. A neurological examination revealed left-side homonymous hemianopia and motor weakness with the modified medical research council scale 2. There was a mild sensory impairment to light touch, pain, and temperature on the left face, arm, leg, and trunk. The proprioception was impaired in his left toe and finger. Tactile and auditory extinction were absent. Computed tomography (CT) of the patient’s brain showed a hemorrhage of the right basal ganglia extending medially to the thalamus and laterally to the external capsule with an approximate volume of 50 cm3 . Considering his past medical history and the anatomical location of the hemorrhage, we diagnosed the hypertensive basal ganglia hemorrhage and treated him with anti-hypertensive medications.
On the second day of hospitalization, the patient started to report the phantom arm. Beside his left paretic arm, he felt another arm protruding from his left shoulder. He could not see or touch this phantom arm, but he felt it very vividly. He reported that the phantom arm resembled his paretic arm in size and shape . The phantom arm was not triggered by any specific condition; rather, it was persistently perceived. Closing his eyes or looking at his real arm did not influenced this false perception. Examination revealed that he could intentionally move his phantom arm. He stated that the movement was independent of his paretic arm and the strength was the same as his unaffected right arm. He could wave, grip or touch objects with his phantom hand. However, when we asked him to hold a ball with his phantom hand, he felt like the ball kept slipping out of his hands. Also, when we asked him to pretend using chopsticks with his phantom hand, he stated that it was clumsy because he was using the non-dominant hand. He also could not reach an object that was located far away from him with his phantom arm. He did not experience any involuntary movements of the phantom arm. When we put the glove on his paretic hand, we stated that he was wearing a globe on his paretic hand but not on his phantom hand. Passive movement of his paretic arm did not elicit any movement in the phantom arm. He did not complain of any pain or sensory discomfort in either the paretic arm or the phantom arm.
He was alert and oriented to time, place, and person with the Mini-Mental State Examination score of 30/30. He knew that having three arms is not normal and insisted that the phantom arm was not real. He showed no sign of seizure, and the electroencephalography showed that he had normal brain activity. A follow-up neurological examination revealed no deterioration, and brain CT showed no significant changes in the hemorrhage.
We diagnosed the SPL as a complication of the right basal ganglia hemorrhage. His phantom arm persisted for 3 weeks, and it gradually faded away.