A 55-year-old Chinese female was admitted for a 10-month history of painless decline in her vision of the right eye. The patient was initially diagnosed with chronic uveitis and received glucocorticoid-based therapy; however, she responded poorly and was thus referred to our hospital. She reported a transient history of eye redness but no history of photophobia, floaters, flashes, or scotoma in her right eye. During the systemic review of the patient, no symptoms of oral ulcers, vitiligo, alopecia, headaches, or joint pain were revealed. The patient did not experience any eye trauma or surgery.
Her ophthalmic examination revealed a visual acuity measuring 20/125 OD and 20/25 OS, and her noncontact intraocular pressure values were 13 and 15 mmHg, respectively. The results of both the extraocular appearance and muscle movement examinations were normal. The patient's pupillary light reflex was satisfactory, and her relative afferent pupillary defect was absent. Meticulous slip-lamp examination of the patient's right eye revealed diffuse mutton-fat keratic precipitates, 2 + anterior chamber (AC) cells, and 2 + AC flares. Severe vitreous opacities in the right eye obscured the dilated fundus examination (CLARUS™ 500, Carl Zeiss Meditec AG, Germany) . OCT (Cirrus HD-OCT, Carl Zeiss Meditec, Inc., United States) of the right eye showed high-density reflective spots (indicated by the arrow in Fig. a) in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) layer, while Bruch’s membrane remained intact. Spotted hypofluorescence was observed at the posterior pole and mid-peripheral retina, with clustered hyperfluorescent points at the mid-peripheral retina being observed on the ICGA OD . The results of fundoscopy, OCT, or ICGA of her left eye were unremarkable .
Diagnostic aspiration of the right vitreous was subsequently performed. The cytometric bead array results showed that the ratio of interleukin (IL)-10/IL-6 in the vitreous humour was 1.05, slightly exceeding the upper normal limit (usually set as 1). Specifically, the IL-10 level in the vitreous humour was 39.4 pg/mL, while the IL-6 level was 37.5 pg/mL. The vitreous humour was positive for Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) DNA as determined by the polymerase chain reaction (9.90E + 03 copy/mL), and the vitreous was negative for EBV-IgG. Genetic testing by next-generation sequencing of the vitreous humour revealed several oncogenic mutations, including TP53, JAK2, and FAS. Vitreoretinal lymphoma of the right eye was suspected. Subsequently, whole-body positron emission tomography (PET-CT) showed a hypermetabolic nodule in the retroperitoneal left adrenal area, suggesting a malignant tumour. A core-needle biopsy of the retroperitoneal mass revealed malignant morphological features, including an irregular karyotype, karyokinesis, and karyorrhexis . Further immunohistochemistry and fluorescence in situ hybridization (by a Nikon camera and software, × 400 magnification. Scale bar, 50 μm) proved that the lump was ENKTL; the lump was CD7 + , CD2 + , CD3ε + , CD5-, T-cell intracellular antigen 1 (TIA-1) + , Granzyme B (GrB) + , Ki-67 + and EBV-encoded mRNA (EBER) + . Considering the homology of the two lesions, this patient was confirmed to have metastatic vitreoretinal lymphoma secondary to retroperitoneal ENKTL. Moreover, the positive EBV testing result and oncogenic mutations related to T-cell-derived lymphomas supported the diagnosis. Lymphomatous infiltrates are commonly confined to the space between the RPE and Bruch's membrane in metastatic intraocular ENKTL . Her nasopharyngeal area, a common site for ENKTL, was specifically examined to exclude possible lesions.
Subsequently, the patient received radiotherapy and sintilimab-based chemotherapy treatment at a tumour specialist hospital. Moreover, 0.4 mg of methotrexate was intravitreally injected into her right eye once a week for two months and once a month for the following three months. At the time of submission, the vision of her right eye was improved from 20/125 to 20/32, and the vitreous opacity was significantly improved, as demonstrated in the fundoscopy photos . OCT at follow-up revealed irregular humps inward into the RPE, while Bruch’s membrane remained intact (indicated by the arrowheads in Fig. c, d). PET-CT reexamination showed that the retroperitoneal nodule decreased in size following treatment, and no new lesions were found.