A 36-year-old male patient was hospitalized due to complaints of a gradually aggravated pain on the lateral side of the left scapula for 6 months. Imaging examination showed that the neoplastic lesions on the left side of C7-T2 invaded the vertebral body of T1, T2, and caput costae of the second rib . Tumor metastasis in the left ilium was suspected . A computed tomography (CT)-guided core needle biopsy was performed to obtain the tissue samples of the paravertebral lesion in T2 and the lesion in the left ilium. The pathological results confirmed the diagnosis of FDCS. Diffuse small spindle cells were found in the hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of both paravertebral and iliac lesions. Immunohistochemical staining of the paravertebral sample was positive for cytokeratin (CK){pan} and vimentin; partially positive for cluster of differentiation 68 (CD68){KP1} and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA); slightly positive for S100 and CD34; and negative for SRY-box transcription factor 10 (Sox10), Langerin, thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), and prostatic specific acid phosphatase (PSAP) . Immunohistochemical staining of the iliac sample was positive for CK{pan}, vimentin, CD68{KP1}, and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR); partially positive for Clusterin; slightly positive for S100, CD35, and CD20; and negative for CD21, Sox10, Langerin, and CXC chemokine ligand 13 (CXCL13) .
Tumor resection and nerve root decompression were performed as treatment for thoracic disease. A midline incision was made, and the lamina and facet joints of T1–T3 were exposed. Four pedicle screws were implanted in T1 and T3 . The left lamina and facet joint of T1 and T2 were resected . The left second costovertebral joint and the second rib head were also resected. Transpedicular curettage was performed to ensure sufficient neural decompression of the tumor, providing a safe target volume for radiation.
The body gamma knife was used as a radical treatment for iliac tumor and as an adjuvant treatment for thoracic disease. Body gamma knife planning and delivery were similar to those reported in previous studies (, , ). The patient was placed in a supine position and immobilized using a vacuum negative pressure bag and a body frame bed, allowing to breathe naturally. Markings were made on the four areas of the body that will receive the radiation to ensure reproducible body position. The CT images were transferred to the OPEN body gamma knife treatment planning system. A local bone destruction lesion was found at the posterior lower edge of the left ilium (near the sacroiliac joint) with clear boundaries and soft tissue density. The treatment target area was determined in the bone window on the CT image using the body gamma knife treatment planning system (window width, 1,000 HU; window level, 300 HU). The gross target volume (GTV) was delineated according to the lesion identified in the bone window. The clinical target volume (CTV) was generated by extending the GTV by 5 mm in all directions. The planning target volume (PTV) was generated by extending the CTV by 5 mm in all directions. The 50% radiation dose covered 100% of the PTV, the 60% dose covered 100% of the CTV, and the 70% dose covered 100% of the GTV. For the iliac lesion, the prescription dose for the PTV, CTV, and GTV margins were 40, 48, and 56 Gy in 10 fractions, respectively. The highest physical dose delivered at the center of the target area was 80 Gy. The biological effective dose (BED) of the RT was calculated using a linear quadratic (LQ) model, assuming an α/β ratio of 10. The BEDs at the margins of PTV, CTV, and GTV were 56, 71.04, and 87.36 Gy, respectively, and the highest BED delivered at the center of the target area was 144 Gy. For the thoracic lesion, the prescription doses for PTV, CTV, and GTV margins were 36, 43.2, and 50.4 Gy in 12 fractions, respectively. The highest physical dose delivered at the center of the target area was 72 Gy. The BEDs delivered to the margins of the PTV, CTV, and GTV were 46.8, 58.752, and 71.568 Gy, respectively, and the highest BED delivered at the center of the target area was 115.2 Gy. Radiotherapy target planning of thoracic and iliac lesions was presented in . The treatment process proceeded smoothly, the patient had no complaints, and no abnormal findings were found on blood tests after RT.
The patient did not receive systemic treatment or other local control treatments after the body gamma knife treatment. CT examination of the iliac bone showed that the lesion size was slightly larger than that before the 2-month postoperative follow-up . Thus, iliac bone lesion resection was performed 10 weeks after RT. The pathological examination of the left iliac bone tumor suggested a small amount of bone tissue, fibrous tissue hyperplasia and hemorrhage, myofibroblast reaction, lymphocyte and plasma cell infiltration, a small amount of necrosis, and tissue cell deposition, while no tumor tissue was observed . Thus, the body gamma knife treatment resulted in PCR. The patient was followed up for 1 year, and the VAS score for back pain reduced from 8 at preoperatively to 1 at the last follow-up. Thoracic and pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examinations showed no significant enlargement or recurrence of the tumors after 15 months of follow-up . The timeline of major clinical events during treatment and follow-up is shown in .