A 20-year-old Gravida 1 presented to the emergency department multiple times between 32- and 34-weeks gestational age before ultimately being admitted for preterm labor to the antepartum unit. The patient’s past medical history was significant for morbid obesity (body mass index (BMI) 65 kg/m2) and a reported prior diagnosis of non-alcoholic hepatosteatosis; however, her prenatal care had been uncomplicated to date. Vital signs and labs are noted for the three emergency department visits prior to her antepartum admission. With each subsequent visit, her complaints progressed. Her initial complaint included four days of waxing and waning fevers associated with weakness. At that time, tachycardia was present, and labs were notable for elevated liver enzymes (AST=779 U/L; ALT=876 U/L). Test results for RSV, SARS-CoV-2, and Influenza were negative. A right upper quadrant ultrasound was performed, and the findings suggested steatohepatitis. At the second emergency room visit, she complained of ongoing persistent fevers now associated with dyspnea with exertion. A computed tomography of the chest utilizing a pulmonary embolism protocol was unremarkable. Labs were notable for a white blood cell count of 4.0 K/µL and persistently elevated liver enzymes (AST=606 U/L; ALT=470 U/L). Upon presentation for the third time, she complained of 10 days of waxing and waning fevers, worsening dyspnea, which was now present at rest, and a new onset cough. The patient tested positive for SARS-CoV-2. She was given intravenous methylprednisolone and discharged home. Of note, her lactic acid was never greater than 2.0 mmol/L at any emergency department visit.

The patient presented for a fourth time 13 days after initial presentation. The patient complained of abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding and was admitted for preterm labor at 34 weeks gestation. She still complained of persistent dyspnea and fevers but was oxygenating well on room air without supplemental oxygen. She received standard care, including betamethasone for late preterm antenatal corticosteroid treatment. She was also treated with acetaminophen for her fever, which was no more than 1 g per day. Due to the concern for a urinary tract infection, she was started on daily ceftriaxone on admission, although urine cultures were negative. After two days of uterine quiescence, her amniotic membranes spontaneously ruptured. The patient was switched to intravenous penicillin for group beta-strep prophylaxis and underwent an uncomplicated spontaneous vaginal delivery with a small left labial laceration repaired in a routine fashion.

Five hours after delivery, internal medicine was consulted for persistent tachycardia. An electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus tachycardia. Temperature ranged from 36.5 °C to a maximum of 39.8 °C throughout postpartum day zero. Antibiotics were expanded to cefepime. Eventually, she became slightly hypotensive but responded to fluid administration. She was upgraded to the intensive care unit for suspected septic shock. Antibiotic therapy was broadened to include piperacillin/tazobactam, and blood cultures were repeated. Tylenol was discontinued and N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) was also initiated at this time. Labs are most notable for elevated liver enzymes and elevated lactic acid. Similar temperature ranges are noted on postpartum day one as well as worsening liver enzyme function testing, hypoglycemia that responded to IV dextrose administration, and a slight decrease in the lactic acid (from an average of 9.6 mmol/L to 6.0 mmol/L). On postpartum day one, the decision was made to transfer the patient for a higher level of care.

The patient arrived at our hospital on postpartum day two with clinical findings significant for anasarca, respiratory distress, tachycardia, and persistent fevers. On genitourinary examination, the previous left labial laceration was healing well; however, severe tenderness on bimanual was noted. The clinical diagnosis was postpartum endometritis, and antibiotics were changed to ampicillin, gentamicin, and clindamycin per obstetrical guidelines. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast was significant for hepatosplenomegaly, abdominal ascites, and complex echogenic material in the lower uterine segment with concern for possible retained products of conception. Findings were consistent with a transvaginal ultrasound. A duplex ultrasound of the liver was also performed, which was significant for hepatic steatosis with a limited examination of the flow due to habitus. The results of a comprehensive hepatology panel, autoimmune panel, and viral panel, including EBV, were negative.

On postpartum day three, the patient was taken to the operating room due to a lack of clinical improvement with antibiotic therapy although multiple sets of blood cultures previously drawn were negative. In the operating room, an external genitourinary examination did not reveal any evidence of purulent discharge or necrosis, and the previous left labial laceration appeared to be healing well. Dilation and curettage was performed under ultrasound guidance. The endometrial stripe appeared thin, little tissue was obtained, and excellent uterine resistance was noted with a low suspicion for endomyonecrosis. Simultaneously, a culdocentesis was performed to collect ascitic fluid. Both peritoneal fluid and endometrial tissue were sent for gram stain and culture. The results of both samples were negative on gram stain and did not reveal any underlying infectious etiology. A histological review of the endometrial tissue was negative for retained products of conception or acute inflammation. During the procedure, she received norepinephrine to support her blood pressure and was started on propofol and fentanyl for analgesia and sedation. In addition, she received 100 mg of intravenous hydrocortisone.

Given her clinical condition postoperatively, the patient returned to the intensive care unit, remained intubated, sedated, and on minimal pressor support. Of note, when a sedation pause was performed at this time, the patient was alert and answering questions appropriately. As part of the protocol for propofol use in the ICU, serum triglycerides were checked and noted to be 1,513 mg/dL, for which an insulin drip was then initiated. There was a concern for possible HLH, and a ferritin level was acquired, which measured 23,173 ng/mL. She improved throughout the morning on postpartum day four (postoperative day 1), but by early evening, the patient began to have increased pressor requirements and persistent hypoglycemia despite stopping insulin drip and IV dextrose administration and her mental status became more altered. A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed which showed a left ventricular ejection fraction greater than 70 %, normal right ventricular systolic function, negative bubble study, and a right atrial pressure of 15  mmHg. Her pressor requirements continued to escalate, and maximal doses of norepinephrine, vasopressin, and phenylephrine were reached. Soluble IL-2 receptor and CXCL9 were collected earlier but required processing at an outside laboratory. She developed renal failure alongside her worsening shock and she was initated on continuous renal replacement therapy. The patient was given a pulse dose of 500 mg of IV methylprednisolone with the plan for a bone marrow biopsy the next day prior to initiating HLH-specific treatment. Unfortunately, the next morning, on postpartum day five, she rapidly declined and demised. Labs resulted 48 h after the patient’s death, which demonstrated a soluble IL-2 receptor 11,735 U/mL and a CXCL9 value of >608,000 pg/mL, which secured the diagnosis of HLH.

