A 10-year-old female patient was referred to our hospital due to right high-grade hydronephrosis and a right renal stone, which was detected due to hematuria. Ultrasonography (US) and CT scan revealed hydronephrosis and an 11-mm renal stone . Technetium-99m mercaptoacetyltriglycine (MAG3) renography showed decreased relative function of the right kidney (right:left = 38.2:61.8). While a growth hormone was administered due to growth-hormone deficiency dwarfism, no metabolic abnormalities were detected as a cause of renal calculi in this patient.
Since urine stasis due to hydronephrosis was considered to be a potential cause of stone formation, we decided to perform surgical management for both the hydronephrosis and renal stone simultaneously. Laparoscopic UC and pyelolithotomy were indicated because of the completely intrarenal pelvis. Since the hydronephrosis was so severe with thinning of the cortex, especially at the lower calyx, bleeding due to incision at the lower pole could be controlled best under laparoscopy.
A transperitoneal approach was implemented in a lateral flank position under general anesthesia. Four trocars, including a 12-mm trocar at the umbilicus and three 5-mm trocars, were inserted in a similar fashion to laparoscopic pyeloplasty . After exposing the renal hilum and the upper ureter completely by reflecting the ascending colon, the renal stone was extracted without lithotripsy by making a small longitudinal incision at the ureteropelvic junction . A flexible ureteroscope inserted from the working port confirmed no residual stone in the right kidney. Then, the ureter was transected, and the renal pelvis was closed using 5-0 absorbable sutures at the level of the renal hilum.
To make the anastomosis, the thinning portion of the renal parenchyma at the lower calyx was identified using US, and a 2-cm incision was made with cold scissors . Bleeding from the incised thin renal parenchyma was minimal without clamping the renal vessels. Three anchor sutures were made using 5-0 absorbable sutures followed by insertion of a 5 Fr double-J ureteral stent in an anterograde manner. Uretero-caliceal anastomosis was completed in a running fashion using 5-0 absorbable sutures .
Blood loss was minimal, and no transfusion was required. The operation time was 379 min. The postoperative course was uneventful. An indwelling urethral catheter was removed 4 days after surgery, and the patient was discharged 6 days after surgery. Stone analysis revealed that the stone was composed of calcium oxalate and calcium phosphate. The double-J ureteral stent was removed 8 weeks postoperatively under general anesthesia. US performed at 6 months after surgery showed improvement of the right hydronephrosis . CT scan revealed patency of the anastomosis , and ipsilateral renal function as assessed by MAG3 renography at 15 months postoperatively had improved from 38.2% preoperatively to 42.0%. No reoccurrence of hydronephrosis or renal stones were observed for 29 months after the procedure.