A 28-year-old female visited a local hospital for preconception care in June 2019 because spontaneous abortion previously occurred at the 8th gestational week in February 2019. Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and subclinical hypothyroidism were found, and euthyrox was prescribed (25 µg/day). Sex hormones were also tested on the 22nd day of the cycle for irregular menstruation (cycle ranged from 31 to 51 days), and the results were abnormal with no evidence of dominant follicle or ovulation .
Then she was referred to the reproductive endocrinology outpatient department of a tertiary teaching hospital for further diagnosis. Menarche occurred at 12 years of age. Physical examination showed a well-developed woman with normal breast size and no signs of hyperandrogenism or insulin resistance. Serum testosterone, androstenedione, and adrenal androgen levels were normal. The pelvic ultrasound on the 4th day of the spontaneous cycle showed a normal uterus size with an endometrium measured at 6 mm. The antral follicle count per ovary was > 20, and a cyst (1.6 × 1.3 × 2.2 cm) beside the left ovary was observed. Serum antimullerian hormone (AMH) was 8.33 ng/mL. Polycystic ovary syndrome was primarily diagnosed based on ovulatory dysfunction and polycystic ovarian morphology after excluding other etiologies. Oral contraceptives containing drospirenone and ethinylestradiol were prescribed for 3 cycles.
After stopping oral contraceptives, the early follicular phase serum estradiol levels persistently increased to between 527 and 642 pg/mL (normal range in follicle phase, 19.5-144.2 pg/mL) during the next 10 months, as illustrated in Table . All estradiol measurements were obtained from the same laboratory, using the same competitive chemiluminescent immunoassay (CLIA, Siemens ADVIA CENTAUR). The patient was further referred to the oncology department. However, the levels of other tumor biomarkers were negative (CA-125 6.8, CA-199 6.9, CEA 0.7, β-HCG 2, a-fetoprotein < 1.3). Radiologic assessment by abdominal and pelvic computed tomography was negative for any significant adrenal or adnexal masses, except for a cyst next to the left ovary. Moreover, any form of hormonal substance or dietary supplement was absent by reviewing the dietary diary. Findings on physical examination were completely normal, with no spider angiomas, telangiectasia, palmar erythema, breast tenderness or varicose veins.
On the basis of persistent elevated estradiol and the cystic lesion beside the ovary, a granulosa cell tumor of the ovary was suspected. Laparoscopy surgery was performed, but a left mesosalpinx cyst and benign pathological results were found.
The source of increased estradiol was still unclear after screening for 11 months. The patient was then suggested to monitor the follicle growth by ultrasound and attempt pregnancy. Surprisingly, the follicle would grow slowly and eventually ovulate. An appropriate rise in estradiol was observed with follicle growth (1067.8 pg/mL when the follicle was 1.5 cm in diameter).
There were discrepancies between the serum estradiol level and the clinical picture (follicle growth and normal follicle stimulating hormone). We suspected a case of falsely elevated estradiol levels. The comparison of samples drawn on the same day (14th day of spontaneous cycle), showed our laboratory and the reference laboratory estradiol values to be 619 pg/mL (Siemens ADVIA CENTAUR) and 60 pg/mL (Beckman, DxI 800), respectively. The latter values of estradiol were in concordance with the clinical situation. Thus, falsely increased estradiol was confirmed, and it resulted from analytic interference. Further treatments, including induced ovulation by using letrozole, ultrasound monitoring and intercourse guidance, were scheduled for her urgent pregnancy demand. Successful clinical pregnancy was achieved after six months of therapy. The patient has given birth a healthy baby on 13th March 2022, and she is satisfied with the treatment.