A 68-year-old man with ET visited our hospital for premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) and shortness of breath on effort. He had started taking anagrelide 1.5 mg daily, an inhibitor of megakaryocyte maturation and polyploidization, 1 month before his visit because his platelet count could not be controlled using hydroxyurea. He had normal physical findings with no clinical evidence of heart failure. He did not have any thrombotic or bleeding complications of ET. He underwent Holter monitoring, echocardiography, and coronary computed tomography (CT). Holter monitoring showed no sustained ventricular tachycardia, and the patient’s PVC burden was <20%. It was suspected that the PVCs had been induced by the anagrelide, and his palpitations gradually resolved without any changes to his medication. However, his shortness of breath persisted. Echocardiography showed normal left ventricular ejection function (70%), with no evidence of valve disease. Coronary CT showed severe stenosis of the left anterior descending artery (LAD), prompting coronary angiography (CAG) that revealed moderate stenosis of the left main trunk (LMT) and LAD . The instantaneous wave-free ratio value of the proximal LAD lesion was 0.88. To estimate the efficacy of the heparin, we checked the activated clotting time (ACT), which was 144 s, even after 8000 units of unfractionated heparin had been delivered intravenously. Therefore, heparin resistance was suspected. We did not measure fractional flow reserve because the patient had active asthma, PVCs, and an inadequate prolongation of ACT. The patient’s platelet factor 4, a protein in platelet α-granules released, was markedly increased (91.7 ng/mL; the normal range is <20 ng/mL), whereas he was negative for antithrombin (AT)-3 and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia platelet factor 4 antibody (HIT-Ab). Conventional anti-anginal therapy was implemented, but his shortness of breath persisted and a treadmill test showed significant ST depression in V4–V6. We planned to perform percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) only after the patient’s platelet count had fallen below 600 000/μL. Meanwhile, the patient was treated by a haematologist at our hospital using hydroxyurea and anagrelide. Seven months after the initial CAG date, the patient’s platelet count was <600 000/μL. On the day before his PCI, his platelet factor 4 was 355.0 ng/mL, which was still markedly higher than the upper normal limit. We observed a de novo lesion in the proximal left circumflex artery (LCX) and stenosis progression in the LAD at the time of the PCI, neither of which had been detected at the previous CAG ( and ). During the PCI procedure, argatroban was infused to maintain the ACT above 250 s. Specifically, 1 mg/kg of argatroban was injected intravenously, followed by infusion at 31 mL/h. The PCI was performed successfully without any complications. Synergy stents were implanted in the LMT-LCX (diameter: 3.5 mm, length 24 mm) and LAD (diameter: 3.0 mm, length 24 mm; and ). After 9 months, follow-up CAG showed no restenosis, and no bleeding complications were observed during the course ( and ). The patient received dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin and prasugrel) after stent implantation.