A 24 years old male arrived to our outpatient department complaining of right-sided otalgia and hearing loss for 8 years, no history of otorreah, vertigo or dizziness. He had a history of right-sided chronic suppurative otitis media with a history of two operations at the same side, which were right side atticotomy combined with tympanoplasty in 2002 and right side tympanoplasty in 2007. Examination showed dull, intact tympanic membrane. Tuning fork showed mild conductive hearing loss. The rest of the examination was within normal.
Audio-tympanogram showed mild conductive hearing loss in the right side and type B tympanogram. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed opacification of the right middle ear and mastoid as shown in . Patient was admitted to the hospital and all pre-operative hematological, biochemical and serological investigations were within normal. Patient underwent exploratory right tympanatomy combined with right cortical mastoidectomy. Tissue specimens were sent for histopathology and comprehensive microbiology for aerobic, anaerobic, fungal and acid-fast bacillus cultures.
Histopathology showed acute and chronic inflammation with diffuse fibrosis. Acid-fast bacillus staining was negative and all microbiological cultures failed to grow any organisms. A Grocott-Gomori’s methenamine silver-nitrate stain (GMS stain) showed branching bacterial filaments as seen in , allowing the diagnosis of actinomycosis to be established.
Patient had a history of Penicillin allergy. Consultations for both infectious diseases and allergy/immunology specialties were obtained to determine an optimal management strategy. He was started on Augmentin 1g and Doxycycline 200mg/day. Then, discharged in a stable condition on same medications with regular outpatient clinic appointments. During regular follow-up visits in outpatient clinic till up to date patient has no complaint, tympanic membrane looked normal. CT was done showed normal right middle ear and mastoid opacification as shown in .