A 4-year-old girl visited her local hospital due to abdominal pain and vomiting for one day. Then, she was admitted to our department for a giant retroperitoneal lesion, which was considered an NB.
The girl’s abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed a giant retroperitoneal lesion, which was considered an NB. For further diagnosis and treatment, she visited our department. Her symptoms such as abdominal pain and vomiting had disappeared spontaneously without treatment after admission.
Previously, she did not have a specific past medical history.
The girl did not have any significant family history. Both her father and mother were healthy.
On physical examination, a mass was found on palpation of abdomen, mainly in the left upper and left lower quadrants, extending to the right lower quadrant, of about 10 cm × 7 cm in size. It was firm mass without tenderness, and had an unclear boundary and limited mobility.
Tumor markers revealed a neuron-specific enolase level of 42.45 ng/mL. All other blood test findings, including other tumor markers, coagulation, liver and renal function tests, were within normal values.
Ultrasonography showed a giant hypoechoic mass in the left retroperitoneal space, and the mass had a patchy strong echogenicity and no obvious cystic area. The lesion size was 12.4 cm × 10.5 cm × 6.3 cm with irregular morphology, and the mass crossed the midline. A tumor blood supply vessel with a diameter of 0.3 cm branched from the abdominal aorta . Contrast-enhanced CT showed that the huge lesion appeared well defined and was 123 mm × 85 mm in maximum cross-section, while the inferior mesenteric artery was fully encased 360°. Mixed density and patchy calcification were seen within the mass, the solid component was significantly enhanced, and adjacent structures were pushed out. The radiologists considered it to be a tumor (NB?) .
To clarify the diagnosis and decide the next treatment, ultrasound-guided abdominal mass aspiration biopsy was performed. Pathology revealed a retroperitoneal neoplastic lesion, and some cells were spindle-shaped and considered Schwann stroma. As a whole, the tumor was differentiated, while some of the cells were suspected to have undergone ganglion cell differentiation. Some areas appeared to be immature, but no definite NB nesting mass was observed. Immunohistochemical results showed calretinin (+-), Syn (+-), NF (+-), and SOX10 (+-). Therefore, the pathologists first considered it to be a GN .