A 27-year-old Chinese woman presented to the outpatient department of our hospital with abnormal pregnancy.
The patient had experienced menopause for 60 d. Her normal menstrual cycle was 27-35 d, and a urine pregnancy test was positive at 40 d of menopause. After 52 d of menopause, 174.8 mIU/mL of blood beta human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) and 3.79 nmol/L of progesterone were examined in the hospital, and TVS indicated a honeycomb mixed echo in the uterine cavity of approximately 7.6 cm × 6.2 cm and a rich blood flow, some of which seemed to be embedded in the CS scar. The patient had no abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding and was experiencing a mild early pregnancy reaction. She was admitted to our hospital because of the abnormal pregnancy indicated by TVS.
The patient had been delivered by CS due to macrosomia 4 years previously.
The patient has no relevant family history.
The patient had a temperature of 36.7 °C, heart rate of 82 bpm, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, and blood pressure of 117/62 mmHg, and the oxygen saturation in room air was 99%. After admission, a gynecological examination revealed some bloody secretion in the vagina, mild cervical erosions without lifting pain, enlargement of the anterior uterus similar to that at 60 d of pregnancy without tenderness, and no abnormalities in the bilateral appendages.
Hemoglobin level was 126 g/L, blood β-hCG was 189.6 mIU/mL, progesterone was 1.0 nmol/L, and the white cell and platelet count were normal. The prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were normal, and the d-dimer value was 1.98 mg/L. Serum C-reactive protein was normal. The blood biochemistry and urine analyses were normal.
According to the TVS review, the scar area revealed a disorderly high echo mass, and multiple vesicular echoes were found in utero, with the largest being approximately 2.2 cm × 1.1 cm . An embryo abortion was considered, and a hydatidiform mole could not be excluded. The electrocardiogram and chest computed tomography scan were also normal.