A 53-year-old, right-handed male patient presented with sudden onset of right hemiparesis and aphasia. Left middle cerebral artery (MCA) stroke was diagnosed. The patient's medical history included systemic hypertension and dyslipidemia. Previously undiagnosed atrial fibrillation was then identified. Systemic fibrinolytic therapy was administered first without result; local intraarterial fibrinolytic treatment and mechanical thrombectomy were then performed, achieving recanalization of the distal MCA.
Computed tomography angiography (CTA) that was performed during the diagnosis of the stroke also revealed an aneurysm of the PCoA . No signs of subarachnoid hemorrhage were observed in the basal cisterns, and the patient had no focal cranial nerve deficits prior to the stroke. The aneurysm measured 3 mm and had a posterior orientation. A day after the stroke, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a mass in the interpeduncular fossa that was larger than expected . The mass measured 14 mm, projected medially, and was compatible with a partially thrombosed aneurysm.
Bilateral carotid and left vertebral angiography [Figures and ] revealed an aneurysm arising from the left PCoA itself. The saccular-type aneurysm originated 3 mm distal to the ICA bifurcation, with a 3.5 mm dome height and a 1.5 mm neck width. A fetal-type posterior cerebral artery (PCA) was present on the left. We opted for endovascular treatment of the aneurysm because the configuration of the aneurysm was favorable in our opinion, rather than surgical clipping. Endovascular occlusion was performed under general anesthesia in a separate procedure. A guide catheter was introduced to the right ICA. Then a microcatheter was placed into the aneurysm sac in the PCoA. Once the microcatheter was placed three coils were packed (3 × 80, 2 × 60, and 2 × 40 mm) until no additional coil could fit into the lumen. Postcoiling angiogram showed complete occlusion of the aneurysm . The postprocedure course was uneventful.
At the 6-month follow-up, magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) did not show recanalization. The patient exhibited marked neurological improvement with therapy, presenting with mild right hemiparesis and motor dysphasia with mild nonfluent speech and normal comprehension.