A 48-year-old man experienced a sudden onset of seizures in his left lower limb. He had never previously experienced such an episode. Gadolinium-enhanced MRI (Gd-MRI) revealed a small, homogenous-enhancing mass in the peripheral aspect of the right parieto-frontal lobe. The patient was referred to our hospital for further evaluation. The results of the physical examination performed at the time of admission were unremarkable. No cutaneous stigmata of neurofibromatosis Type I was observed. A neurological examination revealed no significant findings.
The lesion appeared as a well-defined, isosignal intensity area on T1-weighted MRI , was hyperintense on T2-weighted MRI , and also hyperintense on fluid attenuation inversion recovery MRI . The lesion demonstrated homogenous enhancement on Gd-T1-weighted MRI [-]. Curvilinear enhancement was observed beneath the parietal bone but was unlikely to represent a “dural tail sign;” however, these findings are similar to convexity meningioma. T2-weighted MRI showed definite evidence of perilesional edema. Digital subtraction angiography showed some feeding arteries (right middle cerebral artery branch) [ and ], right anterior cerebral artery branch [ and ], and right middle meningeal artery (MMA) branch [ and ]. Preoperative feeder embolization targeted to the right MMA branch was performed [ and ].
Our preoperative diagnosis was an extra-axial tumor, such as convexity meningioma or other tumors. A whole-body evaluation revealed no evidence of malignancy. The patient underwent a parietal craniotomy, with total resection of the tumor. During surgery, tumoral invasion beyond the dura mater was observed . When the dura was opened, a well-demarcated, firm, spherical tumor was observed beneath the arachnoid membrane. The tumor was elastic, hard, grayish in color, and loosely adherent to but separable from the dura mater . The tumor was totally removed piece by piece, with the adjacent brain tissue and dura . Postoperative MRI showed the total removal of the tumor [-]. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged without neurological deficits.
In light-microscopic assessments, the tumor was composed predominantly of Antoni Type A, and intermingled with Antoni Type B . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for S-100 protein but negative for glial fibrillary acidic protein, cluster of differentiation 34, epithelial membrane antigen , signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 , progesterone receptor, and synaptophysin. The histopathological diagnosis was schwannoma. The tumor was observed to be in the subarachnoid space extending to outer space of dura mater, intimately attached to the pia mater [ and ]. Electron-microscopic studies were not performed.