The patient’s chief complaint was positive urinary protein and elevated serum creatinine (Scr) levels.
A 28-year-old man had positive urinary protein (++) and elevated Scr (149 μmol/L) test results in 2014. He underwent renal biopsy in February 2015 and was diagnosed with “IgAN, mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis with sclerosis”. Since then, the patient had been taking losartan (100 mg daily) and ketosteril (α-ketoacid tablets; 2.52 g/3 times daily). He first visited the outpatient department at our hospital on June 1, 2017. At this visit, malaise, waist soreness, acid reflux, and bubbles in the urine were the main clinical manifestations. The patient also complained of frequent urination at night. His tongue was light red with a yellow coating, his pulse was slippery (meaning that his pulse was beating freely and smoothly like the movement of abacus beads), and his pharynx was red.
The patient visited the outpatient department again on August 2, 2017. At this visit, waist soreness and fatigue were resolved. The patient’s stomach discomfort was also alleviated. However, he still had a sore throat and spermatorrhea.
At his 3rd visit on September 28, 2017, serological indexes were stable. Clinical manifestations such as waist soreness, fatigue, pharynx discomfort, spermatorrhea, and epigastric discomfort were unchanged.
At the 4th visit on October 26, 2017, serological indexes had decreased significantly. The patient’s epigastric discomfort had improved, but waist soreness remained.
At the patient’s 5th visit on November 23, 2017, his clinical symptoms including waist soreness, fatigue, spermatorrhea, and epigastric discomfort were all resolved, and the serological indexes had also decreased.
The patient has no history of a relevant illness.
The patient has no family history of a similar illness.
On admission, the patient’s blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg, and no abnormalities were detected during the physical examination, including the cardiopulmonary system. There was no edema in either lower limb.
The serological and urinary indexes are shown in Table .
Renal ultrasound showed no obvious abnormality.
Under light microscopy, a renal biopsy sample contained 25 glomeruli, among which there were 15 glomeruli with global sclerosis and no crescent. The remaining glomeruli were enlarged with approximately 90-110 cells/glomerulus. There were some mesangial areas with severe matrix hyperplasia with 2-3 cells/mesangium. The basement membrane was normal and the structure of capillary loop remained open. Complete sclerosis was seen in some glomeruli. Masson Stain was negative.
There were moderate lesions in the tubulointerstitium with indistinct tubular structure, no tubular atrophy, some swollen and degenerated tubular epithelial cells and some vacuolar degeneration. Focal fibrosis (40%) and more inflammatory cell infiltration could be seen in the interstitial area.
Immunofluorescence showed classic prominent IgA deposits.