A 27-year-old Japanese man was brought to the emergency room with coma. He was diagnosed as having schizophrenia at the age of 13 and as having autism spectrum disorder at the age of 18. The medication at that time was 50 mg/day of atomoxetine, 5 mg/day of risperidone and 3 mg/day of guanfacine, although risperidone was decreased from 9 to 5 mg and guanfacine was increased from 2 to 3 mg 35 days before. He had been drinking over 4 L of water for the last few weeks. His impaired consciousness level was 3 points (E1V1M1) of the Glasgow coma scale (GCS). His vital signs were as follows: temperature, 39.1°C; blood pressure, 174/98 mmHg; heart rate, 95 beats/min; oxygen saturation, 92% (under 9 L of O2 supply). shows laboratory data in emergency room. He suffered from abnormal balance of electrolytes. As shown in , he had significant hyponatremia and hypochloremia with normal potassium concentration, and reduction of blood osmotic pressure. His inflammation markers were markedly elevated. In addition, he suffered from rhabdomyolysis. Indeed, his creatine kinase, myoglobin and urinary myoglobin levels were significantly high. As shown in , his head computed tomography (CT) revealed severe cerebral edema. In addition, significant fluid retention was observed throughout the body, namely, pleural effusion, pulmonary and intestinal edema . We evaluated the causes of hyponatremia in this patient. Since antidiuretic hormone (ADH) level was elevated to 0.8 pg/ml when sodium level was 109 mmol/L, we diagnosed him with syndrome of inappropriate secretion of ADH (SIADH). Based on these findings, we thought that he probably suffered from severe cerebral edema which was induced by hyponatremia associated with NMS and SIADH. In addition, rhabdomyolysis and NMS was diagnosed necessitating comprehensive therapy in intensive care unit (ICU).
On admission to ICU, he required mechanical ventilation and administration of 0.9% NaCl. Moreover, we started immediately administering 10% glyceol (600 ml/once a day, 5 days + 400 ml/once a day, 2 days + 200 ml/once a day, 2 days) for cerebral edema and continuous furosemide (3 days) for diuresis. In addition, he was treated with methylprednisolone (1,000 mg/once a day, 3 days) for cerebral edema and suspection of autoimmune encephalitis, and with dantrolene (40 mg/once a day, 1 day + 100 mg/once a day, 4 days + 60 mg/once a day, 2 days) for NMS. Eye openings and spontaneous limb movements were observed several times at day 2 (his sodium level, 115 mmol/L). His impaired consciousness was improved and he was able to speak sometimes at day 3 (his sodium level, 130 mmol/L). The patient was extubated at day 3 and his head CT revealed the improvement of severe cerebral edema at day 4 . Finally, we successfully treated severe cerebral edema and hyponatremia, which was induced and complicated with NMS, water intoxication, SIADH and rhabdomyolysis. shows a time course of his cerebral edema and shows his clinical time course in ICU. His adrenal and thyroid function was normal (adrenocorticotropic hormone, 61.7 pg/ml; cortisol, 13.0 μg/dl; thyroid stimulating hormone, 3.208 μIU/ml; free triiodothyronine, 2.89 pg/ml; free thyroxine, 1.03 ng/dl; respectively) after correction of hyponatremia. He was transferred from ICU to general ward at day 9 and was discharged 29 days after admission.
After discharge, he was followed-up by the psychosomatic center of another hospital. He continued to receive the same psychosomatic treatment and did not have recurrence of malignant syndromes or water intoxication.