We report the case of a 46- year-old woman with falsely elevated FT4. She had no family history of thyroid disease and suffered from hypertension and dyslipidaemia. She was an active smoker and was having peri-menopausal symptoms. No other relevant medical conditions were present. She was first presented with a serum thyrotropin (TSH) level of 20.95 µUI/mL (0.5 - 5) and a serum free thyroxin (FT4) level of 7.7 pg/mL (8 - 18). The analysis was performed on Siemens Healthcare Reagents Kit in Advia centaur platform. Thyroid peroxidase and thyroglobulin auto-antibodies levels were positive; a thyroid ultrasound showed no goiter. The patient was diagnosed with clinical autoimmune hypothyroidism and was treated with 75 micrograms of levothyroxine daily. She was discharged from the endocrinologist to her primary care physician. Annual thyroid function tests were carried out and the results were within normal range, so the dose of levothyroxine remained unchanged.
Eight years after she was first diagnosed with hypothyroidism, she showed a FT4 level of 51.7 pg/mL (8 - 18), a free triiodothyronine (FT3) level of 2.8 pg/mL (2.3 - 4.2) and a TSH level of 7.393 µUI/mL (0.5 - 5) in one of the annual routine thyroid tests performed by her primary care physician. The results were confirmed by a repeated test three weeks later. On the basis of these results, her primary care physician recommended a reduction in the dose of levothyroxine from 75 micrograms to 50 micrograms and referred the patient to the endocrinologist for further assessment. On examination, the patient had a body mass index of 35 kg/m2, no palpable goiter, a blood pressure of 129/88 mmHg and a heart rate of 98 bpm. She had recently increased her weight, to the extent of 7 kilograms in 6 month and she did not indicate tremor, palpitations, sweating, insomnia, diarrhoea or any other features of hyperthyroidism, in spite of the very high FT4 levels. She also denied having headaches or visual field problems that could have been caused by a TSH-producing pituitary adenoma. The test results in the past and the absence of family history of thyroid problems made the diagnosis of thyroid hormone resistance unlikely. Furthermore, the normal level of FT3 in the presence of high levels of FT4 pointed to the possibility of interference in the FT4 quantification.
With the suspicion of interference in the FT4 quantification, the laboratory chemist was contacted and a second FT4 test, in a specimen collected 20 days after the previous one, was analyzed in parallel in two different platforms. Blood specimens were collected from the patient between 8 - 10 hours AM after overnight fasting and 24 hours after the last dose of levothyroxine. Sera of patient were left at room temperature 20 minutes, followed by centrifugation at 3000g for 15 minutes. The sera were then analyzed or immediately stored at -70°C for seven days. First, an Advia centaur platform with a Siemens Healthcare Reagents Kit (Method 1) was used with quality control material freeze-dried and human based “Immunoassay Plus Control” from Biorad and a within-run CV < 5% and inter-run CV < 8%. Second an alternative immunoassay platform Cobas e 411 with Roche Diagnostics Corporation (Indianapolis) Reagent kit (Method 2) was used with quality control material human based and freeze-dried Precinorm U from Roche Corporation and an intra-assay CV < 8.11% and an inter-assay CV < 11.2%. The TSH coefficient of variation intra-assay and inter-assay in Advia Centaur Platform were < 2.8% and < 4.28%, respectively. Both Roche Cobas “e” and Advia Centaur are competitive one-step immunoassay for FT4 quantification but differ in reagents labeling. In Advia Centaur, the labeling is an analogue of T4 hormone, labelled with acrydinium-ester, which compete with the patient’s FT4 for a little quantity of polyclonal rabbit antibody bound to a solid phase. However, in Roche, the labeling is a polyclonal sheep antibody (immunometric one-step assay) labelled with sulfonyl-Rhutenium; the solid phase bound T4 analogue and the patient’s FT4 patient hormone compete for a little quantity of polyclonal sheep antibody labeled with suffonyl-Rhutenium. The results obtained by both methods are shown in . After confirming an under-treated hypothyroidism, the dose of levothyroxine was increased to the initial of 75 micrograms.
Autoantibodies anti-T4 presence was confirmed using PEG precipitation and dilution methods, following an in house protocol based in the radioactivity measurement of the precipitant after addition of Polyethylene glycol solution 20% w/v in water to the serum patient and serum negative control previously incubated with I-125 radiolabeled -Thyroxine in the same run. Serum patient was found to be positive with a percentage of 77.4% of fixation (positive if higher than 10%). Control negative serum showed a percentage of 5% of fixation. Auto-antibodies anti-T3 were negative following the same in house protocol. The patient sample was PEG-precipitated in order to confirm the autoantibodies anti-T4 interference in FT4 Advia Centaur assay with a validated in-house protocol in an Advia centaur platform. We selected a patient control specimen with a very low FT4 concentration like Blank and another patient control specimen with very high FT4 concentration. To compare both, the matrix effect by PEG in Advia centaur acrydinium-ester label and the behaviour of a sample in the same patient range after PEG precipitation. The antibody interference gave a very discordant result before and after PEG precipitation in the patient’s problem specimen. No relevant disagreement was found in the control specimens before and after PEG precipitation.
To further evaluate the antibody interference, we performed a double-dilution test in order to confirm the T4-autoantibodies interference in the Advia centaur platform. We did this by using a very low FT4 level pool from hypothyroid patients as a zero diluent and patient´s control specimens without FT4 test interference as well as a very high FT4 level. All of them were analyzed at the same run. The patient sample showed a non-linear increase in the FT4 level due to the decreasing title of high avidity interfering T4-autoantibodies after double-dilution test . Finally, total T4 and T3 levels were also analyzed in Advia centaur platform in order to detect interference in total thyroid hormones. No relevant discordance was detected after the total T4 and total T3 quantification in Advia centaur platform respect the FT4 and FT3 hormones in the same platform and patient’ specimen. The total T4 level was 67.9 µg/dL (4.5 - 10.9) and the total T3 was 1.43 ng/mL (0.6 - 1.81). PEG precipitation and dilution tests were performed . Patient specimen showed a very low PEG precipitated recovery, which accounted for the PEG eliminated interference probably owing to the antiT4-autoantibodies. We speculate that the high title and high avidity patient index anti T4 autoantibodies were quenching the T4 coated paramagnetic solid phase beads, displacing the low title monoclonal mouse anti T4 from the binding site in the T4 molecule. After washing the monoclonal acrydinium labeled mouse, antiT4-antibodies were discarded and no signal was detected in the competitive assay, which explained the high Total T4 concentration observed in the patient sample in the Advia centaur platform total T4 assay.