A 50-year-old female presented with three years of metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint pain. She has no family history of RA. She visited our hospital with a chief complaint of foot pain and swelling 3 years ago. Morton's disease was initially suspected. She stopped visiting our hospital because pain did not get better. 3 years after, she was referred from clinic to our hospital because of the foot deformity, subcutaneous hemorrhage, and bone erosion image on the X-ray. On physical examination, she had pain and swelling on MTP joint of forth toe . The MTP joint had 0° of extension and 30° of flexion. Pain on motion was observed at that time. Laboratory tests revealed low levels of inflammatory markers and positive serological markers for RA: C-reactive protein (CRP) was negative, rheumatoid factor (RF) was 29.3 IU/mL, and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (ACPA) was 496.6 IU/mL. She scored 6 points according to the 2010 American College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism (ACR/EULAR) classification criteria and was classified with RA. X-ray showed bone erosion of metatarsal (a and b). MRI showed synovial proliferation and fluid around 3rd and 4th metatarsals (c). Because of difficulties in diagnosis, disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs were not administered prior to surgery, only non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were administered, but there was no improvement in pain. She had pain due to lateral dislocation of proximal phalanx of foot and was performed synovectomy for diagnosis and treatment. Enlarged MTP joint capsule was observed (a). Incision through the joint capsule revealed synovial proliferation (b). After synovectomy, we found destruction of articular cartilage and subchondral bone (c). Joint instability due to periarticular tissue destruction was observed, so MTP joint was fixed by using Kirschner-wire (d). On pathological examination, there was infiltration by inflammatory cells including plasma cells with blood vessel proliferation (a and c) and formation of lymphoid follicle (b). CD138 immuno-staining was positive (d). CD138 is a member of the syndecan family of type I transmembrane proteoglycans. CD138 is highly expressed on plasma cells which is characteristic for RA . Pathological findings were consistent with chronic synovitis consistent with rheumatoid arthritis. Surgical wound had healed in two weeks. K-wire was removed one month after surgery, and she could walk with a little pain. The MTP joint had 20° of extension and 40° of flexion postoperatively. Postoperative figure is shown . After that, she was administered methotrexate at 4 mg per week. The pain has been getting better after administering methotrexate. 8 mg per week of methotrexate is still being administered to inhibit the progression of RA.