A 20-year-old female underwent deformity correction and spinal fusion surgery for presumed adult idiopathic scoliosis with posterior spinal instrumentation comprising pedicle screws and hooks extending from T3-T12 . The pre-operative assessment including an ECG did not demonstrate any abnormalities and her past medical history was uneventful while she had a normal level of physical activities including sports. The anesthetic and scoliosis surgery was uncomplicated with the patient maintaining good O2 levels and blood pressure while the intraoperative neuromonitoring showed stable motor and sensory potentials throughout. Her initial post-operative course was without incident until post-operative day 2 when she had episodes of acute de-saturation which prompted USG Doppler for bilateral lower limbs and computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA). While both the studies ruled out any evidence of pulmonary embolism, CTPA revealed right heart strain pattern and an enlarged right side of the heart. A subsequent 2D echocardiography revealed a large atrial septal defect (ASD) which had remained asymptomatic up to that point. In addition, the CTPA demonstrated a lateral breech at the left T10 pedicle screw level with the screw tip being in close proximity to the aorta. A multidisciplinary team meeting was held where it was decided to prioritize cardiac management for ASD and keep the malpositioned screw under observation with removal planned for a later date. An ASD repair procedure was performed and this was uneventful with the patient making a good recovery.
After recovery from the cardiac procedure, a repeat computed tomography (CT) scan was performed to plan removal of the screw; the CT scan showed the position of the left T10 screw in close vicinity of the aorta . To determine the exact position of the screw tip in relation to the aorta, an angiogram and an intravascular ultrasound was done which showed no evidence of intra-luminal extension of the screw tip. In addition, a transesophageal ultrasound was performed and this ruled out any extra-luminal contact with the aorta. Two years following the primary scoliosis correction, it was decided to proceed with removal of the spinal instrumentation with the vascular surgeon and intervention radiologists being on standby. The midline longitudinal scar was reopened and the spine was exposed across the previously operated segments from T3-T12. A solid posterior spinal fusion was noted across the previously operated levels which allowed the spinal instrumentation to be removed without compromising the surgical outcome of scoliosis correction. Intraoperative neuro-monitoring was used and the procedure was uncomplicated. The fusion mass was re-grafted using allograft bone. The patient was followed in our clinic for an additional period of two years during which there was no clinical or radiographic evidence of scoliosis recurrence.