The patient was a 19-year-old Caucasian woman who presented to the clinic initially with nonspecific symptoms of fatigue, fever and abdominal pain. Past medical history was noncontributory; she was an otherwise healthy adult from the United States, and did not report ill contacts, intravenous drug use, or recent sexual contacts. She had a temperature of 102.3°F, WBC of 4,800, AST of 330 U/liter and ALT of 250 U/liter. She was thought at the time to have a viral prodrome and was treated symptomatically. The patient returned to the clinic 3 days later with resolution of her constitutional symptoms but with the development of inflammation and pain around her recent tongue piercing (1 to 2 weeks before this visit). The patient was treated for oral thrush, and cultures of the tongue were taken and grew normal oral flora and beta hemolytic streptococci group C. Several days later, the patient presented to the emergency room with worsening fever, abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, myalgia, and arthralgia. At this time, she had an AST of 6000 U/liter and ALT of 4000 U/liter. The following day, her lab values increased to an AST of 9200 U/liter and an ALT of 4400 U/liter. Bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase were within normal limits. Other laboratory values were as follows: alcohol, non-detectable; CMV, infectious mononucleosis, leptospira, EBV, HBV, HCV, HEV, HIV all negative; urine drug screen negative; serum acetaminophen level of 3 μg/dl.
CT scan showed a mottled liver and a 2 to 4 mm abscess of the anterior tongue. Shortly after admission to the ICU, she developed hypotension, coagulopathy with a PT of 83.2s and PTT of greater than 200s, hyperammonemia, and acute renal failure thought to be due to hepatorenal syndrome. The medical team was in the process of preparing her for transport to receive a liver transplant but the patient expired. Postmortem laboratory results revealed a tongue viral culture positive for HSV and a positive serum HSV PCR.
Autopsy revealed a liver weighing 1620 g with diffuse geographic necrosis. Histological examination of the liver showed extensive hemorrhagic necrosis with HSV intranuclear inclusion , Cowdry type 1 and 2 , with immunoreactivity for HSV-1 . Other findings included bilateral pleural effusions (approximately 500 ml) and a pelvic wall hematoma (4.0 × 2.5 cm).