A 65-year-old male with ischemic cardiomyopathy, permanent AF (diagnosed for five years), and a single-chamber DF-1 ICD for primary prevention was brought to the emergency department for multiple internal electrical shocks. He had his first device implanted 12 years ago and subsequently underwent two box changes, with the last being two years prior to the current presentation. His presenting ECG showed atypical atrial flutter/AF with a fast ventricular rate of 180 bpm . Device interrogation revealed a total of 51 shock therapies, all for rapid AF, which were mislabeled as ventricular fibrillation . No clinical signs or symptoms of decompensated heart failure were obvious on physical examination. The laboratory findings were unremarkable, including normal blood count and thyroid function. The echocardiography showed an enlarged left ventricle with a severely depressed ejection fraction (30%), mild valvular regurgitations, and a dilated left atrium with a diameter of 50 mm and a volume of 105 ml. The ICD had a ventricular tachycardia detection zone programmed at 170 bpm and a ventricular fibrillation detection zone programmed at 200 bpm with an initial detection duration of 3 s. Since most of the shocks were delivered for rates well above 200 bpm, we considered that reprogramming the device would be futile. So, because the patient was on optimal heart failure therapy (including an angiotensin receptor/neprilysin inhibitor, mineralocorticoid antagonist, and sodium-glucose co-transporter-2) and maximum AVN blocking agents (10 mg of Bisoprolol and 0.25 mg of Digoxin five days per week), a decision was made to control the heart rate with a physiological pace and ablate strategy. Successful LBBAP was first performed using a Medtronic C315 His catheter (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) and a Medtronic SelectSecure 3830 lead (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA), with the identification of a large proximal left bundle branch potential and non-selective capture resulting in a paced QRS complex of 110 ms duration . The capture threshold for the left bundle branch was 0.7 V at 0.4 ms and the sensing values were above 12 mV. The lead was connected to the existing defibrillator`s IS-1 sense-pace port and the defibrillator coils to the corresponding high-energy ports. During the same procedure, successful ablation of the AVN was performed . The device was programmed with a single ventricular fibrillation detection zone at 200 bpm with an initial detection duration of 5 s. The patient was discharged the next day. The 6-month follow-up showed constant pacing and sensing thresholds, no inappropriate shocks, and an improvement in ejection fraction to 40%.