A 34-year-old man with ccTGA collapsed and suffered cardiopulmonary arrest. He underwent bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation and was transported to the hospital where ventricular fibrillation was confirmed . He was immediately converted to sinus rhythm by external defibrillation. A secondary prevention ICD implantation was indicated and the patient was transferred to our tertiary hospital. Physical examination revealed a systolic murmur (3/6 on the Levine grading scale), without any other clinical manifestations of heart failure. His blood pressure was 106/62 mmHg. Electrocardiography (ECG) revealed sinus bradycardia with a heart rate of 42 b.p.m. . Twenty-four-hour Holter ECG revealed an average heart rate of 48 b.p.m., maximum heart rate of 59 b.p.m., and minimum heart rate of 38 b.p.m. Echocardiogram showed that reduced systolic function of both ventricles (left ventricular ejection fraction was 36%, right ventricular ejection fraction was 42%, and tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion was 18 mm), but there was no significant valve regurgitation or haemodynamically significant valve vitia.
He had undergone pulmonary artery banding operations twice as a child, and then underwent a double-switch operation with combined Senning and Jatene operations at the age of 14. He did not take any medications after cardiac surgery; echocardiograms were followed up about once a year until age 31 (last right ventricular ejection fraction was about 50% and relatively well preserved). Our contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan revealed that the superior vena cava and inferior vena cava were connected to the anatomical right ventricle via Senning pathway . Coronary artery angiography revealed no stenosis or anomaly of coronary arteries. We also conducted cardiac magnetic resonance imaging scan. The results revealed left ventricular ejection fraction around 30%, right ventricular ejection fraction difficult to assess, and no apparent scar. The adult congenital heart disease team decided to implant a dual-chamber ICD for ventricular fibrillation and sinus bradycardia. Implantation of the atrial lead was expected to be challenging, so it was decided to perform an electrophysiological study prior to the ICD implantation. This was also expected to reduce the implantation procedure time and thereby reduce the risk of procedure-related complications. We performed an electrophysiological study using a 3D mapping system (Ensite®) to determine the best placement site for the atrial lead.
Right femoral vein was cannulated and two sheaths were inserted. Two quadripolar electrode catheters were positioned in the right atrium and right ventricular apex, respectively. A 3D substrate map was performed in sinus rhythm. Then, we evaluated the function of sinus node and atrioventricular node by atrial pacing. The paced cycle length of atrioventricular nodal Wenckebach-type block was 620 ms. Pacing from the right atrium at a basic cycle length of 500 ms for 30-s showed that the maximum sinus node recovery time was 1728 ms. Finally, we checked electrical potential and the threshold of the right atrium. The electrical potential of the right atrium was relatively good, but the threshold was high overall [about 3 volts (V)]. The roof of the right atrium was mostly with low voltage, with the exception of a scattered limited region where the threshold was 1 V and the sensed electrical potential was normal (, black arrow). Three weeks later, a dual-chamber ICD implantation was performed (Fortify Assura DR, St Jude medical; atrial lead, 2088TC-52; shock lead, 7120Q-58). We implanted a shock lead in the right ventricle and then introduced an atrial lead to the right atrium. The thresholds at the free wall side and bottom of the right atrium were high, so we placed the atrial lead at the roof of right atrium beyond cavoatrial junction using a J-shaped stylet as third attempt to implant atrial lead. The threshold there was 0.7 V. We did not perform defibrillation threshold testing. The device was programmed in DDD mode at 60–90 b.p.m. with two zones of therapy; ventricular tachycardia: ≥171 b.p.m., anti-tachycardia pacing + shock therapy [anti-tachycardia pacing × 6, 36 joule (J), 40J x2]; ventricular fibrillation: ≥200 b.p.m., shock therapy with anti-tachycardia pacing while charging (36J, 40J × 5). shows a chest X-ray 1 week after the ICD implantation. The slack did not reduce after then. We introduced bisoprolol 2.5 mg and continued after his discharge. The patient was discharged without no complications in his postoperative course.
We checked the parameters of the pacemaker and leads 5 months after implantation. The amplitude of the sensed P wave was 5.0 mV or more and the pacing threshold was 0.5 V. The percentage of atrial pacing was 18% and that of ventricular pacing was 1%. Two years after implantation, the first appropriate therapy (anti-tachycardia pacing) was delivered for ventricular tachycardia. The patient was asymptomatic. A monomorphic ventricular tachycardia with a cycle length of 330 ms was terminated by a sequence of anti-tachycardia pacing (a burst of eight ventricular paced beats at 88% of the cycle length of ventricular tachycardia).