A 47-year-old female patient presented with a palpable lesion protruding from the left areola. This lesion was first noted 10 years earlier and had not shown changes. However, recently it noticeably increased in size.
She underwent breast augmentation surgery with silicone implants eight years ago.
Physical examination revealed a soft, fluctuating, mobile, and non-tender mass measuring approximately 4 cm in size. Part of the overlying skin was slightly greenish in appearance with mild protrusion. However, there was no ulcer or other skin changes.
Sonography showed a well circumscribed oval cystic lesion with internal hyperechoic debris and fluid-fluid level. There was no internal blood flow on color doppler study. The mass broadly contacted with dermis, compressing the breast parenchyma . Breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to check breast implants, on which the lesion could also be evaluated. MRI showed a well circumscribed oval mass of left subareolar area measuring 3.9 cm. The lesion attached to the cutaneous layer of the areola and compressed the breast parenchyma. Thin fatty layer was noted between the mass and the breast parenchyma, suggesting separated mass from the breast. The lesion showed T1 hyper-intensity compared to muscle and high T2 signal intensity. On post-contrast fat saturation T1-weighted image, the mass showed a well-circumscribed thin and even enhancing wall. There was a small enhancing mural component in the inner wall of the mass . It was not detected on ultrasound because internal debris filling the mass masked the mural component. In differentiation of the lesion, we overlooked the enhancing solid portion and considered the lesion as benign such as epidermal inclusion cyst.
The tumor was resected due to its persistent and growing tendency. The mass was well demarcated with dense fibrous tissue. It was located between the breast parenchyma and the areola. The mass showed deep khaki color. It was filled with brownish and tan necrotic mucoid fluid. Microscopically, the lesion was predominantly cystic, measuring 3.5 cm × 2.5 cm × 2.4 cm with solid portion of 1 cm × 0.3 cm carcinoma and benign tissue of less than 0.1 cm. The carcinoma was composed of epithelial cells with clear or eosinophilic cytoplasm, prominent nucleoli, and frequent mitosis. Suspicious microinvasion to the fibrous cystic wall was noted . Resection margin was less than 1 mm and free of pathology. There was no lymphovascular invasion. Cytokeratin expression of the tumor showed positive for CK7 but negative for CK20. It was moderately positive for Ki-67, reflecting cell proliferation. Regarding other results in immunohistochemistry, it was positive for P63, C-erbB-2, and P53, but negative for estrogen and progesterone receptor.