The patient described is a 28-year-old man with a history of hypertension who initially presented to the ophthalmology department with a 2-year history of progressive, bilateral vision loss. Findings on exam included poor visual acuity, bilateral optic atrophy, reduced foveal threshold, and nonspecific inferior defects. Fundoscopic exam at this time revealed optic disc pallor and a cup-to-disc ratio of 0.3 bilaterally. Given these findings, the patient was subsequently referred to the department of neurology for evaluation of possible MS. Brain MRI revealed T2 FLAIR hyperintense lesions involving the body of the corpus callosum and the periventricular white matter without contrast enhancement, suggestive of demyelinating plaques . CSF testing showed normal protein and cells (0 WBC/mm3, 17 RBC/mm3, 33 mg/dL protein, and 66 mg/dL glucose) along with elevated IgG index and 4 CNS specific oligoclonal bands, strongly increasing the suspicion for MS. MRI of the spine showed no additional lesions. Serological testing for MS mimics was largely unrevealing except for serum copper which was marginally low at 66 ug/dl (normal range 72–166 ug/dl).
Three months after the diagnosis of MS, the patient presented to an outside hospital with a severe right-sided headache and he was referred to our hospital for further evaluation secondary to imaging demonstrating hydrocephalus and intracranial mass. Of note, the patient had not begun treatment for MS at the time of his hospital admission. At time of presentation, the patient was alert and in no apparent distress. The patient characterized the headache as constant for the past month, and worsened in the week before presentation. He denied any vomiting or nausea and his neurological examination was unremarkable. No upper motor neuron findings or visual field deficits were present at the time of examination. Fundoscopic exam showed no relative afferent pupillary defect. MRI of his brain demonstrated an intraventricular mass located in the posterior third ventricle, obstructive hydrocephalus and worsening of corpus callosum and periventricular T2 hyperintense lesions . An endoscopic third ventriculostomy was successfully performed to treat hydrocephalus and a biopsy was taken of the mass for pathological evaluation.
Two small biopsy specimens were submitted for examination. The tumor contained solid sheets of polygonal cells of moderate size and centrally located nuclei. The cytoplasm was pale in some areas [ and ] but was more eosinophilic in other areas. The nuclei were moderately sized and showed a limited variation in size. Prominent nucleoli were noted in many of the tumor cells [Arrow in and ] and were best appreciated in the cytologic preparation obtained during intraoperative consultation. On immunohistochemistry with Ki67, an average labeling index of about 30% was demonstrated. The tumor cells were positive for OCT3/4 , CD117 (c-kit) , placental alkaline phosphatase, cytokeratin AE1/AE3, and cytokeratin 7. The tumor cells were negative for H3 K27M , glial fibrillary acidic protein, Olig2, IDH1-R132H, synaptophysin, Sox10, Melan-A, CD30, thyroid transcription factor 1, and thyroglobulin. The tumor cells were also positive for BAF47 (INI1) indicating no loss of INI1 gene. A diagnosis of germinoma was made based on these characteristics.
The patient’s neurologic exam was normal postoperatively and he was discharged home after a 2-day hospital stay. Two months after surgery, the patient was started on carboplatin + etoposide to attempt cytoreduction before radiation therapy to treat intracranial germinoma. Interestingly, brain MRI 4 months after surgery showed resolution of hydrocephalus, periventricular T2 hyperintense changes (thought to possibly be related to trans-ependymal flow initially) and decrease in size of corpus callosum plaques . To rule out paraneoplastic optic neuritis, serum studies were performed and common markers for the disease, anti-CRMP-5, and anti-amphiphysin, were both negative. At the time of this manuscript, the patient had not undergone adjuvant radiation treatment nor started disease modifying treatment for MS as this was held secondary to initial focus on oncologic treatment after discussion among the patient’s treating physicians.