The patient was a 76-year-old woman. At the age of 70, when she was admitted to our hospital’s department of collagen medicine with polymyositis, she developed a depressive state for the first time and was subsequently treated by the department of psychiatry. She was diagnosed with major depressive disorder by diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders IV-TR and treated with mirtazapine 45 mg; however, her depressive state and anxiety agitation did not improve. Thereafter, she failed to respond to various drug therapies, including escitalopram, venlafaxine, vortioxetine, and augmentation with aripiprazole, and she underwent initial mECT at the age of 72. The depressive state improved immediately after mECT, but she relapsed several times, requiring mECT each time.

At the age of 76, she was admitted to our hospital to undergo mECT for the fifth time because of recurrent depressive symptoms such as decreased appetite, anxiety, and agitation. After admission, vortioxetine 10 mg and olanzapine 10 mg were tapered off. Quetiapine 50 mg, suvorexant 15 mg, and trazodone 25 mg were continued. Propofol (1.0 mg/kg) was administered intravenously, and rocuronium bromide (1.0 mg/kg) was given to avoid muscle contractions. After induction of anesthesia, suxamethonium chloride (4.0–5.0 mg/kg) was administered intravenously as a muscle relaxant. The mECT was bilateral and started at 35% stimulus intensity, and effective convulsions were obtained for the first time. However, during the 8th mECT at the same intensity (35% stimulus intensity), an unexpected prolonged seizure of 966 s (over 16 minutes) occurred. The seizure was abruptly stopped with diazepam 10 mg and midazolam 2 mg. There were no tardive seizures. The patient had used a range of antidepressants in the past with poor efficacy, therefore, we considered continuing mECT could be reasonable to improve her depressive symptoms.

During the ninth mECT session, the stimulation intensity was increased to 50%, which resulted in effective seizures and no prolonged seizures. Subsequently, appropriate convulsions were obtained with the same stimulation intensity, and she completed 12 sessions. Her depressive symptoms improved both subjective and objective, and she was discharged on the 45th day of hospitalization.