The patient in this case was an 11-year-old male who fell while running and injured his left wrist(We have obtained the consent of the patients and their families regarding sharing information associated with the patient). An X-ray examination at the local hospital revealed a fracture of the distal radius and dislocation of the distal ulnar radial joint. The doctor at the hospital administered the patient 2 manipulations and plaster fixation. Two months later, the patient presented to our hospital due to local swelling and pain. An initial examination of the injury site found no signs of neurovascular damage, but there was pain at the left upper ulnar radial joint, dorsal ulnar bony projection of the left wrist with slight local swelling and significant tenderness. The left wrist joint had nearly unrestricted extension and flexion, but its rotational ability, particularly supination, was limited .
We performed an X-ray of the injured site and found that the distal left ulna was split and a new ulna was growing. With the consent of the patient’s family, we performed a CT examination of the area which clearly revealed the deformity was more clearly . The new ulna grew inwards, was slightly smaller than the original ulna and did not have a complete articular surface, while the normal original ulna protrudes dorsally and laterally with an intact articular surface and a “Y” shaped distal ulna. The patient exhibited normal wrist flexion and extension, but had limited rotation. Following a discussion, the patient’s parents declined surgical treatment. Consequently, we recommended functional exercise and regular follow-up to manage the condition. After a period of seven months, the patient returned to us as a result of experiencing pain. Examination showed that the showed that the pain in the left upper ulnar radius had almost disappeared and the rotation of the left wrist had improved, but there was still pain on extreme supination. The x-ray showed that the distal ulnar bifurcation was still visible, but the two bifurcated ulnae were close to each other and the base was decreased compared with that at 2 months after injury .
The patient presented to our hospital at 3 years and 7 years after the injury. At the last follow-up, the patient’s status was that of a university student, not yet in the workforce. The patient’s left wrist function recovered satisfactorily and did not interfere with his daily life or physical activity, including playing basketball, push-ups and lifting heavy objects. A physical examination revealed that the length of the forearms were equal, the left elbow joint was normal, the left wrist deformity was minimal, the left ulnar styloid process was not prominent, there was no obvious local tenderness, the left wrist extension and flexion and rotation range of activities were normal. However, there was mild pain around the ulnar styloid process on extreme posterior rotation of the left wrist. The X-ray showed that the distal ulna was shortened and bifurcated, but the ulnar bifurcation was atrophied and smaller than previously, the ulnar styloid process was deformed and enlarged, the inferior ulnar radial joint was dislocated, the distal ulna did not participate in the composition of the radial carpal joint, and there was no obvious deformity of the radius.
When performing activities of daily living (ADLs), the normal functional range of wrist motion is 5 degrees of flexion, 30 degrees of extension, 10 degrees of radial deviation and 15 degrees of ulnar deviation [, ]. During the follow-up visits, we recorded the patient’s range of motion including wrist flexion and extension, ulnar and radial deviation of the wrist, and anterior/posterior rotation of the forearm . The wrist function was rated following the criteria proposed by Krimmer et al. .