A 32-year-old young man was transferred to the emergency department with sudden chest pain lasting for 80 min. He has had high blood pressure for 4 years but on no medication, and had a blood pressure of 174/113 mmHg and a pulse rate of 78 beats per minute. Electrocardiography showed ST-segment elevations in leads II, III, aVF, V3R, V4R, and V5R . Serum creatinine was 73 μmol/L, and serum troponin T was 7.97 ng/ml. Killip classification was class I. Aspirin 300 mg and ticagrelor 180 mg were chewed just before the coronary angiography (CAG) was performed, followed by a routine antithrombotic therapy of oral DAPT (aspirin 100 mg qd, ticagrelor 90 mg bid) lasting for 1 year. The treatment was approved by Hainan Hospital of PLA General Hospital ethics committee, and informed consent was signed. The CAG showed that the left circumflex (LCX) was completely occluded by a large amount of thrombus in the distal portion . A bolus of unfractionated heparin (11,250 IU) was administered intravenously. A Runthrough guidewire was advanced through the thrombus to the distal end of the occluded LCX. The distal end of a 2.5 mm × 15 mm Sprinter Legend balloon was cut off, leaving a metal marker at the tip. Then, the balloon was inserted over the Runthrough guidewire and through the stenotic section of the occluded coronary artery .
A total of 300,000 units of urokinase, 15 ml physiological saline, and 5 ml iopromide were mixed, forming a 20-ml cocktail. Following this, 1 ml of the cocktail was bolus-injected through the cut balloon, which was repeated every 30 s . After injection, the mixture of contrast agents and thrombolytic agent retained in the distal end of the occluded lumen, exerted its thrombolytic effect while visualizing the occluded vessels during this process. After 7 min of ICART, the thrombus in the proximal segment disappeared, but the thrombus in the distal location still existed. An aspiration catheter was used for thrombus aspiration, but it was unable to pass through the lesion because of the tortuosity of the blood vessels. The occluded segment was dilated up to 5 atm with a 2 mm × 20 mm Sprinter Legend compliant balloon at the distal portion of the LCX. Blood flow improved to TIMI grade 2. Diltiazem 200 μg was given through the intracoronary artery. The blood flow in the coronary artery was restored to TIMI grade 3 . The chest pain was completely relieved, and the ST-segment elevation was resolved . Intravenous infusion of tirofiban was maintained for 36 h after PCI. Oral administration of aspirin (100 mg/day), ticagrelor (180 mg/day), rosuvastatin (10 mg/day), bisoprolol (5 mg/day), nicorandil (15 mg/day), and perindopril (2 mg/day) was continued. Low molecular-weight heparin was administered subcutaneously after stopping tirofiban. No significant bleeding complications occurred after ICART. The patient was discharged 10 days after ICART. At a follow-up time of 1 year, there was no recurrent myocardial infarction, re-hospitalization, or death happened.