A 62-year-old Caucasian woman with cardiovascular risk factors of smoking and dyslipidaemia was evaluated in the ED of her local hospital due to sudden onset anterior chest tightness with no radiation, relief positioning nor intensification through breathing movements. The patient described throat pain, as well as fever and cough for the preceding 2 weeks. Constant CP started 2 h before the ECG was obtained, and it showed ST-segment elevation in the inferior and lateral leads . This clinical condition was interpreted as a ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. Acetylsalicylic acid and clopidogrel loading doses were immediately administered and thrombolytic treatment with tenecteplase (7000 U) was initiated [time estimated to percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was more than 120 min]. The patient was transferred to a PCI centre. During the helicopter transportation, the patient experienced two episodes of diplopia, lasting a few minutes. At arrival, ECG was repeated showing no ST-segment deviation and the coronary angiogram did not identify any atherosclerotic lesions. The patient noted complete relief from CP, although during evaluation presented with tachypnoea, basal crackles upon pulmonary auscultation, a 3/6 systolic murmur in the cardiac area, blood pressure of 130/70 mmHg, heart rate of 90 b.p.m. and body temperature of 37.8°C. Bed rest, furosemide, and supplemental oxygen were initiated. The echocardiogram showed moderate to severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction, due to areas of akinesia in the apex, distal and mid segments of the walls, sparing most of the basal segments and a mobile friable mass inside the left atrium, attached to the septum with dimensions of approximately 55 mm × 42 mm . Images acquired 48 h after admission revealed a left ventricle ejection fraction slightly improved (, S1–S3).
The initial laboratory study showed leucocytosis (15.7 × 103cell/mm3) with neutrophilia and C-reactive protein (3.6 mg/dL), N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (1431 pg/mL), and troponin I (19.4 µg/L) slightly high. Other laboratory values were within normal range. On the second day, C-reactive protein increased to 14 mg/dL and the maximum troponin I levels were 20.2 µg/L.
The head computed tomography did not present bleeding or recent ischaemic lesions but could identify morphologic sequelae of focal ischaemic lesions in the cerebellum and left occipital lobe.
In order to clarify the characteristics of the mass and understand the cause of the cardiac dysfunction, the patient was transferred to a tertiary centre with CMR available and possibility of performing cardiac surgery.
The CMR showed a mobile left atrium mass (, S4 and S5), adherent to the interatrial septum, isointense with respect to myocardium on T1 weighted images (WI), hyperintense with respect to myocardium on T2 WI, with slight enhancement during first pass perfusion, and heterogeneous enhancement in the late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) images, suggesting a possible myxoma . Regarding the myocardium evaluation, the left ventricle was non-dilated with mild systolic dysfunction and multiple subepicardial LGE foci in the inferolateral and mid-distal segments of the anterolateral wall, consistent with the diagnosis of myocarditis .
The patient underwent surgery on the 6th day with total tumour excision and autologous pericardial patch repair of the atrial septal defect. The periprocedural transoesophageal echocardiogram showed the mobility of the mass in to the left ventricle during diastole (, S6–S8).
During recovery, the patient presented with mild vertigo while walking and diplopia in extreme eye movements. After a neurologist assessment, a cerebral magnetic resonance imaging was requested where were identified multiple infracentimetric lesions throughout the cerebral parenchyma, infra and supratentorial, affecting the cerebellar peduncles and left caudate nucleus. These lesions were moderately hypointense on T1 WI and hyperintense on T2 WI, presenting enhancement after administration of gadolinium. These features were consistent with an embolization process caused by fragments of the myxoma. The histopathological results of the operative specimen confirmed the diagnosis of myxoma.
The patient started in a rehabilitation program and at the 2 months’ follow-up visit complete recovery from neurological deficits was noted with the echocardiogram revealing normal left ventricle ejection fraction.