A 31-year-old pregnant woman gravida two abortion 1 admitted in our institution (HAZRAT ZEYNAB Hospital of Shiraz University of medical science) at gestational age (GA) of 27 + 3 weeks with the chief complaint of vaginal leakage and diagnosis of premature rupture of amniotic membrane (PROM). In her first obstetric sonography at GA of 19+2 weeks, the MCDA pattern was confirmed with adequate amniotic fluid, and no congenital anomalies were detected. On the first physical examination, no tachycardia, fever, and uterine tenderness were observed. The patient’s speculum examination revealed fern-positive vaginal leakage without malodor discharge, with a closed cervix and no uterine contraction. Ultrasound examination showed two alive fetuses, and the posterior placenta and amniotic fluid of both fetuses were adequate (5cm and 7.5cm). Strip NST of both fetuses was reactive with an FHR base of 150. Based on these examinations, the patient admitted and received IV antibiotics at first for two days, continued with oral antibiotics for seven days, and two doses of corticosteroids for lung maturation administered during 48hrs.
The patient was under observation in the hospital with weekly WBC and CRP (c-reactive protein) and twice-weekly NST and maternal pulse rate (PR) and temperature monitoring for early detection of chorioamnionitis signs. In-hospital course after two weeks of admission, the biometry and colorflowmetry of the umbilical artery revealed fetal weight discrepancy of 31% and IUGR stage I for one of the fetuses and the other fetus was relatively small for gestational age (SGA). Ultrasonography also reported that no intertwin membrane was seen most probably because of the rupture of the membrane since the patient had not experienced any invasive procedure during pregnancy. Fetal heart rate monitoring was acceptable for gestational age. Also, no sign of chorioamnionitis presented until the 3rd week of admission. At the 30th week of gestation, the patient developed maternal tachycardia (PR: 110-120), fever (t: 38-38.5), a rise in WBC count up to 14000, and persistent tachycardia of the IUGR fetus (170-180). Therefore after hydration and administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics, the emergency cesarean section was performed due to chorioamnionitis diagnosis. At the time of cesarean section two female newborns delivered by breech and vertex presentation, the first one cried immediately after birth with an APGAR score of 6, weighing 1430gr and the second one born with mild respiratory depression and poor APGAR score of 1 and birth weight of 1020gr. APGAR score re-evaluation five minutes after the delivery showed the scores of 8 and 6 for the first and the second newborn, respectively. Two times nuchal cord was observed around the neck of one of the fetuses. Furthermore, two umbilical cords were twisted and formed a complex of true knots and tight loops as it is shown in . Umbilical artery blood gas examinations showed PH: 7.4, pCo2: 35, HCO3: 21.3, base excess: -2.6, for the first fetus, and PH: 7.35, pCo2: 32, HCO3: 17.1 and base excess: -7, for the second one (the depressed baby). Both neonates were admitted in the NICU ward because of prematurity and also respiratory distress syndrome in the second twin. No significant neonatal complication occurred, except mild hyperbilirubinemia. All cultures and gram stain of throat, nose, blood, eye discharge, and CSF were negative. Brain sonography revealed grade-I IVH in the second twin. The first and the second babies were respectively discharged from NICU ward 20 and 24 days after their birth, and no complications have been observed yet in the afterbirth follow-ups. After consultation with the mother and upon her request, the placenta and umbilical cord were sent for histological examination. The anatomical pathology findings (macroscopic) confirmed the MCDA as the type of chorionicity with no specific pathological changes except cholangitis of the placenta.