A 28-year-old Caucasian Greek woman presented to the emergency department after sustaining an injury to her right knee during dancing. The mechanism of her injury compromised vigorous internal rotation of the femur on the tibia with the knee in flexion. She complained of mild pain in both the medial and lateral aspects of her knee joint. Her right knee was locked in 35° of flexion.
Physical examination demonstrated negative Lachman-Noulis and anterior drawer tests. Clicks or catches were not detected by palpation during flexion, extension, and rotary motions of her knee joint. There was tenderness in her medial and lateral joint line. Results of standard anteroposterior and lateral roentgenograms were normal. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) evaluation demonstrated the tears in both menisci of the right knee , while the anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments were found to be intact .
Our patient had no relevant medical history. Her physical examination and laboratory tests were unremarkable. No diseases of the connective tissue or other deficiency of the ligaments were detected.
She underwent a knee arthroscopy in the next 24 hours, and the diagnosis of combined injury of bicompartmental bucket-handle tears with an intact anterior cruciate ligament was confirmed . Arthroscopic evaluation also revealed a discoid lateral meniscus. Moreover, a grade III chondral lesion (graded on the Outerbridge classification), less than 1 cm2 in size, was detected on the medial femoral condyle . A partial medial and lateral meniscectomy was then performed. The decision was made because of the discoid lateral meniscus and the quality of the ruptured part of the medial meniscus. The torn tissue - approximately 40% of the mediolateral width of each meniscus - was removed. The cartilage defect was repaired by drilling therapeutic holes (approximately 0.5 to 1.0 mm in diameter) into the subchondral bone marrow space underlying the region of the cartilage lesion (microfracture technique) .
At our patient's follow-up examination six months after her injury, clinical tests demonstrated that her right knee was stable, had a full range of motion and had no tenderness. The functional outcome was evaluated using Lysholm scoring. At the time of her presentation to our emergency department she had a Lysholm score of 75, while six months after her injury, her Lysholm score had increased to 85 . She was satisfied with the outcome of the operation and returned to her pre-injury activities.