A 42-year-old right-handed woman suffered from weekly repetitions of unconscious dancing for 5 years, despite of multiple antiepileptic drugs including levetiracetam 3000 mg/d, valproate 900 mg/d, and pregabalin 300 mg/d. She was admitted to the epilepsy monitoring unit of a tertiary referral center for the feasibility of epilepsy surgery. On the initial clinical examination, she had no other symptoms or signs. The routine laboratory tests were negative. Magnetic resonance imaging showed right hippocampal atrophy . Her habitual seizure was recorded during video-electroencephalography monitoring. The seizure began with the right hand automatism and ictal speech, which suggest that the ictal onset zone would be on the right side. An evolution of rhythmic delta activity was observed in the right temporal area beginning 16 s after the automatism (see Additional file 1: Video S1). As the ictal discharge spreads to the left temporal area, which means the secondary generalization, the ictal speech disappeared. After 20 s from the secondary generalization, she had rhythmical movement of her legs, similar to stepping through a dance, and the simultaneous video-electroencephalography showed regional slow waves over both of her frontal areas. When the ictal rhythm has switched to the left side, the left upper limb automatism and immobility of the right upper limb represented the rhythmic theta activity, which is still seen in the left temporal area. Taken together, we could identify the kicking and stepping like a dance as well as shaking left arm. According to her husband, the movement would have involved twirling dance, making a right turn when she was standing. However, it was not shown on the video. The dancing lasted even after the rhythmic discharge, which definitized the post-ictal dancing. We surmise that the “dancing” movement might be derived from some combination of automatism consisted of complex, rhythmic, and sequencial movement. She was completely amnestic with respect to the episode. Her ictal speech and the ictal electroencephalography imply that the right hippocampus atrophy should be the epileptogenic focus. There has been only one seizure for 3 months since a stereotactic gamma knife surgery applied to the atrophic right hippocampus.
The authors declare that they adhered to CARE guidelines/methodology.