A 49-year-old French-Canadian male presented to our outpatient clinic with thick hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles. He reported that his paternal great-grandfather, two of his brothers, and his daughter had or have similar but milder lesions. This condition became apparent at the age of 6 months and gradually worsened over the years. The associated deep fissures made standing, walking and using his hands very difficult and painful. The pain and functional limitations were especially severe in the morning, when the patient had to crawl to the bathroom on his knees, leaning on the dorsum of his hands. Over the years, he had learned to regularly pare the thickened keratin off his soles and to use over-the-counter emollients that he found more effective than prescribed keratolytic preparations.
Examination revealed compact, thick, and yellow palmoplantar hyperkeratosis with deep fissuring most prominent in the center of both palms. The keratoderma was surrounded with well-defined erythematous borders. The soles were diffusely thickened, while on the palms, the thenar and hypothenar areas were relatively spared. The hyperkeratosis involved the volar aspect of the fingers in a wavy linear pattern . The hyperkeratosis did not extend over the dorsum of the hands and feet, and no starfish keratosis was seen. Knuckle pads were noted over the metacarpophalangeal articulations, and the fingertips were pointed and sclerotic. The toes were twisted and swollen, and three of them were encircled at their base with constriction bands (pseudoainhum). The nails were grayish, grossly thickened, and showed a markedly increased longitudinal curvature described as ‘parrot-beaking’ . There was no involvement of the hair and teeth, the oral mucosa was normal as was the voice, no epidermal cyst was seen, and the general physical examination was normal.
A 4-mm punch biopsy showed massive, compact hyperkeratosis with parakeratosis, prominent irregular acanthosis, and extensive epidermolytic hyperkeratosis (granulovacuolar degeneration of the keratinocytes; fig. ). The patient and his daughter, similarly affected, were referred for molecular testing and genetic counseling. Sequencing of exon 1 of the KRT9 gene and select exon analysis of the KRT1 gene failed to reveal mutations in keratin 1 and keratin 9. A final diagnosis of PC was established when whole exome sequencing was subsequently carried out and showed that both the patient and his daughter harbored a heterozygous mutation in KRT16 (L124R). No other pathogenic mutation was found.
The patient was treated with acitretin 10 mg once a day for 1 month and tolerated the medication well. The dose was then increased to twice a day. He responded well, with a reduction of the hyperkeratosis in both palms and soles, healing of the fissures , loosening of the pseudoainhum, as well as with improved mobility and dexterity, which have been maintained over the last 5 years.
The daughter is less severely affected, presenting with thickened nails, diffuse plantar keratoderma, and focal palmar hyperkertosis in a striate pattern reminiscent of her father's, although without fissuring or limitation in mobility. Given her desire to raise a family, she declined treatment with acitretin.