A 20-year-old male with no known past medical history or allergies presented to the emergency department (ED) complaining of acute, sudden onset, left forearm pain and rash. The patient was working at an eyeglasses and contacts store and stated that the pain started when he knelt to lift something up from ground level. In doing so, he placed his left elbow on his left thigh. He immediately felt a stinging sensation in his left elbow with severe 10/10 pain radiating down the extremity to the left forearm and hand. Shortly afterward he noticed the affected area had become erythematous, thus he presented to the ED for an emergent medical evaluation. Pertinent negatives included absence of fever, chills, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, urinary complaints, back pain, and headache.
The patient arrived hypertensive with initial blood pressure measuring 130/91 millimeters of mercury. Triage vital signs were otherwise normal. On physical examination, the patient appeared anxious. The primary survey of airway, breathing, and circulation was unremarkable. Focused examination of the affected region demonstrated an approximately 1 × 2-cm area of erythema and edema over the proximal posterior forearm with an associated grid-like pattern of raised urticaria. The rash was localized and did not exhibit desquamation .
The left upper extremity was otherwise neurovascularly intact with a palpable radial pulse and capillary refill less than three seconds. Assessment of motor function and active and passive range of motion at the elbow was normal. Laboratory assessment and imaging were determined to be of no utility and were not ordered. Upon further inquiry, the patient mentioned that his arm may have contacted a caterpillar, which was found on the ground at the site where his pain first began. A photo of the caterpillar was eventually obtained and provided on the patient’s smartphone .
The emergency physician called the Poison Control Center (PCC) hotline, which confirmed that the symptoms were likely the result of an asp caterpillar envenomation. Of note, the expert at the PCC mentioned that the presentation was particularly unusual given that it occurred in a commercial building devoid of trees and foliage. Other diagnoses considered were allergic reaction, insect bite/sting, contact dermatitis, cellulitis, and traumatic injury.
Therapeutic management focused on aggressive symptom management. Due to concern for a developing hypersensitivity reaction, dexamethasone 8 milligrams (mg) intravenous (IV), acetaminophen-codeine 300-30 mg per os (PO), famotidine 20 mg IV, ketorolac 30 mg IV, and diphenhydramine 25 mg IV were administered. Upon further inspection of the affected area, several spines were visualized penetrating the patient’s skin. Silk tape was applied to the affected area and carefully removed, thus stripping away the offending spines. The patient’s pain rapidly improved. The patient received an additional 25 micrograms of fentanyl IV after reassessment an hour later. He underwent a period of observation in the ED and was discharged with prescriptions for methylprednisolone 4 mg PO and oxycodone-acetaminophen 5–325 mg PO. Attempts to contact him after discharge to arrange follow-up and a wound check were unsuccessful. There were no subsequent patient encounters documented in the electronic health record.