A 39-year-old healthy male complained of pain in his left chest and back, the pain persisted for 11 days, with ring-shaped radiations to the precordial area, and numbness in both the lower extremities continued for 9 days. The skin sensation below the costal margin was weakened, and there was only a sense of banding. After a long walk, the patient could feel a sense of disharmony in both lower limbs. The most prevalent signs were patellar clonus, ankle clonus, and Babinski sign, which were significantly positive. MRI of thoracic vertebrae showed a strip-like structure equal to T1 signals in the spinal canal at the level of T1–T3 vertebrae, low and equal T2 signals, and high signals in the fat-suppression sequence. The contrast-enhanced T1 weighted phase showed a uniform enhancement, with clear borders and wide base attachments close to the dural membrane. The meningioma was located on the left posterolateral side of the spinal cord, and dumbbell-type growth was outward at the level of the T2–T3 intervertebral foramen . Computerized tomography (CT) with a value of 67HU showed a soft tissue mass in the spinal canal at the level of the T1–T3 vertebral body. A spot-like calcification density was observed, and the spinal cord was compressed and moved to the right. The enhanced scan showed moderately uneven enhancement. The CT-mediated biopsy of the T2–T3 intervertebral foramina lesion showed meningioma . Immunohistochemistry showed that Vim, E-cad, S-100, D2-40, PR, and EMA were (+), whereas, Ki67 (5%) and CK were (−). The left thoracic hemilaminectomy was performed under general anesthesia. The operation was extended to the maximum possibility to increase the exposure field and ensure the minimum displacement of the spinal cord during the operation. At the same time, the left intervertebral joint bone of T2/T3 was resected, and the resected bone was preserved; later, the bone graft was prepared by calcining and trimming. The tumor was gray-colored, appeared fish-like structure, rich in blood vessels, located on the left posterolateral side of the dura mater, and grew to the anterolateral side of the spinal cord but did not exceed the midline of the ventral side. The tumor penetrated deep in and grew outwards, located in the ventral side of the left nerve root of T1 and surrounded by the left nerve root of T2. With a nerve stripper exploration, the tumor could completely strip from the T1 root and dura mater and get separated from the T2 nerve root, which was unclear. To remove the tumor completely, the T2 nerve root was severed, the sleeve was burned, and a sufficient hemostatic was applied that was covered with a gelatin sponge to autologous with the bone grafted. Postoperative pathology showed meningioma, immunohistochemical EMA, PR, S-100 (+), Ki-67 (1%), and E-Cadherin (+). The patient’s sense of banding disappeared immediately after the surgery, and there was no uncoordinated walking even after attempting a long walk. Cerebrospinal fluid leakage occurred on the 3rd day postoperatively, but there were no symptoms of hypotensive cranial pressure such as headache, nausea, and vomiting. He was encouraged to walk daily, suggested to lie on his right side, and change his dressing daily. The cerebrospinal fluid leakage recovered on the 10th day of the postoperative procedure, and the patient was discharged on the 13th day of the postoperative procedure. The patient was advised to come for the follow-up on the 3rd, 6th, and 12th months postoperatively, and there were no further complaints observed. MRI showed no recurrence of the mass, no compression of the spinal cord, and no instability of the thoracic spine.