A 43-year-old man underwent radical total gastrectomy for gastric cancer. He was not taking medications for specific diseases such as hypertension or diabetes, and had no other familial, environmental, or social problems. A postoperative intra-abdominal abscess developed around the anastomotic site due to an esophagojejunal anastomotic leak, which improved after percutaneous drainage and conservative therapy. Histopathological examination of the tumor revealed mixed differentiated adenocarcinoma; the tumor was classified as stage IB (pT1bN1M0) according to the 7th TNM classification of the International Union Against Cancer. He received adjuvant chemotherapy with oral 5-FU for 2 years. Analysis of tumor marker levels (CEA and CA19-9) was performed every 3 months and computed tomography (CT) imaging and gastrofibroscopy (GFS) every 6 months. About 29 months after gastrectomy, CT imaging was performed and revealed a solitary localized mass measuring 43 mm in diameter among the retroperitoneal lymph nodes of the posterior inferior vena cava (IVC) (A). The patient’s physical examination, neurological examination, laboratory including tumor marker analysis, and other radiologic findings (including positron emission tomography-CT) were unremarkable. We considered that his previous gastric cancer recurred either in a lymph node or the retroperitoneum. Second-line chemotherapy consisting of oxaliplatin and 5-FU (FOLFOX) was administered in four cycles. However, a follow-up CT scan indicated that the tumor rapidly enlarged (59 mm); no new lesions were observed (B). Hence, we decided to completely resect the tumor due to lack of response to the chemotherapy. His vital signs and laboratory findings upon admission were normal, including CEA level (1.9 ng/mL) and CA19-9 level (10.6 U/mL). His operative finding was the tumor strongly adhered to the IVC; therefore, this part of the IVC was also removed via an en bloc resection of the tumor mass. Ascites and peritoneal disseminated lesions were not detected during the procedure. Macroscopically, the tumor was hard and fibrotic, measuring 66 × 58 × 50 mm. The cut surfaces were multinodular, diffusely edematous, and myxoid with focal petechial hemorrhagic necrosis (approximately 15%) and had a fish-flesh appearance . The pathological examination showed pleomorphism with bizarre multinucleated tumor cells and an average of 19 mitoses per 10 high-power fields in the tumors (A). The tumor was immunohistochemically positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA), desmin, and H-caldesmon and negative for c-KIT, CD34, and S-100 (B).
Finally, the patient was diagnosed with pleomorphic and epithelioid leiomyosarcoma with high mitotic activity. We assumed that the leiomyosarcoma was a second primary malignancy that developed from the retroperitoneum.
The patient’s postoperative course was favorable. He received adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy. He did not experience disease recurrence for 3 years and underwent surgical resection of locoregional and lung metastasis. He survived for 5 years.