A 57-year-old Chinese man presented to the urology clinic with unable to self-urinate for two weeks.
After two weeks of having the catheter in place and consistently taking tamsulosin, the patient remained unable to self-urinate.
A 57-year-old male initially visited an outpatient clinic specialising in urological surgery due to urinary urgency and frequency. In October 2022, the patient was diagnosed with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Despite treatment with tamsulosin, an α-blocker, his symptoms rapidly worsened within two months. Subsequently, he was admitted to the emergency department for acute urinary retention and received an indwelling catheter. After two weeks of having the catheter in place and consistently taking tamsulosin, the patient remained unable to self-urinate. He revisited the urological surgery outpatient clinic in December 2022 and was admitted for BPH. Over the previous two months, the patient experienced no other symptoms, such as fever or weight loss.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumours.
The patient's physical examination revealed no apparent abnormalities. Digital rectal examination indicated a Grade II prostate, characterised by a firm texture, smooth surface, lack of tenderness and an absent central groove.
Blood routine examination and liver and kidney function test results were within normal limits. The serum total prostate-specific antigen measured 4.30 ng/mL (normal < 4 ng/mL), and the free prostate-specific antigen was 0.42 ng/mL. Routine urine analysis presented no significant abnormalities.
Ultrasound examination of the urinary system demonstrated normal left and right kidneys. Computerised tomography (CT) estimated the prostate size to be approximately 57 mm × 36 mm × 34 mm, with a volume of around 36 mL. The bladder's residual urine volume was approximately 552 mL, as illustrated in Figure . The preoperative international prostate symptom score was 27, and the quality of life (QOL) score was 5. Urodynamic examination indicated a maximum urine flow rate of 6.4 mL/s and an average urine flow rate of 5.2 mL/s.
Based on the aforementioned examinations and tests, the patient was preliminarily diagnosed with prostatic hyperplasia. Upon conducting a physical examination, laboratory tests and imaging, a HoLEP procedure was performed on the patient in December 2022.
The surgeon observed that the patient's prostate tissue was notably swollen, with the left lobe of the prostate exhibiting significant oedema and protruding into the bladder. Additionally, extensive trabeculation was present within the bladder. The prostate tissue's texture was delicate, making it prone to bleeding upon contact. Once the bleeding from the prostate wound was controlled, the excised tissue was collected and submitted for examination. The patient experienced symptom regression following surgery.