A 6-year-old right hand dominant female child was brought by her father to the emergency department with the history of a fall 2 h back, with the point of the extended and pronated left elbow making forceful contact with the edge of the step. She presented with a painful and deformed left elbow, and with inability to move her left forearm. It was tender, swollen, deformed and held in 40 degrees of flexion, with the support of the contralateral limb. The forearm seemed to be in a fixed and pronated state. Active range of movements were not possible, and trivial passive movements elicited pain. Radial artery pulsations were palpable. The hand was pink, warm and the fingers showed a capillary refill time of less than 2 s. On careful neurological examination, light touch sensation in the ulnar nerve territory of the left hand was decreased as compared to the other hand, with marked sensory diminution over the little finger. The pain, temperature, deep touch sensations and the motor examination of the left upper limb were unremarkable. Close examination of the radiographs revealed the presence of a posterior dislocation and convergent translocation of the left elbow, without any fracture.

An urgent MRI scan of the left elbow was performed to rule out cartilaginous and ligamentous injuries. MRI of the left elbow revealed dislocation of the ulno-trochlear and radio-capitellar joint, with the presence of hemarthrosis. It also showed articulation of the radial head with the humeral trochlea and of the ulnar olecranon with the humeral capitellum. The lateral collateral ligament and the lateral ulnar collateral ligament revealed full thickness tears at the proximal attachments, while the medial collateral ligament showed the same at the distal attachment. Bulkiness of the ulnar nerve was noticeable at the level of the distal end of the humerus along with an annular ligament tear.

Under short general anaesthesia and image intensifier control, the haematoma was aspirated percutaneously from the elbow joint, via a posterior portal. A closed reduction with a hyper-supination manoeuvre was then performed. Closed, stable reduction was achieved and a bivalved cast in 100 degrees of flexion and full supination was applied to hold the reduction and to immobilize the left elbow.

The patient was reviewed after 1 week, at which the radiographs showed a congruent left elbow joint with maintained reduction. Sensations of the left hand in the ulnar nerve territory, which were diminished at the initial presentation, were now restored and equal in both limbs. The bivalved cast was replaced by an above elbow full cast in full supination. The cast was removed at 4 weeks and a check radiograph showed the presence of a congruent elbow joint. Gradual rehabilitation including flexion-extension and pronation-supination were initiated. By the end of 2 months, the child had regained complete arc of range of motion. At the 6-month followup, there was no varus-valgus laxity which was confirmed clinically as well as with stress radiographs. Additionally, the QuickDASH score was found to be 2.3, Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) was found to be 95, and the child was seen to be carrying out all activities of daily life without any difficulties [8]. A similar radiological and functional outcome was found at the 1 year follow-up. We replicated the mechanism of this injury in the cadaveric lab on a preserved specimen of the elbow with intact osteoligamentous anatomy. This was done to depict the patho-mechanics of PRUT, on an illustrated cadaveric model to understand the cascade of events in this rare injury.