A 21-year-old virgin female presented to our hospital with complaints of mild abdominal pain, hirsutism, and oligomenorrhea. Her medical history was of interest. The patient had menarche at the age of 13. However, 1 year before admission to our institution, she experienced hirsutism and oligomenorrhea with menstrual cycles of more than 60 days apart. Therefore she visited an external gynecologic clinic where she was prescribed oral contraceptives to regulate her periods. The patient claimed to observe a mild regression in the symptoms with no further examinations. However, details and data supporting her previous admission were not available. The patient’s mother had a hysterectomy several years ago due to the diagnosis of multiple leiomyomas. Other than that, family and medical history were unremarkable.
On presentation to our institution, physical examination revealed abdominal tenderness with a palpable pelvic mass and mild hirsutism in the thigh. Her body mass index (BMI) was 19.1 kg/m² (height: 150 cm, weight: 43 kg). Interestingly, ultrasonography demonstrated a large left ovarian mass measuring 154 × 104 mm, and compressing the uterus . No pelvic enlarged lymph nodes or Douglas pouch effusion were observed, and computed tomography (CT) scan revealed no other lesions. Due to the large size of the ovarian mass and the risk of compressing the uterus and the adjacent organs, a unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. Macroscopic examination revealed a large, well-circumscribed lobulated solid yellow-brownish mass, measuring approximately 15 × 9 cm . Cut sections demonstrated bright orange-yellowish nodules with scattered foci of necrosis and hemorrhage and a rich-vasculature capsule .
Microscopic examination demonstrated diffuse and nodular proliferation of medium-sized to large polygonal neoplastic cells with pale to granular eosinophilic cytoplasm, small round nuclei, and mild atypia . The cells were separated by a vascular stroma, with no evidence of capsular invasion . Few scattered foci of necrosis and hemorrhage were observed , whereas the mitotic rate was less than 2 per 10 high-power fields, and crystals of Reinke were not observed. Thus final diagnosis was a steroid cell tumor-not otherwise specified (SCT-NOS). Immunohistochemistry revealed positivity for Inhibin-a, Calretinin, and ER , whereas CD99, PR, and AR showed negative expression, confirming the aforementioned diagnosis, and expression of Ki-67 was estimated to be less than 20% . Molecular and additional techniques were not available. Following surgery, the patient was hospitalized for 5 days and discharged later with a stable condition and normal laboratory and radiologic results. However, 2 weeks later, she was admitted back to our hospital due to an intermittent localized pain in the right iliac fossa. Full body computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a small right ovarian mass that was reported as a benign functional cyst by an expert radiologist and an oncologist, with no other lesions. Due to the patient’s young age and fertility desire, the medical decision was to stay monitored radiographically with no surgical interventions. Two months later, a CT scan demonstrated a prominent decrease in the cyst’s size supporting its benign functional origin. And since her last visit, the patient has been in a stable condition according to clinical and radiologic monitoring with no virilization symptoms. A timeline of the patient’s case can be seen in Fig. .