A 74-year-old woman was referred from the Department of Dermatology and Venereology to the Department of Oral Medicine Dr. Hasan Sadikin Hospital, Bandung. The patient has been hospitalized for 4 days and has been given dexamethasone 5 mg intravenously, cetirizine 10 mg tablets, and clindamycin tablets 300 mg. Based on the anamnesis, blisters on the skin that felt burning, sore, and itchy first appeared 1 week ago. Complaints of the painful canker sores in the oral cavity began to appear 2 days ago. The patient experienced of intense pain during the day. She has no medical history of any systemic disease and does not take any medication. Extraoral examination revealed a symmetrical face and the regional lymph nodes were not palpable and painless. She had multiple crusts on the neck, buttocks, and upper and lower extremities.

Intraoral examination showed erosion covered by a yellowish white layer on the right and left buccal mucosa, haemorrhagic purpura on the right and left buccal mucosa and right lateral tongue, an ulcer with a diameter of 0.5 cm on the left lateral border of the tongue, and the root remnants of 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 26, 27, 33, 34, 35, and 36 teeth. Hematology tests revealed increased values of leukocytes (15.93 x 103/µL), eosinophils (6%), and segmental neutrophils (77%). A skin biopsy of the lesion on the left thigh was performed to establish a definitive diagnosis. The results of histopathological examination showed a formation of a subepidermal blister containing eosinophil and neutrophil cells.

Based on anamnesis, clinical examination, and appropriate investigations, the definitive diagnosis was oral lesions associated with dermatitis herpetiformis with a differential diagnosis of pemphigoid bullosa and linear IgA dermatoses. Additional diagnoses were exfoliative cheilitis, chronic traumatic ulcer on the left lateral border of the tongue, chronic apical periodontitis et causa the root remnants of 12, 14, 15, 16.17, 26, 27, 33, 34, 35, 36, and generalized chronic marginal gingivitis. The therapies provided by the Department of Oral Medicine including 0.025% hyaluronic acid mouthwash and petroleum jelly. Patients were instructed to brush their teeth regularly, not consume gluten-containing foods, rinse their mouths using 0.025% hyaluronic acid mouthwash three times a day, and apply petroleum jelly to moisturize the lips. Patients are also advised to do scaling and extraction of the tooth remnants of the upper and lower teeth. The prognosis of this case is good.

The oral lesions showed significant improvement at the second visit, 10 days after treatment. Erosive lesions in the oral cavity began to heal. She felt no pain at all and had no difficulties in eating solid foods. The patient uses 0.025% hyaluronic acid mouthwash and petroleum jelly regularly.

The patient was being infected with COVID-19 two months later and was treated in the COVID-19 isolation room at the Hasan Sadikin General Hospital in Bandung for 1 week. She experienced the typical symptoms of COVID-19 (fever, muscle aches, and shortness of breath) and decreased oxygen saturation (87.3%). Acute exacerbations of dermatitis herpetiformis lesions on the skin and perioral occurred after the patient was infected with COVID-19. Extraoral examination revealed crusts on the perioral, erosive lesions covered by white-yellowish plaque on the vermillion border of the upper lip. Laboratory tests revealed anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG S-RBD values (>40,000 AU/mL), eosinophils (6%), total eosinophils (0.50 x 103/µL), C-reactive protein (2 mg/dl), quantitative D-dimer (3.72 µg/mL) during hospitalization. Chest X-ray image depicted a ground-glass appearance from the mid to the lower right lung. The patient was diagnosed with right bronchopneumonia.

The intraoral lesions healed after a month of the treatment. The patient admitted that she has avoided foods containing gluten and routinely uses medicines provided by the Department of Oral Medicine. There were no adverse events or unwanted reactions from the drugs that she had been consumed. Follow-up therapy from the Department of Dermatology and Venereology includes methylprednisolone tablets (24 mg/day), cetirizine 10 mg tablets, and ranitidine 150 mg tablets. The patient was approved and written informed consent of this case including the images, and the institution has also approved for publication.