Our case is a 4 years and 8-month-old Syrian Arabic girl with a birth weight of 4 kg, who is the sixth of seven siblings born to healthy consanguineous parents. She followed normal psychomotor development and experienced no remarkable illness until the age of 4 years and 2 months when her parents noticed a rapid weight gain (about 1 kg every 10 to 15 days) due to excessive eating (she required six to seven big meals/day). Later, they observed her to have alterations in body secretion (decreased tears when crying, decreased nasal discharge, unfavorable body odor, and decreased sweating) in addition to blue cold extremities, diarrhea alternated with constipation, polyuria, and polydipsia. Two months after the onset of obesity she had urinary incontinence during night sleep. Then, significant behavioral changes developed including: mood alteration, anxiety episodes, rage attacks, nervousness, and aggressive behavior, in addition to recurrent fatigue, social withdrawal, prolonged periods of sleep (12 hours continuously), and difficulty staying awake during the day. These complaints grew to be a serious concern to the family so she was admitted to Damascus Children Hospital, endocrinal department, at the age of 4.5 years, for further investigations.
For three generations, the family history was negative for similar presentations, obesity, or psychiatric disorders. It was noteworthy that an older sister of our patient had died at the age of 12 years with a diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Her sister’s malignancy was not accompanied by any of the signs or symptoms our patient had.
On physical examination, general obesity was noticed without striae or altered skin pigmentation. No dysmorphic features were observed, neither were there any minor or major congenital malformations. Her weight was 25 kg (above 97% percentile) while her length and head circumference measured 110 cm (at 90% percentile) and 52 cm respectively. Her body mass index (BMI) was equal to 20.1 .
An ophthalmic examination revealed left exotropia with normal fundus and normal papillary response. The performed laboratory analyses did not indicate any significant abnormality. Her complete blood count (CBC), blood glucose, sodium (Na), chlorine (Cl), potassium (K), calcium (Ca), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), triglycerides (TG), cholesterol, urine density, creatinine, and urea were all within normal limits. Her thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), free thyroxine (T4), morning cortisol, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), prolactin, growth hormone (GH), insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF1), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and luteinizing hormone (LH) were also within normal limits.
Her abdominal and pelvic ultrasound was normal. Her bone age was slightly advanced and it fitted 5 to 5.5 years old. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was normal; it showed no cortical atrophy. A homogenous mild enlargement of her pituitary gland was observed on both T1-weighted and T2-weighted images with normal hyperintense posterior lobe on T1-weighted images .
Since the endocrine function tests were normal, her symptoms had been explained on the basis of psychotropic origin, and she was discharged with antipsychotic medication (risperidone 1 mg orally per day) and the recommendation to follow up at the out-patient psychiatric clinic after 3 months of prescribed treatment. After 3 months of discharge, when she was 4 years and 8 months old, she developed dyspnea that worsened with exertion and during sleep, continuous snoring, and recurrent chest pain. The respiratory symptoms lasted for 5 days after which she had two episodes of cyanosis and obstructive apnea which lasted for 10 minutes with improvement via oxygen mask. As a result of progressive respiratory distress (respiratory rate 35/min, expiratory grunting, flaring of nostrils, wheezing with prolonged expiration, and remarkably loud snoring) she was readmitted to Damascus Children Hospital, intensive care unit (ICU). Investigations showed hypoxemia, hypercapnia, and respiratory acidosis accompanied by radiological evidence of a big round opacity in her right lung .
She was intubated 24 hours after admission and attached to a mechanical ventilator because of severe respiratory distress with altered consciousness: blood gases were pH 7.27, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) 79 mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) 38 mmHg, and oxygen saturation 79%. Her laboratory results were within normal limits except for elevated values of Na (up to 162) and C-reactive protein (77 mg/L). During this admission, her weight was recorded as 40 kg (>97th percentile).
A chest computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a 6 cm round mass filling most of her right lung and pushing her heart and mediastinum to the left with infiltration and consolidation of the right lower lobe of her right lung .
Subsequently, when her health stabilized, a complete resection was performed of a 10×10 cm solid round mass from the posterior wall of her chest. It was a mature ganglioneuroma .
Her unexplained rapid gain of weight and the presence of chest ganglioneuroma brought attention to ROHAAD syndrome as a diagnosis of her situation and helped to exclude other illnesses that could be considered in the differential diagnosis. Familial obesity and Prader–Willi syndrome were both excluded since her family history did not support the first, and with the absence of mental retardation and congenital abnormalities there was no indication to investigate the latter.
A good improvement in consciousness was achieved by stopping sedative drugs, so she was able to speak, move her limbs, and interact with others. Nevertheless, she required prolonged ventilation because of respiratory instability and she had myoclonic seizures. Three attempts at extubation failed without a clear reason. A brain MRI was ordered which revealed a generalized cortical atrophy of her brain with the same mild pituitary gland enlargement observed in a previous MRI .
A month after her admission to the ICU, a tracheostomy was performed because of lack of spontaneous breathing. One week later, she had cardiorespiratory arrest and died. A timeline of her signs and symptoms is shown in Fig. .