An 81-year-old man visited our hospital complaining of dysphagia. The patient received an upper lobectomy of the right lung for lymphoma and additional chemotherapy 20 years ago. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy detected an elevated tumor in the EGJ . The tumor was mainly located in the stomach, but it continued into the squamocolumnar junction . We found a submucosal invasion of the tumor in the lower esophagus . Biopsy specimens taken from the tumor showed SCC histopathologically. Laboratory examination showed that the serum level of SCC was elevated (25.2 ng/ml, normal range < 2.5 ng/ml), whereas the serum levels of CEA and CA19-9 were in normal range (3.4 ng/ml, < 5 ng/ml and 7 U/ml, < 37 U/ml, respectively). Barium meal study showed an elevated lesion in the gastric cardia , which had invaded the lower esophagus approximately 15 mm from the EGJ . Computed tomography showed a tumor, 50 mm in size, located in the EGJ and several lymph nodes surrounding the EGJ were swollen . No mediastinal node metastasis was found, and hepatic and lung metastasis were not detected. In 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography, the standardized uptake value (SUV) max of FDG accumulation was 19.9 in the tumor . Respiratory function test showed an obstructive disorder because of previous smoking. Although the serum level of HbA1c was 6.3%, fasting blood glucose was 123 mg/dl. He was administered drugs for hypertension.
We diagnosed the tumor as SCC, overhanging in the stomach, of the EGJ before surgery. Considering the frailty due to the influence of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, we selected surgery because of the elderly. The patient underwent a proximal gastrectomy combined with lower esophagectomy and node dissection surrounding the EGJ, the celiac trunk with its branches, and the lower esophagus. The lower esophagectomy and dissection surrounding the lower esophagus were made by a median incision of the diaphragm from the hiatus. Proximal margin of the esophagus 3 cm apart from the EGJ was taken. During the operation, washing cytology using saline showed no cancer cells. After removal of the tumor, frozen sections were made and no cancer invasion was confirmed in both the proximal margin of the esophagus and the distal margin of the stomach. We performed esophagogastrostomy using a circular stapling system in the mediastinum. Macroscopic findings showed a tumor was located in the EGJ , and the tumor showed a submucosal progression . The postoperative course was uneventful. Histopathologic examination showed the tumor consisted of SCC and adenocarcinoma . We observed SCC continuously in the squamous epithelia of the lower esophagus . Helicobacter pylori was not microscopically detected. In the distal part of the tumor, SCC was covered with the normal columnar mucosa . Several nests of adenocarcinoma were scattered in the tumor and occupied 35% of the tumor; however, the SCC component was located in the surface to the deep layer of the tumor . We observed a transition between SCC and adenocarcinoma . Node metastasis was observed in eight of dissected 32 nodes. Seven of the eight nodes showed both metastases of SCC and adenocarcinoma , and a node in the right area of the gastric cardia showed metastasis of SCC . No reaction for human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 protein (HER2) was immunohistochemically observed in SCC cells. A weak positive reaction for HER2 was observed in adenocarcinoma cells, and the staining intensity was judged to be 2+ . Thus, the tumor was diagnosed as ASC of the EGJ, and the TNM classification (UICC 8th edition) was pT3 pN3 M0, pStage IVa. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy using S-1 orally because of the elderly with the frailty, and was well without recurrence 6 months after surgery.