A 55-year-old male patient was admitted to Shanghai Xuhui Central Hospital due to fever, cough, and expectoration for 3 days on 9 April 2021. The patient had a history of hypertension, long-term smoking, chronic bronchitis, and emphysema. On 17 March 2021, the patient visited a tertiary general hospital in Shanghai and received a radical resection of right lower lung cancer and right upper lobectomy, and the postoperative pathology changes were various. Invasive adenocarcinoma was identified in the right lower lung, with alveolar and adherent growth, not involving the visceral pleura. A large number of acute and chronic inflammatory cells were infiltrated the right upper lobe, and fungal hyphae were specifically visible, considering fungal infections (Candida infection was suspected, and mucormycosis and aspergillosis were ruled out). On 7 April 2021, the patient developed a high fever, with chest computed tomography (CT) in that hospital revealing possible empyema on the right side, postoperative changes in the right lung with scattered infection, multiple fractures of the right ribs with chest wall pneumatosis, and enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum. His vital signs upon admission to our hospital were as follows: temperature, 39.0°C; blood pressure, 134/70 mmHg; respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min; pulse, 112 beats/min; blood oxygen saturation level (SpO2), 92% (without oxygen inhalation); clear mind, stable breathing, no cyanosis of lips, the disappearance of breath sounds in the right lower lung, dullness to percussion in the right lower lung, and no dry or moist rales heard. As given above, the patient was diagnosed with right hydropneumothorax and empyema, pneumonia, postoperative malignant tumor of the right lower lobe (adenocarcinoma), and hypertension.
After admission, the patient was given empirical anti-infective treatment with flucloxacillin (2 g Bid) plus levofloxacin (0.5 g Qd) injection. In addition, treatment for reducing phlegm, pleural effusion puncture and drainage, and other symptomatic treatments were given. On 10 April 2021, the patient had a sudden high fever without explained causes, accompanied by dyspnea, profuse sweating, and a large amount of purulent sputum. Physical examination revealed a heart rate of 108 bpm/min, an SpO2 of 75% (without oxygen inhalation), a blood pressure of 118/88 mmHg, a respiratory rate of 34 breaths/min, wheezing appearance, clear consciousness, coarse breath sounds, and a large number of palpable moist rales. Blood gas analysis showed a decreased pH of 7.237 and an elevated PCO2 and PO2 level (62.1 and 97.2 mmHg, respectively), indicating type II respiratory failure. The patient was given Bipap ventilator-assisted ventilation (A/C mode, inspired positive airway pressure (IPAP) 18 cm H2O, expired positive airway pressure (EPAP) 4 cm H2O, f = 24, O2 = 5 L/min) and transferred to the intensive care unit. Meropenem injection 0.5 g q8h and linezolid injection 0.6 g q12h were given immediately. The bedside chest x-ray showed infectious lesions and pleural effusion in the right lung (, ). The patient refused bronchoscopy. Sputum and blood samples were sent for mNGS (Vision medicals, Guangzhou, China), but both showed negative results. On 11 April 2021, the bedside chest x-ray was repeated, and the symptoms improved (, ). On 12 April 2021, the culture of pleural effusion in the microbiology laboratory reported Gram-negative bacteria, which was preliminarily considered as Eikenella corrodens based on morphology. Chest CT was performed on the same day, indicating a right lung abscess with cavitation (, ). The patient was given a meropenem injection of 0.5 g q8h alone for anti-infection. On 17 April 2021, the symptoms of cough, expectoration, chest distress, and shortness of breath were improved, without fever. The patient was transferred to the respiratory medicine ward. On 23 April 2021, the re-examination of chest CT showed that the lesion was continuously absorbed .
The patient was discharged on 25 April 2021. Amoxicillin 1.0 g q8h continued for 1 week. The conditions of the patient were stable. On 24 May 2021 and 9 July 2021 (, ), the re-examination of chest CT showed further absorption of the lesion. To date, the patient had no fever, dyspnea, or other symptoms.
Under aseptic operation, B ultrasound-guided thoracentesis was performed on 9 April 2021. A total of 15 ml of dark red pleural effusion was withdrawn and sent to the microbiology laboratory for aerobic and anaerobic culture. Direct smear staining showed elongated Gram-negative bacteria . The culture was transferred to a Columbia blood agar plate and incubated at 35°C under 5% CO2 for 72 h. We observed a typical straw cap colony on the plate, which was flat, with central convex and smooth round . A 16S rRNA gene sequencing was performed. The pathogen was detected as Eikenella at the genus level.
To further confirm the pathogen at the species level, a sputum sample collected on 11 April 2021 was sent for mNGS (Hugobiotech, Beijing, China), identifying the pathogens as E. halliae (82 specific reads, ,). Considering the rarity of the pathogen in this patient, the previously negative mNGS data were reanalyzed, and E. corrodens (91 unique reads, ,) were found in the background microorganisms. Interestingly, the pathogens detected by the two mNGS tests were different at the species level. So, high-throughput whole genome sequencing (WGS) was finally applied, of which the result showed that the isolate had the best concordance with E. halliae .
DNA was extracted from sputum samples using the QIAamp DNA Micro Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) according to its manual. DNA libraries were then constructed by QIAseqTM Ultralow Input Library Kit (Illumina, California, USA), and the quality of libraries was estimated using Qubit (Thermo Fisher, Massachusetts, USA) and Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA). The qualified libraries were finally sequenced on the Nextseq 550 platform (Illumina, California, USA). Reads of short length, low quality, and low complexity were removed from the raw data. Human DNA was also removed after mapping the human reference genome database (hg38). The remaining reads were finally aligned to the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Microbial Genome Databases. The detailed method is shown in the .
The patient was initially treated with ß-amides and quinolones, but his conditions progressed, and respiratory failure occurred during treatment. According to the susceptibility protocol of rare bacteria and aerobic bacteria in the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) M45-A3 document, this bacterium was highly sensitive to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid. To further determine the sensitive drugs, the broth microdilution method was used for the susceptibility test in this case, and it was found that amoxicillin/clavulanic acid was the best antibiotic drug for the patient.