The patient is a 71-year-old man who presented with abdominal discomfort and vomiting after a meal. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a tumor in the duodenal bulb, and he was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. Laboratory tests revealed anemia, elevation of CEA (87.0 ng/ml) and CA19-9 (136 ng/ml), and a normal total bilirubin value (0.7 mg/dl). He underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy again, which revealed an irregular tumor occupying the lumen of the duodenal bulb, and the 2nd portion could not be observed. The biopsy result was adenocarcinoma . CT scan revealed a 10-cm tumor with poor contrast effect in the pancreatic head region, and a 6-cm tumor thrombus was observed from the superior mesenteric vein to the junction of the portal and splenic vein . Invasion into the gastroduodenal artery was suspected, but no invasion into the celiac or superior mesenteric arteries was revealed. MRCP showed no significant dilation of the common bile duct or main pancreatic duct . In abdominal ultrasonography, the lesion invading the superior mesenteric vein was considered to be a tumor thrombus with an echogenic region in the vascular lumen . After admission, frequent blood transfusions were required due to bleeding from the tumor. There were no problems with cardiopulmonary function and no evidence of distant metastasis. He was diagnosed with primary pancreatic cancer or primary duodenal cancer with portal vein tumor thrombus. We planned to perform pancreatoduodenectomy combined with portal vein resection to cure and relieve the symptoms.
At operation, a large tumor was found in the head of the pancreas and the descending duodenum . GDA was not involved. There were no obvious findings of peritoneal dissemination or liver metastasis, so we performed pancreaticoduodenectomy, with combined resection of the portal vein replaced by the right external iliac vein graft . The caudal limit of the tumor thrombus was just above the first branch of the SMV, and the SMV was cut at one orifice. The cranial side of the portal vein was cut in the hepatoduodenal ligament, and the splenic vein was ligated. The portal vein was reconstructed by the interposition of the right external iliac vein graft. The portal vein flow was gradually interrupted by thrombosis formation so that collateral vessels developed. SMV flow was completely blocked, and the flow seemed to run through collateral vessels. This made surgery difficult due to hemorrhage. On the other hand, temporary bypass was not necessary because collateral vessels were well developed. The operation time was 615 min, and blood loss was 2405 g. The resected specimen showed a large tumor occupying the head of the pancreas and invading the duodenal lumen . The tumor showed a gelatinous appearance on cross section and was mainly located in the pancreas head. The tumor size was 105 × 70 × 100 mm in three dimensions. Histopathological findings showed colloid carcinoma of the pancreas, as adenocarcinoma cells floating in the mucus lake were observed . No adenomatous lesions were observed in the adjacent duodenum mucosa. There was a tumor thrombus in the portal vein. Tumor thrombi were also observed in small vessels within and around the tumor bed . Because we did not observe any distinct evidence of direct cancer involvement into the portal vein , we considered that this tumor thrombus in the portal vein was formed by intravascular extension through venous vessels. According to the general rules of the AICC/UICC 8th edition TNM staging system, the tumor was described as pT3N0M0. The resection margin was positive for the tumor thrombus at the proximal stump of the portal vein. Immunohistochemistry studies showed that it was CK7+, CK20−, CA19-9+, CK19+, and CDX-2+, which were consistent with colloid carcinoma of the pancreas.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and there were no complications, including pancreatic fistula. He was discharged from the hospital approximately 2 months after the operation after moving to the rehabilitation ward. He moved to the rehabilitation ward not only for medical reasons, but also for social reasons. After 6 weeks of surgery, S-1 was administered as adjuvant chemotherapy, which was discontinued and switched to gemcitabine monotherapy as he had severe diarrhea. Liver metastases appeared 12 months postoperatively, so gemcitabine was used in combination with nab-paclitaxel for 2 months. However, his physical status worsened, and chemotherapy was discontinued. He died at home 16 months after the operation.