88-year-old female patient with a history of Alzheimer's, admitted with worsening mental confusion 4 days ago, associated with periods of agitation, aggressiveness and inappetence. She was continuously using sertraline and quetiapine.

She presented with somnolence, disorientation, and no focal deficits. A head CT scan was performed, which showed changes expected for the patient's age group, with no signs of acute changes to the method. A 6-hour EEG showed diffuse disorganization of the brain's electrical activity. A reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test for 2019 coronavirus disease (COVID-19) was requested at admission to the hospital, given the context of the pandemic and acute neurological change, which was positive.

The patient remained under neurological surveillance, with adjustment of antipsychotics and introduction of enoxaparin as a pharmacological prophylaxis of venous thromboembolism. She underwent an MRI on the third day of admission, which showed the presence of multiple foci of heme-iron deposits with a predominance in the periphery of the brain parenchyma (suggestive of amyloid angiopathy).

On the fourth day of admission, he presented a picture of dysarthria and decreased motor strength in the left hemicorpus. An emergency brain scan was performed, which showed hemorrhage in the central and parieto-occipital sulcus on the right, as well as the emergence of recent intraparenchymal hemorrhage, compromising the precentral gyrus, measuring about 3.3 x 3.4 x 2.4 cm (estimated volume of 14 ml).

The patient was admitted to the neurological intensive care unit for clinical support, where heparin was discontinued and neuroprotection measures were performed. After evaluation, the neurosurgery team did not indicate surgical treatment. There were no changes in blood pressure levels and other vital signs. In the laboratory tests performed, there were no changes in coagulogram. However, there was a change in inflammatory markers (D-dimer of 1,411 ng/mL and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 3.15 mg/dL, with a reference value of less than 1 mg/dL). Ferritin and lactic dehydrogenase were within normal values.

It evolved with improvement of the confusional state, but he maintained a motor deficit on the left. On the 13th day, he presented involuntary movements in the face, and a new electroencephalogram was requested, which showed epileptiform activity of variable projection in both cerebral hemispheres, predominantly in the anterior right region. In a new tomography of the skull, a greater regression of the content of subarachnoid hemorrhage in the central and parieto-occipital sulcus was observed, as well as a greater reduction of the partial attenuation/metabolisation of the intraparenchymal hematoma in the right perirrolandic region, compromising mainly the post-central gyrus, with an area of vasogenic oedema more conspicuous in the neighbouring cerebral parenchyma, remaining similar to the mass effect characterised by blurring of the sulcus between the local cortical gyruses. An anticonvulsant was initiated, with improvement of the condition, without new crises (clinical and electrographic).

He is currently in the process of rehabilitation, with a left motor deficit without other neurological changes.
