A 32-year-old Japanese man with no medical history visited a local doctor because his blood pressure (BP) was alarmingly high (215/150 mmHg) at the time of a health check-up, and he was aware of a loss of appetite and headache lasting more than 2 months. Given the diagnosis of severe hypertension, the patient was administered doxazosin, an α-adrenergic antagonist, and he was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. He was a current smoker of up to 10 cigarettes per day.

At the referral visit, the patient’s BP was still severely high at 170/102 mmHg, and his pulse rate was 74 beats per minute. Physical examination revealed no edema or signs of meningeal irritation. Laboratory data indicated polycythemia (RBC 703 × 104/µL, hemoglobin [Hb] 20.2 g/dL) and renal failure with proteinuria and hematuria (creatinine [Cr] 3.70 mg/dL, urine protein-to-Cr ratio 0.28 g/gCr, RBC 10–19/high-power field) (Table 1). His serum cortisol, plasma renin activity, plasma aldosterone concentration, and catecholamine levels were within normal ranges, and no autoantibodies associated with glomerulonephritis were detected (Table 1). Abdominal ultrasonography showed bilaterally enlarged kidneys (right: 14.2 cm × 8.4 cm, left: 14.0 cm× 8.5 cm) and no hydronephrosis. Although severe hypertension caused by polycythemia and renal failure was suspected, the precise cause of the polycythemia, renal failure, and renal enlargement was unclear.

To reduce BP, 40 mg/ day of nifedipine controlled-release (CR), a long-acting calcium channel blocker, and 20 mg/day of olmesartan, an angiotensin receptor blocker, were added. The patient’s BP improved significantly to 135/95 mmHg on day 8 (7 days after the referral visit), and a renal biopsy was performed to determine the cause of renal failure and enlargement. Light microscopy revealed virtually normal structures in seven obtained glomeruli, but diffuse and extensive interstitial infiltration with medium- to large-sized atypical lymphoid cells. Immunohistochemistry showed the cells to be positive for cytoplasmic CD3, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase, and Ki-67, but negative for CD20. Immunofluorescence staining and electron microscopy revealed no evidence of immune deposits. Bone marrow biopsy revealed > 25% blasts, and myeloperoxidase staining was negative. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with T-ALL and bilaterally enlarged kidneys caused by renal infiltration of leukemic cells. Computed tomography (CT) showed moderate right pleural effusion; anterior mediastinum mass; slightly enlarged lymph nodes in the neck, mediastinal, right hilar, right axillary, and abdominal para-aortic areas; and enlarged kidneys. Consistent with these findings, [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose (18FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET)/CT demonstrated an increase in metabolic uptake in these organs, with the largest increase observed in the kidneys. Serum EPO levels were high at 38.7 mIU/mL (normal range: 4.2–23.7 mIU/mL) despite high Hb levels; thus, he was diagnosed with secondary polycythemia. No adrenal or liver tumors or hypoxic lung disease were detected, and oxygen saturation was 95% in room air; therefore, we considered that secondary polycythemia may have been caused by the bilaterally enlarged, infiltrated kidneys.

On day 20, the patient was treated with prednisolone to reduce the tumor mass. After 1 week, remission induction chemotherapy (vincristine, daunorubicin, dexamethasone, l-asparaginase, methotrexate, cytarabine, prednisolone) was administered according to the Japan Adult Leukemia Study Group (JALSG) ALL202-O protocol. On day 21, hemodialysis was initiated due to severe tumor lysis syndrome. After 1 month of chemotherapy, the patient’s renal function improved, and he was taken off hemodialysis. His kidneys were smaller on day 24 (right: 11.9 cm × 7.2 cm, left: 13.0 cm× 7.5 cm) and their size had normalized on day 60 (right: 9.4 cm × 5.5 cm, left: 10.8 cm× 5.0 cm). His Hb levels normalized on day 23 but gradually decreased from day 45 to day 62, at which time the Hb level was 7.3 g/dL. EPO level was low at 12.0 mIU/mL on day 59; therefore, 30 µg of darbepoetin alfa was started for the treatment of renal anemia. Consistent with the improvements of the bilaterally enlarged kidneys and polycythemia, his BP improved, and doxazosin and olmesartan were discontinued on day 22. His systolic BP improved to 110–120 mmHg at a dose of only 20 mg/day of nifedipine CR. Future plans for the patient include a hematopoietic stem cell transplantation after hyper-CVAD therapy (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, dexamethasone) and MA therapy (methotrexate, cytarabine).