A 63-year-old female patient presented with postmenopausal intermittent vaginal bleeding for 2 months. She denied other urinary, rectal, and gynecological symptoms such as abnormal vaginal discharge, abnormal defecation, and abdominal pain. Transvaginal ultrasonography showed a small amount of hemorrhage in the uterine cavity, endometrial thickness of 0.68 cm, and no abnormal echo in the bilateral adnexal area. The levels of relevant tumor markers were all within normal ranges as follows: CA125:15.4 U/ml (reference value:<35 U/ml), CEA:2.21 ng/ml (reference value:<5 ng/ml) and CA19-9:13.6 U/ml (reference value:<37 U/ml). The endometrial cytology examination hint to possible endometrial adenocarcinoma. No other neoplasms, hereditary diseases, or related family histories were self-reported. The multimodal PET/MR examination was recommended to provide further information about the depth of myometrial invasion and the assessment of metastases in endometrial carcinoma.
The multimodal PET/MR imaging including the whole-body 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) PET and the multimodal MR images were performed with the hybrid PET/MR scanner (SIGNA TOF-PET/MR, GE Healthcare). The patient signed an informed consent form for the PET/MR examination and the publication of relevant images. On the pelvic sagittal MRI, there was no significant thickened endometrium and no high FDG uptake in the uterine corpus, but only a polypoid mass stretching from the lower segment of the uterine endometrium to the cervical canal . The polypoid lesion showed a slightly high intensity signal on non-contrast T1-weighted images (T1WI) and fat-suppressed T2-weighted images (fs T2WI), but no restricted diffusion signal in diffusion-weighted images (DWI) . Following gadolinium administration, a mild enhancement of the lesion was observed on contrast enhanced T1WI (T1WI+C) . The PET and PET/MR fusion images showed slight hypermetabolism in the lesion . Based on the pelvic PET/MR multimodal images and cytology examination, the polypoid mass in the cervical canal was suspected to be endometrial carcinoma.
Unexpectedly, the maximum intensity projection (MIP) images of whole-body PET revealed an abnormal hypermetabolism in the left lower abdomen (SUVmax = 17.68 g/ml) . Thus, the coronal whole-body PET/MR images were reconstructed to evaluate the abnormal hypermetabolism. The coronal whole-body T2WI and PET/MR fusion images showed that the abnormal hypermetabolism on PET images was a mass in the intestinal wall of the descending colon . The thickened descending colon wall that showed markedly high signal intensity on either DWI (ADCmean = 0.75*10^-3 mm2/s) or T1WI+C and hypermetabolism on axial PET/MR fusion images was observed.
Subsequent colonoscopy examination confirmed the presence of a descending colonic tumor on the corresponding location of PET/MR images. The patient underwent simultaneous laparoscopic radical hysterectomy and descending colectomy. Macroscopic analysis of the resected uterus confirmed that the polypoid mass stretching from the lower segment of the uterine endometrium to cervical canal. And the endometrial carcinoma (G2) categorized as superficial myometrial invasion and the poor-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma invading the muscularis propria without serosa invasion were demonstrated by histologic analysis. Lynch syndrome was considered because the patient had both primary endometrial carcinoma and descending colon carcinoma, even though she had no relevant family history. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis indicated that MLH1 and PMS2 proteins were negative expression in the resected tumor tissues derived from uterus . Molecular analysis identified no KRAS and BRAF mutations of primary colon tumor. Moreover, the gene analysis of both tumors was performed to identify microsatellite instability (MSI) for the diagnosis of Lynch syndrome. The results of endometrial carcinoma gene analysis included deletion mutations in exon 15 and exon 17 of MLH1 , replacement mutation in exon 16 of MSH-2 and duplication mutation in exon 5 of MSH-6 . And deletion mutation and replacement mutation of MLH-1 derived from the colon tumor were also confirmed . Therefore, post-operative adjuvant therapy and follow-up would be modified according to Lynch syndrome, and relevant genetic testing had been recommended for high-risk relatives.