A 69 years old female presented with gradual onset slowly progressive intermittent diffuse headache of moderate to severe intensity for 3 years. No diurnal pattern of symptoms or associated vomiting or visual disturbance was noted. She was clinically euthyroid and denied galactorrhea, postural dizziness, limb weakness or numbness, convulsions or sphincter dysfunction. Her past history was unremarkable.
General physical examination was unremarkable with normal vital parameters (temperature 37.4 °C, heart rate 76 per min, blood pressure 130/70 mmHg without a postural drop, respiratory rate 16 per min), normal visual fields on confrontation method and had no papilledema or other focal neurological deficits.
Investigations revealed an abnormal thyroid profile suggestive of secondary hypothyroidism [TSH 1.2 mIU/L (0.4–4.0), free T4 0.6 ng/dL (0.9–1.7) and free T3 3.5 pmol/L (3.5–6.5)]. Further investigation showed low cortisol levels (4.03 µg/dL) and markedly raised prolactin level of 1634 mU/L (< 400 mU/L). Thyroxine (75 mcg daily) and hydrocortisone (10 mg mane, 10 mg noon, 5 mg vesper) replacement therapy was commenced and titrated with regular monitoring of free T4 and cortisol levels.
Visual fields assessment by perimetry showed a right homonymous inferior quadrantanopia. Non contrast CT scan of the brain showed an old cerebral infarct in the left parietal lobe . An MRI scan of the head was performed and a mass lesion in the sellar region was found . The mass lesion was reported as a pituitary macroadenoma and the old cerebral infarct was thought to be unrelated. Patient was referred for neurosurgery after commencing thyroxine and cortisol hormone replacement therapy.
However on re-evaluation by the neurosurgeon, doubt was cast on the diagnosis of a ‘pituitary tumor’ due to the multilayered and ‘halo’ like appearance of the lesion on MRI . A CT angiogram was performed due to the unusual appearance of the tumour. A large aneurysm measuring 19.9 mm × 21.5 mm with a neck of 5 mm was discovered arising from the cavernous portion of the left internal carotid artery .
Thus a potentially catastrophic event was averted which could have occurred had trans-sphenoidal surgery been attempted for a pituitary tumor. It is also noteworthy that old infarct could also have been an embolic consequence of the aneurysm.
The patient eventually underwent endosaccular coiling and stenting without any complications. Her symptoms resolved and made and uncomplicated recovery. However, her visual filed defect did not improve, which would probably have been a result of previous parietal infarct. During a follow up visit at 6 months she remained symptom free but required thyroxine and hydrocortisone replacement.