A 50-year-old female patient with the main complaint of “irregular vaginal bleeding and fatigue for 6 months” visited our hospital on 12 February 2019. A mass was presented in the endometrium of the patient detected by ultrasonic examination. On pelvic MRI, a mass in the uterus involved deep muscular layer was confirmed as a 5*6 cm mass that appeared to be pelvic lymph node metastasis . Blood test showed a serous hyponatremia with Na+ level of 123∼131 mmol/L.
The patient received diagnostic curettage, and the pathological result showed high-grade malignant endometrial carcinoma. Tumor markers including carbohydrate antigens 125 (CA125) and human epididymis protein 4 were detected in normal ranges, and no intraepithelial or malignant lesions were found in cervical exfoliative cytology examination.
The uterus with enlargement in smooth and hard nature was found in the posterior position according to the gynecological examination. Hard nodules with poor activity and no tenderness can be touched in the anterior uterine wall. Based on the pathological result, endometrial carcinoma invading the serosa was diagnosed in the patient. For the huge mass in the endometrium and the poor state of patient, she received two circles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with taxol and carboplatin, while improving the persistent hyponatremia, then staging operation of endometrial cancer was conducted under general anesthesia on 21 May 2019.
During the operation, it was found that the enlarged uterus was located in the middle of the pelvis, the size was about 60 days of pregnancy, and the surface was smooth. The appearance of the main ligament and bilateral fallopian tubes and ovaries was normal, and no tumor was found on the surface of the appendix, omenta, and peritonea. The lymph nodes in the pelvis and surrounding the abdominal aorta were enlarged. First, we get the cytology of peritoneal fluid which resulted negative. And then laparotomy radical hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy was performed. Incision of the uterus showed that the solid tumor of the posterior wall of the uterus with diameter of 2 cm, slightly brittle texture and pale in color protruded from the muscle wall to the uterine cavity. No lesion was found in the vaginal fornix and cervix. The normal appearance of the bilateral attachments was found, and the lymph nodes in the pelvis and surrounding the abdominal aorta were evidently enlarged.
Pathological gross examination of the tumor showed that there was no obvious tumor in the serous surface membrane of the uterus. Incision of the uterus showed that the solid tumor of the posterior wall of the uterus with diameter of 2 cm, slightly brittle texture and pale in color protruded from the muscle wall to the uterine cavity. Microscopically, the endometrium was presented with mixed carcinoma. Histologically, two kinds of carcinoma were distributed separately. And the carcinoid was distributed in the muscles of myometrium with invasive pattern, accounting for about 70% of the tumor. Diffused infiltrating carcinoma of myometrium of the uterus is neuroendocrine tumor, with no obvious cellular atypia, abundant cytoplasm, rare mitograms of 0–1/10 HPF, Ki67 index of about 2%, consistent with carcinoid, multifocal vascular and lymphatic invasion, nerve invasion. Squamous cell carcinoma is arranged in the uterine body cavity, accounting for about 30% of the tumor . There is no glandular (or tubular) structure or keratinization of the tumor cell components. The tumor has penetrated the uterine serous membrane. Multi-lesions of lymphatic vessel space infiltration were found. Of the 23 harvested lymph nodes from the pelvic, 5 metastasized lymph nodes were identified in the abdominal aortic and left pelvic lymph nodes with mixed carcinoma. Negative reaction was displayed in the cervix, bilateral ovary, and oviduct. Immunohistochemically, in carcinoid carcinoma, the tumor cells were partly positive for synaptophysin (Syn), S-100, NSE, chromogranin A (CgA), CD56, cytokeratin (CK), H-CK, P63, and P40. The progesterone receptor and the estrogen receptor were negative. CA125, P16, Napsin A, WT-1, CD99, and vimentin were negative. The Ki67 proliferation index was 10%. Elastic fibers show vascular invasion. D2–40 showed lymph node metastasis. In squamous cell carcinoma, the tumor cells were partly positive for CK, CK7, CEA, P63, P40, PAx-8, and CEA. Additionally, results of villin, CDX-2, and CK20 were all negative. The histologic features of the tumor and its immunohistochemical profile support the diagnosis of carcinoid of the endometrium with squamous cell carcinoma .
Based on the revision of FIGO 2009 staging for endometrial carcinoma, the patient was classified as stage IIIC2. Postoperatively, the patient was given adjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin and etoposide under interval of 3 weeks and received “sandwich” therapy of chemotherapy-radiotherapy-chemotherapy. In the first circle of chemotherapy, grade 1 nausea and vomiting and grade 3 myelosuppression were developed in the patient. The patient received radiotherapy followed by 3 circles of chemotherapy with no sign of further deterioration. A complete response was achieved in the patient on the basis of the RECIST1.1 criteria. She is currently under close follow-up with no recurrence for 4 years and 4 months after surgery.