A 47-year-old man with a history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus presented to the emergency room with sudden-onset hemiplegic paralysis on the left side, which had persisted for 3 h. Acute cerebral ischemia was confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; Fig. A). The patient suffered from hemiparesis, with a score of 2 points according to the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS), as evaluated by two neurologists.
However, computed tomography (CT) performed before the MRI revealed a subacute SAH ; thus, intravenous thrombolysis with a recombinant tissue plasminogen activator could not be performed. DSA performed after CT and MRI revealed a dissecting aneurysm in the M1 section of the MCA and distal occlusion further along the aneurysm . Based on the DSA images, we postulated that recanalization of the occluded MCA was too high risk. Furthermore, we considered extracranial-intracranial bypass; however, this was declined by the patient and his family. Thus, conservative treatment was administered with dual antiplatelets (100 mg aspirin and 75 mg clopidogrel daily) and lipid-lowering therapy (40 mg atorvastatin calcium tablet daily), without endovascular treatment. We planned to embolize the dissecting aneurysm in the right MCA one week later.
Unfortunately, the patient experienced more severe neurological deficits within 24 h, resulting in a new NIHSS score of 12 points. Repeated CT scans excluded intracranial hemorrhage or hemorrhagic transformations. Additional cerebral ischemia was detected using diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) . We continued the conservative therapeutic strategy. Although hypertension and diabetes mellitus were confirmed by biomedical tests, arterial pressure and blood glucose levels were normal. The neurological function of the patient remained stable. All Glasgow Coma Scale and NIHSS scores are presented in Supplementary Data A, and arterial pressure monitoring data are presented in Supplementary Data B.
One week later, endovascular treatment was administered to the M1 aneurysm according to the therapeutic procedure. During this procedure, we observed that the dissecting aneurysm had enlarged significantly, with the volume having more than tripled in one week . The endovascular procedure was completed satisfactorily and the patient underwent neurological rehabilitation. We performed a second DSA nine days after the endovascular procedure, which confirmed successful treatment of the MCA aneurysm . A CT scan performed before DSA revealed that the SAH was barely detectable (Supplementary Data ).
However, the patient experienced a severe headache 5 days after the repeat DSA. CT confirmed a new acute SAH . CT angiography was performed immediately, which revealed no evidence of re-rupture of the treated aneurysm or other new aneurysms (Supplementary Data ). To exclude other hemorrhagic cerebral vascular diseases, such as arterial venous malformation and carotid-cavernous sinus fistula, we performed a fourth DSA on the day after the hemorrhage recurrence. The DSA revealed that an enlarging dissecting aneurysm had been detected in the right PCA , which had not been seen previously. In addition, a new SAH was confirmed on CT during DSA . We intended to perform endovascular treatment by trapping the enlarging dissecting aneurysm and parent artery; however, the patient’s family declined further invasive treatment. Thus, we administered conservative treatment to the patient who died two days later. A schematic diagram details the course of the multiple aneurysms and the treatment modality employed in the present case.