A 75-year-old man from the South-West Region of Cameroon (an endemic zone for onchocerciasis) and of Bamileke ancestry presented to our clinic with skin lesions that had been evolving for over a year. The eruptions were first noticed a few hours after he took 12 mg of ivermectin (Mectizan) during mass drug administration (MDA) campaigns carried out every 3 months (as part of the public health strategy and in line with a recommendation from the World Health Organization’s African program for control of onchocerciasis and to fight against filariasis in endemic parts of Cameroon). The initial eruptions were dark, itchy discolorations with occasional burning and appeared as single isolated rashes on his groin, genital, and neck regions.
On further inquiry, he described similar symptoms in the past whenever he took ivermectin which disappeared after he stopped the drug. Further consumption of ivermectin (2 months prior to consultation) during the ensuing campaign resulted in worsening of the old lesions with development of multiple new lesions over his face, back, and extremities. His family and medical history were not remarkable for any previous drug or cross-reactivity reactions.
On physical examination, he looked well with vital signs within normal limits. There were multiple well-defined circular erythematous hyperpigmented plaque lesions of sizes ranging from 1 × 3 cm to 7 × 10 cm on his face, neck, groin area, and both extremities occupying approximately two-thirds of his total body surface area (TBSA). Other systemic examinations were normal.
A laboratory work-up including full blood count, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serology, urine analysis, and biochemistry (liver and kidney function tests) were normal. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was at 65 mm/hour after the first hour, while punch biopsy of the skin, and antinuclear antibodies (ANA)/antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (ANCA) were requested but were unavailable.
A working diagnosis of FDE was made based on clinical signs and patient history despite the lack of histopathological findings.
Discontinuation of ivermectin (plus counselling on avoidance of other possible culprits), a short course of systemic corticosteroids (prednisone 60 mg daily for a week), and orally administered antihistamines (hydroxyzine 75 mg daily) were employed as treatment modalities. Close patient follow-up revealed marked regression of lesions within a fortnight with residual hyperpigmentation .