A 68-year-old man was referred to Kindai University in 2004 with bilateral uveitis of unknown cause. The right eye had lost vision due to suspected Candida keratitis after penetrating keratoplasty, which was performed in 2007. A mild anterior chamber inflammation and keratic precipitates with small corneal oedema, followed by refractory secondary glaucoma, caused bullous keratopathy in the left eye that necessitated DSAEK in 2011. The clinical findings observed during these periods, such as unilateral high intraocular pressure and corneal oedema with keratic precipitates, were suggestive of cytomegalovirus (CMV) corneal endotheliitis. A diagnosis of CMV corneal endotheliitis was made based on detection of CMV DNA in the aqueous humour after DSAEK. Corneal grafting failed even with administration of 0.5% ganciclovir eye drop six times with 0.1% fluorometholone eye drop four times daily for more than a year. After the second DSAEK in 2013, 1.0% voriconazole, 0.5% ganciclovir, and 0.1% betamethasone phosphate eye drops continued to be administered four times daily for 2 years. In 2015, the patient presented with small crystalline opacities in the centre of the cornea that progressed extremely slowly and had multiplied by 2017 . The patient complained visual disturbance without any eye pain or foreign body sensation when the corneal opacity covered the visual axis, although he did not exhibit any subjective symptoms when the keratitis occurred for the first time. Gram staining of the scraped cornea revealed an unstained small oval microorganism that was only visible by Fungiflora Y staining . Given the past episode of vision loss of the other eye due to suspected Candida keratitis, we administered two doses of voriconazole by intrastromal injection. Since the treatment was ineffective, penetrating keratoplasty was performed. The excised corneal tissue was fixed with formalin, embedded in paraffin, and processed for histological analysis.
Histologically, numerous oval organisms, 1.3–2.6 μm in diameter, were found throughout the corneal stroma. The organisms could be identified by haematoxylin and eosin staining and Ziehl–Neelsen staining, and fluoresced under ultraviolet illumination by Fungiflora Y and Uvitex 2B staining, but were unstained with periodic acid-Schiff reaction and Grocott’s staining . For TEM observation, ultrathin sections were prepared from the targeted area of paraffin sections after osmification and embedding in Epon blocks by the inverted beam capsule method . They were observed with an HT 7700 microscope (Hitachi High-Technologies, Tokyo, Japan). A polar tube with multiple loose coils—which is consistent with the morphology of microsporidia—was detected in the spore-like elements of the microorganisms by TEM . The corneal graft remains transparent and no clinical findings suggestive of recurrence of microsporidial keratitis nor graft rejection is found with administration of 0.1% betamethasone phosphate eye drop four times daily at 1 year and half postoperatively.