A 2 year-old boy was referred to our pediatric department for a 10-month’s history of thrombopenic purpura which failed to respond to conventional therapy with corticosteroids. The patient was born from healthy and no consanguineous parents. The medical history revealed an episode of anemia at the age of 1 month which required blood transfusion but no previous history of diarrhea. On admission, physical examination showed, fever at 38°C, skin purpura and no neurological impairment. The platelet count was 9×109/l; hemoglobin level was at 6.8g/dl with marked reticulocytosis. Direct coombs test was negative and the lactate dehydrogenase rate was at 2314 IU/l. The blood film revealed numerous schistocytes and microspherocytes. Mild proteinuria and hematuria were detected but the renal function was preserved. Coagulation tests were normal. Regarding, the absence of previous diarrhea, and renal insufficiency, the diagnosis of atypical HUS was reported. Hemoglobin level has normalized (10.9g/dl) after one blood transfusion while platelet count remained low at 35 ×109/l. TTP was then suspected; the patient was treated with 20ml/kg of fresh –frozen plasma, which promptly resulted in total recovery of thrombocytopenia (152×109/l). He was discharged after improvement. Twenty days later, he relapsed a new hemolytic episode which improved with a new plasmatherapy. Further investigations revealed a severe deficiency of ADAMTS 13 activity (level< 5%), ADAMTS 13 antigen was undetectable (< 65ng/l; kit American Diagnostica, Stamford, USA). No inhibitors for ADMTS 13 were found. For genetic analysis, all 29 exons with flanking intron-exon baoundaries of the ADAMTS 13gene were amplified and sequenced. The propositus was found to be homozygous for a new mutation: c 2203 G>T-p.Glu735X (domain TSP1-2) in exon 18. The patient’s family sequencing gene couldn’t be performed but no members had a history of a TTP-like disorder, thrombosis or bleeding episodes. Since, the diagnosis of congenital TTP was confirmed; the patient was placed on prophylactic regimen with regular infusions of FFP. During 4 years of follow-up, only one hemolytic crisis occurred at starting therapy. This event led us to reduce the intervals between infusions from 4 weeks to 3 weeks. Small volumes (10ml/kg) of FFP were able to prevent crises. Actually, at 6 years of age, the patient has a normal physical and mental development. The renal function is still normal.