A 27-year-old man went to the local hospital because of exertional dyspnoea for the past 6 months. Oral diuretics were given. He had a history of recurrent oral and genital ulceration for 5 years. Imaging examination showed aortic regurgitation and aortic root aneurysm. He underwent aortic root replacement with a 20 mm Medtronic ATS mechanical valve and a 26 mm graft. During the operation, the thickened aortic cusps were perforated and changes of arteritis were obvious. There was no obvious annulus at the attachment of non-coronary cusp, so the suture was placed on the left ventricular outflow tract. Post-operative electrocardiogram showed a complete atrioventricular block. His heart rate was about 40 b.p.m., without dizziness or syncope, so a permanent pacemaker was not implanted. The histopathology of resected tissue showed fibromyxoid valvulopathy with leucocyte infiltration. Behcet’s disease was diagnosed, and oral prednisone (10 mg/day) was administrated after surgery. After 6 months, the cardiovascular examination was normal, and the patient stopped prednisone by himself.
One year after the operation, the patient was admitted to the local hospital due to sudden chest pain. Computed tomography revealed a pseudoaneurysm at the distal anastomosis of the ascending aorta. He underwent percutaneous temporary pacemaker implantation and endovascular stent graft exclusion. Two 36 mm tube grafts were deployed. The patient had fever 4 days after endovascular intervention. Blood cultures were positive for Streptococcus viridis and Streptococcus oralis. The temporary pacemaker was removed. Targeted antibiotic therapy according to drug sensitivity results was initiated. During the next 4 months, the patient’s temperature fluctuated between 36°C and 38°C. Laboratory examination showed a white blood cell count of 1.06–8.58 ∗ 109/L (reference range: 4–10 ∗ 109/L), a haemoglobin of 90–111 g/L (reference range: 120–160 g/L), a B-type natriuretic peptide of 1400–1900 pg/mL (reference range: 0–150 pg/mL), a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 47–63 mg/L (reference range: 0–8 mg/L), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 12–36 mm/h (reference range: 0–15 mm/h). Subsequent blood cultures were negative. Transoesophageal echocardiography showed paravalvular leakage and dysfunction of one mechanical valve leaflet. Computed tomography showed pseudoaneurysm recurrence and type I endoleak. Then, the patient was referred to our hospital.
For cardiopulmonary bypass, femoral arterial cannulation and atrial cannulation were used. The pseudoaneurysm was 6 cm ∗ 4 cm, and the adhesion around the aorta was severe. After cross-clamping of the aorta, the aneurysm was incised, and the malfunctional valved conduit was removed. The aortic root replacement with a flanged composite valved conduit (flanged Bentall; ) was performed. A 22 mm supra-annular mechanical valve Medtronic AP360 and a 26 mm vascular graft Maquet were used. The flange of the conduit (5 mm in length) was implanted to the aortic annulus with interrupted pledgeted sutures. The Cabrol technique with an 8 mm graft was preferred due to tension on the left coronary anastomosis. The right coronary button was anastomosed end-to-side to the composite graft. The distal anastomosis of the graft to the transected aorta was performed using a continuous 4–0 polypropylene suture. After surgery, a permanent pacemaker was implanted. Immunosuppressants included oral prednisone (1 mg/kg/day) and cyclophosphamide (100 mg/day). Cultures of aortic tissues and grafts were negative. Antibiotic treatment (ceftriaxone) lasted for 8 weeks. After 3 months, the cardiovascular examination was normal, and the patient was in New York Heart Association functional class I. Computed tomography during follow-up was normal .