A 73-year old male with progressive impairment of gait, persisting neuropathic pain in his legs, dizziness due to postural changes, and unexplained weight loss of 20 kg (BMI 26.8 kg/m2) during the last 2–3 years presented to our outpatient clinic. Three years ago diagnosis of lumbar spinal stenosis was made and decompression surgery was performed to alleviate neuropathic pain. As symptoms progressed, 1 year before the first presentation a second surgical procedure was scheduled and it was only in the preoperative diagnostic workup that echocardiography revealed left ventricular hypertrophy suspected to represent cardiac amyloidosis (see Fig. ). Endomyocardial biopsy showed extensive amyloid deposition in Congo red stained tissue with a typcial apple green birefringence and fluorescence signal, which could be classified immunohistochemically as TTR derived amyloid (see Fig. ). Regarding the cardiac manifestation and the patient’s age and sex ATTRwt amyloidosis was suspected and treatment with tafamidis (61 mg daily) was initiated.
At the time of referral, the patient was not able to walk unaided for almost 1 year due to weakness of his legs and impairment of balance. Neuropathic pain and dizziness due to orthostatic dysregulation had progressed and the patient reported no obvious improvement after approximately 1 year of treatment with tafamidis. The patient’s family history revealed frequent deaths due to cardiac events in his first-degree relatives (see Fig. ). His father died at the age of 67 from a cardiac event not further specified, as well as two of the patient’s brothers. One of them reportedly suffered cardiomyopathy and polyneuropathy. The only living brother, aged 68, was considerably impaired by a cardiomyopathy and peripheral neuropathy of unknown etiology.
The clinical examination showed a severe impairment of gait due to sensory ataxia, bilateral distal paralyses of the lower extremities (ankle dorsiflexion MRC grade 2/5, plantar flexion MRC grade 2–3/5 on the right side, MRC grade 3–4/5 on the left side). A slight weakness of both hands (MRC grade 4/5) was evident, as well as moderate atrophy of distal limb muscles, distal symmetric hypesthesia, and lost tendon reflexes. Nerve conduction studies (NCS) confirmed a severe axonal sensorimotor neuropathy with bilaterally unobtainable sural and tibial nerve amplitudes. Corneal confocal microscopy (CCM) showed a highly reduced corneal nerve fiber density (7 fibers/mm2, reference: > 24 fibers/mm2) indicating prominent small fiber involvement. Extensive laboratory testing for potential causes of the neuropathy including HbA1c, vitamin B1, B6, B12, folic acid, TSH, ANA, ANCA, rheumatid factor, hepatitis serology, serum electrophoresis and immunofixation did not yield any relevant abnormalities. There was no history of alcohol abuse or any other exposure to neurotoxic agents. However, molecular genetic analysis (Sanger sequencing, bioinformatic analysis of collected data by means of Mutation Surveyor Version 3.10 and Alamut Visual Version 2.6.1) revealed a heterozygous sequence variant in exon 2 of the TTR gene (NM_000371.3 (TTR): c.194C > T, p.Ala65Val, s. Table and Fig. ), classified as likely pathogenic (class 4) according to the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) classification system, which had been reported in ClinVar twice (ClinVar Accession: VCV000448841.4, ClinVar Variation ID: 448841). In ClinVar, the variant is classified as a variant of uncertain significance (two submissions) and once with the condition amyloidogenic transthyretin amyloidosis, but there is no literature on individuals with TTR-related conditions with this genotype. ACMG criteria PM1 (variant located in a mutational hot spot), PM2 (variant absent from general population in databases gnomAD/ExAC), PM5 (novel missense change at an amino acid residue where a different missense change determined to be pathogenic has been seen before), and PP3 (multiple lines of computational evidence supported a deleterious effect on the gene product) were fulfilled . Presuming this genotype to be amyloidogenic, the patient’s brother underwent targeted genetic testing by Sanger sequencing that revealed the same heterozygous sequence variant.