We present a 26-year-old Hispanic gravida 0 with a known history of Bardet-Biedl syndrome and abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB). She was evaluated in the emergency room (ER) for heavy vaginal bleeding and dizziness and was found to have profound anemia with a hemoglobin and hematocrit of 5.4 g/dL and 15%, respectively. The patient was seen in the ER one week prior with same symptoms and was then started on conjugated equine estrogen (Premarin 5 mg twice daily). Her gynecologic history was notable for menarche at the age of 13 followed by regular periods until 2 years prior to her presentation. She remained amenorrheic for 1.5 years until she resumed regular 5-day periods with normal flow 6 months ago. The patient had been sexually active but denied history of sexually transmitted diseases. Review of her records revealed three prior abnormal Pap smears (abnormal squamous cells of undetermined significance in association with positive high-risk HPV testing). Three prior colposcopies with cervical biopsies were negative.
The patient's past medical history included Bardet-Biedl syndrome, morbid obesity with body mass index (BMI) of 54 kg/m2, severe persistent asthma, congenital absence of one kidney, obstructive sleep apnea, and scoliosis. She reported no pertinent past surgical or social history. Her family history was notable for unprovoked deep vein thrombosis in the patient's sister. She denied any known medical allergies. Her medication list included conjugated estrogen (Premarin) 5 mg twice daily, fluticasone/salmeterol (Advair) twice daily, and albuterol (Proventil) as needed. Social history was unremarkable.
On presentation to the ER, the patient's vital signs included blood pressure of 132/66 mmHg, heart rate of 115 bpm, respiratory rate of 16, oxygen saturation of 98%, temperature of 37.6 C, and weight of 146.5 kg. Her physical exam was notable for morbid obesity, no abdominal tenderness, and a 30 mL blood clot at cervical os. Bimanual exam demonstrated closed nontender cervix. Fundus and adnexa were not palpated due to body habitus. Laboratory findings were otherwise unremarkable except for anemia indices mentioned above. Urine pregnancy test was negative. Pelvic anatomy was evaluated with transvaginal sonography, which revealed a thickened, 1.6 cm mildly heterogeneous and hypervascular endometrium without identification of a discrete mass but with a possible hypervascular stalk suggestive of polyp . The uterus measured 8.3 × 5.1 × 5.3 cm and was mildly heterogeneous. Right ovary appeared morphologically normal, whereas the left ovary was not visualized. She was admitted to gynecology service for further management. Patient was transfused 2 units of packed red blood cells. Medroxyprogesterone (Depo-Provera) 150 mg IM was given to stabilize her endometrium, and patient was started on medroxyprogesterone 20 mg orally every 8 hours with quick control of her bleeding.
Patient subsequently underwent hysteroscopy, dilation, and curettage which revealed hypertrophic, vascular appearing endometrial tissue with presumed endometrial polyp. Patient was then discharged home on oral medroxyprogesterone and close follow-up.
Final pathology from her endometrial sampling was reported as FIGO grade 1, nuclear grade 1 endometrioid adenocarcinoma with squamous metaplasia. She was then referred to a gynecologic oncologist for further care. Pelvic and abdominal MRI were performed and revealed less than 50% invasion into the myometrium and no apparent extra uterine disease . After extensive discussion the decision was made to proceed with definitive surgical management and the patient underwent robotic assisted total laparoscopic hysterectomy and bilateral salpingectomy with ovarian preservation and bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection with sentinel node biopsy. Intraoperative findings were notable for a 12-week sized globular uterus, normal fallopian tubes and ovaries, and fatty liver. No extra uterine masses were identified. Patient was discharged home on postoperative day 1. Final pathology assessment was FIGO grade 2, nuclear grade 2, endometrioid adenocarcinoma with squamous differentiation, with her background endometrium demonstrating complex atypical hyperplasia. Final TNM staging was pT1aN0, FIGO stage IA . The patient is currently recovering well from the surgery. No further chemotherapy was recommended.