A 75-year-old man who had a distal arch saccular aneurysm (60 mm) underwent operation. Because of liver cirrhosis (Child Pugh B), endovascular treatment was chosen. Computed tomography (CT) showed a 60-mm arch aneurysm . The diameter of the Aneurysm, proximal neck, and distal neck diameters were 60 mm, 36 mm, 30.7 mm, respectively. Aortic arch angle was 77 degrees. 2-debranch TEVAR using a fenestrated endograft (Najuta) was performed to achieve long proximal sealing length and preserve brachiocephalic artery. First, Right subclavian artery to left carotid and left subclavian artery bypass using T-shaped graft (Propatene, Gore), was performed prior to stent graft insertion . Given the aneurysm length of 60-mm, a CTAG stent graft of 31-mm diameter × 15-mm length (W.L. Gore and Associates Flagstaff, AZ, USA) was implanted just distal to the LSCA to supply Najuta steadily. The fenestration of the Najuta of 42-mm diameter was successfully positioned in zone 0 and delivered to the brachiocephalic artery . Molding of the endograft after deployment of Najuta stent graft was not performed in order to avoid aortic dissection. It was an off-label use as the proximal neck length was 16.9 mm (< 20 mm).
Six hours postoperatively, he experienced acute hypotension, pancytopenia, and worsening lactic acidosis, resulting in systemic circulation failure. Emergent CT showed proximal collapse of the endograft and type I a endoleak with systemic blood flow obstruction . Due to the patient's poor general condition, a minimally invasive treatment was chosen. An additional stent graft 34-34-150 (Valiant Captiva, Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) was placed, with molding, just distal of the the second fenestration emergently at the ascending aorta to bail out Najuta collapse . Brachiocephalic artery flow was maintained. Consequently, the endoleak reduced, and systemic circulation improved. Nevertheless, hepatic failure continued due to hemolysis and progressive anemia the following day. Emergent open chest salvage was performed on the third postoperative day. Because the stent graft was in the ascending aorta, we established a cardiopulmonary bypass with femoral arterial inflow and right atrial outflow. A fresh retrograde type A aortic dissection and collapse of the proximal part of the Najuta were observed during surgery. The entry was located at the lesser curvature of the ascending aorta between proximal Najuta stent graft and Variant. Aortic dissection occurred after 2nd stent graft insertion to ascending aorta by balloon dilatation of the endograft. Following the successful closure of the false lumen caused by the removal of the proximal 2 stent by suturing the stent graft to the aorta, the patient's hemodynamics were stabilized (Video 1). However, he had an extensive cerebral infarction with brain edema. Therefore, extracranial decompression surgery was required, resulting in temporary improvement of symptoms. The patient had complicated repeat extensive cerebral infarction. On the 19th postoperative day, the patient died of multiorgan failure.