The patient described herein, a 10-year-old girl, is the first child of healthy non-consanguineous parents, born after an uneventful pregnancy affected by ID, attention deficit, behavioral and speech delay, hypotonia, facial dysmorphisms, eye anomalies. She also showed congenital malformations such as cerebral anomaly and forward anus. Her birth weight was 3,450 g (50th centile), length was 50,7 cm (50th centile), and head circumference was 34 cm (25-50th centile). The Apgar score was 9/9. Since the birth, the child has been subjected to a series of medical tests that revealed a complex clinical picture, such as a brain ultrasound that showed the presence of a slightly wider left ventricle. Furthermore, the presence of further forward anus relative to the sphincter floor was observed, so she was subsequently subjected to electro stimulation and submitted to surgery for the removal of vegetation skin. At 30 days visit, a cranial ultrasound showed a slightly dilated left ventricle, while there were not cardiologic alterations or skeletal anomalies. A brain MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) confirm the presence of a wider left ventricle. Standard karyotype was normal, as well as X-Fragile test. The neuropsychiatric evaluation performed at the age of 4.7 years showed an I.Q. of 89 (Stanfod Binet scale) and a mental age of 3 years and 10 months. At last clinical evaluation, performed when she was 10 years old, the patient showed facial dysmorphisms such as prominent mandible and enlarged nasal root , in association with mild hypotonia, a hint of curvature of the trunk; a comprehensive neuropsychiatric evaluation has also been performed. The girl showed mild ID, with a greater operating capacity of verbal thought than visual-motor thought. If properly stimulated, the patient offers the best overall performance; she showed also graphomotor delay, handling and grip difficulties. Regarding the affective and relational behavior, the child was introverted and showed attention deficit. About the communication and language area, the child showed speech delay (dyslexia). Finally, audiological tests showed normal hearing, and eye exams showed exotropia.