A 25 days old male infant was the first born child of a 26 year old mother and 32 year old father. Family history was unremarkable and there was no parental consanguinity.

During pregnancy, the pregnancy was well monitored. The mother denied any history of drug abuse involving tobacco and ethanol. Furthermore, there was no reported exposure to radiation or chemical substances. It is noted that the mother received antibiotic therapy during the third and fourth months of gestation due to recurrent urinary tract infections. Congenital abnormalities have been detected in the fetus at 33 weeks of gestation, including:Atrial septal defectInline graphic shortened lower limbs, narrow forehead, small jaw, and signs of restricted fetal growth in the womb.

During Postnatal course, the birth length was 46 cm, weight 2000 g and head circumference 33 cm. The baby was admitted to hospital with severe vomiting, feeding difficult and irritability, with multiple congenital anomalies were noted by the family.

Physical examination: the infant had microcephaly, broad nasal tip, maxillary hypoplasia gingival enlargement, low set ears, ptosis and staphyloschisis, the limbs hadsyndactyly of second and third toes. Cardiovascular system examination showed short systolic murmure at lower left sternal borderin. Genital examination showed small penis hypospadiasis with undescended testis. The baby had dry mucous membranes and tachycardia.

Laboratory examination and diagnostic tests, the laboratory investigations showed hyponatremia and elevated level of blood urea. Routine peripheral blood cell counts were normal. Serum cholesterol level showed low value of 43 mg/dl (normal value in neonates 85–165 mg/dl).

Karyotyping was 46XY
Our patient is homozygous for a pathogenic variant, [NM-001360.2:c121OC,T;p.(Arg404CYS)] in the DHCR7 gene. Pathogenic variants in the DHCR7 gene are associated with Smith-Lemli-Optiz syndrom with an autosomal recessive mode of inheritanc.

Radiological studies, the infant was evaluated with echocardiography that showed atrial septal defect (ASD) with pulmonary hypertension. The head ultrasound showed a agenesis of corpus callosum, abdominal ultrasonography showed Horseshoe kidney. Upper gastrointestinal contrast study showed sevrs gastro oesophageal reflux. A diagnosis of Smith-Lemli-Opitz-syndrome was made based on clinical ، biochemical profile and molecular genetic testing.

Then, we managed dehydration and hyponatremia. An orogastric tube was inserted and Tips were provided to parents for managing gastroesophageal reflux, including elevating the head of the bed, feeding in an upright position, and avoiding tight clothing. After our patient experienced severe irritability, he was prescribed simvastatin at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg/day for 6 weeks, followed by an increased dose of 1 mg/kg/day for 12 months. During the follow-up period, an improvement in the baby’s irritability was observed with good tolerance and without any side effects.