A 30-year-old man with no significant past medical history or family history had felt numb of his left extremities for 1 month. He also complained of mild headache and interrupted vomiting. Physical examination at admission revealed no abnormal signs such as asymmetric pupils or hemiparesis. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multifocal lesions of the brain. The largest one was an occupying lesion at his right thalamus, with a compressive deformation of the right ventricle. This mass was mostly hyperintense on T1-weighted (T1W) and T2-weighted (T2W) images. After gadolinium (Gd) administration, the whole mass presented a heterogeneously enhanced character. While at the frontal angle of the left ventricle as well as pineal body region, two nodules with isointensity on both T1W and T2W images were detected, and they also mildly enhanced after Gd administration .
The patient underwent a right occipitotemporal craniotomy after admission. With ultrasound guidance, a 4-cm-deep colostomy was carried out through the patient’s supramarginal gyrus to the occipital angle of the right ventricle. The mass was seen at the lateral wall of the ventricle, with grey and red appearance, uneven texture, and rich blood supply. There was an obscure boundary between the mass and normal tissue aside, as the tumor showed an infiltrative pattern of growth. Resection within the mass had alleviated the pressure, thus releasing some cerebrospinal fluid, which lowered the pressure even more. Then a total resection of the mass around its approximate boundary was achieved .
The examination was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical University. On gross examination, the surgically excised tissue, with a volume of 5.0 × 5.0 × 4.0 cm3 approximately, was heterogeneously soft and rough with pinkish color. On microscopic examination, the tumor was composed of a mount of large and bizarre giant cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm on hematoxylin-eosin (H-E) staining, which was compatible with a diagnosis of glioblastoma. Scattered cells with loosely cohesive cytoplasm (that is, ‘vacuole sign’) could be seen, which indicated the presence of an oligodendroglioma component . Immunohistochemically, the astrocytic tumor cells showed weakly positive on the methylation of genes of O-6-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter and strong mutation of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) genes . Additionally, the tumor cells were both immunoreactive for P53 and had amplificated vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) genes . The immunofluorescent staining of 1p19q showed there were no mutations existed .
After the resection, the patient presented with lucid mind but mental fatigue, his left extremities’ muscle strength is grade I, while his right ones’ is grade V. The patient left the neurosurgery department with a wheelchair, and his Karnofsky Performance Scale (KPS) score is 50. Concurrent radiotherapy and chemotherapy were administered 1 week later, and the radiotherapy was three-dimension conformal and intensity-modulated which covered both the left ventricle and the surgical cavity of the right thalamus, with a dosage of 58.0 Gy in 29 fractions. At the meantime, the patient had continuous temozolomide, 160 mg (75 mg/m2/day) per day for 42 days. During this adjuvant therapy, the patient’s mental status got normalized, and his left hemiparesis was gradually improved with grade-IV strength of the arm and grade-III strength of the leg at the end of the medication. Complications other than mild nausea did not occur.
A follow-up MRI study performed 4 weeks after radiotherapy (14 weeks after resection) showed thickened enhancement after Gd administration in the pineal body region and the frontal angle of the left ventricle, compared with the pre-radiation MRI study, which might indicate tumor dissemination to these areas. Adjuvant temozolomide with 150 to 200 mg/m2 for 5 days every 28 days was then administered to the patient for 12 cycles. During the long-term therapy, the patient was followed by MRI and clinical visits every 2 to 4 months. Blood testing for hematologic toxicity was performed every cycle, and the results did not show abnormal blood cell counting or changes in liver and kidney functions. Gastrointestinal toxicity or allergy was also not seen. After 8 cycles, the MRI showed significantly weakened signal in the frontal angle of left ventricle as well as the pineal body region on the Gd enhanced images. At the end of the 12-cycle therapy, the enhancement area of left ventricle almost disappeared, the same change presented in the pineal body region as well . At the recent clinical visit, the patient showed normal mental status, along with grade-IV muscle strength of his left extremities. The patient was back to work as a green worker, and his KPS score was improved to 90.