A 42 year old female with cutaneous lupus for 16 years was evaluated for new onset hypertension and ankle oedema of 2 months duration. She was found to have a nephrotic range proteinuria (3.7 g per day) with microscopic haematuria and underwent renal biopsy for suspected lupus nephritis. She did not have coagulopathy, local skin sepsis or uncontrolled hypertension at the time of the biopsy. The procedure was performed under ultrasound guidance, adhering to aseptic precautions by an experienced specialty trainee in nephrology. Two cores were obtained with two passes using a Histo Automated Spring-loaded renal biopsy gun with a 16G needle. No complications were observed during the immediate post-procedure period. Patient did not develop undue pain, haematuria or overt bleeding from the biopsy site. She was discharged from hospital the next day.
She was on prednisolone 60 mg daily and had steroid induced diabetes mellitus. Her glycemic control was poor (HbA1c 9.0%, fasting plasma glucose 188 mg/dL) while being on treatment with metformin 750 mg thrice daily and gliclazide 40 mg twice daily.
Eight weeks later she was re-admitted with pain in the left flank, intermittent fever and malaise for 1 week. She did not have urinary symptoms, haematuria, nausea or vomiting.
Her past medical, surgical, gynaecological and family history was otherwise unremarkable. She was a housewife, leading an active lifestyle, well supported by family members and was well compliant with treatment.
On admission, she was ill, febrile (37.5 °C), had tachycardia (112 beats per minute) with normal blood pressure (120/70 mmHg), respiratory rate (18 per minute) and oxygen saturation (99% on ambient air). She was pale and had bilateral symmetrical pitting ankle oedema, malar rash, and erythematous desquamating rash over sun exposed areas. Abdominal examination revealed an exquisitely tender subcutaneous induration in the left flank without overlying erythema, warmth or rash. Cardiovascular, respiratory and neurological examinations were unremarkable.
Investigations revealed a neutrophil leukocytosis (total white cell count 22 300 / mm3, neutrophils 88% with left shift and toxic granules), elevated C-reactive protein (120 mg/L, reference < 6 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (88 mm 1st hour). She also had normochromic normocytic anaemia (haemoglobin 8.9 g/dL), normal renal functions (Creatinine 57 micmol/L) and normal liver biochemistry except for hypoalbuminaemia (26 g/L). Renal biopsy was reported as having insufficient tissue as it contained only tubules, without any glomeruli.
Urinalysis showed proteinuria and microscopic haematuria without pyuria. Urine and blood cultures grew no organisms. Ultrasound scan of the abdomen showed a subcutaneous hypoechoeic area over the left flank suggestive of a fluid collection. A contrast enhanced CT scan of the abdomen was done which showed a retroperitoneal collection of pus that extended in to the subcutaneous tissues through the muscles of the posterior abdominal wall . No communication was reported between the abscess and the renal tissue.
She underwent incision and drainage of the abscess, which drained 400 mL of blood stained pus. Collection was found to be extending from the retroperitoneal region to the subcutaneous tissue plane, two regions communicating through a channel that penetrated the posterior abdominal wall musculature. The abscess had no communication with renal tissues or the collecting system. Pus culture isolated an extended spectrum beta lactamase producing Escherichia coli. She was treated with intravenous meropenem 1 g 8 hourly along with regular debridement of the surgical site.
Her symptoms gradually resolved with treatment and inflammatory markers returned to normal. Follow up imaging with ultrasonography did not reveal any residual collection. Two weeks later, she was discharged from in patient care with a plan for repeat biopsy from the right kidney.