A 22-year-old man presented to the emergency department at the general hospital no 58 (IMSS León Guanajuato México) after being stabbed once with an ice pick in the chest during a bar fight. On arrival, the patient was unstable with a blood pressure of 90/50 mmHg, no paradoxical pulse was noticed, heart rate was 110 beats/min, and respiratory rate was 28 breaths/min. The physical examination was notable for one penetrating stab wound, the object was not in situ, the entry site was a tiny hole in the fifth intercostal space to the left of the sternum, and there was a left pleural effusion syndrome and a holo-systolic murmur at the heart apex. The X-ray confirmed the haemothorax, and 3D transthoracic echocardiography showed an LV ejection fraction of 60%, a VSD located at the apex with a diameter measured around 6 × 8 mm, and no signs of tamponade or free wall of the right ventricle rupture (, , and ). A left chest tube was placed draining 700 mL of blood, and no transfusion was required. The patient was transferred to UMAE T1 Bajío Hospital (third-level centre) for treatment of the VSD. There was a discussion with the heart team and the patient. Because there was only one central defect with good rims and the patient rejected surgery, it was decided to perform percutaneous closure.
The procedure was performed under general anaesthesia and transthoracic echocardiography guidance. Right femoral arterial access and right internal jugular venous access were obtained. We considered no need to perform coronary angiography. Right and left heart haemodynamics demonstrated mild pulmonary hypertension and a QP:QS >1.5. A left ventricular angiogram shows an apical 10 mm VSD (, ). From the right femoral sheath, a 5F JR3.5 catheter was advanced into the left ventricle (LV). A 0.035″×260 cm glidewire was used to cross the VSD to the left pulmonary artery. A 20 mm Ensnare was used to snare and externalize the wire through the jugular sheath . We used the arteriovenous loop to introduce the 8 Fr TorqVue delivery sheath and placed it into the LV. The VSD was sealed by deploying an Amplatzer 14 mm muscular VSD occlude (St Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN) (, ).
Transthoracic echocardiography performed on the third day after the procedure showed the excellent location of the device with a trace of flow through the mesh in colour Doppler imaging. The patient was discharged on the fifth postoperative day. After 6 months, the echo Doppler shows no residual shunt, normal pulmonary artery pressure, and normal biventricular function ( and , ). The patient remains asymptomatic.