A 20-year-old nulliparous woman presented to our gynecologic department because of intermittent abdominal pain and a 3-month history of dysmenorrhea. She had a history of 2 right ovarian teratomas that were managed surgically. At the age of 16 years, she experienced lower abdominal pain for 2 weeks. A subsequent pelvic sonography showed a complex, right ovarian cyst, of approximately 5.36 × 4.3 cm in size; her carbohydrate antigen (CA) 125 level was 23.4 U/mL (normal, 0–25 U/mL, at our hospital). We performed a laparoscopically assisted ovarian cystectomy, and the subsequent pathologic analysis revealed a mature cystic teratoma. During the laparoscopy, the left ovary was visually examined, and morbid findings were not noted. One month after the surgery, her symptoms had improved and no residual tumor was observed on pelvic sonography. The patient was subsequently lost to follow-up. After 1 year, she presented to our out-patient department with a 2-month history of prolonged menstrual periods; a right ovarian complex mass, approximately 3.7 × 4.3 cm, with a solid component, was noted during a pelvic ultrasound examination (Figure ). Her CA125 level was 11.9 U/mL. She, again, underwent laparoscopically assisted ovarian cystectomy in our hospital, and the pathological report revealed another mature cystic teratoma. However, no abnormal findings were noted for the left ovary.
She received regular follow-up care every 6 months and had been well for the next 3 years. However, at the age of 20 years, she presented with intermittent abdominal pain as well as dysmenorrhea that had persisted for several months. A complex mass, that had an approximately 10% solid component, was detected on sonographic examination. In addition, her CA125 level was 103.1 U/mL. Based on the findings of serological tests, we suspected the presence of a malignancy. The patient underwent a contrast-enhanced abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan, which revealed an 8.9 × 5.7-cm, complex, cystic tumor of the left adnexa, with compression and displacement of the urinary bladder. Moreover, a 5.1 × 3.9-cm, complex, cystic, partially solid tumor was noted on the right adnexa (Figure ).
Due to the presence of bilateral adnexal lesions and the suspicion of malignancy, the patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy, bilateral ovarian cystectomy, and pelvic adhesiolysis. During the laparotomy, a capsulated, enlarged, 9 × 6 cm, left ovarian tumor was detected, with abundant sebaceous and hair-containing tissue. The right mass appeared to be a teratoma, 5 × 4 cm in size. Histopathological findings confirmed the presence of bilateral, mature cystic teratomas, composed of sebaceous and keratinous materials as well as hair shaft components. No evidence of malignancy was found. After discharge, the patient underwent follow-up at 1, 3, 9, and 15 months. She did not report abdominal pain or menstrual abnormalities, and a pelvic sonography did not demonstrate any signs of recurrence or residual tumor.