We present the case of an 81-year-old woman, with past medical history of hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus controlled with medication, who presented to the emergency department after falling from her own height onto her left hemibody and outstretched hand. She denied cranioencephalic trauma or loss of consciousness. At admission, she complained of intense pain in her left hand and reduction in the wrist's range of movement due to pain. At physical examination, she had a “fork back deformity”, swelling, and was tender to touch; the patient complained of a pain level of 9 out of 10 according to the VAS score with fracture manipulation. Plain radiographs showed a minimally displaced, dorsally angulated, extra-articular, shortened distal radius fracture with loss of radial tilt.

The patient referred severe pain with passive motion and near the fracture site, she was reluctant to allow for a block near the site and to receive surgery. Due to the intense pain referred by the patient, and the possibility of management with closed reduction, we opted for a supracondylar radial nerve block to ensure proper pain management. Therapeutic options were discussed with the patient and her daughter, and as a result of a shared decision-making process, she opted for closed reduction with supracondylar radial nerve block. After obtaining the patient's informed consent, the procedure was performed. With the patient supine and the arm flexed over the abdomen, the physician positioned themselves facing the lateral aspect of the affected arm. The ultrasound machine was placed front-facing the physician, allowing an unobstructed view of the screen. A high-frequency 6–13 MHz (MHz) Mindray linear transducer was used to locate the radial nerve on the lateral aspect of the humerus, approximately 2 cm above the lateral epicondyle. At this location, the nerve is followed distally, visualizing its bifurcation into deep and superficial branches. Subsequently, the probe was displaced proximally to ensure the correct anatomic location. The nerve (hyperechoic) travels through the intermuscular septum between the surrounding (more hypoechoic) brachial and brachioradial muscles.

The site was prepared with an aseptic technique and sterilized with a chlorhexidine solution. Sterile surgical lubricant was spread on the intended injection site. Later, a mixture of 10 ml of 1:1 0.25 % bupivacaine and 1 % lidocaine with epinephrine was injected with a 50-mm, 22-gauge Stimuplex® insulated echogenic needle around the radial nerve (proximal to its branch) under direct ultrasound guidance using an in-plane technique, identifying the needle in its full length. To prevent nerve injury due to high pressure at the injection site, low resistance during the procedure was assured. The patient manifested minimal discomfort during the injection process. Fifteen minutes after the injection, the patient reported no pain at rest, and the fracture was reduced. Axial traction maneuvers and ligamentotaxis, hyperextension, flexion, and ulnar deviation were performed with subsequent immobilization with a forearm sugar tong splint without complications. Shortly thereafter, the dorsally angulated distal fragment was reduced with minimal discomfort. After confirmatory radiographs showed adequate reduction, she was discharged with orthopedic follow-up. At the two-week follow-up, the sugar tong splint was replaced by a brachiopalmar closed cast, and at the monthly follow-up, the appropriate fracture reduction was again verified through radiographs. After that, the patient was lost to follow-up due to administrative concerns derived from her insurer, where we believe she was transferred elsewhere to continue here care.