A 44-year-old Indonesian female patient presented to the Emergency Department of Sanglah General Hospital (Bali, Indonesia) with the chief complaint of blackish stool that had occurred 2 hours prior to admission and was accompanied by coffee ground vomitus and epigastric pain. Two weeks prior to admission, the patient had been admitted to the district hospital with complaint of blackish stool and received a blood transfusion. The blackish stool recurred 1 week later.
The patient denied a history of abdominal trauma but reported a history of elective LC due to cholelithiasis 3 years prior to admission and was hospitalized for 5 days. History of abdominal pain or gastrointestinal bleeding afterwards was denied. History of alcoholism, hepatitis, or chronic liver diseases was denied.
The patient’s vitals were within normal range; blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, heart rate was 84 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 16 breaths per minute, and axillary temperature was 36.6°C. Pallor of the conjunctiva indicated anemia, and scleral icterus suggested slight jaundice. The patient expressed pain on palpation at the epigastric and right hypochondriac region.
Blood analysis revealed low hemoglobin 9.88 g/dL (normal range: 12–15.5 g/dL) but normal platelet and white blood cell count. Liver function markers were abnormal, with aspartate transaminase of 354.9 U/L (11–33 U/L), alanine transaminase of 321.3 U/L (11–50 U/L), total bilirubin of 3.52 mg/dL (0.3–1.3 mg/dL), direct bilirubin of 2.95 mg/dL (0.0–0.3 mg/dL), alkaline phosphatase of 233 U/L (53–128 U/L), and gamma-glutamyl transferase of 301 U/L (70–140 U/L). Amylase, lipase, prothrombin, and partial thromboplastin times were normal.
Results from abdominal ultrasonography were unremarkable; there were no signs of biliary obstruction or intraabdominal free fluid. Nonvariceal UGIB caused by peptic ulcer was suspected, and appropriate conservative treatment with lansoprazole bolus 60 mg intravenously followed by continuous drip 6 mg/hour intravenously was initiated, with esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) ordered for further evaluation.
The EGD revealed blood covering the gastric tissues up to the second part of the duodenum. After cleansing, the source of bleeding remained inapparent. However, a blood clot was found at the ampulla of Vater . The diagnosis of hemobilia was made, and computed tomography (CT) scan was planned
While waiting for the abdominal CT scan, the patient experienced massive hematemesis and hematochezia. Emergent angiography was performed to determine the source of bleeding and address the patient’s hemodynamic instability. The imaging showed contrast extravasation from a gastroduodenal artery pseudoaneurysm distal to the common bile duct, with flow to the duodenum . The patient was diagnosed with hemobilia due to ruptured gastroduodenal artery pseudoaneurysm.
The patient was treated with fluid resuscitation and packed red cell transfusion. Although transcatheter arterial embolization would have been the preferred procedure to stop the bleeding, it was unavailable in our center; therefore, laparotomy surgery was performed. The laparotomy confirmed the bleeding from gastroduodenal artery pseudoaneurysm, and ligation and excision of the pseudoaneurysm were performed . After surgery, the patient’s vital signs were stable, and no recurrent bleeding episode occurred. Unfortunately, the patient developed ventilator-associated pneumonia and passed away.