A previously healthy 14-day-old male presented with an uncontrollable bleeding following a circumcision. The circumcision, which is a norm in the patient's family, was performed at local settings by his primary healthcare physician without adequate preparation in terms of laboratory tests, and was complicated by profuse bleeding despite sutures placement. There was no fever, vomiting, diarrhea, shortness of breath or jaundice upon presentation to the emergency room (ER).
This neonate is a product of a normal vaginal delivery of a 29-year-old mother that had undergone all required pregnancy tests which came back normal. Apgar Scores were 8 and 9 at 1 minute and 5 minutes, respectively. Physical examination after the delivery did not show any findings of clinical importance. His first 2 weeks were uneventful. Weight at birth was 3.1 kg.
The patient's blood group is AB+ with an unknown maternal blood group, which makes it relatively more difficult to find matching blood and plasma.
Regarding the family history, the patient is a member of a family of five, with two older brothers who are completely healthy with no history of bleeding tendencies, as are the parents, who are first degree cousins. The patient is not taking any medications, and there is no family history of bleeding episodes. No psychosocial history of clinical importance was reported. The patient doesn't have any known food or drug allergy.
Regarding vital signs at the presentation, the patient's heart rate was 166 beats/minute, respiratory rate was 62 breaths/minute, blood pressure was 82/51 mmHg and the rectal temperature was 37.3 °C.
Initial workup included a Complete Blood Count (CBC) that showed a hemoglobin of 15.5 g/dl, Hematocrit (HCT) of 46%, White Blood Cells count (WBC) of 10.15*109/L, platelets (PLT) count of 409000, Prothrombin time (PT) of 57 seconds, Partial Thromboplastin time (PTT) of 120 seconds, and International normalized Ratio (INR) of 4.69.
Initial management with vitamin K and Fresh Frozen Plasma was made. The patient was stabilized and monitored for the next three days. His first admission lasted six days.
An inpatient follow up with coagulation profile was done on the admission to the pediatric ward and showed elevated PT, PTT, and INR with normal platelets count despite the initial management (A). A presumptive diagnosis of coagulation disorder was made. A mixing study was sent and the results showed a correction in the coagulation profile, which confirmed a factor deficiency. Factors assay showed normal results for all factors except factor V which was only 11% active. Factor V's normal activity range is between 50% and 200%.B shows the activity level of factor V during the first admission.
The patient was discharged with the diagnosis of factor V deficiency, and the family were advised to follow up at the hematology clinic. Genetic testing was ordered for the patient, and the parents.
Two weeks later, the patient was brought to the emergency room by his mother complaining of seizures that she described as alternating eye movements and bilateral arm jerking. The patient's initial workup showed elevated PT, PTT (A) and low factor V activity (B). Urgent head CT scan was done and showed intracranial hemorrhage .
The patient was started on Phenytoin, Mannitol, and the neurosurgery team was consulted, who decided that craniotomy and evacuation are required to stabilize the patient's condition. Fresh Frozen Plasma and vitamin K were given prior to and after the surgery.
After 9 days of admission, no complaints or complications were noted, and the patient is now discharged and is being followed in the outpatient hematology clinic.weeks later, genetic testing results showed a homozygous pathogenic frameshift mutation in the F5 gene -p.(P927Lfs*7) gene-causing premature termination after 7 codons. Both parents were heterozygous for this mutation.