The patient is a five-year-old female with a past medical history of Wolff–Parkinson– White syndrome, asthma, and oppositional defiant disorder who presented to the emergency department with unwitnessed ingestion of a foreign body. The patient’s mother endorsed that on 29 November 2020 at 21:00, the patient complained of chest pain and admitted to previously swallowing a silver object. Upon arrival at the hospital, she had four episodes of non-bloody, nonbilious emesis, and epigastric pain. A chest X-ray showed a round metallic object projecting over the mid esophagus, with a double halo and step-off appearance, consistent with button battery (BB) ingestion. Due to the potential for rapid onset of damage following BB ingestion, the patient was subsequently admitted for emergent endoscopic removal of the BB, and directions were given that she was to receive nothing by mouth (NPO).

We performed an esophogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) 6 h after ingestion and discovered a 20 mm BB in the middle third of the esophagus. We successfully removed the BB with rat tooth forceps without complications. Visualization of the site showed mucosal ulceration and erosion. According to the commonly used Zargar classification of esophageal injuries, this lesion was determined to be Grade 2B due to the erosion’s circumferential nature. The endoscope was advanced to the stomach and showed no damage. A nasogastric (NG) tube was not placed at the time of the endoscopy.

The following day, the patient endorsed substernal chest pain and dysphagia with saliva. Her diet remained NPO, and she was started on ceftriaxone and intravenous (IV) pantoprazole. A follow-up chest X-ray on day two showed no evidence of cardiopulmonary disease, pneumomediastinum, or pneumothorax. An esophagram on day three showed mild irregularity in the mid-esophagus but no contrast extravasation to suggest perforation.

We performed a repeat EGD on day four to assess esophageal mucosa healing and place an NG tube for feeds. The endoscope was progressed to the middle third of the esophagus, revealing a single, non-bleeding, posterior erosion with sloughing of necrotic tissue. A 10 French NG tube was placed under direct visualization. Post endoscopy, we initiated feeds via NG tube, but the patient developed a fever of 38.8 °C. We then added IV cefepime and metronidazole to her medication regimen and held feeds due to the concern for mediastinitis. An MRI showed possible inflammation in the posterior mediastinum. However, the patient’s fever subsided, and a chest X-ray did not reveal signs of esophageal perforation. On day six, we restarted feeds via NG tube and discontinued antibiotics. On day eight, a repeat esophagram showed persistent irregularity of the posterior esophageal wall consistent with ulceration. She was discharged the same day on NG tube feeds, omeprazole, and instructed to avoid food and water by mouth.

The patient returned to the ED the following day with bilious vomiting following bolus tube feeds. An X-ray revealed that the tip of the NG tube had been displaced to the duodenum, which was then pulled back to the stomach without complication.

At clinic follow-up 4 weeks following ingestion, the patient was tolerating feeds via NG tube and sips of water. The following day, we used a GIF-HQ 190 endoscope of 9.9 mm diameter that showed moderate stenosis with friable mucosa in the middle third of the esophagus. We could not traverse the stenosis with the endoscope. Due to the lack of equipment available and the endoscopist’s minimal experience with strictures, we did not attempt dilation at that time. We performed an esophagram two days later to assess the length of the stricture, but there was no evidence of strictures, perforation, or fistulas on imaging in neither the lateral view or the AP view.

About seven weeks post ingestion, she returned for an EGD with possible stricture dilation and NG tube removal. The patient was tolerating a full liquid diet by mouth in addition to NG tube feeds, with no symptoms of fever, chest pain, or dysphagia. Upon introduction, the endoscope could not pass through a severe esophageal stenosis 15 cm from the incisors. Balloon dilation was performed to 10 mm, 12 mm, 13.5 mm, and twice to 15 mm, after which we passed the endoscope to the stomach and removed the NG tube. The patient tolerated the procedure well and was discharged to home once she tolerated liquids by mouth.