A 49-year-old woman with a 1-month history of dyspnea was admitted to our hospital. Her medical history included hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and uterine fibroids. Chest computed tomography (CT) and echocardiography revealed a large epicardial effusion (A). The patient underwent pericardiocentesis to remove 1.2 L of hemorrhagic pericardial fluid. Cytology of the fluid was negative for malignant cells. Contrast-enhanced CT after pericardiocentesis showed a tumor measuring 24 × 33 mm in the right atrium (B). Following pericardiocentesis, the patient's symptoms were alleviated, and she was discharged. Two weeks later, transthoracic echocardiography and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed progression of the epicardial effusion. Since there were no severe symptoms, we did not intervene. MRI showed a 25 × 28-mm mass in the right atrium exhibiting high signal intensity on T2-weighted images (C). Blood test results for tumor markers were negative. Coronary artery angiography revealed a feeding artery from the sinus node branch to the tumor. We investigated for embolization of the feeding artery, although we could not find any previous report of such embolization treatment of the feeding artery in the case of a cardiac tumor. These examinations were insufficient to make a definitive diagnosis. However, the tumor was resected to alleviate the persistent tamponade.
Preoperative transesophageal echocardiography, performed under general anesthesia, showed a mass measuring 28 × 41 mm originating from the free wall of the right atrium. It was not adherent to the tricuspid valve or septum and was thus resectable. Upon pericardiotomy, the tumor was visualized in the right atrium, adherent to the pericardium. The tumor was highly vascularized and had rough borders . Cardiopulmonary bypass was established between the ascending aorta and superior vena cava. A venous cannula was subsequently inserted into the right femoral artery, through the inferior vena cava, and into the front of the right atrium so as not to interfere with the tumor. We made an incision on the right atrium near the tumor and observed the presence of endocardium on the smooth surface of the mass. We biopsied a part of the tumor surface to obtain an intraoperative frozen section, which revealed the presence of a sarcoma. The tumor and adherent right atrial wall were removed with adequate margins to the greatest extent possible. The resected right atrial wall was reconstructed using a bovine pericardial patch. Pathological examination of the resected tumor revealed fusiform tumor cells in frequent mitosis and a rich blood supply with intraluminal red blood cells. Immunological staining was positive for CD34 expression . A pathological diagnosis of angiosarcoma was made; the resected end of the superior vena cava was tumor-free. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 12. Postoperative CT and echocardiography showed no residual tumor, while positron emission tomography revealed normal findings. Two months later, the patient received radiotherapy (heavy ion therapy) to the right atrium for a month at a dose of 64 Gy in 16 Fr. There was no local recurrence 6 months after surgery. However, metastasis to the lungs was identified. Although the patient received chemotherapy (paclitaxel and cisplatin), lung and liver metastases progressed . Unfortunately, the patient died of multiorgan failure due to multiple metastases 17 and 18 months after surgery and diagnosis, respectively.