In April 2007, a 56-year-old Caucasian woman with a painful, right-sided neck mass presented to a private practitioner. Ultrasound (US) suggested a clinical diagnosis of subacute thyroiditis, which was not supported by subsequent laboratory tests (C-reactive protein 1.9 mg/L; leukocytes 9700/μL; thyroid hormones within normal range; antithyroid auto-antibodies negative). Two days later, the patient had an exacerbation of the latero-cervical pain which prompted a repeat US of the neck, which revealed an iso-echoic lesion (51.3 mm in size), apparently included within an enlarged right thyroid lobe (83.5 mm). The lesion was interpreted as an intrathyroid hematoma and the opinion of a neck surgeon (MRP) was requested. The patient's medical history was collected at this time and included a severely diminished bone mass treated with bisphosphonate, though no information on bone metabolism was provided. History ruled out any regional traumatic event. The patient seemed quite anxious and dysphonetic but not dyspnoeic. Physical examination revealed a tender right-sided cervical mass, extending from the right mandibular arch to the thoracic inlet.
The patient was referred to the Special Surgical Pathology Department at Padova University Hospital, where computed tomography (CT) showed a laterocervical hemorrhagic lesion, extending from the lateral neck to the right prevertebral/paratracheal spaces ; a distinct midline shift and compression of both the hypopharynx and the trachea were also documented. During the CT procedure, the patient suffered from severe respiratory distress with dyspnea and she was immediately referred for surgical treatment, where an ovoid, hemorrhagic mass (4.0 × 2.4 × 1.3 cm, weight 8.1 g) was revealed posterior to the right thyroid lobe. Laboratory tests (conducted during the surgical procedure) demonstrated severe hypercalcemia (3.18 mmol/L; normal range: 2.10 to 2.55 mmol/L) with a decrease in hemoglobin level (12.0 g/dL). Surgery consisted of hematoma evacuation, parathyroidectomy and "en bloc" right thyroid lobectomy . There was no evidence of regional lymph node involvement. The surgery was curative and both serum calcium and parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels quickly dropped to within the normal range (at discharge: calcium 2.29 mg/dL; PTH 52 pg/mL).
Gross section of the surgical specimen revealed a three-layered lesion consisting of peripheral areas of (partially fluid) hemorrhagic material, invading a more internal, compact (partially organized) zone around the core of the specimen, which consisted of necrotic parathyroid remnants . Multiple gross samples were obtained for histological assessment, which showed an extensively hemorrhagic chief cell parathyroid adenoma surrounded by a loosely organized hemorrhagic and fibrous reaction, which became frankly hemorrhagic in the tissue samples obtained from the periphery of the resected mass.
A 9-month follow-up including clinical evaluation, serology and US, revealed no clinical abnormalities.