A 25-year-old female professional dancer presented to the sports medicine department due to increasing pain in the left iliac crest with radiation to the left leg. She initially noticed the pain after chiropractic treatment 6 months before (see timeline in Additional file ). Further medical history of the patient was unremarkable. After the clinical diagnosis of lumbar syndrome was established, the sports physician prescribed acupuncture and physiotherapy. Both did not ease the pain. Next, a swelling of the left hip region appeared. Ultrasound showed no signs of arthritis but raised suspicion of a soft tissue mass. The patient was then referred to the adult oncology department.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis revealed a large tumour of the left iliac bone with infiltration of periosteal muscles and soft tissue. Left-sided pubic bone, sacrum and sacroiliac joint were infiltrated . Skeletal scintigraphy revealed no further osseous lesions , computed tomography (CT) of chest and abdomen excluded metastases. A biopsy was performed, which resulted in diagnosis of OS, grade III of chondroblastic subtype. Despite recommendation for chemotherapy, the patient decided to perform a fasting cure and lost 6 kg weight.
A further MRI was done a couple of weeks later due to increasing, intolerable pain, despite treatment with opioids, cox-2-inhibitors, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and coanalgesics. Tumour size remained stable. The patient then decided to start chemotherapy according to recommendations of EURAMOS-1/COSS protocol in the paediatric oncology department.
Under chemotherapy the pain subsided within 2 months and the tumour size decreased without relevant side effects except for nausea. Due to her profession as a dancer, the patient refused to undergo local therapy by surgery or radiation and discontinued chemotherapy after 4 months. We discussed the very poor prognosis of OS without local therapy in detail with the patient.
Much to our surprise, we found no signs of tumour relapse or metastases within the next year. Imaging studies displayed a stable residual tumour mass of the left iliac bone with further decline of contrast enhancement and soft tissue portions .
Unfortunately, 16 months after the end of chemotherapy the patient first recognized a lump in her left breast. Clinical examination revealed enlarged lymph nodes (2 cm) of the left axilla. The patient refused mammography; ultrasound indicated possible breast cancer. A couple of weeks later, ultrasound-guided biopsy of the breast lump was performed resulting in the diagnosis of invasive ductal carcinoma (G2, B5b, ER/PR 0%, HER2/neu score 3, MIB-1 30%). Again, the patient declined biopsy of the lymph nodes. MRI of the chest revealed destructive carcinoma of the complete left mamma without signs of pulmonary metastases (TNM: cT2, cN1, cM0). Skeletal scintigraphy neither displayed activity of the pelvic OS nor of other bone lesions. Head MRI ruled out an initially suspected parietal metastasis with slightly increased tracer uptake . Ultrasound of the abdomen displayed a hypo-echogenic nodule of the liver.
Once again the patient refused any further treatment. Two months later, she was admitted to the gynaecologic department with severe headaches and intermittent visual field loss. The gynaecologists interpreted findings as migraine headaches due to spontaneous improvement of pain and unremarkable MRI of the head. A couple of days later, she presented to the emergency department with sudden deterioration of her general condition, dyspnoea and decreased oxygen saturation. A CT of chest and abdomen revealed diffuse pulmonary consolidations, pericardial effusion and several hypodense hepatic nodules consistent with disseminated end-stage breast cancer. Upon further deterioration, the patient and her family agreed to withhold invasive procedures and the patient soon died of respiratory failure.
After establishing the diagnosis of breast cancer, we performed genetics for Li-Fraumeni syndrome and confirmed the diagnosis (common TP53 mutation: DNA binding domain, c.733G > A, p.Gly254Ser, heterozygous). Family history of the patient was unremarkable regarding classical Li-Fraumeni criteria, the patient’s father died from a pulmonary tumour at old age.
To elucidate the very uncommon course of the OS without signs of vital tumour, despite absence of local therapy and incomplete chemotherapy, we performed array-comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) of the tumour material according to routine protocols . Table compares common CNA in OS with the individual CNA of our LFS patient.