A 46-year-old female patient was admitted to our department on December 12, 2019 due to the presence of abdominal and back pain for 2 d and aggravation of these symptoms for 1 d.
The patient had no obvious inducement for upper abdominal pain or back pain 2 d before admission. Her discomfort was mainly located in the middle and upper left abdomen, and she exhibited persistent, paroxysmal aggravation; no nausea and vomiting; and no fever and chills. At the outpatient department of our hospital one day prior, after first ruling out angina pectoris, the patient was sent to the Department of Cardiology, where cardiac enzyme analyses, electrocardiograms, and other tests were performed to rule out ischemic heart diseases; next, she went to the emergency department of our hospital to undergo laboratory analyses. Amylase levels were normal and routine blood tests showed normal white blood cells and a haemoglobin (Hb) level of 125 g/L. After symptomatic treatment, the patient’s abdominal pain worsened, and she was admitted to the Department of Gastroenterology.
The patient reported no history of chronic abdominal pain, upper abdominal murmur, or weight loss during the disease course. She reported a history of “arrhythmia” for 3 years, and no history of hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, etc.; additionally, she had no history of pancreatitis or abdominal trauma and no family history of genetic diseases.
N/A.
The patient’s body temperature was 36.8 °C, blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg (1 mmHg = 0.133 kPa), and heart rate was 100 beats/min. She had a face of acute ill, painful expression, clear consciousness, mild pallid eyelid conjunctiva, flat abdomen, tenderness and rebound pain throughout the abdomen, no obvious mass, and no muscle tension. No murmurs were heard in the upper abdomen on inhalation or exhalation.
The blood test showed that Hb was 88 g/L, liver and kidney function was normal, C-reactive protein was 12 mg/L, and blood and urinary amylase levels were normal.
Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed haematomas around the head of the pancreas and retroperitoneum. To further determine the cause of the haematoma, CT and CT angiography (CTA) examinations of the whole abdomen were performed, suggesting a superior mesenteric artery (SMA) mural thrombus , with stenosis of the lumen, local pancreaticoduodenal artery dilation, 1.2 cm wide diameter , uneven thickness , and a haematoma around the head of the pancreas and retroperitoneum. Moreover, an abnormal collateral vessel was formed between the gastroduodenal artery and the SMA. The preliminary diagnosis was “retroperitoneal haemorrhage, PDAA, and SMA mural thrombus”. The cause of bleeding was considered to be PDAA rupture. The blood examination showed an Hb level of 69 g/L, and the red blood cell suspension was used to correct anaemia. Because the patient was critically ill and our hospital has not yet performed coil vascular embolism and interventional therapy, surgical exploration was performed in combination with the above conditions.
After layer-by-layer laparotomy, the omentum and gastrocolic ligament were dissociated along the greater curvature of the stomach to expose the retroperitoneal hematoma and remove the hematoma adjacent to the duodenum and above the pancreas. The hepatoduodenal ligament was dissected and the gastroduodenal artery isolated. There was active bleeding approximately 1 cm below the branch of the gastroduodenal artery. PDAA rupture was ruled out due to the location of the bleeding. We read the enhanced CT and the CTA films in detail, and found that the initial segments of the celiac artery and SMA were narrow and that the celiac artery origin was V-shaped . In addition, abnormal collateral blood vessels were formed between the arteria gastroduodenalis and the SMA.