A 52-year-old male manifested mildly progressive fatigue in the muscles of mastication over 3 years, without diplopia, dysphagia, or limb weakness. The patient complained of fatigue when chewing hard food (beef jerky, dried sweet potatoes, pancakes, etc.), but not obvious when eating soft food (rice, noodles, etc.). He also felt easy to cramp in the muscles of the neck, abdomen, and limbs. During the 3 years, he felt the symptoms slightly aggravated. Additionally, the patient suffered from hypertension for 6 years and pre-excitation syndrome for 5 years and accepted surgery because of a kidney stone 8 years ago . A younger brother of the patient presented a postural tremor in his hands for 10 years.
Neurological examination revealed reduced strength of masticators after repeated movements. Weakness and spasms of facial muscles were present, and tongue wasting with fasciculations was observed (Video ). While the weakness, wasting, or fasciculations were not obvious in the limbs. The patient also showed slightly postural hand tremor, and ptosis in the right eyelid was observed. Muscle strength in his upper and lower limbs was 5/5 according to the Medical Research Council score, and the Quantitative Myasthenia Gravis score was 4 (3 in ptosis, 1 in facial muscles). Muscle reflexes and muscle tone were normal. Sensation and coordination were intact. There was no gynecomastia.
Routine laboratory tests showed a normal creatine kinase level but detected an elevated level of serum uric acid (501umol/L, normal range 208-428umol/L) and triglyceride (4.53mmol/L, normal range 0.56-1.70mmol/L). Thyroid function and sex hormones were normal. The lactic acid stress test was negative. Tests of AchR antibody (ELISA), MUSK antibody (CBA), LRP4 antibody (ELISA), and RyR antibody (ELISA) were normal, while the test of titin antibody (ELISA) was positive (1.09 OD). The electrocardiogram showed a WPW pattern ECG with a heart rate of 80 bpm , but the patient did not manifest any cardiological symptoms such as palpitation. CT scans of the lung and thymus gland were normal. Brain MRI showed supratentorial multiple ischemic changes.
Nerve conduction studies showed decreased action potentials in the right median, ulnar and bilateral sural sensory nerves, and the left peroneal compound muscle action potential was lower in amplitude than the right side. Both motor and sensory nerve conduction velocities were normal. Needle electromyographic studies showed high-amplitude, long-duration motor unit potentials in a diffuse distribution of limbs, tongue, rectus abdominis, paravertebral, and sternocleidomastoideus muscles, and showed simple phases in all tested muscles. Fibrillation and positive sharp waves were only observed in the tongue muscle. The above results revealed chronic neurogenic damage with both motor and sensory involvement. In addition, the 3-Hz RNS showed a decremental response in bilateral orbicularis oculi (14.9% on the right side and 12% on the left side) but did not detect a decremental response in trapezius or abductor digiti minimi, and no significant decremental or incremental response to 30-Hz RNS was noted.
After informed consent, a muscle biopsy was performed on his left biceps brachii, and the muscle pathology showed a grouping muscle fibers, indicating chronic neurogenic damage . Genomic DNA was obtained from the peripheral blood leukocytes. The genetic analysis was performed using polymerase chain reaction and fragment length analysis, which revealed an increased number (39 repeats) of tandem CAG repeats in the AR gene confirming the diagnosis of SBMA . The same genetic analysis result was also detected in his brother. The patient felt the fatigue symptom significantly improved after oral pyridostigmine bromide treatment (30 mg, Tid), but the symptoms keep progressing in the subsequent follow-up process.