In September 2014, an 18-year-old, non-smoking male was diagnosed with an open fracture of the right tibia, Gustilo’s classification grade IIIB following a traffic accident. The patient weighed 65 kg. Emergency debridement was performed at the local hospital following injury . The fracture and wound had not healed 3 months after injury. Copious pus was drained and the patient was transferred The Second People’s Hospital of Yunnan for further treatment.
The patient was admitted to The Second People’s Hospital of Yunnan 97 days after the injury. A physical examination of the patient’s right calf revealed a soft tissue defect and exposed tibia. A 4 × 10 cm incision was observed on the anterior medial side of the upper calf and a 3 × 12 cm-sized wound was seen on the anterior medial side of the lower leg. Significant foot drop was observed. The patient experienced hypoesthesia on the lateral side of right calf and the dorsal surface of the foot; however, normal sensation was felt on the plantar surface of the foot and the dorsalis pedis artery appeared normal. The range of motion of the knee was 0–80°, and ankle extension and flexion were 10 and 20°, respectively. Level III myodynamia was observed in the pretibial muscle and the triceps surae .
Following discussion with the patient, a limb salvage protocol was adopted in favor of amputation. The treatment plan consisted of two stages. The first step was to treat the infection by performing repeated debridement, replacing the external fixation, vacuum sealing drainage (VSD) and local and systemic application of antibiotics. In the second stage, the bone transport technique was used to repair the bone defect, and rehabilitation exercise was performed to restore the function of the affected limb as much as possible. The patient was informed about the treatment plan and the associated risks. A series of examinations were performed to assess the tibial infection. An X-ray revealed necrosis and hyperplasia in the middle of tibia . Single-photon emission computed tomography showed radionucleotide accumulation in the midtibial region and computed tomography angiography confirmed that the anterior and posterior tibial arteries were normal. Laboratory investigations were as follows: i) C-reactive protein, 21.6 mg/l: ii) erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 35 mm/h; iii) white blood cell count, 16.47 × 109/l; and iv) Neutrophil percentage, 84.51[50–70]. The final diagnosis was an infected right tibial nonunion with a soft tissue defect.
Debridement to completely remove the infected and devitalized bone, inflammatory and scar tissue was performed on the second day after admission . The debrided bone was replaced with a three-segment monolateral external fixator (Third Medical Instrument Company; Fig. ) followed by the implantation of vancomycin-impregnated cement beads (4 g vancomycin and 80 g cement) in the bone defects . The wound was partially closed and the dressing was changed regularly following surgery. The second debridement was performed 5 days after the initial procedure and involved the removal of inflammatory tissue and the antibiotic beads. VSD was used to cover the wound and to promote the growth of granulation tissue while simultaneously draining pus. The third debridement was performed 5 days after the second procedure, and involved the removal of the VSD. The wound appeared clean and was subsequently sutured. At this point, the bone defect measured 25 cm in length. Antibiotic sensitivity testing was performed following each of the three debridement procedures and Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Enterococcus faecalis were identified. Vancomycin and meropenem through the veins were used to treat the infection. Wound healing and infection control marked the end of the first stage of the treatment plan.
The repair of the massive bone defect posed the biggest challenge during the second stage of the treatment plan. As bone transfer technology has a number of advantages, this technique was applied. Wound healing and infection control were assessed through relevant indicators and when satisfactory, a single osteotomy was performed 2 cm away from the ankle joint surface . Bone transport was initiated 1 week later at a rate of 1 mm per day (0.25 mm four times a day). The quality of the newly formed bone was assessed 2, 4 and 6 months after osteotomy using X-rays , which revealed satisfactory osteogenesis was occurring. A total of 15 months after osteotomy, the distracted bone had reached docking site, which resulted in skin invagination and axis deviation . The embedded soft tissue was removed and the axis was adjusted. To promote docking site union, the external fixation was loosened and increasing load across the site of osteogenesis were gradually added. The total length of transport was 24.5 cm. After 40 months, union was achieved and the consolidation of the newly formed bone was complete . The patient exhibited the following range of motion: i) Knee extension, 0°; ii) knee flexion, 110°; iii) ankle extension, 10°; and iv) knee flexion, 10° . A knee valgus deformity angle of 4° and a 10 mm shortening of the tibia were observed. The bone healing index was 1.6 months/cm. When the bone and soft tissue wound have healed, the patient was able to walk painlessly without ambulatory assistive devices and resumed daily activities successfully. The ASAMI was used to assess the limb function and bone healing, and revealed a good functional and bone repair result. Similarly, the KSS of functional outcome yielded good result and the LEFS was 65.
Eighteen months after the bone and soft tissue wound have healed, we performed a follow-up evaluation with Short Form-36 (SF-36) score and LEFS (Additional files , and ). The SF-36 score was 86, and the LEFS was 70. The overall treatment progress is briefly presented in Table .