A19-year-old male with sudden chest discomfort was admitted to the hospital. He had no past medical history. He did not have bloody stools or symptoms of upper respiratory infection before the onset of chest discomfort. He complained of general fatigue and shortness of breath upon exertion. Physiological examination findings were not noteworthy; no skin lesions were noted, blood pressure was 104/54 mmHg, heart rate was 67 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation was 99% on room air. Careful follow-up was performed without inotropic therapy. The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with a right bundle branch block, ST segment elevation in II, III, aVF, V4, V5, and V6, and abnormal Q waves in the same leads . Peripheral blood tests revealed remarkably elevated troponin T and creatinine kinase levels . Echocardiography demonstrated moderate left ventricular hypertrophy accompanied by oedema and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 42% with patchy areas of reduced wall motion. Coronary angiography did not reveal significant stenosis (see , ). Patchy areas of reduced wall motion were demonstrated by LV angiography (see , and ). Endomyocardial biopsy from the right ventricular septum showed no pathological findings that were consistent with myocarditis . Subsequent tests reported high levels of soluble interleukin-2 receptor and lysozyme . Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) with contrast revealed myocardial late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) predominantly on the epicardial side of the posterolateral wall . Fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) revealed fluorodeoxyglucose accumulation in the same regions as LGE detected with CMR and in the transverse colon and sigmoid colon ( and ), but there was no abnormal accumulation in the respiratory tracts. Faecal occult blood was positive, so colonoscopy was performed. Inflammatory changes were observed in the transverse colon . Epithelioid granulomas were found in a biopsy specimen from the transverse colon .
Based on these findings, we made a clinical diagnosis of active CS. We administered oral prednisolone (30 mg/day). The dose of prednisolone was decreased by 5 mg each month. At 6-month follow-up, LVEF (57%), and follow-up colonoscopy revealed significant resolution of inflammation. When PET was performed 1 year later, there was still strong accumulation of FDG in the heart ( and ). After the examination, the patient experienced sudden runs of sustained ventricular tachycardia with loss of consciousness at rest. He was admitted to our hospital again. We performed implantable cardioverter-defibrillator placement. At 4 months after the addition of methotrexate (8 mg/week), there was markedly less cardiac accumulation of FDG ( and ). Eight months have passed since the addition of methotrexate, there is no episode of heart failure admission nor shock therapy.