A 20-year-old healthy Japanese woman had a 2-day history of high fever and consulted the emergency room in Kawasaki Medical School. There was no significant past medical history except for mycoplasma pneumonia at the ages of 1 and 18. She had sex for the first time 6 months earlier. She had erythema in the pharynx and lymph node enlargement at the posterior cervical and left axillary region, but there were no findings on physical and neurological examination. Her chest sounds were clear, and she had no cough. The tips of the liver and spleen were not palpable. Her vital signs were as follows: heart rate 108 beats/minute, blood pressure 101/58 mmHg, and temperature 38.9°C. Table shows the laboratory data on admission. Leukocytopenia and increased C-reactive protein (CRP) were observed: white blood cell (WBC) count, 1710 /μL (neutrophils 76.0%; monocytes 5.0%; lymphocytes 18.0%; atypical lymphocytes 1.0%); CRP, 3.92 mg/dl. She had mild liver dysfunction: γ-GTP, 78 U/L; alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 276 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 30 U/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 28 U/L. Her chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) on admission revealed no remarkable change including pneumonia, and her abdominal CT revealed slight hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. Neither influenza A nor B antigens were detected, and Mycoplasma pneumonia antigen was not detected. Her hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C antibody tests were negative. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antigen/antibody test was negative (cutoff index <0.3). Her Treponema pallidum hemagglutination (TPHA) was negative. Pathogenic bacteria were not detected, although small amounts of Corynebacterium sp. and Gram-positive cocci were detected in urine culture. We started antibiotic therapy (500 mg/day of levofloxacin), because we failed to rule out a bacterial infection due to an elevated CRP level. She was suspected of having a bladder infection by her previous doctor, and in fact she had bacteriuria. Her virus antibodies were as follows: EBV (EBV) anti-viral capsid antigen (VCA) immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody, 0.2 (−) (fluorescent antibody method [FA], SRL Inc., Tokyo); EBV anti-VCA immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody, 0.2 (−) (FA, SRL Inc., Tokyo); EBV anti-EBV nuclear antigen (EBNA) Immunoglobulin (Ig) G antibody, 0.1 (−) (FA, SRL Inc., Tokyo); CMV IgM antibody, 3.89 (+) (enzyme immunoassay (EIA), SRL Inc., Tokyo); CMV IgG antibody, 24.0 (+) (EIA, SRL Inc., Tokyo). Based on these findings, we finally arrived at a diagnosis of primary CMV infection. Four days later, her temperature was reduced to under 37°C, and about 1 week later, her clinical symptoms disappeared and laboratory data including leukocytopenia and liver dysfunction were improved . She was discharged 10 days after admission. She did not experience another abnormal physical condition after discharge, but we continued to observe her condition on an outpatient basis. Therefore, we checked her virus antibodies. Her CMV IgM antibody became negative about 3 months later, and we confirmed that her CMV infection was a prior infection pattern.
About 5 months later, she again experienced fever and lymph node enlargement at the posterior cervical region and visited our emergency room. She had no symptoms other than high fever and lymph node enlargement, and there were no findings on physical or neurological examination. Her vital signs were as follows: heart rate 85 beats/minute, blood pressure 98/56 mmHg, and temperature 38.9°C. Table shows the laboratory data at that time. Atypical lymphocytes were detected and the CRP level was slightly increased: WBC count, 6860/μL (neutrophils 19.0%; monocytes 6.0%; lymphocytes 73.0%; atypical lymphocytes 2.0%); CRP, 0.57 mg/dl. Furthermore, she had severe liver dysfunction: γ-GTP, 291 U/L; ALP, 1060 U/L; AST, 379 U/L; ALT 381 U/L. We thought that it would be better to hospitalize her and start drip infusion of monoammonium glycyrrhizinate glycine for severe liver dysfunction, but she did not agree to the hospitalization. Therefore, instead we started 60 mL/day of monoammonium glycyrrhizinate glycine on an outpatient basis. At that time, we suspected viral infection and thus we did not administer antibiotics. She visited our office for drip infusion of monoammonium glycyrrhizinate glycine every day, and about 5 days later the high fever disappeared. About 1 week later, her clinical symptoms and laboratory data were improved and we stopped the therapy with monoammonium glycyrrhizinate glycine. At that time, her EBV antibodies were as follows: EBV anti-VCA IgM antibody, 1.7 (+); EBV anti-VCA IgG antibody, 5.7 (+); EBV anti-EBNA IgG antibody, 0.1 (−). Therefore, we finally diagnosed her condition as primary EBV infection.
In addition, we checked the antibodies for both CMV and EBV infection several times in this patient, and Table shows the time course for these antibodies. Such time course clearly shows that this patient had primary EBV infection shortly after primary CMV infection.