An 11-year-old male child presented to the Department of Oral Medicine and Radiology with a rapidly enlarging swelling on left lower jaw since one month. There was no history of trauma or pain associated with the swelling. Also, no secondary or sensory changes could be elucidated. His past dental/medical history was unremarkable.
The extraoral examination revealed facial asymmetry due to a diffuse swelling on the left side of the face, which extended superoinferiorly from infraorbital margin to the lower border of the mandible measuring approximately 6 × 5 cm in its greatest dimensions. The anteroposterior extent of the swelling was from the corner of the mouth till the pinna of the ear . The skin over the swelling appeared to be normal with uniformly blending borders. Swelling was firm-to-hard in consistency and was non-tender on palpation. No discontinuity was noted in the lower border of the mandible. There was neither local rise in temperature over the swelling nor fixity to the underlying structures. Lymph node examination revealed solitary, enlarged, unilateral, fixed, firm to hard left submandibular lymph node.
The intraoral examination disclosed a large mass extending from the distal of left second premolar to the retro molar area expanding both buccally and lingually. The swelling was approximately 5 × 4.5 cm in size, well defined, and irregular in shape with a rough lobulated surface. The mucosa over the swelling appeared slightly ulcerated .
On palpation, the inspectory findings were confirmed. The swelling was nontender and variable in consistency ranging from soft to firm, nonfluctuant, nonreducible, compressible, and non-pulsatile. The teeth in the affected area were not sensitive to percussion and grade 1 mobility could be demonstrated in 37.
The radiographic examination of the mandible revealed ill-defined, osteolytic, mixed, radiolucent, and radiopaque lesion involving premolar–molar region of left side body of mandible, extending from distal of erupting 34 to angle of the mandible on panoramic radiograph. A normal trabecular pattern was disrupted in the affected area, simulating moth-eaten appearance. The lamina dura was found to be discontinuous in the involved teeth. A considerable root resorption was seen in 73, 74, 75. Severe crestal and inter-dental bone loss in relation to 36 and 37 was evident .
As a part of regular investigations of maxillofacial swellings, the patient was subjected to ultrasonography to check the vascularity and nature of the lesion. The ultrasonographic findings revealed an isodense large soft tissue mass in the involved area measuring approximately 56 × 56 mm in size. Ultrasonography also showed erosion and periosteal reaction of mandible. The mass was associated with increased vasculitis with arterial flow on color Doppler ultrasonography . Enlarged submandibular lymph nodes were also observed.
In order to precisely know the location, anatomical relation of the tumor, its effect on surrounding structures, and any evident metastases, computed tomography (CT) was advised. CT sections showed an ill-defined, expansile, osteolytic lesion in the body of the mandible on left side with a significant enhancing soft tissue matrix. Multiple irregular patchy radiolucent areas mimicking moth-eaten appearance were noted in the internal structure. Erosion, irregular thinning and discontinuity of both buccal and lingual cortex on CT images were evident. The characteristic sun ray pattern or the radiating spicules were noticed on lingual cortex. No considerable cortical expansion was observed .
Based on the clinical and radiological appearance, a provisional diagnosis of malignancy of left body of the mandible was given. A complete hemogram was performed, which showed anemia, leukocytosis, and increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate. An increase in the serum levels of alkaline phosphatase and C-reactive proteins was also observed.
Fine needle aspiration cytology of the lesion showed a highly cellular smear with tumor cells arranged in groups of loosely cohesive cell as well as scattered singly. Individual cells were small, dark having round-to-ovoid nuclei, dark chromatin, and scanty cytoplasm. Few cells were large with moderate cytoplasm, round-to-ovoid nuclei, and granular chromatin. The background show formed elements of blood suggestive of small round cell tumor. We performed incisional biopsy of the pathology under local anesthesia to establish a definitive diagnosis.
Confirmatory diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma was made after histopathological evaluation of biopsy specimens. The features observed during microscopic examination were sheets of uniform small round cells arranged in diffuse pattern with indistinct outline, scanty cytoplasm, well-defined nuclear outline with round-to-oval nucleus, and inconspicuous nucleoli. Mitotic figures were not prominent .
The standard treatment options for localized ES are surgical excision, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, or combination of all. The patient was referred to regional cancer centre where surgery for the tumor resection was performed under general anesthesia. The surgical specimen consisted of a portion of the mandible and the teeth involved in the tumor. In this case, patient underwent adjuvant chemotherapy treatment with vincristine, and cyclophosphamide at the Regional Cancer Centre.