A 48-year-old multiparous woman was admitted to our hospital's gynecology ward with a history of heavy menstrual bleeding and pelvic pain. She had undergone an abdominal myomectomy in 2006, a caesarean section in 2010 and hypertension under treatment. Physical examination revealed an enlarged uterus. Subsequent pelvic ultrasound showed markedly lobular and enlarged uterus containing intramural uterine leiomyomas, the two largest measuring respectively 6.4 × 5.4 cm, and 4.2 × 4.8 cm. Blood testing found a haemoglobin level of 7.4 g/dl although the patient's vital signs were stable.
After discussing the various treatment options, the patient consented to hysterectomy by laparotomy. Intraoperative examination showed severe adhesions fusing the bladder to the uterus and the uterus to the small bowel. After adhesiolysis, intra-abdominal visualization revealed an enlarged uterus containing two fundal intramural myomas as diagnosed by ultrasound. The adnexa on both sides were normal and there were no fluid collections or other significant findings suggestive of malignancy throughout the abdomen. Due to the many difficulties associated with the total hysterectomy, including obesity, anaemia, a large uterus and adhesions from previous operations, a subtotal hysterectomy was decided in order to complete the procedure safely. The patient was discharged a few days after surgery without any complications.
Macroscopic examination revealed a bosselated, large uterus with multiple leiomyomas. Microscopic examination showed tumors with features of conventional leiomyoma and a mesenchymal tumor proliferation with a fasciculate architecture composed of fusiform tumorous cells with STUMP. It showed cell necrosis with atypical cells and karyorrhexis; however, there was no evidence of a mitotic activity . On immunohistochemical analysis, the smooth muscle cells expressed AML (, A), P53 wild-type (, A) and desmin (, B). The Ki-67 proliferation index was low (<1 %) (, B).
For optimal oncological care, our case was discussed in a multidisciplinary team meeting (MDTM). The consensus was that no adjuvant therapy would be offered considering the lack of benefit of adjuvant therapy in the current literature. However, it was recommended to keep the patient in close follow-up, every six months for five years, by a gynaecologic oncologist, including clinical and computed tomography (CT) scan. A 6-month follow-up thoraco-abdomino-pelvic CT scan revealed no evidence of local recurrence or distant metastasis.