A 34-year-old woman, gravida 2, para 1, was transferred to Shengjing hospital of China Medical University at 33 weeks of gestation. At 24 weeks of pregnancy, the patient was informed that she was pregnant with a boy during an ultrasound examination at the district hospital. However, during the 32-week ultrasound examination, the doctor found abnormalities in the perineum of the fetus. A detailed ultrasound examination was performed at 33 weeks in Shengjing hospital, and a perineal scan revealed that the fetus was female, not male. Two-dimensional ultrasound showed a hyperechoic mass (1.7 × 1.2 cm) resembling a scrotum in the perineum of the fetus . The pedicle connected the mass to fetal skin around anus. Dynamic observation revealed another small hyperechoic mass (0.8 × 0.7 cm) protruding from the fetal anus, connecting to the other end of the pedicle. The masses floated in the amniotic fluid with no obvious blood flow on color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI). Three-dimensional ultrasound showed scrotum-like masses and their relationship with other organs . The mother underwent amniocentesis, and no abnormalities were found on a comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) array.
A female neonate was delivered, weighing 3,240 g at GA 40 + 2 weeks. Her Apgar scores were 10 and 10 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. Perineal examination revealed two soft spherical masses protruding from the patient's anus and connected by a pedicle. The masses were 2.5 × 1.5 cm and 1.4 × 0.7 cm in size . The neonate underwent an abdominal ultrasound examination, and no other abnormalities were found. We also performed a postnatal ultrasound on the perineal masses. Sonography showed two well-defined hyperechoic masses connected by a pedicle, and CDFI detected blood flow signals in the masses. The results of the sacrococcygeal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were normal. Surgery was performed under general anesthesia 1 day after birth. The masses were originated from the peri-anal skin at 4:00 in lithotomy position, and the anal sphincter was not involved. Histopathological examination of the masses suggested hamartomas composed of hyperplastic lymph vessels and adipose tissues . After the masses were removed, a cavity was discovered along the posterior rectal wall . The contrast agent showed an irregular cystic mass connected to the posterior wall of the rectum, and rectal duplication was suspected . An en bloc excision of the cystic mass and the posterior wall of the rectum was performed. Rectal duplication was confirmed by histopathological examination. At the time of writing this report, the patient was 2.5 years old, and recovered well after surgery without other abnormalities.