A 37-year-old female presented with bilateral mandibular swellings with associated progressive facial asymmetry for 10 years. The swellings gradually increased in size expanding the buccal cortex. She had mild difficulty in mouth opening while movement of temporomandibular joints was normal. The patient developed pain on the posterior aspect of right mandible for one and a half years which became intense with time. There was no history of trauma. Clinical examination revealed a well-demarcated expansile bony swelling in the left lower tooth bearing region extending from the left second premolar to right mandibular canine anteriorly. The swelling was firm and tender with pinkish appearance of mucosa. A clinical diagnosis of ossifying fibroma was considered. Another well-defined painful swelling was present in right posterior premolar area. Orthopantomogram revealed a 7 × 5.5 cm well-defined, expansive radiolucent mass with scattered radiodense calcified areas involving the roots of the first and second left premolars, right and left canines, and right and left central and lateral incisors. The right posterior mandible area showed a 2.5 × 2 cm well-defined radiopaque swelling distorting roots of the second and third molars. There was a visible thin peripheral radiolucent zone surrounding the radiodense area resulting in obliteration and deviation of the roots .
The patient underwent complete surgical excision with piecemeal resection of both lesions at a peripheral hospital, and the two specimens were sent to our center for processing and primary diagnosis. The larger specimen was labelled as “Left mandibular swelling” and the smaller was labelled as “Right mandibular growth”. The larger specimen contained two grey white soft to firm, multinodular tissue pieces, that measured 7 × 5.5 × 2.5 cm in aggregate. The cut surface was tan-white, lobulated and gritty. The smaller was comprised of three bony hard, tan-white tissue pieces that collectively measured 2.5 × 2 cm.
Microscopy of the larger specimen demonstrated a fibro-osseous lesion composed of hypercellular fibroblastic stroma with scattered calcified structures. The stromal cells had hyperchromatic nuclei and moderate eosinophilic cytoplasm. No significant atypia or mitosis was present. The calcified material was comprised of variable proportion of basophilic cementum-like tissue and osteoid bone. Curvilinear woven and lamellar bony trabeculae rimmed by osteoblasts were seen . Histological examination of the smaller specimen revealed a lesion composed of interconnecting thick trabeculae of cementum-like material rimmed by plump cementoblasts in a loose fibrovascular stroma. There was no atypia or pleomorphism .
Based on all these features, the larger specimen was diagnosed as COF and the smaller specimen as CB. Additional surgical intervention was not required, and it took six months for the patient to regain complete jaw movements. No adjuvant therapy was given. Recurrence was not observed after a follow up of three years. The patient’s consent was obtained for publication. Ethic Review Committee (ERC) exemption was not sought as patient identification was not disclosed in the manuscript.