A 62-year-old woman presented to our emergency department with progressive shortness of breath and cough for 3 days. Initial physical examination revealed that the patient was tachypneic, and vital signs were temperature 37.7° C, heart rate 110 beats per minute, blood pressure 100/55 mm Hg, and oxygen saturation 85% on room air. Chest auscultation revealed clear lung fields and a pansystolic murmur over the right lower parasternal area. Her history was significant for end-stage renal disease managed with regular haemodialysis by a right-sided double-lumen tunnelled catheter. At this time, the differential diagnosis included pulmonary embolism, fluid overload, and SARS-CoV2 infection.
Computed tomography pulmonary angiography was performed and revealed bilateral segmental and subsegmental pulmonary embolism . Polymerase chain reaction testing for SARS-CoV2 was negative. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit, and intravenous heparin infusion 18 U/kg/h was initiated and up titrated till 28 U/kg/h to achieve APTT of 80 ms. She subsequently stabilized. However, 2 days later, she suddenly developed hypotension with blood pressure of 70/40 mm Hg.
Transthoracic Echocardiography (TTE) revealed a dilated right-side, significant tricuspid regurgitation, pulmonary artery systolic pressure was 56 mmHg with normal aortic valve morphology and flow. Electrocardiography showed ST-segment elevation in the inferolateral leads . Laboratory studies showed a high-sensitive cardiac troponin-T values that increased from 5000 ng/mL to 21 957 ng/mL (reference range: 0–18 ng/mL). The patient was immediately moved to the catheterization laboratory for coronary angiography, which revealed total occlusion of the posterior descending artery. Multiple attempts for aspiration and balloon inflation to restore the flow failed. The patient then was relocated to the ICU.
Two days later, the patient suddenly developed complete heart block, which required temporary pacemaker insertion. In addition, she became feverish with a temperature of 38.9° C, and pus oozing from the haemodialysis catheter site was observed. Line sepsis was diagnosed, and the catheter was removed with a large amount of pus. Subsequent blood culture and catheter tip culture revealed Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
Transesophageal echocardiography (TOE) was performed and revealed aortic valve vegetations with acute severe aortic regurgitation, right atrial appendage mass, and patent foramen ovale. A multidisciplinary team meeting was urgently done, and the decisions were immediate initiation of antibiotics and urgent preparation for surgery. Intravenous vancomycin 30 mg/kg/d in three doses was initiated.
After 90 min, the patient developed a disturbed level of consciousness and resistant shock. She was mechanically ventilated, intravenous inotropes were increased to the maximum dose and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation system was inserted. The patient continued to rapidly deteriorate, and then died.