The patient is a 24-year-old male with no relevant history, except for an appendectomy performed 12 days prior to admission. The patient reported that he had a two-day course of evolution until surgical treatment. He had nausea, vomiting and intense pain in the right iliac fossa, without fever. The examinations of that occasion revealed a mild leukocytosis of 13,200 mm3 and platelets of 64,000 mm3 as the only alterations. An appendectomy was performed, finding gangrenous appendicitis, without intra-abdominal collections. After the surgery, good evolution was observed, so he was discharged on the second day of hospital stay, prescribing cefuroxima (1 g) from admission until five days after discharge.

On his second admission, the patient presented with a fever of three previous days, not quantified, without predominance of time, self-limited. Subsequently, ictric skin and sclera dye was added, in addition to coluria. He did not manifest any pain, fever or others. In his initial laboratories, leukocytes of 8600/µl, platelets of 32,000/l, total bilirubin of 4.7 mg/dL, direct bilirubin of 3.9 mg/dL, TGP of 129 U/I, TGO of 63 U/I, alkaline phosphatase of 288 U/l and lipase of 744 U/l were observed.

Empirical treatment was initiated with piperacillin/tazobactam and with noreprinephrine, due to low blood pressure. An ultrasound was performed, which showed a tubular portal vein of 10 mm in diameter, with hypoechoic content and flow present. A blood culture was performed, with no bacterial development. Subsequently, an intravenous contrast medium tomography was performed, which revealed the presence of a thrombus in the portal vein and splenomesaraic trunk. After six days of established management, leukocytes of 7500/µl, platelets of 128,000/l, total bilirubin of 1.0 mg/dL, direct bilirubin of 0.6 mg/dL, ALT of 34 U/I, AST of 37 U/I and alkaline phosphatase of 189 U/l were observed. During the hospital stay, clinical improvement was observed, with normal blood pressure after the cessation of norepinephrine. The antibiotic was maintained for a week and he was discharged with rivaroxabán, 20 mg daily for three months, on the recommendation of the haematology department. The three-month review did not show any clinical alteration, in addition to normal or negative immunological profile and determination of protein C, S and antithrombin III.
