The patient in this fatal case was a 2-year-old girl who was born full-term and had developed normally. She had no medical history of asthma or pneumonia and no familial history of immunodeficiency. She had no brothers or sisters.

The patient was admitted to the hospital due to 3 days of fever and 15 min of respiratory and cardiac arrest. The symptoms started on 10 November (3 days before admission), with a fever (up to 39.8 °C) but no chills, rash or convulsions. Ibuprofen was given orally. The body temperature decreased for 4 to 5 h but then climbed to 40.3 °C. Shortness of breath accompanied the fever, and the body temperature did not decrease obviously after the oral administration of ibuprofen. Wheezing caused by the retention of phlegm in the throat and a single paroxysmal cough occurred. The patient occasionally coughed up a small amount of yellow phlegm and had a slightly runny nose. She had no asthma, breathing difficulty or hemoptysis; she had lethargy and a poor appetite but no vomiting or diarrhea. On 11 November (2 days before admission), the patient still had a high fever, and her body temperature fluctuated around approximately 40 °C. The patient’s body temperature did not obviously decrease after she was given oral ibuprofen and acetaminophen alternately. Acute infection was considered from then on. The patient received an intravenous infusion of 0.14 g Zithromax and 120 mg rographolide as well as aerosol inhalation of 2 mg budesonide, but her fever persisted, and her body temperature rose to a peak of 40 °C. On 12 November (1 day before admission), the patient still had a persistent fever and wheezing due to the retention of phlegm in her throat. She had shortness of breath, a light cough, and a drooping spirit, accompanied by a rash on the torso and limbs. Her appetite was slightly improved, and she had no vomiting or convulsions. On 13 November, the patient had sudden respiratory and cardiac arrest 3 h before admission. She was immediately and continuously treated with cardiopulmonary resuscitation by physicians and the intravenous injection of adrenaline (4 times). She was treated with trachea cannula and mechanical ventilation, and her heart beat recovered approximately 15 min later, but the patient remained in a deep comatose state with no spontaneous breathing. Then, the patient was transferred to our hospital and immediately underwent electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring. Bloody fluid was visible in the indwelling gastrointestinal decompression tube, and the blood-gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis. The patient was treated with sodium bicarbonate to correct the acidosis. She was diagnosed with an acute CNS infection and brain hernia. After cardiopulmonary resuscitation, she was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU). The head CT scan showed extensive brain swelling, decreased brain parenchymal density, narrowed cerebral ventricles and cisterns. These findings prompted a diagnosis of extensive brain edema and hernia. The chest posteroanterior radiograph showed fuzzy, coarse bilateral lung markings, visible small patchy shadows in the right inferior lung and a clear pulmonary hilus. These findings were diagnosed as pneumonia. Routine blood examination results suggested the presence of a bacterial infection; thus, the patient was treated with vancomycin and meropenem to control an infection. After that, immunoglobulin (1 g/kg) was administered for immune support. The patient was still in a deep coma state, and light reflexes of both pupils were absent. The patient’s spontaneous breathing was weak and irregular, and she had no response to painful stimulation. Compared with earlier, her rash was reduced, and the pulmonary lesions shown on the chest posteroanterior radiograph were slightly absorbed. Immunoglobulin (1 g/kg) was continuously administered to neutralize pathogens. On 15 November (3 days after admission), transcranial Doppler ultrasound assessment showed that the patient’s anterior and posterior cerebral circulation corresponded to the diagnostic criteria for brain death. On 17 November (5 days after admission), various organ functions failed, and the patient could not tolerate a spontaneous breathing test. Her guardian chose to quit treatment, and the patient died.

Laboratory diagnosis
Viral antigen detection based on both an immunofluorescence assay and the Luminex xTAG respiratory viral panel assay was positive for RSV in the patient’s nasopharyngeal aspirates (which were collected on 14 Nov, the 5th day of disease onset and the 2nd day of admission) and negative for adenovirus, influenza A and B viruses, parainfluenza virus 1–4, human metapneumovirus, enteroviruses and rhinoviruses, human coronavirus HKU1, 229E, NL63 and OC43, and human bocavirus. Because the patient’s guardian refused to consent to lumbar puncture, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was not available for the detection of CNS infection.

The blood biochemistry results are summarized. The amounts of red blood cells (RBCs), hemoglobin, and platelets continuously decreased after the onset of symptoms. Extremely high levels of C-reactive protein from the third day (36–104 mg/L) suggested viral or bacterial infection; however, bacterial cultures of blood specimens yielded negative results.


The percentage of T lymphocytes was 46.6%, of which helper T cells and suppressor T cells accounted for 29.6 and 13.2%, respectively. The ratio of CD4/CD8 was 2.2. The proportions of B lymphocytes and NK cells were 45.6 and 3%, respectively. All these immunological indexes indicated dysfunction of the patient’s immune system.

Metagenomic and viral molecular analysis
Oral swab, nasopharyngeal aspirate, and serum specimens collected on 14 Nov (the 5th day of disease onset and the 2nd day of admission) were subjected to multiplex metagenomic analyses using an NGS platform. The nucleic acid library was constructed as previously described. The amplified nucleic acid libraries were then analyzed using an Illumina HiSeq 4000 sequencer for a single read of 126 bp. The raw sequence reads were filtered using previously described criteria to obtain valid sequences.

When bacteriophages, plant-origin sequences resulting from food debris in the oral cavity, and contamination from the reagents used in the sample processing step (murine leukemia virus (MLV), for example) were excluded, only human RSV (based on the NCBI taxonomy database) was identified, with at least one specific sequence from the oral swab (2137 reads) and the nasopharyngeal aspirate (146 reads). No virus-related sequences were detected in the serum specimen. Meanwhile, large numbers of sequence reads related to bacteria, including Streptococcus mitis, Streptococcus parasanguinis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus salivarius, Streptococcus infantis, Streptococcus suis, Neisseria meningitidis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Haemophilus sputorum, Haemophilus parainfluenzae, Enterococcus cecorum, and other conditioned pathogenic bacteria were also detected in the oral swab, nasopharyngeal aspirate, or/and serum specimens. However, although the metagenomic analysis showed sequence reads assigned to Kingdom Bacteria, the bacterial culture of the blood specimens yielded negative results.



Based on the random distribution of reads of the RSV virus genome, the complete length of the genome was obtained using NGS methods and gap amplification. This RSV strain was subtyped as RSVB; it was found to cluster in the BA genotype and had the signature 60-bp duplication in the G gene. The newly identified virus was named RSVB/BCH-Y/2016, and the full genome sequence was deposited in GenBank under accession number KY924878. The phylogenetic analysis was conducted with representative sequences from nearly all RSVB subgroups (BA1–10, GB1–4, SAB1–4, URU1–2) from GenBank; RSVB/BCH-Y/2016 belonged to BA9 subgroup. The nucleotide homology comparisons revealed that the G gene of this strain was most closely related (share 98.82% homology) to strain RSVB/GZ/13–730, which was isolated from a child in Guangzhou, China, in 2013. For the six most important antigenic sites (Ø, I, II, IV, V, VI) in the fusion protein for drug or vaccine (such as palivizumab) targeting, no mutation was found in RSVB/BCH-Y/2016.