A 62-year-old male presented to an outpatient ophthalmologist with a 5-day history of progressive binocular diplopia and was referred to our institution. On presentation, neurologic and ophthalmologic examination showed a right pupil-involving partial third nerve palsy with no other abnormal findings. Routine brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and time-of-flight MR angiography (MRA) demonstrated an AVM located in the right frontal operculum extending to the anterior insula with venous drainage into the right basal vein of Rosenthal. There was no subarachnoid or intraparenchymal hemorrhage to suggest AVM rupture. A diagnostic cerebral angiogram was performed next and demonstrated a 1.9 cm × 2.2 cm AVM fed by the right middle and accessory meningeal and sphenopalatine arteries and opercular branches of the middle cerebral artery (MCA). The venous drainage followed a deep pattern into a dilated and tortuous right basal vein of Rosenthal to the vein of Galen and ultimately into the straight sinus . The patient underwent staged embolizations of the feeding pedicles using Onyx-18 embolic material (Medtronic, Minneapolis, USA) to facilitate planned surgical resection. In the first stage, superselective catheterization of the right middle meningeal, accessory meningeal, and sphenopalatine arteries was performed using a Marathon microcatheter (Medtronic, Minneapolis, USA) and a Synchro 10 microwire (Stryker, Kalamazoo, USA) . In the second stage, the next day, the feeding branches of the opercular segment of the MCA were accessed with a Scepter balloon-guided microcatheter (MicroVention Inc., Tustin, USA) and a Synchro 2 microwire . On the following day, the patient underwent a right pterional craniotomy for resection of the AVM. An intraoperative control angiogram confirmed complete obliteration of the AVM [ and ]. The pathologic tissue examination was consistent with AVM.
At the 4-week follow-up, the patient reported complete resolution of the diplopia. Neurologic examination demonstrated no deficits and isocoric pupils with intact extraocular movements bilaterally. There was no recurrence of the diplopia 6 months after surgery.