A 69-year-old man with untreated hypertension was transported to our hospital 4 h after being injured in a motor vehicle accident. The patient was conscious and his body temperature was 36.6°C, heart rate was 75 bpm, blood pressure was 186/115 mmHg, respiratory rate was 18 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation was 96% (nasal cannula, 1 L). Laboratory data showed elevated troponin I (0.149 ng/mL) and CK-MB (27.3 U/L) levels. Electrocardiography revealed premature ventricular contraction and an incomplete right bundle branch block, but no remarkable findings were observed on echocardiography. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed serial fractures from the left fourth to seventh ribs. The sixth rib was protruding into the thoracic cavity toward the heart . The fifth rib was fractured near the heart, and the seventh rib was fractured near the diaphragm. A small pleural effusion, suspected to be a hemothorax, was observed in the left thorax. However, it was not increasing in size; therefore, drainage was not conducted. Surgery was considered to repair the rib fractures. However, extravasation into a liver cyst was identified, and the bleeding needed to be stopped by interventional radiology (IVR) prior to surgery while the patient's vital signs were stable. Nine hours after the injury, following IVR, the CK-MB level decreased to 15.7 U/L, and the troponin I level increased to 1.009 ng/mL. Cardiac injury was suspected and exploratory VATS was immediately performed. The assessment showed that the left ventricular wall was crushed below the injured pericardium on the anterior side of the phrenic nerve . Although the phrenic nerve was intact, the diaphragm was damaged, though no penetrating injury to the abdominal cavity was observed. The coronary arteries were not injured, and there was no bleeding in the damaged area. A fragment of the sixth rib was protruding into the thoracic cavity; however, no pulmonary fistula was observed. The injury to the left ventricular wall did not penetrate deep into the lumen; therefore, it was closed horizontally using a U-shaped suture with 4-0 non-resorbable polypropylene with felt, and covered with collagen-fibrin patch (TachoSil®). The lacerated pericardium was sparsely sutured to prevent cardiac tamponade and hernia. The scattered bone fragments were removed, and the fifth and sixth ribs were repaired using bioresorbable plates (SUPER FIXSORB-MX®) as braces. The diaphragm was not repaired as the injury had not penetrated the abdominal cavity. After placing a 20-Fr. double lumen chest tube to the anterior side and a 28-Fr. single lumen chest tube to the posterior side, the operation was complete. The patient was able to maintain adequate ventilation and oxygenation. He was extubated on postoperative day 2. The chest tubes were removed on postoperative day 4. Paroxysmal atrial fibrillation appeared transiently, but improved after the administration of beta-blockers. The patient's myocardial enzyme levels gradually decreased, and he was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 16.
No major abnormalities were noted 3 months postoperatively .