A 15-year-old Indian girl was referred to our Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry with the chief complaint of unerupted teeth. Her medical history revealed delayed closure of the anterior fontanelle, a fracture of her right humerus at three years of age and delayed puberty. Our patient was poorly built, short statured, moderately-nourished with a concave facial profile. She had shrugged shoulders with more than normal mobility of the shoulder girdle. Oral findings include Class III malocclusion with anterior and posterior crossbite and retained deciduous teeth .
An orthopantomogram revealed multiple unerupted permanent teeth and supernumerary teeth in the mandibular anterior region . A lateral cephalograph revealed wide skull sutures . The posteroanterior view of a chest radiograph revealed the absence of clavicles and a bell-shaped ribcage. Based on these clinical and radiographic findings, a diagnosis of cleidocranial dysplasia was made. However, her chromosomal analysis revealed normal female karyotype 46XX.
A multidisciplinary dental approach involving oral and maxillofacial surgeons, orthodontists and pedodontists was followed in our case. Space management and proper eruption of her permanent teeth for aesthetic purposes were planned. Under general anesthesia, all her primary mandibular anterior teeth and supernumerary teeth were removed. Permanent anterior teeth were exposed surgically and orthodontic brackets and ligature wires were placed for traction for the permanent teeth to erupt, along with a lingual arch appliance to prevent the arch collapsing . The same procedure was performed in the maxillary anterior region after two months . Our patient's self image was taken care of through behavior management and counseling.
After six months, the permanent teeth were erupting assisted by the orthodontic brackets and arch wire . Despite thorough oral hygiene instructions and maintenance during every follow-up visit, our patient suffered from poor oral hygiene due to the bonded orthodontic brackets and wires.
Under an aggressive oral hygiene maintenance program, our patient is followed-up periodically for further treatment.