A female patient, aged 23 years and 10 months, sought orthodontic treatment with the main complaint related to esthetic concerns, described as “crowded lower teeth”. She was seeking a second opinion and wished to avoid tooth extraction, as well as any form of surgery. Her general state of health was good, with no contributing medical history. Pre-treatment facial photographs showed a convex facial profile, with a protruded lower lip. In the front view, a small asymmetry was visible on the right side, which was a bit rounded compared to the left side.
The pre-treatment intraoral photographs showed a mild gingival recession in the mandibular left central incisor. The posterior teeth presented with a clinically significant palatal inclination and a constricted maxillary arch, with the right second premolar in crossbite. She presented an Angle’s Class II malocclusion, division 1, subdivision, crowding of 2 mm in the mandibular arch, and a 3-mm deep curve of Spee, 6.0 mm of overjet between teeth #11 and #41, and 2.0 mm between teeth #21 and #31, in addition to deep overbite. The width of the maxillary lateral incisors was proportionally smaller than that of the maxillary central incisors. The mandibular midline was deviated 1.5 mm to the right. Gingival recession was visible on the mandibular left central incisor.
In the panoramic radiograph, all permanent teeth were visible, including extensive restorations in the second molars and tapered incisor root tips .
The analysis of the pretreatment lateral cephalometric radiograph and tracings , ) revealed a Class II skeletal pattern (ANB = 7º) with a maxillary protrusion (SNA = 87º), protruded mandibular incisors (1.NB = 41º, 1-NB = 11mm and IMPA = 104º), and protruded maxillary incisors (1-NA = 7mm).
The patient had a constricted maxillary arch, with mandibular molars and premolars that were lingually inclined as a compensatory mechanism. The first objective, therefore, was to expand the maxillary arch transversely to create an adequate skeletal width, in order to correct the position of the teeth. Additional objectives were to achieve correct overbite and overjet, and to improve the dental and skeletal relationships in the three planes of space.
Options for treatment included the following: 1) Maxillary expansion with a Hyrax-type expander, which would require surgery (i.e., surgically-assisted rapid palatal expansion, SARPE); 2) Maxillary expansion with MARPE, in an attempt to avoid surgery; 3) Maxillary expansion with a Hyrax-type palatal expander fixed to the molars and premolars (a non-surgical procedure); 4) Align, level, and carry out dentoalveolar expansion with the orthodontic archwires and intermaxillary elastics; and 5) Perform light interproximal reduction and extraction of four first premolars.
The second option was chosen as the treatment plan for this patient. Treatment was initiated with the placement of a 11.0-mm maxillary skeletal expander (PecLab, Belo Horizonte/MG, Brazil) fixed with four miniscrews (1.8x5x4 mm anterior and 1.8x7x4 mm) and two immediate activations (2/4 of a turn), followed by activations of two turns per day for one week. Pain and some discomfort in the palate and nasal cavity areas, as well as headache, was reported by the patient on the fourth day. These issues were resolved by diminishing the expansion to an activation rate of 1 turn per day and prescribing an analgesic.
By the tenth day, the patient reported hearing clicks in the region of the palatal suture and, in the following days, reported the appearance of the midline diastema . There was a discrete opening of the anterior bite due to contact of the buccal cuspid of the left first maxillary molar, which moved in the direction of the overlapping mandibular molar. The activations were stopped after 25 turns and the appliance was stabilized. The radiographic image shows the opening of the midpalatal expansion .
Subsequently, brackets were bonded to all teeth, except for the first molars. The following archwires were used: 0.016 x 0.016-in NiTi heat-activated, 0.016 x 0.022-in NiTi, 0.017 x 0.025-in NiTi heat-activated, 0.018 x 0.025-in SS, and 0.019 x 0.025-in SS finishing archwire.
Miniscrews between the second premolars and first molars were applied to distalize the upper left molars and premolars.