The patient, a 43-year-old female was admitted to hospital due to a right upper lobe space occupying lesion. Nine months after lung surgery, she was treated again for painless gross hematuria.
During physical examination, the patient was found to have space occupying lesions in the right lung, and was first admitted to hospital for right lung lesion resection. After 9 mo, there was no obvious inducement for painless hematuria for 5 d, thus she was admitted to hospital again.
Her past history was unremarkable. No other operations were performed during this period.
Her family history was unremarkable.
Nine months after lung surgery, the patient was admitted to hospital again due to sudden, painless hematuria. A mass of 2.0 cm × 1.0 cm × 1.0 cm could be touched under the right chest wall, with fair activity, tough quality and a clear boundary.
The results of a hemogram, ESR, and other tumor markers (alpha fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, CA-125, CA-199) were all within the normal range, tuberculin skin test (5 TU PPD) was negative.
Computed tomography (CT) image showed an irregular dense soft tissue lesion in the posterior upper lobe of the right lung, approximately 3.8 cm × 3.3 cm × 4.0 cm in size, and calcification in the periphery of the tumor .
The CT density of both kidneys was uneven, with patchy slightly high-density shadows in the upper and lower pole of the right kidney and the middle parenchyma of the left kidney, and an unclear boundary. Enhanced CT showed mild to moderate inhomogeneous enhancement, and the density decreased slightly in the delayed phase. The degree of enhancement was lower than that of the surrounding normal renal parenchyma. Filling defects were found in the bilateral renal veins, which showed mild enhancement. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple long T1, short T2 and diffusion-weighted imaging high signals in both kidneys. Similar signal clusters were found in the left renal pelvis and upper ureter. Two dimensional ultrasonography images showed that the volume of both kidneys was increased, and several extremely low echo masses were seen in the parenchyma, with unclear and irregular boundaries, the bilateral renal veins were widened and hypoechoic filling was seen inside. Color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI) showed no obvious blood flow signals in both renal veins, and no obvious blood flow signal was found in the renal lesions. The following were seen on contrast-enhanced ultrasonography (CEUS, Figure ): Multiple solid space occupying lesions were found in both kidneys, the contrast medium filled the heart rapidly during the arterial phase, showing slightly high enhancement, and low enhancement when the contrast agent withdrew in 60 s. Metastasis of synovial sarcoma was considered based on the patient’s medical history and imaging findings.
According to chest wall ultrasonography , a very low echo mass approximately 1.5 cm × 1.4 cm × 2.0 cm in size was seen in the superficial subcutaneous fascia layer, with a clear boundary, regular, aspect ratio > 1, and the echo of the surrounding fat layer was increased. On CDFI, a spot strip blood flow signal was seen inside. CEUS showed that the contrast medium filled the heart rapidly (9 s) during the arterial phase, showing overall high enhancement. After 39 s, the contrast medium quickly withdrew and showed low enhancement.
Combined with the immunohistochemical results, postoperative pathology of pulmonary lesions indicated synovial sarcoma. Pathology of the chest wall mass and kidney mass showed that the nucleus was fusiform or ovoid in shape under the microscope with hyperchromasia, the nucleoli were not obvious, cytoplasm was sparse and unclear, and the mitotic count was rare. Pathological diagnosis was synovial sarcoma metastases .