A 22-year-old Caucasian male was admitted to hospital with aggravated signs of anaemia: primarily exhaustion and sleepiness, accompanied by marked pallor. Iron deficiency anaemia had been diagnosed in this patient at the age of 2 months. The patient was then put on iron supplements along with other vitamins necessary for erythropoiesis. Before his first birthday, celiac disease was histologically diagnosed, and anaemia was considered to be an accompanying disease. In early childhood, the patient experienced a cytomegalovirus infection as well as other typical childhood diseases. He was immunized according to his home country’s specific vaccination schedule and had an otherwise unremarkable childhood. Even though the patient had been put on oral iron and vitamin supplements, the severity of the anaemia remained within the moderate to severe range, only sporadically mild, and therefore the patient underwent further testing. At the age of 18, the patient underwent bone marrow examination with no pathologic findings, as well as an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, lower gastrointestinal endoscopy, and capsule endoscopy, all of which had done previously. This time, however, the discovery of dilated blood vessels in the duodenum was made during upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, although neither angiodysplasia nor Osler-Weber-Rendu disease were found. A computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen was performed resulting in the discovery of an intestinal malrotation of the duodenum and an absence of the proximal part of the SMV with varices in the duodenal wall, which had functioned as a collateral blood flow due to mesenteric vein occlusion . The anaemia was proclaimed to be a result of chronic occult blood loss through dilated blood vessels in duodenal mucosa, and therapy slightly helped the condition at the time.
At the age of 22, the patient quit taking all supplements. The resulting life-threatening anaemia necessitated hospitalization and red blood cell transfusions within 6 months. Although, the transfusions did not yield the expected results, they indirectly confirmed a chronic loss via the duodenal collaterals. The patient underwent another computed tomography of the abdomen which confirmed the previous findings, and, after his condition was stabilized, was referred to our surgical clinic for a consultation. An elective surgery was scheduled for the following month. Meanwhile, the patient was treated with repeated intravenous iron supplementation and correction of hemostasis parameters. Finally, when the patient was admitted to our surgical ward, he was slightly pale but a physical examination produced no remarkable findings. The next day, he underwent surgery under general anaesthesia with mobilisation of the malrotated bowel, and after meticulous preparation we were able to find the suitable blood vessels for the bypass. After administering an intravenous heparin (100 units per kg), we created an anastomosis between the large collateral arising from the distal section of the SMV and the anterior inferior pancreaticoduodenal vein draining to the present proximal section of the SMV without any prosthetic material . We also performed ligation of some dilated veins on the duodenal surface with the aim to interrupt the blood flow in the duodenal varices. The postoperative period was unremarkable, and the patient was discharged to outpatient care. During the 3-month period after the surgery, we put the patient on anticoagulant treatment with low molecular weight heparins. Five months after the surgical intervention, a CT of the abdomen was performed to confirm the patency of the venous anastomosis and diminution of duodenal varices. A slightly stenotic passage through the anastomosis with a regression of the duodenal varices, draining into the SMV, was observed. Two months later, the patient underwent an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with the intention to ligate the residual duodenal varices. The patient still has three large duodenal varices, which have been currently left untreated because of the patient’s good clinical and laboratory status with no clinical signs of bleeding and no anaemia or iron deficiency.