A 71-year-old Norwegian woman was admitted to a local hospital in Oslo only hours after returning from a four-week holiday to Thailand. She presented with rapid onset of nausea and vomiting associated with fever and exhaustion, and had also been complaining of fatigue for two days. She was febrile (39.5 °C), and had a respiratory rate of 26 min−1. The leukocyte count was 12×109cells ml−1 and the C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 9 mg l−1. Intravenous antibiotic therapy with ampicillin and gentamicin was commenced on suspicion of urosepsis, but the patient’s condition rapidly deteriorated the same evening, with increasing confusion and speech disturbances; nuchal rigidity was noted. Bacterial meningitis now appeared likely. The patient was administered 4 g of ceftriaxone and transferred to Oslo University Hospital (OUS).
Upon arrival at OUS, the patient had obvious nuchal rigidity and incoherent speech, and was motorically agitated and confused. The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was assessed as 12, but downgraded to 9 during the initial evaluation, at which point she was intubated.
A cerebral computed tomography (CT) scan with angiography showed no acute ischaemic lesions, haemorrhage, arterial occlusion, stenosis, or aneurism. Lumbar puncture yielded cloudy cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) under increased pressure, with 0.1 mmol l−1 glucose (serum glucose 11.1 mmol l−1), a protein level of 6.9 g l−1, and a leukocyte count of 2115 mm−3 with 87.3 % neutrophils. No microbes were found on an acridine orange stain of CSF. A nigrosin stain did not show any cryptococci, although the examiner noted the presence of unidentified elements. Treatment was changed to meropenem and vancomycin since the infection was presumably acquired in a region endemic for highly resistant bacteria.
The patient’s condition deteriorated over the following twelve hours in spite of early initiation of antibiotic therapy. CRP increased to 269 mg l−1. A repeat cerebral CT scan showed general oedema, hydrocephalus and uncal herniation. External ventricular drainage with monitoring of intracerebral pressure (ICP) was established; ICP was measured to 80–90 mmHg. The patient remained unresponsive, with fixed dilated pupils. After observing that ICP remained consistently equal to mean arterial pressure, and examination indicated cessation of all cerebral functioning with no hope of improvement, active treatment was withdrawn three days after admission, and the patient was pronounced dead shortly thereafter. An autopsy was requested.