A 30-year-old woman with a history of rheumatoid arthritis on long-term methotrexate and a previous hospital admission for a complicated fungal urinary tract infection (UTI) presented to her gynecologist with 1 week of vaginal discharge, vaginal pruritus, and bilateral flank pain. Urine and vaginal cultures were obtained, and she was started on intravaginal clotrimazole while awaiting results. The vaginal and urine cultures obtained by her gynecologist were notable for heavy growth of S cerevisiae that was susceptible to voriconazole, clotrimazole, flucytosine, and amphotericin B, and her infectious disease doctor was notified. Due to a limited availability of outpatient flucytosine and rapid development of resistance with monotherapy and poor urinary concentration of other antifungals, the patient was admitted by infectious disease for intravenous amphotericin B deoxycholate.

Six months prior, the patient was admitted for refractory fungal vulvovaginitis and complicated C glabrata pyelonephritis. At that time, the patient reported nearly a 7-month history of flank pain, vaginal pruritus and discharge, and dysuria refractory to multiple courses of azole therapy. Urine cultures during that hospitalization were positive for azole-resistant C glabrata. Infectious disease was consulted and recommended treatment with a 7-day course of amphotericin B deoxycholate. The patient completed treatment with resolution of symptoms. Outpatient follow-up cultures were negative for C glabrata.

Upon arrival at the hospital, the patient reported subjective fever, bilateral flank pain, joint pain, and dysuria. In the setting of her infectious symptoms, the patient had stopped her methotrexate at the recommendation of her rheumatologist, leading to worsening rheumatic joint pain. On admission, her vital signs included a temperature of 37.1°C, heart rate of 72 beats per minute, blood pressure of 124/70 mmHg, respiratory rate of 18, and an SpO2 of 99% on room air. Physical examination was remarkable for bilateral costovertebral angle and suprapubic tenderness to palpation. There was no abdominal distention, rebound, or guarding. Cardiac, pulmonary, and neurologic examinations were unremarkable. Complete blood count on admission demonstrated mild leukopenia with a white blood cell (WBC) count of 4.56 (normal: 4.80-10.80 K/cumm) and mild anemia with a hemoglobin of 11.8 (normal: 12.0-16.0 g/dL). Her comprehensive metabolic panel was unremarkable. Urinalysis demonstrated a specific gravity of 1.042 (normal: 1.003-1.030), <1 WBC (normal ≤ 3/HPF), few bacteria, few mucous, and 15 squamous epithelial cells (normal ≤ 5/HPF). Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis showed bilateral striated nephrograms and perinephric fat stranding, which, paired with her clinical presentation, was consistent with a diagnosis of fungal pyelonephritis.

The patient was started on intravenous (IV) amphotericin B deoxycholate, which, despite its nephrotoxicity, was selected over liposomal amphotericin B for its superior urinary concentration. After initiation of antifungal therapy, her flank pain slowly improved as did her pelvic symptoms. Urine cultures collected upon admission resulted on hospital day 5 and confirmed S cerevisiae but also grew Klebsiella pneumoniae. Intravenous ertapenem for the Klebsiella was started once the care team was made aware of the urine culture result. Of note, the patient did have clinical improvement prior to the initiation of ertapenem. Discussion of possible sources of S cerevisiae exposure revealed that the patient had an active sourdough starter in her home which she fed and stirred daily. She completed a 7-day course of IV amphotericin B deoxycholate for the S cerevisiae and transitioned from IV ertapenem to ciprofloxacin (based on sensitivities) for a 10-day course of treatment for the Klebsiella. She was discharged home with close follow-up.