A 27-year-old HIV-positive Chinese Manchu male complained of intermittent headache, nausea, and vomiting (non-projectile vomiting three times in total) for two weeks in January 2022. No fever, amaurosis, or unconsciousness were presented. He denied preceding travel or unusual animal exposures. He was diagnosed with HIV infection five years ago and nadir CD4+ T-cell count was 79 cells/μL. He initiated ART with tenofovir, lamivudine, and efavirenz, but treatment failure occurred one year later with plasma HIV RNA 2.19 × 105 copies/mL and CD4+ T-cell count 14 cells/μL. The local doctor shifted the ART regimen to tenofovir, lamivudine, lopinavir/ritonavir without a genotypic drug resistance test, and his plasma HIV viral load was well controlled thereafter. Neurological physical examination showed no abnormalities. The brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) presented bilateral multiple white matter T2-weighted hyperintensities especially in the FLAIR sequence , without T1-wighted enhancement or mass effect. Lumbar puncture showed high intracranial pressure, lymphocytic pleocytosis, and elevated CSF protein level . CSF HIV RNA was 774 copies/mL, while plasma HIV RNA was undetectable. The following blood tests all displayed negative results, including the T-cell enzyme-linked immuno-spot assay for tuberculosis, the syphilis rapid plasma reagin titer, Toxoplasma gondii IgG and IgM, cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgM, herpes simplex virus (HSV)1/2 IgM, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-IgM, galactomannan, 1,3-β-D-glucan, cryptococcus antigen, EBV-DNA, CMV-DNA. Besides, the CSF tests which detected acid-fast stain, India ink stain, cryptococcus antigen, culturing of bacteria and fungus, and CMV-DNA were also all negative. No other pathogens were confirmed by the next-generation sequencing in the CSF (using the MGISEQ-2000 platform in BGI PathoGenesis Pharmaceutical Technology, BGI-Shenzhen). The pathological phenotype of encephalitis was required, but the patient declined brain biopsy. CD8 encephalitis was suspected, and thus prednisone and glycerol fructose were prescribed empirically to reduce inflammation reactions in the brain.
One month later, the patient presented headache relief, and obvious improvement in MRI performance and laboratory tests in the CSF . Then, prednisone was tapered (60 mg daily followed by a reduction of 5 mg per week) and discontinued in May 2022. However, he complained of a headache relapse in June 2022. MRI showed the increased area of multifocal leukoencephalopathy . Moreover, increased HIV replication was observed in both CNS and plasma, and further HIV drug resistance tests of CSF and plasma (Sanger sequencing in Dongguan Medical Laboratory of Micro-scale and Presicion) presented identical results of major protease inhibitor (PI)-related mutations, nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI)-related mutations, and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI)-related mutations . The encephalitis owning to CSF drug-resistant HIV escape was considered. Thus, ART regimen was switched to zidovudine (sensitive), lamivudine (highly resistant), and dolutegravir (sensitive). As well, prednisone 60 mg daily was restarted. One month after that, HIV suppression was achieved in both CSF and plasma , and MRI displayed moderate shrink of diffused white matter area . Then, prednisone was tapered (the same as last time). A complete remission of brain MRI lesions was achieved in December 2022 . Meanwhile, prednisone had been withdrawn. The timeline for treatment adjustment and follow-up of this case was clearly outlined in Fig. .