A 45-year-old man was referred to our center due to Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome for radiofrequency ablation. General physical examination was normal. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed pre-excitation in favor of left posterior accessory pathway (AP). Echocardiography was also normal.
Guided by fluoroscopy, right atrium (RA), right ventricle, and coronary sinus catheters were introduced into the corresponding heart chambers. Basic electrophysiology study confirmed that AP was located in the posterior part of mitral valve ring; so we decided for TSP. This was the first time we used HeartSpan Steerable (Merit Medical Systems, South Jordan, UT, United States) sheath and the needle for TSP; in the previous TSP procedures, we used the AgilisTM sheath (Abbott, Saint Paul, MN, United States). Withdrawal of trans-septal sheath from superior vena cava into RA after 2 jumps usually places the introducer system in the fossa ovalis; but in this patient, this maneuver did not work despite several attempts. Finally, we could place the sheath into lower part of the interatrial septum, just above coronary sinus catheter in left anterior oblique projection. Jerky puncture with the needle was done and small amount of contrast injection showed that the needle has traversed the interatrial septum. So, we advanced the steerable sheath over the needle to the left side, and then the needle was withdrawn. However, to our surprise, contrast injection into the side branch of the sheath showed that it was in the left ventricle (LV) rather than the left atrium (-A). We advanced the 0.032” guidewire through the sheath to LV, and retracted the sheath to RA. Continuous arterial blood pressure monitoring did not show hemodynamic compromise, nor did echocardiography show pericardial effusion; so we decided to perform radiofrequency ablation of AP via the retrograde trans-aortic approach that was successful (-B).
We transferred the patient to coronary care unit (CCU) for better hemodynamic monitoring. On the next day, transthoracic and trans-esophageal echocardiography showed LV outflow tract to RA jet (-C and -D respectively). The patient was discharged uneventfully. Follow-up echocardiography showed that the tract was present for up to 18 months without any evidence of cardiac enlargement . Since the patient was asymptomatic, endovascular or surgical closure was not attempted.