A 66-year-old female had complained of intermittent discomfort and pain in the right gluteal area. She had also noticed an alteration in bowel habit with recent constipation. The symptoms persisted, and she was treated with analgesia and laxatives.
However, there was no specific diagnosis until she fell onto her back and fractured L2, L3 and L4 vertebrae which necessitated further imaging work-up with CT scan of the thoracolumbar spine. Of note, the fractures were stable and non-displaced. Hence, no need for surgical intervention. The CT scan performed to assess the spine revealed an incidental finding of a large mass extending from the right gluteal region into the pelvis. A CT scan of the pelvis was also performed, and this showed a large fatty intramuscular lesion extending into the pelvis through the greater sciatic notch . The differential diagnosis was listed as a possible lipoma or low-grade liposarcoma. As part of the diagnostic work-up for this right intramuscular gluteal mass with intrapelvic extension, the patient underwent MRI of the abdomen and pelvis. There was no suspicious soft tissue abnormality detected on the MRI of the abdomen but the MRI of the pelvis showed a large homogenous fat lesion noted in the right pelvic side wall between the gluteus maximus and gluteus medius muscles which extended into the pelvis via the greater sciatic foramen . There was no enhancing component. No heterogeneity or thickened or irregular septations were detected. The margins were distinct. The mass measures approximately 18.9 cm × 13 cm × 22.8 cm. The intrapelvic component of the mass measures approximately 10.5 cm × 6.2 cm × 12.1 cm. There was a leftward displacement of the rectum noticed as a result of the mass effect from the central pelvic mass .
Physical examination revealed an area of firm induration/possible mass in the lower aspect of the right gluteal compartment. This was not tender and there was no associated redness or discoloration of overlying skin. Digital rectal examination showed normal anal sphincter tone and no mass was palpated within the anorectum.
The patient proceeded to have a CT guided core needle biopsy of the mass. This showed scant fragments of fibroadipose and fibroconnective tissue without features of malignancy. There was focal myxoid change. However, the cytologic atypia that would warrant a diagnosis of atypical lipomatous tumor/well differentiated liposarcoma was absent. Furthermore, FISH for MDM2 amplification was attempted, but could not be performed due to sample inadequacy. The case was presented for discussion at the multidisciplinary tumor conference and the consensus recommendation was to proceed with surgical resection of the tumor. Following this, the patient underwent wide excision of the mass through a transgluteal approach and final pathology showed well-differentiated liposarcoma .
Regarding follow up, the patient has been undergoing surveillance for 3 years. She was seen every 3 months for the first year after resection. Computerized tomographic scans of the chest, abdomen and pelvis were done every 6 months for the first year of surveillance. The patient was seen twice a year for the following 2 years. Computerized tomographic scans of the chest, abdomen and pelvis were done annually for years 2 and 3 of surveillance. The patient has remained disease-free; that is no evidence of local or distant recurrence of the liposarcoma or the sciatic hernia.