A 73-year-old male patient with a fever of more than 40° and difficulty in physical movement was admitted to the emergency department of our hospital. The patient had alcoholic cirrhosis of the liver. The laboratory findings revealed a strong inflammatory response, including a white blood cell count of 27200/μL, a C-reactive protein level of 12.85 mg/dL, and a high blood ammonia level of over 500 μg/dL. The tumor marker was high, with a carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level of 62.4 ng/mL. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a large mass near the aortic bifurcation. The tumor was initially diagnosed as unresectable sigmoid colon cancer because of iliopsoas muscle invasion and intramuscular abscess formation, left hydronephrosis due to left ureteral invasion, urinary bladder invasion, and congestive edema of the left lower leg due to invasion of the common to external iliac artery/vein. Colonoscopy revealed a circumferential lesion at 15 cm from the anal verge, and biopsy demonstrated that the tumor was a well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. Genetic testing revealed that the tumor was a RAS mutated, BRAF wild type, and microsatellite stability tumor.

First, a transverse colostomy was performed; then, a left nephrostomy was created for left hydronephrosis, and percutaneous drainage was performed for iliopsoas abscess, resulting in an improved inflammatory response. After 4 courses of FOLFOX + bevacizumab therapy, the tumor volume decreased, and no new lesions appeared, and the CEA level decreased to 10.1 ng/mL. Four months after the initial visit, it was determined that an R0 resection was possible via total pelvic exenteration with iliac artery reconstruction. The patient underwent left A-F bypass using an expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (e-PTFE) graft (8 mm) with ligation of the proximal common femoral artery followed by total pelvic exenteration and combined resection of the left common and external iliac artery/vein and right ureterocutaneostomy. The distal rectum was transected, and the anus was preserved; however, colorectal anastomosis was avoided. The operative time was 13 hours 39 minutes, blood loss was 3276 mL, and transfusions of red blood cells (8 units) and fresh frozen plasma (6 units) were intraoperatively performed.

Pathological findings revealed that the tumor was ypT4b (bladder) N0M0, ypStage II. Treatment of left leg edema and gait rehabilitation took time, but no postoperative complications of Clavien-Dindo grade 2 or higher were observed, and the patient was discharged on the 44th day after surgery. No adjuvant chemotherapy was administered due to performance status (PS) of 2. The patient was alive 9 months after surgery and had not experienced recurrence and rebound of left leg edema.