A 13-year-old-male with no known past medical history presented after being struck by a car. He presented with several orthopedic injuries: an open left humeral shaft fracture, left knee osteochondral fracture, and left open patella fracture. The patient was intubated and sedated on presentation to the emergency department, and therefore, a thorough neurovascular assessment could not be made. However, the patient had a palpable radial pulse. He was taken for open treatment of left patella fracture, irrigation and debridement to left open humeral wound, and surgical stabilization of left humerus fracture.

As for his left open humeral shaft fracture, the wound and constituent soft tissues were copiously irrigated and debrided. Intraoperatively, a mid-substance, complete intramuscular biceps tear was noted. The radial nerve was identified to be contused where it passed beyond the fracture site posteriorly; however, it was in full continuity throughout the course of the nerve. Next, the fracture was reduced and stabilized with a 4.5 mm narrow large fragment plate.

Attention then was directed at open repair of the intramuscular, mid-substance biceps rupture. Proximal and distal ends were identified. Ethibond sutures were used in a running Krackow fashion while the elbow was held in hyperflexion. All six sutures were then tied with the proximal corresponding limb repaired to the distal corresponding limb. Once all six suture tails had been fully tensioned and tightened, the elbow was taken through a gentle range of motion from approximately 80 degrees short of full extension to full flexion with no noted gapping about the biceps repair site. Wound closure ensued, followed by placement into a splint in 100 degrees of flexion. Postoperatively, the patient was extubated and was observed to be distally neurovascularly intact in radial, ulnar, and median nerve distributions.

Nine days after the index surgery, the patient presented due to purulent drainage from the surgical wound. He was taken to the operating room for wound exploration and irrigation and debridement. Intraoperatively, it was noted that the biceps repair had failed. Deep tissue samples were sent for culture. The area was debrided, leaving a large soft tissue defect. A wound vac was then placed. He was placed on antibiotics postoperatively that were narrowed to ciprofloxacin once cultures speciated to Enterobacter and Citrobacter.

He was taken back to the operating room three days afterwards for a repeat wound exploration, repeat irrigation and debridement, revision open biceps repair, and wound closure. He was treated with oral ciprofloxacin per the pediatric infectious disease recommendations. He was made platform weight-bearing to the left upper extremity in a splint with a lateral side strut, with the arm flexed to 100 degrees to protect the intact brachialis muscle. At twelve days postoperatively, his wound was healing appropriately.

At his first postoperative visit 2.5 weeks after his first surgery (six days after the repeat debridement and revision open biceps repair), the surgical incision was healing well. At seven weeks after his first surgery (5.5 weeks since the repeat debridement and revision open biceps repair), plain film radiographs showed fracture healing and no hardware complications. At this time, his weight bearing status was advanced to weight bearing as tolerated for activities for daily living, and he began gentle active and passive range of motion exercises; occupational therapy for static dynamic extension splinting was also initiated. The patient returned at 14 weeks after his first surgery (12.5 weeks since the repeat debridement and revision open biceps repair) and was able to actively range his left elbow from full flexion to 10 degrees shy of full extension; he had full pronation and supination. At this visit, his weight bearing status was advanced to weight bearing as tolerated, except for heavy lifting.

He completed five total months of oral antibiotic therapy with ciprofloxacin. He was advanced to full weight bearing with no restrictions nine months after his index surgery. At this clinical visit, he lacked two degrees of terminal extension. Subsequently, at his most recent clinic visit (one year after his index surgery), he had full flexion/extension to the left elbow, 5/5 biceps, supination, and pronation strength, and was playing sports without limitation.