The patient was a 72-year-old man with no pertinent medical history. An upper gastrointestinal imaging (UGI) performed for GC screening revealed an abnormality wherein there was a horizontal inversion of the upper gastrointestinal tract and deformation of the stomach body. Upper endoscopy showed an elevated lesion with an ill-defined border in the anterior wall of the lower-third of the stomach body , and histopathological examination revealed a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. Contrast-enhanced multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) showed inverted thoracic and abdominal organs and illustrated the wall thickness of the stomach body, which had no obvious metastasis . Furthermore, the aortic arch to the thoracic aorta was in the normal anatomical position ; hence, the case was diagnosed as SIP. The 3D angiography revealed a complete right–left reversal of the abdominal arteries . SI is known to be frequently associated with chronic sinusitis and bronchiectasis, and this clinical triad is called the Kartagener syndrome . However, chronic sinusitis and bronchiectasis were not seen in this patient.
Preoperative staging of GC was clinical Stage IIB (cT3N0M0) according to the tumor/node/metastasis (TNM) classification of malignant tumors 8th edition.
LDG with D2 lymph node dissection (LND) and modified delta-shaped Billroth-I reconstruction was performed. Although this case was SIP, the abdominal organs were completely inverted ; hence, this operation could be performed with the usual LDG symmetrically . Five trocars were placed in the left–right reversal of the usual LDG in our hospital. The surgeon and the assistant performed this operation by reversing the standing position and the roles of the left and right hands from the usual LDG. The surgeon had to operate the energy device with the non-dominant hand. However, the surgeon used the energy device with the dominant hand for supra-pancreatic LND. The problem encountered with this method was that the forceps of the left hand crossed the energy device; however, the supra-pancreatic LND could be safely performed without the energy device interfering with the pancreas.
In this operation, there were two problems that could not be solved by performing the operation symmetrically. One of the problems was the method of retracting the lateral segment of the liver. We usually use the Nathanson liver retractor in laparoscopic gastrectomy (LG), which was also used in this case. However, the tip of the liver retractor was oriented toward the hepatic hilar side due to its asymmetrical hook shape. Therefore, the retraction of the lateral segment of the liver was somewhat insufficient, and special care was required not to damage the liver . The second problem was intracorporeal suturing. We usually perform intracorporeal suturing with the surgeon in the paraxial position; however, in this operation, the surgeon performed the suturing in the co-axial position between the patient’s legs. By shifting to this standing position, the surgeon was able to suture with the dominant hand and the normal needle direction.
Operation time, including intraoperative frozen section histological analysis for the proximal resection margin, was 323 min, and blood loss was 10 ml. After an uneventful postoperative course, the patient was discharged on postoperative day 10. Postoperative staging of GC was pathological Stage IIIB (pT4aN3aM0) according to the TNM classification of malignant tumors 8th edition. The patient received S − 1 + docetaxel adjuvant chemotherapy for 1 year after surgery without any signs of recurrence.