A 37-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital on September 15, 2020 due to recurrent cough for more than 10 mo.
The patient developed a paroxysmal cough accompanied by a small amount of white sputum 10 mo ago. She had no chills, fever, chest pain, hemoptysis, or shortness of breath. She received symptomatic treatment such as anti-infection at a local hospital but her symptoms persisted during this period. The above symptoms recurred 1 mo ago with a little yellow sputum. Fever and hemoptysis were absent. The patient was admitted to our hospital for further treatment.
The patient was thin and weighed only 40 kg (Body mass index: 15.6). Her temperature was 37.4 °C, pulse rate was 99 bpm, respiratory rate was 19 breaths/min, and blood pressure was 100/63 mmHg. No clubbing of fingers, icterus, or generalized lymphadenopathy were observed. Clinical examinations of the cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and nervous systems were normal, but crackles were found in the lower lobe of the left lung during lung auscultation.
Laboratory studies showed normal white blood cells (8.6 × 109/L), and the neutrophil ratio was 83.0%. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 26 mm/h (normal value < 15 mm/h), and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein was 8.2 mg/L (normal value < 8.0 mg/L). Arterial partial pressure of oxygen was 91 mmHg (partial pressure of oxygen/fraction of inspiration O2 433.3 mmHg), and arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide was 41 mmHg. The 1,3-β-D-glucan test and galactomannan test were both negative.
Enhanced computed tomography images revealed a honeycomb lesion in the lower lobe of the left lung, and an enhanced vascular shadow was seen in the descending aorta, which was consistent with pulmonary sequestration .
We also performed bronchoscopic alveolar lavage in the posterior basal segment of the left lower lobe. Gram-positive bacilli were detected in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) . The modified acid-fast staining of BALF was weakly positive, and the possible presence of Nocardia species was considered. Following culture of BALF, N. cyriacigeorgica was identified , which was confirmed by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (matrix-assisted laser desorption/ ionization-time of flight; VITEK MS, bioMérieux, Craponne, France) .