A 17 year old horse-rider girl was referred to our clinic for 2 weeks history of moderate continuous, crampy abdominal pain, starting in the epigastric region and shifted to the left upper quadrant. This pain was associated with fatigue, loss of appetite. Patient denies any nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, fever, night sweats. She reported a remoteleft shoulder pain with negative MRI. Her physical exam was positive for splenomegaly 9 cm below costal margins, and left upper quadrant tenderness, with no rebound tenderness. Her laboratory examination showed a Hg:12.8 g/dL, platelet: 124,000/mm, WBC: 6500/mm with 62% neutrophils, 24% lymphocytes, and 7% eosinophils, platelet: 124,000/mm, a CRP:0.78 mg/L. The Liver enzymes, Bilirubin, Albumin, LDH, the Chemistry panel were all in normal range. Abdominal ultrasound showed a large splenic cyst of 15 cm containing homogenous internal debris . An abdominal computed tomography scan showed the same 15 cm splenic cyst with parietal calcifications, compressing the stomach, most likely of hydatid origin (a, b). Abdominal MRI showed unilocular splenic cyst hypo-intense T1, hyper-intense T2 (a, b). Differential diagnosis for described findings include; Splenic abscess, Hydatid cyst, epithelial cyst and post traumatic hemorrhage in pre-existing epithelial cyst. Based on clinical picture and endemic status for hydatid cyst differential can be narrowed.
Serologic test for Hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), Cytomegalovirus (CMV), HIV, Toxoplasmosis, Entamoeba histolytica, Leishmania brazilensis, donovani, and EBV IgM were all negative. EBV IgG was elevated showing prior immunization. The immune-diffusion test for Echinococus multilocularis was negative. The Indirect hemagglutination test and the Elisa test for Echinococcus granulosus were also negative.
Nevertheless, due to an elevated IgE level: 317 kU/L, the patient was considered as having splenic hydatid cyst and was treated by albendazole PO with meals in a dose of 400 mg twice daily for 28 days, and received the anti-pneumococcal vaccine.
Due to the severe continuous pain, the large size, the risk of spontaneous rupture and the patient’s wishes to resume her hobby as a horse-rider as soon as possible, she was consented for operative exploration via a laparotomy incision for splenic cyst un-roofing.
Exploration was done, abdominal cavity was protected by hypertonic saline (3%NaCl) filled pads, cyst was punctured, 2 liters of dark green fluid was aspirated. Hypertonic saline was injected in the cyst, and then aspirated after 15 min. Un-roofing and partial resection was done afterward.
The postoperative course was un-eventful and the patient was discharged home on the post-operative day 5.
The pathology report showed stratified epithelium with fibro-inflammatory reaction in the pericystic zone compatible with splenic epithelial cyst.
The patient still symptom free after 5 years of follow up and her labs showed a WBC: 7700/mm3 normalization of eosinophils (2.5%).