A 10-year-old, male entire, Maltese terrier mix breed dog presented with a three-month history of slowly progressive abdominal distension. The patient was reported to vomit bilious material daily for two weeks prior to presentation and had no other significant clinical history. Physical examination identified abdominal distension with no overtly palpable abdominal mass effect, a grade IV/VI left-sided apical systolic cardiac murmur and generalized moderate muscle atrophy.
Echocardiographic examination identified chronic degenerative mitral valve disease, most consistent with myxomatous mitral valve disease. Sonographic examination of the abdominal cavity identified a markedly expansile, heterogeneously echogenic, well-vascularized soft tissue mass with multiloculated cystic structures containing anechoic fluid admixed with echogenic particulate matter . The origin of the mass could not be determined. The mass extended cranially to the level of the liver, caudally to the level of the bladder, and dorsally to the level of the kidneys. Other findings included a mild reduction of renal corticomedullary definition bilaterally, diffusely hyperechoic hepatic parenchyma, and a symmetrically enlarged prostate with cystic areas. The remainder of the abdominal sonographic examination was unremarkable. Thoracic radiography identified no abnormalities.
Abdominocentesis removed 700 mL of transparent straw-colored fluid, identified as transudate (protein 26 g L−1) with low numbers of large mononuclear cells (120 × 106 cells L−1). The cellular population of the abdominal fluid consisted of large mononuclear cells with vacuolated grey to light blue cytoplasm, with a round, irregular medium to large nucleus most likely of monocyte lineage. Complete blood count and serum biochemical analysis were unremarkable. Resting ammonia was within reference range. Prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time were within normal limits.
A multilobulated cystic mass arising from the duodenum and orad portion of the jejunum with omental adhesions was identified during ventral midline celiotomy . The longest diameter of the mass measured approximately 20 cm. The adhesions were broken down and the mass was resected with 5 cm orad and aborad margins. A functional end-to-end stapled anastomosis of the duodenojejunum was performed. A focal nodule identified within the left lateral liver lobe was biopsied. The remainder of the peritoneal cavity examination was unremarkable.
Histopathologic examination identified an unencapsulated, cavitated mass composed of monomorphic mesenchymal cells arranged in interlacing streams and loosely organised herringbone patterns with variable collagenous or myxoid matrix. Empty cystic spaces multifocally scattered throughout the mass were not lined by epithelial cells . Neoplastic cells were characterised by indistinct margins, small amounts of vacuolated, amphophilic cytoplasm and oval-shaped nuclei with marginated chromatin and small, centrally located nuclei. Anisocytosis and anisokaryosis were mild, and the mitotic count was five per 10 high power fields (equivalent to 2.37mm2). A preliminary diagnosis of nonangiogenic, nonlymphogenic intestinal mesenchymal tumor (NIMT) was made based on histopathology alone. NIMTs are a subset of poorly defined intestinal sarcomas that require immunohistochemistry (IHC) for further classification between the primary differential diagnoses of GIST and leiomyosarcoma. In this case, IHC for CD117 and smooth muscle actin were required to distinguish between primary differential diagnoses of GIST and leiomyosarcoma, and exclude less likely differentials including fibroblastic and neural tumors.
IHC for CD117 demonstrated moderate-to-strong membranous labelling of greater than 95% of neoplastic cells . IHC for smooth muscle actin yielded variable cytoplasmic staining among neoplastic cells . GIST was diagnosed based on positive immunolabelling with CD117.
Hepatic biopsies identified no metastatic disease. Mild hepatocellular glycogen accumulation and lipogranuloma formation, considered incidental findings, accounted for the gross appearance of the liver during surgery. Hepatic biopsy specimens were submitted for bacterial culture and sensitivity due to pale-yellow discoloration of the liver at time of surgery. Aerobic and anaerobic bacterial culture of hepatic tissue identified no bacterial growth.
The patient was started on toceranib at 3.0 mg kg−1 orally three times per week on a Monday, Wednesday, and Friday dosing schedule. No local disease recurrence or metastasis was noted on examination 78 days after starting toceranib.
Metastasis of GIST was strongly suspected at recheck examination 251 days after surgery based on computed tomographic imaging, which identified multiple peritoneal nodular changes and a small volume of encapsulated peritoneal effusion . No evidence of pulmonary metastasis, and no local recurrence at the duodenojejunal enterectomy site was identified on computed tomography. Toceranib was discontinued approximately two months prior to this recheck examination and diagnostic imaging study due to owner non-compliance; the patient had a one-month history of mild lethargy prior to the recheck. Peritoneal fluid analysis identified a macrophagic exudate without evidence of neoplastic cells. No specific sampling of the suspected metastatic lesions was performed due to an inability to access these sites safely.
The patient was re-initiated on toceranib at 3.0 mg kg−1 three times per week on a Monday, Wednesday, and Friday dosing regimen at the time of suspected metastasis. There was initial improvement in clinical signs of lethargy after re-initiation of therapy. The patient later presented for worsening lethargy and anorexia of one week duration, and owners elected for humane euthanasia due to a poor prognosis. The overall survival time was 370 days. Post-mortem examination was declined by the owners.