A 15 year old girl presented to the ER with coma following several tonic–clonic convulsions.
The patient was previously healthy with no personal or familial medical history. During her visit to a dentist for endodontic treatment, the dentist injected 1.5 ml of 2 % lidocaine (the total dose was 30 mg) and epinephrine 1:100,000 for local anesthesia. The solution was injected on the left side by an expert hand without prior aspiration.
The injection lasted about 2 min. By the end of the injection, the girl collapsed and several intermittent tonic–clonic convulsions ensued. These lasted about 30 min and were followed by deep coma.
Glasgow coma scale (GCS) was three, brainstem reflexes were intact, and no fever was noticed. Vital signs were within normal limits.
Her left cheek and gingiva were edematous and a giant gingival hematoma was noticed.
Optic disc examination showed no edema.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) was normal except for sinus tachycardia (120 beat per minute).
Electroencephalography (EEG) showed diffuse slow activity, predominately theta rhythms, with no signs of continuous status epilepticus.
Brain computed tomography (CT) revealed reduced white–gray matter differentiation with effacement of cerebral sulci which was compatible with cerebral edema.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging with venogram and angiogram MRI + MRV + MRA showed cerebral edema, bilateral and almost symmetric hyperintense T2 lesions with restricted diffusion in both frontal and occipital lobes , and no underlying cerebral venous thrombosis CVT.
Lumbar puncture was performed and revealed the following results: 10 lymphocytes, elevated protein (50 mg/dl), no RBCs, and negative gram stain. Whereas blood glucose was 50 mg/dl, CSF glucose was 70.
Ordinary labs including Calcium, Albumin, MG, Na, K, creatinine, urea, LFTs, CBC, Plt, PT, PTT, and INR were all normal and troponin was negative.
The patient was admitted to the ICU and intubated.
Phenytoin at dose 15 mg/kg was loaded with close cardiac monitoring, and a maintenance dose of 100 mg twice daily was initiated in the second day.
A bolus (1 g/kg) of Mannitol was given intravenously, followed by a maintenance dose of 0.5 g/kg/8 h. GCS, consequently, improved to nine in 2 days.
The patient recovered completely and was discharged after a week of admission.