A 20-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital on July 9, 2021, for evaluation of recurring abdominal pain, diarrhea, and black stools, which had been persisting for 6 years.
The patient received treatment at a local hospital 6 years back for seven days of unexplained abdominal pain. On examination, the peritoneal stimulation sign was positive. Abdominal X-ray at the time revealed a gas shadow located below the diaphragm. On diagnostic abdominal puncture, 5 mL of purulent fluid was withdrawn, thereby raising the suspicion of perforation in the digestive tract. Laparotomy performed for exploration revealed diffuse peritonitis, acute gangrenous appendicitis with perforation, adhesive intestinal obstruction, and pelvic abscess. Appendectomy, intestinal adhesiolysis, and pelvic abscess removal surgery were performed during the procedure (July 2, 2015). Following surgery, the patient’s condition improved and he was discharged. However, one year after discharge, the patient stared experiencing recurrent abdominal pain and dark red loose stools, with positive test results for fecal occult blood and mild to moderate anemia. Colonoscopy had been performed several times before and showed the presence of intestinal ulcers and bleeding at other hospitals. In light of the colonoscopy findings, a clinical diagnosis of IBD was made. Oral treatment with mesalazine was administered at a local hospital, at a dose of 2 tablets four times a day for a total of 6 weeks. However, there was no improvement in the symptoms of rectal bleeding. Subsequently, oral treatment with azathioprine was added, at a dose of 50 mg once a day for a total of 2 months. Even with this treatment, the symptoms of rectal bleeding did not improve. The Mayo score was 8 points both before and after medication (with an increase of 2-3 times per day compared to the normal bowel movements, mixed blood in the stool within less than half of the time, ulcer formation detected by endoscopy, and moderate condition). Considering its ineffectiveness, mesalazine and azathioprine treatment was discontinued.
On July 9, 2021, the patient presented with persistence and worsening of the abovementioned symptoms. The frequency of episodes of abdominal pain and black stool had increased, with approximately 30 mL of dark red loose stools about 3-4 times a day, without mucus, or pus. In addition, he reported dizziness, but did not report any nausea, vomiting, abdominal distension, or constipation. The patient did not experience any loss of consciousness. Moreover, the patient did not show any signs of fever, chills, or night sweats. Subsequently, the patient sought medical attention and was hospitalized for further evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment.
The patient's medical history was the same as before, with no other surgical or traumatic history. He also denied having any history of long-term use of NSAIDs or glucocorticoids. Due to gastrointestinal bleeding, the patient received red blood cell infusion twice, without any negative reactions during the process. There was no evidence of infectious diseases, such as typhoid fever and tuberculosis, or any sexually transmitted diseases.
The individual reported a history of alcohol consumption for three years, although the amount consumed was unknown. He denied having any history of smoking or exposure to toxins; he also denied any family history of genetic diseases.
On examination, the patient had stable vital signs, a clear mind, an anemic face, and pallor of the palpebral conjunctiva, lips, and nail beds. Superficial lymph nodes were not palpable, and cardiopulmonary examination revealed no apparent positive signs; only an old longitudinal surgical scar measuring approximately 20 cm in length was noted on the abdomen. Tenderness was noted beneath the xiphoid process, but there was no rebound pain or muscle tension. No shifting dullness was detected, and bowel sounds were heard at a rate of 6 per minute. No edema was observed in either lower limb.
Routine blood tests revealed moderate anemia and a decrease in the average red blood cell volume . Other tests conducted after admission showed no abnormalities in coagulation function and blood biochemistry. No abnormal findings were obtained in laboratory tests for antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, antinuclear antibodies, immunoglobulin, lymphocyte immunochip, C-reactive protein (CRP), blood sedimentation rate, and detection of common viruses such as human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and cytomegalovirus. Analysis of the stool sample collected revealed the presence of occult blood. Fecal bacterial culture and fecal fungal culture did not show positive findings. Additionally, the 13C-urea breath test yielded a negative result. Whole-exome sequencing performed for the detection of genetic diseases led to the identification of autosomal ACVRL1 and PLA2G4A gene mutations (July 21, 2021; Figure ).
On gastroscopy performed on July 12, 2021, the esophagus appeared to have normal morphology and color, with no evident abnormalities . The distance from the cardia to the incisor was approximately 40 cm, and the dentate line was clearly visible. No abnormalities were visible in the mucosa and structure of the gastric fundus and gastric body. The gastric fundus showed a moderate amount of mucus and yellow turbidity, with a smoothly curved gastric angle. In addition, congestion and edema of the gastric antrum mucosa were noted, with no signs of ulcers or masses. The pylorus appeared to be circular and functioning properly, with smooth opening and closure. Similarly, no abnormalities were detected in the duodenal bulb and mucosa of the descending duodenum. The above findings led to the conclusion of chronic non-atrophic gastritis with bile reflux.
Colonoscopy performed on July 16, 2021 revealed that the surgical repair site between the ascending colon and the ileum was visible 55 cm from the anus (usually 60-70 cm away from the anus); the ileocecal valve and cecum were indistinguishable . There were scattered nodular protrusions, lamellar vesicle, and shallow ulcers at the site of surgical repair, as well as in the ileum. Additionally, local mucosal protrusions, ulcers, and nodular protrusions were observed near the hepatic flexure of the transverse colon. The morphology of the remaining part of the descending colon and sigmoid colon appeared normal, with regular folds, a smooth mucosal surface, and rich and clear vascular network; no abnormal secretions, erosion, ulcers, or masses were detected in these segments of the colon. Similarly, the rectal mucosa exhibited no obvious abnormalities, But a fistula in the perianal area was suspected. The colonoscopy findings raised a suspicion of CD.
Pathological examination of the appendix removed on July 2, 2015, showed acute gangrenous appendicitis, peritonitis, appendix perforation, and fecal stone incarceration within the cavity.
Histopathologic examination of a sample of intestinal mucosa obtained on July 19, 2021 revealed superficial mucosa ulceration in the ileum with abundant inflammatory exudates, formation of granulomas, infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells, and no caseous necrosis . Additionally, the superficial mucosa of the colon showed signs of acute and chronic inflammation.
Multiple routine investigations during hospitalization revealed a decrease in the levels of red blood cells, hemoglobin, and average red blood cell volume; slightly higher fibrinogen levels; and a positive fecal occult blood. Given the patient’s history of appendiceal perforation, special care was taken to remain vigilant for signs of gastrointestinal ulcers, and a careful gastroenteroscopy and pathological examination was performed, which validated the atypical intestinal lesions of CD or UC. Additionally, the patient did not exhibit symptoms such as low fever or night sweats, and did not have abnormalities in chest CT and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Moreover, enteroscopy did not show any transverse ulcers, and pathological findings did not suggest caseous necrosis. Absence of the typical symptoms and the investigative findings together rule out the possibility of tuberculosis infection. The 13C-urea breath test result was negative, which ruled out Helicobacter pylori infection. Since the patient did not have any history of taking NSAIDs or corticosteroids, drug-induced ulcers were also ruled out. Moreover, no abnormalities were detected in tests for urine cytomegalovirus deoxyribonucleic acid, fecal bacterial culture, fecal fungal culture, and common virological tests; therefore, viral, bacterial, and fungal infections were ruled out. Upon retrospective analysis of the clinical manifestations, enteroscopic and pathological findings, the diagnosis was established as IBD without typical features of CD or UC. The patient did not have extraintestinal manifestations, and tests for CRP, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, antinuclear antibodies, immunoglobulin levels, lymphocyte immunochip showed no abnormalities. Furthermore, despite undergoing mesalazine and immune-modulating therapy with azathioprine, there was no improvement in the patient's symptoms. Thus, the early age of onset; recurrence of symptoms; atypical features of CD and UC; and lack of response to aminosalicylic acid, immunotherapy, and related symptomatic treatment raised suspicion of the potential etiopathogenetic role of genetic factors in this case.
Subsequently, whole-exome sequencing for genetic diseases was performed, which revealed mutations in the ACVRL1 and PLA2G4A genes. Mutations of both these genes are known to cause a decrease in the ability of the intestinal mucosa to resist injury and sustain repair. Kangfuxin liquid is known to have an effect of accelerating the repair of pathological tissue, shedding of necrotic tissue, and healing of ulcers and wounds. Accordingly, we modified the treatment plan and administered oral Kangfuxin liquid of 10 mL three times daily to promote the repair of the intestinal repair. The patient was discharged once his symptoms improved on initiating this treatment, and treatment was continued for 4 wk after discharge. If the patient occasionally experiences symptoms such as abdominal pain, diarrhea, and black stool, oral administration of Kangfuxin liquid can alleviate the symptoms.