A 68-years-old Mongoloid woman presented with an asymptomatic, flesh-colored lesion on the right upper eyelid. The lesion had slowly increased in size over 5 years. No similar lesions were found on other parts of the body. Her medical and family histories were unremarkable, and she had experienced no triggering trauma.
Upon ophthalmologic examination, the protruding lesion was found to be approximately 5 × 5 × 4 mm and located on the upper lid margin . Palpation of the lesion did not elicit pain, and the lesion was non-slidable. On the photography of anterior segment, the nodule was verified as flesh-colored, dome-shaped, with eyelashes on the smooth surface, and the lesion located on the anterior lamella of the lid margin, without superficial ulceration and dilated blood vessels. . The conjunctiva, cornea, and lens were unremarkable and so as the fundus examination results. Examinations showed that the left eye was normal. The visual acuity of both eyes was 20/20.
The lesion was removed by shave excision under local anesthesia. The lesion was non-slidable, and it was adherent to the tarsal plate and its covered skin. Anterior lamella of the eyelid was resected with a trigonal wedge, with the removal of 1 mm of extra tissue from the margin of the lesion, and the thin layer of the tarsal plate. The anterior lamella defect of the upper eyelid was repaired using A-T flap. A gray line split was performed on the cut ends of skin defects, then, the skin defects were sutured directly. We checked the preauricular lymph nodes, and no lymphadenopathy was found. After the operation, the patient was compression bandaged for 24 h.
Histologically examination of the lesion showed a well-defined tumor mass involving a hair follicle, and a proliferation of multiple thin strands of basaloid cells, extending from the central follicle into the surrounding fibrous stroma. The fibrous stroma presented a sharp contrast with the surrounding dermis. Hematoxylin-eosin stains contained mucin content in the stroma . The histologic findings were characteristic of fibrofolliculoma.
Two weeks after the surgery, the patient had no particular complain. The right upper lid showed almost identical to that of the left . During the 3-month follow-up, no signs of recurrence or new lesions appeared.