A Chinese boy with a medical history of eczema and obesity presented with two episodes of anasarca and hypovolemic shock.
When the patient was six years old, he had coryzal symptoms for two days and a one-day history of vomiting, diarrhoea and generalised abdominal pain. His blood pressure was 85/66 mmHg and heart rate was 144 beats per minute (bpm) upon presentation at another local hospital. This progressed to hypovolaemic shock requiring admission to the paediatric intensive care unit for fluid resuscitation. Laboratory investigation showed haemoconcentration, hypoalbuminemia and renal impairment with metabolic acidosis . Echocardiogram revealed a thickened left ventricle. Blood culture yielded coagulase-negative Staphylococci, which was deemed a skin contaminant. He was treated with fluid resuscitation and a seven-day empiric course of ceftriaxone. The patient’s renal function normalised after fluid replacement and he was discharged after one week. An echocardiogram was repeated a month later, which showed normal ventricular wall thickness, structure and function.
The patient was well afterwards until he was eight years old. He presented with vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain and a low-grade fever for one day. Again, he was admitted to another local hospital. The child became lethargic, hypotensive (76/52 mmHg), tachycardic (141 bpm), with physical signs of poor perfusion. Within 8 h of admission, a total of 3500 ml (70 mL/kg) of normal saline boluses were given but there were only transient periods of improvement and the blood pressure remained low overall. Laboratory investigation again showed haemoconcentration, hypoalbuminemia, impaired renal function and metabolic acidosis . Echocardiogram from the referring hospital showed a thickened left ventricle; the interventricular septum was 11.9 mm (Z-score + 13.34) and free wall was 14.2 mm (Z-score + 16.22).
His blood pressure remained unstable despite additional boluses of 3500 ml (70 mL/kg) of normal saline in total over the next 12 h. Multiple inotropic medications including dopamine, dobutamine, noradrenaline and stress dose hydrocortisone were started. He was transferred to our hospital, a tertiary referral centre, for consideration of ECMO within 24 h of admission.
During the transfer, he was given a total of 11 intravenous boluses (total 21 mL) of 0.1 mg/mL adrenaline due to persistent shock. He developed pulseless electrical activities shortly after arrival to our cardiac intensive care unit and recovered after two minutes of cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Upon return of spontaneous circulation, his blood pressure was 44/37 mmHg and his heart rate was 185 bpm. Post-resuscitation echocardiogram showed poor systolic function of both ventricles with the left ventricular internal dimension at end-diastole (LVIDd) of 18.3 mm (z-score − 8.65); the intraventricular septum at end-diastole (IVSd) was 18.3 mm (z-score + 4.61); left ventricular posterior wall at end-diastole (LVPWd) was 13.4 mm (z-score + 3.95); left ventricle fractional shortening (LVFS) was 18.3%; tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) was 14.3 mm (z-score − 3.60) and the left ventricular mass index was 70 g/m2 .
Emergency central veno-arterial ECMO was immediately initiated via cannulation of the right atrium and ascending aorta, and another 5200 ml (100 mL/kg) of fluid and blood products were given over the first 12 h after ECMO was started to maintain his intravascular volume. An optimal ECMO flow was achieved at 3 L/min with a cardiac index of 2.2 L/min/m2 afterwards. His nasopharynx aspirate was positive for parainfluenza virus type 2 and stool culture was positive for Salmonella group B. Blood culture and urine culture were negative and there was no detectable urinary protein. The patient had a mildly low immunoglobulin (Ig) G level of 687 (724–1380) mg/dL, but normal IgA and IgM. Protein electrophoresis and urine immunofixation showed no monoclonal antibody peak.
The patient was very oedematous and developed compartment syndrome involving both lower limbs that required emergency fasciotomy. He also developed rhabdomyolysis with deranged renal function and pulmonary oedema 24 h after ECMO was initiated. Echocardiogram repeated 12 h after ECMO insertion showed reduced thickening of his left ventricular wall. The patient’s cardiac function, renal function and perfusion subsequently improved. Inotropic and ECMO support was weaned off three days after initiation. Echocardiogram four days after termination of ECMO support showed improvement of the left ventricular dimension and wall thickness and cardiac function: LVIDd was 33.4 mm (z-score − 2.63); IVSd was 6.95 mm (z-score 0.09); LVPWd was 6.62 mm (z-score 0.28); LVFS was 32.6% and the left ventricular mass was 39 g/m2 .
As the patient’s clinical and laboratory findings were all suggestive of ISCLS after discussion with an immunologist, montelukast 5 mg daily was started as prophylactic treatment at three weeks, and he received his first monthly immunoglobulin infusion (1 g/kg) prophylaxis two months after the initial presentation. At his subsequent follow-up appointment, he still had residual peroneal neuropathy. Echocardiogram 11 weeks later showed normal left ventricular wall thickness and a full recovery of his biventricular function. He has remained asymptomatic so far for more than 12 months at his most recent clinic follow-up.