A 49-year-old woman was admitted because of fever and abdominal pain. She had chronic renal failure caused by type 2 diabetes mellitus and initiated continuous ambulatory PD (CAPD) one year ago, with a conventional twin-bag system and no automated cycler device. Although her body fluids and solute levels were well controlled, she developed recurrent infections with Staphylococcus caprae at the catheter exit site, leading to chronic subcutaneous tunnel infection with abscess around the catheter . Subsequently, she underwent subcutaneous pathway diversion two months ago. When admitted to the hospital, she had a body temperature of 38.6 °C, pulse rate of 98 beats/minute, and blood pressure of 118/73 mmHg. Her entire abdomen was tender, with apparent rebound tenderness. The catheter exit site showed no signs of infection. Her laboratory data revealed that a white blood cell (WBC) count of 8950/μL, with 85.1% neutrophils, and C-reactive protein level of 9.43 mg/dL. Her dialysis effluent appeared cloudy, and the WBC count in the effluent was 3870/μL (76% polymorphonuclear cells). Considering these results, she was diagnosed as having CAPD-associated peritonitis.
Initially, the peritonitis was suspected to be because of the recurrent subcutaneous tunnel infection caused by S. caprae, as it occurred relatively soon after the subcutaneous pathway diversion. However, an abdominal computed tomography scan revealed no findings of recurrent subcutaneous abscess . After sampling the effluent in blood culture bottles and sterile plastic tubes for bacterial culture, she received empiric antibiotic therapy with continuous intraperitoneal ceftazidime that was mixed in the dialysate bags (125 mg/L of dialysate). Her fever and abdominal pain immediately ameliorated, and the WBC count in the effluent normalized in five days. The causative bacteria for the peritonitis were not identified by culture testing. However, mass spectrometry (MALDI Biotyper, Bruker Daltonics, Germany) for bacterial identification successfully detected C. canimorsus in a tiny colony in solid culture medium inoculated from samples collected in sterile plastic tubes . The patient had four cats in her house, and the room for bag exchange was not sequestered from these cats. Additionally, she frequently slept with the cats on the bed, although the catheter had never been damaged by cat bite or scratch. She was thoroughly advised not to allow the cats in her bedroom and in the room for bag exchange.