The case is a 26 years old lady who had referred to a gynecologist because of infertility 2 years ago. She has married 8 years ago and after 2 years, she decided to have child. During the first two years of marriage they used natural method for contraception and she had not used any OCP or IUD. Her menarche was at the age of 14 and from then on she has a regular and normal monthly menstruation.
She had a negative past medical history with no sign or symptoms of neurologic diseases such as anxiety or depression. She had also no history of any clinical disease, pelvic or abdominal surgery, and extensive weight loss and drug or alcohol abuse.
In her family history the only positive clues were; the presence of hypothyroidism, diabetes and vitiligo in her mother and aunts. In physical exams: BMI=23, secondary sexual signs were normal and there was no sign or symptom of hirsutism, acne or any other systemic disease. Evaluation of her husband revealed normal male factor and spermogram. Laboratory findings included: serum FSH, serum LH, serum prolactin, TSH, testosterone, progesterone and estradiol which all of them were at the normal range.
Post coital test (PCT) and histrosalpangography were normal. Diagnostic laparoscopy showed no signs of tubal adhesion or endometriosis. After seven months and performing primary and secondary evaluation, she was diagnosed as a case of unexplained infertility and IVF was suggested for her.
About 9 months ago, the patient had a medical consultation because of diarrhea and 3 kg of weight loss. She reports a history of 12 months intermittent, non bloody and osmotic diarrhea which consists of normal bowel habits intervals. There was no history of fatty stool or consumption of laxatives.
Lab findings:
HB: 11.8 (NL: 12-16) MCV: 76 (NL: 80-95)
MCH: 27 (NL: 36-48) Serum Fe: 110 (NL: 80-180)
TIBC: 320 (NL: 250-460) Serum Ferritin: 54 ngr/ml (12-300) CRP: +ESR: 18 S/E: negative
OB: negative. AST: 29 IU (NL: 5-40)
ALT: 31 IU (NL: 8-40)
Considering iron deficiency anemia, intestinal signs and the history of 4 years infertility, we became suspicious to celiac disease and checked serological factors (total IgA and tTG).
The positive results of these tests (Total IgA>40 and tTG>30) followed by upper GI endoscopy and biopsy of the second portion of duodenum. The obtained tissues were observed by two expert pathologists and they reported severe malabsorption with flattening of villi, hyperplasia of crypts and total atrophy of mucosa which was presenting stage III of modified marsh classification ( and ). Based on patient's history and serologic and pathologic findings diagnosis of CD was confirmed and she received a complete gluten free diet. After 3 months all her clinical features including; diarrhea, flatulence and anemia were eradicated and pregnancy occurred.