A 68-year-old woman patient presented arrhythmias with hypotension requiring electrical cardioversion. Her electrocardiogram (ECG) was interpreted as atrial fibrillation (AF) by AP. She was brought urgently to our electrophysiology laboratory, where we are trained for electroanatomical mapping but it is not available. The ECG suggested the presence of posterior or right postero-septal AP ;
In this case, with recurrent AF by AP and hypotension we did not decide to perform the electrophysiological study to determine the AP insertion sites due to the patient's clinical condition. Cardiologists who was in charge of the patient requested our intervention due to despite the group I-C antiarrhythmic drugs treatment (at recommended doses) the patient continued suffering AF by AP. Once in the electrophysiology laboratory secondary to catheters movement into the heart AF by AP began with hypotension and it was necessary to perform electrical cardioversión (2 Joules per kilogram of weight was calculated, discharge was synchronized with QRS of the electrocardiogram). A deep sedation was performed with midazolam (10 mg ampules in 2 ml), initial dose of 0.5 mg. A single shock was required to recover sinus rhythm.
Considering the above we proceeded with the protocol of ablation stablished in our laboratory: two punctures on the right femoral vein with placement of introducers (8F and 7F) by Seldigner technique and one puncture on the left femoral vein (7F). The study was performed with BIOTRONIK technology (Multicath study catheter), a non-deflectable 7F quadripolar catheter with 2 mm tip electrode to record the His electrogram, a non-deflectable decapolar catheter with 5 pairs of CS electrodes. All electrograms into CS showed short AV from proximal to distal CS .
Using a BIOTRONIK ablation catheter (Alcath gold fullcircle) through the 8F introducer. Delta wave in V1 showed negative suggesting the septal region accessory pathway.
It seemed ventricular electrogram CS proximal (CP 9–10) was earliest during sinus rhythm in Fig. B. It is important to validate the electrogram component between atrium and ventricle. Nevertheless, AP mapping on the right posterior septal region showed no accessory pathway recordings. That is why we decided to perform anterograde mapping of the AP into the left cavities, using a St Jude deflectable sheath (Agilis 8.5 F) and by transseptal puncture we accessed to the left atrium. Mapping with the ablation catheter of the entire posteroseptal, posterior, posterolateral and lateral region of the mitral annulus, we never saw an AV shorter than those observed in the CS; the shorter AV into left chambers was observed on posteriorseptal región (delta-V of 5 ms), then we decided to apply radiofrecuency (RF) on there (temperature of 60 degrees, 55 watts and 60 s of application); finally it was not successful.
We returned to the right cavities decided to map in sinus rhythm the entire CS from its proximal to the most distal portion, observing AP recordings with very short AV along the CS, the shortest delta-V was − 20 ms, always on proximal CS (CS 9–10), Fig. B. Nevertheless, the AP electrogram was not found nearby of it. Finally we decided to map into the CS finding the a continuous electrogram on ablation catheter, with intermediate accessory pathway potential spike into of the left posterior coronary vein (PCV) considering its probable radiological projection and here was applied RF with 50 watts and 50 Celsius degrees on the PCV anatomical region . During the first seconds of radiofrequency application the patient referred intense pain, so we decided a deep sedation with midazolam newly, this time 1 mg to achieve deep sedation. A trained specialist was in charge of the patient's airway management. This allowed us to gradually increase the temperature for ablation and fortunately there were no impedance increases in the ablation channel. It allowed us to continue and end the procedure.
After we decided to increase 55 watts and 60 Celsius degrees; a junctional rhythm started and we moved the His recording catheter to the right atrium and started to pace with a higher cycle length than the junctional rhythm after 60 consecutive seconds of RF the AP was ablated on the ventricular site. We could recognize the accessory pathway was ablated because during pacing from the right atrium a normal PR segment can be observed on the surface electrocardiogram, without the presence of a delta wave . If accessory pathway were still present, pacing from the atrium at a basic cycle higher than junctional rhythm would reveal the presence of the accessory pathway (delta wave on electrocardiogram).
The radiological projection suggests we were probably in the posterior coronary vein; however, a venography should have been performed to identify that site; there is a anatomical variation of the CS ostium. Some of the patients showed large ostium with trumpet-shape. It is still unclear the shortest delta-V was located at left posterior vein without CS venography or Geometry with 3D mapping system. In our laboratory we have not a 3D system, we should have performed CS venography and it was not performed. It was a limitation to diagnosis the anatomical site of ablation.
According to our laboratory protocols, we waited ten minutes after ablation and administered adenosine, 12 mg intravenously for verification of AP ablation. After the administration of adenosine an electrocardiographic pattern reappears with the presence of delta wave ; however, compared to the initial ECG, a small R wave appears in DII and CS recording has been modified with shorter AV on CS 1–2 and 3–4 . Upon observing a new site where the CS 3–4 accessory pathway would be passing through, we decided to stimulate from that point of the atrium (CS 3–4) and observed maximum pre-excitation. We also stimulated from 9–10 CS and there was no change in the magnitude of the surface electrocardiogram delta wave. When pacing from the right ventricle, the first retrograde atrium was observed at CS 3–4. Considering that initially left intracavitary mapping had been performed, we decided to go directly through the CS.
Mapping within CS with ablation catheter up to anatomical and fluoroscopic region where the CS catheter recording 3–4 was located (it was removed) . Successful ablation was achieved at this second point, on the mitral annulus. After waiting 10 min and administration of adenosine, ablation was successful at two distant epicardial points and the ECG was in sinus rhythm with normal PR .