A 58-year-old Caucasian man was referred to the eye clinic in view of multiple raised yellowish lesions in both fundi. He had originally visited his optician for occasional flashes and floaters. He had recently been diagnosed with diet controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus and was on a low dose of amlodipine (5mg/day) for well controlled hypertension. His other drug history included analgesics (paracetamol, dihydrocodeine) and omeprazole. He admitted to heavy alcohol consumption in the past and had chronic liver disease with ascites.
His examination revealed that he had hepatomegaly with a palpable liver edge three fingerbreadths below the right costal margin, but no splenomegaly. An ultrasound of the liver showed generally increased echogenicity suggestive of liver cirrhosis. A computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the presence of liver cirrhosis and showed evidence of esophageal varices, in keeping with decompensated chronic liver disease.
There was no evidence of a localized lesion in the liver, ruling out the possibility of both hepatocellular carcinoma and metastatic disease as causes of decompensation. His liver function tests (LFTs), including alkaline phosphatase (ALP), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT), had been elevated for several years. Interestingly, he was also found to have a marginally elevated plasma viscosity of 1.81mPa/s (normal range 1.5 to 1.72mPa/s) with no evidence of paraprotein.
His ocular examination was within normal limits for the anterior segment. His visual acuity was 6/6 in both eyes. Ophthalmoscopic examination of both eyes revealed a symmetrical pattern of dozens of variably sized, slightly yellowish, translucent raised lesions throughout the fundi . These lesions were confirmed as multiple neurosensory retinal detachments on optical coherence tomography (OCT) and fundus autofluorescence . The patient was followed-up in the eye clinic and was asymptomatic until his last follow-up. Visual acuity, fundus and OCT findings were unchanged. As the visual acuity was good and there was no evidence of choroidal neovascularization, conservative management was recommended.