A 50-year-old woman with past history of hypothyroidism (on 25 μg levothyroxine) presented to emergency department with history of acute chest pain for 1 day prior to admission and an episode of syncope 15 min prior to admission. There was no significant drug history or history of an emotional or physical stimulus prior to admission. On examination the patient was in shock and had a feeble pulse with a rate of 150/min and a systolic blood pressure of 60 mm of Hg. General physical examination was notable for prominent pigmentation over the tongue and skin creases on hands . Cardiovascular examination was unremarkable. The initial electrocardiogram revealed monomorphic ventricular tachycardia with a rate of 160/min . The same was cardioverted via 200 J biphasic DC shock. Electrocardiogram after cardioversion revealed a sine-wave pattern consistent with hyperkalemia . Calcium gluconate and other anti-hyperkalemic measures were instituted, and gradually, there was resolution of the sine-wave pattern. The subsequent electrocardiogram obtained had sinus rhythm with T-wave inversions in anterior and inferior leads with a prolonged QTC of 530 ms . Her blood pressure responded to intravenous saline and minimal dose of noradrenaline and subsequently was 120/60 mm of Hg. The urine output was adequate at 100 mL/hour. Bedside echocardiography demonstrated regional wall motion abnormalities with a hypokinetic and ballooned apex corresponding to left anterior descending artery. The left ventricular ejection fraction was 35% with a normal systolic pulmonary artery pressure of 35 mm of Hg (Additional file : Video 1). There was no left ventricular outflow gradient. The working diagnosis at this stage was acute anterior wall myocardial infarction, and accordingly dual antiplatelets, statins and low molecular weight heparin were instituted.
The initial laboratory investigations were significant for hyperkalemia (7.8 mEq/L) and hyponatremia (128 mEq/L) with a preserved renal function (creatinine-1.0 mg/dL). There was microcytic and hypochromic anemia with a hemoglobin of 11 mg/dL. The cardiac biomarkers were modestly elevated consistent with acute myocardial injury with a cardiac troponin I of 0.73 ng/mL (range 0.0–0.03 ng/mL). Her thyroid function tests were also deranged with an elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone of 67.70 mIU/L [–] and low T3 (2 pmol/L) and T4 (10 pmol/L). Despite adequate anti-hyperkalemic measures, the serum potassium remained elevated (5.8–6.5 mEq/L) for the next 48 h; however, the electrocardiogram changes of hyperkalemia had reverted.
The patient was managed conservatively for the next 24 h but still required persistent inotropic support and intravenous fluids for maintenance of blood pressure. There was significant postural dizziness, and a postural fall of 50 mm of Hg was present at 3 min. Her levothyroxine was escalated to 75 μg daily. In view of these postural symptoms, skin changes and significant electrolyte abnormalities in the background of normal renal parameters, suspicion of adrenal insufficiency was kept, and investigations were performed accordingly. The subsequent 8 am cortisol was 0.429 mcg/dL consistent with adrenal insufficiency. To identify the cause of adrenal insufficiency, a cosyntropin test was performed, and the subsequent 8 am cortisol was 0.423 mcg/dL consistent with primary adrenal insufficiency. The diagnosis of APS II was established.
The patient had remarkable improvement in her hemodynamics after initiation of intravenous 50 mg hydrocortisone every 6 h. The postural blood pressure fall resolved after 48 h and hyperkalemia also resolved. To rule out coexistent coronary artery disease, an invasive coronary angiogram was performed which revealed normal coronaries and the presence of apical hypokinesia on left ventricular angiogram . The echocardiogram showed improvement in cardiac function with an ejection fraction of 45% and regional wall motion abnormalities. The cardiac troponin I fell to 0.13 ng/mL (range 0.0–0.03 ng/mL). The diagnoses of TCM were established in accordance with the International Takotsubo Diagnostic Criteria . Antiplatelets and statins were subsequently withdrawn, and she was discharged on 50 mg metoprolol, oral prednisolone 10 mg twice daily and 75 μg levothyroxine.
At one month of follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic and there was normalization of her left ventricular ejection fraction (Additional file : Video 3). Currently, the patient is doing fine at 6 months of follow-up.