A 23-year-old-woman was referred to our hospital for severe pain and decreased visual acuity started one day ago in the right eye. Two days prior to this, the patient had foldable iris-fixated pIOL (Artiflex; Ophtec BV, Groningen, the Netherlands) implanted in both eyes at an outside clinic. On postoperative day one, she had undergone anterior chamber (AC) irrigation to remove residual viscoelastics which caused intraocular pressure (IOP) spike in the right eye.On examination, uncorrected distant visual acuity (UDVA) was hand motion with IOP of 21 mmHg for the right eye. Biomicroscopy of the eye revealed severe conjunctival injection, corneal edema, corneal infiltration at superior main incision, membrane formation around the pIOL, and a deep AC with a 1.5 mm hypopyon, which were thought to represent infectious endophthalmitis (Figure A). Posterior segment evaluations such as vitreous cell grading and fundus examination were impossible because of severe corneal edema and AC inflammation. B-scan ultrasonography showed no definite vitreous involvement, and the left eye was normal.
Immediate management involved AC irrigation, obtaining aqueous humor for culture and stain, and intravitreal vancomycin (1.0 mg/0.1 cc) and amikacin (0.4 mg/0.1 cc) injection. Gram and KOH stain smear revealed no bacteria or fungus. The patient was also treated with systemic (flomoxef 1.0 g every 12 hours) and topical (fortified vancomycin (50 mg/mL) and amikacin (20 mg/mL) hourly) antibiotics, prednisolone 1.0% four times daily, and homatropine 2% twice daily eye drops for a week, then the frequency was reduced according to the clinical response, culture, and sensitivity results. After 5 days of incubation, cultures became positive for Streptococcus mitis/oralis. By day 2 of admission, the patient did not improve so that AC irrigation, intracameral vancomycin (1.0 mg/0.1 cc) and amikacin (0.4 mg/0.1 cc) injection, and subtenon triamcinolone injection (40 mg/1.0 cc) were performed.
After the second round of intervention, the patient began to improve clinically. On day 5, UDVA improved to 20/100, and biomicroscopy revealed moderate AC reaction without hypopyon and decreased inflammatory membrane behind the pIOL (Figures B, C). At 2 weeks, UDVA was 20/40 and IOP was 11 mmHg (Figure D). Endothelial cell density was measured at 3143cells/mm2. At 1 month, UDVA improved to 20/32, and biomicroscopy showed minimal AC reaction and corneal edema.