A 35-year-old female gravida eight para two with a recent left tubal pregnancy and a left salpingectomy 11 days prior, presented to the emergency department (ED) with two days of left lower and upper quadrant abdominal pain radiating to the epigastric region. The patient’s last menstrual period had been several months prior. She had a family history of ectopic pregnancies and a history of a prior sexually transmitted infection but no documented history of pelvic inflammatory disease. The physical examination revealed left lower quadrant abdominal tenderness, rebound, guarding, and left adnexal tenderness. Her vital signs were unremarkable, with an initial blood pressure of 132/82 millimeters of mercury, pulse of 75 beats per minute, temperature of 98°F, and oxygen saturation of 99% on room air.
Her laboratory studies were notable for a hemoglobin of 11.9 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range: 11.6–15 g/dL) and a normal white blood cell count of 8.4 thousand per cubic milliliter (k/μL) (reference range: 5–10 k/μL). Her lipase and liver function tests were within normal limits. Her human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) had tripled from 6,253 milli-international units per milliliter (mIU/mL) (reference range: ≤2 mIU/mL) from her prior presentation to 18,038 mIU/mL. Transvaginal ultrasound showed a possible ectopic pregnancy adjacent to the right ovary and no intrauterine pregnancy .
The patient declined medical abortion and was taken to the operating room for a right salpingectomy. On her initial presentation 11 days prior, the patient’s preoperative ultrasound had shown a complex focus of the left ovary with a hyperechoic thick rim suggestive of ectopic pregnancy and probable right-sided corpus luteal and anechoic cysts (, ). No evidence of right ectopic pregnancy was documented intraoperatively during the patient’s initial salpingectomy. Pathology findings from the initial left- and subsequent right-sided procedures showed immature chorionic villi, congestion, and hemorrhage consistent with a tubal pregnancy. The patient had an uneventful recovery after her second surgery.