A 45-year-old man previously injured by a chest shotgun was referred to our Institution for a retained bullet in the left ventricle. The patient’s medical history included hypertension, diabetes, and thyroid dysfunction.
One month before the admission, the patient underwent an emergency cardiorrhaphy through a left thoracotomy. At that time, the patient was in a war zone, and the previous emergent operation was performed by a general surgeon with the aim to stop the bleeding. At the time of hospitalization, the patient was in stable clinical conditions with sporadic atypical chest pains and rate-dependant left bundle branch block (LBBB). At presentation, the physical examination did not showed pathological signs, except for a left thoracic wound. Blood tests, including markers of cardiac injury, were all within normal limits. Transthoracic echocardiography showed the bullet retained within the left ventricular chamber localized into the posterior wall underneath the posterior mitral leaflet without signs of valve dysfunction or systolic dysfunction . Chest X-ray and angio-computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the presence of the missile in the left ventricle wedged within the tendineal chordae underneath the posterior mitral leaflet .
Preoperative workup included a coronary angiogram showing unobstructed coronary arteries. After multidisciplinary discussion at the Heart Team, we decided to proceed with the surgical removal of the RCM. The operation was performed through median sternotomy with routine cardiopulmonary bypass. After aortic cross-clamping and cardioplegia delivery, the left atrium was opened, the posterior mitral leaflet was incised just above the RCM, and the bullet was removed . The edges were then sutured to re-establish continuity of P2 with a 4/0 braided suture. Posterior ring annuloplasty was then performed using a flexible Gore-tex band. The post-operative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the seventh post-operative day. Echocardiography performed at discharge did not revealed any residual mitral regurgitation.