A morbidly obese 32-year-old Asian female with a body mass index of 52 and a history of meningioma excision and asthma, presented to the emergency room (ER) with a positive COVID-19 test and shortness of breath, cough, and diarrhea. She was hypoxic with oxygen saturation via pulse oximetry (SpO2) of 88% on room air, tachypneic with respiratory rate of 35, febrile with temperature of 100.5 F, pulse rate 89, and blood pressure 106/84. CXR demonstrated bilateral basal multifocal infiltrates. She was admitted on 5 L/min of O2. The patient experienced symptoms 7 days prior to presenting to the ER. Upon admission, the patient was confirmed to be SARS-CoV-2 positive by nasopharyngeal swab and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction with an Abbott ID system. The patient was started on Ceftriaxone and Azithromycin for potential superimposed bacterial infection. She was considered high risk due to morbid obesity, asthma, low oxygen saturation, infiltrates on CXR, and tachypnea. Her condition worsened despite antibiotics and supportive therapy and was evaluated for ICU admission on hospital day 3. Consent was obtained for the institutional review board (IRB)-approved randomized clinical trial of LLLT for COVID-19. LLLT treatment started on hospital day 3 while antibiotics continued. The patient was not receiving any antiviral or steroid medications.
The patient’s response to LLLT was evaluated via SMART-COP (systolic blood pressure, multilobar infiltrates, albumin, respiratory rate, tachycardia, confusion, oxygen, and pH) and Brescia-COVID prediction tools, CXR radiographic assessment of lung edema (RALE) , and blood markers of inflammation .
The SMART-COP Score evaluates pneumonia severity and predicts the need for intensive respiratory or vasopressor support (IRVS) in community-acquired pneumonia. The pretreatment SMART-COP score was 5, indicating potential serious progressive complications, rapid referral to the ICU, and the need for a ventilator. The Brescia-COVID Respiratory Severity Scale is a stepwise algorithm for managing patients with confirmed COVID-19. Pretreatment score was 4, which predicted ICU and ventilator support.
The RALE score [, ] evaluates lung edema by CXR in ARDS patients. To quantify the extent of infection, a severity score was calculated by adapting and simplifying RALE score . A score of 0–4 was assigned to each lung depending on the extent of involvement by consolidation or ground glass opacities (0 = no involvement; 1 = <25%; 2 = 25%–50%; 3 = 50%–75%; 4 = >75% involvement). The scores for each lung were summed up to produce the final severity score . Before treatment, the RALE score was 8, consistent with 100% involvement of the lungs.
Prior to LLLT, the patient had significant tachypnea and complained of “terrible shortness of breath” with activities of daily living.
The multiwave locked system (MLS) scanner-equipped laser utilized in this study was deemed a nonsignificant risk device by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) prior to obtaining IRB approval. An FDA-cleared laser system (MLS-ASA/Italy) typically used in pain clinics was employed. Two simultaneous and synchronized laser diodes, emitting at 905 and 808 nm, were used in pulsed modes . The scanner was positioned 20 cm above the skin, according to the manufacturer specifications. Each lung was scanned for 14 min, from apex to base over 250 cm2 of the posterior thorax, . The patient tolerated all four consecutive once-daily LLLT without complication.
During the first laser treatment, her SpO2 increased from 92% to 97% on 3 L/min oxygen within 10 min of starting treatment. After the second laser treatment the patient was breathing without dyspnea. Following treatments her respiratory rate returned to normal 19–20 breaths/min. After the fourth treatment, the patient was able to independently ambulate and had improved ability to perform activities of daily living. Patient was discharged 2 days after her last treatment on 1 L/min oxygen. Total hospital stay was 7 days. On follow-up 2 days after discharge, she was weaned to room air. The SMART-COP score decreased from 4 to 1 after treatment, indicating low risk for IRVS and requiring observation only. The Brescia-COVID score decreased from 4 to 0 after treatment, which supports patient monitoring via pulse oximetry and clinical evaluation.
Before treatment, the RALE score was 8, consistent with 100% involvement of the lungs, and it diminished to three after LLLT. The imaging absorption stage for severe COVID-19 is typically seen after ≥14 days , but in this case, the absorption stage is evident at 7 days .
Blood work included pre- and post-LLLT, IL-6, ferritin, and CRP. Immediately after final treatment IL-6 dropped from 45.89 to 11.7 pg/mL, ferritin from 359 to 175 ng/mL, and CRP improved from 3.06 to 1.43 mg/dL .
Oxygen requirement before treatment was 3–6 L/min with SpO2 88%–93% and improved to 1–3 L/min and SpO2 97%–99% after treatment.
At 2 weeks and 6 weeks from discharge the patient reported subjective improvement in respiratory symptoms and well-being. She was satisfied and appreciative of her LLLT experience and treatment outcome.