A 33 year old female patient, known to have microscopy positive pulmonary tuberculosis (MPT+) complicated by a left pneumothorax, under anti-tuberculosis treatment having received two months of quadritherapy based on Rifampicin + Isoniazid + Pyrazinamide + Ethambutol and then during the second phase of treatment with dual therapy based on Rifampicin + Isoniazid (one month), referred to our department of maxillofacial surgery for two swellings, one fronto-glabellar and the other posterior right cervical, progressively evolving over the last 4 months, initially frontal and then secondarily right cervical, evolving in a context of asthenia, anorexia, evening fever and weight loss of 13 kg in 6 months.
Clinical examination found two swellings of soft consistency, fluctuating on palpation, painless, warm and fairly well limited . Examination of the lymph nodes did not reveal any cervical or distant adenopathies and pleuropulmonary auscultation found bronchial rales on the right and an abolition of vesicular murmurs on the left as a consequence of her pulmonary tuberculosis.
Cranio-cervico-facial CT scan showed two superficial subcutaneous collections in the fronto-glabellar and right posterior cervical regions, with no intracranial abnormalities suggestive of fronto-glabellar and cervical abscesses .
Chest CT scan revealed a sequelae lung, with parenchymal dystrophy with excavations and para septal emphysema on the right side and a medium-sized pneumothorax with underlying lung collapse on the left side .
An exploratory puncture of the two fronto-glabellar and cervical swellings confirmed the diagnosis of abscess by bringing back a purulent fluid . Cytobacteriological examination of the samples confirmed the tuberculous origin of the two abscesses by the detection of Acid-Alcohol-Resistant Bacilli (AARB) on direct examination, followed by positivity of the Xpert gene by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and isolation of Mycobacterium tuberculosis hominis by culture. The diagnosis of multifocal tuberculosis was retained in the patient, and then a human immunodeficiency virus serology was carried out on the patient, which came back negative, proving her immunocompetence.
After the results of the cyto-bacteriological analysis, the patient underwent surgical drainage of the two abscesses and was referred back to the pneumology department for further management and therapeutic readjustment. Anti-tuberculosis treatment was maintained in the patient for a total of 12 months. The follow-up at the consultation was done at D-14, 1 month, 2 months and 3 months by careful clinical examination alone without imaging, with a good evolution without signs of local or distant recurrence.