A 48-year-old woman who had experienced diffuse chest pain came to the emergency room (ER). The chest pain, initiated five years back, which was episodic in nature and lasted for a week, and since then, similar recurrent episodes have occurred every six months until present. She also had a history of multiple episodes of shortness of breath, headache, and loss of consciousness. Moreover, she reported involuntary weight loss of approximately 15 kg over five years. Also, 600 mL of straw-colored fluid was aspirated two years ago during an emergency pericardiocentesis. She was empirically given anti-tubercular therapy for nine months, given tubercular pericardial effusion. Despite anti-tubercular therapy, her symptoms persisted.
She was alert, asthenic, with marked mucocutaneous pallor, afebrile, blood pressure of 80/60 mm of Hg, pulse of 124/min, respiratory rate of 26/min, and oxygen saturation at room air of 92%. On auscultation, she had venous jugular engorgement with bilaterally decreased vesicular breath sounds in lung bases and decreased heart sounds.
The results of the investigations pointed to central hypothyroidism with lowered free T3 levels, free T4 levels, and TSH levels. The leading question revealed her eight-year amenorrhea history since her last pregnancy. This pregnancy was complicated by postpartum hemorrhage. Other investigations were done to rule out hypopituitarism, and serum hormone levels indicated panhypopituitarism.
Panhypopituitarism was identified as the diagnosis, along with significant central hypothyroidism and hypocortisolism .
Her chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with prominent broncho vascular markings in both upper zones, suggestive of pericardial effusion with pulmonary edema, and her electrocardiogram showed low voltage complexes .
An echocardiogram confirmed a global simple pericardial effusion with evidence of cardiac tamponade and hemodynamic compromise .
MRI brain with the pituitary protocol was done, which showed empty sella .
Based on the history of postpartum hemorrhage, a diagnosis of Sheehan syndrome was given. MRI of the pituitary showed empty sella, suggestive of complete anterior pituitary failure.