The female proband was born to a 33-year-old G2P2 mother at 37-weeks gestation by spontaneous vaginal delivery without complications. Pregnancy was unremarkable except for possible clubfoot noted on ultrasound scan. Birth weight was 2,440 g (20th centile), length 45.5 cm (10th centile), and head circumference 31 cm (10th centile). A hemangioma on the neck was diagnosed at one week after birth. A small patent foramen ovale (PFO, 3 mm x 4 mm) was found at 12 months of age and has been followed without surgical intervention. The proband was referred for clinical genetic evaluation at the age of 26 months for dysmorphic features, speech delay and mild growth delay. She walked at 15–16 months and her fine motor skills were age appropriate. She had four-five words at two years of age. When last reviewed at three years nine months of age, she was able to pronounce words with three syllables and had more than one hundred words. She understood multistep commands and exhibited age-appropriate behavior.
She had mild to slight conductive hearing loss at 500–4000 Hz with a notch or normal hearing at 2000 Hz and she used bilateral hearing aids from age two years 11 months until three years two months, when her 10–15 dB loss had improved. Her teeth were late to erupt and she was missing three primary teeth.
At thee years and nine months of age, height was 90 cm (4rd centile), weight was 13.34 kg (16th centile) and occipitofrontal circumference was 48 cm (19th centile). She showed mild dysmorphic features, including sparse frontal hair with a high anterior hairline, hypertelorism with an interpupillary distance (IPD) measuring 5.8 cm (>97th centile), synophrys, a preauricular pit on the left side, short philtrum with a short columella, downturned corners of the mouth, and small, widely spaced teeth . She had a resolving hemangioma on the neck that measured five cm, pectus excavatum and a small, reducible umbilical hernia. Her fingers were small with mild fifth finger clinodactyly, but measurements did not show brachydactyly. The second toe overlapped the third toe on right foot.
The proband’s brother was delivered at 39-weeks gestation to the same mother (30 years old, G1P1) without complications. His birth weight, length, and head circumference were 3,650 g, 49.0 cm, and 35 cm, respectively, and all were within the normal range. At age of 5 years, his growth and development were appropriate for age. He had small epicanthic folds and mild clinodactyly of the fifth fingers and toes with mildly small fifth toes, but there were no other findings.
The proband’s mother is a 35-year old and typically developed female. She had an embolic stroke at age of 26 years. Investigations with an echocardiogram showed a PFO with an atrial septal aneurysm and the PFO was closed using a transcatheter approach. Her hypercoagulability workup was negative. She had dyslipidemia with a slightly elevated lipoprotein level. Her family history was unremarkable for cardiac disease.
The proband’s father is a normal healthy male.