A 72-year-old Bahraini female known to have type 2 diabetes mellitus, resistant systemic hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and peripheral artery disease (PAD) with a history of stenting distal abdominal aorta (12 mm × 40 mm S.M.A.R.T control self-expanding stent) and right common iliac artery (7 mm × 17 mm Express LD) in 2014 was referred to our cardiac centre for evaluation of repeated episodes of FPE.
On arrival, she was in mild dyspnoea and oliguric. Her blood pressure was 182/105 mmHg, and her heart rate was 109 b.p.m. Physical examination has revealed bilateral basal crackle with no audible cardiac murmur and periumbilical, high-pitched bruits. Her electrocardiogram showed QRS voltage criteria for left ventricular hypertrophy, which was confirmed with a transthoracic echocardiogram that revealed concentric left ventricular hypertrophy with Grade II diastolic dysfunction and normal left ventricular size and systolic function with no regional wall motion abnormality. Baseline Creatinine was 225 µmol/L (reference range 44–88 µmol/L) and hence we performed the coronary angiogram with minimal contrast (18 cc only) to rule out underlying coronary artery disease in view of multiple risk factors and troponinaemia, which showed coronary calcifications but no flow-limiting disease in the epicardial coronaries. Since the patient had resistant systemic hypertension with abdominal bruits, non-selective renal angiography was conducted and showed bilateral heavily calcified high-grade ostioproximal RAS. While we were sorting out a strategy for ad hoc intervention for the tight renal arteries she desaturated, her blood pressure raised to 240/130 mmHg, her heart rate increased to 130 b.p.m., and her respiration rate was 26/min with diffuse bilateral fine crackles. Considering acute florid pulmonary oedema and being anuric despite large dose of diuretics, we aborted the procedure and timely inserted the right internal jugular dialysis line and transferred her to the cardiac care unit for urgent haemodialysis.
The next day, after full stabilization, we brought her back to the Cath lab for renal angioplasty. We decided for the left transradial approach for two reasons: the left radial artery has a shorter distance to the renal arteries than the right radial artery and the angles of the renal arteries off the aorta favour a radial approach than a retrograde femoral access.
Under local anaesthesia, the left radial artery access was achieved with a 7-Fr sheath. We managed to navigate a 90 cm sheath across an unexpected left subclavian stenosis with balloon dilatation and slide it subsequently across a tortuous descending aorta using NaviCross microcatheter and Terumo Glidewire Advantage, which was exchanged to Hi-Torque supracore guidewire thereafter to land the sheath into the abdominal aorta.
A 7-Fr multipurpose guide catheter engaged the right renal artery, and a selective renal angiogram confirmed the presence of critical calcified stenosis at the proximal part of the right renal artery .
The lesion crossed with Hi-Torque BMW 0.014 × 300 cm guidewire. Intravascular ultrasound pullback showed a very high superficial and deep calcium burden in the proximal segment of the right renal artery with a 5.2 cm reference vessel diameter . Considering severe calcifications, we decided to proceed with shockwave lithotripsy using a 4.0 mm × 12 mm, 138 cm shockwave C2 IVL balloon with a total of 80 pulses. Fair expansion of the 4.0 mm IVL balloon at 6 atmospheres was achieved . Now, without further balloon dilation, a 5.0 mm × 18 mm Resolute Onyx stent was deployed at 14 atmospheres with a good final angiographic result .
The same procedure was applied for the left renal artery after confirmation of tight osteoproximal lesion with selective injection . This time, the IVUS study showed a larger vessel diameter of 7.1 cm with severe semi-circumferential calcium arc that we overcame successfully with 6.0 mm × 60 mm, 110 cm shockwave M5 IVL balloon (10 rounds each of 30 pulses) at 6 atm . Once the lithotripsy treatment is completed, a 7.0 mm × 17 mm Express SD Renal stent was deployed at 10 bar. Final angiography demonstrated an excellent position of the stent and confirmed patency of the left renal artery . The patient tolerated the procedure well and was transferred to the cardiology ward for further monitoring. A few hours later, we noticed a dramatic improvement of blood pressure measurements and urine output. She required one more haemodialysis session to enhance renal recovery and minimize the risk of contrast induced-nephropathy and was successfully discharged to home 48 h post-procedure.
In the 2-week of follow-up, she was asymptomatic, serum creatinine almost normalized (96 µmol/L, reference range 44–88 µmol/L) with adequate blood pressure control. Three months after discharge, renal function recovered completely and return to normal (Creatinine 81 µmol/L, reference range 44–88 µmol/L) with good blood pressure control on amlodipine 10 mg o.d. only.
In our institution, there are no standards for routine duplex or imaging follow-up after renal angioplasty unless mandated clinically.