The patient was a 67-year-old man. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed Borrmann type 3 advanced gastric cancer at the pyloric region and abdominal ultrasonography revealed abdominal aortic aneurysm. The patient initially underwent distal gastrectomy and D2 dissection for Borrmann type 3 advanced gastric cancer. One month later, endovascular aortic repair was performed for the abdominal aortic aneurysm. The size of the gastric tumor was 40 × 27 mm, and the pathological report identified tubular adenocarcinoma: tub2 and T2N1M0 stage IIA. Six weeks after gastrectomy, postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy was started with oral TS-1 (120 mg/body; days 1–14 every 3 weeks). Six months later, abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) showed multiple tumors in liver segments S1 and S7 and partial resection of the caudate lobe and posterior segment was performed. The pathological report showed metastatic adenocarcinoma from gastric cancer and HER-2 positive.
Eight courses of S-1 (120 mg/body; days 1–14 every 3 weeks) and oxaliplatin (80 mg/m2 every 3 weeks) were added after liver resection, but 7 months later, the tumor recurred with multiple liver metastases. Nine courses of paclitaxel (80 mg/m2; days 1, 8, and 15) and ramucirumab (8 mg/kg; days 1 and 15) therapy, three courses of irinotecan (140 mg/m2 every 2 weeks), and four courses of docetaxel (50 mg/m2 every 3 weeks) were added sequentially. Liver metastases temporarily reduced in size, but the tumor enlarged again (a). Nivolumab (3 mg/kg every 2 weeks) was therefore started and the liver metastases displayed a reduction in size after 2 months (b). Administration of nivolumab was continued and the tumor shrank further (c), but the patient suffered from general malaise. The dose interval of nivolumab was gradually increased to every 4, 6, and 8 weeks while liver metastases were monitored by CT.
After 28 months of nivolumab administration, the patient developed cough due to bronchitis and malaise had worsened, so nivolumab was discontinued (a). Two months after discontinuing nivolumab, bronchitis symptoms had improved, but malaise had worsened, blood pressure had decreased, and adrenocorticotropic hormone and cortisol levels had declined. Adrenal insufficiency was diagnosed and steroid therapy was started with hydrocortisone, leading to improvements in general malaise and gradual recovery of adrenocorticotropic hormone and cortisol levels. Moreover, the metastatic tumors shrank further after discontinuation of nivolumab (b). Nine months after discontinuation of nivolumab, CT showed that the liver metastases had almost disappeared (c). Hydrocortisone administration was tapered off and discontinued after 1.5 years of treatment. Currently, as of 3.5 years after discontinuation of nivolumab and 8 years after recurrence of liver metastases, no radiological evidence of recurrence has been identified .