A 16-year old male patient consulted the maxillo-facial and oral surgery outpatient clinic of the Chris Hani Baragwanath Academic Hospital (Johannesburg, South Africa) complaining of severe facial deformity and inability to open his mouth. The patient’s history was significant for bilateral post-traumatic TMJ ankylosis sustained at the age of 4 years. He was treated with gap arthroplasty and bilateral costochondral grafts at the age of 8 years. Thereafter, his mouth opening gradually decreased and multiple jaw stretching procedures were performed under general anaesthesia.
Five years later, chin asymmetry and concomitant malocclusion became apparent and subsequent diagnosis of right CCG overgrowth and reankylosis on the left side was made. A gap arthroplasty was performed on the left side, however the patient returned a year later with bilateral TMJ reankylosis .
The clinical examination revealed facial asymmetry with deviation of the mandibular midline to the left. His mouth opening was restricted to approximately 5 mm interdental distance (IDD). He also presented with a cant in the occlusal plane and marked malocclusion. A and B show pre-operative mouth opening at 8 year and 16 years.
Radiographic investigation included PA mandible (A), orthopantomogram (B) and coronal CT Scans (C). These images confirmed elongation of the vertical ramus on the right side, asymmetry of the chin towards the left side and bilateral ankylosis of the TMJ (yellow arrows) with right mandibular overgrowth (white arrows) respectively.
In view of the severity of the deformity, combined orthognathics and TMJ reconstruction with custom joints was planned. The procedure and custom-made prostheses were planned using 3D imaging and stereolithic model generated from his CT scan . Surgical release of bilateral ankylotic masses was carried out using surgical guides via Al-Kayat and Bramley (modified preauricular) and Risdon submandibular approach. Temporomandibular joints were reconstructed with Biomet Microfixation patient-matched alloplastic TMJ prostheses . An IDD of 35 mm was achieved. Facial asymmetry, occlusal plane cant and cross-bite were corrected with Le fort I osteotomy and a genioplasty .
At the time of his 12 month postoperative evaluation, he had a maximum mouth opening of 30 mm IDD and his functional and aesthetic evaluation was satisfactory .