The patient was a 43-year-old man with a fecal specimen that was positive for occult blood during a routine check-up. He underwent a colonoscopy, which revealed a type I serrated polyp (SP) in the sigmoid colon 20 cm from the anal verge. He was referred to our hospital for an endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR). The histopathologic assessment of the resected specimen showed infiltration into the submucosal layer and he was referred to the Department of Digestive Surgery for an additional resection.
The medical history included hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and elevated hepatobiliary enzymes. He was 158 cm tall and weighed 53.2 kg. Blood tests showed elevated liver enzymes, but no other abnormalities, and tumor markers were within the normal ranges. A preoperative CT scan was negative for distant metastases and enlarged lymph nodes, and colonoscopy revealed a scar at the site of the EMR in the sigmoid colon 20 cm from the anal verge.
Surgery was performed under general anesthesia in the lithotomy position. A laparoscopic sigmoidectomy was performed. The sigmoid colon was transected 10 cm from the anal side of the tumor, and after a small laparotomy, the sigmoid colon was extracted from the abdominal cavity. ICG (Diagnogreen; Dai-Ichi Pharm, Tokyo, Japan) was injected as a 12.5-mg bolus (0.25 mg/kg) from a peripheral vein, and ICG /TG was used to evaluate blood flow. We used a T530 thermal camera (FLIR Systems, Tokyo, Japan) and analysis software (ResearchIRMAX; FLIR Systems, Tokyo, Japan).
After confirmation of the boundary between ischemic and non-ischemic colon tissues at the level of the mesenteric processing site, the colon was resected; however, a diverticulum was noted at the anastomotic site when the anvil head of the circular stapler was inserted and attached to the oral side of the colon when performing the anastomosis. Because there was a risk of suture failure if the anastomosis had been performed using a double stapling technique (DST), additional resection (2 cm of colon on the oral side) was needed. After further manipulation of the mesentery, ICG was administered again, and fluorescence due to the remaining ICG from the previous administration was observed in the colon that was thought to have interrupted blood flow . Blood flow in the colon was confirmed by TG, and a transitional zone of serosal surface temperature was observed at the mesentery processing site, which corresponded to both the tissue where blood flow had been preserved and the ischemic tissue. Therefore, additional colon resection was performed along the boundary between the ischemic and non-ischemic tissues.
After the anvil head was re-attached and the colon returned to the abdominal cavity, a DST anastomosis was performed between the oral side of the colon and the rectum. A leak test performed immediately after the anastomosis was negative, and the anastomosis appeared to have been performed successfully without any problems. A closed-suction drain was placed on the back side of the anastomotic site and the wound was closed. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged to home 5 days after the surgery.