66-year-old male with a history of smoking, atrial fibrillation and hypertension, who was referred to the thoracic surgery department for a pulmonary nodule found on imaging studies performed during the staging of prostate cancer (Gleason 3 + 4 = 7). A 19.8 mm, bilobed, well-defined margin, pulmonary nodule was observed on a CT scan. A 18F-choline PET scan reported a heterogeneous formation in the prostate with a SUV 5.6 and a bilobed, well-defined margin, pulmonary nodule in the lingular segment of 19.5 mm with a SUV 5.4. The case was discussed in the Tumour Committee and, given the impossibility of ruling out a primary pulmonary neoplasm vs. pulmonary metastasis of prostate cancer, it was decided to perform a systematic pulmonary resection and lymph node sampling. Although the lung is a common site of metastasis of prostate cancer, it is rare for a small-sized neoplasm without other distant (bone) involvement to present a single pulmonary lesion. On the other hand, morphologically, it is not the typical image of a primary pulmonary neoplasm (spiky/irregular borders). The intraoperative study of the nodule was reported as “positive for neoplasm” and, given the difficulty of histological definition, it was decided to perform an anatomical pulmonary segmentation (lingulectomy) to avoid performing a sub-optimal oncological resection of a pulmonary primary and, eventually, preserve parenchyma, if it is a metastasis of prostate. The patient had a normal pulmonary function test and an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0. The definitive pathological anatomical result was: perivascular epitheloid cell tumour (pulmonary PEComa or clear cell tumour) of 1.4 cm. The tumour did not present necrosis. Immunomarking techniques were performed on paraffin-embedded tissue sections, performed on a BenchMark-XT automatic equipment (Ventana-Roche) for the following determinations: HMB45: focal positive; CD117: negative; TTF1: negative; chromogranin: negative; AML: negative; PAX8: negative; NKX 3.1: negative; CK7: negative; CK 8/18: negative; CK: negative; CD34: positive; synaptophysin: negative; CD68: negative; CD31: negative; ERG: negative; Ki67: less than 1%; S100: negative.
