A 77-year-old lady presented with the complaints of a left-sided breast lump of 1-month duration. She had been a heart patient and had been on treatment for the last 4 years. On clinical examination a 3 × 2 cm firm, mobile, non-tender lump was identified in the outer quadrant of her left breast. The overlying skin of the breast along with nipple and areola were unremarkable. There was no significant axillary or cervical lymphadenopathy. The other breast was normal. She underwent a mammographic examination, followed by fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) that was essentially inconclusive. Subsequently, she underwent a frozen section for a primary diagnosis.
On mammography, a 2 × 2 cm ill-defined mass with irregular margins was identified in the left upper outer quadrant. No micro-calcifications were seen. The right-sided breast was normal. .
The lumpectomy specimen on cut surface revealed a firm, grey-white, fibrous, un-encapsulated nodular tumor measuring 2 × 1.2 × 0.8 cm with infiltrative borders. No area of calcification was identified. The closest margin was the base and was found to be 0.5 cm away from the tumor.
Frozen sections revealed a tumor with predominant spindle cells showing mild atypia, amidst a sclerotic stroma and conspicuously infiltrated the adjacent fat. A diagnosis of a low-grade sarcoma was favored over a metaplastic carcinoma. Therefore, a sentinel lymph node biopsy and/or an axillary node dissection (ALND) were not conducted at the time of surgery.
Histological sections revealed a spindle cell tumor showing an infiltrative growth pattern with prominent areas of sclerosis reminiscent of keloid formation. The cells were mainly arranged in fascicles and displayed tapering nuclei with mild anisonucleosis. Mitoses were inconspicuous. Occasionally, the cells were plump with epithelioid shapes and revealed mild atypia with an occasional small cluster formation. Interspersed were foci of benign ductal hyperplasia and papillary hyperplasia, including a micropapilloma along with focal aggregates of chronic inflammatory cells. The micropapilloma did not show any significant atypia. . No discrete squamous differentiation was identified. No focus of Ductal-carcinoma-in-situ (DCIS) was seen in any of the sections. The two closest differential diagnoses considered were fibromatosis and a "fibromatosis like" metaplastic carcinoma. A wide panel of IHC antibody markers was performed . The tumor cells were simultaneously diffusely positive for epithelial markers i.e. the various cytokeratins CK, CK7, High molecular weight (HMWCK) and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), along with a mesenchymal marker i.e. vimentin. . All the cytokeratins were positive in the interspersed benign ducts that acted as internal controls. The tumor cells were negative for Gross cystic disease fluid protein (GCDFP), estrogen (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR). The myoepithelial markers i.e. smooth muscle actin (SMA) and p63 showed focal, positive expression. . S100 and Desmin were negative. Ki-67 (proliferation marker) showed focal positivity in less than 5% tumor cells . The tumor cells were negative for CD34 and CerbB-2/HER-2/neu. . A diagnosis of a low-grade "fibromatosis-like" metaplastic carcinoma, associated with a micropapilloma, was finally made. All the cut margins were free of tumor.
A portion of fresh tumor tissue fixed in 3% glutaraldehyde was processed for electron microscopy. Ultra thin sections stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate were observed under an electron microscope model: Zeiss 109, Germany.
Ultrastructurally, the tumor cells embedded in a collagenous stroma showed fibroblastic and myoepithelial features along with presence of peripheral villous processes with a focal basal lamina and intercellular junctions .
After surgery, the patient completed adjuvant radiotherapy (RT). Thereafter, she has been on a regular 2 monthly follow-up; including her metastatic work-up with Positron emission tomography (PET-CT) of the body and bone scan. Due to a high cardiac risk, a second surgery for an ALND was not performed. Nevertheless, till 1 year and 4 months of her follow-up she has not been identified with any lymphadenopathy, recurrent lesion or metastatic lesions in her body.