An 85-year-old male presented, lethargic and confused, from a skilled nursing facility in which he was “found down”, covered in non-bloody diarrhea. On arrival to the hospital, the patient was unable to recall events but as reported by the nursing staff at the nursing facility, he had been complaining of abdominal bloating. Th patient’s medical history was significant for congestive heart failure, atrial fibrillation, hypertension, diabetes, and chronic kidney disease. There was no history of liver disease or alcohol or drug use.

On physical examination, he was found to be awake and oriented to self and place. A notable examination finding was a soft, non-tender, mildly distended abdomen, asterixis and 2+ lower extremity pitting edema. The patient was admitted with the preliminary diagnoses of a congestive heart failure exacerbation, metabolic encephalopathy, and an acute kidney injury. Due to concern for sepsis, he was empirically started on vancomycin and cefepime.

Initial laboratory tests revealed a brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level of 3915 pg/mL, white blood cell count of 11 500/mm3, hemoglobin of 11.5 g/dL, platelet count of 90×103/mm3, serum bicarbonate of 25 mEq/L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 89 mg/dL, creatinine of 3.51 mg/dL, total bilirubin of 2.3 mg/dL, direct bilirubin of 1.4 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase of 22 U/L, alanine aminotransferase of 9 U/L, and an international normalized ratio of 1.27. His initial cultures, urinalysis, and stool studies were negative for infection. A transthoracic echo-cardiogram was performed and was notable for an ejection fraction of 35–40% with global hypokinesis, a dilated inferior vena cava, and an elevated pulmonary artery (PA) pressure of 67 mmHg. A follow-up abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed a small right pleural effusion and a moderate amount of free intraperitoneal fluid.

Given these imaging findings, in conjunction with his symptoms of confusion, asterixis, and abdominal distension, a diagnostic paracentesis was performed. The aspirated fluid was dark yellow and opaque with a serum ascites albumin gradient (SAAG) calculated to be 1.9 g/dL, total fluid protein of 3.3 g/dL, polymorphonuclear (PMNs) of 1115 cells/mm3, 49% PMN leukocytes, 2% lymphocytes, and 40% mononuclear leukocytes. With a SAAG of 1.9 g/dL and a total fluid protein count of 3.3 g/dL, we concluded that the peritoneal fluid represented cardiac as-cites as there was no evidence of cirrhosis. Blood cultures taken were negative, which may reflect initiation of sepsis protocol on patient’s admission reducing the yield of the culture. Diagnosis was made on the basis of previously reported cell counts of the fluid. Bacterial peritonitis was presumed due to a very high neutrophil count. The patient was subsequently treated with ceftriaxone 2 mg daily for 5 days and albumin (on day 1 and 3) with improvement in his encephalopathy.

Unfortunately, the patient exhibited a rapid acute and then chronic decline in his renal function. The patient and family declined hemodialysis resulting in further failure of his congestive heart failure treatment. Shortly afterwards, he became oliguric and expired from renal failure.