A 38-year-old illiterate housewife from rural southeast Mexico, with bilateral urolithiasis attended a urology consultation at a highly specialized public hospital in Yucatan Mexico, as she had had a fever between 38 ℃ and 40 ℃ for the previous 2 d, accompanied by severe pain in the right flank irradiating to the ipsilateral suprapubic region and reported changes in frequency and quality of urination.
She was admitted for in-hospital care, and abdominal computerized axial tomography was performed, along with blood and urine tests, including cultures. Tomography indicated the presence of gas in the right kidney indicating EPN Huang IV and confirmed the presence of a nonfunctional left kidney . Blood culture was unremarkable, while urine culture reported S. fonticola as a single pathogen, sensitive to most antibiotics but resistant to trimethoprim and nitrofurantoin.
Antecedents included that she debuted with symptomatic bilateral urinary lithiasis in 2015, and she was diagnosed with chronic kidney disease Class Kidney Diseases Global Outcomes 3A that same year. Left renal exclusion was confirmed using radiotracer mercaptoacetyltriglycine gammagraphy.
In 2016 and 2017 second look percutaneous nephrolithotomy was performed, finding right ureteral stenosis due to lithiasis; JJ catheters were temporarily placed in the right kidney and removed after treatment.
Fever and right flank pain irradiating to the ipsilateral suprapubic region persisted.
Diabetes and hypertension had been ruled out at every hospitalization, as the patient only registered normal values of fasting glucose and blood pressure. The patient was treated with piperacillin/ tazobactam; a combined endoscopic intrarenal surgery was performed to place a metallic catheter and to treat with percutaneous drainage. After 3 d of antibiotic, she became afebrile. The gas presence due to anaerobic bacteria reduced according to imaging, and a new culture was performed on day 4, which was reported negative. Her white blood cell count improved markedly. However, after 8 d her fever relapsed, and new studies were performed, finding Pseudomonas aeruginosa as a single pathogen in her urine culture along with an increase in neutrophils and white blood cell count in general. She was therefore treated with meropenem .
After 10 d of treatment, with tomographic and laboratory evidence for the resolution of the acute signs and symptoms, she was discharged.