A 50-year-old hypertensive woman presented to the emergency department of our hospital presenting headache while shopping. There was no history of preceding falls or head injuries. She had not been administered steroids, anticoagulants, or antiplatelet agents. At presentation, the patient was fully awake and did not exhibit any focal neurological deficits. The blood pressure was 176/113 mmHg, and blood examination revealed normal findings. Cranial computed tomography (CT) revealed a subtly compressive, apparently ASDH in the left cerebral convexity. It was 15 mm in thickness without displacement of midline structures and showed a regression in 1 day with resolution of the headache . Three-dimensional CT angiography showed no vascular lesions in the intracranial dural sinuses or major cortical veins . Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed on post hospitalization day (PHD) 6 revealed a non-enhancing, nodular lesion in the subdural hematoma, and adjacent to the left parietal cortex . The patient was conservatively managed based on a probable diagnosis of non-traumatic ASDH. However, the patient presented with disorientation and aphasia on PHD 14; CT showed a considerable enlargement of the subdural hematoma with better delineation of the nodular lesion on T2-weighted sequence . Catheter angiography performed on PHD 14 did not reveal any intracranial vascular lesions. The patient underwent removal of the microsurgical hematoma including the nodular lesion through a 5 × 5-cm parietal craniotomy. The subdural hematoma showed a bi-layered structure comprising a thick outer membrane and inner semisolid clots. The cerebral cortex underneath the hematoma was intact. The nodular lesion identified previously on MRI, possessed a fibrous capsule, included clots, and adhered to the outer membrane of the hematoma and arachnoids. These attachments were bluntly dissected without injuring the cortical vessels coursing underneath . Abnormal vasculature was not found between the lesion and surrounding tissues. The outer membrane of the hematoma and the semisolid subdural clots were partially removed. Microscopically, the resected outer membrane of the CSDH and the nodular lesion revealed areas of microvascular proliferation . The patient’s postoperative recovery period was uneventful. On postoperative day 35, CT showed a remarkable resolution of the residual hematoma .