Written informed consent was obtained from the patient.
A 28-year old pregnant woman (gravida 0, para 0) was recommended for C-sec at a local gynecology hospital due to cephalopelvic disproportion. She had been in contact with a SARS-CoV-2 infected patient, and she began self-isolation on February 14, 2020. She developed fever (> 38℃), mild sore throat, and cough, after which she visited a public health center and was tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 on February 25 (36+2 weeks gestation). She self-isolated herself at home after diagnosis and observed her prognosis. She had mild symptoms and received conservative treatment without medication. The symptoms improved and she only had a mild cough with no fever and sputum on February 29. She wanted to delay delivery until she recovered from the infection. However, an emergency C-sec was decided on March 6 (37+6 weeks) due to obstructed labor with incomplete rotation of the fetal head. The patient was transferred to our center, which is a designated hospital for pregnant patients infected with SARS-Cov-2. Her blood type was ‘O-Rh (+)’ and pre-natal workup did not show any specific findings. On arrival, she was immediately transferred to the radiology center for chest radiographs and computer tomography (CT) scans. We then transferred her to a pre-treatment room in the delivery center equipped with negative-pressure ventilation, exclusive elevators, and pre-operative laboratory test kits, including electrocardiograph (ECG), X-ray machine, blood tests, and urine test. Hemoglobin was 10.9 g/dl, erythrocyte sedimentation rate was slightly elevated (42 mm/h), C-reactive protein was normal (0.15 mg/dl), and other pre-operative laboratory test and ECG results seemed normal. The chest radiographs revealed left lower/middle lobe consolidation and increased vascular marking . We also observed multifocal peribronchial ground glass appearance and consolidation in the left lower lobe from chest CT scans . The SARS-CoV-2 reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) result of sputum and nasopharyngeal swab was obtained pre-operatively. Baseline fetal heart rate was 129 beats/min.
The C-sec was performed in an operating room at the delivery center, which is located on a different floor from the main operating room ( and ). Hence, the traffic line of the patient did not overlap with that of the other surgical patients. In this case, spinal anesthesia was selected as the anesthetic method, because even if we started with spinal anesthesia, there could still be chances of switching to general anesthesia in case of inadequate anesthesia or sudden changes in the patient’s clinical condition. We were already equipped with a ventilator protected by three mechanical high-efficiency particulate air filters, video laryngoscope, fiber-optic laryngoscope blades and handles, endotracheal tubes (6.5 mm, 7.0 mm, and stylet), medication drugs such as propofol, lidocaine, rocuronium, sugammadex, atropine, and closed suction catheter before the patient entered the operating room.
All medical staff members wore enhanced personal protective equipment (PPE), including N95 mask, surgical cap, double gown, double gloves, shoe covers, and a powered air-purifying respirator ( and ) in the fitting room . In the operating room, we measured the initial blood pressure (115/69 mmHg), heart rate (82 beats/min), and peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (99%) under a facial N95 mask without any O2 supply , and the ECG result showed normal sinus rhythm.
The patient was 166 cm in height and 62 kg in weight. She was placed in the left lateral decubitus position. Spinal anesthesia was performed with a 25-gauge Pencan spinal needle at the L3/4 interspace, and 9 mg of 0.5% marcaine and 20 μg of fentanyl were injected intrathecally. She was placed in the supine position with a left lateral tilt after 10 min, and anesthesia was assessed bilaterally with cold alcohol cotton and the T4 level blockage was checked.
After spinal injection, the patient experienced nausea and had low blood pressure (71/40 mmHg). The nausea improved with elevation in blood pressure (103/60 mmHg), and the vital signs stabilized after five injections of 100 μg phenylephrine and fast dropping 400 cc of Hartmann solution and 250 cc of colloid (Volulyte®, Fresenius Kabi, Bad Homburg, Germany). The C-sec was performed uneventfully. The baby was born 6 min after incision, and then 100 mg carbetocin was administered intravenously shortly after the birth. Oxytocin 20 IU/1000 ml Hartmann dextrose was also infused continuously to produce uterine contraction and minimize the blood loss.
Total anesthesia time was 50 min and operation time was 40 min . An estimated blood loss of 400 cc was noted, and 780 cc of crystalloid and 250 cc of colloid were administered during surgery. For pain control, a patient-controlled analgesia pump (ANAPA AC0605®, Ehwa Biomedics, Korea) with butorphanol (10 mg), ketorolac tromethamine (180 mg), ramosetron (0.6 mg), and normal saline (26 ml) was used.
During the recovery state, the patient stayed in the operating room. Her vital signs remained stable and the patient had no complaints. Recovery blockage on T8 was confirmed and she was transferred to a single room in the SARS-CoV-2 ward (another SARS-CoV-2 suspected mother stayed separately there) through an exclusive elevator with a nurse wearing PPE.
Both SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR tests conducted on March 6 and March 8 were confirmed negative. Therefore, the patient was transferred from the SARS-CoV-2 ward to the general ward on March 10 and discharged on March 11 without any complications.
The baby girl weighing 3130 gm was born on March 6, 2020 at 11:22 with Apgar scores at 1 and 5 min of 9 and 10, respectively. She was transferred immediately to a private newborn’s room in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) in order to avoid being exposed to SARS-CoV-2. The NICU consists of two separate spaces: one for suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 babies and the other for healthy babies. All four newborn babies delivered from mothers with suspected SARS-CoV-2 tested negative and were transferred to the latter in the NICU.
The SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR results using placenta, amniotic fluid, and cord blood were negative. Furthermore, the nasopharyngeal swab of the baby was negative on two consecutive SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR tests. The medical staff had to wear level ‘D’ PPE until their SARS-CoV-2 PCR testing was reported negative.
The neonate was in a healthy state getting oral feeding and was discharged with her mother.