A 20-year old woman, gravida 2 para 1001, at 35 5/7 days of gestation presented to the outpatient clinic to establish prenatal care and reported a pruritic rash on her legs that appear only during pregnancy. She recently moved to Hawaii from Chuuk, a state of the Federated States of Micronesia, where she had limited prenatal care. The patient denied any past medical history. During her first pregnancy in Chuuk, 18 months prior, she had noted a pruritic rash on her legs that resolved after she had an uncomplicated vaginal delivery with a normal male infant. She denied any family members with a similar rash. The patient’s left leg was noted to have erythematous plaques with a few scabs from ankle to knee and a few hypopigmented patches.

She was admitted for early labor at 38 4/7 days of gestation and proceeded to have a spontaneous vaginal delivery. Neonatal Apgar scores were 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively, with a birth weight of 3,997 g. After placental delivery, intermittent uterine atony was noted requiring administration of methylergonovine maleate and misoprostol with subsequent improvement in uterine tone. The estimated blood loss from the delivery was 450 mL. Within 4 h of delivery, the patient became febrile to 102.4 F with tachycardia, prompting initiation of gentamicin and clindamycin for presumed endometritis. On physical exam, the patient was noted to have a plaque-like rash on her bilateral lower extremities and perineum and small erythematous patches on her bilateral upper extremities.

On postpartum day #1, the patient was hypotensive with worsening, painful rash. Physical exam revealed urticarial wheals throughout chest, arms, buttock, and thighs, and her left lower extremity had crusting lesions with the background rash. Due to concern for a drug reaction, gentamicin and clindamycin were discontinued. The patient required intensive care admission with a norepinephrine drip and two units of packed red blood cells to stabilize her blood pressure. She was transitioned to vancomycin, metronidazole, and aztreonam for possible infectious etiology. Famotidine and Cetirizine were added for histamine blockade. On postpartum day #4, the patient stabilized off norepinephrine with resolution of urticaria but persistent left lower extremity lesions with central eschars. She was discharged on postpartum day #5 with topical clobetasol and mupirocin.

At her two week postpartum check, the patient reported that the rash was improving with clobetasol and mupirocin. On physical exam, a scattered annular rash was noted over bilateral arms and legs. At her four week postpartum check, she reported the rash was still painful. On physical exam, urticarial papules, plaques, and polycyclic wheals in various stages of healing, some with scale and crusting extending down bilateral legs to plantar surface of feet, worse on left lower extremity with 2+ pitting edema. She also had polycyclic wheals scattered on her abdomen, back, and bilateral upper extremities with associated erythema. At six weeks postpartum, the patient’s rash continued with worsening pain and increased leg swelling, therefore oral prednisone was started, which caused improvement, but not complete resolution of the rash. The patient was referred to dermatology and at eight weeks postpartum, a skin biopsy of a lesion showed tuberculoid granulomatous dermatitis, consistent with HD.

The patient was referred to the Hansen’s Disease Community program and an infectious disease specialist. Three months postpartum, the patient’s neurologic exam revealed loss of sensation in bilateral feet and retained sensation in bilateral hands. She was started on multidrug therapy for HD and continued on prednisone.