Male patient, only child of a Brazilian healthy non-consanguineous couple. Second trimester ultrasonography observed fetal ascites and bilateral hydrocele. Prenatal screening for infectious diseases was negative. There was no drug abuse during pregnancy.

The child was born at term, by cesarean section, with birth weight of 3400 g (p58), length of 48 cm (p20), and OFC 35.5 cm (p79). Clinical examination showed hydrocele, diastasis recti, and unilateral clubfoot. There were no signs of hepato or splenomegaly (and abdominal ultrasound was normal at birth). Echocardiogram at 4 days of life disclosed just patent foramen ovale. The patient was evaluated by the Genetics unit. No specific diagnosis was suspected, even though mild coarsening facies was already present. Skeletal survey performed at one-month-old, due to congenital clubfoot and dysmorphisms, revealed mild proximal misshapen metacarpals and thickening of the provisional cartilage.

When the child came back to the Genetics evaluation at 6 months-old, the mother reported she had noticed a progressive growing mass in the lower back since the patient was 2 months old. This had been investigated with X-rays and MRI in one of the patient’s visit in the Emergency Unit due to respiratory symptoms. The mother also reported that the patient had been suffering of frequent upper respiratory tract infections, needing hospitalization twice for wheezing crises.

At physical exam, the patient displayed a typical gibbus deformity (Fig. 1), which raised the suspicion of mucopolysaccharidosis. Since the patient had had fetal ascites, initially, MPS VII was suspected. Biochemical investigation revealed a diagnosis of MPS type VI (urinary glycosaminoglycans: 402 μg/mg Cr, reference value for age: 133–460 μg/mg Cr, with dermatan sulfate excretion, and enzymatic assay detected arylsulfatase B deficiency in white blood cells, with another sulfatase within the normal range).

Sequencing of the ARSB gene showed two pathogenic variants in trans: c.944G > A (p.Arg315Gln) and c.1143-1G > C.

At the age of 7 months, the patient was brought to the emergency unit due to respiratory distress. A chest X-ray showed a possible lung congestion and echocardiogram revealed discrete tricuspid regurgitation and a thickened mitral valve with posterior leaflet prolapse, causing moderate to severe regurgitation. As a result, furosemide was prescribed. Due to the rapid cardiologic changes, captopril and spironolactone were added.

At 9 months of age, the patient was hospitalized again because of cardiac decompensation. Comparative chest X-ray showed an increased cardiac area, and echocardiogram indicated worsening of mitral regurgitation. Dobutamin and dopamine were initiated, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Dobutamin was progressively withdrawn and carvedilol was introduced. Progressive improvement of respiratory distress was seen. However, a few days later echocardiogram showed left atrium and left ventricle enlargement, normal left ventricular systolic function, discrete tricuspid insufficiency, mitral valve with thickened leaflets, posterior prolapsed leaflet and severe regurgitation, evident with Doppler.

With the rapid progression of mitral regurgitation, at 10 months the patient developed congestive heart failure and dobutamine was resumed. After stabilization, the patient was discharged receiving furosemide, captopril, spironolactone, carvedilol, digoxin, aspirin, and domperidone.

A few days after discharge, the patient was readmitted to the emergency room due to hyporexia, irritability and vomiting. The physical exam showed tachycardia, hypoxemia, respiratory distress, and hepatomegaly. He was sent to ICU, with worsening of cardiac function. The patient used bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP). Because of significant mitral insufficiency, left ventricular dilatation and refractory cardiac failure, in a patient with a genetic multisystemic disorder, a multidisciplinary team met to discuss the management.

It was decided to perform cardiac surgery (valvuloplasty with mitral valve ring reduction) (Fig. 5). The patient was 11 months by the time of the surgical intervention. LV shortening fraction at 7, 9, 10 and 11 months were 70, 56, 79 and 58%, respectively. ECG showed left ventricular overload and normal sinus rhythm.

A month after the surgery, the patient began enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with galsulfase weekly.

The last echocardiography shows discrete mitral insufficiency after valvuloplasty and last glycosaminoglycan measurement in urine was within normal range (246 μg/mg creatinine - Reference value for children under 2y: 79–256 μg/mg creatinine).

After the cardiac surgery, growth was improved (weight and height). The patient is currently with 2.5 years old and presents with mild motor delay (sat alone at 18 months and walked at 23 months old).