In June 2017, a 49-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to the emergency department of the Northern Jiangsu People’s Hospital owing to chest tightness and breathing difficulty that persisted for 3 days. She was previously in good health and was a non-smoker. In addition, she had fever, chills, and a maximum body temperature of 38 °C. She did not have urinary or fecal incontinence, chest pain, general fatigue, cough, or hemoptysis during the course of her disease. Following admission, results of complete blood test revealed that white blood cell count was 12.21 × 109 cells/L and the percentage of large white blood cells was 85.5%. Blood gas analysis results showed 7.480 PH, 100 mmHg PaO2, 31 mmHg PaCO2, and 23.1 mmol/L HCO3−. D-dimer assay indicated a value of 5.28 mg/L. A computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) revealed filling defects in the main pulmonary artery, upper and lower pulmonary artery branch . There were no distinct signs of embolism in color ultrasonography examination of the upper and lower limbs. The patient was diagnosed with PE, and was treated with anticoagulation, antiplatelet aggregation, and anti-infection medications. During the 18 h after admission, the patient experienced worsening shortness of breath and anoxia and was subsequently transferred to the Emergency Intensive Care Unit (EICU) for non-invasive ventilator assisted ventilation. Additionally, the patient was intravenously administered alteplase once every 12 h for 3 consecutive days and 5000 units subcutaneous unfractionated heparin. Warfarin (5 mg) was orally administered once a day. On noting that the prothrombin time (PT) and international normalized ratio (INR) were 2–2.5 times their respective normal levels, warfarin therapy was singly administered along with anti-infective, supportive, and oxygen therapies. Once her condition had considerably improved and the anoxia was reduced, she was discharged from the hospital.
After 10 days, dyspnea and chest tightness recurred. In addition, she experienced persistent right chest pain, which aggravated when she lied on her right side and was not relieved by rest. Minor vaginal bleeding was also observed. She presented to the Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine of our hospital for a CTPA, which revealed filling defects in the left and right branches of pulmonary artery as well as bilateral pleural effusion . A routine coagulation test revealed 37 s PT and 3.33 INR, and a D-dimer assay showed a value of 8.75 mg/L. No abnormalities were observed in limb color ultrasonography, tumor antigen testing, or surrogate markers of autoimmune diseases (anti-nuclear antibody, anti-RNP antibody, anti-CCP antibody, c-ANCA, p-ANCA, anti-SS-A antibody, and anti-SS-B antibody). Based on the monitoring of PT and INR, we decided to discontinue warfarin to prevent an overdose situation. Relevant contraindications were excluded and the patient underwent interventional inferior vena cava filter implantation combined with thrombolysis implantation therapy, along with low-dose urokinase. Following surgery, she continued to receive anticoagulant treatment. On considerably improvement in her condition, she was discharged.
One month later, she was referred to our hospital again due to swelling in her right lower limb. She received interventional inferior right iliac vein dilation and stent placement. In October 2018, she presented again with a week-long history of right-sided chest pain, cough, difficulty in breathing, and weight loss. A CTPA revealed no evident improvement of the thrombosis in the right and left main pulmonary artery, progression of pneumonia, and a reduced right pleural effusion, compared with the previous CTPA. Once again, the tumor associated antigen test was performed. Tumor antigen testing revealed an elevated Ca125 level of 69.16 U/ml (normal value < 35 U/ml) and Ca199 level of 30.22 U/ml (normal value < 27 U/ml). She was treated with anticoagulation, anti-infection, supportive, and oxygen therapies. We recommended her to undergo a positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) test, but she refused and was discharged from the hospital.
She subsequently underwent a PET-CT examination in another hospital. The PET-CT revealed diffuse heterogeneous thickening of the right pleura, substantially increased glucose metabolism, fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake on L5 vertebral body, striated soft tissue lesions along the right iliac vein, and increased FDG uptake. In November 2018, she was once again admitted to our hospital. Results of enhanced chest CT scan revealed a bilateral PE, bilateral pulmonary infection, right pleural thickening, and pleural effusion . She completed the CT-guided pleural biopsy and postoperative histopathology revealed the tumor consisting of squamous cells were arranged in the nest bulk with invasive growth . Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining was performed for pleural lesion was positive for P63 , P40 , CK5/6 , epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and negative for CD5 , CD117 and Calretinin . Combining with the IHC analysis, the pathological diagnosis was squamous cell carcinoma. Based on her medical history and results of histopathological examination and imaging, the patient was finally diagnosed with PPSCC.
Between 1977 and 2019, we identified 9 previous reports of squamous cell carcinoma arising from the pleura in patients. As described in Table , patients ranged in age between 49 and 75. These cases underwent chest pain, cough, dyspnoea, and other clinical symptoms. Most lesions of these patients were observed in the right pleura. Most of the cases had been in long standing chronic empyema, bronchopleural fistula or pneumothorax before a diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma. But in our case, the patient was previously healthy without chronic empyema or bronchopleural fistula. After being diagnosed with pulmonary embolism, our patient experienced recurrent chest wall pain and pulmonary embolism.