The patient is a 54-year-old gentleman, who presented with a few months of mid-epigastric pain, nausea and vomiting with associated weight loss in February 2012. CT and MRI scans revealed a 3.3 × 3.1 cm pancreatic head mass encasing superior mesenteric artery and vein with associated mesenteric periportal lymphadenopathy. He also had sub-centimeter lung nodules presumed to be metastatic deposits. He thus had a clinical stage 4 unresectable pancreatic cancer. Genomic analysis of tumor biopsies revealed the presence of KRAS mutation (G12D) and loss of CDKN2A/B.
The patient was placed on a clinical trial with first-line treatment of Reolysin and gemcitabine, receiving cycle one day one on March 2012. Reolysin was administered at a dose of 1 × 1010 TCID50 IV on days 1, 2, 8, and 9 (immediately after gemcitabine on days 1 and 8) in combination with 800 mg/m2 IV gemcitabine on days 1 and 8, with 21-day cycles. The patient displayed a clinical response with improvement in cancer-related pain. The best radiographical response was documented as stable disease by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) guidelines .
With the patient on treatment, a biopsy of the pancreatic mass was performed after cycle 25 day 8 in February 2014. The biopsy features were consistent with the diagnosis of pancreatic adenocarcinoma, with confirmed KRAS mutation (G12D) and loss of CDKN2A/B. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on Reolysin-treated or untreated HCT116 colon cancer cells as a positive and negative control for reovirus staining, respectively . Viral replication was detected using antibodies against the reovirus protein, as the presence of viral RNA may not necessarily imply infectious virus particles. A polyclonal antibody, raised in goats, was derived from mature reovirus viral capsid proteins . Importantly, IHC analyses of biopsy specimens from a pancreatic cancer patient revealed strong positivity for reoviral protein and activated caspase 3 within the tumor . Biopsies from pancreatic cancer patients frequently contain benign fat, which may serve as an excellent internal negative control. Images of the stained fat cells were negative for reovirus and active caspase-3 and were from the same tissues that displayed positive staining for reovirus and active caspase-3 . Serial section analysis showed a very high concordance of reoviral protein and activated caspase-3, which is characteristic of a productive reovirus infection. In addition, co-expression analysis demonstrated that the reoviral protein and active caspase-3 were being expressed in many of the same cancer cells . Our preclinical studies with Reolysin identified induction of ER stress and NOXA to be key determinants for Reolysin-mediated apoptosis [, ]. In agreement with the induction of active caspase-3, we also noted a significant increase in the expression of GRP78/BIP, which is commonly induced following ER stress and NOXA in the biopsy sample following Reolysin and gemcitabine treatment .
Toxicities were manageable and included grade 1 fever likely due to Reolysin and grade 3 thrombocytopenia and neutropenia due to gemcitabine. The patient also had a biliary obstruction, which required stenting in November 2013. He completed 27 cycles of treatment with the last one in April 2014. At this time, he presented with disease progression with ascites and jaundice.