A 38-year-old Chinese woman was an emergency admission to our hospital with a sudden onset of acute epigastralgia for the past 14 hours. In particular, she had severe pain in her left upper quadrant, accompanied by nausea but no vomiting, inability to pass flatus and stool as well as intestinal obstruction, no radiating pain, and she was afebrile. She had a history of endometriosis but no abdominal surgery. On admission, she had pain and looked slightly pale, with a pulse of 102 beats/minute and a blood pressure of 106/77 mmHg. Her abdomen was tender in the epigastric region, but Blumberg’s sign and muscular defense were absent; bowel sounds were absent. Blood tests revealed an increased leukocyte count (15.41 × 109/L, with 92% neutrophils), hemoglobin (Hb) 118 g/L, and normal liver and pancreatic enzymes. An emergency abdominal plain film demonstrated the right side below her diaphragm was free of gas; perforation of the digestive tract was considered. Her left upper jejunum had mild expansion, intestinal obstruction was not ruled out. After admission, she was dehydrated, hemodynamically unstable, and her blood pressure decreased progressively to septic shock. We made a presumptive diagnosis of gastrointestinal perforation and septic shock. Septic shock invariably requires anti-shock treatment and urgent surgery even if symptoms are limited as in our case. At laparotomy, we observed the ileocecal was relatively free , which was pulled by the ileum at omental sac area, the small intestine loop dilated and herniated through the hepatogastric ligament hiatus into retrogastric space , and then twisted out of a fissure in gastrocolic ligament. Approximately 1 m of her intestine showed edema; some of her small intestine was necrotic. Straightening some of her small intestine suggested intestinal malrotation for the cecum was free. There still was a diverticulum of approximately 3.0 × 6.0 cm sited at a distance of 80 cm from the ileocecal intestine. Finally, the strangulated intestinal loop and the diverticulum were resected, an appendicectomy was performed, and the fissure was closed. Her postoperative recovery was smooth and she was discharged on day 6 after the operation without any complications during the hospitalization.