A 16-year-old Persian man visited a referral hospital after his mother was diagnosed as having aggressive MTC. The 38-year-old woman, who had had a mass in the thyroid gland and cervical lymphadenopathy for six years, underwent thyroidectomy a year earlier after being diagnosed as having the disease. Her family members were then asked to visit a physician for further evaluation as the disease usually runs in the family.
Our patient had no history of the main symptoms of the disease, namely lymphadenopathy (LAP), weight loss, fever, café au lait spots, ocular problems, gastrointestinal problems (failure to thrive (FTT), abdominal pain, dysphagia, projectile vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, flatulence), thyroid nodule, hoarseness, dyspnea and cough.
On physical examination, his face was symmetric and there was no sign of high arched palate, mandibular prognathism, and flat nasal bridge. He, however, had bumpy lips and several neuromas on his upper and lower eyelids, lips and tongue, all characteristic of MEN2B. His thyroid gland and abdomen were normal, and there were no other remarkable finding in the physical examination. He had a normal height with no signs of marfanoid habitus. He had increased calcitonin and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels but tests for RET proto-oncogene on exon 10, 11 and 16 were negative.
The results of an ophthalmology examination showed several mucosal neuromas on inner eyelids and conjunctivae, prominent perilimbal conjunctival blood vessels and enlarged corneal nerves. His intra-ocular pressure (IOP) was normal. His upper gastrointestinal and small bowel series were also normal.
Pheochromocytoma was ruled out based on the laboratory test results. Our patient thereafter underwent a thyroidectomy. The results of pathological tests revealed a small (0.5cm) medullary thyroid carcinoma in right lobe, with surgical margins free of tumor.
Post-operative evaluation, including cervical ultrasound as well as cervical, thoracic and abdominal computed tomography, were normal. Our patient's calcitonin and CEA levels were then assessed periodically.
It should be noted that all the family members had signed an informed consent, providing the authors with an authorization to publish their information.