Written patient consent was obtained and our institutional ethical committee approved publication of this case report.
A 55-year-old female (157 cm tall and weighing 58 kg) was admitted to our hospital for annuloaortic ectasia (AAE) and moderate aortic valve regurgitation (AR). The preoperative transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) examination confirmed AAE and moderate AR and detected abnormal blood flow just superior to the pulmonary valve. A coronary angiography demonstrated two fistulas from the right coronary cusp and left coronary artery with contrast draining to the pulmonary artery. Thus, the patient was diagnosed with AAE, AR, and coronary artery to pulmonary artery fistula and scheduled for repairing the dilated aortic root while preserving the native aortic valve and closure of the fistula.
Anesthesia was induced with midazolam, 10 mg; fentanyl, 0.2 mg; and vecuronium, 8 mg and maintained with propofol, remifentanil, and vecuronium. After induction of anesthesia, a pulmonary artery catheter was placed through the right internal jugular vein and we performed blood sampling from the pulmonary artery, the right atrium, and the radial artery. We detected the oxygen step-up in the pulmonary artery and calculated that pulmonary flow/systemic flow (Qp/Qs) and left-to-right shunt ratio was 1.9 and 46%, respectively (oxygen saturation in the radial artery, the right atrium, and the pulmonary artery is 99.6, 73.3, and 85.5, respectively). Furthermore, we confirmed shunt flow of the coronary artery to pulmonary artery fistula draining to just superior to the pulmonary valve by TEE. Since the calculated values of Qp/Qs and left-to-right shunt ratio were unexpectedly high, we explored the presence of another shunt which had not been detected by preoperative TTE or plain computed tomography. Then, we found abnormal blood flow contrast draining from the descending aorta to the pulmonary trunk with upper esophageal aortic arch short-axis view . We suspected the presence of PDA and reported it to surgeons, and then, closure of PDA was added to the schedule.
After establishment of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), the fistula from the right coronary cusp was found easily on the heart and it drained to the pulmonary artery. We tried to snare the fistula and confirmed no ECG changes, and then, we ligated this fistula. Then, the aorta was cross-clamped and the heart was arrested. The surgical findings after incision of the pulmonary main truncus included two orifices at just superior to the pulmonary valve and at the roof of the pulmonary trunk. The former orifice was drained from the fistula from the right and left coronary artery. After cardiac arrest, significant blood flow was noted through the latter orifice, so we considered that the latter orifice was drained from PDA. These orifices were closed, and then, repairing the dilated aortic root while preserving the native aortic valve was performed. Weaning from CPB was uneventful. We confirmed no residual shunt by TEE and calculated Qp/Qs as 1.0.