A previously healthy 29-year-old male with no medical history of respiratory illness, recurrent throat infections, or hospital admissions presented to the emergency department with a 3-day history of progressively worsening sore throat, odynophagia, and dysphagia. On presentation day, he started experiencing mild hoarseness and shortness of breath, especially when lying supine, which prompted seeking medical attention. On further questioning, the patient was not taking any prescribed medications and had no known drug allergies. He reported continuous e-cigarette use starting 2 days prior to the development of symptoms, minimal alcohol intake, and no use of recreational drugs.
The patient received intravenous Dexamethasone In the emergency department, which immediately improved his shortness of breath. A throat culture was negative for group A, B, and C Streptococcus. COVID-19 was ruled out with a PCR nasal swab. The total peripheral white blood cell count was mildly elevated, but the rest of the renal and metabolic panels were normal. A lateral soft tissue radiograph of the neck showed a poorly defined and thickened epiglottis with a classic thumb sign, indicating acute epiglottitis .
Considering his respiratory concerns, the Otolaryngology team was consulted. On examination, the patient was afebrile and was not experiencing trismus or stridor. Direct bedside laryngoscopy showed an enlarged, erythematous, and swollen epiglottis, partially obstructing the supraglottic region . Arytenoids were noted to be edematous bilaterally with normal vocal cord mobility.
The patient was admitted to the hospital for airway monitoring and was started on intravenous Ceftriaxone and oral Metronidazole. He was also given another dose of intravenous Dexamethasone and was asked to stop using his e-cigarette.
The patient’s condition improved significantly after 2 days, and a repeat laryngoscopy showed resolution of the swelling in the epiglottis . The patient was switched to oral Amoxicillin for 10 days and was discharged from the hospital.