A 25-year old primigravid woman came to the University of Gondar Hospital fetal medicine outpatient clinic after she was referred for a fetal intraabdominal cystic mass seen on routine ultrasound scanning for a biophysical profile. Her medical and obstetric history was unremarkable. She had antenatal care and obstetric ultrasound was done at the fifth and seventh months and she was told that her fetus is in good condition. At 39 weeks of gestation, she came to us referred for advanced ultrasound scanning and we found an 80 × 60 × 40 mm retro vesical, oval, midline pelvic cystic mass with internal echoes. There was minimal calyceal dilation of both kidneys but the urinary bladder was seen and it was having a normal outline and volume. There was no abnormality in the anatomic scanning of the other systems. The amniotic fluid volume was normal and the biophysical profile was reassuring. The woman was counseled and induction of labor was done with oxytocin and she gave birth to a 3200-g female alive newborn. Immediately upon delivery the newborn was examined and there was an imperforate hymen that bulged forwards and the abdomen was distended, otherwise, the perineum, anus, and urethral orifice were normal. The baby passed urine and meconium. Grossly there was no dysmorphic feature in the newborn. Abdominopelvic ultrasound was done and showed a 100 × 70 × 40 mm oval cystic pelvic mass behind the bladder and there was also mild calyceal dilation of both kidneys, but there was no other abnormality. A renal function test was done for the newborn and found to be normal. Hymenectomy was done on the second day of delivery and around 200 mL of milky fluid was removed. The abdominal distention was relieved, and the renal calyceal dilation disappeared. Abdominal ultrasound after the procedure showed an empty uterus and vagina and the newborn was discharged improved. The newborn came back after 2 weeks for a checkup and she was doing well with normal hymen remnants and vaginal orifice.