Our patient was a girl who was 40 weeks in utero and born through natural vaginal delivery as the first child of a Japanese couple. Her birth weight, height, and head circumference were 3244 g (+0.67 standard deviation [SD]), 46.8 cm (−0.77 SD), and normal, respectively. Neonatal asphyxia was not observed at birth. Her family history lacked evidence regarding consanguineous marriage, epilepsy, or neuromuscular disease. At 15 days old, she presented with bilateral tonic–clonic seizures that lasted for a few minutes, which started in the left or right upper extremity. The seizure frequency increased to approximately 10 per day; the patient was admitted to the hospital by her previous doctor. Interictal electroencephalography (EEG) revealed multifocal spontaneous spikes. The EEG showed isolated spike waves in the right frontal, central, and occipital regions that did not spread widely. It was not a suppression-burst or hypsarrhythmia pattern. General blood tests, plasma amino acid analysis, general spinal fluid tests, spinal fluid virus isolation, and urinary organic acid analysis revealed no abnormalities. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed no obvious epilepsy-inducing structural abnormalities. She was started on phenobarbital for neonatal-onset epilepsy of unknown classification; however, she showed no improvement. She was referred to our hospital at the age of 75 days.

Physical examination and general neurological findings revealed no obvious facial abnormalities or deformities. Eye-tracking and smiling when someone touched or held her were appropriate for infant age. Interictal EEG revealed normal sleep waves; however, there were frequent localized spike waves and spike–slow wave complexes. A tentative diagnosis of symptomatic localization-related epilepsy was made, and treatment was initiated. She continued to experience seizures approximately 10 times a day; therefore, phenobarbital was discontinued and carbamazepine was started at 78 days old. However, it was discontinued after a few days due to an increase in seizure frequency. Oral sodium valproate and zonisamide were initiated at 81 and 88 days old, respectively. Vitamin B6 was administered; however, it was discontinued after having no effect. After starting sodium valproate and zonisamide, there was a gradual decrease in the seizure frequency; however, even at the maximum dose, seizures were still observed 3–4 times a day. Initially, the seizures were generalized tonic convulsions starting from the left upper extremity. However, around the age of 88 days, she displayed a series of nodding spasms. After adjustment of medications, oral intake was decreased, and tube feeding was initiated. At 108 days old, the patient underwent examination for primary disease according to the Department of Child Neurology, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry. Long-term EEG monitoring revealed frequent irregular high-amplitude spikes and slow waves without left-right synchrony during sleep and wakefulness, which indicated a hypsarrhythmia. Ictal EEG revealed a fast-wave rhythm and positive slow waves preceding the spasm. Eye tracking and chuckling during the early disease stage were no longer observed. Further, she was considered to be developmentally regressing and was diagnosed with West syndrome. Brain MRI revealed no structural abnormalities presenting as obvious epileptic foci, including focal cortical dysplasia. The patient was started on adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) therapy at 114 days old, which was administered daily for two weeks.

The seizures disappeared the day after starting ACTH therapy. Recurrent spasms were observed 8 days after initiating ACTH therapy. Subsequently, sodium valproate and zonisamide were continued; however, there was no change in seizure frequency. Nitrazepam was started at the age of 4 months, which decreased the seizure frequency to 1–2 per day. EEG revealed multifocal spikes; however, the typical hypsarrhythmia disappeared and there was improved background activity. Cerebral cortical atrophy occurred as a side effect of ACTH therapy. Development remained regressive, without evidence of head control, eye tracking, or chuckling. Due to aspiration pneumonia, nutrition was maintained by tube feeding. The patient was discharged from the hospital at 6 months old. After 7 months old, the patient lacked obvious clinical seizures. At 10 months old, genetic testing for West syndrome was performed. Subsequently, she was hospitalized for a urinary tract infection and pneumonia at 10 months and 1.3 years old, respectively.

At approximately 1.2 years old, she began experiencing a series of seizures involving the twitching of her right leg during sleep for 2–3 min at a time. Ictal EEG revealed series-forming myoclonus seizures. Interictal EEG showed multifocal spikes and slow waves at sleep onset without hypsarrhythmia. Moreover, background activity during wakefulness revealed continuous slow waves. Brain MRI showed diffuse cerebral atrophy and corpus callosum thinning; however, there were no obvious abnormal structures. Despite the observation of a new seizure type, three antiepileptic drugs were administered at extreme doses and no indication for active surgery was indicated.

At 1.5 years old, she underwent further genetic testing. Target capture sequencing was performed to screen 114 epilepsy-related genes in the proband of the Department of Pediatrics at Fukuoka. We identified a missense variant (RefSeq accession number NM_003165: c.875G > A [p.Arg292His] available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/refseq/ (accessed on 27 July 2022)) in the STXBP1 gene. Sanger sequencing confirmed the variant in the proband. A search for this variant in her parents through Sanger sequencing revealed that the variant was de novo. Finally, she was diagnosed with developmental and epileptic encephalopathies exhibiting clinical characteristics of West syndrome due to STXBP1 gene mutation (c.875G > A [p.Arg292His], previously reported in ClinVar [rs796053361] as a pathogenic variant). Other unidentified variants in addition to STXBP1-p.Arg292His may have contributed to her clinical phenotype; since she did not undergo whole genome or whole exome sequencing, we continue to investigate this possibility.

The patient is currently 2.1 years old. Although the frequency of epileptic seizures has decreased, her development remains regressive, and she has a severe intellectual disability. At the time of writing, apart from the neurological phenotype, the patient had no other symptoms, such as metabolic disease, primary immunodeficiency, or hyperinflammatory condition. She continues to receive medical treatment. Should the seizures worsen in the future, we will review the choice of drug according to the seizure type and consider palliative epilepsy surgical treatment to reduce seizure frequency.