A 72-year-old male with a history of growth hormone deficiency symptomatic for generalized fatigue and weakness and on somatropin replacement therapy (1 mg daily) had an incidentally found pituitary lesion identified two decades prior on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) following hospitalization for stroke. His comorbidities included obesity (body mass index, BMI 30) and diabetes. At that time, the lesion was assumed to be a microadenoma measuring 1.0 cm and abutting the optic chiasm. At the time, he had no visual deficits and was managed conservatively. In 2021, he presented to his outside endocrinologist with an elevated cortisol level of 2.3 mcg/dL from a normal value one year prior and the absence of overt changes in clinical features, suggesting subclinical CD. In addition, the low-dose (1 mg) dexamethasone suppression study did not suppress cortisol levels, indicating CD versus Cushing’s syndrome. Repeat imaging demonstrated the growth of the lesion, now measuring 1.3 cm, with no compression of the optic apparatus .
As a result of these findings, surgery was recommended. He underwent endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal resection of the lesion without issue, and postoperative MRI demonstrated no residual mass . Postoperative AM serum cortisol was 12.4 mcg/dL one day after surgery and 1.7 mcg/dL two days after surgery. At one year follow-up, the patient’s insulin-like growth factor 1 level was decreased to 181 ng/mL from 281 ng/mL prior. Complete postoperative endocrinological laboratory results for patient 1 are unavailable due to reliance on endocrinological workup from an external hospital, despite efforts to access the records. Pathology demonstrated multiple fragments of the pituitary gland with normal nesting growth patterns. In addition, pituitary transcription factors, including growth hormone factor 1 (Pit-1), T-box transcription factor Tpit, and steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) showed normal distribution patterns in the parenchyma. Adjacent to these fragments was a colloid nodule and epithelium suggestive of RCC. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful with his RCC resection. Approximately one week after surgery, for symptoms of nausea, fatigue, and muscle weakness, his workup was benign aside from hyponatremia, which was corrected during his hospitalization. One month postoperatively, the patient exhibited excellent recovery and no complications from the operation. On a longer-term follow-up with endocrinology, the patient reported improved fatigue and generalized muscle weakness.