A 66-year-old man with multiple cardiovascular risk factors; such as diabetes, hypertension, smoking and STEMI 6 years ago, who did not receive a reperfusion therapy. He consulted the ER referring atypical chest pain that began 8 days prior to his visit. He showed normal vital signs with the following relevant findings in the cardiovascular physical examination: visible and palpable double systolic apical impulse with a wide apical impulse area (4,5 cm in diameter), located in the fifth intercostal space of the left mid-clavicular line. On auscultation, an audible fourth heart sound (S4) was present. The cardiac biomarkers were negative.
Normal sinus rhythm, Q-wave in inferior leads and T-wave inversion in lateral leads. .
Mild cardiomegaly, of note, a homogeneous opacity was observed adjacent to the LV. .
Revealed a saccular image in the LV posterolateral wall, which, due to its characteristics, suggested a thrombosed PSA in the LV free -wall. .
Showed a spherical-shaped left ventricular cavity with segmental wall-motion abnormalities, a LV ejection fraction of 40% by 3D method, PSA involving the basal and mid segments of both, inferolateral and anterolateral wall; with a narrow neck (38 mm), a shunt of LV to PSA was observed in color Doppler. .
A viability protocol rest imaging/4-h redistribution imaging/24-h redistribution imaging was performed and showed a myocardial infarction located in the inferolateral wall, which involved the inferoseptal region; non-transmural in the apical segment and transmural in basal and mid segment, without signs of viability in the delayed redistribution imaging. .
Multi-vessel coronary artery disease, with involvement of the left main coronary artery and high SYNTAX score [40 pts.]. Left ventriculography was not performed due to elevated end diastolic pressure and because of the previously reported left ventricular mural thrombus.
The case was discussed by the heart team. Due to the high SINTAX score and the mechanical complication, a coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) plus aneurysmectomy with geometric reconstruction was considered. On-pump CABG was performed with internal thoracic artery anastomosis to the left anterior descendent coronary artery. A giant posterolateral wall LV PSA of approximately 7 cm was observed; described with a “petrous” consistency and adhered to the posterior pericardium. Due to the previously mentioned findings, it was not possible to perform the aneurysmectomy, as the cardiovascular surgical team considered the benefit was not worth compared to the risk of performing the procedure, so the surgery was concluded. The patient was discharged five days after CABG and he is currently asymptomatic, in NYHA functional class II and is followed up as an outpatient in our hospital.