History of Presentation
We report a case of a 73-year-old woman who was referred to us from an outside hospital because of progressive dizziness and exertional dyspnea. An echocardiogram revealed a large floating structure (27 × 17 mm) attached to the anterior mitral leaflet along with hypertrophy and massive calcification of the left ventricle. Notably, significant involvement of the midventricular septum was observed, leading to subvalvular left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction. On explicit inquiry, the patient reported experiencing breathing difficulties during exertion in her youth. According to the patient, an ultrasound examination at that time revealed that her heart was enlarged.

Medical History
The patient was known for coronary artery disease and had a history of ovarian carcinoma. She had undergone an adnexectomy, pelvic lymphadenectomy, and adjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel.

Differential Diagnosis
Massive myocardial calcification is a very rare condition that manifests because of a range of different etiologies. In terms of cause, they are classified into metastatic and dystrophic. Metastatic calcification occurs as a result of elevated serum calcium levels and most commonly affects patients with chronic renal failure undergoing hemodialysis. Additionally, hyperparathyroidism, calcium and vitamin D deficiency, and oxalosis can also contribute to the development of myocardial calcifications. Dystrophic calcification arises from calcium deposits forming in necrotic tissue, which can be caused by a range of myocardial injuries such as myocarditis, myocardial infarctions, tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, hemorrhage, endomyocardial fibrosis (EMF), and idiopathic mitral annular calcification (MAC).

Investigations
In regards of the floating mitral valve structure morphologically, there was suspicion of a fibroelastoma or a vegetation, although clinically and microbiologically no evidence of an endocarditis was found. Because of the high risk of embolization in either case and because of the presence of hypertrophy-related LVOT obstruction as well as significant aortic valve stenosis, we decided to proceed with surgery for the patient.
Preoperatively, coronary angiography revealed no significant coronary stenoses in terms of the known coronary artery disease. However, during the examination, significant myocardial calcification observed echocardiographically was confirmed. Additionally, computed tomography (CT) of the heart was performed, revealing excessive calcifications of the left ventricular myocardium, with emphasis on the septum and apex. Furthermore, there were significant calcifications of the mitral valve annulus suggestive of caseous calcification of the mitral annulus.

Management
During the intraoperative procedure, removal of the floating structure, decalcification of the anterior mitral leaflet, subvalvular myectomy with excision of a hypertrophic myocardial portion next to the calcification, and biological aortic valve replacement (BAVR) due to an aortic valve stenosis were performed. Histologic examination of the intraoperatively removed floating mitral valve structure revealed fibrin components, enclosed basophil granular structures, nucleated cells, and neutrophilic granulocytes, consistent with endocarditis.

Regarding the myocardial calcification of the midventricular septum, histologic examination of the hypertrophed myocardium revealed endocardium and myocardium with significant scarring (which could be well visualized with Elastika-van-Gieson staining), intramural blood vessels without abnormalities, no inflammation, and cardiomyocytes with slight variation in nuclear size, indicating evidence of EMF and interstitial fibrosis.
Postoperatively, the patient was readmitted to our cardiology clinic. We continued the antibiotic endocarditis therapy in accordance with guidelines alongside postoperative care and discharged the patient in good clinical condition thereafter.

Outcome and Follow-Up
Four years later, the patient was admitted to our hospital by her cardiologist. She presented again with increasing exertional dyspnea. On the transthoracic echocardiogram, we now observed an increasing left ventricular hypertrophy with a preserved left ventricular systolic function and a diastolic dysfunction. However, there was no gradient increase in the LVOT under Valsalva maneuver. In addition, we noticed signs of pulmonary hypertension with a systolic pulmonary artery pressure of 99 mm Hg. Furthermore, during a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination, right ventricular dilatation and impaired right ventricular function with a right ventricular ejection fraction of 29% were confirmed as a consequence of pulmonary hypertension. A follow-up CT of the heart revealed a significant increase in myocardial calcification.

The patient also underwent cardiac catheterization. Coronary angiography ruled out progression of her known coronary artery disease, and right-sided cardiac pressures and resistances were determined during a right heart catheterization. During this procedure, the diagnosis of combined precapillary and postcapillary pulmonary hypertension was established, with a mean pulmonary artery pressure of 58 mm Hg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 26 mm Hg, and pulmonary vascular resistance of 8.4 WU. In the clinical context, we interpreted the combined precapillary and postcapillary pulmonary hypertension to be caused by the chronic severe diastolic dysfunction because of massive myocardial calcification of unclear etiology.