A 9 days-old male neonates weighing 3.60 kg was referred by local hospital to our center (National Cardiac Center Harapan Kita Hospital/NCCHK) and was ventilated because of severe metabolic and respiratory acidosis, circulatory dynamics instability with history of respiratory distress, cyanosis, hyperbilirubinemia and severe infection that present since he was born on year 2011. The perinatal history was unremarkable and at a previous hospital she was born at 40 weeks of gestation by normal labour with a birth weight of 3.85 kg, oxygen saturation 90% and an APGAR score of 9/9. On the 6th day postpartum he presented with feeding difficulty, severe cyanosis and congestive heart failure and was referred to local hospital for further treathment, was ventilated at the emergency room with oxygen saturation 82%, and then transferred to us for possible surgical repair. Stable hemodynamic with oxygen saturation was 75%, while differential oxygen saturation was noted between the both upper and lower limbs (89%; 76% and 97%; 83%, respectively). No apparent cardiac murmur was detected. His chest X-ray showed mild cardiomegaly and congestion of the lungs, and pulmonary edema. Electrocardiogram showed normal rhythm, right axes deviation, and mild right ventricular hypertrophy.
Admitted to our pediatric cardiac intensive care unit (PCICU) with oxygen saturation between 40% and 70%. Two-dimensional Echocardiography revealed an IAA type A and APW type II with a restricted PDA, pulmonary hypertension but no ventricular septal defect (, ). A PGE1 infusion 10 nano was started to re-open the ductus arteriosus and diuretics were administered. During the following days the baby had severe infection and DIC with increased of leucocyte 28.387, pro-calcitonine 11, D-dimer 4.800. Also had experienced of several epileptic episodes, and a brain sonography showed arachnoiditis, brain edema and no intracranial bleeding. Because of the risk of infection, sepsis and taking into account the good general condition, operation was deferred.
After improvement of the clinical condition, operation was performed on the 20th days of life. A one-stage surgical correction was performed through a median sternotomy under profound hypothermia (26 °C). Before the administration of heparin, the entire ascending aorta and the arch vessels, pulmonary trunk and both branch were mobilized. The external anatomy confirmed an IAA type A and a large APW type II, and this time the right pulmonary artery (RPA) was recognized to originate from the posterolateral part of the ascending aorta, as well as connection with common pulmonary artery. Aorta and pulmonary arteries (PA) were obvious and intact at their origin. The ascending aorta is then come to end by giving three branches including, brachiocephalic artery, left common carotid artery, and left subclavian artery. There was not evidence of descending aorta. Proximal part of PDA arose from PA trunk which is distally becoming into descending aorta with left pulmonary artery are origin from PA trunk also detected at the same time (, ).
Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established by the right hemicerebral perfusion and the bicaval drainage. The right hemicerebral perfusion was obtained via expanded 4-0 mm polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) graft sewn to the right brachiocephalic artery. The aortic cross clamp was applied (one-third flow) and cardioplegia was infused. Aortic arch vessels were clamped at the origin of the brachiocephalic artery, the left common carotid artery, and left subclavian artery. Immediately there after, snaring of both pulmonary arteries precluded overflooding the lungs, and the pump flow was lowered to 10% to perfuse only the myocardium. Ductal tissue was ligated near its pulmonary origin and resected until normal aortic tissue appeared, then the ascending aorta was longitudinally incised. An extended end-to-side anastomosis of the descending aorta to the distal ascending aorta was performed with a continuous 7-0 polypropylene suture. After removal of the aortic cross-clamp and off the snares in the vessels, full flow bypass was resumed and the anastomosis was checked for bleeding and undue tension.
The aortic cross-clamp was reapplied proximal to the aortic cannula, cardioplegia was infused, and the AP window repair was started. The ascending aorta was transversely incised distal to the AP window. Inspection confirmed the location of the AP window which appeared to be very large 10 mm diameter, as well as aortic origin of the RPA. The left pulmonary artery (LPA) arose from the PA trunk in the normal fashion. The coronary arteries were normally positioned. Becaused of the excessive blood flow distally, the aortic cross clamp was removed and reapplied for right hemicerebral perfusion again (one-third flow). A 4-0 Gore-tex patch was used both to close the aortopulmonary window and separated the right pulmonary artery from aortic origin (B).
After rewarming, CPB was easily weaned with moderate inotropic support. Total bypass time was 125 minutes, cross clamp time 71 minutes and one-third flow 66 minutes. Peritoneal dialysis was performed post operatively for 3 days and electively switch with lasix intermitten.
The postoperative recovery was uneventful. Slowly weaning from ventilation and extubated on 7th day post operatively with good clinical condition. No clinical signs of neurologic disturbances were observed and cardiopulmonary function as well as distal perfusion were very satisfactory. Early postoperative echocardiography using colour doppler demonstrated an excellent early surgical result with a minimal pressure gradient of 12 mmHg across the aortic reconstruction with good LV function, no AP window residual.
Currently on year 2021, the patient has grown up as a cheerful 9 year old child who is growing actively and has entered elementary school in grade 2. There are no abnormalities of the heart and lungs according to the patient's mother and always carries out routinely follow up with the pediatric cardiologist. However, there is still a cerebral palsy sequela which is currently being treated by a pediatric neurologist.