A 72-year-old male patient, smoker (47 pack-years), with no known medical history was presented with symptoms of fatigue, shortness of breath for the past 2 months (New York Heart Association functional Class III) and bilateral lower limb oedema since 2 weeks. His electrocardiogram displayed sinus rhythm at 90 b.p.m. with left axis deviation, intraventricular conduction delay (QRS duration 118 ms) and QS morphology in leads III, aVF and V1–V5. His blood pressure and oxygen saturation were within normal range (135/85 mmHg and 96%, respectively). Lung and cardiac auscultation revealed absence of breath sounds in the right lower lobe and a harsh pansystolic murmur at the left lower sternal edge, respectively. The patient also had jugular vein distention. Chest X-ray displayed significant right-sided pleural effusion. Laboratory tests showed high proBNP (8904 pg/mL), slightly elevated troponin I (cTnI 0.083 ng/mL), mild anaemia (Hgb 12.2 g/dL, Hct 37.4%), and a normal renal function.
Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated an aneurysm of the basal inferior and inferoseptal segments of the left ventricle as well as dilation and systolic impairment of the right ventricle with hypokinesia of it’s free wall. Colour Doppler revealed a shunt between the left and right ventricle through the aneurysmatic segment and moderate insufficiency of the atrioventricular valves. The left ventricular ejection fraction was 48% (via Simpson) and pulmonary artery systolic pressure was elevated (50 mmHg). Qp/Qs ratio was 2.4.
The patient was admitted to the coronary care unit and heart failure treatment with bisoprolol (2.5 mg q.d.), zofenopril (10 mg q.d.), and furosemide (40 mg b.i.d.) was initiated and titrated. Delayed treatment of the septal rupture was decided due to his stable haemodynamic status. Right heart catheterization revealed elevated pulmonary artery and wedge pressures, whereas cardiac output was normal and Qp/Qs ratio was estimated 2.8. Coronary angiography uncovered proximal occlusion of the right coronary artery , while the left coronary circulation did not present severe stenosis. Right coronary artery intervention was not attempted due to the non-viability of the underlying infarcted myocardium. Acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) (100 mg q.d.) and atorvastatin (40 mg q.d.) were added.
Over the course of hospitalization, the patient’s symptoms improved significantly. A transoesophageal echocardiogram was performed , which showed a 14 mm serpiginous defect with irregular borders and no favourable rupture anatomy for device closure at the site aforementioned in TTE, so he was referred for surgical repair.
During surgery, scarred myocardium was found at the right ventricular wall and basal segments of the posterior and inferior walls of the left ventricle. Ventriculotomy was achieved through the posterior LV wall. The septal defect was measured 15 mm and was repaired with two Teflon patches, without any residual shunt.
The patient didn’t present any complications and has been symptom-free ever since. He is followed up by his cardiologist at the local health centre.