A 38-year-old Caucasian man was seen in the emergency department following a referral by his general practitioner, as there were concerns from his family that he was voicing bizarre ideas. He complained of feeling increasingly stressed, anxious and paranoid and he was having flashbacks of fictional events from his past. He described visualizing these events as if they were being played in a movie. He had beliefs that many people from his local community were involved in a conspiracy against him and he was being provoked by other people to get into fights. He also had beliefs that he was being followed and watched, and he elaborated that he could feel the presence of evil and evil things being passed onto him by other people.
He had no past psychiatric history and there was no family history of any mental health related problems. He had experimented with recreational drugs such as cocaine and ecstasy in the past but he denied any use of recreational drugs in the last 2 years. He worked as a successful self-employed businessman. His symptoms, particularly the persecutory delusions and delusional memory, worsened and he was admitted to the local psychiatric hospital.
His physical and neurological examination was unremarkable, and blood tests including urea and electrolytes, liver function tests and thyroid function tests were normal. An electroencephalogram (EEG) was inconclusive of any seizure activity and a computed tomography (CT) scan of his brain revealed a lacunar infarct of the putamen region in the left basal ganglia. A detailed history of any cardiovascular incidents was explored and he gave a history of severe crushing chest pain 6 months before presentation. He did not seek medical attention, the pain did not recur, and there were no cardiological or neurological sequels. An electrocardiogram and echocardiogram showed no compromise of cardiac functions.
The lacunar infarct was treated conservatively and he was commenced on an atypical anti-psychotic medication, aripiprazole, and his psychotic symptoms gradually improved over the following weeks. He tolerated aripiprazole quite well and did not experience any extrapyramidal or significant side effects to the medication. His insight into his delusional beliefs improved and he was able to rationalise them. Following 3 weeks of hospitalization, his symptoms had improved and he was successfully discharged with community follow-up.