A 52-year-old male patient came to our clinic for a consultation regarding rashes on his fingers, arms and legs. It was learned from the patient’s story that he had been screened for the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) because his wife had tested positive two days previously. A reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) was found to be positive. The samples were obtained using a nasopharyngeal swab.
He had complaints of mild weakness and myalgia and he had been using tablets of diltiazem (120 mg/day), doxazosin (4 mg/day), atorvastatin (10 mg/day) and acetylsalicylic acid (100 mg/day) for five years due to essential hypertension and coronary artery disease. The patient did not complain of coughing or dyspnea, and no lung involvement was detected on computed tomography (CT). In laboratory tests, acute-phase reactants were found to be within the normal range: procalcitonin 0.005 ng/ml, sedimentation 12 mm/h and C-reactive protein (CRP) 8 mg/l. The patient was accepted as a COVID-19 case and treatments with hydroxychloroquine (600 mg BID for one day and then 400 mg BID for the following five days) and azithromycin (500 mg daily for five days) were started. Two days after the onset of constitutional symptoms, vesicular skin lesions started to develop on the finger’s side as can be seen in .
Informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of clinical pictures, and permission to report on this case was granted by the local ethics committee.
The patient’s first dermatological signs consisted of vesicles on the sides of his fingers and millimetric erythematous papulovesicular eruptions, which were concentrated on the extensor aspect of the lower legs and flexor aspect of the arms . Initially, the patient was evaluated as having irritant contact dermatitis, and administration of mometasone furoate ointment and cetirizine tablet (20 mg/day) was started. After three days, it was noticed that the patient’s existing lesions began to acquire a petechial-purpuric appearance and cherry angioma-like lesions appeared on his upper arms, extending from the inner side to the armpit, and on the upper lateral aspects of the trunk .
In laboratory tests, antinuclear antibody levels, antithrombin-3 levels, complete blood count, liver function tests and coagulation parameters were found to be within the normal range and conditions that cause vasculitis were ruled out. No histopathological examination of the skin lesions was performed because the patient did not agree to undergo a biopsy.
The patient developed severe weakness and severe muscle pain in his legs, which could be interpreted as restless leg syndrome. The skin manifestations gradually regressed leaving a reticular purpuric appearance. Some of the cherry angioma-like lesions disappeared after a brown crust had formed, while others persisted.