A 72-year-old man was referred to Tishreen University Hospital in 2021 to perform a radical cystectomy due to Urothelial carcinoma with muscularis propria invasion, which was confirmed by histopathological biopsy. Laboratory tests showed a low hemoglobin level; 10.2 g/dL with hematuria. Other Routine blood values were normal. The patient medical history shows that he underwent transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) followed by intravesical BCG (Bacillus Calmette-Guerin) therapy administered for 3 years. The patient has smoked 5 cigarettes daily for the past 40 years. He had never used alcohol. He had no allergy to any drugs. There was no tumor history in his family; particularly no history of bladder tumors. Computerized tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast was performed. Coronal contrast-enhanced CT image shows a mass occupying almost the entire bladder cavity, in addition to the presence of a heterogeneous mass in the right lower quadrant in the expected location of the appendix with tiny peripheral calcifications (A). That mass was suspected of being a right common iliac artery aneurysm, but the CT angiography (CTA) showed the integrity of the artery (B). The patient underwent a radical cystectomy and appendectomy. Both specimens were sent to the pathology department for histopathological study. Pathological examination of the bladder specimen showed the tumor was a high-grade invasive carcinoma that invaded all layers of the bladder and reached perivesical tissue. On the other hand, the gross examination of the appendix specimen revealed a cystic dilation at the distal tip, measured 5.5 cm × 4.5 cm x 5 cm, filled with gelatinous mucus, and some calcifications were seen in the lumen. The serosa was smooth. . Microscopically, we found mucinous epithelial proliferation with extracellular mucin (A), and the epithelium rests on mural fibrosis (B). Foci of mucin and calcifications are seen (C). While the base of the appendix is within normal limits (D). The patient was stable and discharged 15 days later, without any complications.