A 25-year-old man residing in the hilly district of Nepal presented with a 10-year history of pain and swelling in both hands and feet of insidious onset, progressive in nature without radiation but exacerbated during long travel and dangling of limbs associated with profuse sweating (hyperhidrosis) and progressive enlargement of hands and feet. He also gives a history of easy fatigability, heat intolerance and skin changes like acne, scalp dandruff and thickened eyelids. He had visited multiple health care centres for this concern for the past 10 years as the suspected diagnosis could not be confirmed by any laboratory results. None of the family members had a similar history.
The patient was moderately built with marked thickening of skin folds in his forehead and evident swelling of bilateral ankle joints along with grade IV clubbing on both upper and lower limbs . Systemic examinations were otherwise normal. A clinical diagnosis of PDP, a rare genetic disease characterised by pachyderma, digital clubbing and periostosis was made. Normal serum insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) level and thyroid function tests ruled out our other differentials such as acromegaly and hyperthyroidism. Routine blood investigations including blood counts, liver function tests and renal function tests were also normal. Psoriatic arthritis was ruled out on the basis of the clinical history, which is generally limited to the extremities with psoriatic nail involvement and tests for rheumatoid factor and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide were normal, ruling out suspicion of rheumatoid arthritis.
Radiography of the ankle joint showed symmetric, shaggy subperiosteal new bone formation and cortical thickening leading to the characteristic dripping candle wax appearance of the fibula; coarse periosteal new bone formation in the distal tibia and fibula leading to distortion of the medial malleolus and periarticular osteopenia with preserved articular surface along with hyperostosis of the metatarsal bones .
Hyperostosis of the metacarpal bones, proximal and middle phalanx with unaffected articular surfaces along with increased soft tissue shadow showing characteristic sausage finger appearance was also seen in the radiograph, which was supported by the clinical picture . Hair on the end appearance of the parietal bone along with hyperostosis of the skull bones and normal appearing Sella turcica was witnessed .
After the diagnosis of PDP was made, he was prescribed with selective COX-2 inhibitor (etoricoxib 90 mg oral once a day) and he showed partial improvement in joint pain and swelling along with a gradual reduction of pachyderma making his daily life easier with treatment thereafter. Additionally, retinoid ointment was also used during this course, which might have improved symptoms of facial acne and skin changes whereas physical therapy also helped to improve joint mobility. Radiological follow-up after 6 months showed improvement in soft tissue thickening near the occiput and supraorbital ridge of the skull as well as in soft tissue swelling of the lower limb .
Continuous pain and change in his physical appearance affected his personal and social life. Ambiguous diagnosis and deteriorating symptoms made the process of seeking medical help overwhelming. Over the course of treatment, the physical and mental well-being is now improving. For follow-up, he visits our outpatient clinic or communicates via telephone with the consultant. The patient experienced no complications from the condition or the medications.