An 80-year-old man was admitted to our institute for lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) in April 2018. International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) of the patient was evaluated as 30, while Quality of life (QoL) was scored as 5 points and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status was 0. Digital rectal examination revealed a grade III enlarged prostate, with palpable hard nodules on the surface obviously and the central sulcus disappeared. The value of serum prostate- specific antigen (PSA) was 145.6 ng/mL (normal value: 0–4 ng/mL), testosterone (T) was 354.5 ng/dl (normal value: 193–740 ng/dl), hemoglobin (Hb) was 119 g/l (normal value: 130–175 g/l), serum creatinine (SCr) was 67 μmol/l (normal range: 57–111 μmol/l). The pelvic enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that a high possibility of prostate cancer, and the seminal vesicles and pelvic bones were invaded . Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) indicated tumor had metastasized to multiple bones including the right ilium and the right sacroiliac joint . Transrectal ultrasound-guided biopsy revealed poorly differentiated AdPC after pathological examination, with a Gleason score of 9 (4 + 5), PSA (+), synaptophysin (-), chromogranin A (-) and Ki67 (15%) . The clinical stage was determined as stage IV (T3b N0 M1b) and this patient agreed to accept the ADT comprising bicalutamide (50 mg, once a day) combined with goserelin (10.8 mg, once every three months) since April 2018. The patient had a good response to the aforementioned therapy with the LUTS improved (IPSS 15, QoL 3) and serum PSA level decreased to 0.077 ng/mL (normal value: 0–4 ng/mL). Meanwhile, subsequent pelvic enhanced MRI and SPECT suggested the volume of the primary tumor and metastases was significantly reduced at the follow-up in June 2019.
However, 6 months later, the patient gradually presented with gross hematuria, urination pain, anemia, tachycardia and pale lips, and thus was admitted to our institute again in December 2019. Hb decreased continuously from 115 g/l to 79 g/l in four days after admission, and showed no obvious improvement even after blood transfusions. At that point, serum PSA was 0.416 ng/mL (normal value: 0–4 ng/mL), T was 4.33 ng/dl (normal value: 193–740 ng/dl), SCr was 86 μmol/l. Although SPECT indicated no significant change in bone metastases , the pelvic enhanced MRI suggested that the primary prostate cancer tumor was enlarged with bladder invasion and the parailiac lymph nodes were involved . An emergency contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen further suggested that the tumor had metastasized to thoracic vertebra without urinary obstruction and ureterohydronephrosis. To sum up, the disease has progressed to the more aggressive CRPC stage.
In consideration of the relative stable PSA level and the rapid progression of the disease, we tested the serum NSE with a value of 170.8 ng/mL (normal value: 0–17 ng/mL). All these results indicated a possible formation of t-NEPC. Therefore, a secondary biopsy of the enlarged primary tumor was performed. The results of pathology showed small-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma . The immunohistochemical staining contained features of t-NEPC, which had an intensive Ki67 expression (70%), was negative for PSA staining and positive for synaptophysin and CD56 ( and ). Furthermore, a genetic testing of the blood sample showed germ-line mutations of RB1 and FOXA1 , both of which are tightly associated with the formation of t-NEPC.
The effect of conservative treatments (eg, continuous bladder irrigation, fluid infusion and blood transfusion) for hematuria was limited. To control the bleeding of the primary tumor and relieve symptoms, the patient was treated with superselective prostate artery embolization (PAE) after multi-disciplinary consultations in January 2020. During the surgery, digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed extravasation of contrast medium from branches of right prostatic artery . Then, superselective PAE was performed to terminate the bleeding. Polyvinyl alcohol particles (PVA) were successfully injected into the right prostatic artery . We also found that a large amount of contrast medium overflowed at the terminal of the left prostatic artery . However, the left internal pudendal artery was selected to be embolized with infusion of PVA, gelatin sponge and spring coil due to the malformation of the left prostatic artery . Finally, the hematuria was controlled immediately with no obvious discomfort after operation.
After analyzing all test results and conducting a comprehensive evaluation, we have realized that the patient was not suitable for platinum-based chemotherapy due to his weak constitution. For this reason, to further control the disease and relieve pain of the patient, palliative radiotherapy (intensity modulated radiation therapy, IMRT) to the pelvic tumor (60.2 Gy/2.15 Gy/28 fractions), the lymph drainage area (50.4 Gy/1.8Gy/28 fractions) and bone metastases (30Gy/3Gy/10 fractions) was performed in the Department of Tumor Radiotherapy of our institution in February 2020. The LUTS were relieved effectively after the palliative radiotherapy. The tumor biomarkers decreased after the superselective PAE and the radiation therapy (NSE from 170.8 ng/mL to 32 ng/mL; PSA from 0.416 ng/mL to 0.058 ng/mL). Moreover, enhanced MRI in May 2020 showed that the primary tumor was smaller than that in December 2019 . Unfortunately, the patient could not withstand the pain of the disease and then refused the follow-up treatments. He eventually died of cachexia and multiple organ failure at home on July 12, 2020.