A 59 year old Chinese woman underwent routine mammographic screening that revealed scattered areas of fibroglandular densities with microcalcifications developing in the lower inner quadrant of the left breast and prominent lymph nodes. Magnification mammographic views of the left breast demonstrated amorphous heterogeneous calcifications in a segmental distribution, spanning an area approximately 70 mm in maximal anterior–posterior dimension. No associated mass was identified on mammography or ultrasound. A 14 gauge (G) ultrasound-guided, spring-loaded core biopsy of the left breast lesion revealed low-to-intermediate grade ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) (with associated microcalcifications).

The patient was gravida 3 para 3, postmenopausal approximately 1 year previously, with no family history of breast cancer and in good health. She had no history of malignancy and was a lifetime nonsmoker.

Ultrasound of the left axilla showed normal morphology level I lymph nodes and one to two abnormal level II lymph nodes with focally increased cortical thickness measuring up to 5 mm and an eccentrically displaced and partially flattened fatty hilum. This clinical scenario raised the question of why this patient had enlarged nodes in the apparent presence of only DCIS.

In addition, 10 months prior to presentation, she had acute upper respiratory tract symptoms consistent with a viral illness, with a negative nasopharyngeal swab reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction test for severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2). This patient had sought medical attention after she detected swelling in her left supraclavicular fossa 7 months earlier. In addition, 7 days prior to presenting with left supraclavicular fossa swelling, she had received the first dose of the Pfizer COVID-19 vaccine in the left deltoid muscle. Just prior to her vaccination, serologic testing for total antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid and spike proteins were negative.

Physical examination at the time of her presentation revealed a cluster of three soft nontender lymph nodes in the left supraclavicular fossa, each approximately 1–1.5 cm in diameter. There was no detectable cervical or axillary lymphadenopathy. Breast exam was normal, with no palpable masses. A chest X-ray revealed no abnormalities. The enlarged lymph nodes were attributed to the COVID-19 vaccine. Over the next 4 weeks, the left supraclavicular lymph nodes decreased in size and became barely palpable.

Initial ultrasound-guided 25G and 22G fine needle aspiration of the level II axillary lymph node yielded insufficient lymphoid sample and was unsatisfactory for evaluation.

Dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to further assess the breasts and lymph nodes. There was corresponding focally increased non-mass enhancement at the site of the left breast biopsy proving DCIS but no MRI evidence of grossly invasive disease. In the left axilla, there was an enhancing mass measuring 1.3 cm in diameter, deep to the pectoralis major muscle. An ultrasound-guided core biopsy of this mass was performed. Pathology revealed lymphoid tissue with interfollicular areas containing small lymphocytes, plasma cells, and rare eosinophils. No aberrant expression of CD20, CD3, BCL2, BCL6, kappa, lambda, or AE1/AE3 was identified. These histologic findings and the immunophenotype were consistent with lymphoid hyperplasia.

Lymphadenopathy can be caused by various etiologies, including malignancies, infections, autoimmune disorders, or miscellaneous conditions such as certain medications, foreign bodies, or vaccinations. In this case, many etiologies could be eliminated from consideration on the basis of the patient’s history, physical exam, and investigations. The patient had no known infections and no findings suggestive of an infection. She had no history of or symptoms suggestive of an autoimmune disorder. The patient was only taking hormone replacement therapy, steroid inhaler, and chronic antihypertensive medications in the 7-month period between vaccination and diagnosis of DCIS, none of which are associated with lymphadenopathy. There was no history of any implanted device or foreign body. After reviewing imaging and pathology, the clinical team concluded that the enlarged left axillary lymph nodes with reactive histology were not due to a malignancy or benign tumor. Thus the team determined by diagnosis of exclusion that the lymphadenopathy was most likely due to the prior ipsilateral upper extremity COVID-19 vaccine administration.

Because of the extent of the DCIS, the final recommendation was to do a total mastectomy of the left breast with sentinel node removal and immediate reconstruction with a deep inferior epigastric artery perforator (DIEP) flap.

Surgical pathology revealed multifocal intermediate grade DCIS that was positive for estrogen receptor protein and progesterone receptor protein, with the largest area spanning 59 mm on histology. The left axilla sentinel lymph node was negative for malignancy. The patient had an uneventful recovery and received no additional treatment.