A 67-year-old man who was a current smoker presented with an edematous right arm and face in our hospital. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a tumor of approximately 40 mm in diameter in the right upper lobe, with right axial and mediastinal lymph node metastases, and pleural effusion . According to the findings of a transbronchial lung biopsy and systemic survey, he was diagnosed with adenocarcinoma corresponding to clinical T4N3M1c (stage IVB: 8th edition of UICC TNM staging). An epidermal growth factor receptor mutation and rearranged anaplastic lymphoma kinase genes were not detected. His tumor had invaded the superior vena cava (SVC), leading to the swelling of his right arm and face, suggesting SVC syndrome. He was treated with palliative radiotherapy consisting of a total dose of 30 Gy for SVC syndrome. After irradiation, the size of the tumor in the right upper lobe was slightly decreased . Immunohistochemistry using the 22C-3 antibody revealed the high expression of PD-L1 and a TPS of 75%. He did not have a personal or family history of any autoimmune conditions and autoimmune related antibodies such as anti Jo-1 antibody, anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody, anti-thyroid stimulating hormone antibody, free T3, free T4, rheumatoid factor (RF), anti-acetylcholine receptor antibody, antinuclear antibody and anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody did not show abnormal findings. Subsequently, pembrolizumab (200 mg/body, every 3 weeks) was initiated as the first-line therapy. Approximately 2.5 months after treatment with pembrolizumab, he presented with an asymptomatic, poorly demarcated 1–3 cm erythematous plaque over the right trunk of his body, which gradually developed in size . He had no symptoms and his blood examination test results showed no remarkable changes. Therefore, pembrolizumab therapy was continued. Histopathologic examination from a skin biopsy showed ectatic dermal lymphatics with intraluminal aggregations of histiocytes , which were positive for CD68 and lymphatic vessels that were positive for podoplanin (D2–40) . We ultimately diagnosed him as ILH based on the clinical and histopathological findings. RF and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) antibody were checked after the appearance of erythematous plaques; however, they were negative. Laboratory results revealed that TNF-α levels were increased after 2 months of pembrolizumab treatment . After 4 cycles of pembrolizumab treatment, the size of the tumor in right upper lobe had decreased. However, the tumor in the axial lymph node progressed and his right arm swelling worsened. Therefore, the treatment was changed to cisplatin (75 mg/m2) and pemetrexed (500 mg/m2) as second-line therapy. After 2 cycles of chemotherapy, he maintained a partial response without any severe adverse events and ILH was gradually resolved with topical steroid therapy.