A 53-year-old Caucasian male represented to hospital with a 2-week history of acute New York Heart Association Class IV dyspnoea, reduced exercise tolerance, and intermittent chest pain. Of note, he had multiple hospital attendances in the preceding 8 weeks, for similar symptoms attributed to recurrent viral pericarditis in the context of a recent viral illness. He had been managed with non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, colchicine, and 4 weeks of prednisolone for this. His medical history included asthma with infrequent exacerbations, allergic rhinitis, hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, obesity, and treated obstructive sleep apnoea. There was no history of recent surgery, travel, ill contacts, or active dental infection.
On examination, he was afebrile, normoxic, and normotensive, but was tachycardic (heart rate 112 beats/min) and tachypnoeic (respiratory rate 24). Cardiorespiratory examination revealed soft dual heart sounds and decreased breath sounds at bilateral lung bases, but no pulsus paradoxus. Jugular venous pressure was not elevated. Oral cavity examination noted multiple previous fillings, but overall dental health was adequate with no over gingival inflammation or dental abscesses or decay.
Electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus tachycardia with no diffuse changes or electrical alternans. Blood investigations revealed normal white cell count [7.32 × 109/L (reference range: 4–11 × 109/L)] but elevated C-reactive protein [CRP; 106 mg/L (reference range: 0–8 mg/L)]. Chest X-ray, N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NTproBNP), and autoimmune screens were unremarkable.
Initial transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed mild left ventricular (LV) dysfunction with a large (2.4 cm) asymmetric pericardial effusion containing organized echogenic material adjacent to the right ventricle (RV). There was associated diastolic collapse and significant tricuspid and mitral inflow variation (62 and 27%, respectively). Inferior vena cava (IVC) was dilated and fixed ( and ).
Urgent pericardiocentesis was performed. A total of 150 mL of blood-stained fluid was drained with symptom relief ( and ). Pericardial fluid biochemistry revealed lactate dehydrogenase (LD) 3584 U/L (reference range <300 U/L); fluid/serum LD ratio 12 (reference range <0.6); cholesterol concentration 1.7 mmol/L (reference range <1.2 mmol/L). Cultures were sent for testing. A pigtail catheter was placed for further drainage.
The catheter was removed 48 h later due to clinical improvement, minimal output (total 240 mL drained), and improved inflammatory markers (CRP 95 mg/L, 79 mg/L, 53 mg/L 1, 2, and 4 days post-drainage). Notably, purulent debris in the catheter was observed before removal.
Repeat TTE demonstrated only a small residual effusion (1.3 cm). Concerningly, however, the RV free wall now appeared akinetic and adherent, with ventricular interdependence and a minimally collapsing dilated IVC.
Unexpectedly, pericardial fluid cultured gram-positive bacillus 48 h post-drainage. Intravenous (i.v.) vancomycin 2 g 12 hourly was initially commenced and changed to targeted i.v. benzylpenicillin 1.8 g 4 hourly on the identification of A. meyeri 96 h later. Fungal and acid-fast bacilli cultures were negative. No malignant cells were identified. Extensive workup with serial urine and blood cultures were negative. Orthopantomogram (OPG) demonstrated previous dental restoration and some caries disease, but no periapical lucence, abscess, or periodontal ligament widening.
Repeat TTE, however, demonstrated increasing pericardial effusion (1.8 cm) and worsening tricuspid and mitral inflow variation (35 and 36%, respectively) ( and and , ). Further characterization with cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging confirmed 2.6 cm pericardial effusion adjacent to the RV free wall, with hyperenhancement of the involved markedly thickened pericardium on late gadolinium acquisitions. Free breathing acquisitions demonstrated diastolic septal flattening during expiration consistent with constriction, and there was a mild reduction of LV- and RV end-diastolic volumes and mild biventricular dysfunction ( and and , and ). There was no evidence of pulmonary infection. He was referred for consideration of surgical source control. Owing to concerns regarding optimal antibiotic duration prior to surgery, his case was also discussed at a multidisciplinary meeting involving Cardiology, Cardiothoracic Surgery, and Infectious Diseases specialists. He was initially deemed suitable for outpatient surgical management. However, clinical deterioration with the development of significant exertional dyspnoea and escalating inflammatory markers despite maximal appropriate antibiotic therapy necessitated semi-urgent inpatient surgery.
Median sternotomy was performed revealing significant collection overlying RV, which was adhered to the thickened pericardium . Samples were taken for histopathology and microbiology. The pericardium was incised and a 100–200 mL frank pus was drained, before thorough washing. The sternum was protected from contamination throughout. Pericardium was then resected over the RV whilst preserving the phrenic nerve, around to the LV anterior surface. The right pleura was opened to allow drainage of potential effusions prior to right pleural, pericardium, and mediastinal drain insertions before sternal closure. The drains were removed on Day 5 post-pericardiectomy.
Histopathology confirmed organizing fibrinous pericarditis, with reactive stromal and endothelial cells but no malignant cells. There was no bacterial growth on prolonged aerobic and anaerobic incubation. Day 6 post-operative TTE demonstrated a small pericardial space with no effusion and a preserved LV function ( and and , S and ).
The patient was discharged 10 days post-pericardiectomy, with complete symptom resolution. He completed 6 weeks of i.v. benzylpenicillin antibiotic therapy and was reviewed in the Cardiology, Cardiothoracic Surgery, and Infectious Diseases outpatient clinics prior to de-escalation to oral antibiotics. He has since completed 7 of planned 12 months of oral amoxicillin 1 g thrice daily. The patient reports no further episodes of chest discomfort or dyspnoea and is satisfied with his physical recovery. He has, however, experienced low mood as a result of his recurrent hospitalizations and surgery and is currently receiving care from his primary care physician to address this.