A 66-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because of right upper abdominal pain, right chest pain, and dyspnea. Her past medical history included hypertension, primary biliary cirrhosis, and rheumatoid arthritis (RA), treated with a steroid agent and interleukin-6 (IL-6) inhibitor. In addition, LC was performed for acute gangrenous cholecystitis 11 months earlier . The operative report revealed iatrogenic gallbladder perforation and stone spillage due to severe regional inflammation. The bacterial culture of the gallbladder bile tested positive for Escherichia coli. Tazobactam/piperacillin was administered from the time of surgery to postoperative day 7. Although the inflammatory markers such as white blood cell counts and C-reactive protein were improved, she had persistent fever. Computed tomography (CT) was performed and multiple dropped stones were found. However, abdominal abscess was not found on CT. Upon receiving the culture results, meropenem was administered for the next 10 days. She was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 21.
Chest radiography revealed a right pleural effusion . Chest CT revealed a right pleural effusion with passive atelectasis . Furthermore, abdominal CT showed perihepatic fluid collection and multiple small radiopaque density masses . The patient was treated with an antimicrobial agent (meropenem), and ultrasound-guided transthoracic drainage was performed. The bacterial culture of pleural effusion was positive for Escherichia coli, which was consistent with the culture result of the gallbladder bile in acute cholecystitis. However, the drainage was incomplete, and the prescribed treatments did not alleviate the inflammatory reaction. Consequently, thoracotomy and laparotomy with gallstone retrieval were performed. In laparotomy, the abscess in the Morrison’s fossa was opened and drained, and dropped stones around the liver were removed . The thoracic cavity was covered with membranous necrotic tissue, and a multilocular abscess was observed. However, there was no communication between the thoracic cavity and the abdominal cavity and there were no stones in the thoracic cavity . The patient’s symptoms, pleural effusion, and perihepatic fluid collection completely resolved after surgery. The patient has remained well without complications after 14 months of follow-up.