A 42-year-old Native American female presented to University of South Dakota Sanford Medical Center in December of 2020 after developing numbness, tingling, and a sharp shooting pain in both arms immediately following parathyroidectomy for parathyroid adenoma (S = 0). The numbness, tingling, and pain were worse in the right arm and radiated across the upper back and chest. Medical history was significant for a traumatic SCI caused by a motor vehicle collision at the age of 15. Following her injury, she experienced paralysis of her bilateral lower extremities, classified by the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) as an ASIA B injury. Her injury required thoracolumbar stabilization with Harrington rods. She had resulting chronic foot drop and was only able to ambulate with a walker. The patient did not report any history of upper extremity symptoms prior to parathyroidectomy. Examination of the patient was significant for morbid obesity with a body mass index (BMI) of 51. She had decreased temperature and light touch sensation in the upper extremities and neck in dermatomes C3 through T10 with preserved proprioception and vibration sense. Hypocalcemia was suspected as a cause of her paresthesias considering her recent parathyroidectomy, but calcium levels were normal. Cervical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 2 days after symptoms onset (S+2 days) demonstrated a T2 signal hyperintense area, just to the right of midline, that extended throughout the length of the central cervical spinal cord, consistent with an expanding syrinx . Thoracic MRI showed the syrinx extended throughout the thoracic spinal cord as well . The reading radiologist initially misread this MRI as longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis. The radiologist specifically reported that they did not believe this was a syrinx because it was located in the lateral aspect of the spinal cord rather than in the central spinal cord canal. There was mild peripheral contrast-enhancement around the syrinx. The patient was hospitalized, and an extensive infectious, autoimmune, and metabolic workup was negative. A working diagnosis of longitudinal extensive transverse myelitis was made, and the patient was treated unsuccessfully with 5 days of intravenous methylprednisolone. Repeat cervical MRI 2 weeks after symptom onset revealed no changes from the previous MRI. Her paresthesias and pain persisted.
Six months after discharge (S+7 months), the patient presented to our neurology clinic for increasing weakness in the lower extremities, worsening dexterity of her right hand, and more frequent falls. These symptoms had progressed to the point of requiring her to move to an assisted living facility as she was unable to complete her activities of daily livings (ADLs) independently. On examination, there was new pronator drift, decreased right hip flexion strength, and decreased reflexes in the right upper extremity. Based on the patient’s current and previous symptoms along with the previous imaging, we were able to arrive at a diagnosis of PTS, which had previously been missed. Cervical MRI was repeated and showed rostral expansion of the syrinx into the brain stem [ and ]. With the advancement of her symptoms and growth of the syrinx into the brainstem, the patient received an urgent referral to an outside facility for neurosurgical evaluation.
The consulting neurosurgeon at the outside facility did not believe her condition warranted hospital admission and requested that she be seen on an outpatient basis. Due to a combination of difficulty finding temporary housing for the patient that could provide skilled nursing care, and difficulty working the patient into the neurosurgeon’s schedule, the patient’s care was delayed. She was not seen by the neurosurgeon for another 6 weeks (S+9.5 months). During that time period, the patient became progressively weaker, and had more frequent falls. She also developed a hoarse voice, concerning for vocal cord paralysis, and dysphagia with several episodes of choking.
On evaluation at the outside facility the evaluating neurosurgeon concluded that the patient’s symptom severity and rapid progression were indications for surgical drainage of the syrinx. The patient was taken to the operating room, and a C7-T2 laminectomy was performed. After removing the C7 through T2 lamina and entering the dura, the cord was noted to be quite dilated, nearly filling the entire dural tube, and was rotated 90° within the dura. A 2 mm hole was made in the dorsal root entry zone of the cord below the C8 nerve root to insert the shunt. The syrinx cavity was encountered at a depth of <1 mm, and the cord immediately deflated after penetration of the syrinx. A syringo-subarachnoid shunt was placed to allow the syrinx to continuously drain. The surgery and immediate postsurgical period were uncomplicated.
She was discharged back to her previous nursing home 9 days following the operation. The patient was ambulating back at her baseline with a walker. Follow-up 2 months after surgery (S+12 months) noted subjective persistent but not worsened right arm and leg weakness, as well as weakened voice. At this point, the patient was able to complete her ADLs independently although she had assistance at home. It was determined that the surgery stabilized as well as halted the progression of her neurological symptoms but did not reverse them. Cervical MRI 4 months after surgery (S+14 months) showed dramatic reduction in syrinx size, with only a small residual fluid collection, which confirmed that the shunt was patent and functioning . However, thoracic MRI showed possible persistent syringomyelia with slight enlargement compared to previous, which was significantly limited due to hardware artifact . The patient continues to live in a nursing home with assistance with her ADLs and frequent physical therapy. Patient consent and hospital approval were obtained before the writing of this report.