A 77-year-old woman presented to our hospital with a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetic mellitus. She also had occlusion of the left central retinal artery due to ipsilateral carotid stenosis 3 years prior, after which no further ischemic events had occurred. Neck MRA demonstrated severe stenosis of the proximal left internal carotid artery (ICA), and the external carotid artery was not detected . Intracranial MRA showed weak flow signal intensity of the left ICA and left middle cerebral artery [ and ], and neck computed tomography revealed severe circular calcification . 123I-iodoamphetamine single-photon emission computed tomography (123I-IMP SPECT), additionally, showed reduced CBF and cerebral vascular reserve [ and ] in response to acetazolamide in the left hemisphere.
Staged therapy was subsequently performed, as this patient had a high risk of HPS following conventional CAS or CEA. Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) (aspirin 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg) was administrated 2 weeks before PTA. The procedure was performed under local anesthesia. After intravenous administration of 5000 U heparin, the lesion was crossed with a 0.014 inch guide wire, and submaximal angioplasty was performed using a 2.5 mm × 12 mm noncompliant Gateway® balloon (Stryker Neurovascular, Kalamazoo, Michigan). The stenotic lesion was sufficiently expanded immediately; however, elastic recoil was observed ten minutes later. PTA was then performed using a 3.0 mm × 12 mm Gateway® balloon. After expanding the stenotic lesion, we observed that flow delay was improved [-]. Two days after first stage PTA, 123I-IMP SPECT revealed improvements in CBF . In addition, no neurological morbidity was observed during the interval between the first and second stages.
In the second stage, CEA was conducted under general anesthesia 7 days after the first stage, using real-time near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) monitoring. The carotid sheath was dissected, and the arteriotomy was completed. Furui’s double balloon shunt system was used to maintain blood flow from the common carotid artery to the ICA. When the ICA was clamped, left cerebral hemisphere NIRS dropped by 10%. However, once reperfusion to ICA was delivered through the shunt system, NIRS returned to baseline. Further, we found a calcified plaque with a large thrombus at its proximal end . The plaque was, then, extracted, and the ICA was closed. The skin incision was then closed. Intracranial and neck MRA showed normal flow signals [ and ]. CBF was improved, and hyperperfusion was not detected in postoperative 123I-IMP SPECT immediately and 2 days after CEA . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was, then, discharged with no neurological deficits. She continued to receive DAPT until 6 months after completing CEA.
The extracted thrombus was found to consist of calcified plaque. A hematoxylin-eosin stain of the thrombus showed mostly intact and partially lytic blood cells, without necrotic tissue . Therefore, the thrombus was assumed to be between 1 and 5 days old, as per previous reports.[,] We, therefore, found that the thrombus was formed after the first therapeutic stage.