A 69-year-old lady presented to our hospital with a few days’ history of intermittent episodes of breathlessness, and reduced exercise tolerance to a few yards. On the morning of her admission, she described a brief episode of chest pain, which her family had thought was a panic attack.
She had a background history of alcoholic liver disease with cirrhosis (Child-Pugh score A), portal hypertensive gastropathy, hiatus hernia, healed duodenal ulcer, and chronic anxiety. She was a current smoker of over 30 pack years and had been abstinent from alcohol for 3 years.
On arrival, our patient was alert and oriented. Her observations showed a pulse rate of 127bpm, blood pressure (BP) of 166/78 mmHg, respiratory rate of 34, oxygen saturation of 86% on 5 L oxygen, and temperature of 36.3°C. Auscultation of her chest revealed bilateral wheeze, with normal heart sounds. She had cold peripheries with a prolonged capillary refill time and no peripheral oedema.
Her first arterial blood gas (ABG) revealed acute decompensated type two respiratory failure (T2RF) . Given her background, she was treated initially as an infective exacerbation of likely underlying, undiagnosed COPD, and was started on antibiotics, nebulizers, and steroids.
Within a couple of hours, she became increasingly agitated and subsequently less responsive. A repeat ABG revealed worsening T2RF and non-invasive ventilation (NIV) in the form of bi-level positive airway pressure was commenced.
Chest X-ray revealed hyperinflation with upper lobe diversion , and her ECG showed ST elevation in the anterior leads . Blood tests revealed an elevated white cell count, troponin, brain natriuretic peptide, and D-dimer . She was reviewed by intensive care, and the working diagnosis was ST-elevation myocardial infarction with LV failure resulting in T2RF. ACS treatment with aspirin, clopidogrel, and fondaparinux was commenced, and urgent cardiology opinion was requested.
Upon cardiology review, a bedside echocardiogram showed severe LV systolic dysfunction, with dyskinesis of the mid and apical septal and lateral walls, with preservation of basal function. The mid and apical segments of the RV free wall were dyskinetic with preservation of basal function. A possible diagnosis of BTC was proposed. However, based on the presence of Q waves across the chest leads on the ECG, and the fact that BTC is a diagnosis of exclusion, the differential diagnosis was that of a prior infarct with persistent ST elevation.
A computed tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) ruled out pulmonary embolism, and the patient was responding well to NIV, with a repeat ABG 3 hours after initiating NIV showing resolution of acidosis and hypercapnia, but persistent hypoxaemia .
Her troponin increased to 2000 ng/L, and in view of the patient’s complex background and acute illness, she was managed in our intensive care department. She was deemed too unstable to undergo invasive coronary angiography.
On her second day in hospital, she became hypotensive with a BP of around 90/60 mmHg. Repeat ECG showed resolution of Q waves, and a new right bundle branch block with deep T-wave inversion. Her troponin had further risen to 3000 ng/L. Repeat bedside echocardiogram remained consistent with BTC . The systolic pulmonary pressure (SPAP) was elevated at 47–52 mmHg, estimated from the moderate tricuspid regurgitation. Metaraminol and subsequently dobutamine and noradrenaline were commenced for BP support. Our local tertiary centre advised switching these to a levosimendan infusion for 24 hours, and intra-aortic balloon pump support was felt unnecessary. Our patient haemodynamically stabilised with improved BP and urine output.
Over Days 4 and 5, following the cessation of levosimendan, our patient still required low dose inotropic support.
On Day 6, our patient developed rate-controlled atrial fibrillation (AF) with ST elevation in V1-V4 with biphasic T waves, although, she remained free of chest pain . In spite of her new AF, repeat echocardiogram ( revealed complete recovery of the LV systolic function with no evidence of regional wall motion abnormality. Her right ventricle continued to show basal wall preservation of function and mid to apical RV dilatation and dyskinesis, and SPAP of 54 mmHg. Troponin level had further fallen to 329 ng/L. Supportive management continued.
Over the next 48 hours, after clinical improvement, inotropic support was weaned. On Day 8, repeat echocardiography showed that in addition to the prior recovery of her LV function, her RV function had also fully recovered (, ). The previously documented SPAP remained >56 mmHg, which was interpreted as her baseline due to her COPD. Invasive coronary angiography confirmed no obstructive coronary artery disease , thus we could confirm that our patient had indeed suffered from BTC, as up until this point, we had been unable to rule out myocardial infarction. Her ECGs continued to show persistent anterior ST elevation with biphasic T-wave changes.
Our patient continued to improve and was stepped down to the coronary care unit and was engaging well with inpatient rehabilitation. Unfortunately, on the morning of Day 15, she developed another episode of T2RF, possibly due to aspiration following a choking episode on breakfast. Focused echocardiography ruled out the recurrence of TC, and she responded swiftly to NIV, requiring less than 24 hours. She was transferred to the respiratory ward for ongoing management of her airway disease and discharged 2 weeks later.
Co-incidentally, her thyroid function tests (TFT) on Day 6 showed raised T4 and undetectable thyroid-stimulating hormone level . After confirmation with repeated blood tests, the diagnosis of thyrotoxicosis was made. The endocrine review and subsequent thyroid-receptor antibody levels suggested autoimmune thyroiditis or Graves’ disease. At a later stage, carbimazole treatment was commenced and beta-blocker continued with regular endocrine follow-up. Our patient had a brief admission in September 2020 with mild shortness of breath. Repeat echocardiography showed normal biventricular systolic function, normal LV diastolic function and filling pressures and an SPAP of 40 mmHg.