A 64-year old man was referred to our department for right recurrent pleural effusion. A CT scan showed thickened right parietal pleura with a minimal pleural effusion, but no pulmonary nodules or lymphadenopathies or distant metastases. Because of negative cytology malignancy, the patient underwent a thoracoscopic pleural biopsy on December 2004 that showed an epithelioid monophasic pleural mesothelioma, followed by talc pleurodesis at the end of the procedure.
Three weeks later the patient underwent a right extrapleural pneumonectomy with coverage of the bronchial stump with a flap of thymic tissue. The pathological examination confirmed a monophasic epithelioid pleural mesothelioma, with lung and pericardial fat infiltration, but no invasion of the diaphragm or pericardium (pT3 N0 M0). The postoperative period was uneventful.
Ten months later the patient complained of a fever and cough. The diagnosis of broncho-pleural fistula was made immediately after the first appearance of cough and fever by bronchoscopy that clearly showed a 2-mm fistula on the mediastinal side of the stump confirmed by the methilene blue passage from bronchus to the chest tube. Rapid fluid drainage and antibiotic therapy allowed us to cure the infection of the pleural space avoiding the formation of empyema. After chest tube drainage, the attempt to conservatively close the fistula using biological glue was unsuccessful. So we decided to use a modified Y Dumon stent (Tracheobronxane Y; Novatech SA, La Ciotat Cedex France) to exclude the right stump. The right arm of the Y was shortened and the open end was closed with a silicone material from which the stent was fabricated, and then inserted in the tracheobronchial tree trough a rigid bronchoscope. The tracheal part was 18 mm in width and 4 cm in length, while the left bronchial arm was 16 mm in width and 2 cm in length. Under rigid bronchoscopy, we first introduced the biological glue (CoSeal, Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Fremont, CA – USA) all over the bronchial stump that was of 1 cm lenght, followed by the insertion of the modified Y Dumon stent .
The negative cultures from the pleural fluid allowed us to remove the chest drain and to discharge the patient on the 3rd postoperative day. The patient was uneventful (no empyema or pneumonitis verified) until he died 4 months later for pulmonary emboli. The post-mortem examination showed a massive pulmonary thrombus in the left main pulmonary artery which explain the sudden respiratory insufficiency and death at home and an initial relapse of mesothelioma in the posterior part of chest wall, without signs of infections.