A 36-year-old man was referred to our clinic from his family dentist with a complaint of pain around the anterior maxillary region on the right side. The patient’s medical history was non-contributory. Intraoral examination identified a firm, non-fluctuant mass with no ulceration in the vestibular region between the right upper central incisor and canine . The right upper central and lateral incisors were missing. A computed tomography (CT) showed severe bony resorption between the right upper second premolar and the left upper lateral incisor . Incisional biopsy was performed via vestibular approach. The specimen of the tumor was extirpated with overlying mucosa. During the biopsy, an intact cortex was not observed. The histological diagnosis was moderately differentiated SCC. The connection between the tumor and the overlying mucosa was not observed. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CE-CT) revealed a destructive tumor with no cystic lesion, >50 mm in diameter. The tumor pressed the skin around the nasal ala and the nostril of the right side, but no direct connection between the skin and tumor was observed. Although the maxillary sinus and nasal cavity were deformed by the tumor, no abnormal findings were seen for the mucosa of the nasal cavity and maxillary sinus . One swollen and enhanced lymph node was recognized in the submandibular area of the right side. Positron emission tomography (PET) revealed the enhanced lesion in the maxilla and the right submandibular area. There was no evidence of metastatic disease on chest radiography, upper gastric endoscopy or PET. Based on these findings, solid type PIOSCC was diagnosed.
The patient underwent tumor ablative surgery. After bilateral supraomohyoid neck dissection, the primary tumor was radically excised. The surgical specimen comprised the anterior two-thirds of the hard palate and nasal septum, bilateral inferior nasal conchae and the skin around the nasal ala and nostril of the right side. The surgical defect was reconstructed using a partially double-folded free radial forearm flap and prefabricated denture-based surgical obturator. Microscopic examination of the surgical specimen revealed SCC without cystic component in the maxillary bone. The islands of the tumor cells extended into the bone with no dysplasia or carcinoma in the skin and mucosa of the nasal cavity and maxillary sinus. The dissected surgical specimen of the neck showed one lymph node metastasis of the ipsilateral submandibular region. Although adjuvant radiotherapy was recommended, the patient declined additional treatment. The postoperative course was quite good. Neither recurrence nor metastasis had been found as of 3 years and 1 month postoperatively.