A 50-year-old diabetic female patient, who has been on oral hypoglycemics for seven years. She had never been treated for tuberculosis and had no recent history of a tuberculosis contact. She reported the appearance of bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy two months before her admission, without any other associated respiratory or extra-respiratory signs, all evolving in a context of fever, night sweats, and preservation of her general condition. The physical examination revealed a patient in a good general condition (PS 1) with multiple lymphadenopathies of different sizes, painless and without any inflammatory signs, located in the cervical, axillary, epitrochlear, and inguinal regions. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.
The chest X-ray showed a left hilar opacity and a right paracardiac opacity . The complete blood count was normal. The C-reactive protein was slightly elevated at 40 mg/l, blood ionogram, kidney function test, liver function test, and the viral serologies including HIV were normal. The search for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) in sputum was negative, and the tuberculin skin test (TST) was positive at 15 mm. The biopsy of the cervical adenopathy showed the presence of an epithelioid and giant cellular granuloma without caseous necrosis. Unfortunately, the culture of the biopsy specimen was not performed.
The patient was put on anti-tuberculosis as tuberculosis was highly suspected due to the epidemiological context, the clinical symptomatology and the strong positivity of the tuberculin test. On the fifteenth day, she developed a generalized pruritic erythematous rash that required the interruption of the treatment. A thoracic CT scan was performed, which revealed mediastinal hilar and axillary adenopathy without parenchymal involvement and a right breast lump (a, b).
Bronchoscopy showed thickening of the left upper lobar spur, bronchoalveolar lavage was predominantly lymphocytic (42%), staged bronchial biopsies were negative as well as the search for AFB in the bronchial aspiration fluid.
Bilateral mammography and mammary ultrasound showed a right and left breast lump which is classified respectively BI-RADS V and BI-RADS IV (a, b). The breast biopsy was in favor of a granulomatous inflammatory process without caseous necrosis.
The phosphocalcic balance, the electrocardiogram, and the ophthalmic exam were without abnormalities. The biopsy of the accessory salivary glands showed the presence of a giant cellular epithelioid granuloma without caseous necrosis compatible with sarcoidosis. The pulmonary function test showed a correct total lung capacity (TLC). Beta microglobulinemia, serum protein electrophoresis, and abdominal ultrasound were without abnormalities.
The diagnosis of sarcoidosis was based on clinical, radiological, biological, and histological criteria (presence of granuloma without caseous necrosis in 3 different organs: lymph node, salivary glands, and mammary glands).
Therapeutic abstention was recommended with clinical and radiological surveillance. The evolution was marked over two years by the disappearance of arthralgias, hilar adenopathies and peripheral adenopathies.