A 63-year-old male presented to the First Hospital of Jilin University with a 2-month history of a cervical mass. He had no history of neoplasms and no family history of tumors. Blood tests showed slightly increased thyroid stimulating hormone levels (56 μIU/mL) and decreased T3 (2.4 pmol/L) and T4 (10 pmol/L) levels. His antithyroglobulin antibody levels were within the normal range. Computed tomography imaging showed a mass, approximately 4.5 × 4.0 × 4.5 cm in size, with calcification in the left thyroid lobe and two smooth and homogeneous nodules in the right thyroid lobe. The trachea was compressed and deflected toward the left side . The patient underwent total thyroidectomy with cervical lymph node resection. Neck MRI showed that the epicenter of the left lobe mass was in the thyroid gland and that it did not originate from the surrounding thyroid cartilage .
Macroscopic examination of the resected specimen revealed a lobulated mass with calcification that occupied the majority of the left thyroid lobe and two homogeneous, oval nodules in the right thyroid lobe .
Histopathologically, the majority of the tumor in the left thyroid lobe comprised low-grade hyaline-type cartilage, and some spindle cells were observed around the hyaline cartilage . In some areas, the tumor infiltrated the remaining thyroid tissue . A high-grade spindle cell sarcoma could be seen in some areas , in which the high-grade sarcoma cells exhibited extensive pleomorphism, atypia, and a high mitotic rate . One of the two nodules in the right thyroid lobe had a gray-white appearance, and it comprised a prominently collagenous stroma and some bland spindle cells infiltrating the surrounding thyroid tissue . The other nodule had a brown appearance; it was completely enclosed within a thin, fibrous capsule and exhibited normofollicular and microfollicular architecture . We carefully examined all hematoxylin and eosin–stained sections; however, we did not observe any definite necrosis.
Table shows the summary of immunohistochemical findings. The spindle tumor cells in both thyroid lobes were positive for vimentin but negative for cytokeratin and epithelial membrane antigen. These spindle cells showed high expression of Ki-67 . The low-grade hyaline-type cartilage in the left thyroid tumor was positive for vimentin . The positive rate of expression of vimentin in both the thyroid tumors was 90%. The positive rate of expression of Ki-67 in the spindle cells of the left thyroid tumor was 50%. The positive rate of expression of Ki-67 in the spindle cells of the right thyroid gray-white nodule was 20%.
The patient received postoperative radiotherapy and was free of local and regional recurrence or distant metastases at the 8-month follow-up evaluation.