A case of C.X.Z, male aged 39-year old, and farmer by profession was wheeled into our department with severe symptoms of subacute RHF. His spouse narrated that in January,2018, he had experienced mild bilateral swelling of lower limbs (in form of stockings), and was managed on diuretics for about 7 days, after which symptoms disappeared completely. She denied him having had any cardiac surgery, chest radiation, tuberculosis or significant chest trauma. 8 months after initial symptoms, thus in October,2018, he suddenly developed chest pain, which he thought was due to long working hours in the field. On-counter remedies (pain killers) offered temporal relief. After 2-days of progressive chest pain, patient begun experiencing abdominal discomfort and observed swelling of feet after bed. On the 4th day in his illness, he developed shortness, a development that prompted him seek medical attention.

On presentation the patient through his spouse complained of breathing difficulties, abdominal fullness and swelling of lower limbs. She further narrated that, during bed time, shortness of breath worsened upon lying flat. During physical examination, patient exhibited incoherent talk, responded to various questions with same answer repeatedly. Both the neck veins (JVD~ > 15mmH2O) and abdomen were highly distended. Chest auscultation demonstrated a ‘cardiac knock’, and both S1 and S2 were muffled. Abdominal palpation revealed gross ascites. The lower extremities were cold to touch with bilateral pitting edema from knee and below.


Diagnostic Procedures

Diagnosis of localized CP was established using cogent imaging results of comprehensive transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and computed tomography(CTA). A 4 chamber video clip of a 2D TTE examination demonstrates dyskinesia of the right ventricle(RV) due to the presence of a thickened (calcified) pericardium(cyst-like) on its anterior wall. Other visible abnormalities include: right atrium enlargement, respirophasic interventricular deviation into left ventricle and shudder, scientifically proven to be due to the differential filling rates of both ventricles in diastole. A comprehensive TTE report (not shown here) demonstrated hepatic vein distension, a patent inferior vena cava (with no respirophasic variation) and ejection fraction(EF) of 50%. The chest radiography appeared normal. However, CTA uncovered two adjacent pads of calcification with interposed fluid.Because CP is relatively common in our region,radiology personnel have gained experience in diagnosing CP with occasional application of the Swan-Ganz catheter.


Decortication

Through standard midline sternotomy, an off-pump partial pericardiectomy was performed from cardiac surgery operation room. Using a combination of cautery, scissors and sharp hooks, we approached the pericardium from the free RV wall (junction with right atrium). After 30 to 40 min into decortication process, we judiciously punctured a plate of calcified tissue overlaying the anterior RV wall with subsequent gush of a ῾milk-like’ fluid(approx.700mls). Fluid decompression led to adjustments of ventriculae pressures and cardiac out-put. The video in shows the heart beating with less obstruction.