A 70-year-old woman presented to our outpatient clinic. She complained of motor weakness in the right hemisphere, which had appeared 4 months before. Magnetic resonance imaging was performed to rule out the presence of any intracranial lesions. Chronic lacunae infraction of the left corona radiata was detected on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images. The lacunae infraction of the left corona radiata was considered a cause of her right motor weakness. No edematous changes were found in the infratentorial or supratentorial regions. However, magnetic resonance angiography revealed a vascular lesion . Vascular lesions were also found below the cerebellar tentorium on constructive interference in steady-state images . Cerebral angiography was performed as an arteriovenous shunt was suspected. A right external cerebral angiogram showed an arteriovenous shunt supplied by the mastoid branch of the occipital artery. A selective angiogram of the mastoid branch of the occipital artery revealed that the arteriovenous shunt was fed by the PMA. The arteriovenous shunt showed two draining patterns, travelling through the superior vermian vein to the petrosal vein and superior petrosal sinus and through the inferior hemispheric vein, inferior hemispheric vein, and tentorial sinus [ and ]. The left occipital angiogram showed an arteriovenous shunt fed by the left PMA [ and ]. On maximum intensity projection images, the shunting point was located beneath the cerebellar tentorium, and the drainer ran through the tentorial sinus into the transverse sinus . The internal carotid angiogram revealed no apparent feeders. The bilateral posterior cerebral arteries were of a fetal type. The straight sinus flow was anterograde. The left vertebral angiogram revealed no feeders. Venous congestion was suspected on the venous phase of the left vertebral angiogram. No retrograde flow of the basal vein of Rosenthal was observed [-]. Based on the findings of cerebral angiography, the arteriovenous shunt was diagnosed as TDAVF fed by the bilateral PMAs draining into the straight sinus with retrograde venous flow (Borden type III, Cognard type III). Transarterial endovascular surgery was planned to prevent hemorrhagic events associated with TDAVF.
Under general anesthesia, two Envoy 5F 90 cm MPD (Codman Neuro, Raynham, MA, USA) were introduced in the bilateral occipital artery. The mastoid branch of the left occipital artery was selected with a Masters HF 2.8-Fr/3.2-Fr 125 cm (ASAHI INTECC J-Sales, CO., LTD, Tokyo, Japan) and a Traxcess 14 0.012/0.014 200 cm (Terumo Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). The Masters HF 2.8-Fr/3.2-Fr 125 cm was placed at the mastoid foramen. Using an ASAHI CHIKAI 0.014 200 cm (ASAHI INTECC J-Sales, CO., LTD, Tokyo, Japan) and a Traxcess 14 0.012/0.014 200 cm, another Masters HF 2.8-Fr/3.2-Fr 125 cm was introduced through the mastoid branch of the right occipital artery to the right PMA. As the left PMA was quite tortuous compared to the right PMA, we considered that a transarterial embolization approached from the right PMA was the easiest course of action. From the right Masters HF 2.8-Fr/3.2-Fr 125 cm, a Carnelian MARVEL® 1.6/1.8-Fr 155 cm (Tokai Medical Products Inc.) was introduced near the shunting point with an ASAHI CHIKAI 0.008 200 cm (ASAHI INTECC J-Sales, CO., LTD, Tokyo, Japan) . A Carnelian MARVEL® 1.6/1.8-Fr 155 cm was also placed in the left PMA to inject the contrast medium intraoperatively. The inner lumen of the right Carnelian MARVEL® 1.6/1.8-Fr 155 cm was filled with 5% glucose solution, after which heated 20% n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) was injected from the right Carnelian MARVEL® 1.6/1.8-Fr 155 cm. After NBCA reached the drainer with an injection volume of 0.3 mL, the right Carnelian MARVEL® 1.6/1.8-Fr 155 cm was removed. NBCA migrated partially to the left transverse sinus, left inferior hemispheric vein, and left petrosal vein [ and ]. The right and left occipital angiogram revealed the disappearance of the shunt [-], which was also confirmed by cone beam computed tomography using a half-diluted contrast agent. NBCA did not migrate to the arteries. The bilateral common carotid angiogram also revealed the disappearance of the shunt, and the venous flow was anterograde. A vertebral angiogram was finally acquired to ensure shunt disappearance. However, a residual arteriovenous shunt, which was not seen on preoperative angiography, was identified. Venous congestion also remained in the left cerebellar hemisphere [-]. On 3-dimensional reconstructed maximum intensity projection (3D-MIP) images, the residual arteriovenous shunt beneath the cerebellar tentorium was identified above the location of the NBCA along the cerebellar tentorium .
On the 3D-MIP images, a dural branch originating from the SCA was identified as the feeder of the residual shunt. The artery originated close to the bifurcation of the basilar artery and the SCA. The artery branched from the anterior pontomesencephalic segment of the SCA and was considered to be the AWW [ and ]. As the embolization of the main shunting point with NBCA was successfully achieved and the shunting flow was not remarkably strong, we considered that the residual arteriovenous shunt could be monitored under observation.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. The residual arteriovenous fistula fed by the AWW disappeared spontaneously, as seen on follow-up vertebral angiography 1 week after the procedure [ and ]. No cerebellar ischemic lesion was observed postoperatively. The patient was discharged from the hospital without any neurological deficits. No apparent recurrence of the TDAVF was observed on the cerebral angiogram acquired 6 months after endovascular embolization.