We presented a 20-year-old male patient, who fell from a height of about 30 feet. He was initially managed at a nearby community hospital where he was diagnosed to have multiple rib fractures on both sides, with bilateral hemopneumothorax. The primary management of patient was performed with bilateral intercostal chest drains and positive pressure ventilation for lung contusion. The patient had no neurological deficit at initial presentation. He was then referred to our center after four weeks for further management.
On examination, there was tenderness over the tenth thoracic vertebrae with mild knuckle deformity. There was no motor or sensory deficit at any level. Superficial and deep tendon reflexes were normal. Radiographs and computerized tomography showed a fracture dislocation with spondyloptosis of the ninth thoracic vertebra (T9) over the tenth thoracic vertebra (T10) with vertebral body fracture of the eight vertebral body ( - ). The pedicles of both T9 and T10 vertebrae were fractured bilaterally, thus separating the posterior elements from their respective vertebral bodies. There was complete spondyloptosis of T9 over T10 vertebral body and both T9 and T10 vertebral bodies could be seen in a single transverse section of computerized tomography . The patient was scheduled for surgery after improvement in general and lung condition. The spine was approached through standard posterior midline incision. There was no significant kyphosis seen and the posterior elements of the eighth and ninth thoracic vertebrae were lying almost in place with undisplaced fractures in the lamina of respective vertebra. The pedicle screws were inserted in the fifth, sixth and seventh thoracic vertebrae proximally and the tenth, eleventh and twelfth vertebrae distally ( - ). An in-situ posterior instrumentation with laminectomy of T8 and T9 vertebrae and posterolateral fusion from the fifth to twelfth thoracic vertebrae was performed. No attempt was made to reduce spondyloptosis of T9 over the T10 vertebrae. The patient tolerated the operation well and there was no postoperative neurological deterioration. He was mobilized with the help of customized dorsolumbar rigid orthosis on fifth postoperative day. He was followed up at monthly intervals and radiographs along with computerized tomography showed satisfactory in situ fusion between T9 and T10 vertebral bodies . The patient returned to his previous occupation.