In February 2018, a 26-year-old female patient presented to our hospital with progressively worsening anal pain, constipation, and hematochezia for approximately two years. She had given birth right two and a half years previously. She had no prior medical history and family history of gastrointestinal malignancies. On admission, her vital signs were stable. Digital rectal examination revealed an ulcerated 5-cm indurated lesion located at the nine o’clock position and 2 cm from the anal verge, with bleeding upon palpation. The blood tests showed elevated carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (10.51 ng/ml; reference range, < 3.4 ng/ml) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) (40.49 U/ml; reference range, < 22 U/ml). The diagnosis of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma was established by flexible sigmoidoscopy with biopsies and histological examination. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvic confirmed the tumor stage of cT3N1M0 . Radiologic examinations did not detect metastasis to the liver, bone, lung, or breast.
Following consultancy with the multidisciplinary team, the patient underwent prophylactic transverse colostomy to avoid upcoming obstruction and then received 6 cycles of modified FOLFOX-6 neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The scheduled long-course radiotherapy (50Gy/25f) was ceased after the first time due to severe anal incontinence and myelosuppression. Laparoscopic abdominoperineal resection (R0) with a permanent colostomy was performed for her 6 weeks after the termination of neoadjuvant therapy . Guided by the fast-track surgery pathway, the patient’s recovery was uneventful, with discharge on postoperative day 5. The final diagnosis of rectal SRCC (ypT3N1bM0, Tumor Regression Grade 2) was determined via postoperative pathologic findings . Two out of eighteen mesorectal lymph nodes were identified with tumor involvement. Meanwhile, the proficient mismatch repair (MMR) was detected. The postoperative chemotherapy was consistent with the neoadjuvant regimen and initiated 4 weeks after surgery.
After the second cycle of adjuvant modified FOLFOX-6, a painless, firm mass was palpable in the right breast and the area of vulva, respectively. The follow-up CT examination found the right breast mass . Ultrasound-guided core needle biopsies were performed for her. Hematoxylin & eosin and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining indicated the metastases to the breast (positive: CK20, CDX-2, E-cadherin; negative: CK7, PR, ER, Her-2, GATA3, GCDFP15) and vulva (positive: CDX-2, PCK, CEA, Alcian Blue) from rectal SRCC. In addition, genetic testing demonstrated RAS/BRAF wild-type and microsatellite instability-low (MSI-L).
In December 2018, metastases to bilateral lung have been developed and the evaluation of efficacy was identified as progressive disease. Then the chemotherapy regimen was changed to irinotecan (290mg, day1, q3w) plus tegafur (50mg bid, day1-14, q3w). However, multiple metastases throughout the body (including the left breast) were found 3 months later. Tegafur (50mg, bid, day1-14, q3w) plus raltitrexed (4mg, day1, q3w)-based chemotherapy in combination with bevacizumab (400mg, day1, q3w) as the third-line treatment did not provide favorable efficacy. Unfortunately, the patient passed away 15 months after initial diagnosis due to rapidly progressive disease. The results of serum tumor markers (CEA and CA19-9) are listed in . Though limited sensitivity, the reduction of tumor markers at the early phase represented favorable response to neoadjuvant therapy, while the elevation of tumor markers at the late phase indicated rapidly progressive disease. The timeline with clinical data from the episode of care is shown in .