We present the case of a 60-year-old female patient of mixed race (Honduran) from an urban area of Honduras, with a pathological history of arterial hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus under control (metformin 500 mg and enalapril 10 mg). In December 2015, she presented to a local medical service with dysphonia that had progressed over 2 months; it was exacerbated by singing and accompanied by orthopnea that had progressed over a month. She denied odynophagia, weight loss, dysphagia, and hyporexia. She had no relevant family history.
Physical examination showed a good general condition, mesomorphic biotype, and stable vital signs. During the segmental physical examination, a soft mass was palpated within the anterior region of the neck; it was painless and mobile on swallowing and had irregular margins without inflammatory signs.
Ultrasound (US) of the neck showed a solid ovoid tumor located in the left thyroid lobe. It had well-defined borders, an approximate dimension of 37 × 24 × 37 mm, and a volume of 17 mL. The right thyroid lobe was normal with a dimension of 34 × 11 × 10 mm and a volume of 2 mL. The thyroid isthmus and adjacent vascular structures had no obvious abnormalities. One week later, fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy was performed on a single nodule. FNA was also performed for some lymph nodes suggestive of malignancy. The anatomopathological report confirmed ATC. Laboratory tests showed elevated thyroid stimulating hormone levels .
Computed tomography of the neck performed a month later showed that the thyroid mass covered the entire left lobe, with predominant vascularity toward the periphery. The tumor extended to the isthmus and the right lobe, where the neoplasm replaced the inferior pole. There was also evidence of multiple adenopathies with loss of morphology, and all were larger than 8 mm. There were findings suggestive of infiltration of the perithyroid muscles and displacements of the trachea and carotid sheath; there was no infiltration of the other adjacent structures.
A total thyroidectomy and bilateral central radical dissection were performed in February 2016 in a second-level care unit and sent for a pathological study. The macroscopic description of the right thyroid lobe measuring 25 × 10 mm is as follows: the external surface is rough partially covered by fibrous adhesions, at the cut of a soft consistency of gray color, with small areas of light brown color, separated by the isthmus where colored areas are observed light brown and left thyroid lobe measuring 55 × 30 × 20 mm, external surface is rough covered by fibrous adhesions, when cut with a mass that replaces the entire lobe, without viable thyroid tissue (see Fig. ). Microscopic study revealed an anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (stage IV B) with focal involvement of soft tissues and lymph nodes with macrometastasis (see Figs. , , , and ). There were no postoperative complications. No immunohistochemical study was performed.
Subsequently, five cycles of chemotherapy with doxorubicin (60 mg/m2) were completed in 6 months. She did not receive any other form of therapy. Currently, the patient is under oncological surveillance (control appointments with imaging studies and hormonal tests every 6 months since her intervention). The most recent follow-up appointment was in February 2021; she showed no signs of recurrence. She has achieved 5 years of complete remission and has maintained optimal health.