A 60-year-old female with a medical history of hypertension presented to the orthopedic foot and ankle clinic with progressive pain about her right first MTPJ. She reported having a first MTPJ arthroplasty in 2004 and long-standing pain in her first MTPJ that worsened with walking. She had attempted a Morton’s extension orthotic without pain relief.
On physical examination, there was tenderness to palpation about the first MTPJ, with mild swelling and a well-healed dorsal surgical scar. Range of motion of the joint was painful through the entire arc of motion. There was also tenderness to palpation on the plantar aspect of the second and third MTPJs, with corresponding plantar-based calluses, but normal sensation throughout the foot, with palpable pedal pulses, and brisk capillary refill in all toes.
Three-view radiographic evaluation of the right foot showed a prior first MTPJ arthroplasty with perihardware lucency indicative of loosening components and a shortened first ray. The patient was diagnosed with failed first MTPJ arthroplasty secondary to loosening of the components, with concomitant second and third transfer metatarsalgia. After discussing treatment options, the patient chose to undergo surgical intervention involving hardware removal and first MTPJ arthrodesis, along with second and third metatarsal head Weil osteotomies to address her metatarsalgia. Her pre-operative metatarsophalangeal-interphalangeal (MTP-IP) score was 39.
In the operating room, an incision was made through her prior dorsal surgical incision. Dissection was carried down to the first MTPJ arthroplasty. The components were grossly loose and were removed without difficulty. Curettes and a drill bit were used to debride the intramedullary portion of the distal first metatarsal and the proximal aspect of the proximal phalanx . A 2-cm bone gap was identified, and inadequate bone stock remained in the proximal phalanx to allow for hardware fixation. A decision was made to proceed with arthrodesis without the use of hardware. Ten cc of bone marrow was aspirated from the proximal tibia and mixed with a bone substitute (NovoGro®, Osteonovus, Toledo, Ohio) for later use. Fibular strut allograft with adequate length to fill the bone void was measured under fluoroscopy and cut to appropriate size to hold the toe out to length. Traction was applied to the toe, and the strut grafts were placed across the joint and within the medullary canal of the first metatarsal and then the proximal phalanx . The strut graft provided stability to the joint through its tensile effect. The bone graft substitute was packed into the proximal phalanx, first metatarsal head, and remaining first MTPJ space . Weil osteotomies were performed on the second and third metatarsal heads through separate dorsal incisions to restore a normal cascade. The patient was placed in a posterior, short-leg splint postoperatively and made non-weight bearing.
At her 2-week follow-up, she was transitioned to a short-leg cast and continued her weight bearing restrictions. Radiographs at 1 month showed callus formation and graft consolidation at the first MTPJ . The patient was transitioned to a fracture boot at 6 weeks, but was kept non-weight bearing until 3 months postoperatively. At her 3-month follow-up, the patient was transitioned to a forefoot rocker sole shoe with carbon plate insert and allowed to weight bear as tolerated. She reported no pain in her great toe. A computed tomography scan was obtained at 4 months postoperatively, which showed continued consolidation of the fusion. At 5 months postoperatively, the patient was back to wearing her normal shoes and reported no activity limitations, including jogging. At 2 years postoperatively, she reported no pain in the toe and was completely satisfied with the procedure. Her final MTP-IP score was 83.