A 10-year-old boy started to develop craniofacial deformities 2 years ago.
The patient’s mother reported that the child began to develop craniofacial deformities, accompanied by nasal deformities, uneven dentition, and abnormal occlusion. No significant hearing loss or symptoms of increased intracranial pressure were observed.
At the age of 3 years, the child had a closed craniocerebral trauma without surgical treatment. There was no history of surgery, hepatitis, tuberculosis, or other special medical history.
The patient had no other personal or family history. The appearance characteristics of the child at the ages of 3, 5, 8, and 10 years are shown in Figure .
Developmental malformation of the head and face, with a head circumference of 52.3 cm, maxillofacial malformation , and abnormal structure of the cheekbones, nasal bones, mandibles, and maxillary sinus bones were observed. Bilateral eyeball protrusion of 16 mm, uneven oral dentition, with most of the teeth in the entire mouth missing, and abnormal occlusion were also seen. Mouth opening was limited to only two fingers (or 3 cm), and severe wear was seen on the posterior teeth. Varicose veins were observed on the skin of the lower jaw. No coffee-like pigmentation was observed on the facial skin. There was no deformity in both auricles, the external auditory meatus on both sides was narrow, and the tympanic membrane could not be clearly seen. The nasal mucosa on both sides was congested, the total nasal meatus was narrow and clear mucus was visible, and no neoplasms were found in the middle nasal meatus. Pure tone audiometry showed binaural mixed hearing loss (left ear air conduction [AC]: 63 dB, bone conduction [BC]: 55 dB; right ear AC: 68 dB, BC: 51 dB).
Alkaline phosphatase level was 1296 U/L (normal range: 40-150 U/L), and other biochemical indicators were basically normal. Pituitary level of luteinizing hormone was 2.58 mIU/mL (normal range: 16-53 mIU/mL), follicle stimulating hormone was 1.10 mIU/mL (normal range: 3.3-8.0 mIU/mL), estradiol was 79 ng/L (normal range: 6-53 ng/L), testosterone was 15.2 μg/L (normal range: 3-5.7 μg/L), and prolactin was 52.25 μg/L (normal range: 16-53 μg/L). 25-Hydroxyvitamin D was 70.2 nmol/L (normal reference: > 75 nmol/L), osteocalcin was 385 μg/L (normal reference: 4-10 μg/L), and growth hormone was 2.105 ng/mL. The thyroid function and routine blood and urine tests were basically normal. The child's guardians refused genetic testing.
The whole body X-ray showed abnormal proliferation of multiple bone fibers in the bilateral tibia, femur, humerus, ulna, radius, and skull . High resolution computed tomography of the temporal bone indicated diffuse thickening and increased density of the maxillofacial bone, skull, and atlas axis. The thickest part of the frontal bone was approximately 3.7 cm, and no gasification was observed in the maxillary sinus, ethmoid sinus, frontal sinus, sphenoid sinus, and mastoid air chambers on both sides. The bony parts of the external auditory meatus on both sides were narrow, with a width of about 3.8 mm and 2.3 mm on the right and left sides, respectively. Bilateral middle ear tympanic cavities and sinuses were narrow, and there were no abnormalities in bilateral ossicles and inner ear structures .