A 62-year-old Indian male, a chronic smoker, presented with three episodes of rest angina for the last 1 month. He was detected with hypertension and was taking telmisartan hydrochloride, 40 mg once a day for the last 5 years. There was no history of any other comorbidity. At presentation, his blood pressure was 130/82 mmHg, and his pulse rate was 90 beats per minute. His cardiovascular examination was unremarkable. The electrocardiograph showed T-wave inversion in leads LII, LIII, and aVF . Echocardiography revealed a structurally normal heart with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 55%. Cardiac troponin-I level was normal.
At the age of 52, he was diagnosed with chronic stable angina when a coronary angiogram revealed a diffuse lesion in the right coronary artery (RCA), causing critical stenosis . PCI to RCA was done with implantation of three second-generation DES (zotarolimus-eluting Endeavor Spirit stent, Medtronic Vascular, CA, USA) with an adequate overlap of stent edges. Post dilatation with a 3.0 × 15 mm non-compliant (NC) balloon in the distal RCA and a 3.5 × 15 mm NC balloon in mid-proximal RCA achieved good angiographic results . Intracoronary imaging was not done at that time. He received dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT), including aspirin and clopidogrel, for 1-year post-PCI, after which only aspirin was continued. He has also received metoprolol and atorvastatin since then. He did well for the last 9 years following PCI.
During the current presentation, he was diagnosed with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome and was given 180 mg ticagrelor along with 75 mg aspirin. A coronary angiogram revealed diffuse in-stent restenosis (ISR) extending from proximal to the mid-stented segment of RCA with a focal haziness causing 90% stenosis . This hazy lesion corresponds to the overlap segment of proximal-mid RCA stents ( and ). An intracoronary OCT imaging of RCA was performed (ILUMIEN TM Optis systems, MA, USA) to elucidate the mechanism of stent failure. Longitudinal OCT image (, middle panel) revealed well-apposed struts throughout the length of the stented segment, diffuse intimal hyperplasia, and neo-atherosclerosis, causing a variable degree of luminal stenosis. Furthermore, the OCT appearance of neo-atherosclerosis was variable. While predominantly fibrotic hyperplasia was noticed in the distal and proximal stent, neo-atheroma in the middle stent showed a predominantly lipid-rich plaque with minimal fibrous element, especially at the site of proximal stent overlap. This segment also revealed a thin overlying fibrous cap, plaque rupture, and a white thrombus causing significant luminal area reduction (, upper and lower panels, Videos 1 and 2). Further analysis of the OCT images revealed a vessel diameter of 3.2 mm in the distal reference segment of RCA. This correlates well with the measured mean stent diameter of 3.18 mm in distal RCA, 3.51 mm at the distal stent overlap, and 3.55 mm at the proximal stent overlap segments of RCA, thereby ruling out under-expansion as a mechanism of stent malfunction in the index patient .
We pre-dilated the ISR lesion with a 2.5 × 15 mm semi-compliant balloon followed by a 3.0 × 15 mm NC balloon and a 3.5 × 15 mm NC balloon at high pressure. Our initial plan was to treat the lesion with a drug-eluting balloon as ISR was intrastent. However, OCT imaging after balloon angioplasty revealed a dissection flap at the upper edge of the proximal stent, extending from the neoatheroma. A review of OCT images revealed a predominantly fibrotic plaque at this site . So, the diseased segment was treated with a 3.5 × 38 mm third-generation Sirolimus-Eluting Polymer Free Coronary Stent (Coroflex ISAR-Neo Stent, B. Braun, Melsungen, Germany) followed by high pressure (18 atm) post-dilatation with a 3.5 × 12 mm NC balloon. Repeat OCT imaging showed a well expanded and well-apposed stent with minimal stent area (6.54 mm2) , except at the proximal part where it was malapposed (, Video 3). This segment was further post-dilated with a 4.5 mm NC Balloon at 14 atm as guided by OCT. The final angiogram showed thrombolysis in myocardial infarction III flow . No further OCT imaging was done in view of contrast load. He was discharged on metoprolol, telmisartan, atorvastatin, and DAPT, including 75 mg of aspirin once a day and 90 mg of ticagrelor twice a day. Being a candidate with high thrombotic risk, he was prescribed an extended duration of DAPT as per current guidelines. He is doing well on follow-up at 6 months after discharge.