A 35-year-old Chinese female was referred to complete root canal treatment of the maxillary right molars using a DOM. She had repeated episodes of swelling in the upper right posterior maxilla for the past three months. The basis for the referral was the presence of a second root canal in the mesiobuccal root (MB2), as stated by the general dentist was suspected but not found. The pulp of 3 main root canals for the upper right first permanent molar (#16, Fédération Dentaire Internationale notation) and upper right second permanent molar (#17, Fédération Dentaire Internationale notation) were removed by the dentist. The medical history was non-contributory. The intraoral examination revealed profound disto-occlusal destruction in #16 and mesio-occlusal destruction in #17 . Teeth #16 and #17 were sensitive to palpation and percussion but were negative for thermal testing.
Based on the preoperative radiographs of teeth #16 and #17, the pulp chamber was noted to be extended, the pulp floors exhibited apical displacement, and the roots were short. In addition, teeth #16 and #17 had periapical translucency .
According to the radiographic images, teeth #16 and #17 were diagnosed as symptomatic apical periodontitis and mesotaurodonts.
The clinical condition was explained to the patient, and root canal therapy was proposed and conducted. After proper disinfection and rubber dam isolation, all the subsequent procedures were performed using a DOM (Leica, Germany). The residual decay was excavated, and the access opening was prepared. The pulp chamber was identified with three orifice openings (MB, DB, and P), and the dentist utilized the ProTaper F2 after discussion. A complex pattern of the dentinal map in teeth #16 and #17 was demonstrated. After removing the dentinal lips around the orifice of the three prepared canals with a DG-16 endodontic explorer, the second canals (MB2, DB2, and P2) of the tooth #16 were identified. In contrast, the extra root canal orifice was concealed approximately 2–3 mm under the prepared canal orifice of MB and P in the tooth #17.
Two experienced operators (He Wang and Na Cao) analyzed the data taken by CBCT using a Scanora ® 3D unit (SoredexOy, Tuusula, Finland). In this device, the mandible is stabilized with a cheek rest while the patient is seated, and two vertical plastic rods (one on each side) are used to support the head position. The settings (FOV and voxel resolution) were chosen for each patient based on the area to be examined and the diagnostic task in question. Considering the small FOV (6 × 6 cm, resolution 0.13-mm), the scan time was 23 s.
The results were further evaluated and verified by the CBCT . Together with the DOM, the ultrasonic tips maintained good visibility of the operative field. The ultrasonic tips were used for the removal of gross tissue and calculus. We prepared six canals in the tooth #16 with two canals in the mesiobuccl root (MB1 and MB2 canals), two in the distobuccal root (DB1 and DB2 canals), and two in the palatal root (P1 and P2 canals) . Also, we prepared seven canals in the tooth #17 with three in the mesiobuccal root (MB1, MB2, and MB3 canals), two in the distobuccal root (DB1 and DB2 canals), and two in the palatal root (P1 and P2 canals) . All of the extra canals were prepared using a stainless steel hand files (ISO size 8). During the root canal preparation, it was apparent that MB2 and MB3 in the tooth #17 were joined together in the apical third of the mesiobuccal root, but P1 and P2 in the same molar were separated in the middle third of the palatal root and joined together in the third apical. The working length was determined by both radiographs and an electronic apex locator (Raypex5; VDW, Germany). The instrumentation was completed using ProTaper sequence S1, S2, F1, and F2 rotary files (ProTaper Universal; Dentsply Maillefer, Switzerland) as per instructions from the manufacturer. Sodium hypochlorite (2.5%) was used as intracanal irrigat, and calcium hydroxide was used as a disinfectant. The access cavity was sealed with a temporary filling (IRM; Dentsply).
One week later, the two teeth were not associated with symptoms, and root canals were obturated using a continuous-wave condensation technique with thermoplasticized gutta-percha (E&Q Plus system; Meta, Korea) and AH Plus (Dentsply) as sealer cement . The access cavity was temporarily restored, and the patient was sent for coronal rehabilitation.