The patient’s father provided written consent to the use the patient’s medical information for research and publication.
A 1-year-old girl (weight 10 kg) had suffered from a cough with sputum production for more than 2 days. She had a medical history of having swallowed a TFB 2 days earlier. The physical examination was normal, except for a wheezing sound in the right lung. A chest computed tomography scan revealed an 8 × 4 × 21 mm3 mass in the trachea near the carina, which given the patient’s history, was suggestive of the diagnosis of a TFB aspiration. After careful preoperative preparation, we scheduled the patient to undergo an emergency rigid tracheobronchoscopy to remove the TFB under general anesthesia. In order to keep the patient in spontaneous breathing, the combination of intravenous and inhalant anesthesia with propofol, fentanyl, and sevoflurane was planned to be administered. In the operating room, standard monitoring was installed, including SpO2, noninvasive blood pressure, and an electrocardiogram. Before administration of anesthesia, the child was premedicated with atropine (0.1 mg) and dexamethasone (2 mg)intravenously. Then anesthesia induction was performed with 8% sevoflurane carried by 6 L/min oxygen flow. After the patient became unconscious, anesthesia was maintained with 3–5% sevoflurane and 1 L/min oxygen flow for more than 5 min. Before rigid tracheobronchoscopy introduced into the trachea, the child received propofol (20 mg) and fentanyl (10 μg) intravenously to deepen the anesthesia. After 1–2 min, when her lower jaw was flabby, the surgeon introduced a LTA applicator into the trachea under the guidance of rigid tracheobronchoscopy, and then sprayed topical 1% lidocaine on the surfaces of the vocal cords and trachea. After the surgeon applied the topical anesthetic to the trachea, the girl suddenly suffered from bucking, which made it difficult to withdraw the LTA applicator. The surgeon quickly examined the opening of the main trachea using rigid tracheobronchoscopy, and found the TFB had migrated to the subglottic region against the LTA applicator. In this situation, manual ventilation became impossible and within half a minute, the patient’s SpO2 decreased to 91% and her heart rate dropped from 150 to 100 bpm. We administered an intravenous injection of atropine (0.3 mg) and succinylcholine (10 mg). Meanwhile, the surgeon tried to free the TFB by pushing it back into the trachea, after which the LTA kit was easily withdrawn. We then mask-ventilated the lungs successfully. The patient’s SpO2 quickly increased to 97% and her heart rate rose to 140 bpm. After deepening the anesthesia with propofol (20 mg) intravenously, the surgeon successfully grabbed and removed the TFB under jet ventilation . Afterwards, the girl’s condition improved quickly and she recovered uneventfully. She was discharged from the hospital 2 days later without complications.