A 35 year old woman WITH no significant past medical history. The history of her illness goes back 2 years marked by the appearance of a left parotid tumefaction. The initial histological study by biopsy revealed a mixed salivary gland tumor of 28 mm without signs of malignancy. The patient had a large resection of this mass with negative surgical margins. 6 months later, she presented with a nodule next to the surgical scar at the subangulomandibular level of 6 cm fixed firm painful on palpation without inflammatory signs associated with left peripheral facial paralysis. Examination of lymph node areas was normal. A parotid MRI revealed an expansive process measuring 42 mm, poorly limited, moderately infiltrating the masseter and pterygoid muscles with heterogeneous spontaneous signal with dynamic enhancement according to a type C curve and a very low ADC (–).
The extension assessment made by a thoraco-abdomino-pelvic scanner and a bone scintigraphy requested in the face of bone pain, was without abnormality. The patient underwent excision of the mass with extemporaneous examination suggesting an infiltrating carcinoma from which the surgical procedure was completed by a wide left parotidectomy with ipsilateral triangular dissection and preservation of the left facial nerve. The definitive pathological examination showed an undifferentiated malignant tumor proliferation whose immunohistochimical profile suggested a primary peripheral neuroectodermal tumor or PNET. Tumor cells were CK (+) and CD99(+), on the other hand synaptophysin, EMA, NSE, chromogranin, and vimentin were negatives. The study by Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) confirmed the presence of a specific EWING/PNET type translocation in 60% of the tumor cells. The diagnosis of extra-skeletal Ewing’s sarcoma was retained. VDC/IE type chemotherapy (vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide alternating with ifosfamide, and etoposide) was indicated followed by external radiotherapy on the operating bed delivered at a dose of 54 Gy in standard spreading and fractionation (1.8 Gy/session and 5 sessions/week). The CTV and PTV margins were 1.5 cm and 5 mm respectively . Treatment planning was performed on the Varian AAA 13.7 Eclipse TPS via a Linac-type linear accelerator. The tolerance of the treatment was good with maximum toxicity of grade 2 mucositis and grade 1 dermatitis which progressed well under symptomatic treatment. A clinical and radiological follow-up by cervical MRI was done every 3 months. The 10-month follow-up showed no locoregional and distant recurrence.