A 49-year-old man with a history of acromegaly was admitted to our hospital with the concern of recurrent shortness of breath and dyspnea on exertion during the previous 2 years, and he had experienced an episode of presyncope 2 weeks prior without any further evaluation. He was a chef in a local restaurant for almost 30 years. He had no family history of any diseases and no past history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, sleep apnea, or sudden cardiac death. He did not smoke or consume alcohol. The patient provided a history of stereotactic radiosurgeries twice in a decade or so and adherence to treatment with a somatostatin analog (octreotide given 40 mg once per month through intramuscular injection) at the time of diagnosis 20 years before. The patient was overweight and moderately nourished. He was 1.85 m (73 inches) tall, weighed 134 kg, and had a body mass index of 39 kg/m2. His blood pressure was 110/60 mmHg, and his heart rate was 92 beats/min with sinus rhythm. He had distinct skeletal features that included prominent superciliary arches and nose bridge, enlargement of the tongue and lip, and large hands and feet. Cardiac auscultation revealed irregular premature beats and pathological third heart sound, and a systolic murmur was discovered over the apex and aortic area. Bilateral extensive borders of cardiac dullness were noted. His physiological reflexes were present without any pathology. An electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus rhythm with wide (160 ms) QRS duration of left bundle branch block (LBBB). The patient’s condition was classified as New York Heart Association (NYHA) stage III–IV.

On admission, magnetic resonance imaging showed pituitary macroadenoma. Given the symptoms described, we arranged blood testing of myocardial injury markers showing an elevated brain natriuretic peptide level of 740 pg/ml indicating cardiac failure (Table 1). Hormone laboratory tests performed subsequently demonstrated excessive secretion of GH and IGF-1, twofold greater than the reference normal upper limit, which was consistent with pituitary macroadenoma (Table 2). Other routine analyses of liver and renal function were roughly normal.

A Holter monitor was ordered for underlying arrhythmias to explain the patient’s dyspnea, chest discomfort, and presyncope. It demonstrated sinus rhythm with an average heart rate of 68 beats/min, frequent ventricular premature beats, and nonsustained ventricular tachycardia (up to 2200 ms).

A chest x-ray showed a cardiothoracic ratio (CTR) of 78%. Echocardiography showed diffuse impairment of left ventricular (LV) systolic motion, reaching an LVEF of 16%. We noted hypertrophy of the ventricular septum at 18 mm, ventricular dilation, with LV diameter of 72 mm. The right ventricle and atrium and the left atrium were also dilated with moderate mitral regurgitation and mild tricuspid regurgitation. There was no associated systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the mitral valve. Dyssynchrony of the biventricular systolic motion was apparent.

Given an exertional component to the symptoms together with echo presentations in order to better exclude ischemic cardiomyopathy, coronary angiography was performed, which showed normal coronary arteries without stenosis, and left ventriculography applied simultaneously revealed an EF of 20% with diffuse LV hypokinesis.

Given the patient’s previous medical history of acromegaly, the absence of obstructive coronary artery imaging findings or segmental dyskinesia, family history of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), symmetric hypertrophy, as well as absence of SAM of the mitral valve, acromegaly-induced cardiomyopathy was confirmed, which was absolutely opposed to coronary heart disease (CHD) and HCM.

These results indicated that it was probably not a case of hereditary cardiomyopathy; therefore, we diagnosed the patient as having secondary dilated cardiomyopathy due to acromegaly, even taking it a step further progressing to congestive heart failure secondary to acromegaly-induced dilated cardiomyopathy.

Chronic excess of GH and IGF-I secretion affects cardiac morphology and performance [5], so etiological treatment for acromegaly-induced cardiomyopathy is crucial to suppressing GH secretion or blocking GH action for the sake of reversing acromegaly-induced cardiomyopathy. The mainstay of treatment acknowledged globally is surgical resection of the pituitary adenoma [6], which was unfortunately considered high-risk given our patient’s cardiac condition (NYHA stage III–IV). Although stereotactic radiosurgery combined with somatostatin analogs and GH antagonists administrated previously were effective in suppressing hormones, they could not help his cardiac function. Therefore, we carefully administered diuretics, vasodilators, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI), β-blockers, and spironolactone for management of heart failure following the current guidelines [7]; in the meantime, octreotide (200 μg/day) was administered for the control of GH excess. After good compliance of pharmacotherapy and a regular medical examination regimen for nearly half a year, the serum GH and IGF-1 concentrations decreased from 32.50 ng/ml to 1.98 ng/ml and 627.00 ng/ml to 229.10 ng/ml, respectively, but the patient was hospitalized again because of uncontrollable cardiac failure. Accompanied by the normalization of GH and IGF-1 levels, the patient’s cardiac function did not seem to take a favorable turn upon readmission. Though echocardiography showed a recovered EF value from 16% to 28%, a significant ventricular mechanical dyssynchrony was detected as formerly. Electrophysiological study was performed using a nonaggressive stimulation protocol, which revealed a nonsustained ventricular monomorphic tachycardia. In the presence of overt ventricular dyssynchrony, complete LBBB, LVEF< 35%, inducible ventricular tachycardia, and symptomatic heart failure despite guideline-directed medical therapy, surgical indication was rarely assessed by neurosurgeons, and stereotactic radiosurgery together with pharmacotherapy produced infinitesimal effects. Therefore, we boldly recommended cardiac resynchronization therapy with defibrillator (CRT-D) implantation based on device implantation official guidelines. The patient underwent CRT insertion finally and was discharged to home 5 days later, pharmacotherapy continued as usual.

Telephone follow-up was arranged, and the patient claimed symptom improvement following the device insertion 1 month later and was basically back to normal life. We required that he return for follow-up at 1 month, 3 months, and 6 months after the interventional therapy. The patient has been followed in our outpatient clinic for nearly half a year now. During his last visit, echocardiography identified improved LVEF of 54%, and a chest x-ray showed reduced CTR of 60%. The patient was in NYHA functional class II.