A 6-year-old girl, was born to healthy parents with third-degree consanguinity. This family of Indian origin was referred for investigation and genetic counseling for facial dysmorphy with global developmental delay, and behavioral issues of the proband. Maternal history revealed intra-uterine growth retardation during the antenatal period that ended with a full-term female baby born through cesarean section due to breach presentation. Her birth weight was 2.75 kg.
The proband had normal feeding history, and there were no neonatal concerns. At approximately 5 months of age, the proband attained her neck control. She could stand with support by 3 years and could walk independently by 5 years of age. She could utter only a few bi-syllable words. Despite being hyperactive, no abnormal hand movements were observed. She had a history of two episodes of febrile seizures at 8 months and 2 years of age. During these episodes, she was observed with other symptoms such as cough, cold, and fever. Her physical examination revealed craniofacial disproportion, which included microcephaly with a narrow bifrontal diameter and a flat forehead. Other anomalies such as facial dysmorphy including epicanthal folds, hypertelorism, depressed and low nasal bridge with bulbous nasal tip, flaring nares, prominent philtrum, and pointed chin were also observed . However, no oro-dental anomalies were observed in the proband.
She also had hallux valgus with increased gap between the first and second toes (sandal gap deformity), clinodactyly of toes, and pes planus (flat feet). No other deformity of the trunk or limbs was observed. She had dark pigmentation in armpits, genitalia, and on the knuckles. She had mild hypotonia with brisk and deep tendon reflexes. Her expressive communication was good but her verbal communication was affected. Her social responses seemed to be fair. The proband was diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) with psychomotor developmental delay. Sample collection and written informed consent was obtained according to the need of the institutional ethics committee in accordance with Helsinki declaration. CARE guidelines were followed for reporting.
On investigation, low hemoglobin with normal serum calcium (10 mg/dl) and Vitamin B12 levels were detected. Her sleep electroencephalogram (EEG) was normal. Radiographic studies of the proband showed small sclerotic areas in the lower part of the right femur, and abnormally shaped skull with minimal sclerosis in the lower occipital region . However, the bone density was normal and there were no features of fracture or dislocation of the bones. Corticomedullary differentiation was maintained and no periosteal reaction was noted. CT scan of the brain revealed prominent sulcal pattern with enlarged cisternal spaces in the brain parenchyma. These changes were prominently observed in the frontoparietal region. In addition, mild cortical atrophy was also detected. There was no evidence of focal hypo– or hyperdense lesion. Moreover, subdural, extradural or intracerebral hemorrhage, or subarachnoid bleeding was not observed. The pons, midbrain, both cerebellar hemisphere, and brain stem appeared normal. No mass lesion was observed in the posterior fossa.
MRI revealed a significant hypoplastic appearance of posterior part of the brain. It also showed corpus callosal dysgenesis with the absence of rostral area. Moreover, a mild paucity of the peritrigonal white matter was seen surrounding the trigones of bilateral lateral ventricles. However, no obvious gliosis, extra-axial collection or lesions were noted. Her echocardiogram showed normal systemic and pulmonary venous drainage, normal valves, and normal sized cardiac chambers. The Ophthalmological evaluation revealed bilateral intact vision with healthy macula.
Chromosome banding study showed a normal female karyotype i.e. 46, XX at 550-bands resolution . The fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) study was performed using LSI ELN (7q11) (orange) /LSI 7q22 (green) (Kreatech dual color probe). Since two signals were observed in all the cells, clinical prediction of Williams syndrome was ruled out. The proband DNA was further investigated with array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) using [Agilent 60 K], with an average resolution of 150 kb. No copy number variations i.e. deletions and/or duplications of pathogenic significance were detected [arr(1–22,X)× 2]. Thus, cytogenetic aberrations with resolution of 150 kb or greater were unlikely to be responsible for the clinical features in the proband.
The genomic DNA (gDNA) of the proband was isolated from the peripheral blood using the salting-out technique . This DNA sample was processed for clinical exome sequencing (CES) on Illumina NextSeq 500. A detailed protocol is mentioned in the Additional file . Sequencing detected a homozygous missense variation c.1228 T > A in the exon 6 of the FAM20C gene (OMIM*611061) (GenBank accession number NM.020223.3; coding sequences NP_064608). This variation resulted in the amino acid substitution of threonine for serine at codon 410 (p.Ser410Thr; ENST00000313766), confirming the clinical diagnosis of RS (OMIM # 259775).
The functional effect of this variant was studied using the in silico analysis tools. The variant was predicted to be disease-causing by Mutation Taster , with a score of 58. The impact of the substitution of serine to threonine was predicted to be probably damaging (score of 0.972) by Polyphen2 (PolymorphismPhenotypingV2) . Scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) predicted that the variant was tolerated with a score of 0.51, and PROVEAN anticipated that the variant had a deleterious effect on the protein function. This variant was reported as a likely pathogenic allele (SCV000583504.1) and benign (SCV000343602.2) in ClinVar. Its reference SNP number is rs148276213. The minor allele frequency of the rs148276213 variant is 0.0034 in the 1000 genomes database and 0.006108 in the ExAC database for the South Asian population.
CES also revealed another compound heterozygous variant in the tubulin gamma complex associated with protein 6 (TUBGCP6) gene (OMIM*610053) in the proband. The compound heterozygous variant in exon 24 [c.5327C > G (p.Ser1776Cys)] and exon 16 [c.3383G > A (p.Arg1128Lys)] is associated with microcephaly and chorioretinopathy-1 (OMIM#251270). In silico analysis predicted the first variant (c.5327C > G/p.Ser1776Cys) to be disease-causing using the Mutation Taster, tolerated by SIFT (score 0.07) and probably damaging by PolyPhen (score 1.00). While second variant (c.3383G > A /p.Arg1128Lys) found to be a polymorphism by Mutation T@ster, tolerated by SIFT (score 0.65), and benign by PolyPhen (score 0.023). Second variant was dismissed as the cause of disease in the proband, because this genotypic variation did not correlate with the phenotypic features of the proband, and also because various bioinformatics prediction softwares could not predict it as damaging.
The variant has an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. Its confirmation in the proband and her parents was carried out using bi-directional Sanger sequencing with primers covering both the exon and the intron-exon boundary of exon 6 of the FAM20C gene (Additional file ). Sequencing confirmed both the parents to be heterozygous, and the proband to be homozygous for c.1228 T > A (p.Ser410Thr) variant in exon 6 of FAM20C gene . This variant was submitted to ClinVar database (accession ID is SCV000583504.1). During a subsequent pregnancy, the same family approached again for genetic counseling. The prenatal diagnosis revealed a heterozygous state of the fetus for the c.1228 T > A (p.Ser410Thr) variant, and a normal carrier child was delivered (data not shown).
Using NCBI Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST), the native and mutated sequences of the FAM20C gene were studied to understand the effect of the variant, and also to predict the protein structure against PDB with default parameters . The template PDBID: 5WRR was considered for modeling the protein structure. Additional details regarding the homological modeling is mentioned in the Additional file [–].
A root mean sequence deviation (RMSD) of 0.3 Ao was observed between native and mutant structure, indicating changes in the loop regions of the superimposed structure. A decrease instability was predicted by iStable with a confidence score of 0.605. Furthermore, I-Mutant predicted a large decrease in protein stability due to the variant p.Ser410Thr with ΔΔG value of − 1.37 Kcal/mol .
The protein sequence of Homo sapiens (NP_064608) was aligned along with other species using an online multiple sequence alignment program known as Clastal Omega . It is observed that the orthologs protein sequences of the FAM20C gene were highly identical to H. sapiens FAM20C gene protein sequence suggesting a highly conserved locus .
Using PCR technique of amplification-refractory mutation system (ARMS), 200 unrelated control samples (100 males and 100 females) were studied to demonstrate the pathogenicity of c.1228T>A (p.Ser410Thr) variant. Amplification of the PCR product was confirmed by 2.5% agarose gel electrophoresis. From the 200 subjects screened for the above genotype, no carriers for the c.1228T>A (p.Ser410Thr) variant were found (Additional file ).