A 14-year-old male of Eastern European descent was referred to pediatric gastroenterology for severe malnutrition and epigastric abdominal pain initially attributed to gastroesophageal reflux disease. He had been experiencing eight months of daily postprandial periumbilical abdominal pain. At the time of the initial GI assessment in clinic, he was taking omeprazole for the past few months with some improvement in abdominal pain, but he had experienced a 9% weight loss over the past six months with his weight below the 3rd percentile (Z-score < -6). His past medical history is notable for NBS that was diagnosed at six months of age, with combined immunodeficiency phenotype with low B cell and poor T cell function. He was diagnosed after his older sister underwent genetic testing and was found to have a NBS1 657del5 mutation. His family history is notable for two siblings with NBS along with a first cousin. He has associated microcephaly, short stature with height below the 3rd percentile (Z-score < -2), bronchiectasis, and lymphopenia with IgG deficiency, requiring routine IVIG infusions. He has a history of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma that was diagnosed at age eight during a hospitalization for pneumonia and pleural effusion. On initial labs, he was noted to have an elevated uric acid of 7.2 mg/dL and LDH of 2711 U/L, leading to further diagnostic work-up. MRI of the chest revealed a large right chest mass and multiple lesions in his kidneys, spleen, pelvis, and tibias. Bone marrow biopsies revealed patchy tumor involvement and he was treated with the ANHL1131 protocol at reduced dose given his chromosomal instability and has been in remission for 6 years.
On presentation to the pediatric GI clinic, the physical exam was unremarkable. The abdomen was soft, non-distended, and non-tender with no masses appreciable. The oropharynx was clear and there was no significant cervical, axillary, or inguinal adenopathy. Initial laboratory workup for abdominal pain and weight loss included a complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, c-reactive protein, and celiac antibodies which were all within normal limits. Additional diagnostic work-up to look for inflammatory or malabsorption etiologies of his symptoms were pursued due to the extent of his weight loss. His fecal calprotectin was elevated to 318.2 mcg/g (normal < 50 mcg/g) and given his constellation of symptoms, an endoscopy and colonoscopy were performed. Endoscopy revealed white nummular lesions , chronic gastritis without evidence of H. pylori, and focal active ileitis. Colonoscopy showed a < 5 mm tubular adenoma in the sigmoid colon.
Pathology of this lesion showed Reed-Sternberg cells and neoplastic cells strongly/diffusely positive for CD30 and CD15, and with dim/partial positivity for CD20, PAX5, CD79a, and BCL6 . CD19, CD22, CD43, CD45, and ALK were negative. CD10 stain was predominately negative and testing for cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus were negative. MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was used for staging of disease and showed lymphadenopathy of the lesser sac and gastric cardia . A lumbar puncture and bone marrow were performed and were negative for disease. He was diagnosed with stage IIB Classical Hodgkin’s disease of stomach.
He underwent two cycles of OEPA chemotherapy (vincristine, etoposide, prednisone, and doxorubicin) at 30% and 40% full dose. The remainder of standard Hodgkin’s treatment consisting of two cycles of COPDAC (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone, and dacarbazine) was not recommended to avoid alkylating agents in a patient prone to malignancy. He tolerated the treatment well without any complications and achieved complete remission. Unfortunately, 9 months later, he was admitted for a bowel perforation and found to have recurrent Hodgkin disease. He completed one cycle of OEPA chemotherapy at 30% dosing and transitioned to pembrolizumab while considering a bone marrow transplant.