A 49-year-old single man (rural worker), born and raised in Laranjal Paulista-SP, was admitted to our Emergency Room at the Botucatu Medical School University hospital with 3 months history of bilateral occipital headache. Along with a history of active smoking and previous use of alcohol, the patient reported a personal history of mild occipitotemporal injury 3 months ago. On physical examination, left dysdiadochokinesia and three palpable cervical lymph nodes were noted on the left side; one of them with increased dimensions. The patient was submitted to computed tomography (CT) in a 16-row multidetector scanner, which revealed, after iodinated contrast infusion, a nodular hypodense lesion with ring enhancement and associated perilesional edema in the left cerebellar hemisphere . In light of these findings, hypothetic diagnoses of cerebellar abscess and neoplasy (primary or metastatic) were made. Radiological workup was initiated to investigate the eventual primary neoplastic site. Chest radiography showed reticular opacities, perihilar and poorly defined in the right hemithorax. The CT in a 16-row multidetector scanner and high-resolution chest protocol were done, showing pulmonary nodules in the right, some of them with excavated wall, sometimes thin and smooth, sometimes asymmetrical, and occasionally associated with perilesional ground-glass opacities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of the brain revealed similar finding found on CT of the anterior skull, in T1-weighted sequences , showed peripheral hyperintense rim surrounding a hypointense center and ring enhancement after intravenous infusion of paramagnetic contrast . The T2-weigthted sequences and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) [Figure and ] showed perilesional edema in the left cerebellar hemisphere and peripheral hypointense in the center of the respective lesion. The diffusion-weighted (DWI) sequences and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), respectively, showed hyperintense and hypointense lesions with restricted diffusion of water molecules [Figure and ]. The proton spectroscopy curves for MR of cerebellar lesions showed an increase in lactate and lipids peaks and reduction of N-acetyl-aspartate (NAA) peak, without increase in choline peak . Fine needle aspiration of the lymph node was performed, and cytological analysis revealed a nonspecific reactive lymphadenopathy. Microsurgery biopsy of cerebellar lesion was performed, and the histological analysis concluded that it was paracoccidioidomycosis without neoplasia signals .