A 26-year-old Japanese male presented with severe headache and nausea for approximately 3 weeks. He had a prior episode of suspected convulsion of which magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a cystic nodular lesion measuring approximately 60 mm in diameter, located in the left parietal lobe of the cerebrum. The patient was administered medication, and symptoms were subsequently relieved. However, 12 days later, he experienced worsened symptoms and was transferred and admitted to the emergency department of the University of Miyazaki Hospital.
MRI showed a mass of 70 × 53 × 57 mm in the left temporoparietal lobe . A solid element with slight hypointensity on T1-weighted and hyperintensity on T2-weighted images along the dura mater was noted. Cystic changes were likely associated with the sanguineous fluid. A peritumoral band with hyperintensity on T2-weighted image was observed at the periphery of the lesion, suggesting an extra-axial lesion . A dural tail sign was also noted on the gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted image . The lesion appeared to be focally infiltrative to the brain surface, but no apparent connection to the ventricle was observed . Preoperative clinical diagnosis was meningioma, but hemangiopericytoma and ependymoma were included as differential diagnoses. Left parietotemporal craniotomy was performed. The tumor was an extra-axial mass and had partially infiltrated the dura mater and surface of the brain parenchyma in the left temporal lobe. Small pieces of tumor tissue were removed for intraoperative diagnosis. Under an emergency setting, near-total resection was achieved even if the lesion was in the eloquent area. The patient received postoperative adjuvant radiotherapy (total dose 54 Gy). However, within 1 year postsurgery, the tumor recurred and a second resection surgery was performed. Four years after the first surgery, the tumor metastasized to the spinal cord and the patient eventually died (total postoperative follow-up period was 4 years and 4 months).