A 42-year-old female patient presented in June 2022 with a complaint of gradual progressive painless diminution of vision in the left eye that started 16 months earlier. Clinical history revealed an episode of sudden, profound, painless diminution of vision in the same eye that had occurred 18 months earlier in December 2020. At the time of that episode, visual acuity in the left eye was as low as hand motion, but gradually improved over a period of 4 months to reach 3/60. However, after that initial partial improvement, visual acuity in the left eye progressively deteriorated from 3/60 to become 1/60 at the time of presentation. Through medical history and earlier investigations i.e. FFA, SD-OCT macula , we concluded that the episode of acute drop of vision in the left eye was caused by left CRAO for which the patient had undergone an extensive systemic workup that established a diagnosis of SLE according to EULAR/ARC criteria with positive ANA, positive anti-Cardiolipin Ab, positive beta2 Glycoprotein Ab, fever, thrombocytopenia and non-cicatricial alopecia . The rheumatologist prescribed the patient HCQ at a dose of 400 mg/day which is equivalent to 5.3 mg/kg/day (slightly above the recommended daily dose of 5 mg/kg/day by the AAO revised guidelines 2016) and oral steroids with varying doses throughout the course of treatment ranging between 20 and 60 mg/day. At the time of presentation, ophthalmological examination revealed BCVA 6/6 OD and 1/60 OS, unremarkable anterior segment examination, right normal fundus, left bull's eye maculopathy and temporal optic disc pallor with attenuated retinal vessels .SD-OCT macula was performed which revealed foveal and parafoveal outer retinal defects involving the RPE, ELM, IS/OS as well as intraretinal degenerative cysts and generalized thinning and atrophy of the neurosensory retina in the left eye while the right eye was normal . Therefore, a diagnosis of left advanced HCQ maculopathy was made after exclusion of other possible causes of unilateral bull's eye maculopathy e.g. resolved unilateral acute idiopathic maculopathy (UAIM), subretinal fibrosis and uveitis syndrome (SFU), asymmetric cone or cone/rod dystrophy, benign concentric annular macular dystrophy, Stargardt's disease and traumatic maculopathy. These causes were excluded because none of them matches the clinical picture of our case for variable reasons e.g. the negative family history and the strictly unilateral involvement with completely normal right eye with BCVA 6/6 and intact color vision, excludes dystrophies. Moreover, the insidious rather than acute onset, the absence of signs of uveitis, the strict monofocal foveal and parafoveal involvement as opposed to multifocality, the regular oval edges of bull's eye rather than irregular pigmented edges, exclude UAIM and SFU as possible etiologies. Furthermore, the negative history of ocular or head trauma excludes traumatic maculopathy. Consequently, a recommendation to stop HCQ was conveyed to the rheumatologist who shifted the patient to Leflunomide.What is atypical about this case is the rather early onset maculopathy which manifested in the advanced form of bull's eye maculopathy after only 16 months of HCQ treatment compared to the reported incidence which is < 1% at 5 years. Another unusual aspect is the strictly unilateral involvement where the left eye shows advanced maculopathy while the right eye is normal. We assume that the early onset monocular HCQ maculopathy may be related to the CRAO that affected the same eye prior to HCQ treatment.