A 56-year-old male patient presented by a gradually progressive course of lower back pain, burning sensation of both lower limbs followed by urinary incontinence. The past history was irrelevant. X-ray of lumbosacral region revealed sacral osteolytic lesion with an associated soft-tissue mass. Non-contrast computed tomography of lumbosacral spine revealed a large 11 cm × 8 cm × 12 cm lobulated mass of the sacrum filling the sacral canal and having pre- and retro-sacral extension. The patient underwent maximal possible excision of sacral mass in December 2018 and the post-operative pathology revealed chordoma. Post-operative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a well-defined heterogeneously enhanced residual destructive bony lesion 8.5 cm × 6.5 cm × 7.5 cm affecting the sacrum (, ). The panel decided post-operative conventional radiotherapy dose of 60 Gy in 30 sessions. The follow-up MRI revealed about 30% response. There was clinical improvement following the surgery and radiotherapy.
In February 2020, the patient developed left inguinal swelling. Pelvic sonar showed enlarged left inguinal lymph node 3.5 cm × 2 cm × 3 cm with distorted hilum. Excisional biopsy was done and revealed metastatic chordoma (-). Metastatic work-up was free. The patient started Gleevec 400 mg daily. In June 2020, the patient developed an enlarged right inguinal lymph node 4 cm × 3.5 cm × 3 cm and the excision biopsy revealed metastatic chordoma as well. Metastatic work-up was free. Gleevec was stopped. A second-line target therapy was recommended but was not received by the patient. In September 2020, the patient developed headache, dysarthria, numbness at cheek, and lips. MRI brain revealed a well-defined abnormal signal intensity at the left side of clivus 3 cm × 4.5 cm × 4.8 cm suggesting chordoma . Transnasal biopsy revealed chordoma.
In October 2020 , the panel decided conventional radiotherapy of 60 Gy in 30 sittings. The follow-up MRI revealed regression of the clivus lesion and the patient improved clinically. At present, the patient is clinically stable while on follow-up.