A 40-year-old female patient with a history of late-onset allergic rhinitis was referred from a private hospital to Siriraj Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand. She presented with a 2-week history of numbness in the right leg, progressively worsening dyspnea, and multiple crops of erythematous papules and vesiculobullous lesions that subsequently ruptured, becoming shallow and ulcerated areas on the forehead and left ear. She had been treated with diclofenac and antihistamines, but there was no improvement. Afterward, she developed fever, worsening dyspnea, and hemoptysis. She was admitted to the intensive care unit due to hypoxic respiratory failure and was diagnosed with pneumonitis with alveolar hemorrhage. She denied any underlying diseases and was not taking any current medications. She had no history of smoking or alcohol use.

Physical examination revealed a chronically ill-looking middle-aged woman who was pale and febrile. Bilateral chest crackles were noted, and there was no pedal edema. Cutaneous examination revealed multiple erythematous papules and vesicles with some shallow erosions on an erythematous base located on the forehead and left ear, as well as multiple well-defined, non-blanchable erythematous patches and papules on both palms and both lower legs. A neurological examination showed decreased pinprick sensation in the right foot, and motor power was grade V/V in all extremities. Examination of the GI and cardiovascular systems was unremarkable.

Laboratory results on admission were as follows: white blood cell count, 20.8 × 103/μL; neutrophils, 34.5%; eosinophils, 52.8%; absolute eosinophil count, 10.9 × 103/μL; hemoglobin, 10.5 g/dL; platelets, 281 × 103/μL; total protein, 6.8 g/dL; serum albumin, 3.6 g/dL; AST, 31 U/L; ALT, 41 U/L; ALP, 96 U/L; serum urea nitrogen, 7.4 mg/dL; serum creatinine, 0.5 mg/dL. Workup for infections, including blood and sputum cultures, was negative. Autoimmune serology demonstrated a positive anti-myeloperoxidase antibody and negative results for antinuclear antibody and anti-proteinase-3 antibody. The chest X-ray showed multifocal alveolar opacities in both the middle and lower lung zones. A CT scan of the chest performed at presentation revealed multifocal consolidations with surrounding ground-glass opacities scattered in both lungs, suggestive of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. Bronchoalveolar lavage was performed, revealing a white blood cell count of 3,500 cells/μL, with neutrophilia (3%), eosinophilia (67%), and numerous red blood cells. Transbronchial biopsy showed eosinophilic pneumonia and marked eosinophilic infiltrates in the bronchial wall tissue, but no vasculitis or granulomas were identified in the tissue sample. A skin biopsy of the forehead revealed intraepidermal separation accompanied by necrotic keratinocytes, with the presence of neutrophils and eosinophils within the vesicle, along with focal leukocytoclastic vasculitis. There was superficial and deep perivascular and interstitial infiltration, predominantly consisting of eosinophils and neutrophils. Direct immunofluorescence (DIF) was negative. Electromyography showed evidence of multiple mononeuropathies.

The patient was diagnosed with EGPA based on a history of eosinophilic pneumonitis, pulmonary vasculitis, eosinophilic bullous vasculitis, mononeuropathies, eosinophilia, and positive anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies. She was treated with intravenous methylprednisolone 500 mg/day for 3 days and a single dose of intravenous cyclophosphamide 800 mg (0.52 g/m2), followed by a switch to oral prednisolone 30 mg/day. The skin lesions gradually improved, developing post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation, and her oxygen requirements showed improvement. Subsequently, she was discharged on oral steroids with a plan to infuse cyclophosphamide once a month for induction of remission. Four months after diagnosis, the patient progressed to GI vasculitis with bowel ischemia, ileal perforation, and subsequent death from gram-negative bacilli septicemia.