We present the case of a 50-year-old man who had been on dialysis for 6 years due to chronic kidney disease caused by glomerulonephritis. Abdominal enhanced computed tomography revealed a 22 mm left renal tumor, and a laparoscopic left renal nephrectomy was performed .
Histopathology revealed clear cells with a tubular, cylindrical, and papillary shape .
Immunohistochemistry revealed the tumor cells to be diffusely positive for CK7, negative for CD10 and AMACR, and immunoreactive with CA IX in a cup-like distribution .
Following these findings, a pathological diagnosis of pT1aNxMx, CCPRCC, G2, Fuhrman grade 2, INFa, v0, ly0 was made. The tissue of the renal cortex exhibited a thyroid-like appearance and renal arteriosclerosis, consistent with the histology of ESRD.
We studied the expression of miR-155 in the present case and compared it to that in nondialysis kidney tissue. Total RNA was extracted from frozen specimens of the tumor and renal cortex of the present case using a mirVanaTM miRNA isolation kit. Total RNA was also extracted from the frozen normal renal cortex samples of 96 patients with renal cell carcinoma who did not undergo dialysis. We generated cDNA from the RNA extracted from tumor and renal cortex samples using a TaqMan®microRNA RT kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). Relative quantitative analysis of miR-155 was carried out using a TaqMan miRNA Assay (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). We found miR-155 expression to be 2.4 times higher in tumor samples than in renal cortex samples of the present case . miR-155 expression in the renal cortex was 0.04 times lower in patients with ESRD compared with normal patients .
mTOR is a highly conserved serine/threonine kinase that regulates cell growth and metabolism. It has been reported that miR-155 targets TSCs TSC1/TSC2 in the mTOR pathway in CCRCC.
To compare CCPRCC in our patient and CCRCC for regulation of the mTOR pathway by miR-155, we investigated the expression of immunohistochemistry in mTOR pathway. As reported previously, we confirmed a decreased expression of TSC2 and increased expression of mTOR, S6, and 4EBP1 in CCRCC. Moreover, we confirmed the same expression pattern of CCPRCC in our patient .
In addition, we investigated the quantitative analysis in our patient using a MantraTM Quantitative Pathology Workstation with inForm® image analysis software (ParkinElmer, Life Science, Waltham, MA, USA). The positive staining rates of TSC1/TSC2 in the carcinoma were lower than in the renal cortex. Conversely, the positive staining rates of mTOR and 4EBP1 in the carcinoma were higher than in the renal cortex .