A 21-year-old woman was admitted to our department for a giant hepatic tumor that was found one month prior during a physical examination.
One month ago, an ultrasound examination at a local hospital revealed a giant hepatic tumor. However, the patient did not experience any obvious abdominal pain, distention, nausea, vomiting, chills, or fever.
She denied a medical history of oral contraceptive use, hepatitis, metabolic disorders, and immunodeficiency diseases.
The patient was unmarried, and her last menstrual period ended 11 d before admission. No additional family history was presented.
The patient’s sclera was not stained yellow and superficial lymph nodes were not enlarged. Her abdominal examination showed that her abdomen was flat and soft, and there was no obvious tenderness throughout her abdomen. The lower margin of the liver was palpable 15 cm below the xiphoid, but the spleen was not palpable.
Routine blood, kidney function, and coagulation function tests as well as the levels of tumor markers such as alpha-fetoprotein (AFP; 2.7 ng/mL, reference range 0-20 ng/mL), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; 0.71 ng/mL, reference range 0-5 ng/mL), and CA19-9 (2.39 ng/mL, reference range 0-37 ng/mL) were all within normal ranges. The C-reactive protein level was mildly elevated (8.25 mg/L, reference range 0-8 mg/mL). The liver function test revealed mildly elevated gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase and alkaline phosphatase (gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, 309 IU/L, reference range 10-60 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 182 IU/L, reference range 42-125 IU/L). The hepatitis A-E markers were all negative.
A CT scan performed at our hospital revealed a giant hepatic tumor measuring 22 cm × 20 cm × 10 cm, which completely replaced the left hepatic lobe. On non-contrast enhanced CT, the tumor showed a heterogeneous hypodensity, with a clear boundary . On the contrast-enhanced CT, the tumor presented with patchy or nodular enhancement and the subcapsular feeding arteries were visible in the arterial phase , which became intensified and hyper-attenuated in the portal phase . However, some regions of the tumor were not enhanced in the arterial and portal phases.
To further diagnose the patient’s condition, MRI was also performed. On T1-weighted MR images, the tumor appeared heterogeneous hypointense with a complete capsule . On T2-weighted MR images, diffusion-weighted imaging, and multiplanar reconstruction images, the tumor appeared heterogeneous hyperintense . Following an injection of Gd-DTPA, the tumor presented with heterogeneous enhancement and the subcapsular feeding arteries were also visible in the arterial phase . In the delayed phase, the tumor had more intense enhancement over a larger range than in the arterial phase, and the capsule was significantly enhanced .