This patient was a 71-year-old man with a history of grade 2 hypertension for 30 years, and he presented with dizziness for a week. As sudden urinary incontinence, weakness in right lower limb, and trouble speaking, he underwent an emergency non-enhanced head computed tomography (CT) examination. The CT examination showed a slightly low-density area in the left frontal lobe and the left temporal lobe, which raised a suspicion for acute infarctions. The following contrast-enhanced head CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examinations showed no infarction, but a 1.7 × 1.4 × 1.3 cm sellar occupied lesion with heterogeneous enhancement . The patient had normal levels of pituitary hormones. Physical examinations showed the mouth drawn to the left side, the right nasolabial fold blunting, and the deviation of the protruded tongue toward the right side, which indicated a right facial paralysis. The symptoms were effectively relieved after the patient underwent the drug treatment including aspirin and atorvastatin for secondary prevention of stroke and ginkgo biloba extract for symptomatic treatment. The patient subsequently underwent transsphenoidal resection of pituitary mass on October 22, 2019.
The greyish-white colour resected specimen was about 1.5 cm in diameter. Histologically, this tumour contained hypocellular and hypercellular areas that showed apparent geographical separation . The hypocellular area showed elongated spindle cells arranged in a fascicular pattern around small vessels and scattered Herring bodies. The spindle cell had blunted-ended to irregular nuclei with abundant, palely eosinophilic, fibrillary cytoplasm . The hypercellular area was characterised by pseudorosettes in which the tumour cells showed crowding, overlapping the nucleus with speckled nuclear chromatin . Mitoses were not seen in the tumour. Immunohistochemistrically, the tumour cells showed diffuse nuclear expression of TTF1 . S100 and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) expressed in the tumour cells and Herring bodies. Neurofilament (NF) was completely negative in the hypercellular area but had a little positive in the hypocellular area . Silver impregnation was only noted in a perivascular distribution . Ki-67 showed extremely low proliferative index in the tumour. The other markers were negative, including glial fibrillary acidic protein, Olig2, SOX10, CD68, adrenocorticotropic hormone, thyroid stimulating hormone, growth hormone, prolactin, luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, SF1, PIT1, TPIT, cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen, CD68, and Galectin-3, neither was periodic acid–Schiff. The final diagnosis was pituicytoma with a biphasic pattern and admixed with scattered Herring bodies. The patient made a good postoperative recovery and had no recurrence at 4 months of MRI follow-up.