A 45-year-old male patient gazed at the sun several times during a baseball game that took place on a sunny day at 7 weeks prior to his first visit to our clinic. Immediately after gazing at the sun, the subject reported having bilateral central scotoma and decreased vision. At the time of the incident, the patient was taking etizolam for a psychiatric condition (panic disorder). At the first visit, his decimal best corrected visual acuity was 0.8 (logMAR conversion: 0.10) (with -3.00 diopters, cylinder -1.00 diopters axis 5°) in the right eye and 0.7 (logMAR conversion: 0.15) (with -3.00 diopters, cylinder -1.00 diopters axis 180°) in the left eye. Slit lamp examinations showed no abnormalities in the anterior segments and media of both eyes. Fundus examinations showed a tiny, yellowish spot in the fovea bilaterally . FAF (Spectralis HRA; Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) , fluorescein angiography, and indocyanine green angiography all indicated that there were no remarkable abnormalities in either of the eyes. OCT (Cirrus HD-OCT; Carl Zeiss Meditec AG, Dublin, CA, USA) images showed an elevated and blurred ellipsoid zone along with loss of the interdigitation zone at the foveal area bilaterally . There was also no vitreomacular adhesion or traction seen in either of the eyes . When the findings were taken together, the patient was diagnosed with solar retinopathy due to the characteristic symptoms and bilateral findings present after an episode of sun gazing. Treatment was started at the first visit, with the patient given a posterior sub-Tenon triamcinolone injection in his right eye followed by being placed on oral prednisolone therapy (30 mg per day) on the same day. The prednisolone therapy was decreased over a 12-week tapering period. There were no changes noted in the decimal best corrected visual acuity at 2, 4, and 6 weeks after starting the medication. However, at 9 weeks, there was improvement to 1.2 in the right eye and 1.0 in the left eye, with this good visual acuity sustained and observed at the examinations at 12 and 21 weeks. Fundus examinations performed at 12 weeks after the initial treatment showed the tiny, yellowish spots were diminished in both eyes. Sequential OCT images obtained during the follow-up examinations showed that the blurred ellipsoid zone that was visible in both eyes at 2 weeks after initiation of the therapy along with the elevated ellipsoid zone both improved to nearly normal at 4 weeks in the right eye and at 21 weeks in the left eye. However, loss of the interdigitation zone was observed after 12 weeks in the right eye and after 21 weeks in the left eye .