A 31-year-old G3P2 female at 25 weeks of gestation presented with chest palpitations and light-headedness. Physical exam demonstrated tachycardia with borderline hypotension, without evidence of new murmurs on initial auscultation. Her medical history was notable for atrial tachycardia (AT) during two previous pregnancies managed with metoprolol and flecainide, though ultimately requiring induction of labour due to impending foetal compromise at 34 weeks. She underwent two failed catheter ablation procedures at outside institutions several months after delivery of her second child; however, the arrhythmia was not inducible during the first study, and the second was aborted prior to ablation due to haemopericardium requiring emergent pericardiocentesis. An implantable loop recorder (ILR) was placed at that time. The patient was reluctant to undergo another ablation and was treated with sotalol 40 mg twice a day by her primary cardiologist. During her third pregnancy, higher doses were not prescribed due to a low baseline blood pressure. This admission was prompted by chest palpitations and dizziness associated with an SVT at 160 beats per minute while on her home maintenance dose of sotalol.
Her blood work-up on index hospitalization did not demonstrate any electrolyte or thyroid abnormalities to potentially explain her arrhythmia exacerbation. Electrocardiogram revealed a narrow complex, long R to P wave interval tachycardia with ventricular rates of 162 bpm, and QTc 408 ms . Transthoracic echocardiogram showed grossly normal systolic ventricular function without any evidence of valvular pathology.
Intravenous boluses of metoprolol, adenosine, and diltiazem were administered without conversion to sinus rhythm; however, transient atrioventricular block was observed without affecting the atrial rate, consistent with the previous suspected diagnosis of AT. Sotalol was discontinued and she was switched to oral flecainide acetate and metoprolol tartrate, with the doses up titrated to 100 mg BID, respectively. Despite escalation of medical therapy, she continued to have multiple breakthrough episodes with concomitant palpitations, requiring diltiazem infusion at 10 mg/min. Her course was further complicated by worsening hypotension and risk of foetal bradycardia, requiring admission to the coronary care unit for vasopressor support with intravenous phenylephrine and foetal monitoring.
After coordinated discussions with electrophysiology and maternal foetal medicine, a decision was made to undergo a fluoroscopic-free catheter ablation with electroanatomic mapping to minimize radiation exposure. Due to the patient’s anxiety, the procedure required general anaesthesia and continuous peri-operative foetal heart rate monitoring was performed under the supervision of maternal foetal medicine. Despite aggressive stimulation with quadruple stimuli and isoproterenol infusion, the procedure was unsuccessful at inducing the culprit clinical AT. A right atrial flutter was reproducibly induced and successfully ablated.
Empiric isolation of the pulmonary veins (PVs) was considered, but not pursued for several reasons. The lack of inducibility precluded accurate mapping of the site of origin, with no well-defined endpoint for ablation. Empiric PV isolation would require at least 4 weeks of post-ablation oral anticoagulation which could cause more harm during pregnancy, particularly if the site of origin was outside the PVs. Unfortunately, the AT recurred 2 h after the procedure, and the decision was made to up-titrate pharmacological therapy, with a combination of sotalol 120 mg and flecainide 100 mg twice daily. This suppressed the arrhythmia, and she was monitored for an additional 72 h as an in-patient with an acceptable QTc of 487 ms and sinus rate , following which she was discharged. She returned to the emergency department 6 weeks later at 31 weeks’ gestation with another episode of symptomatic AT, shortly followed by a new onset of abruptio placentae, requiring an emergent, yet successful caesarean section.
Four days postpartum, she continued to have intermittent, non-sustained episodes of AT. The procedural bleeding risks and post-ablation anticoagulation were discussed with obstetrics who deemed her to be of acceptable risk for initiation of oral anticoagulation. She underwent a repeat fluoroscopy-free electrophysiology study and ablation under general anaesthesia. This time, burst pacing from the coronary sinus at 300–400 ms on isoproterenol induced the left AT which matched her clinical arrhythmia. Based on high density mapping with a PENTARAY® catheter (Biosense Webster Irvine, CA), triggered activity was found primarily in the left superior PV: however, was also present in the right superior and left inferior PVs. She therefore underwent isolation of all four PVs with non-inducibility of any arrhythmia post ablation with and without isoproterenol infusion . Twenty-four months post-ablation, she has been symptom free and has had no SVT on the ILR. Both she and the baby are healthy with no complications from either the pharmacotherapy or ablation procedures.