A 66-year-old man, without known systemic diseases, was referred to our department with a progressive decrease in visual acuity of his right eye (RE).

He had been assisted at our department more than 10 years before due to exudative bilateral maculopathy of unknown etiology. At that time, exuberant atrophic macular abnormalities had been recorded in both eyes, more pronounced in the LE. He had been submitted to full dose photodynamic therapy with verteporfin (PDT) and several anti-VEGF intravitreal injections. He underwent cataract surgery with intraocular lens implant. In the last registered visit, he presented a corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) of 20/32 on his RE and counting fingers on his LE.

The patient was lost to follow-up at our department for 10 years and he returned in December 2020 complaining of RE vision loss. The CDVA was 20/63 on the RE and counting fingers on the LE. On slit-lamp examination, no anterior chamber reaction was observed but a vitreous haze was present on the RE. Fundoscopy revealed bilateral large, yellowish lesions located in the macula, associated with significant atrophy, particularly in the LE. No changes were observed in peripheral retina.

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed a flat retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) detachment with hyper-reflective material under RPE, damage of external retinal layers, including external limiting membrane, ellipsoid zone and RPE, and cystoid macular edema on the RE. The LE showed a large area of macular atrophy, with subretinal fibrosis; both eyes exhibited an anomalous OCT pattern of the inner choroid with extensive loss of choriocapillaris. Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) showed central hypoautofluorescence secondary to RPE and photoreceptors loss.

The RE FA showed an early irregular pattern with significant late hyperfluorescence due to staining. On the LE, a large early hypofluorescent lesion involving all macular areas and extending to the temporal optic disc border, with well-defined edges and late internal hyperfluorescent areas, was defined. In the indocyanine green angiography (ICGA), an heterogenous pattern with anomalous dilated choroidal vessels could be observed.

The OCT angiography (OCTA) of the RE demonstrated an anomalous vascular network, suggestive of choroidal neovascularization.

Systemic work-up revealed a positive TPHA test and a negative VDRL. The patient confirmed a known past history of syphilis of more than 30 years eventually treated with oral antibiotics, when living in a sub-Saharan African country. Since then, the patient did not develop any other symptoms or signs suggestive of syphilis. No other significant changes were found on the systemic work-up, including evidence of other infectious or immune diseases.

With collaboration of the Infectious Diseases department, the patient was admitted in the hospital and started systemic treatment with intravenous Penicillin G for 14 days as well as intravitreal ranibizumab injections on the RE in a PRN regimen.

After systemic and intravitreal treatment, the patient experienced visual acuity improvement to 20/25, without metamorphopsia. There was a regression of the RPE detachment and cystoid macular edema, since the first month after systemic treatment.

A regular follow-up is maintained in order to evaluate the need for repeated intravitreal injections.