We report here a 6-year-old girl came to the outpatient department of Mogadishu Somali Turkey Hospital complaining of voice changes (deepening), extensive overweight, excessive hair growth over the body and clitoromegaly for one year. Initially, her mother was noticed that she had weight gain and her clitoris was more protruded than the normal until become elongated and enlarged associated with labial enlargement. Within one year, throughout the body, hair grew, especially chin and pubis, and bad smelling odor and revealed male characterization.

On examination, her height was 1.0 m, her weight was 60 kg, and her blood pressure was 190/150 mm Hg (refractory hypertension). She had cushingoid facies, signs of virilization in the form of pustular acne, hirsutism (axillary and facial hair), and clitoromegaly. She also had an unpleasant body odor. On palpation, she had a palpable mass on the right side of her abdomen. In laboratory investigations, elevation of Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-SO4) 419.03 µg/d (normal range 24.4–209.7 µg/d) indicating production of excess hormones related to adrenal tumors. Other hematological and biochemical parameters were normal.

As usual in pediatric cases, in the beginning, an abdominal ultrasound (US) was performed, showing a well-defined adrenal mass with a slightly heterogeneous mix of hyper- and hypoechoic consistency with smooth margins. For further investigation and lesion characterization, computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen has done, revealing that the right adrenal fossa well-defined a 6 cm sized mass lesion with heterogeneous contrast enhancement containing hypodense necrotic areas and slightly displaces right kidney inferiorly. To bring her blood pressure back into normal range, the child was admitted to the intensive care unit two days before the operation.

A diagnosis of an adrenocortical tumor was made. Correction of general condition was done. Details about the disease, plan of management, and risks were explained to the parents. After written consent and pre-anesthetic checkup, during the surgery, a Makuuchi incision was made to the patient’s abdomen. Next, the solid mass was excised by means of unilateral right adrenalectomy. Then, abdominal layers were repaired using a vicryl 1. And the mass was sent for histopathological study. Histopathological diagnosis was made using the Li-Weiss-Bisceglia criteria. The histological features of the current case are indicated. Microscopic examination revealed >75% oncocytic cells, diffuse architecture (>33% of tumor) and high nuclear grade. In addition, Ki-67 proliferation index was calculated as 15–20%. According to these findings, the case was diagnosed with oncocytic ACC. The patient was admitted, and appropriate post-operative care was given. And discharged after one week with good condition and oral medications were given. Corticosteroid drugs were started with a high dose and the dose was gradually reduced. And all the symptoms disappeared 6 months after the operation.