A 53-year old man presented to his local district general hospital with epigastric pain. Relevant past medical history includes type 2 diabetes mellitus, and a history of excessive alcohol consumption of 44 units/week.
The patient underwent an abdominal dual-phase contrasted computed tomography (CT) scan. In addition to background liver steatosis and right liver atrophy, a central mass was identified at the bifurcation of the right anterior and posterior portal vein. The lesion was enhanced during the arterial phase, and mild contrast washout at the portal venous phase, suggestive of possible hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) . The mass had increased in size as compared to previous imaging. Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) liver confirmed the same mass in the right lobe with peripheral biliary ductal dilatation. This then raised the possibility of a clinical diagnosis of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma .
Preoperative bilirubin was 15 μmol/L (normal range: 4–22 μmol/L), alkaline phosphatase was 110U/L (42–98U/L) and aspartate transaminase was 39 IU/L (6–34 IU/L). Alpha-Feto Protein (AFP) and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9) were 3.7kU/ml (<4kU/ml) and 7 (<33kU/L) respectively.
This patient was then referred to our tertiary hepato-pancreato-biliary centre for further management. Having discussed this case in our multi-disciplinary meeting, fluorodeoxyglucose—positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) CT scan was performed and excluded extrahepatic metastasis. No FDG uptake was demonstrated within the lesion as compared to the background liver parenchyma.
The patient was listed for surgical resection with curative intent. Right lobe hepatectomy and excision of the extrahepatic biliary tree with the reconstruction of a hepaticojejunostomy was performed. There were no postoperative complications. Patient made a good post-operative recovery and was subsequently discharged home. 68Ga-DOTA-conjugated peptide PET scan completed 4 weeks post-operation did not demonstrate any evidence of residual disease.
A 20 mm diameter friable, greyish and pale tumor occupied the lumen of the right hepatic duct and infiltrated into the surrounding liver and hilar adipose tissue. The background liver appeared yellowish with vague accentuation of the lobular architecture.
At light macroscopy , approximately half of the tumour mass formed an intraductal growth, with the rest of the tumour infiltrating into periductal fibrovascular tissue and local liver parenchyma. Both the intraductal and periductal infiltrative aspects were composed of large sheets of relatively monomorphic cells mixed with a rhabdoid or plasmacytoid appearance. Nuclei were generally round and regular and often showed a “salt-and-pepper” appearance with focally increased and dense chromatin. Immunohistochemistry in this cell population stained strongly and diffusely for synaptophysin (DAKO, M0776, 1:100) and chromogranin (DAKO, 1:100) . The proliferative rate estimated with immunohistochemical analysis for Ki67 (MIB-1, DAKO, M0701, 1:100) was up to 8 % and up to three mitotic figures were present in 50 HPF .
A minor component of the cell population (estimated to be around 30 %) showed a signet ring appearance with clarification of the cytoplasm suggestive of intracellular mucin , which stained weakly with alcian-blue-dPAS and showed focal acinar formation with intraluminal mucin secretion . With the limitation of single epitope immunohistochemistry on serial sections this cell population appeared to retain the expression of chromogranin and synaptophysin. This also showed cytoplasmic or membranous expression of MUC-1, (Abcam, Ab696-250, 1:100) predominantly in the deeper aspect of the tumour, but did not stain for MUC-2 (Novocastra, NCL MUC2, 1:100), MUC5 (Novocastra, NCL MUC5, 1:100) or MUC-6 (Novocastra, NCL MUC6, 1:100). There was weak and diffuse nuclear staining for CDX2 (Leica Bond RTU, PA0535) throughout the tumour. Staining for CA19.9 (Leica RTU, PA 0424) highlighted the superficial component of the intraductal growing tumor, in keeping with residual biliary epithelium . The background biliary epithelium did not reveal dysplasia or metaplastic changes. Hep-Par1 staining of tumour was negative .
The background liver showed steatohepatitis, mainly macrovesicular, affecting around 30 % of the hepatocytes associated with a mild bridging fibrosis.