A 74-year-old Caucasian woman (patient 1) with no significant medical history presented with constant rotational vertigo, progressive gait ataxia with a tendency to fall to the right side and vertical diplopia increasing in right gaze. All symptoms were characterized by subacute onset with moderate progression over 6 months. Her elder sister, a 76-year-old Caucasian woman (patient 2) likewise presented with a 6-year-history of rotational vertigo, continuous gait ataxia and marked vertical diplopia. Symptoms were reported to have presented subacutely at onset and had initially been misdiagnosed as brainstem infarction.
In both patients, neurological examination revealed remarkably similar symptoms including gaze-evoked nystagmus and a slight abduction deficit of the right eye as well as ataxia and dysmetria in the upper and lower extremities with right-sided predominance. Because of the pronounced gait ataxia of both patients, they depended on a wheeled walker. Upon motor, reflex and sensory examination, no relevant findings were elicited, in particular no signs of dysarthria, peripheral neuropathy, spasticity, areflexia, vegetative symptoms or fasciculations that could have pointed to one of the hereditary ataxias, such as SCA1, 2, 3 and 6. Neuropsychological assessment did not reveal any substantial cognitive or memory deficits. Cerebral MRI findings showed mild generalized atrophy and multiple white matter lesions in both patients . Except for glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) levels, which were expectably elevated due to the existing T1DM, all other routine laboratory examinations were within normal limits. Comprehensive workup with extended autoimmune laboratory examinations revealed remarkably high serum and CSF GAD-ab levels in both siblings . Other autoantibodies were negative, in particular antibodies against the NMDA, AMPA or GABA(B) receptor, LGI1, Caspr2, MAG, glycin receptor, or onconeuronal antibodies. Further CSF analysis showed slight pleocytosis in patient 1 and oligoclonal immunoglobulin bands in both patients.
In addition, the medical history of patient 1 revealed Hashimoto's thyroiditis with elevated serum antithyroid peroxidase antibody levels and recently diagnosed T1DM, whereas patient 2 exhibited a 7-year-history of Grave's disease with high levels of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins and a 6-year-history of insulin-dependent T1DM . Their family history revealed a 73-year-old brother suffering from rheumatism and another 75-year-old brother without relevant diseases.
The diagnosis of cerebellar ataxia with GAD-abs was established in both siblings based on the subacute onset, CSF inflammation in patient 1, the very high GAD-ab titers, the partial response to immunotherapy, the age at onset and the typical constellation of insulin-dependent diabetes. Because of these findings, no genetic testing was performed. Since the detection of GAD-abs can occasionally indicate a paraneoplastic etiology [, ], we undertook full-body computed tomography scans in both patients as well as whole-body and brain positron emission tomography in patient 1, all of which showed no pathological findings, suggesting the absence of any malignancy.
Plasma separation by immunoadsorption was used to eliminate pathogenic antibodies from the serum compartment by binding to the extracorporeal columns. For this, patient 1 received 5 cycles every other day which led to subtle improvement of gait ataxia. Extended treatment with a further 10 cycles of immunoadsorption eventually resulted in remarkable improvement of gait which allowed the patient to walk without her walking frame. In patient 2, 7 cycles of plasmapheresis were administered every other day and resulted in subjective improvement of gait disability, and a slightly diminished degree of gaze-evoked nystagmus was seen on follow-up examination. However, relevant impairment persisted so that immunosuppressive therapy was escalated in both women to 1,000 mg rituximab intravenously according to common practice . Both patients gave their written informed consent for data analysis and the publication of this case report.