A 75-year-old man was transferred to our emergency department for examination of abdominal pain and frequent vomiting. His medical history records reported hypertension, diabetes, mild dyslipidemia, and gastric cancer that was managed with a distal gastrectomy procedure 2 years prior to his admission to our hospital. Reconstruction by Billroth I anastomosis was performed on the stomach. The patient's vital signs were as follows: Glasgow Coma Scale score, E4V5M6; temperature, 36.6°C; blood pressure, 139/103 mmHg; heart rate, 108 b.p.m.; respiratory rate, 25 breaths/min; and oxygen saturation, 94%.
The physical examination revealed that his abdomen was flat and soft, with sensitivity in the midline but no recurrent pain. His symptoms included nausea, regurgitation, and hematemesis, while jaundice and pallor were not detected.
Complete blood count revealed the following: white blood cells, 14.4 × 109/L; hemoglobin, 193 g/L; and platelets, 161 × 109/L. The serum laboratory tests were all within the normal range except: total amylase, 1,363 IU/L; blood urea nitrogen, 44.9 mg/dL; creatinine, 2.25 mg/dL; glucose, 453 mg/dL; hemoglobin A1c, 7.6%; and C-reactive protein, 3.13 mg/dL. Total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, triglycerides, and total bilirubin levels were also normal.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) indicated enlarged pancreas with fluid retention and a bezoar with air component in the duodenum, with the absence of stones in the gallbladder and common bile duct . Following the physical inspection, we undertook esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) to identify the cause of frequent vomiting, hematemesis, and duodenal obstruction. We detected only mild bleeding caused by reflux esophagitis and a bezoar that had obstructed the duodenum.
The patient's consumption of alcohol was low with no evidence of trauma, infections, or medications. Therefore, we concluded that the bezoar was the main cause of acute pancreatitis.
In the absence of elevated bilirubin levels, we decided to follow a conservative treatment strategy, assuming that the common bile duct was impartially obstructed. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) where intravenous fluids were administered, and his urine output was monitored. It was difficult to maintain urine output, and he was started on ventilatory management because he developed respiratory failure on day 3 of hospitalization. The patient had gone into shock, which persisted. Vasopressors were administered. Antimicrobials were started because bilirubin levels were elevated, which can result in complications like acute cholangitis. Despite supportive care, his symptoms did not improve, and bilirubin levels continued to increase. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT carried out on day 3 revealed the presence of residual duodenal bezoar and obstruction of the common bile duct . He had been admitted with acute pancreatitis due to papillary obstruction, but the bilirubin level was speculated to have risen over time. We reconsidered the papillary obstruction as the cause of the acute pancreatitis. We decided to remove the bezoar and open papillae. He presented with coagulopathy and poor clinical condition, and surgery was considered an unsafe treatment option. Therefore, we attempted to dissect the bezoar by undertaking EGD; forceps were used to crush the bezoar and attempt maximum removal. However, the bezoar was large and hard, and could not be removed in a single EGD. The procedure was repeated three times, on days 6, 7, and 9, to dissect and remove the bezoars . In a previous case, duodenal diverticulum had been noted as a cause of the bezoar, but no diverticulum was found in this case. Duodenal papillae unclogged and the bilirubin levels declined. Chemical analysis of the stone revealed that the bezoars mainly consisted of calcium oxalate (>98%).
Following the bezoars' removal, the patient's clinical condition gradually improved, and he was extubated on day 7. On day 8 the patient left the ICU and on day 31 he was discharged from the hospital with no complications. A 6-month follow-up revealed no recurrence of the symptoms.