A 32-year-old woman was admitted to the ward with a two-month history of headaches, occasionally accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and vertigo. She had a chronic daily headache, starting in the morning and becoming worse in the upright position. The headaches manifested as a dull ache with moderate to severe intensity, which was constant during the day in the frontal and occipital regions bilaterally. Her headache got better when lying down. She also had a negative history of lumbar puncture, trauma, or manipulation. There was no fever, chills, dizziness, unsteady gait, blurred vision, diplopia, or photophobia. In her past medical history, previous headaches, Ehlers-Danlos, Marfan syndrome, polycystic kidney disease, and spontaneous retinal detachment were not detected; all these conditions are related to intra-cranial hypotension. In drug history, the use of oral contraceptive pills was positive, but she did not use any other drugs. On physical examination, her vital signs were normal, with blood pressure: 12080, pulse rate: 88/minutes, respiratory rate: 16/minutes, temperature: 37.2ºC orally. General physical examination indicated that the head, neck, abdomen, extremities, and skin were normal. In addition, in neurological examination, the patient was awake, obeyed requests, and was oriented to time, place, and person. Her speech was fluent, and all cranial nerves were intact. An ophthalmologic exam showed normal eye movement and reactive pupils, and normal fundoscopic exam was detected. In the motor system, there was no atrophy, and the muscle power was 5/5. The plantar reflex was bilaterally downward and deep tendon reflexes were all 2/2. Sensory and cerebellar tests were normal, and meningeal signs were absent. She had no family history of these diseases, nor any past history of any other diseases. She was a teacher and did not have any psychiatric disorders. The patient had normal complete blood count (CBC). Brain computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) were normal. Brain MRI, with and without gadolinium, was performed; the MRI without gadolinium was completely normal, but in the MRI with gadolinium, meningeal enhancement was clearly seen ( and ).
A lumbar puncture was conducted, revealing an opening pressure of 2 - 3 cm H2O with no leukocytes or erythrocytes, and with normal protein and glucose levels and regular lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) . The lumbar puncture clearly worsened her positional headache. Her CT myelography from the cerebrum end to the spine revealed a normal condition, without any leakage of CSF or abnormality. Therefore, we tried to increase the intracranial pressure (ICP) of the patient with hydration, using dextrose water serum and a high caffeine diet, including drinking tea, and reducing daily activity. After two days, a significant improvement was seen in her headache.