It is a male product of gestation 1, mother 27 years old, pregnancy of 32 weeks of gestation with adequate prenatal control, obtained by urgent cesarean section for placental detachment; he did not breathe or cry at birth, so resuscitation was initiated with adequate recovery to the orotracheal intubation. Birth weight 1,225 kg, height 42 cm. After birth, a globose upper abdomen was observed, so an orogastric probe was placed with presence of biliary flow and an abdominal radiography was requested which presented an image of a “double bubble” and absence of distal air. The patient was sent to our hospital unit at 25 days of life for surgical management due to suspicion of AD.

Therapeutics

Upon admission, abdominal ultrasound showed evidence of duodenal atresia and an echocardiogram showed no evidence of congenital heart disease. Finally, the patient was operated on at 33 days of life. A laparotomy was performed to examine the patient and AD was found in the third portion, with a very dilated proximal end and the presence of pancreatic tissue surrounding the second duodenal portion.

Subsequently, the jejunal distal end was located, which corresponded to intestinal atresia type IIIb of approximately 50 cm, which was surrounded by the ileocolic artery in a helical form until it arrived at the ileocecal valve; Meckel's diverticulum was found 16 cm from the ileocecal valve. The distal end was incised and a Nelaton probe was introduced to corroborate permeability; an atresic segment was found at the first cm, which was resected. Subsequently, saline was infused with a 10 cc syringe and the permeability of the rest of the intestine was corroborated; the end was closed with a continuous suture and Lembert points with PDS 5-0. Intestinal malrotation was found, so Ladd's bands were lysed, invaginating appendicectomy and cecal positioning in the left hypochondrium were performed. Subsequently, a duodenal-jejunal anastomosis was performed laterally with PDS 5-0 prior to the second duodenal portion and stenosis was avoided by the annular pancreas; a transanastomatic naso-jejunal probe 12 Fr and peritoneal drainage were placed and the abdominal closure was performed without the need for bypass or intestinal resection.

The patient remained in fasting with total parenteral nutrition for eight days and was administered extensively hydrolysed formula through a naso-jejunal tube, which was removed on the tenth day post-surgery with adequate tolerance to gradual increases until tolerating its total capacity. The control radiographs showed adequate distal air distribution compatible with favorable evolution. There was no need for re-surgical intervention and the patient was discharged to his home at 55 days of life. Currently, the patient is almost one year old and presents adequate growth and development, with no post-surgical complications to date.
