A 60-year-old woman was admitted with a mixed GGO in the upper lobe of her left lung that had been found a year earlier . Pre-operative enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) showed that the diameter of the GGO was 8 mm and also depicted the right aortic arch with right descending aorta and absence of the left pulmonary artery . The internal thoracic artery extended to the left lung , which meant that the left lung had a multifocal blood supply. The right lung showed compensatory inflation, and the volume of the left lung was reduced. The mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes were of normal size. Pulmonary function testing revealed increased respiratory resistance, with a forced expiratory volume in 1 s of 1.67 L (71.4%), a peak expiratory flow of 4.83 L/s (79.7%), and a maximum expiratory flow at 75% of forced vital capacity of 3.28 L/s (61.3%). The patient reported no symptoms of hypoxia.
We performed pulmonary ventilation imaging and perfusion imaging. Pulmonary ventilation imaging showed reduced ventilation function in the upper lobe, the dorsal segment of the lower lobe, and the anterior inner basal segment of the left lung and in part of the apicoposterior segment of the right upper lobe. Pulmonary perfusion imaging showed no developing in the left lung.
We then performed three-dimensional reconstruction of the bronchi, lungs, pulmonary vasculature, and mixed GGO. The reconstruction revealed that the aortic arch traversed over the right primary bronchus and that the left pulmonary artery was absent . The mixed GGO was in the apicoposterior segment of the left lung .
During video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery, we observed pleural adhesion in the left side of the thorax and decreased compliance in the left lung. According to the three-dimensional reconstruction, the nodule was in the apicoposterior segment of the left lung, and wedge resection was performed to obtain the specimen for intra-operating pathological diagnosis. The specimen was fast-frozen, and pathological study revealed that it was adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS). On the basis of this pathological diagnosis, wedge resection was recommended. The final pathological examination revealed that the nodule was well-differentiated lung adenocarcinoma . The para-carcinoma tissue showed that there existed the dense tissue , which cause the decreased compliance in the left lung. Immunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor area was positive for c-MET, ROS1, P53, CD10, and CD31 .
Although the pathological diagnosis was upgraded in this patient, wedge resection was adequate because of the GGO component, and a favorable outcome was expected. Chest CT performed a week after the operation revealed no hemorrhage or pneumothorax . The patient was discharged on postoperative day 7 and instructed to attend a follow-up check a month after discharge. To prevent relapse, regular follow-up was recommended.