An 83-year-old man was brought to our emergency room with 10-day history of fever, severe headache, and difficulty in moving. MRI revealed a brain abscess, which was treated by abscess drainage and systemic antibiotic treatment. Although the patient had no symptoms, a CT performed to determine the cause of the brain abscess revealed thickening of the wall of the esophagus , and the patient was referred to our department.
Barium swallow revealed a tumor measuring 6 cm in length with an abnormal ulcer mound in the middle thoracic esophagus; endoscopy revealed a Type 2 tumor . Histopathological examination of biopsy specimens revealed the squamous cell carcinoma. Abdominal and chest CT revealed wall thickening in the middle thoracic esophagus without invasion of the adjacent mediastinal organs or mediastinal lymph node metastasis. In addition, CT revealed an azygos lobe in the right thoracic cavity . We planned the esophagectomy for the esophageal cancer after control of the brain abscess. Although intrathoracic adhesions were anticipated on account of a previous history of bacterial pyothorax 14 years ago, we decided to perform esophagectomy via a thoracoscopic approach without any preoperative treatment because of his advanced age. After consulting with the respiratory surgeons, we planned to resect the abnormal azygos vein during esophagectomy.
The patient was placed in the prone position. Due to the adhesions in the thoracic cavity as expected, insertion of the trocars required some ingenuity. We performed dissection of adhesions using a 10-mm flexible scope and obtained an adequate field of view. Trocars were inserted as needed while performing dissection of adhesion, and we finally inserted the four trocars into the right thoracic cavity: three 12-mm trocars into the fifth intercostal space on the posterior axillary line, seventh intercostal space at the midpoint between the inferior scapular angle line and the posterior axillary line, and ninth intercostal space on the level of the inferior scapular angle, and a 5-mm trocar into the sixth intercostal space on the mid-axillary line. Although we usually insert a trocar into the third intercostal space on the mid-axillary line, we could not insert it due to adhesion of upper lobe of the of right lung. Therefore, we performed all surgical procedures via the four trocars. Then, we continued the dissection of remaining adhesion in the thoracic cavity. The middle and lower mediastinum was manipulated first because of the strong adhesions around the esophagus in the middle and lower mediastinum and the tumor's extensive contact with the left main bronchus on preoperative CT . Fortunately, the adhesions were detached without any damage, and the esophagus could be dissected from surrounding organs. Adhesions around the upper esophagus were not severe and fortunately found the azygos lobe easier than expected, and the azygos vein was supported by the mesentery draining into the superior vena cava . It might interfere with forceps operation and the surgical field or pose a risk of injury during esophagectomy, after dividing the mesentery, we clipped and cut the vessel with a vessel-sealing system, and both ends were ligated using the endloop™ . After that, we performed McKeown esophagectomy with dissection for three field lymph nodes including around bilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve, as previously described . The operation time for the thoracic part was 325 min, and the blood loss during the thoracic part of the surgery amounted to 29 ml. The postoperative course was uneventful and physical functions that were impaired by the brain abscess recovered well. The patient was discharged on the 21st postoperative day. Histopathological examination of the resected specimen confirmed the diagnosis of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, and the lesion was classified as pT3, pN0, M0, pStageIIB (UICC 8th).