A 45-year-old Khas male from Kathmandu, Nepal, office-worker by profession, presented to us with complaints of generalized aches and pains all over the body for one week and chest pain for two days. The chest pain was localized to the right lower region, gradual in onset and sharp stabbing in character which was aggravated on deep inspiration. He also complained of dry cough associated with shortness of breath for two days which was increased on exertion. He had no history of fever, rhinorrhea or sore throat or similar history in his family members or colleagues. He had a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension for five years. He had no prior history of surgery or trauma. He had been diagnosed as a case of bilateral serous otitis media 20 days prior to this presentation for which bilateral grommet insertion was done at another hospital. However, he had no history of recurrent sinusitis, nasal deformity, hemoptysis, mononeuritis, frothy or bloody urine, skin rash, red eyes, joint pain, Raynaud’s phenomenon, alopecia, photosensitivity, oral or genital ulcers. His current medications included metformin-glimepiride (1gm/2 mg) twice daily, amlodipine-losartan (5/50) once daily and atorvastatin 10 mg once daily. He was a social drinker and non-smoker. He had no significant illness in the family. Physical examination showed tachycardia at 120 bpm, Blood pressure 130/90 mm Hg and respiratory rate 20 per minute with oxygen saturation 90% on room air. Head, ears, eyes, nose and throat (HEENT) examination was unremarkable. Chest examination revealed decreased breath sounds in right infra-scapular and infra-axillary regions. Cardiovascular examination revealed a pericardial friction rub with normal heart sounds. The abdominal, musculoskeletal, nervous system and skin examinations were unremarkable.
His initial laboratory investigations showed mild anemia with neutrophilic leukocytosis . His nasal swabs for COVID-19 and influenza were negative. Chest radiography showed elevated right hemidiaphragm with blunting of bilateral costophrenic angles . Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated minimal pericardial effusion with normal left ventricle and right ventricle systolic function. The patient was admitted with the working diagnosis of right sided pleuritis with pericarditis. The patient was managed with supportive measures along with empirical antibiotics in the line of pleuro-pericarditis. Further investigations were done including ultrasound of the chest which showed significantly reduced diaphragmatic excursion on the right side. Computed tomography (CT) chest showed a well-defined nodule in left upper lobe with bilateral pleural and pericardial effusion . Pulmonary function test (PFT) was done which showed significantly improved forced vital capacity in sitting position in comparison to supine position . Because of multisystem involvement in the form of bilateral otitis media, phrenic nerve palsy, pleuropericarditis, pulmonary nodule, neutrophilic leukocytosis, raised inflammatory markers, a strong suspicion for GPA was made. Anti proteinase-3(PR-3) was sent which came back strongly positive . A final diagnosis of GPA was made and the patient was started on intravenous methylprednisolone pulse of one gram daily for three days. He was also given the first dose of intravenous rituximab at 375 mg/m2 which was planned for a total of 4 weeks with prednisolone 60 mg. With the above treatment, his symptoms and laboratory markers started improving. He was discharged after seven days with the final diagnosis of GPA. Till the writing of this report, he had already completed 4 doses of rituximab and he had no further episodes of cough, chest pain, shortness of breath and body ache. His laboratory parameters including C-reactive protein (CRP) had normalized. However, his repeat chest X-ray showed persistent elevation of the right hemidiaphragm.