An eight-year-old boy referred to our clinic manifested with pain along with swelling in mandibular incisors for the past one month, especially the past week. No relevant medical, family or psychosocial history was reported. There was no abnormality on extraoral examination. An abnormal coronal anatomy of the bilateral mandibular central incisors was found on intraoral examination. The conical crown had a deep depression with a talon cusp on the conical crown, and caries or restorations were not found in the teeth. There was a giant abscess on the labial gingiva of the left mandibular central incisor, which exhibited pain on vertical percussion and degree II tooth mobility. Concurrently, there was a fistula on the distal and lingual gum of the right mandibular central incisor, which exhibited slightly pain on vertical percussion and degree-I tooth mobility .
Radiographic examination showed periapical radiolucency exhibiting a scantly defined border, as well as an invagination which had a central invaginated canal extending from the pulp chamber throughout the apical foramen in the mandibular central incisors . This type of anatomy was consistent with a DI Odhlers type IIIb. Although there was no response on the electric pulp vitality test, there were doubts about the dependability of this result due to immature development of the root with an open apex. We performed a CBCT (cone‑beam computed tomography) scan as a complementary examination to acquire more comprehensive anatomic information and an accurate diagnosis. The CBCT images exhibited an invagination of the bilateral mandibular central incisors extending from the crown throughout to the root canal apex; however there was no communication with the main root canal. The apical foramen was incomplete and had a large area of periapical radiolucency of approximately 5.2 × 7.8 mm in the left mandibular central incisor and approximately 4.1 × 6.4 mm in the right mandibular central incisor .
We diagnosed the case as DI with chronic apical periodontitis. Extraction and orthodontic intervention are important because of the complex root involvement and the uncertain prognosis of conservative therapy. Nevertheless, the patient’s parents hoped to retain the natural teeth. Endodontic therapy was selected as the preferred treatment plan.
According to the radiographic examination, we found that there was no communication between the invagination and the main root canal. It was postulated that the pain and infection were caused by infection in the invagination, while the main root canal pulp remained vital. Under rubber dam isolation and a dental surgical microscope (Leica M330; Leica microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany), conservative endodontic access into the invagination was made using a small round bur, while the main root canal pulp was not exposed. The orifice of the invagination was confirmed with an endodontic explorer and 15# K-file. No penetration was observed between the invaginated canal and the main root canal. At the same time, the periapical tissues discharged a bloody and purulent exudate. Stainless-steel hand K-files along with nickel-titanium rotary instruments were employed to instrument the invaginated canal; however, with caution not to surpass the length of the canal. In the process, the invagination was irrigated thoroughly with 1.5% sodium hypochlorite solution (NaOCl) and 0.9% saline solution. Moreover, a sonic-activated device was employed to attain a more effective debridement. It was necessary to irrigate the invagination thoroughly due to the complex canal structure. Paper points were employed to dry the invaginated canal, followed by application of paste of calcium hydroxide, and then temporary filling material (Caviton; GC Co., Tokyo, Japan) was employed to seal the access cavity.
During the second appointment after 2 weeks, the patient felt well, and the fistula on the distal and lingual gum of the right mandibular central incisor had disappeared. The giant abscess on the labial gingiva of the left mandibular central incisor was relieved but not healed. Abundant irrigation using 17% ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) solution was employed to remove the intracanal dressing of the invagination along with the smear layer. Subsequently, copious 1.5% NaOCl and saline with the sonic-activated device were applied. After that, paper points were employed to dry the invaginated canal, which was then obturated with the Vitapex (Neo dental co., Tokyo, Japan). Then we took the radiographic imaging of the teeth to confirm the position of the Vitapex , and GIC (glass ionomer cement) (GlasIonomer FX-II; Shofu Inc, Kyoto, Japan) was used to seal the access cavity.
At the third appointment after 1 month, the patient felt well, and the right mandibular central incisor had no clinical signs or symptoms. There was still an abscess on the labial gingiva of the left mandibular central incisor, although it was smaller. For the right mandibular central incisor, Vitapex was obturated in the invagination canal to induce root development, and then used GIC and composite resin (Z350; 3M ESPE, St Paul, MN, USA) to seal the access cavity. For the left mandibular central incisor, it was identified that main root canal pulp was infected, and treatment was required. Under local anesthesia utilizing articaine with 1:10,000 epinephrine, small round bur was employed to prepare an endodontic access to the main root canal, and the pulp was found to be necrotic. A stainless-steel hand K-files was employed to simply instrument the main root canal and was irrigated abundantly with 1.5% NaOCl and 0.9% saline solution with a sonic-activated device to obtain more effective chemical debridement. Paper points were used to dry the main root canal, followed by application of calcium hydroxide paste via syringe, and the access cavity was sealed with GIC. At the same time, we replaced the dressing in the invagination with Vitapex .
At the fourth appointment after three weeks, there were no clinical signs or symptoms of the left mandibular central incisor. 2% mepivacaine hydrochloride (no epinephrine) was used to perform local anesthesia, followed by reaccession of the main root canal. Next, 0.9% saline along with a sonic-activated device were utilized to remove the calcium hydroxide paste. Gentle irrigation of the canal with 17% EDTA solution (20 mL) was performed and followed by drying using paper points. The canal was over-instrumented with a precurved K-file extending 2 mm past the apical foramen, to induce bleeding. The instrument was extended 3–4 mm below the CEJ (cementoenamel junction) to allow formation of a bold clot. We placed an iRoot BP Plus (Innovative BioCeramix, Vancouver, BC, Canada) on top of the blood clot. At the same time, iRoot SP (Innovative BioCeramix) and warm gutta-percha obturation replaced the Vitapex in the invaginated root canal. Then, the tooth was sealed with GIC and was restored using a composite resin. A radiographic image verified the position of the iRoot BP Plus .
Eighteen months later, there were no clinical signs or symptoms of the mandibular central incisors. According to the radiographic image, the open apex was closed, and the root continued to develop. Therefore, iRoot SP and warm gutta-percha obturation replaced the Vitapex in the invaginated root canal of the right mandibular central incisor, and then the tooth was finally restored with composite resin .