Due to aggravated cough and expectoration with fever, chest tightness and shortness of breath, a 64-year-old female was admitted to our hospital four days ago. She had been diagnosed with xerostomia and xerophthalmia over 20 years.
Emission Computed Tomography (ECT) examination revealed decreased functions of bilateral parotid and submandibular glands. A chest CT three years ago showed scattered, various-sized and roundish radiolucencies, striped or hazy opacities in both lungs and multiple small nodules in the right lung . Another chest CT one year later revealed new patchy opacities in the right lung and lingual lobe, scattered various-sized and roundish radiolucencies, multiple small nodules in the right lung which were similar to those in the previous CT image; the striped or hazy opacities seen previously were still visible in both lungs .
The patient was admitted to our hospital one year and 4 months later due to recurrent cough, expectoration and low fever. The chest CT revealed multiple cysts with multiple patchy and nodular opacities in both lungs . Results of antinuclear antibody profiles and vasculitis series were: SSA (RO-52) positive (+), SSA antibody positive (+), ESR 87 mm/hr, immunoglobulins: IgA 4.29 g/L, IgG 20.3 g/L and IgM 0.68 g/L. Blood gas analysis: pH 7.39, pCO2 39.5 mmHg, pO2 68.4 mmHg and SaO2 93.1%. Pathological report on (right lung biopsy): Chronic inflammation of lung tissue with diffuse distribution of lymphocytes in focal areas . Diagnosis: lymphoma could not be excluded. Preliminary clinical diagnosis: (1) Sjogren's syndrome, lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia first consideration; (2) malignant lymphoma to be excluded; (3) pulmonary infection. The patient received anti-inflammatory treatment and was discharged after symptoms were improved.
After discharge, the patient continued to experience constant cough, expectoration and fever even after repeated anti-inflammatory treatments. A left lung biopsy was performed 4 months later during her inpatient treatment in another hospital. The pathological report indicated chronic suppurative inflammation with massive necrosis and cellulitis.
The patient’s chest enhancement CT after this admission displayed obviously more patchy and nodular foci in both lungs compared to previous CT images. Some of the lesions were surrounded with ground glass shadows . The diagnosis was: malignant tumor to be excluded. Auxiliary routine blood examinations showed white blood cell count 21.8 × 109/L and absolute neutrophil count 21.14 × 109/L.
Pathological results from our hospital (right lung biopsy) and another hospital showed small areas of proliferating inflammatory fibrous tissue and small numbers of heterotypic cells within the necrotic tissue. Malignancy could not be excluded.
Immunohistochemistry showed: CD20 (+) , Ki-67 (high-value-added activity), BCL-6 (+), CD21 (+). Based on history and pathological results, the final diagnosis was Sjogren's syndrome, malignant transformation of LIP into diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Subsequently, chemotherapy with a reduced-dose regimen of rituximab and Chop (R-miniCHOP) was administered eight times. Following treatment, PET/CT showed complete remission of lymphoma, but the patient was at high risk of recurrence and is under active follow-up.