A 45-year-old German Caucasian woman was transferred to our department of general surgery with a suspected esophageal perforation after endoscopic recovery of a pearl onion which was impacted in the middle third of the esophagus. After recovery of the pearl onion, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed slightly bleeding mucosa at the site of impaction as well as an impassable stenosis. Her medical history, included relapsing periods of dysphagia since her childhood that were never examined by endoscopy or gastrografin swallow. At admission, she presented in a stable condition with normal laboratory findings. Clinical investigation revealed no abnormalities other than retrosternal pain as well as emphysema of the skin. Chest and abdominal radiography showed free intra-abdominal air as well as a pneumomediastinum. A gastrografin swallow was performed revealing leakage at the distal esophagus and pneumoperitoneum . Explorative laparotomy and direct closure with hemifundoplication were performed and the mediastinum was drained.
Because of pathological drainage continuing on the tenth postoperative day as well as increasing white cell counts, we performed a gastrografin swallow that revealed mucosal irregularities and a double-barreled esophagus . Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy identified an esophageal intramural dissection with complete obstruction of the true lumen at 35 cm, as well as mucosal bridges .
These findings left us without any feasible conservative management options. The presence of mediastinitis due to a suspected transmural perforation prompted us to perform a transhiatal esophagectomy with cervical esophagostoma and blind closure of the stomach.
The pathology report showed the true esophageal lumen and a transmural perforation as well as a second lumen that was focally covered by a flat squamous epithelium with multiple ulcerations within the submucosal layer . The postoperative course was uneventful and 3 months after esophagectomy, a reconstruction with a cervical esophagogastric anastomosis was performed and the patient was discharged on the 12th postoperative day after an uneventful course.