A 23-year-old male sedentary worker sustained road traffic accident 1 year back, fall on outstretched hand, while he was driving two-wheeler. Immediately, he noticed inability to adduct the arm, bony mass below the collar bone. He was taken to nearby local hospital manipulated to reduce dislocation. He was immobilized in adducted position. He was asymptomatic till last 2 months when he experienced one more episode of dislocation which he reduced himself, following which seven episode of dislocation following daily routine activities each reduced by patient himself. Pain aggravated in last few days which made him to visit our hospital. On examination, coracoid tenderness present, Neer apprehension test positive, load and shift test positive, anterior draw test was grade 2, with no hyperlaxity. Routine radiographs revealed coracoid fracture. Computed tomography was done to assess glenoid bone loss and avulsion fracture of coracoid . Coracoid fracture belongs to Ogava et al., type II, magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the same . Labrum was deficient anteriorly and there was no associated rotator cuff tear.
After a discussion with patient, open Laterjet procedure using fractured coracoid process in beach chair position under general anesthesia was decided. An incision of 5 cm made over apparent coracoid made standard deltopectoral approach performed. Clavipectoral fascia incised. Fractured coracoid process identified with its partial coracoacromial ligament and pectoralis minor attachment which was separated. Fractured fragment with conjoint tendon attachment separated from underlying structures . Graft was prepared of size length of 2 cm width of 0.8 mm with good amount of cancellous bed. Two drill holes were made over graft centimeter apart using 3.2 mm drill bit with special graft holding device. Graft recipient site was approached using upper two-third and lower one-third subscapular split and shoulder capsule incised vertically. Humeral head retracted using fakuda retractor. After adequate exposure and preparation of recipient site offset jig used to place graft parallel to glenoid anterior surface. Bi-cortical drilling performed over glenoid for adequate purchase of screws. After confirming the offset of graft two cannulated cancellous titanium screws of size 36 mm were inserted . Adequate stability of graft and tenodesis effect of lowed third subscapularis confirmed. To provide triple tenodesis effect, lateral leaf of capsule was sutured over glenoid lateral surface with double loaded 3.5 mm metal suture anchor as adequate amount of coracohumeral ligament was not present with fractured coracoid process.
Post-operative rehabilitation includes shoulder immobilizer with chest binder to maintain arm in adducted position. Active elbow wrist exercises, Codman pendular exercises for 2 weeks, following suture removal isometric rotation exercises and shoulder range of motion exercises, were advised as permitted by pain. The patient called for follow-up at 6-week, 4-month, and 6 months for assessment of pain, range . At three and 6 month follow-up, CT scan was performed to assess union of graft and allowed to return to sport activity .