A 76-year-old male complained with shortness of breath, systemic edema for one month. He had been diagnosed as “multiple peripheral neuropathy” in several hospitals due to progressive numbness, pain and weakness of limbs, sweating, constipation and unexplained weight loss for 7 years. He had a history of hypertension for 13 years, but his blood pressure is normal without therapy in the recent two years. The patient had no history of diabetes, smoking, alcohol over consumption in the past. His father had a history of limb numbness and systemic edema. The patient had no other family history of genetic diseases.

On physical examination, malnourished, anemic, lethargic, limb muscle weakness, decreased muscle tone, weakened tendon reflex, sacroiliac decubital necrosis and severe edema.

Laboratory tests revealed myocardial damage with persistent elevation of hs-TnI and NT-proBNP, neutrophilic leukocytosis, moderate anemia with decrease in erythrocytes and hematocrit, mild hypoxemia. Furthermore, other abnormal parameters are listed in Table 1. Chest X-ray showed bilateral pulmonary inflammation with pleural effusion. Electrocardiogram (ECG) indicated low QRS voltage of limb leads, abnormal Q wave of II, III and aVF, and poor increase of V1-V6 R wave. Echocardiography revealed cardiac hypertrophy, left ventricular diastolic dysfunction (grade II) and small amount of pericardial effusion. There was discordance between the low QRS voltage and left ventricular hypertrophy, which may be a vital clue to the diagnosis of cardiac amyloidosis (CA). The speckle tracking imaging showed reduced global longitudinal strain (GLS) with apical sparing and with an apical-to-basal strain ratio 2.7 and the ejection fraction (EF) to GLS ratio (EFSR) was 4.4, which were consistent with the ultrasonic characteristics of CA. A thorough diagnostic approach was followed, in order to detect the underlying pathological condition. Several computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest showed diffuse pulmonary interstitial changes, cystic changes and shadows of lung consolidation, gradually increased shadow of small calcification on the lung surface at the bottom of both lungs, which were typical manifestations of pulmonary amyloid deposition. Whether there is pulmonary inflammation and infection needs to be determined in combination with blood cell examination and C-reactive protein level. The CMR and nuclear medicine modalities (PYP) were not performed because of his critical condition.

For the differential diagnosis between hereditary transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis and AL amyloidosis, this patient had three serum-free light chain assays and immunofixation electrophoresis. The first results were that Fκ and Fλ were 3.05 g/L (normal range: 3.3~19.4mg/L) and 1.37g/L (normal range: 5.7 ~ 26.3 mg/L), respectively. The second result was that elevated free light chain κ (90.9 mg/L, normal range: 3.3~19.4mg/L)) and free light chain λ (62.2 mg/L, normal range: 5.7 ~ 26.3 mg/L), and Fκ/Fλ ratio was 1.46 (normal range: 0.26~1.65). The third results were elevated free light chain κ (124.78 mg/L, normal range: 3.3~19.4mg/L) and free light chain λ (74.10mg/L, normal range: 5.7 ~ 26.3 mg/L), and Fκ/Fλ ratio was 1.68 (normal range: 0.26~1.65). Serum immunofixation electrophoresis was negative for the patient, and serum-free light chain Fκ/Fλ ratio is normal or close to normal (0.26–1.65), so AL amyloidosis can be excluded.1

Abdominal subcutaneous fat biopsy was negative, and no other tissue biopsy was done because of his critical condition. Although the patient is an elderly male, we did not consider the patient as senile wild-type amyloid transthyretin (wtATTR) amyloidosis and insisted on TTR genetic sequencing because the latter generally does not cause progressive polyneuropathy and autonomic dysfunction. A missense mutation c. 148 G-A (p. V50M, Val30Met) was detected in TTR genetic sequencing. It is the pathological mutation site of patients with hereditary amyloid transthyretin (hATTR) amyloidosis.

The genetic finding confirmed late-onset transthyretin Val30Met-associated hereditary amyloid transthyretin (hATTR) amyloidosis, familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) and cardiac amyloidosis (CA) for the patient. Recently, the patient’s first son developed limb numbness and found the same TTR gene abnormality.

The patient had received doxycycline + ursodeoxycholic acid, tafamidis (chlorobenzoic acid, a stable TTR tetramer). The patient had intractable intestinal obstruction on 7 days after treatment, and had to stop taking the medicine. After 80 days of treatment, the patient tragically died of cardiac involvement. We did not perform a biopsy of the heart and lung on autopsy to confirm ATTR amyloidosis deposits because the patient’s son refused.