The patient was an 18-year-old female with Chronic Renal Disease (CRD) on haemodialysis due to probable renal dysplasia, with a history of developmental delay due to hydrocephalus (presenting ventriculoperitoneal shunts). Preoperative and admission chest X-rays were normal. No PPD or IGRA tests were performed as they were not part of the current pre-transplant routine. The recipient did not have a medical history suggestive of tuberculosis.

She received a kidney transplant from a deceased donor on 10/07/18. The donor was a standard criteria one: 17-year-old male, whose cause of death was suicide (hanging). His creatinine level was 1.55 mg/dL. He was induced with thymoglobulin (panel of antibody reactivity, 29%) and maintained with tacrolimus (0.1 mg/kg), mycophenolate sodium, and prednisone. At the time of donation, there was no report of pulmonary disease and no chest radiographs were performed. The donor did not have a history that suggested the diagnosis of prior TB.

Following transplantation, the patient had immediate graft function and was discharged on the seventh postoperative day with creatinine level of 1.16 mg/dL. She was readmitted on the 37th postoperative day with fever and positive cytomegalovirus antigenemia (11 cells) and was treated with ganciclovir for 14 days, but daily fever persisted. Abdominal ultrasound and chest radiographs were normal at this time, and sequential cultures (blood and urine) were positive for Leuconostoc mesenteroides, and she was treated with ampicillin and gentamicin combination, although daily fever persisted.

After 2 weeks of admission without resolution of the clinical picture, a computed tomography (CT) of the chest was performed, which revealed diffuse micronodular disease compatible with miliary TB and abdominal fluid adjacent to the middle third of the transplanted kidney; this fluid fistulized through the skin. At this time, the medical team of the contralateral renal transplant was contacted who informed that their patient presented a similar condition, being diagnosed with tuberculosis from the donor and needing to undergo a graft nephrectomy. In addition, this team identified in the donor's history a hospital admission for pneumonia complicated with pleural effusion one month before his death.

Our patient tested positive for Koch's bacillus by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in urine and positive for alcohol-acid-resistant bacillus (BAAR) in surgical wound drainage fluid. After confirming the diagnosis of TB, the team decided to keep the graft and initiated specific treatment with Coxip (rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol) along with the discontinuation of immunosuppressive medication. The Coxip regimen was maintained for 12 months. Prednisone was reintroduced 12 days after the initiation of TB treatment, and the rest of the immunosuppressive medication was resumed after 8 weeks. The creatinine level after the end of TB treatment was 0.85 mg/dL. The patient is currently on outpatient follow-up with tacrolimus, sirolimus, and prednisone and has a creatinine level of 0.76 mg/dL.
