A 45-year-old man presented to our center with gradually developing weakness of the right limbs for 3 months. He underwent brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at another hospital 3 months prior to admission, which showed an acute ischemic stroke of the left parietal lobe. Twenty days before admission, MRI showed cerebral and subarachnoid hemorrhages, although he had no new symptoms or exacerbation at that time. Ten days before admission, he presented with a sudden headache in the occipital region, difficulty in finding words, and unsteady walking. The patient did not complain of abdominal or bone pain.
At admission, his vital signs and general examination were normal. Mucocutaneous alterations were not observed. Neurologic examination revealed expressive aphasia and right-sided extremity weakness graded 4/5 on the Medical Research Council scale (total range, 0 [no movement is observed] to 5 [muscle contracts normally against full resistance]).
His medical history was unremarkable, with no history of vascular risk factors, including diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, cardiomyopathy, and atrial fibrillation. He also denied smoking, alcohol consumption, or illicit drug use. The patient’s father died of cerebral hemorrhage.
A computed tomography scan of the brain showed an area of infarction with hemorrhage in the left subcortical and corona radiata regions , and the European Cooperative Acute Stroke Study classification was that of parenchymal hematomas 2 (PH2). MRI revealed meningeal and peripheral enhancement but no significant enhancement in the hemorrhage area. High-resolution MRI revealed a thrombosis on the surface of the atherosclerotic plaque. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA; Fig. ) revealed an insect bite-like change in the C1 branch of the left internal carotid artery, which caused up to 50% stenosis. Cerebrovascular malformations and other carotid or intracranial arterial stenoses were excluded.
All blood test results were unremarkable, except for a continued elevation in the platelet (501 × 109/L-601 × 109/L) and white blood cell counts , with normal coagulation function. Therefore, bone marrow biopsy and genetic testing were performed after consultation with a hematologist. Bone marrow biopsy revealed proliferative bone marrow changes, with numerous megakaryocytes and proliferative but mature granulocytes. Further genetic testing revealed a positive JAK2-V617F mutation.
Myeloproliferative disease is a possible cause of complex cerebrovascular lesions. Therefore, the diagnosis of ET was confirmed according to the diagnostic criteria of the World Health Organization (WHO) 2016. After discussing with the hematologist, we decided to administer aspirin and hydroxyurea. After treatment, the patient remained stroke free (mRS score = 1/6, total range 0 [symptom-free] to 6 [dead]), and platelet levels were normal throughout the 1-year follow-up period.