A 64-year-old man visited our eye clinic with a two-day history of decreased visual acuity in his right eye. The patient presented with a medical history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus. He stated that his vision had gradually worsened in recent days.
At the initial visit, his best-corrected visual acuity was 20/125 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye, and intraocular pressures were 18 mmHg and 13 mmHg, respectively. Slit-lamp examination demonstrated mild hyperemia and keratic precipitates. The eye also showed inflammation in the anterior chamber and anterior vitreous, which was scored as grade 2+ and grade 1+ according to the Standardization of Uveitis Nomenclature Working Group guidelines . Fundus examination of the right eye showed multiple and diffuse white-yellowish infiltrations combined with retinal dot hemorrhages in the peripheral retina . The left eye was completely normal. Ultra-wide-field fluorescence angiography showed obstructive retinal arteritis with peripheral non-perfusion and late leakage from the retinal vessels in the right eye .
The patient was hospitalized for further evaluation and appropriate management. Basic laboratory test and serology study were performed. The serological tests were positive for HSV type 1 immunoglobulin G (IgG), VZV IgG, Epstein-Barr virus viral capsid antigen IgG, and Toxoplasma-specific IgG antibodies. Anterior chamber paracentesis and PCR analysis of the aqueous humor have been performed. VZV DNA was identified in the aqueous humor. But, DNA for HSV-1, HSV-2, and cytomegalovirus was not detected. Given the impression of VZV associated ARN, treatment was started with intravenous acyclovir (1200 mg three times a day). Oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) was also started 24 h after systemic acyclovir treatment.
After 3 days of the above treatment, slit-lamp examination revealed 3+ cells in the anterior chamber, 2+ cells in the anterior vitreous, and increased vitreous opacity (grade 2) in the right eye. On the fundus examination, the multiple whitish infiltrations were increased and newly developed vitreous and peripapillary hemorrhages were detected in the right eye . At that time, the patient had symptoms of headache. T2-weighted MRIs of the brain performed to find the cause of the atypical ARN demonstrated a sub-acute or old hemorrhagic infarction in the right occipital lobe, and contrast-enhancing lesions in the right basal ganglia . The spinal tapping was performed in the department of neurology in our hospital at the time when the patient complained of headache, and intracranial pressure was 31 mmHg. This suggests that the possibility of Terson’s syndrome due to suddenly increased intracranial pressure in this case .
In view of the patient’s clinical features, immune status, and brain images, he was diagnosed as having VZV-mediated ARN with Terson’s syndrome. On day 5 of the admission, the patient’s visual acuity was reduced to counting fingers at 50 cm in the right eye. Retinal infiltration and vitreous hemorrhage were increased. Therefore, we started intravitreal injections of ganciclovir (2 mg/0.5 mL). After 5 intravitreal injections (from the 5 to 15 day of the admission), the multiple white-yellowish infiltrative lesions and retinal dot hemorrhages were decreased, and visual acuity increased to 20/800 in the right eye. The vitreous and peripapillary hemorrhages were also markedly decreased compared with the initial status of the ARN. After 20 days of intravenous antiviral therapy, the patient was discharged on oral valacyclovir, 1000 mg twice a day, combined with an oral prednisolone (tapering dose, 0.5 m/kg/day). After 5 intravitreal ganciclovir injections over a period of 8 months, there was no recurrence in the patient’s right eye, in which his visual acuity had improved to 20/60 . The contralateral eye remained normal.