This 50-year-old male presented to our inpatient neurosurgical serve with complaints of right eye pain, blurred vision and occasional diplopia, headache, and gait difficulty with frequent falls due to imbalance. He denies numbness or weakness of extremities. Past medical history included type II diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia.
On exam, he was alert and oriented to person, place, and time. He had decreased vision in right eye and diplopia on extreme lateral gaze. Subtle horizontal nystagmus was noted. The remaining cranial nerve exam was grossly intact. Patient had normal strength and sensation in all four extremities. He had negative Romberg sign but mildly ataxic gait. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) without contrast showed a stable cluster of three cysts centered within the tegmentum of the right midbrain, which in aggregate measured 2.2 cm × 1.4 cm × 1.4 cm . There was a dominant dorsomedial cyst upto 1.7 cm in maximum dimension with associated compression on the adjacent cerebral aqueduct. There was mild associated hydrocephalus with distention of the lateral and third ventricles .
Under general anesthesia, the patient was fixed in Mayfield head holder, and stereotactic navigation was registered for use during the procedure. Two burr holes were placed. A posterior burr hole was planned in the right frontal area near the coronal suture in order to perform the ETV. A second burr hole was planned anterior to the first one in order to access the brainstem cyst and the posterior third ventricle. The endoscope was introduced through the posterior burr hole into the lateral ventricle and through the foramen of Monro into the third ventricle. Third ventriculostomy was performed in the usual fashion in the floor of the ventricle, anterior to the mammillary bodies. Next, the endoscope was introduced through the anterior frontal burr hole and taken into the third ventricle through the foramen of Monro in a more posterior trajectory in order to reach the brainstem cyst. Fenestration of the cyst was performed with the endoscopic bipolar. Contents of the cyst were consistent with pure cerebrospinal fluid. An external ventricular drain (EVD) was left for intracranial pressure monitoring following the procedure. The closure was done using burr hole covers and routine skin closure. The patient tolerated the procedure well and was transferred to the intensive care unit for further monitoring and care.
Intracranial pressures remained within normal limits, and the EVD was removed the following morning after surgery. Patient was able to ambulate without assistance with minimal pathway deviations and perform daily activities of living independently. Cognition remained intact, and he conversed appropriately. Postoperative MRI showed a decrease in size of the ventricular system with evidence of flow through the aqueduct and ostium of the ETV. There was a stable appearance of cystic lesions in the brain stem with some decrease in size .
At 1-month follow-up his gait, diplopia, and headache had significantly improved. At 5 months, headache, and diplopia had essentially resolved, and computed tomography scan showed well-decompressed cyst and ventricles .