A 59-year-old male patient was diagnosed in 2003 with a smoldering multiple myeloma (IgG lambda) with bone marrow infiltration of 10 to 20% (negative CRAB criteria at that time). In 2004, he developed nephrotic syndrome and a histological diagnosis of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis was made. Immunofluorescence showed C3c deposition but dense deposits were absent on electron microscopy. Six months later, the patient developed progressive renal failure with nephritic syndrome. A subsequent kidney biopsy revealed crescentic membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis with dense deposits (dense deposit disease; DDD). Immunohistochemistry was negative for IgG, IgA, IgM and C1q. Despite treatment with cyclophosphamide, his kidney function rapidly decreased to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in 2004. In the light of a stable remission of his multiple myeloma for 10 years (stage I Salmon/Durie; stage III ISS in 2014; positive CRAB-criteria: renal failure, anemia), a kidney transplantation was planned.
After deceased donor kidney transplantation in October 2015, a kidney biopsy was performed at day seven because of delayed graft function. Immunosuppressive medication consisted of cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetile and oral glucocorticoids without prior induction therapy. The biopsy revealed acute tubular necrosis, acute cellular rejection and an intracapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis (Banff IA; Fig. ). The biopsy result before receiving the additional immunohistochemical staining was compatible with mixed cellular and humoral rejection. The patient received four sessions of plasmapheresis and three doses of antithymocyte globuline (75 mg each) in combination with glucocorticoid pulse therapy. Cyclosporine was switched to tacrolimus. Additional immunohistochemical stainings revealed C3c deposition and on electron microscopy mesangial and dense intramembranous osmiophilic deposits were present, indicating an early recurrence of DDD in the allograft . Graft function improved to a stable creatinine of 2.6 mg/dl over several weeks .
In December 2015, creatinine increased to 3.2 mg/dl. Serum C3 was low (55 mg/dl) and the patient had active urine sediment. Tacrolimus trough levels were stable. A successive kidney biopsy confirmed C3G and minimal residual tubulitis diagnostic of borderline cellular rejection . CRAB criteria were positive for renal insufficiency and anemia. The concentration of free lambda light chain was 10.2 mg/l. Another course of high-dose corticosteroids was combined with five sessions of plasmapheresis and subsequent induction therapy with bortezomib and dexamethasone. Myeloma bone marrow infiltration was 20% at that time. After short-term stabilization (creatinine 3.2 mg/dl over 14 days), graft function rapidly deteriorated over several days . Despite four sessions of plasmapheresis, allograft function further declined and hemodialysis treatment was startet on 30th Dec 2015. Because of refractory MG-C3G, treatment was switched to eculizumab. The first infusion of 900 mg was given on 4th Jan 2016 followed by three infusions of 900 mg eculizumab weekly and one additional dose of 1200 mg 2 weeks thereafter. Graft function improved promptly and tapering of oral steroids was possible. Serum C3 increased from 55 mg/dl before treatment to 84 mg/dl after the induction course of eculizumab. Bortezomib had to be stopped after three cycles because of polyneuropathy.
In March 2016, creatinine increased and the patient developed nephrotic-range proteinuria . A graft biopsy showed active DDD without any sign of myeloma infiltration . The myeloma bone marrow infiltration at this time was 6% and free lambda light chain concentration was 10.4 mg/l. After restarting eculizumab 1200 mg every other week, creatinine and proteinuria improved quickly, indicating a rapid clinical response to complement inhibition. At the last follow-up in March 2018, the patient was well and had a stable allograft function (creatinine of 1.9 mg/dl) without proteinuria (230 mg/g creatinine). Serum C3 was decreased with 57 mg/dl, indicating persisting subclinical immunological activity of MG-C3G. Free lambda light chain concentration at last follow-up was 8.9 mg/l. No progression of myeloma occurred during a 28-months-follow-up after kidney transplantation and besides bortezomib-induced polyneuropathy, no adverse treatment effects were observed.