A 58-year-old male presented with diarrhea. His medical history included type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and a lumbar hernia. He had a history of smoking and occasional alcohol consumption. Physical examination results were unremarkable. Initial laboratory tests revealed a serum hemoglobin level of 12.7 g/dL, a serum carcinoembryonic antigen level of 1.5 ng/dL (reference range: 0–2.5 ng/mL), and a carbohydrate antigen 19–9 level of 13.0 ng/dL (reference range: 0–37 U/mL). Lower gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a half-circumferential rectal tumor. A biopsy confirmed a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed focal wall thickening of the rectum (T3) with several enlarged perienteric lymph nodes (N2) and extramural vascular invasion, without evidence of metastasis (M0). The patient received two courses of neoadjuvant chemotherapy of mFOLFOX6 regimen, followed by laparoscopic Hartmann's operation. Arterial flow at the edge of the sigmoid colostomy was preserved during surgery. The perienteric peritoneal metastasis was completely resected. Postoperative histopathological findings revealed a residual adenocarcinoma with a TNM score of ypT3N2aM1c. The patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 13.
On postoperative day 28, the patient reported an abnormal orifice in the stoma and painful defecation. Physical examination revealed a colostomy fistula at the 6 o'clock position of the stoma orifice . No intra-abdominal abscess or inflammation was observed , and adjuvant chemotherapy with mFOLFOX6 was administered. However, the colostomy fistula gradually enlarged and painful defecation persisted. Consequently, laparoscopic colostomy reconstruction was performed.
During surgery, no necrosis or abscesses were observed in the abdominal cavity. The edge of the stoma was resected, and colostomy reconstruction was performed without complications. Macroscopic examination of the resected intestinal tract revealed thickening of the surrounding intestinal wall, without the evidence of a diverticulum . Histopathological analysis of the resected colon with the fistula showed a fibrosis replacement where originally muscularis propria exists, with adjacent ganglion cells . The patient did not experience any adverse events or gastrointestinal symptoms following surgery.