A 39 years old lady was admitted to a COVID-19 treatment center in July 2021 with a complaint of worsening shortness of breath, easy fatiguability, low-grade fever, chills, frontal headache, and productive cough of yellowish sputum of ten days duration. The patient tested reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) positive for COVID-19 five days before her admission.

She is a known cerebral palsy patient since birth and was on sodium valproate 200mg PO/day for a long time. Two weeks back she was told to have acute angle-closure glaucoma on her right eye and was put on timolol 0.5% eye drop BID, tropicamide 1% eye drop TID, acetazolamide 250 mg PO BID with prednisolone 20mg PO/day.

The patient was referred from a local health center for better ICU care and follow-up after being started on Dexamethasone, Azithromycin, and Ceftriaxone-sulbactam. In the emergency room (ER), her vital signs were BP of 120/80 mmHg, PR of 92 beats/min, RR of 32 breaths/min, T of 36.2 °C, and SpO2 96% on 6L/min facemask oxygen. The only pertinent findings were coarse crepitations over the left lung.

Random blood sugar determined at the ER was recorded high (>600 mg/dL) and urine analysis showed ketone +1 and glucosuria of +3. A chest x-ray from the referral center showed evidence of left-side pneumonia. Laboratory tests on her first day of admission (DOA) showed mild leukocytosis and lymphopenia (14.4 x 103 WBCs with 95% neutrophil and 0.9% lymphocyte), moderate hyponatremia (127 mmol/L) likely due to hyperglycemia, mild hypokalemia (3.2 mmol/L), pre-renal azotemia (serum creatinine of 2.95 mg/dL and BUN of 69 mg/dL) and c-reactive protein of 89.9 mg/L with negative serostatus for HIV. Abdominal ultrasound showed normal-sized kidneys. Arterial blood gas analysis was unfortunately not done because of cartridge stockout at the time.

The patient was admitted to the ICU right away with a problem list of severe COVID-19 with superimposed bacterial pneumonia, prerenal acute kidney injury (AKI), stress-induced hyperglycemia r/o ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), known cerebral palsy, and right eye glaucoma, and was put on dexamethasone 6mg IV/day, ceftriaxone-sulbactam 1.5 mg IV BID, UFH 17,500 SC BID, vitamin C 200mg PO/day, and Zn 20 mg PO/day, and she was treated for diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) as per the local protocol.

On the second hospital day, the patient developed right eye swelling and with an added assessment of right orbital cellulitis, vancomycin (renal dose adjusted) was added.

On day three of admission, the patient was started on NPH (Neutral Protamine Hagedorn) insulin 16/8 SC BID with correctional regular insulin since her glycemic control was poor despite being on a modified sliding scale. Her NPH insulin requirement would eventually be escalated to 28/14 until the patient achieved the target glycemic range on the seventh DOA.

On the fourth DOA, rhino-orbital mucormycosis was considered and liposomal amphotericin B (5mg/kg/day IV) was started and ceftriaxone-sulbactam changed to meropenem 1g IV TID. On the same day, the ophthalmologist evaluated her and planned to continue amphotericin B and a nasal swab was sent for culture.

On the fifth DOA, extensive surgical debridement of necrotic tissue over the rhino-orbital area was done. The next day, the HgA1c result arrived (13.8%) and newly diagnosed T2DM was added to the problem list. Dexamethasone was also held and overall, the patient was improving with resolved fever, decreasing leukocytosis, normalized renal function test, and coagulation profile (PTT of 50.8 and INR of 1.3), and decreasing oxygen support (2 L/min intranasal oxygen).

However, on the eighth DOA, the patient developed a new high-grade fever, increased oxygen demand (20L/min facemask oxygen) and meropenem was escalated to 2g IV TID and septic work up sent. Culture from wound site in the face would eventually grow Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) sensitive to tigecycline and linezolid.

Eventually, patient deteriorated developing lethargy and septic shock of chest focus (new bilateral consolidation on lung ultrasound) with the possibility of fungal invasion into the brain (Rhino-Orbital-Cerebral Mucormycosis). She was started on vasopressors and hydrocortisone; however, intubation was deferred due to likely poor outcome after thorough family counseling. Despite all the above management, the patient eventually died on the ninth day of ICU admission and 20th total duration of illness from symptom onset with the possible immediate cause of death, multi-organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) secondary to refractory septic shock.