18-month-old male infant, the only child of a non-consanguineous couple with no family history of recognized genetic syndromes. His mother, 38 years old at the time of delivery, denied use of medication, as well as smoking or drinking. Routine prenatal examinations were normal, with the exception of the detection of polyhydramnios on the ultrasound of the third trimester. The patient was born by caesarean section at 36 weeks, weighing 2,695 g (0<z<+1), measuring 48 cm (0<z<1) and with Apgar: 8/9. The initial evaluation of the newborn detected important facial asymmetry (E>D) associated with microtia grade 3 and an appendix in the trago-oral line on the right. In addition, he presented important suction deficit and respiratory discomfort, remaining on continuous flow of air pressurized in airways by means of CPAP until being submitted to tracheostomy and gastrostomy, with 16 days of life. He was discharged with 38 days of life and with need of supplemental oxygen.

At 2 months of age, he was referred to the thoracic surgery outpatient department of HC-UFTM for evaluation of stridor and intensification of respiratory discomfort. He underwent naso-fibroscopy, which identified a granuloma just below the tracheostomy orifice, and was submitted to resection. In the same period, he was evaluated by pediatric pneumology and clinical genetics.

The infant's physical examination revealed hypodevelopment of the facial structures on the right, associated with thoracic kyphoscoliosis, but without the description of epibulbar dermoid. His skull and face CT scan showed agenesis of several structures on the right side of the face, including the upper and lower hemibows, zygomatic arch, masticatory musculature, parotid gland and external auditory canal. No intracranial malformations were found. Urine tract ultrasound was normal, and panoramic radiograph of the spine identified hemivertebrae at the level of T11 and T12, justifying the thoracic deformity. The auditory evoked potential of the brain stem (AEP) confirmed conductive hearing loss in the right ear, and, although there was no heart murmur, the patient underwent a transthoracic echocardiography, which was normal. Finally, the cytogenetic examination with GTG banding, through temporary culture of lymphocytes, and the cytogenomic examination, using the high resolution platform CytoSNP-850®, were normal. The findings of the physical examination combined with the complementary examinations led to the diagnosis of MCF.

The infant had several visits to the emergency department for nausea, respiratory distress and stridor. At 5 months, he was admitted for investigation of airway obstruction, and a new nasofibroscopy identified a recurrent granuloma, leading to significant tracheal stenosis. The patient underwent granuloma removal again, followed by dilation and exchange of the tracheostomy tube for a longer one to prevent further stenosis.

About four months later, the patient presented with a new episode of respiratory discomfort, requiring admission, and was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia. On that occasion, he underwent a contrast-enhanced chest CT scan, which showed a trachea with diffusely thickened walls, with a slight reduction in caliber below the end of the tracheostomy cannula; altered pulmonary attenuation, with discrete opacities; and the presence of an aberrant right subclavian artery running posteriorly to the esophagus.

The infant underwent surgery for ligation and disconnection of the vascular ring caused by the aberrant right subclavian artery at 22 months of age. No other thoracic malformations were described during the surgical procedure. His postoperative course was uneventful, and his mother reported that after the surgical treatment, she has not observed episodes of nausea, or even stridor or respiratory discomfort. The patient is currently being followed by a multidisciplinary team, with good motor progression and awaiting reevaluation for craniofacial surgery.
