Mrs RB, a 25-year-old Kuwaiti woman primigravida, married for 18 months, presented to the Maternity Hospital, Kuwait, at 31 weeks of gestation with rupture of membranes of 3 hours duration. This pregnancy was spontaneous and resulted from a non-consanguineous marriage and was followed up in the private health care service. The antenatal period had been uneventful until this emergency presentation. There was no evidence of antenatal ultrasonography in the private health services as the patient did not present any information or reports of such an investigation. She was not known to have diabetes mellitus. Her past surgical/medical/gynecological history was not contributory.
At admission, the patient was calm, afebrile and the vital signs were normal. There was no abnormality in the respiratory and cardiovascular systems. Obstetric examination confirmed a 31 weeks of gestation, the fetus in breech presentation and the presence of normal fetal heart sounds. She was managed conservatively, and she was placed on prophylactic antibiotics. A course of dexamethasone injections was given, and she was transferred to the antenatal ward. After 8 hours, the patient was readmitted to the labor ward complaining of labor pains, and pelvic examination revealed that the cervix was fully dilated with a frank breech presentation at station 1 cm below the ischial spine. An assisted breech delivery of a premature baby, birth weight 1570 g, was conducted. The Apgar scores of 3 and 9 were recorded, and an endotracheal tube was inserted into the baby.
The baby was discovered to have the following abnormalities:
fusion of both lower limbs ; ambiguous genitalia ; cloacal anomaly and tracheoesophageal fistula with atresia Active resuscitation of the new born was undertaken, the baby was then transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) study was conducted on the baby, and it revealed 46 XX chromosome patterns with no numerical or structural abnormalities. Skeletal survey showed that the baby had two femoral bones, two tibias, two fibulas with sacral segmentation defect with 13 bilateral ribs and a normal vertebrae. The baby passed urine through a single partial opening over the sacral area.
Exploratory laparotomy was performed, which showed distal jejunal atresia with dilated proximal bowel of 10–15 cm. The distal colon was atretic. The esophagus was ligated, 15 cm of dilated proximal loop was resected and jejunostomy along with gastrostomy was performed. Renal ultrasound showed left polycystic kidney, and the right kidney was not visualized (query for right ectopic kidney). No magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed on the baby. The baby was discharged after 123 days to continue medical treatment in the USA.
There was a discussion between two of the authors (FAH and AAA) and the parents about the authors’ intention to make a report of the case using all the information provided and the illustrations/pictures/X-rays of the neonate, and the parents gave their written informed consent for such a publication effort.