A 30-year-old Chinese woman came to the dermatology clinic with a two-year history of progressing, diffuse, lattice-like hyperpigmentation of the face and neck. Significant sunlight, chemical materials, medicine, and cosmetic exposures were denied. She had no notable family history of similar conditions. On further questioning, she admitted that she had experienced hair loss and ankle joint pain for two years, and these had worsened in the last two months.
Diffuse, symmetric, and reticular gray brown hyperpigmentation was observed all over the face and neck, especially the cheeks and the area around the mouth . Slight hyperpigmentation was seen on her upper limbs. No similar change can be seen on the rest of her skin and mucosa.
Under skin microscopy, diffuse black-pepper-like changes separated by hair follicles with sweat glands and telangiectasias were seen . The reflectance confocal microscopy showed abundant melanin in the epidermis and dermis, local liquefactive degeneration of basal layer cells, and the presence of melanophages in the dermis ( and ). Histopathology of neck lesions (HE staining) showed punctiform epidermal atrophy, punctate liquefactive degeneration of basal layer cells, melanophages in the dermis, and a few lymphocytes infiltrating around the dermal adnexa . Masson-Fontana silver staining showed amounts of melanin in the epidermis and dermis . Laboratory investigations revealed the following: peripheral white blood cell (WBC) count 2.73 × 109/L (3.5–9.5 × 109/L), antinuclear antibody (ANA) (+++), anti-dsDNA antibody (dsDNA) (+), anti-Sjögren’s-syndrome-related antigen antibody A (+++), C3 0.48 g/L (0.90–1.80 g/L), C4 0.06 g/L (0.10–0.40 g/L), anti-thyroglobulin antibody (TGAb) >4000 IU/mL (0.00–115.00 IU/mL), and anti-thyroid peroxidase (ATPO) >600 IU/mL (0.00–34.00 IU/mL), thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) 92 mIU/L (0.550–4.780 mIU/L), Thyronine-4 (T4) 2.5 μg/dl (4.5–10.9 μg/dl). Serum-free thyroxine (FT4), free triiodothyronine (FT3), thyronine-3 (T3), and adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) were all within normal range. Anti-TSH receptor antibody (TRab) was negative. Doppler ultrasonography of the thyroid showed hypothyroidism changes and a nodular thyroid cyst. Serum sex hormone, adrenal hormone, and the computed tomography scanning of the adrenal glands were all normal.
Diagnoses of RM accompanied with SLE and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis of primary hypothyroidism were made via the clinical features and laboratory investigations.
Prednisone (20 mg/day), hydroxychloroquine (400 mg/day), and L-thyroxine (100 μg/day) were administered orally. The prednisone was withdrawn gradually over the course of 7 months.
Significant improvement was observed after 14 months of treatment. The hyperpigmentation has turned much lighter ( and ). Under reflectance confocal microscopy, the melanin in the epidermis was found to have decreased significantly, the local liquefactive degeneration of basal layer cells showed improvement, and the melanophages in dermis was found to have decreased in number . WBC, C3, C4, and T4 returned to normal. The TSH decreased to 5.667 mIU/L.