A 32-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with a progressively enlarged mass in the rectovaginal space for 9 years.
The mass was found during a routine examination 9 years ago and no obvious progression was seen in following annual examinations until a year ago. The maximum diameter of the mass had significantly grown from 4.0 cm to 9.7 cm in a year, with dents in stools, which was caused by tumor compression. The patient had a submucosal protrusion demonstrated by endoscopy in a local hospital. However, no absolute tumor tissue but only inflammation was found after several times of endoscopic biopsies in the latest 2 years, which was not consistent with clinical estimation. Therefore, she came to our hospital for further diagnosis .
The patient had no previous medical history.
The patient and family had no history of previous similar illness.
The patient’s mental status, appetite, sleep, and weight were normal without any obvious symptoms of abdominal distension, tenesmus, prolapse, diarrhea, or constipation. The anterior rectum wall was plump during digital rectal examination without tenderness or blood stain on the fingertip.
Laboratory examinations were normal, including routine blood analysis, carcinoembryonic antigen, α-fetoprotein, carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9, and CA125.
Contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) showed a mass with liquefaction necrosis (low density area) inside the rectovaginal space, with an obscure margin . Transabdominal US was performed. A heterogeneous hypoechoic mass with a maximum diameter of 9.7 cm was also seen in the rectovaginal space , which was suspected to be a rectal GIST or exophytic uterine fibroid.
Transabdominal CNB (MG1522 BARD MAGNUM Biopsy Instrument; Tempe, AZ, United States; disposable core tissue biopsy needle, gauge size and needle length: 16 G and 16 cm) was performed to make a definite diagnosis . Before the operation, written informed consent was obtained from the patient, and her preoperative regular laboratory examinations were normal, including routine blood test, coagulation function, and blood transfusion set. Some hemorrhage occurred from the vagina, causing premature end of the biopsy, and spontaneously relieved several days later. Strips of greyish shattered tissue were obtained, with the largest diameter smaller than 0.3 cm. Pathology indicated inadequate biopsy tissue for diagnosis. Another biopsy after ERUS assessment was recommended by multiple disciplinary treatment (MDT).
First, ERUS was performed with the MyLab Twice US system (Esaote, Genoa, Italy) equipped with a biplane endoscopic probe (TRT33, linear frequency of 4–13 MHz, convex frequency of 3-9 MHz), recording the location, size, stratification, adjacence, and echogenicity of the tumor. Then CEUS was performed with a bolus injection through the elbow vein of 2.4 mL SonoVue (Bracco, Milan, Italy) . Because of the heterogeneity of the tumor, it was difficult to recognize the necrotic from non-necrotic part in B mode, which can be clearly depicted by CEUS as nonenhanced vs enhanced area. As previous CECT has pointed out necrosis, CEUS was performed right before puncture to confirm the substantial part of the tumor for biopsy guidance for the second time, avoiding the failed samples inside presumptive solid area, which turned to be non-enhanced after CEUS. This guarantees the precision and efficiency of biopsy samples.
The probe was switched to linear mode. The transperineal puncture site and path were decided, and disinfection as well as drape were also completed. After local anesthesia, a freehand biopsy of the lesion was performed with the guidance of in-plane needle. The needle tip and its movements were continuously monitored in real time by ERUS during the whole puncture procedure to procure the tissue of lesion from enhanced area of the tumor on CEUS . Several strips of greyish tissue were obtained with a length of 0.3-1.2 cm . No complications occurred.