A 26-year-old female with no past medical history was referred to acute care by her primary care provider with fever and haematuria. She described 2 months of fevers up to 40°C, malaise and night sweats. Her primary care provider diagnosed a urinary tract infection due to a positive urine dipstick for blood and she received two courses of antibiotics that failed to improve symptoms. At presentation, she reported a dental scaling procedure 1 month after the onset of fevers. Blood cultures were obtained, and she was discharged to the community. Within 48 h, these grew S. gordonii, and she was recalled by the clinical infection unit.
On examination, her respiratory rate was 16 breaths/min, SpO2 99%, blood pressure 116/74 mmHg, pulse 85 b.p.m., and temperature of 36.7°C. She had an early diastolic murmur loudest in expiration at the left lower sternal edge. There were no peripheral stigmata of infective endocarditis or signs of dental infection and no features of cardiac failure.
An electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, normal PR interval, and T wave inversion in leads V2–V4. A chest radiograph showed clear lung fields. Blood tests showed normocytic anaemia with Hb 112 g/L, mean corpuscular volume of 88 fL, normal white cell count of 9.6 × 109g/L, and an elevated C-reactive protein of 81 mg/L. Urine culture showed no growth. Two subsequent sets of blood cultures grew S. gordonii, sensitive to penicillin with a minimum inhibitory concentration of 0.012 µg/mL .
A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a BAV, moderate aortic regurgitation, and possible aortic root abscess. The left ventricle was mildly dilated (left ventricular internal diameter in diastole 5.3 cm) with concentric remodelling, and the ejection fraction was 57%. A transoesophageal echocardiogram revealed aortic valve vegetations and an anechoic lesion at the aortic root not in communication with the atria. This was interpreted as an aortic root abscess . There was severe aortic regurgitation with a valvular jet directed towards the anterior mitral valve leaflet in early diastole, followed by a mid-late diastolic septally directed jet originating through the abscess cavity (see , ). This confirmed a diagnosis of native aortic valve infective endocarditis secondary to S. gordonii.
Two days later, the patient reported headaches and visual disturbance without focal neurology. A magnetic resonance imaging brain revealed dural enhancement overlying the left occipital lobe with associated signal change reported as a small empyema .
On 14 February 2022, she was commenced on 2 g amoxicillin IV 6 hourly. Subsequent blood cultures were negative by 17 February.
The cardiothoracic surgeons offered her mechanical or bioprosthetic valve replacement. She opted for mechanical valve replacement to reduce the likelihood of requiring redo surgery. Surgery was performed 5 days after admission. Intra-operatively, vegetations were present on the BAV, and a sub-valvular cavity was closed with a pericardial patch. This native aortic valve showed no growth after prolonged incubation. She received a 19 mm On-X mechanical aortic valve and post-operatively commenced warfarin therapy.
After 2 weeks of inpatient antibiotics, she was discharged under the outpatient parenteral antibiotic therapy service on once-daily ceftriaxone for 4 weeks.
She was followed up by clinical infection and cardiothoracic surgery services. A further MRI brain on 28 April 2022 showed resolution of the cerebral empyema, and she remains well with no further neurological symptoms.