A twenty-year-old female presented to the oral medicine clinic at the Faculty of Dentistry, Alexandria University. The patient complained of a reddish painful area on the tongue, that started one year ago and has been increasing in size over time . The patient reported completing an orthodontic treatment two years ago after which she has been using a Hawley retainer for orthodontic retention .
No specific findings were found on medical history taking and extraoral examination. Intraoral examination revealed a reddish patch on the left dorsolateral surface of the tongue surrounded by whitish lines. The lesion measured 2 × 3 cm, had normal consistency, smooth surface texture, and normal surrounding tissues . Another lesion in the form of a white keratotic plaque on the right dorsolateral surface of the tongue was found upon clinical examination. It was of 1 cm in size with normal consistency and normal surrounding tissues .
The initial differential diagnoses included erythroplakia (because of the fiery red color), lichenoid contact reaction (because of the Hawley retainer), and geographic tongue (because of the location and age). An incisional biopsy was taken and subjected to histopathological examination to aid in reaching a conclusive diagnosis.
The soft tissue section showed keratinized stratified squamous epithelium of variable thickness. Atrophic areas were predominantly present, other areas showed hyperplasia or epithelial proliferation in the underlying lamina propria. Degeneration of the basal epithelial cells and the basement membrane was evident. There was a dense, band-like lymphocytic infiltrate in the lamina propria that obscured the epithelial-connective tissue junction. Additionally, numerous dysplastic criteria such as hyperchromatism, pleomorphism, prominent nucleoli and mitotic figures were evident .
Histopathological results suggested the diagnosis of OLR. In an attempt to confirm this diagnosis, we performed a patch test by applying grinded acrylic resin, similar to that used in the construction of the Hawley retainer, on the forearm for 72 h and instructed the patient to report any kind of discomfort. After 72 h, there was desquamation, erythema and pigmentation of the skin suggesting a positive patch test, which confirmed our diagnosis .
We instructed the patient to discontinue using the Hawley retainer, replaced it by a vacuum retainer, and prescribed topical corticosteroids to decrease patient’s discomfort. Three weeks later, partial resolution of the lesion was evident. We followed the patient for six months with no signs of lesions recurrence .