A full term delivered, previously healthy, 5-month-old boy presented at our Emergency Room Department with fever for a total of 4 days, diarrhea, cough and irritability. He was being treated with oral amoxicillin + clavulanic acid prescribed by the pediatrician for a left medium otitis diagnosed two days before. Fleeting hives was reported.
On physical examination, he presented good general condition, body temperature was 37.5 °C, no signs of dehydration (capillary refill time <2 s) and a reduction in air penetration in the lower lobes on chest auscultation. Normal physical examination of heart and abdomen. Blood tests showed a very high value of C-Reactive Protein (C-RP: 49.32 mg/dL); hemoglobin (Hb) was 8.8 g/dL, white blood cell (WBC) count was 11,080/mm3 with 79.3% neutrophils, and platelet (PLT) count was 429,000/mm3. Transaminases were normal, while gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) was high (126 UI/L). Chest radiograph showed peribronchial cuffing and we started an additional therapy with oral clarithromycin at a dose of 15 mg/kg. Resin blood culture and serology for Epstein Barr Virus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, type 1 and 2 Herpes simplex virus, Parvovirus B19, Coxsackie viruses and Toxoplasma Gondii ruled out infective origin of symptoms. All serological tests were negative except for IgG anti-Cytomegalovirus. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a focal bowel wall thickening, mild edema around the gallbladder, mild hepatosplenomegaly and a lymphadenomegaly near the hepatic hilum.
After 3 days from admission, the infant continued to have fever and presented erythema involving the palms and the soles. Suspecting a KD for the presence of fever (>7 days), changes in extremities, history of rash and high C-RP levels, we requested a transthoracic echocardiography, which only showed a mild mitral valve regurgitation but no abnormalities of the coronary arteries.
On the fifth day of hospitalization the infant presented a subsidence of the fever and blood tests showed a reduction of C-RP (6.2 mg/dL), GGT (85 UI/mL) and Hb (7.3 g/dL), together with an increase in the WBC count (17,180/mm3) and platelet (594,000/mm3).
In order to rule out an early onset of inflammatory bowel disease, we performed fecal calprotectin and fecal occult blood, both tested negative, and a second abdominal ultrasonography, which showed an improvement of the picture (reduced bowel thickening and no edema around the gallbladder). Moreover, the infant had always fed willingly and his diarrhea had gradually resolved.
However, on the sixth day of hospitalization reappearance of the fever was registered (38.0 °C) and blood tests were performed on the eighth day showing an additional worsening of the anemia (Hb 7.2 g/dL), thrombocytosis (platelets 751,000/mm3), high WBCs (17,920/mm3) and an increase of C-RP (15.7 mg/dL). Serum iron, transferrin, lipid profile were within normal limits. We performed a second echocardiography, which revealed a fusiform aneurysm of the right coronary artery measuring 5.4 mm in diameter and an ectasia of the left anterior descending coronary artery, whose maximum diameter was 3.7 mm with a z-score +9.72 based on international standards . According to the American Heart Association (AHA) criteria the diagnosis of KD was made . He received intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG: one bolus of 2 g/kg) and high-dose oral acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) (100 mg/kg/day). However, after two days of persistent fever, a second bolus of IVIG was administered.
On the eleventh day of hospitalization, a severe anemia occurred: red blood cells (RBC) 2,660,000/mm3, Hb 5.9 mg/dl, Ht 19.8%, MCV 78 fL, RDW 15.2%. Bone marrow examination showed mild eosinophilia (5%), and a RBC transfusion was necessary. We reduced ASA dose to 5 mg/kg/day to achieve an anti-aggregant effect for the presence of a severe thrombocytosis (PLT 1,147,000/mm3).
Forty-eight hours after the second dose of IVIG, due to persisting fever, we started intravenous methylprednisolone at a dose of 30 mg/kg/day for three subsequent days, with initial benefit. However, after three days from the last administration of corticosteroid therapy we recorded a reappearance of the fever (38.0 °C) together, with a further dilatation of the left anterior descending coronary artery and we started oral prednisolone at a dose of 2 mg/kg/day for 30 days. Fever disappeared after 48 h.
The patient was discharged after 26 days of hospitalization, afebrile, with oral ASA. He is being regularly monitored to check the size of the coronary arteries. The last echocardiography performed 18 months after the KD onset showed a mild reduction of the aneurysm of the right coronary artery (3.6 mm) and of the ectasia of the left anterior descending coronary artery (2.5 mm, z-score +2.46). He is still on therapy with oral ASA.