A 40-year-old woman was referred to the facial plastic surgery clinic with a seven-month history of asymptomatic left-sided facial lipoatrophy. She was otherwise healthy with no significant medical or surgical history and was not taking any medications. The lipoatrophy presented over the course of 2 weeks and remained stable for 6 months preceding presentation. There was no history of trauma, infection or previous surgery in the area. She did not receive treatment prior to presentation to clinic. The patient reported no previous lipoatrophy, HIV infection, or autoimmune disease. Her family history was unremarkable for these as well.
The area of fat loss was asymptomatic but socially disfiguring . On examination, there was almost complete loss of the malar fat pad over the malar eminence as well as a concave deformity extending temporally towards the lateral canthus. She was clinically assessed to have moderate to severe concavity of one or more facial regions, observable prominence of bony landmarks, and possible visibility of underlying musculature. These features were consistent with grade 4 facial lipoatrophy according to the scale developed by the Facial Lipoatrophy Panel . Investigations, including a full autoimmune workup, were unremarkable. Lipoatrophy of this severity would be unlikely to resolve spontaneously. No other specialists were consulted in the investigation of this presentation.
The patient provided consent to treatment and the publication of this case report. She received two treatments of autologous fat grafting both of which were done using a Coleman type approach . The area to be treated was marked with the patient standing. For the harvest of fat, 20 mL of 1% lidocaine with adrenaline was injected into the periumbilical area followed by initiation of sterile technique. Using a Coleman liposuction harvesting cannulae, a total of 15 mL of fat was harvested in an atraumatic fashion through a small periumbilical stab incision. The fat was not centrifuged, but was simply transferred directly into 1 mL leur lock syringes for injection, discarding any fluid that accompanied the fat. An infraorbital nerve block was performed with local anesthetic injection into the depressed area. The face was prepped and draped in a sterile fashion and a small stab incision was performed in the mid cheek subunit at the intersection of a vertical line drawn down from the lateral canthus and a horizontal line drawn from the ipsilateral alae. A total of 8 mL of fat was injected into the soft tissues of the cheek and various levels ranging from the supraperiosteum to the subcutaneous plane. Both umbilical and facial stab incisions were closed with a single fast absorbing gut suture. This procedure was repeated 1 year later as a second stage of treatment to improve the correction of the facial deformity. The patient reported no adverse effects from treatment and was satisfied with the results . She continues to be followed annually though future treatments are not anticipated.