A 28-year-old healthy man sustained injury to the left lower leg due to a traffic accident. He was admitted to the local hospital and received a DR/CT examination . The patient suffered a left ankle fracture, clavicle fracture and dislocation. He underwent debridement followed by Vacuum Sealing Drainage (VSD) cover and fibula plate fixation surgery. He was moved to the ICU postoperatively. One week later, he underwent open reduction and internal fixation of clavicle fracture surgery. Postoperative healing of the left shoulder wound was satisfactory, but the left lower leg showed poor wound healing and a large-area skin defect, and the long bone remained exposed. The patient returned to our hospital for further treatment.
The patient presented with stable vital signs and absence of any cardiopulmonary abnormalities; the wound covering the VSD had good negative pressure. There was a weak dorsalis pedis artery, toes showed restricted movement, the shoulder wound healed completely, dorsalis pedis pulse improved, the posterior tibial artery pulse remained unchanged, and the lateral margins of the left foot felt numb. General physical examination results were without exception.
The blood test results of the patient showed white blood cell count of 12.36 * 109/ L, neutrophil percentage of 80.3 %, C-reactive protein of 53.66 mg/L, and calcitonin of 0.115 (0–0.05 ng/mL).
Severe open wound to the left calf, Large skin defect on left calf, Extensive bone exposure in the left calf, Left medial malleolar defect Positive after admission to cephalosporins anti-infection treatment, 7 Ye Zao nucleoside detumescence, low molecular heparin calcium sodium anticoagulation. Four days after admission and debridement surgery, the patient had a large left leg skin defect, the tibia was exposed (area: 23 cm * 10 cm), the ankle area had defects, and the medial malleolus osseous was absent . Ankle joint debridement take part of the training for the inflammatory tissue + drug susceptibility, after thorough debridement, will narrow rear to lift ahead of soft tissue wound, finally use the VSD cover the wound. After 4 days of germiculture, results revealed the presence of enterococcus, and the patient received levofloxacin to fight infection. After 7 days, the VSD was dismantled, the wound and exposed bone area had become smaller, and the surrounding granulation tissue was fresh. The medication of the patient was changed . After 14 days, the patient underwent a second surgery, where intraoperative debridement was carried out on the wound again; ipsilateral thigh skin transplantation was undertaken and covered with VSD. The skin graft grew well, leaving the long bone exposed . After 4 weeks, the skin graft area was observed to be healing well. The exposed bone was ground intraoperatively and subjected to micropower drilling such that each hole was spaced 5 to 10 mm apart . Gentamicin bone cement (DuPuy Synthes, USA) was mixed with powder bone cement (40 g); polymethyl methacrylate reagent (DuPuy Synthes, USA) was added and fully mixed. The cement dough was placed to cover the bone shape and fixed with sutures . The bone cement was removed, and the tissue showed no signs of necrosis . Using an external fixator with the fibula plate, the fibula segment and trim were removed. The fibula ankle bone graft showed fusion and wound healing. The patient was followed up 1 month after discharge, and the affected area showed no infection, indicating recovery .