A 24-year-old woman with cystinosis complicated by end-stage renal failure, for which she was receiving intermittent haemodialysis, was admitted with generalized malaise and weight loss. In May 2001, she had undergone trans-thoracic echocardiography because of increasing shortness of breath on exertion, and this had shown a moderately dilated LV with globally reduced systolic function (ejection fraction, EF = 25%), consistent with dilated cardiomyopathy.
The patient was referred for cardiology consultation following a period of increased breathlessness and a cardiac arrest precipitated by ventricular tachycardia from which she was successfully DC cardioverted. Her medication at that time included perindopril 4 mg once daily (od), carvedilol 3.125 mg twice daily (bd), prednisolone 5 mg od, levothyroxine 200 mcg od, folic acid 5 mg od, darbepoetin 80 mcg per week, mercaptamine (Cystagon) 150 mg four times per day (qds), calcium carbonate 500 mg three times daily (tds), aspirin 75 mg od and alfacalcidol 1.5 mcg od.
On examination, the patient's blood pressure was 86/50 mmHg and she was in sinus rhythm at 76 bpm. She had some facial oedema, mild ankle oedema and bi-basal crackles on chest auscultation. Heart sounds examination revealed a soft apical pansystolic murmur. The remainder of the examination was unremarkable. Echocardiography revealed a dilated LV with globally impaired systolic LV function (EF Simpsons biplane = 25%). There was marked trabeculation of the LV, most prominent at the apex and lateral wall at the mid-ventricular level; six trabeculae were more than 2 mm in diameter. The noncompacted to compacted ratio was 2.2 at the thickest part of the lateral wall on the parasternal short-axis view. Multiple inter-trabecular recesses in communication with the LV cavity were demonstrated by forward and reverse flow of blood on colour flow mapping . These features are consistent with current diagnostic criteria for isolated ventricular noncompaction. At the time of writing, the patient had been referred for heart and kidney transplant assessment and had undergone implantation of an automatic implantable cardioverter defibrillator (AICD).