The patient was a 61-year-old female, from Sichuan Province, China. She had a history of hypertension for five years and underwent a cholecystectomy for gallstones ten years ago. The patient was initially presented to the department of gastroenterology because of abdominal distention and poor appetite. She had dry mouth and several teeth loss. In the past six months she had lost 10 kg weight. She underwent colonoscopy and capsule endoscopy and no abnormalities were observed in the intestinal mucosa. B-ultrasound examination suggested a big pelvic cystic mass, about 75*65*64 mm in size, accompanied by pelvic effusion (depth of about 86 mm), abdominal effusion (right upper abdomen 97 mm, left upper abdomen 46 mm), and bilateral pleural effusion (depth of about 36 mm). Then the patient was admitted to the gynecological ward and received bilateral adnexectomy and peritoneal biopsy under laparoscopy. Pathological examination confirmed benign serous cystadenoma of ovary. Meanwhile, the patient’s blood and urine tests showed abnormalities. She was diagnosed with anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia hypoproteinemia and proteinuria. Immunological examination showed that the patient was positive for multiple autoantibodies including ANA, anti-dsDNA, anti-SSA, anti-RNP, anti-mitochondrial M2 and anti-ribonucleoprotein. Coombs test (both direct and indirect method) was negative. Reticulocyte was normal (1.24%).Bone marrow puncture suggested bone marrow hyperplasia was active. Serum EB virus DNA quantification was 2.8*103copies/mL.Laboratory data was showed in Table .
Then she was diagnosed with systemic lupus erythematosus. The renal biopsy was performed. Renal biopsy findings are shown below.
Immunofluorescent staining: IgG -, IgA -, IgM ++, C3 ++, C1q -, Kappa +, Lambda ++, granularly deposition along the capillary wall .
Light microscopy: A total of 20 glomeruli and 5 glomeruli were global sclerosis. Mesangial cells and matrix mildly increased, capillary walls was thickened . Vacuolar degeneration was observed in renal tubular epithelial cells . A few tubules were atrophic along with slight interstitial fibrosis. There were a few inflammatory cells infiltrating in the renal interstitial. Arteriole intima was thickened without hyaline degeneration.
Electron microscopy: The foot processes were extensively fused and GBM diffusely thickened. A large number of microspheres were found in GBM and podocytes infolded into the basement membrane . Reticular aggregate was seen in the cytoplasm of endothelial cells.
Finally the patient was diagnosed with lupus nephritis and PIG. We gave her losartan (100 mg daily), hydroxychloroquine (100 mg twice a day), methylprednisolone (40 mg daily) and cyclophosphamide (600 mg monthly) treatment. Two weeks later, serum albumin was increased to 31.7 g/ L, serum creatinine was 83umol/ L, hemoglobin was 77 g/L, red blood cell 2.55*1012/L, white blood cell 3.02*109/L and platelet 155*109/L.Then the patient was discharged to her hometown for further treatment.