A 54-year-old Caucasian Greek man presented to the Accident and Emergency department of our hospital with a 20-day history of abdominal pain, vomiting and loss of appetite. He mentioned an eight kg weight loss over the last 20 days, as he had been drinking almost exclusively water due to his symptoms. He had not presented to any hospital facility earlier because he lived in a remote area in the mountains. On admission, he had the septic image of paleness, tachypnea, tachycardia (110 beats/minute) and a fever of 38.5°C, as well as a rigid abdomen. Abdominal and plain chest X-rays demonstrated free gas under both the hemidiaphragms. After initial resuscitation (placement of intravenous lines and nasogastric tube followed by adequate administration of fluids), our patient underwent an emergency exploratory laparotomy. Our patient's worsening clinical image and his deteriorating clinical signs (tachypnea and tachycardia), along with the presence of his acute abdomen led us to conclude that an emergency laparotomy constituted the treatment of choice. In the face of the emergency situation a computed tomography (CT) scan was not performed. Laparotomy revealed peritonitis due to a perforated ulcer on the anterior wall of the duodenum, which was sutured, while the suture line was reinforced with an omental patch . After a thorough lavage of the peritoneal cavity, further exploration of the intra-abdominal organs revealed a second posterior pre-pyloric ulcer on the lesser curvature of the stomach, perforated into the lesser sac . A wedge resection with staplers was carried out , while no further acid reduction procedures were undertaken due to sepsis. A Nissen fundoplication was performed as an anti-reflux measure. Our patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged home on the 13th post-operative day; at this time we administered an appropriate eradication therapy. More specifically, we followed the protocol of triple therapy: a proton pump inhibitor, amoxicillin and clarithromycin were administered. After discharge our patient was referred to gastrointestinal specialists. Our colleagues planned a surveillance endoscopy according to their protocol.