Our patient, a 37-year-old postpartum female, presented to the Tianjin Tumor Hospital in China. Her B-ultrasonography results showed a left breast mass with the largest measuring up to 8 * 7cm in size and with left axillary multiple lymph node metastasis (BI-RADS 5). The pathology of the left breast by core needle biopsy revealed invasive micropapillary adenocarcinoma with the following results: estrogen receptor (ER) (<1%), progesterone receptor (PR) (<1%), HER-2 (3+), and Ki-67 (25%); moreover, the fine needle axillary lymph node biopsy samples confirmed metastatic and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with the following findings: ER (<1%), PR (<1%), HER-2 (3+) and Ki-67 (25%). The patient had undergone chemotherapy with an AC regimen (liposomal doxorubicin 40 mg on day 1 + cyclophosphamide 800 mg on day 1, q3w) for two cycles. However, no obvious reduction in breast mass was observed, and she felt pain in the left breast. Then, she presented to Shanghai Renji Hospital. Physical examination showed 9.0cm mass in left breast with diffuse edema and erythema in skin and several fixed and matted enlarged lymph nodes in the left axilla. The chest CT showed internal nodular foci in the left breast and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the left armpit. Mammography found a diffusely increased density of the left mammary gland with local distortion and fine sand-like calcification (BI-RADS.6) . Breast MRI was carried out and showed a widely abnormal signal (with the largest measuring up to 8.7cm) and skin thickening in the left breast (BI-RADS.6), left nipple depression, fat pad edema in the subcutaneous and anterior areas of the pectoralis major muscle, and enlargement of the left axillary lymph node (, ). Therefore, the clinical stage was designated IIIB (cT4N1M0). Moreover, vacuum-assisted breast biopsy and fine needle aspiration of left axillary lymph node were performed for the patient. The pathology indicated infiltrating carcinoma with ER (-), PR (-), HER2 (2+) and Ki67 (10%). The HER2 fluorescence in situ hybridization test was positive, and the HER2/CEP17 ratio was 4.5. Then the patient started to receive neoadjuvant chemotherapy (pyrotinib 400 mg once daily + weekly trastuzumab (first 4 mg/kg, then 2 mg/kg) + paclitaxel (120 mg (80 mg/m2) on days 1, 8, 15, and 22, q28d) + cisplatin (40 mg (25 mg/m2) on days 1, 8, and 15, q28d)) (PTPC). She experienced grade 3 diarrhea and grade 2 neutropenia, and the dosage of pyrotinib was reduced to 320 mg and then 240 mg once daily for diarrhea. After 2 cycles, breast MRI showed a significant reduction in the lesion size in the left breast (with the largest measuring up to 0.7cm) and a visibly reduced size of the lymph node in the left armpit, which was evaluated as clinical partial response (cPR) by efficacy assessment according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1 (RECIST1.1). After 4 cycles, the breast MRI results showed close to a clinical complete response (cCR) . The most frequent tolerated adverse events were grade 2 neutropenia and grade 2 diarrhea, which were observed in the patient but were not mitigated with further dose reduction. Modified radical mastectomy of the left breast was performed. The specimen suggested hyperplasia of the breast interstitial fibrous tissue with a few infiltrating inflammatory cells and no tumor tissue residue. The tissues from the nipple, dissected surface, lymph nodes, fibrous adipose tissue, and the left axillary lymph node were negative for disease. The postoperative pathology revealed pathological complete remission (pCR). The patient held on receiving 2 cycles of the targeted therapy plus chemotherapy with TPC, but adjuvant radiation therapy and HER2-targeted therapy with trastuzumab were administered in the neoadjuvant setting, and pertuzumab was administered over the 1-year follow-up duration. There has been no clinical evidence of disease progression so far. The disease-free survival is currently 8 months.