A 66-year-old man was admitted to our clinic two years ago complaining abdominal discomfort associated with distension, pain, and symptoms related to small intestine bowel obstruction (vomiting and obstipation). On physical examination a palpable mass in the lower right abdomen was found. CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated a large (9 × 6.5 × 7 cm) low-density, well circumscribed mass in the right lower abdomen, without evidence of tumor infiltration of adjacent structures and without free fluid. No metastatic nodules were found in the liver and the lung.
Laparotomy revealed a pedunculated, ulcerative and friable large mass (a small bowel mass greater than 10 cm) with the features of gastroimtestinal stromal tumor: the surrounding organs (sigmoid colon, rectum, ureters and bladder) were pushed but not involved by the tumor. Furthermore, remarkable intraabdominal metastatic spread consisted of multiple small nodular lesions – less than 2 cm in size – all over the peritoneal surface and between bowel loops, was encountered. No evidence of liver metastasis or lymphadenopathy was found. The patient underwent an en-block resection of the tumor along with all visible disease in order to avoid capsule rupture and intraabdominal spillage, as is recommended . A small bowel resection with an end to end primary anastomosis was performed. Numerous peritoneal nodal metastases were excised and sent for histological analysis.
Histopathological examination of the resected specimens revealed a stromal cell neoplasm with necrotic and hemorrhagic areas and a high index of mitotic count: 8–10 mitoses per high-power fields (HPF). Immunohistochemical analysis revealed C-kit (strongly positive), SMA(strongly positive), focal S-100(+) and CD34(-). The result of histological examination confirmed also the existence of intraabdominal metastatic spread.
Following the histopathological confirmation, immediate treatment with imatinib was initiated. The imatinib was introduced in dose of 400 mg/day without interruption (in order to minimize the risk of relapse associated with the drug interruption) . Postoperatively, patient was followed up with CT scan. According to the clinical, surgical and histopathological features, our patient was included in the high risk group for recurrence. The patient underwent a CT scan of the abdomen and the pelvis in regular 4–6 months intervals [,].
The CT scan performed 2 years after surgical excision and treatment commencement, revealed metastatic liver disease. Dose escalation (400 mg of imatinib mesylate twice a day) was decided and initiated. Six months later, liver lesion was presented with a characteristic size increase . Furthermore, a small soft tissue mass (3,3 × 2,8 × 3 cm) in the right lower abdomen was revealed in the abdominal CT scan. The mass was localized at the anatomic area of the previous excision and was considered either as another metastatic lesion or as a possible local recurrence .
Laparotomy confirmed the presence of liver metastasis, localized between the Segment V & Segment VI as well as intra-abdominal metastatic spread (multiple small nodular lesions – less than 1 cm in size – all over the peritoneal surface and between bowel loops). An intestinal mass was also found 60 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve. Surprisingly, during the thorough exploration of the peritoneal cavity, another mass with completely different macroscopic features was discovered. It was a palpable cecal mass, without extracanalicular growth or infiltration into other organs, associated with local lymph-node enlargement.
Intra-abdominal ultrasound (IOUS) was performed in order to assist in liver resection planning (mainly to enable detection of additional tumors, missed in preoperative CT scan imaging and to evaluate the relationship between metastatic lesions and major vascular structures).
RFA (Radio Frequency Ablation)-assisted liver resection of segments V, VI was performed and a segmental small-bowel resection along with excision of all gross visible peritoneal nodular lesions followed. Finally, a right hemicolectomy was decided in order to treat the "unexpected" cecal lesion.
At this point is important to underline that surgery remains the mainstay therapy for both (GIST and colorectal cancer) although the operative strategies and extent of resection are fairly different. Given the rarity of lymph-node involvement, routine lymphadenectomy is not currently recommended in GIST cases. [,] At the present case because of local lymph-node enlargement a curative resection was performed (included the resection of the lymphatic station), aiming to obtain microscopic disease-free radial and distal margins.
Gross examination of the 29 cm specimen disclosed a 7 × 4 cm tumor originating from the cecum and two polyps located about 7 cm from the cecum. The liver specimen (8.5 × 6.5 × 3.7 cm, segments V, VI) weighted 90 gr and contained the 5 cm metastatic lesion.
Histopathological examination of the resected specimen revealed a recurrent intestinal GIST with malignant biological behavior and a moderately differentiated stage Dukes C (T3, N3, M0 according the TNM staging classification of colorectal cancer) cecal adenocarcinoma .
The specimen had the following characteristics: a) metastatic liver tumor with mesenhymal origin characterized by necrotic and bleeding areas and a mitotic count of <5/50 HPF. Immunohistochemical staining revealed a strongly (+) reaction for c-kit, slight (+) for S-100, and no specific staining for CD34 and desmin. The surgical margins of the resected hepatic specimen were free from invasion, b) moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with a slight extracellular, mucus production. The tumor invaded the muscularis propria and the pericolonic adipose tissue. The neoplastic tissue extended and infiltrated the small bowel wall but the proximal and distant surgical margins were free.
Four of the examined lymph nodes presented metastatic invasion from GIST and 12 from colorectal adenocarcinoma. The above mentioned morphologic and immunochistochemical findings are diagnostic for coexistence of GIST and colorectal adenocarcinoma