A 71-year-old Japanese man with a BMI of 22.8 kg/m2 underwent RARP for prostate cancer. His initial PSA level, Gleason score, and dancer staging were 9.4 ng/mL, 4 + 4, and cT2bN0M0, respectively. The patient had a history of cerebral infarction and bipolar disorder. RARP was performed using the DaVinci Xi® system (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) with port placement as shown in Figure . Prostate resection was performed using transperitoneal antegrade and intraperitoneal posterior approaches. The trocars were removed under laparoscopic guidance. No abnormal appearance of the port site or sucking of the intestine was observed . The fascia of the external oblique abdominal muscle at this site was closed with a single knotted suture using 2-0 Vicryl® (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA). The procedure was completed without any intraoperative complications; the total surgery and console duration were 151 and 118 min, respectively.
Immediately after the surgery, subcutaneous emphysema was observed on X-ray , which improved on POD 1 . The patient had no significant complications on POD 1. On the morning of POD 2, the pelvic drain was removed; however, he exhibited coffee ground vomiting in the afternoon, twice in quick succession. His abdomen was soft but tympanic; no metallic sound was audible. Abdominal X-ray revealed a dilated large intestine but no fluid level . CT revealed an intestinal prolapse into a space between the internal and external oblique abdominal muscles at the 12-mm AIRSEAL® trocar site . Laboratory data from the investigations are summarized in Table . Diagnosis indicated a strangulated ileus due to TSH, and an emergency surgery was performed.
The emergency surgery was initiated using a laparoscope. A 12-mm camera port and two 5-mm assistant ports were inserted. Observation of the abdominal cavity confirmed a prolapse of the small intestine at the 12-mm AIRSEAL® trocar site . The prolapsed intestine was carefully pulled out using Croce-Olmi forceps and it was found to be gangrenous . After restoring the prolapsed intestine into a normal position, the trocar site was closed using 0 PDS® suture (Ethicon) under laparoscopic guidance ; a 4-cm incision was made, and the gangrenous intestine, which extended up to 25 cm, was explored and resected . Finally, functional end-to-end anastomosis was performed using a surgical stapler, and the procedure was completed. No drain was placed.
Three days after TSH repair (5 days after RARP), the patient started oral intake. The urethral catheter was removed 10 days after RARP (8 days after TSH repair), and he was discharged 15 days after TSH repair (17 days after RARP). Pathological examination of the prostate revealed adenocarcinoma, with pT2a, Gleason score 3 + 4, EPE0, RM0, v0, ly0, pn1, sv0. Six months after RARP, his PSA level was below the measurable limit, and he had no abdominal symptoms.