A 73 years-old man was admitted to the hospital after experiencing dyspnea and chest tightness for 3 days. He has a 6 years history of gout, 5 years history of coronary heart disease, and a 2 years history of hypertension. He had long been treated for his disease with nifedipine GITS, clonidine, bisoprolol, and febuxostat. In addition, he received a diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) due to skin erythema, photosensitivity, joint pain, positive for anti-dsDNA (228.65, normal <71 U/mL), anti-ANA (1.80), anti-Ro52 (99, normal <25), and decreases in complement C3 (0.574, normal 0.9–1.8 g/L) and C4 (0.088, normal 0.1–0.4 g/L) 2 years prior to admission and was taking prednisone 10 mg and hydroxychloroquine 100 mg daily, respectively. The patient’s laboratory results are displayed in .
After admission, the pulmonary computer tomography (CT) scan was performed, and the results revealed pulmonary interstitial changes, pulmonary edema, and a small amount of pleural effusion on both sides, and his blood oxygen saturation was 75% (93% after oxygen inhalation), and the pulmonary infection was treated with cefminox sodium, piperacillin/tazobactam, and meropenem successively. Otherwise, a total of 120 grams of human immunoglobulin were administered to help improve the immune system of the patient.
The patient was given oral voriconazole (200 mg/day) for 25 days after the patient’s sputum culture revealed Candida albicans infection and the serum (1,3)-β-D-glucan (+) (542 pg/mL, normal <60 pg/mL). Following the administration of voriconazole, we noticed a progressive decline in the patient’s hemoglobin, leukocyte, and platelet counts in the patient’s CBC test , accompanied by symptoms including visual impairment，nausea, vomiting, hiccups, middle and lower abdominal pain, disorders of consciousness, delirium, hallucination, slow response, and subcutaneous ecchymosis. AKI diagnosis criteria were also met by the patient’s oliguria, gradually rising serum creatinine level, aggravated pleural effusion, and lower limb edema. The patient was treated with hemodialysis and intravenous methylprednisolone (40 mg) daily. When renal function, heart failure, pleural effusion, and edema rapidly improved and urine volume returned to above 1,000 mL per day, hemodialysis was discontinued. The patient’s hemoglobin, leukocyte, and platelets gradually increased once the voriconazole was discontinued. At a follow-up of 14 days, we observed that these markers continued to improve.
During the course of the patient’s treatment, red blood cells (600 mL), fresh frozen plasma (800 mL), and platelet concentrate (400 mL) were transfused. The blood alterations are depicted in , but there was no discernible improvement in stopping the decreasing trend of blood cell count. We performed a bone marrow biopsy the day after discontinuing voriconazole to rule out any potential pathology that might cause hematopenia. Bone marrow aspirate showed active bone marrow hyperplasia. Nucleated cells proliferated actively, and the ratio of granulocytes to red blood cells was 0.387:1. Granular proliferation decreased, accounting for 27.5% of nuclear cells, with primitive cells accounting for 4.5%, the proliferation was mainly characterized by neutrophils, late promyelocytes, rod-shaped nuclei, and lobulated nuclei, with no abnormalities in morphology or size. Erythrocytosis was extremely active, accounting for 71% of nuclear cells, among them, primary red blood accounts for 5.5%, mainly consisting of proliferation of middle and late erythroblasts, imbalance in nuclear and cytoplasmic development, nuclear abnormalities, and megaloblastic transformation of erythroblasts could be observed, the size of mature red blood cells varies significantly, pathological hematopoiesis was very obvious. Megakaryocyte proliferation is very active with maturation disorders. Iron staining: external iron: 2 (+), internal iron: 80% iron granulosa erythrocytes. In addition, genetic testing was negative. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was used to perform genetic testing on bone marrow aspirates and did not find any chromosomal abnormalities or gene deletions, including –7/7q–, +8, p53 (17p13.1), EGR1 (5q31), D20S108, etc. Flow cytometry detection of bone marrow showed that 1.6% of myeloid cells were primitive or immature. Microscope (,) indicated that myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) should be considered, erythroid hyperplasia is significantly active with megaloblastic transformation.
To ascertain whether the patient had fully recovered, we conducted another bone marrow puncture after a 6 months follow-up. The results of the second bone marrow aspiration revealed a significant reduction in the abnormal proliferation of erythroid, granulocytic, and megakaryocytic cells compared to the first, and no obvious MDS-like bone marrow abnormal proliferation was discovered. Flow cytometry results demonstrated that no significant evidence of acute leukemia, NHL, or high-risk MDS-related immunophenotypic abnormalities were detected. Microscopic results bone marrow test was negative, no indication of MDS (,).
Overall, when treating the patient with voriconazole during the first-hospital admission, we observed decreases in peripheral blood cells and diagnosed MDS-like changes in bone marrow by bone marrow puncture. After voriconazole withdrawal, drug-related side effects vanished, and the MDS alterations were significantly improved.