The subject was a 26-year-old male Air Force pilot and a foreign state officer. The pilot had some individual flight experience, with a flight time of 120 h in the last 2 years on a L-39 Albatros, aircraft type designation. He reported no health problems before the training, nor in his medical history. He is a non-smoker and denies drug abuse. A clinical examination before the incident showed normal findings and the beginning of the practical training was normal. Problems arose the moment after the explosive decompression – the pressure inside the chamber was already stable. The pilot signaled to stop by waving his arm, than he crouched down in the seat, holding his head. Then, he produced a few grunts or cough-like sounds. He did not respond to questions about what had happened or what the problem was. After 7–8 s, an emergency descent was ordered to access the pilot. During the descent, the pilot started to respond normally. This emergency descent was likely the reason for the mild iatrogenic barotrauma of the middle ear. This issue was resolved in the next few days and is not connected to the purpose of this report.
Once on the ground, the pilot did not report any major symptoms at first. He said the main problem was sinus pain, that he did not feel any chest pain or have trouble with breathing. He described the coughing sounds as a verbalization of his pain and remembers us talking to him. In other words, he did not understand our concern in regards to lung trauma and did not seem anxious or worried. He also clearly stated that he did not hold his breath during the decompression. After finishing, he was eupneic, with normal hemodynamic parameters and a normal chest examination. After a few minutes, he developed retrosternal pain during deep inspiration and his tolerance of being in a horizontal position was reduced. These symptoms did not worsen, however, he was sent to our emergency department on suspicion of lung barotrauma.
The first chest X-ray and CT showed diffuse emphysema of the superficial and deep parts of the neck, continuing to the proximal section of the ventral chest wall . Diffuse pneumomediastinum signs are apparent paratracheal right, around right pulmonary artery, junction of left pulmonary veins and left atrium further are present signs in right cardiophrenic angle . A small bilateral pneumothorax was found apically and basally with pneumoperitoneum. The pneumoperitoneum was concluded to have been caused by passing gas through the hiatus in the diaphragm. There was no evidence of free fluid in the chest, no dislocations of mediastinal structures, no traumatic skeletal changes. A bronchoscopy was recommended for suspected airway injuries, but the patient refused. Conservative protocol without thoracic drainage was followed during his hospital stay. A two-day interval chest CT scan showed regression of the bilateral pneumothorax, regression of soft tissue emphysema, as well as pneumomediastinum regression. The patient stated he felt well and did not exhibit any additional symptoms, so he was discharged. After the discharge, follow-up examinations were recommended and a 2 month no-fly period was ordered. However, after 3 days, the patient left to his homeland and a contact at required medical level was lost. Pilot reported that he is doing well, without any problems and will be fit-to-fly soon.
A report done by the technical staff ruled out technical malfunction. A breathing mask was used before and after the incident without problem. All of the equipment used had required official certifications. There were not any suggestions of problems with the used equipment.