67-year-old female patient with a history of diagnosed alcaptonuria, which began with diffuse pain in the right hip four years ago, progressive, deaf, with limitation in the mobility arcs in general conditioning to claudicatio intermittens. On physical examination, the ocre pigmentation of the sclera, auricle, was noted; she presented with claudicatio intermittens, right limp, use of support orthotics, abduction 10°, adduction 5°, hip flexion 45°, extension 10°, all movements with the presence of pain. Radiologically, she presented loss of joint space in the right hip, abundant osteophytes, sclerosis in the acetabulum. Laboratory: blood count, general biochemistry and elementary urine examination with no alterations, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): 18; proteinogram, phosphate-calcium balance and parathyroid hormone (PTH) normal, normal iron profile; rheumatoid factor (FR) and anti-histocompatibility antigen (HLA) B27 negative, homogentisic acid in 24-hour urine: 1,140 mg/24 hours (reference < 10 mg/24 hours), alkaline urine test positive. In the operating theatre, with the patient under mixed blockade, a total replacement of the right hip was performed using a posterior approach, with a double-mobility G7 prosthesis (due to a history of spondyloarthropathy with lumbar ankylosis), with a Taper lock stem (Zimmer Biomet). During the procedure, the presence of dark areas in the femoral head and neck, characteristic of AHG deposits, was observed macroscopically. The procedure ended without complications, with post-operative radiological control. The macroscopic pathological examination referred to a femoral head with dark patches in bone and cartilage tissue.

Follow-up was performed at two, four and eight weeks, without finding local or systemic symptomatology. At six months postoperatively, the patient presented gait without alterations, without dismetria of pelvic limbs and without referred pain. It was assessed by the modified Harris scale, obtaining a score of 82, which is defined as a good result. Subsequently, a 12-month postoperative follow-up was carried out, during which the patient showed satisfactory clinical progression with improvements in the ranges of movement. No anomalies were observed in the gait and the patient reported the absence of pain. The modified Harris hip score was recalculated, obtaining a score of 90, which is defined as an excellent result. In addition, an annual control scanometry was performed where the implant was found without data of loosening at the pelvic or femoral level, without shortening of extremities.
