We report a rare case of symptomatic cervical metastasis of a malignant paraganglioma in a 72-year-old male. Five years prior to presentation, the patient visited another hospital presenting with neck swelling and hoarseness. He was diagnosed with paraganglioma of the neck, but an operation was not planned at that time. Six months prior to presentation, the patient’s chief complaints were bilateral shoulder pain, severe neck pain and weakness of the upper extremities. Because of the continual pain, he was referred to us for a second opinion. A physical examination revealed clumsiness in both hands and muscle weakness in the upper extremities. Cervical roentgenograms revealed a lytic lesion of the C3,4,5 vertebral body. Cervical computerized tomography (CT) revealed destruction of the C3,4,5 vertebral body and C4 lamina. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Figure ) demonstrated severe canal stenosis at the C4 level, with spinal cord deformation. An MRI of the neck upon admission showed a large soft-tissue tumor in the parapharyngeal space, which was adherent to the left carotid artery. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan (Figure ) revealed lytic lesions of the C4 and L1 vertebrae and a parapharyngeal space lesion near the carotid body.
As the tumor was extremely large and close to the artery and nervous tissue, the head and neck surgeons avoided this treatment route. The conventional anterior approach to the vertebral body was also rendered impossible because of the obstruction of the primary neck tumor. Therefore, CyberKnife® radiosurgery (Accuray, Inc.) was employed as the primary treatment for the cervical and parapharyngeal lesions. Even after the radiosurgery, the pain and weakness in the upper limbs persisted. We concluded that it would take some time for the effect of radiosurgery to appear, as his severe neck pain was caused by the destruction of vertebrae. Consequently, a C3-6 laminectomy and C1-T1 fusion using pedicle screw fixation was also performed. The highly vascularized tumor on the C4 lamina was removed and sent to the pathology department. A histological examination (Figure ) revealed a malignant paraganglioma. Immediately after the second operation, the patient displayed significant improvement in pain and upper-extremity weakness without any complications. As for the metastasis in the lumbar lesion, the patient had yet to show symptoms, a regular course of radiation was administered. Three months after the second operation, an MRI (Figure ) confirmed that the tumor had shrunk, and the spinal cord compression had disappeared. The last follow-up (six months after the second operation) demonstrated complete recovery of the upper-extremity strength.