The patient was a 29-year-old man admitted to the hospital four years ago (June 2009) due to hematemesis. The problem was diagnosed as esophageal variceal bleeding and the proper treatment was provided. He had no history of alcohol consumption or diabetes mellitus. Moreover, the tests were negative for all types of viral hepatitis (B, C), EBV (Epstein–Barr virus), herpes, CMV (Cytomegalovirus), autoimmune hepatitis, HIV, celiac and Wilson’s disease. The colonoscopy result was normal. On April 2010, liver biopsy showed cirrhotic changes and the patient was diagnosed with cryptogenic cirrhosis. His name went to the list of liver transplantation candidates and the academic management for cirrhotic patients was started for him.
The patient first visited Behesht Clinic of Tehran University of Medical Sciences in Tehran for Iranian traditional medicine on September 2011, about 17 months after being diagnosed. At the time, his medicinal prescription included spironolactone, propranolol, prednisolone and doxepin. The patient stopped taking all the medications after one month.
His height was 173 cm and his weight was 57 kg. In his first visit, he had flatulence, dyspepsia, and heartburn. He was generally thirsty and drank up to eight glasses of cold water a day. He also had severe itching sensation of skin and would not sweat even during intense physical activities. His sclera was icteric.
From his first visit to Behesht Clinic on September 2011 till February 2013, the patient was visited 16 times and each time, considering his general state and by performing physical examinations, the necessary traditional medication was prescribed for him. After three weeks of treatment, his itching sensation was significantly reduced, he felt energetic, and his flatulence and heartburn decreased. During four months of treatment, the patient gained 6 kg without any sign of ascites in abdominal ultrasonography. From the first admission (June 2009) until the end of study (February 2013), the alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level was always in the normal range. The traditional medicine preparations used for this patient were based on the book “Al-Qanoon fi al-Tibb” by Avicenna. What follows is a list of different medicines used at different stages of the treatment:
Monzeje soda, kabed capsuls, sekanjebine-bozoori, sekanjebine-sadri, samgh capsuls, eksir syrup, khabasolhadid, goleghand, habolroman, javareshe amole, aftimoon syrup, araghe-kasni shahtare, araghe-zenyan. and show the changes in the patient’s test results before and after the traditional medication. At the moment, the patient is in a good general condition and there is no need for liver transplantation.