A 59-year-old man with a three-year history of hypertension presented with a one-day history of growing TP increasing stomach pain and frequent projectile vomiting, followed by absolute constipation for one day and abdominal distension six hours before presentation. No history of fever, malaise, jaundice, hematemesis, or melena was available. There was no family history of TB. He had a similar attack previously six months ago, which was conservatively controlled and he was discharged. He was alert, oriented, afebrile, and mildly dehydrated upon inspection. Abdominal examination revealed tenderness throughout the abdomen and increased bowel sounds. However, there was a palpable abdominal swelling. Rectum was found to be empty on digital rectal examination (DRE). He was originally managed by maintaining nothing by mouth, using O2 inhalation, nasogastric aspiration, and Foley catheterization. Intravenous fluid resuscitation was initiated, as well as empiric antibiotics. Blood tests revealed normal hepatic and renal profiles during laboratory workup. His coagulation profile was slightly abnormal, and he had metabolic alkalosis as determined by ABGs. LDH and CEA levels were within normal limits. Simple abdominal X-rays indicated Distended small bowel loops with varying air-fluid levels and an absence of rectum gas shadow, as shown in . Ultrasound of the abdomen was inconclusive.
Contrast-Enhanced Abdominal CT scan (CECT) showed Dilated fluid-filled Small Bowel loops (mainly Jejunal) with max. diameter of 4.5 cm, arranged strangely. Loops were enclosed in a thick membrane while a transition zone appears outside the enclosing membrane. A provisional diagnosis of Abdominal Cocoon Syndrome as given in . Keeping in mind the CT scans, consultant opted for exploratory laparotomy.
Preparation for exploratory laparotomy was performed on the patient by the Consultant Surgeon.
A midline incision was used to expose the abdomen and visualize the interior anatomy. Numerous jejuna and proximal ileum loops were discovered to be in a strong, thick, white membrane , which consisted of two layers. Within the sac's thick, fibrous outer membrane was a thin, avascular membrane. The liver, stomach, and jejunal/ileal loops were all covered in a dense sac. The Encasing Membrane was opened, adhesiolysis was performed, and the membrane was completely removed as Illustrated in a, b & c. The entire colon was healthy except for two locations where the gut wall had thinned out and friable, necessitating primary bowel repair. Additionally, the membrane was sent for histopathology. The abdomen was cleansed completely with normal saline and then closed with a drain friable.
The patient was released without difficulties on the fourth postoperative day and advised bed rest for a week. His osteopath's report revealed the following: Peritoneal tissue: A kind of fibrosis that is densely hyalinized, with mild chronic inflammation and dystrophic calcification. One of the surgery main complications is “bowel injury” and extra care should be taken in consideration.