A 53 year old Pakistani lady presented to the Medicine clinic of a local hospital in 2004 with a history of heel pain and lower back pain for 5 months. In this period, the patient had sustained a rib fracture and left humeral fracture. There was no history of diabetes, hypertension or any other chronic disease. She had not been on any form of medication, including steroids and traditional drugs widely available and prescribed in the region, prior to the onset of pain. At the time of the fractures, she had been placed on non steroidal anti inflammatory agents, acetaminophen and tramadol. There was no history of illicit drug use and she was a non smoker. Family history was unremarkable, particularly in the context of bone disease, and malignancy.
Initial laboratory investigations had shown a mildly elevated total calcium level of 10.8 mg/dL {2.7 mmol/L}-(no albumin level result available from that time for correction). Parathormone levels (PTH) had not been determined. There was no vitamin d or renal function report available from that time. X-Ray pelvis revealed lytic lesions in the right iliac bone . A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbosacral spine showed some signal changes. The differentials based on the MRI were metastatic bone disease or multiple myeloma.
Serum protein electrophoresis was normal. The patient then got lost to follow-up. Her work up was resumed 4 years later when her bone pains had started flaring up. Bone marrow examinations done back in 2007, and later in 2009, were negative for multiple myeloma. A bone scan in November 2009 showed generalized increased tracer uptake over the skull and both the axial and appendicular skeletons- findings in favor of metabolic bone disease . An initial planar parathyroid sestamibi scan requested by a general practitioner in November 2009 was negative for any functioning parathyroid adenoma in the neck or superior mediastinum. No serum PTH report was available from this time either. Following this workup, the patient was treated empirically for bone pains with calcium supplements, an empiric vitamin d injection, and intravenous zoledronic acid 5 mg (without prior bone mineral density assessment via DXA scan). This empiric treatment was instituted by an orthopedic surgeon whom she had been referred to. The patient experienced only a slight improvement in bone pains with this treatment and also developed nausea, vomiting and anorexia. Subsequently, she sought care at the National Institute of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Dow University Health Sciences, Karachi, Pakistan.
At presentation, the patient was well oriented and of functional class 3 (wheel chair bound, able to walk only with support). Her blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg. Neck examination revealed no mass or lymphadenopathy. She had a significant proximal myopathy as well as curved thighs. She had shortened fingers, and spinal scoliosis was evident. Severe generalized bone tenderness was elicited. There was no focal deficit. Laboratory investigations at this time showed a calcium level of 15.1 mg/dL{3.775 mmol/L}, (corrected for albumin of 3.6 mg/dL{36 g/L}); Vitamin D3 level of 33.92 ng/mL{84.664 nmol/L}; phosphorus 2.3 mg/dL {0.743 mmol/L}and alkaline phosphatase of 1298 IU/L {21.633 µkat/L}. Her 24 h urine calcium was 155 mg/day {3.875 mmol/day}, with urine calcium to creatinine ratio of 0.02. Her creatinine level was 1.3 mg/dL {114.92 µmol/L}. The estimated glomerular filtration rate (calculated through Cockcroft-Gault equation) was 50 mL/min {0.835 mL/second).
Following these tests, the patient’s PTH level was ordered and determined to be 2105 pg/mL {2105 ng/L} [Table ]. Ultrasonography of the neck showed a solid hypo echoic, well-circumscribed mass lesion, measuring 1.8 × 1.2 cm at the lower pole of the right lobe of thyroid. There were no calcifications or lymphadenopathy. Appearances were suggestive of parathyroid adenoma. Both lobes of the thyroid appeared normal. A repeat planar sestamibi scan, (requested from a different institute in the city), revealed areas of tracer retention over upper and lower poles of the right lobe of thyroid. The intensity of retained tracer was more over the right inferior parathyroid gland. The findings were highly suggestive of hyperparathyroidism .
A bone mineral density scan showed a T score of − 2.9 in the spine, − 3.8 in the hip and − 4.5 in the distal forearm, consistent with severe osteoporosis. The Z scores at the spine, hip and distal forearm were − 2.0, − 3.1 and − 3.6, respectively .
Ultrasonography of the kidneys revealed a single renal stone (0.6 cm) and no neprocalcinosis.
Based on the biochemistry results of hypercalcemia, associated with elevated PTH levels, a diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism was made. Subsequent sestamibi scan and neck imaging facilitated us to localize the abnormal parathyroid gland. The DXA scan was useful for evaluation of the bone mineral density. In view of the phenomenally high levels of parathyroid hormone, (more than 10 times upper limit of normal), the pre-operative suspicion of parathyroid cancer was high [, ]. The patient was rehydrated with intravenous fluids. Subcutaneous calcitonin injections at a dose of 4 units/kg every 12 h were administered to tide her over until the surgery. Once her calcium levels had come down to 10.5 mg/dL {2.625 nmol/L}L, she was operated upon. At surgery, right hemithyroidectomy and inferior parathyroidectomy with level six lymph node resection was done. The lymphadenectomy was performed as there was evidence of enlarged lymph nodes at neck exploration. The size of the lesion was measured as 2.5 × 1.5 × 1 cm. Histopathology showed features consistent with parathyroid cancer . Capsular invasion and focal vascular invasion were noted. However, margins of excision were tumor free. The excised lymph nodes did not show evidence of tumour infiltration. The patient was not given external radiation therapy postoperatively. Literature review revealed that post operative adjuvant radiation therapy may only have a role in the management of patients with a histologically positive margin following en bloc resection, or in those with lymph node metastases [, , ].
Postoperative PTH level, performed on the second day of surgery, was 59 pg/mL {59 ng/L} (16–87). On the third postoperative day, the patient’s serum corrected calcium declined to 6 mg/dL {1.5 mmol/L}. This was associated with paresthesias around her mouth and carpo-pedal spasm. There were no seizures, although there was some confusion in terms of time and place. Intravenous calcium (2 g calcium gluconate, equivalent to 180 mg elemental calcium, in 50 mL 5% dextrose water) was infused over 20 min. Re-monitoring of calcium levels revealed persistent hypocalcemia. A slow infusion of calcium was initiated at an initial rate of 50 mL/h. This was prepared by adding 100 mL of 10% calcium gluconate (equivalent to 900 mg elemental calcium) to 1000 mL 5% dextrose water. The infusion rate was adjusted, with a goal to maintain calcium levels at lower end of normal range. On the fifth post-operative day, the calcium level had risen to 9.0 mg/dL {2.25 nmol/L}. Neurologic examination was normal and she was tolerating oral diet. Oral calcium supplementation was initiated (Qalsan D four times daily-equivalent to 2 g elemental calcium per day). She was discharged on oral calcium and vitamin D supplementation with active vitamin D, (calcitriol) 0.25 µg twice daily, in a stable condition.
At follow-up, her appetite and mobility had improved significantly, although she continued to experience bone pains. Corrected calcium was 9.5 mg/dL {2.375 nmol/L}. A repeat skeletal scintigraphy done 3 months after parathyroidectomy did not demonstrate a significant change in the lytic lesions . A repeat DXA scan 2 years down the line revealed a significant improvement in bone mineral density at all sites, though more so at the spine and hip, than at the forearm . Thereafter, we followed her clinically, as she was not keen to have further radiologic testing done. We have been monitoring her calcium and PTH levels on an annual basis. They have remained within their normal range till date (2018). She is now functional class 2, (no longer wheel chair bound), and on regular calcium and vitamin D supplements (patient perspective, attached as Additional file ).