A 72-year-old man visited our hospital complaining of gross hematuria. There were no GI illnesses in his medical history. Cystoscopy revealed multiple bladder tumors. CT and MRI showed stage cT1N0M0 disease. The patient underwent transurethral resection of the bladder tumors. Complete resection of the bladder tumors was not achievable because of the extensive lesions. The pathological result was high-grade pT1 urothelial carcinoma. After pathological diagnosis, the patient was treated with two cycles of a gemcitabine and cisplatin regimen as neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The patient then underwent laparoscopic radical cystectomy with the creation of a U-shaped ileal neobladder and limited dissection of the lymph node. Pathological examination showed high-grade pT2 urothelial carcinoma with negative resection margins and pN0 (two lymph nodes). Recurrence evaluation after surgery was determined by FDG-PET-CT due to reduced renal function. Three months after surgery, FDG-PET-CT taken to evaluate the effect of initial postoperative treatment revealed a new appearance of abdominal lymph node metastasis . Due to reduced renal function, combination chemotherapy with gemcitabine and carboplatin was administrated. However, enlargement of lymph node metastases was identified on FDG-PET-CT after two cycles . The patient began treatment with pembrolizumab (200 mg/body administrated every 3 weeks) as second-line treatment. FDG-PET-CT after three cycles of pembrolizumab showed a marked response with the disappearance of FDG accumulation in all metastatic lesions .
The patient had no adverse effects, but after 10 months complained of anorexia and upper abdominal pain. EDG demonstrated diffusely erythematous and edematous gastric mucosa covered with a whitish, fibrin-like membrane . In addition, diffuse erosions were found in the gastric antrum .
Biopsy specimens revealed inflammatory cell infiltration and apoptosis in the epithelium. High numbers of lymphocytes and plasma cells were observed infiltrating into the lamina propria . In addition, T cell infiltration and apoptotic bodies were observed in the gastric epithelium . Immunostaining identified these lymphocytes as CD3+ and CD8+ T-cells in the epithelium. No histological or immunohistochemical evidence of Helicobacter pylori or cytomegalovirus was apparent. However, the serum H. pylori antibody concentration was elevated (15 U/mL; normal <10 U/mL). The clinical and pathological findings were comparable with lymphocytic gastritis induced by pembrolizumab. The patient received eradication therapy combined with the administration of a PPI, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin for 1 week. Eradication therapy and cessation of pembrolizumab led to improvement of clinical symptoms and findings on EDG without steroid therapy in 4 months . The patient has since resumed and continued pembrolizumab administration while maintaining CR for 28 months to date.