A 55-year-old Greek woman was referred to our clinic for the management of a cystic lesion located in the tail of the pancreas. The lesion was discovered incidentally during her staging workup with abdominal ultrasound for invasive ductal adenocarcinoma of the left breast 16 months ago. Just after a modified radical left mastectomy had been performed, we further investigated the pancreatic lesion with a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, which revealed a space-occupying cystic lesion of maximum diameter of 5 cm located in the tail of the pancreas with calcifications of the wall and a central cystic component . Besides the chemo-, radio-, and hormonal therapy she received for her breast cancer, her past medical history also included hypothyroidism under hormone-replacement therapy.
The findings in the physical examination were unremarkable. Blood investigation and tumor markers (CEA, CA 15-3, CA 19-9, and CA 125) were within normal limits. The possibility of a mucinous cystic neoplasm of the pancreas was considered, and a laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy and a splenectomy were chosen.
The first distal pancreatectomy in pigs was described by Soper et al. in 1994; 2 years later, Gagner reported his first five cases of spleen-preserving laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy for insulinoma.
In our case, the patient was placed in a modified lithotomy position, with the surgeon standing between the legs of the patient. We used a five-port technique, placing a 12 mm trocar left paramedian at about the level of the umbilicus, a 10 mm-trocar in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen on the anterior axillary line, a 10 mm-trocar in the subxiphoid region, a 5 mm-trocar in the left hypochondrium on the midclavicular line, and a 5 mm-trocar in the right hypochondrium in the midclavicular line as well . Pneumoperitoneum was established with the open Hasson technique through the 12 mm paramedian port. Exploratory laparoscopy did not reveal macroscopically evident intra-abdominal metastases. We used a 30-degree laparoscope and an ultrasonic dissector (UltraCision; Ethicon, Endosurgery). After entering the lesser sac, we identified the splenic artery at the upper border of the pancreas after its origin from the celiac axis, and we ligated, by using a disposable clip applicator (U.S. Surgical Corp., Norwalk, CT) . The mobilization of the pancreas started at the reflexion of the superior leaf of the transverse mesocolon on the pancreas. The plane at the inferior border of the body of the pancreas was opened with blunt dissection, gradually exposing the posterior surface of the pancreas. The splenic vein was gently dissected by using a right-angle dissector and was ligated with clips. After sufficiently mobilizing the pancreas, this was transected by using an endoGIA (45 × 2.5 mm) . Subsequent mobilization of the spleen from its attachments to the diaphragm, colon, and left kidney was performed. The specimen was retrieved through a vertical extension of the paramedian port site in a retrieval endobag (Autosuture, Norwalk, CT). A drain was placed in the splenic fossa. Estimated intraoperative blood loss was 320 ml, and no blood transfusion was required. The pathology report revealed a pancreatic tumor 5 cm in diameter. The lesion was multiloculated, contained a yellowish fluid and a thick, stiffened wall, consisting of dense fibrotic tissue with hyaline degeneration, calcifications, regions of ossific metaplasia, and microscopic foci of neoplasmatic tissue, compatible with cystic-solid pseudopapillary neoplasm of the pancreas. Seven reactive regional lymph nodes were harvested, and resection margins were free.
The postoperative course was complicated by a pancreatic fistula (50 ml/d) grade B and a reactive left pleural effusion. On the fifth postoperative day, a CT scan of the abdomen was performed, and a subdiaphragmatic collection was drained under CT guidance. The patient's clinical condition was improved, and the patient was finally discharged on postoperative day 13. The patient's follow-up (with abdominal CT and biochemical tests yearly) in a time period of 36 months revealed no disease recurrence or development of diabetes.