A 56-year-old female was referred to our department from another facility in the patient’s area for a rapidly progressing tumor in the gallbladder and liver area. The patient reported several-month right upper quadrant pain and 4-kg weight loss over the past year. There was no laboratory sign of obstructive jaundice at the day of admission. Preoperative CT and MR scan of the liver was performed, and the patient was diagnosed with a tumor in the gallbladder area with a relatively massive infiltration of the S5 and S6 liver segments and extensive regions of necrosis. Given the potentially resectable lesion according to preoperative imaging, exploratory laparotomy was indicated to attempt radical resection. During the exploration, a voluminous tumor was found attached to the peritoneum. Intraoperative ultrasound was performed and revealed a tumor originating from the gallbladder bed area and reaching up to the area of the hepatic hilum and extensive involvement of the hepatoduodenal ligament by the tumor through the lymph nodes. The tumor was classified as inoperable due to this finding. But during the exploration, however, a rupture of the fragile tumor occurred with massive eruption of the necrotic mass and the gallbladder content into the abdominal cavity, accompanied by bleeding of the liver parenchyma. We decided that the condition could only be managed by attempting modified resection. We performed cholecystectomy and non-anatomical resection of hepatic segments S5 and S6 and partial resection of S4 without lymphadenectomy as a debulking operation . The course of hospitalization was uncomplicated, and the patient was discharged to home care on postoperative day 9. Histologically, the tumor was confirmed as MINEN of gallbladder , and its non-neuroendocrine component had the character of moderately differentiated tubular gall bladder adenocarcinoma, while the neuroendocrine component had the appearance of small cell carcinoma and was dominant, accounting for more than 65% of the viable tumor. The neuroendocrine component contained extensive necrosis, with mitotic index 64/10 HPF and a proliferation index of 70% . It was therefore obvious that the prognosis and the subsequent biological behavior would be influenced in particular by the neuroendocrine carcinoma component. Six weeks after the discharge, the patient underwent a follow-up CT scan prior to the initiation of systemic therapy, which revealed a large recurrence of the disease at the resection surface of the liver accompanied by hilar lymphadenopathy. The patient was started on systemic therapy with etoposide and carboplatin in combination with somatostatin analogues with very good radiological effect. We use this regimen as a standard in patients with MINEN of gastrointestinal tract with dominant neuroendocrine component, even with no somatostatin receptors staining available. Now the patient is almost a year after being diagnosed with a tumor, after completion of 6 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy (carboplatin + etoposide) in combination with biological therapy, the long-acting somatostatin analogues. The patient is in good clinical condition, and while a recently performed PET/MRI scan revealed a hepatic lesion and hilar lymphadenopathy in full regression, there was a spread of small peritoneal and pleural metastases, with a solitary metastasis in Th9. The condition was evaluated as disease progression stage according to RECIST criteria, the patient remains in the follow-up care, and it is now 13 months after surgery .