The patient was a 48-year-old woman who had occasionally felt pain and swelling in her left forearm since childhood, but she had not visited a clinic because the pain resolved naturally. She had no medication history or surgical history, and no relevant family history. She had felt increasing pain and numbness in her left finger for about 1 month, and she was referred to our hospital after the pain increased further.
Her forearm were broadly distended and the circumference of the left wrist was 1.2 cm longer than that of the right wrist. Grip strength was reduced by 11.4 kg on the left. Pain in the dorsiflexion of the wrist joint was noted, and the patient complained of numbness in the fingers. Electromyography showed a decreased amplitude of motor nerve conduction of the median nerve compared to the healthy side, but there was no delay in latency. Sensory nerve conduction velocity was undetectable on the affected side in the median nerve. The visual analogue scale for pain was 30/100.
Imaging findings showed no abnormalities on plain X-rays. MRI revealed hyperintensity on T2-weighted imaging and suggested that the vein had expanded from the proximal forearm to the palm . The size of the lesion was 16 × 2.2 × 3.3 cm. The median nerve was compressed by the vascular malformation invading the carpal tunnel.
Pregabalin was given for pain, but there was no improvement. Resection of the vascular malformation was considered to be invasive and to have a risk of incomplete resection. Therefore, carpal tunnel release was performed as an alternative treatment. A skin incision was made from the distal forearm to the palm, and the flexor retinaculum was opened. The veins were present on the ulnar side of the median nerve and were not touched during the procedure to avoid damage. Postoperatively, pain gradually diminished. One year after the operation, numbness of the finger disappeared and the patient was able to return to work. She has had no recurrence of symptoms due to the vascular malformation to date.