A 71-year-old man was admitted for ischemic-like chest pain occurring 10 days prior to the hospital admission. The ECG showed ST-T segment elevation without a q wave in the infero-lateral leads that could identify either myocardial infarction changes or pericarditis. A persistent release of cardiac markers was registered (troponin I 1.05 μg/l [normal value< 0.6 μg/l]) together with a slight increase in inflammatory markers and white blood cells. The clinical presentation, the ECG pattern and the laboratory data were not sufficient to rule out a diagnosis of pericarditis. Transthoracic echocardiography was not diagnostic. The patient underwent two 99mTc-tetrofosmin myocardial SPECTs on different days: the first at rest and the second after the use of nitroglycerine (0.005 mg/kg per os). The left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was calculated using a previously validated and commercially available automated software (quantitative gated SPECT, QGS, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA ). The oral post-nitrate images clearly demonstrated an absence of uptake of 99mTc-tetrofosmin in the lateral and infero-lateral wall ; the LVEF was 31%. This absence of tracer uptake after the nitrate administration clearly indicated the presence of non-viable myocardium . The same patient underwent cardiac MRI using a clinical 1.5-T Gyroscan ACS-NT MRI scanner (Philips Medical System, Eindhoven, The Netherlands). The scan was analysed according to: a) the left ventricular function (sequences balanced-echo cine MRI) and b) the presence of scar tissue with delayed-enhancement (DE) images. Delayed sequences were obtained approximately 12 minutes after intravenous injection of 0.2 mmol/kg gadolinium diethyltriaminepentaacetic acid (Gd-DTPA) using a fast field echo sequence (slice thickness 8 mm, FOV 360 mm, flip angle 15°, TE 1.3 ms, TR 4.1 ms). Delayed enhancement images were displayed with a grey scale to optimally show normal myocardium (dark) and the region of delayed-enhancement myocardium (bright). The akinesia of the infero-apical left ventricular segment and the diskinesia of the lateral wall emerged . The LVEF was calculated as 36%; a bilateral pleural effusion was also present. The DE distribution was transmural with a dilatation of the lateral wall that appeared like an aneurysm. Necrotic myocardium usually accumulates and retains gadolinium-based contrast material for 10 or more minutes after the agent has been administered . Considering the results of myocardial SPECT and MRI together, coronary angiography was performed on the fourth day and occlusion of left circumflex coronary artery was identified. As a result of the clinical and image data, medical therapy was continued.