A 5.8-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital with a 6-month of facial hair and phallic growth, deepen voice and accelerate growth velocity. The Tanner stage was II for genital development and II-III for pubic hair. Both side testicular volumes were 4 mLby Prader. Family history of PP was denied. The serum sex hormone profile indicated prepubertal levels of gonadotropins with basal LH < 0.1IU/L (prepubertal range < 0.1–0.3 IU/L) and basal FSH < below 0.1 IU/L (prepubertal range < 0.1-3), and pubertal testosterone level (4.48 ng/ml, prepubertal: <0.2-1ng/mL). His height reached 129 cm (+ 2.4 standard deviation scores,) with a high serum insulin like growth factor-1 level (+ 3.5 standard deviation scores) in National-specific charts . Other anterior pituitary hormonal profiles were normal. HCG was detectable both in serum and in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 7.12 and 15.66 IU/L separately. Bone age (BA) was advanced to 8 years old. Contrast-enhanced brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a homogeneously enhanced pineal mass . The elevated serum hCG level and pineal mass on imaging suggested the clinicial diagnosis of intracranial germ cell tumor (iGCT) and then two courses of ICE chemotherapy (ifosfamide, carboplatin and etoposide) were performed. Repeated MRI did not reflect a significant shrinkage of the pineal lesion although hCG (< 0.1 IU/L, range 0-2.6 IU/L) has been normalized. Meanwhile, basal serum gonadotropin levels (LH 2.96 and FSH 1.86 IU/L, separately) unexpectedly increased . Considering the possibility of mixed germ cell tumor due to elevated hCG level and poor response to chemotherapy [, ], the patient underwent a neurosurgical operation and the histological result revealed a mature teratoma. Subsequently, he continued to receive two additional courses of ICE chemotherapy and the radiotherapy targeting the whole brain (24 Gy) plus the pineal region boosting (12 Gy). During this period, his gonadotropin and testosterone levels were within the normal pubertal range, although with a transient change . After operation and chemoradiotherapy, MRI indicated the morphological disorders of the pineal gland without an enhanced lesion . The patient’s puberty progressed with the Tanner stage III for genital development and stage III for pubic hair. Meanwhile, the patient’s height reached 134 cm (+ 2.7SD) with a bone age of 12 years. To postpone epiphyseal closure and save growth potential, GnRH analogue therapy was started to suppress gonadal activation. This boy decided to return to the local hospital to continue GnRH analogs therapy. Through telephone survey after 2 months of GnRH analogue therapy, the patient’s gonadotropin levels normalized (LH 0.29 and the FSH 0.13 IU/L) and premature presentations gradually regressed. After 18 months of regular GnRH analogue therapy, the patient’s LH and FSH remained undetectable while his precocious puberty regressed. The growth velocity is approximately 5 cm per year.