The patient was a 16-year-old female with a past medical history of type 1 diabetes on insulin pump therapy, previous episodes of DKA, and autoimmune hypothyroidism. She presented to the emergency department with altered mental status, severe abdominal pain, and multiple episodes of vomiting. According to her mother, all her symptoms started within the prior 24 hours. The patient was observed to be awake but disoriented with generalized abdominal tenderness to palpation. The insulin pump was taken off by the family just prior to presenting to the hospital. She presented to the hospital via emergency medical services, and her vital signs were normal upon arrival. Initial physical examination revealed a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 12 (eyes 3, verbal 4, motor 5) and the patient was localizing to pain on palpation of the right lower quadrant, without any other significant exam findings. Monitoring and intravenous (IV) access were established, and blood for laboratory evaluation was collected.
The patient was started on a lactated Ringer’s infusion. Her vital signs remained stable and upon re-evaluation, her GCS remained unchanged. With her clinical picture and previous history with DKA, initial concern was for DKA, although her initial point-of-care glucose was 109 mg/dL (reference 80–140 mg/dL) Subsequent point-of-care glucose readings showed decreasing levels less than 100 mg/dL (80–140 mg/dl) requiring glucose administration. Because of initial normal point-of-care glucose readings, the treating team pursued other causes of altered mental status. Initial labs were significant for a venous pH of 7.2 (7.35–7.45), bicarbonate of 8 mEq/L (21–28 mEq/L); anion gap of 33 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (4–12 mmol/L); lactate of 2 mmol/L (0.5–1 mmol/L); sodium 133 mEq/L (135–145 mEq/L); potassium 4.9 mEq/L (3.6–5.2 mEq/L); blood urea nitrogen 19 mg/dL (7–20 mg/dL); creatinine of 0.8 mg/dL (0.84–1.21 mg/dL); beta-hydroxybutyrate of 3.26 mmol/L (0.4–0.5 mmol/L); initial plasma glucose of 108 mg/dL (80–140/mg/dL); and leukocytosis of 20,600 per microliter (4500–11000 per microliter).
Urine toxicology, salicylate, and acetaminophen screen and pregnancy test were negative. A non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the brain was unremarkable. She also had an IV contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen, which was suspicious for possible early appendicitis. With her resulting labs, other causes of elevated gap metabolic acidosis were considered. An endocrine consult was obtained for possible eDKA. Based on the consult and test results, the patient was started on an insulin drip at 0.1units per kilogram per hour as well as an infusion of a dextrose 10% solution.
Pediatric surgery was consulted, and after exam and review of the CT results recommended that the patient be taken to the operating room for an appendectomy. Surgical findings were noted to be equivocal and the appendix was removed without complication. The patient’s mental status improved post appendectomy. With fluid and insulin therapy her condition improved, laboratory abnormalities normalized within a few days, and she was subsequently discharged home. The consulting teams agreed that the final diagnosis was eDKA likely caused by appendicitis.