This 28-year-old and 20-week pregnant Chinese woman with genetically confirmed alpha-thalassemia trait and a current obstetric record of gravida 3, para 0, artificial abortion 1 and ectopic pregnancy 1 (G3P0AA1E1 by Gravida/para/abortus (GPA) system) presented to our emergency unit (EU) due to headache, chills, fever and general soreness for one day. At our EU, her physical examination revealed a fever up to 38.5°C, mild tachypnea with a respiratory rate up to 21 breaths/min and bilateral lower back knocking pain. Her obstetric ultrasound revealed 20 weeks gestational age, normal placenta location and a fetal heart beat between 140 and 150/min. No vaginal bleeding was noted.
Her laboratory data showed pyuria (urine white blood cell count 30 to 50/high power field) and severe peripheral blood pancytopenia: white blood cell (WBC) count 2200/mm3 with an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of 1780/mm3, hemoglobin 5.5g/dL, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 119.4fl and platelet count 116,000/mm3. Aggregation of erythrocytes and low reticulocyte percentage (0.1%) were detected in peripheral blood smear. Both direct and indirect antiglobulin tests were strongly positive for antibodies against erythrocytes. The autoantibody was found to be of the cold type. A subsequent laboratory investigation revealed 1:32(+) of cold hemagglutinin titer, raised lactate dehydrogenase (314U/L) and low levels of complement 3 (55.5mg/dL) and complement 4 (10mg/dL).
Her initial bone marrow cytology showed myeloid hyperplasia and only very few erythroid precursors with erythroblasts in abnormal megaloblastic change , some of which presented with pseudopods or ‘dog ears’ , and almost no erythroid maturation beyond basophilic normoblasts. Her bone marrow biopsy revealed scattered erythroblasts displaying homogeneous ground glass intranuclear viral inclusions and positive nuclear immunostaining of B19 virus . Polymerase chain reaction for B19 virus DNA was positive in specimens from her bone marrow, plasma and nasal cavity. Antibodies against Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) were not checked because she did not present with the symptoms and signs of infectious mononucleosis or lymphoproliferative disorders present in most reported cases of EBV-associated hemolytic anemia.
TAC caused by B19 virus infection in a pregnant woman with cold antibody autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) was diagnosed. She received intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) injection (CSL Limited, Parkville, Australia), 0.4gm/Kg/day for five days, for eradication of viremia and prophylaxis of occurrence of hydrops fetalis. Although her peripheral blood reticulocyte percentage increased dramatically after IVIG treatment , her hemolytic anemia did not improve much. In order to control her autoimmune hemolysis, intravenous high dose dexamethasone (Astar Chem. & Pharm., Hsinchu, Taiwan), 40mg/day for four days, was prescribed. This treatment was repeated every two weeks for four cycles and then shifted to a monthly oral schedule. She was discharged in a stable condition after the fourth intravenous treatment and received careful follow-up study in our outpatient clinic. No more erythrocytes were transfused after the fifth course of high dose dexamethasone in spite of persistent mild anemia. During her hospitalization and subsequent outpatient clinic visits, obstetric ultrasound did not reveal any evidence of fetal anemia and hydrops fetalis. Four months later, a normal looking healthy baby boy (Apgar score 8 at one minute and 9 at five minutes, body weight 3240gm) was naturally delivered with vacuum extraction aid. After delivery of the baby, her AIHA quickly resolved.