A 12-year-old Asian female patient was referred from the pediatric hematology-oncology service, department of pediatrics, for the evaluation and management of swollen gingiva and chin . The patient had a history of patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) closure at age 6. She underwent four cycles of induction chemotherapy for acute myeloid leukemia (AML), which had been diagnosed a year previously. She was admitted for the management of neutropenic fever over 39 °C. She was on antibiotics (linezolid, meropenem, sulfamethoxazole, metronidazole, teicoplanin, cefpiramide, amikacin), antifungals (fluconazole, nystatin, amphotericin B, voriconazole, caspofungin), and an antiviral (acyclovir) for her febrile condition, under the impression of neutropenic fever and vancomycin-resistance enterococci (VRE) sepsis. The results of complete blood count with differential were as follows: white blood cell (WBC) counts 40/μL, platelet counts 8000/μL, absolute neutrophil count 0/μL.
As the patient was already on every possible antibiotic, antifungal, and antiviral, close observation and oral hygiene maintenance was the only possible management. Surgical intervention was contraindicated due to her systemic condition, especially considering her hematologic status. Six days after the initial presentation, the patient developed cardiac arrest under the background of uncontrolled fever. Return of spontaneous circulation was achieved after resuscitation, and her general condition improved as days went by. The oral and facial lesion progressed to full-thickness gangrene and underlying alveolar bone separated from the surrounding mandible . Teeth on the segment spontaneously fell out . The necrotic alveolar bone segment also spontaneously fell out.
After the patient had become afebrile and able to return to regular activities, not only the disfigurement but the incompetency of the lips and resultant drooling posed severe obstacles in her daily life since oral intake was disabled. Considering the pancytopenic condition of the patient, surgical repair was done as simply as possible, by local flap, to achieve continuity of the orbicularis oris muscle and competency of the lip, thus enabling oral intake afterwards .