Our patient a 29-year-old right hand dominant male, who presented late, about 25 days after trauma following a motor vehicle accident, had been to multiple hospitals previously and then came to this institute. On examination, he had frank swelling and deformity over the wrist. There was marked tenderness over carpals and the anatomical snuff box. He was unable to move the wrist however retained limited flexion and extension of the fingers. There was no associated open wound and no distal neurovascular compromise and no other skeletal injury. After presenting to the emergency room, his fresh anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique view radiographs of the wrist were done which showed the dislocation of the lunate volarly with the classical spilled tea-cup sign suggestive of volar PLD. An attempt for closed reduction under analgesia and local anesthesia was given in the emergency room itself, however, was deemed unsuccessful. The patient was applied a long arm cast and was subjected to further investigations before being posted for surgery. CT of the right wrist was done which was suggestive of volar displacement of the lunate with undisplaced fracture of waist of scaphoid. After routine investigations, pre-anesthesia evaluation and taking informed consent patient was posted for surgery.
Patient was posted for open reduction and reduction was achieved through dorsal approach. Incision was taken over the dorsal aspect of wrist and after retracting the extensor tendons and cutting through the extensor retinaculum, the wrist joint capsule was visualized. The joint capsule was cut open and the lunate bone was identified under C arm. Traction and manipulation were done and after manipulation with the help of k wire, the lunate was reduced to its original place. Reduction was confirmed under C arm and was deemed acceptable. The fracture of the scaphoid was identified and two percutaneous Kirschner’s wires were passed across the fracture site to hold the fragments in place after confirming the reduction, ligament repair was done. After confirming the reduction and the joint stability, the joint capsule was closed, retinaculum was sutured back, and closure was done. The k wires were cut and pin tract dressing was done and along arm thumb spica cast was applied. Two weeks later, the sutures were removed and the cast was removed and the cast was changed with a short arm thumb spica cast. At 8 weeks, the k wires were removed and the patient was started with rigorous hand physiotherapy. At 1-year follow-up, the active range of motion for active flexion was 75° and active extension up to 65° with a decrease in pronation and supination to 55°. Modified mayo wrist score of 76 indicates a good outcome.