A 38-year-old Japanese woman, gravida 0, presented with abdominal distension and frequent urination, was found to have a pelvic mass on radiologic examinations. She had a history of laparoscopic uterine myomectomy about a year before the onset, where the bilateral ovaries were macroscopically normal . She had no menstrual irregularities or dysfunctional uterine bleeding. Serum estradiol (E2) level was elevated to 214.5 pg/ml (normal 70–160 pg/ml), while testosterone was within the normal range. Luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) were 2.0 mIU/ml (normal 1-14mIU/ml) and less than 0.1 mIU/ml (normal 1.5-8mIU/ml) respectively, indicating E2-mediated negative feedback. CA 125 level was slightly elevated to 39.2 U/ml (normal < 35.0 U/ml). CEA, CA 19–9 and SCC antigen were within the normal range.
The MR showed a large, multiloculated cystic mass with numerous septations in the pelvis measuring approximately 10 × 10 × 12 cm. On T2-weighted images, fluid-fluid levels were demonstrated in several cystic components . T1-weighted images demonstrated intracystic high signal intensities suggesting intracystic hemorrhage . Contrast-enhanced fat-suppressed T1-weighted images showed strong enhancement of the septations similar to uterine myometrium . The mass was suspected to originate from the right ovary because the right ovary was not identified. The left ovary was atrophic for her age . On diffusion-weighted imaging, the septations showed high signal intensity . The uterus was of normal size without endometrial thickening. There was a small amount of ascites which was limited to the pouch of Douglas and vesicouterine pouch . Any calcifications were not detected on CT images. GCT was suspected from these findings.
Abdominal right ovarian tumor resection was performed. During the operation, the frozen section of the right ovarian tumor showed that malignancy could not be excluded due to its nuclear atypia. The differential diagnoses of the tumor included yolk sac tumor, malignant mucinous tumor and AGCT despite of the lack of any typical findings such as coffee-bean nuclei and Call-Exner bodies. Based on this report, abdominal simple total hysterectomy, bilateral oophoro-salpingectomy, partial omentectomy and appendectomy were performed.
The gross appearance of the cut surface of the right ovarian tumor, measuring 13 cm in diameter, showed multiloculated cystic tumor accompanied by intracystic hemorrhagic foci. The left ovary had a maximum diameter of 1.7 cm, suggesting atrophy for her age . Microscopic examination of the right ovary showed round cells that surrounded the macrofolliculars with eosinophilic material and hemorrhage .The tumor cells had scant cytoplasm, round-to-oval vesicular nuclei with small eosinophilic nucleoli, and irregular nuclear contours. The typical findings for AGCT such as longitudinal nuclear grooves (coffee-bean nuclei) and Call-Exner bodies were not identified. The mitotic activity was focally brisk, with an average of 10 mitoses per 10 high-power fields in these areas . Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were positive for vimentin, calretinin, CD99, a-inhibin and MIB-1 labeling index was about 30%. The above findings supported the diagnosis of JGCT. Accordingly, the definitive diagnosis of JGCT, FIGO Stage IA led to no additional treatment.