A 42-year-old female patient was referred to the Department of Gastroenterology at the Second Clinical College of Yangzhou University, for long-standing complaints of solid and liquid dysphagia accompanied by episodes of regurgitation. She underwent two upper digestive endoscopies, on which the presence of food residues in the esophageal lumen and rebound passage through the gastroesophageal junction was observed. Gastroesophageal contrast radiography showed slight dilatation of the esophagus, an absence of primary peristalsis but presence of aperistaltic waves, and a narrow distal esophagus with a ‘bird’s beak’ aspect . A CT scan was performed, but was unremarkable and did not reveal any esophageal lesion. Esophageal manometry demonstrated a hypertensive lower esophageal sphincter pressure in conjunction with incomplete relaxation and isobaric aperistaltic pressurizations, all consistent with type II achalasia . The patient was counseled regarding the diagnosis of achalasia and scheduled for POEM. Informed patient consent was obtained before the procedure. The patient was intubated and brought under general anesthesia. Subsequently, upper digestive endoscopy was performed by using a conventional endoscope. Carbon dioxide insufflation was used throughout the procedure. At the esophageal mucosa, 10 cm proximal to the gastroesophageal junction, a 2 cm longitudinal mucosal incision was made using a Hook knife to serve as the entry point for the tunnel in the planned POEM procedure. The mucosa was then separated from muscular layer starting at beginning of the tunnel and the endoscope was then used to enlarge the submucosal tunnel by further separation of mucosa and muscularis. When the channel reached the proximity of the esophagogastric junction, however, a white band of potential tumor tissue became apparent. On encountering this structure, it was decided to resect the putative tumor by separating it from the surrounding muscular layer under direct endoscopic view using an insulated-tip knife. The then mobilized tumor was excised out of the tunnel using a snare through the mucosal entry. The endoscope was then withdrawn from the submucosal tunnel and was capable of passing the gastroesophageal junction without apparent difficulty, thus the myotomy was aborted. Several metal clips were employed to close the mucosal incision . Subsequent histological evaluation combined with relevant immunohistochemistry produced a definitive diagnosis of leiomyoma . Now, 10 months postoperatively the patient is largely asymptomatic.