A 33-year-old female presented to the clinic complaining of a polyp on top of a red plaque in the left side mons pubis for 1 year. It was a kind of round flaky red bulge lesion in the skin of mons pubis. On top of this, it is shown sarcomatoid hyperplasia covering with the yellow-green crust, and the surrounding skin had no obvious abnormality and elcosis. The plaque was slightly bulgy without pressing pain, covered with a thick yellow-white crust . The plaque was 2.2 × 1.8 × 0.5 cm, and the polyp was 2.5 × 2 × 1.5 cm. The width of the pedicle was 1.4 cm. There were no other systemic abnormalities or any palpable lymphadenopathy, ultrasound B was applied to evaluate the superficial inguinal lymph nodes. She had no significant history of medicine, surgery, irritation, and trauma. Before the lesion appearance, the patient had no discomfort, thus she did not pay attention to the skin lesion, and had not used other external medicines or ask for help from professionals. Until nearly a month, she found that the lesion was prone to bleed after friction, thus she came to our hospital for treatment. The lesion was removed surgically and the histopathologic examination was performed. The possibility of skin tumor was considered through dermoscopy, then the histopathological examination was performed to make the confirmation. Skin biopsy was made on December 31, 2019, and further immunohistochemical reports have been done on January 17, 2020. Detailed information was shown below.
The dermoscopic images showed the dark red background, covering a thick yellow-and-white crust, with spot-shaped and polymorphic vascular structures which focally distributed. In some areas, white homogeneous structures could be seen, as well as dark red clumps. No typical pigment structure was seen . The skin lesions were considered as the diagnosis of skin tumors using dermoscopy.
The excisional biopsy was carried out, and the specimen tissue was fixed in formalin, and embedded in paraffin. The histological examination showed: the skin lesion at the left side of mons pubis was spindle-shaped, the lesion size was 2.2 × 1.8 × 0.5 cm. There were gray-brown and mushroom-shaped protrusions on the epidermis, and the size of the protrusions was 2.5 × 2 × 1.5 cm, the pedicle width was 1.4 cm, and the transaction of the protrusions was grayish-white and grayish-red. Besides, Breslow thickness was about 9.5mm, and Clark level was IV. No tumor embolus was detected in the vessels. The tumor involvement had been found in the incisal edge of long-axis two sides and base of the tumor sample.
Microscopically, the polyps were lined by melanocytes, with pale cytoplasm . It was represented as atypical cells and heteromorphic nuclei, with different cell sizes and abnormal mitosis of 5–7 counts /10HPF. Each slide was reviewed by 3 different pathologists, and the diagnosis was made as the melanocyte tumor.
The immunohistochemistry (IHC) studies revealed that the expressions of S-100, HMB-45, Melan A and Cyclin D1 were stained positive, while CD-117 was focally immunoreactive and CD31, P16, PCK and LCA were stained negative. The final histopathological diagnosis was made: melanocyte nevus malignancy, nodular malignant melanoma. This patient underwent a complete local excision and she recovered well recently.
The patient was required to re-examined regularly after surgery, and recent follow-ups showed that she recovered well and there was no sign of recurrence till now.