We present a rare and interesting case of a 68-year-old White male with T4aN1bM0, stage III (AJCC 8th edition) squamous cell carcinoma of the thyroid. His past medical history included hypertension, prostate cancer treated with androgen deprivation therapy, external beam radiation therapy, and brachytherapy, and a benign parotid tumor status post-parotidectomy 20 years prior. He was retired from working in corporate management, and family history was significant for lung cancer in his father and breast cancer in a sister. Comorbid illnesses included gastrointestinal reflux disease, for which he took ranitidine 150 mg daily and omeprazole 20 mg daily; hypertension, for which he took lisinopril 12.5 mg daily; hyperlipidemia, for which he took atorvastatin 20 mg daily; and seasonal allergies and asthma, for which he took montelukast 150 mg daily and loratadine 10 mg daily. He was also using naproxen and cannabis for cancer-related pain at time of presentation. He was a lifelong non-smoker and did not drink alcohol to excess. He first noticed his right neck mass while shaving 3 months prior to presentation. He reported some mild pain with swallowing, weight loss of unknown amount, right neck sensitivity to light touch, increased hoarseness, and a raspy voice. He was initially diagnosed by his primary care physician as having lymphadenopathy secondary to a sinus infection and received two rounds of antibiotics. The mass failed to improve and, as a result, a fine needle aspiration of the lesion was performed. Evaluation of the biopsy material demonstrated dysmorphic cells containing cytoplasmic keratin, which stained positively for CK5/6, consistent with a squamous cell carcinoma. Monoclonal PAX-8 (Biocare Medical, BC12) staining was also focally positive . Subsequent laryngoscopy revealed no mucosal lesions, but right vocal cord paralysis was observed. A CT of the neck with contrast revealed a 4.8 cm peripherally enhancing hypodense mass with central necrosis lateral to the right hyoid bone, emanating from the thyroid gland . Multiple smaller nodular lesions within the prevertebral space, right paraesophageal region, and superior mediastinum were also identified. A staging PET scan showed a hypermetabolic right thyroid lobe with extensive conglomerate pathologic adenopathy at the right cervical lymph node chain, extending inferior to the right thoracic inlet, as well as a left retropharyngeal hypermetabolic lymph node, but no evidence of distant metastasis . On initial physical and neurologic examination, the oncology team noted a large, firm, fixed right medial neck mass without overlying skin changes, and a normal cranial nerve exam.
The patient’s case was discussed at the head and neck multidisciplinary tumor board, with a consensus opinion that this squamous cell carcinoma was indeed of thyroid origin. Extensive surgical resection including a laryngectomy, thyroidectomy, and reconstruction followed by adjuvant chemoradiation as a potential curative course was recommended. However, due to the morbidity and lifestyle implications associated with surgery, the patient declined surgery and instead chose to pursue concurrent chemoradiation with weekly chemotherapy.
Intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) was used to treat the right thyroid mass to 70 Gy in 35 fractions at 200 cGy per fraction, as well as bilateral retropharyngeal nodes cervical neck nodal levels IB, II, III, IV, and V to 63 Gy in 35 fractions at 180 cGy per fraction . The patient completed radiation with weekly concurrent carboplatin-paclitaxel over 7 weeks. During treatment, he developed grade 2 fatigue, grade 2 mucositis, grade 2 dermatitis, grade 3 dysphagia, and grade 3 dry mouth with thickened secretions with excessive mucus. The skin desquamation was treated with silver sulfadiazine and mineral oil-hydrophil petrolat. A percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube was placed during the first week of treatment due to nutrition and oral intake difficulties at baseline, and the patient lost less than 15 lbs throughout the treatment. Long-term toxicity was significant for chronic xerostomia and dysphagia, requiring a permanent gastrostomy tube. He also developed treatment-related hypothyroidism and was started on levothyroxine approximately 3 months after completion of treatment, when his thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) was found to have gone up from 1.63 (baseline, normal) to 21 mIU/mL (elevated).
After receiving concurrent chemoradiation, the patient underwent two additional cycles of high-dose carboplatin–paclitaxel every 3 weeks. Follow-up imaging after concurrent chemoradiation suggested a partial therapeutic response. PET (18-fluorodeoxyglucose/18-FDG)/CT of the neck demonstrated that the thyroid mass had decreased in size from 5.0 × 5.2 cm, with maximum standardized uptake values (SUV) of 35.3, to 3.8 × 2.1 cm, with maximum SUV of 19.4 . This was also apparent on physical examination, where the tumor was smaller, softer, and less tender to palpation. The right and left neck lymph nodes were also notably smaller and demonstrated less PET-avidity. Imaging of the chest, however, revealed pulmonary metastases up to 9 mm in size, as well as multiple bilateral hypermetabolic nodules .
In light of the new pulmonary metastatic disease, additional systemic chemotherapy with carboplatin–paclitaxel was recommended to the patient. However, he opted for immunotherapy instead due to previous chemotherapy side effects and subsequently completed nine cycles of pembrolizumab. Imaging studies obtained after the third cycle of pembrolizumab demonstrated an interval decrease in the size of multiple pulmonary nodules bilaterally, suggesting a positive response to therapy . At the same time, however, a CT scan demonstrated an increase in the size of the thyroid mass . Additionally, new encasement of the distal common carotid artery, carotid bifurcation, and proximal internal carotid artery was present, and erosion of the thyroid cartilage was also identified. After the sixth cycle of pembrolizumab, imaging continued to demonstrate enlargement of the thyroid mass with increased extension to the tracheoesophageal groove, while the pulmonary nodules continued to get smaller . Following the ninth cycle of pembrolizumab, the thyroid mass had continued to enlarge, eroding the thyroid and cricoid cartilages, extending into the paraglottic space, and invading the cervical esophagus. No new or worsening pulmonary metastatic disease was identified at this time . The tenth cycle of pembrolizumab was halted due to leukocytosis (WBC 21.81 and ANC 19.05) and the patient’s desire to pursue supportive care. Fifteen months after his initial diagnosis, the patient was transitioned to comfort care and died 3 months later. Autopsy was not performed as the patient’s desire was to donate his body to science.