History of Presentation
A 67-year-old woman presented at our ambulatory clinic for a follow-up computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax with contrast medium after pulmonary vein (PV) stenting to address PV stenosis after catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation (AF). During the visit, the patient reported dyspnea (NYHA functional class III), intermittent palpitations, nausea, and general weakness. The clinical examination revealed no notable abnormalities.

Past Medical History
The patient’s medical history included persistent AF, first diagnosed 10 years before the current presentation, with a CHA₂DS₂-VASc score of 3 and an European Heart Rhythm Association score of 2b, under antiarrhythmic therapy with propafenone and oral anticoagulation with rivaroxaban. She had undergone 2 radiofrequency (RF)-based pulmonary vein isolation (PVI) procedures 8 and 7 years earlier. Due to AF recurrence, a new RF-based PVI was planned 3 years ago; however, PV stenosis was detected during angiography of the left PVs and a cryoballoon (CB)-based PVI was performed instead. A subsequent evaluation of the PV stenosis was recommended, but the patient failed to attend the appointment due to absence of symptoms.

The patient presented 9 months ago at our ambulatory clinic with recurrent AF, and a new RF-based ablation was performed 6 months ago. During electroanatomic mapping, a persistent bidirectional block of the PVs was documented. Due to induction of atrial tachycardia and typical atrial flutter, anterior and posterior line ablations, and a cavotricuspid isthmus ablation were performed, with successful termination of the arrhythmias. High-grade stenosis of the left PVs was confirmed angiographically, and PV stenting was successfully completed 5 months before the current presentation by a multidisciplinary team. The prestenotic diameter of the left superior pulmonary vein (LSPV) and left inferior pulmonary vein (LIPV) was 6.5 and 7.0 mm, respectively. The 2 left PVs were dilated, and a 20- × 7-mm stent and a 20- × 10-mm stent were implanted in the LSPV and LIPV, respectively (Video 3). One week before the current presentation, the patient was hospitalized at another institution due to recurrent atrial tachycardia. Electrical cardioversion was performed, and therapy with propafenone was initiated.

The medical history also included cardiac decompensation secondary to AF, with pulmonary edema, respiratory insufficiency, and intermittent noninvasive ventilation; chronic kidney disease; hypothyroidism managed with substitution therapy; arterial hypertension; hypercholesterolemia; and intolerance to flecainide.

Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis considered AF or atrial tachycardia recurrence, worsening of left ventricular function, a new episode of pulmonary edema, propafenone intolerance, and progression of the PV stenosis leading to pulmonary hypertension.

Investigations
The electrocardiography at presentation showed a normofrequent sinus rhythm with no pathologic changes. Initial blood tests revealed previously known reduced renal function (glomerular filtration rate, 47 mL/min/1.73 m2) and hypothyroidism with inadequate substitution therapy.
The thoracic CT scan with contrast media showed the stent in the LSPV, with normal contrast and positioning and a slightly progressive, high-grade, short stenosis of the LIPV, with no visible stent at this level. Additional findings included dilatation of the truncus pulmonalis (diameter: 35 mm) and the right pulmonary artery (diameter: 28 mm). The scan concluded a dislocation of the stent from the LIPV, which could not be visualized in the thoracic scan, along with signs of pulmonary hypertension.

A subsequent abdominal CT scan identified the displaced stent in the abdominal aorta, located just cranial to the aortoiliac bifurcation.

Management
A multidisciplinary team consisting of electrophysiologists, radiologists, and interventional radiologists decided to implant an additional stent at the aortoiliac bifurcation to secure the displaced stent. Five days after presentation, an aortic digital subtraction angiography was performed, revealing the dislodged stent superior to the aortoiliac bifurcation and a moderate atherosclerotic stenosis of the right common iliac artery (CIA), by present peripheral artery disease. Due to the significant size mismatch between the diameter of the aorta, left CIA, and the displaced stent, overexpanding the stent in the abdominal aorta or repositioning the stent in the left CIA was deemed unfeasible. A double stenting procedure of the aortoiliac bifurcation using the kissing stents technique was performed. Two cobalt-chromium 9- × 58-mm stents (Dynetic, Biotronik) were implanted: the left one secured the displaced PV stent in place, whereas the right one treated the CIA stenosis. A Doppler ultrasound of the arteries of the lower limbs, performed on the first postprocedural day, showed no evidence of stenosis after stent implantation. The patient was discharged on rivaroxaban and clopidogrel therapy.

Outcome and Follow-Up
Due to recurrent AF despite propafenone therapy, a new RF-based AF ablation was performed 4 months after presentation, including reisolation of the anterior line and completion of the box lesion. During the procedure, atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia was induced by programmed stimulation, and a slow-pathway ablation was performed. During the slow-pathway ablation, a transient third-degree atrioventricular block occurred. Follow-up revealed a persistent second-degree 2:1 atrioventricular block, and a 2-chamber pacemaker was successfully implanted.
Seven months after the presentation, the patient’s symptoms had significantly improved. A renewed ventilation-perfusion analysis, however, showed progressive worsening of the left lung perfusion. A new angiography of the LIPV, with subsequent stenting, was planned. A Doppler ultrasound examination of the main arteries in the lower limb did not reveal any pathologic findings.