A 30-year-old, ill-appearing South Asian male patient presented to the emergency department with new-onset fever, chest discomfort, macular exanthema, abdominal pain, coughing, mild dyspnoea, and tachypnoea for a couple of days. The patient’s medical history was unremarkable except for a recent infection with SARS-CoV-2 about a month prior to the current presentation. There was no history of smoking or a family history of cardiovascular disease and the patient had a mildly increased body mass index of 29. The course of the COVID-19 disease was mild with only minor symptoms of respiratory infection, most notably coughing, did not require further medical attention, and the patient recovered completely without any residual symptoms. The patient had not been vaccinated prior to COVID-19 infection or since then. Upon admission to the emergency department, the patient tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acids in consecutive nasopharyngeal swabs. Antibody-testing for SARS-CoV-2 was positive with 164 U/mL, confirming past COVID-19 infection.
On examination, a widespread, itching, non-scaling macular exanthema was evident, which originated at the lower legs and had since spread to the trunk. Additionally, mild abdominal tenderness was localized in the epigastric area and pulmonary auscultation revealed bilateral fine rales in the lung bases. Upon cardiac auscultation, no murmurs or pathological heart sounds were evident and peripheral volume status appeared euvolaemic. The further physical exam was unremarkable and vital signs were initially stable. Laboratory work-up showed significant inflammation [white blood cells 11.7 G/L and c-reactive protein (CRP) 155 mg/L] and a mild increase of markers of myocyte necrosis and myocardial stretch [high-sensitive cardiac troponin I (hs-cTnI) 84 ng/L and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) 476 ng/L] . Upon chest X-ray, bilateral diffuse reticular abnormalities were described in both lungs . The patient was started on i.v. broad-spectrum, empiric antibiotics after blood cultures were drawn (ceftriaxone 2 g i.v. and azithromycin 500 mg p.o.) and was subsequently admitted to the department of pulmonary medicine. High-resolution chest computed tomography (CT), which was issued to further characterize the X-ray findings, showed mild bilateral, multilobular interstitial abnormalities, and ground-glass opacities most notably in the basal sections of the lung . These findings were compatible with a history of SARS-CoV-2 infection and there were no signs of acute bacterial pneumonia or severe respiratory disease.
Upon laboratory follow-up, a significant increase of both hs-cTnI and NT-proBNP was noted. The electrocardiogram was unremarkable except for sinus tachycardia with a heart rate of 120 beats per minute and peripheral low voltage. Transthoracic echocardiography showed mildly reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 49% without evidence of regional wall motion abnormalities (, ). Since the patient continued to suffer from chest discomfort referral for acute coronary angiography was issued, which excluded coronary artery disease. Ventriculography confirmed mildly reduced left ventricular systolic function with an ejection fraction of 43%. . The patient was then transferred to our cardiological ward for haemodynamic monitoring and further management. To confirm the current tentative diagnosis of acute myocarditis, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was arranged. Pulmonary embolism may also be considered as a potential differential diagnosis in this setting. However, since the pre-test probability for pulmonary embolism was low (Wells Score of 1.5), echocardiography showed normal right ventricular function nor any other signs of pulmonary embolism and a different diagnosis was considered more likely, a second CT scan was omitted to reduce radiation exposure in this young patient.
During the next couple of days, despite continuous antibiotic treatment, symptoms did not improve and clinical findings further deteriorated: heart rate further rose and blood pressure dropped to 90/60 mmHg. In addition to the aforementioned symptoms, we found bilateral redness of the eyes, consistent with conjunctivitis and a generalized arthralgia. Autoimmune diagnostics returned negative and we did not find any signs of acute human parvovirus B-19 infection, mononucleosis, streptococcal infection, influenza, or rubella upon diagnostic work-up, which have to be considered as potential differential diagnoses in this case. The complex, multi-organ symptom constellation with a failure of clinical improvement despite broad-spectrum antibiotics facilitated the diagnosis of MIS-A following recent mildly symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection. According to current literature, the patient was started on a 100 mg daily dose of aspirin and an intravenous hydrocortisone drip with 200 mg/day after an initial bolus of 100 mg. The patient’s symptoms and haemodynamic parameters improved drastically following the start of steroid treatment. We also observed a prompt and steady decrease of inflammatory markers and the last fever spike of 39°C was documented on the day of steroid initiation. Cardiac MRI finally confirmed acute myocarditis with findings of myocardial oedema, late gadolinium enhancement and small pericardial effusion—at this point, in time the patient was already feeling better and only suffered from intermittent and mild chest pain .
After 6 days of intravenous corticosteroid treatment—stopped without tapering—the patient was discharged from hospital care without significant residual symptoms. The necessity of strict, physical activity restriction for 3–6 months was discussed with the patient. There were no adverse or unanticipated events secondary to corticosteroid treatment. Upon 2-week follow-up, the patient was feeling well and there was no symptom recurrence. Echocardiography at 6-week follow-up revealed a normalization of systolic left ventricular function alongside a normalization of laboratory markers of myocardial injury. Antithrombotic treatment with aspirin was also stopped at this point.