A 14-year-old White Italian boy came to our Emergency Unit with a headache that had worsened over 20 days together with blurred vision and diplopia over the previous 10 days. His past history was negative for significant morbidities. He reported a recent episode of fever associated with cough, which coincided with the onset of headache. For this respiratory infection he had started taking levofloxacin 500 mg once a day one week before coming to our attention but had stopped taking it after three days due to worsening headache. This headache was initially associated with daytime somnolence, myalgia and arthralgia. The somnolence and arthralgia underwent rapid and spontaneous regression, with subsequent appearance of blurred vision.
The physical examination revealed an alert adolescent with weight of 66 kg (75th -90th percentile) , height of 169 cm (50th–75th percentile) and body mass (BMI) of 23.1 kg/m2 (85th–95th percentile) . The general examination was normal. The neurological examination was normal except for a right eye abduction deficit. Eye examination showed a normal visual acuity (10/10) in both eyes with normal colour vision and pupillary light responses, but a fundus examination revealed severe bilateral papilloedema with elevated disc, hyperaemia, blurred margins and vessel tortuosity in both eyes . Lancaster red-green test confirmed a right abducens nerve palsy, and campimetry showed a restricted visual field with external right muscle deficiency on the right side. Cranial neuroimaging (CT and MRI) showed a normal brain parenchyma with no evidence of hydrocephalus, mass, structural lesion, or abnormal meningeal enhancement. MRI neuroimaging showed oedema of both optic nerves with a tapered appearance of the right optic nerve. Venography was not performed, but an angio-MRI of the cerebral circulation was normal. Visual evoked cortical potentials were normal. A 24-h Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring was negative.
Blood tests showed high M. pneumoniae IgM (15.00 AU/ml, normal range 0–9) and normal M. pneumoniae IgG levels (3.89 AU/ml, normal range 0–9) suggesting a recent infection, with normal white blood cell indices and negative C-reactive protein. Clarithromycin was then prescribed for 14 days without any adverse effects.
Serological screening for Coxsackie, Parvovirus, ECHO virus, Adenovirus, Cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV), Herpes Simplex Virus 1 (HSV1), and Herpes Simplex Virus 2 (HSV2) excluded recent infections. Thyroid function was normal. Antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-double stranded DNA (dsDNA), ENA screening and rheumatoid factor were negative.
During hospitalisation we observed a complete and spontaneous regression of headache and an initial spontaneous reduction in diplopia within a few days. Oral prednisone 50 mg/day (0.75 mg/kg/day) was administered for a week and ocular fundus was monitored.
Since severe bilateral papilloedema persisted one week after the first assessment, lumbar puncture was performed with the patient sedated and relaxed in lateral recumbent position. Opening cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure measured with a standard manometer was 20 cm H2O and closing pressure was 19 cm H2O. These CSF pressure values have traditionally been considered borderline, but are within normal range according to a recent study in children .
CSF biochemical tests and cultures were negative. HSV1, HSV2, VZV, HHV6, CMV, Neisseria, Haemophilus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus B group, Escherichia coli, Listeria and Cryptococcus neoformans, Parvovirus, Adenovirus, EBV DNA and Enterovirus and Parechovirus RNA PCR were negative. CSF oligoclonal bands were absent on CSF and blood tests.
Oral acetazolamide (1 g divided twice daily) was introduced to accelerate recovery. A gradual further improvement in diplopia was seen during hospitalisation . Ophthalmological, neurological and neurosurgical follow up was continued after discharge. The patient gradually improved, with complete resolution of the right abducens nerve palsy in one month and resolution of papilloedema in three months . For this reason, acetazolamide was gradually reduced and stopped on resolution of the papilloedema (see Additional file ).