A 69-year-old woman presented with pericardial discomfort and was subsequently diagnosed with advanced gastric cancer after upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. The patient underwent laparoscopic distal gastrectomy with D2 lymph node dissection, and the final pathological diagnosis was U, Less, Type 2, 46 × 38 mm, adenocarcinoma with enteroblastic differentiation, pT4a, INFa, Ly0, V0, pPM0, pDM0, pN2, and pStageIIIA (Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma) . Human epidermal growth factor type 2 was negative, combined positive score of programmed cell death ligand 1 was 5 or higher and microsatellite instability was negative. The patient received oral S-1 (80 mg/m2 twice a day for 1–28 days) as postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy, but liver metastases were observed 8 months later in segments 4 (41 × 39 mm) and 8 (24 × 22 mm). The location and number of metastases were confirmed by contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission tomography (PET)–CT. There was no elevation observed in the tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9). The patient was switched to weekly paclitaxel plus ramucirumab, but Grade 4 neutropenia was observed during the first cycle, and nivolumab monotherapy was initiated (3 mg/kg intravenously every 2 weeks) after consultation with the patient .
After eight cycles, the target lesion of liver metastasis achieved a PR by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), and nivolumab treatment was continued. After 18 cycles, liver metastases had shrunk to 24 × 22 mm in segment 4 and 11 × 9 mm in segment 8, and PET–CT showed no abnormal fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) accumulation in liver metastases, and no new metastases appeared. CEA and CA19-9 did not show any significant changes within the normal range during the course of treatment. However, at this point, the patient developed a Grade 3 immune-related adverse event (irAE), a pemphigoid skin disorder, and the nivolumab treatment was discontinued.
As the metastases were controllable with anticancer agents, no new lesions appeared, and the patient’s performance status was maintained, it was decided to resect the liver metastases. The patient underwent laparoscopic partial hepatectomy for segments 4 and 8, resulting in pathological CR . After a medication withdrawal period due to the surgery, the skin disorder had resolved, and postoperative chemotherapy with nivolumab was resumed. However, due to a recurrence of the skin disorder, the chemotherapy was immediately stopped. The patient was followed up without treatment, and no recurrence findings were observed for 25 months postoperatively.