A 66-year-old male patient was referred to our department with a right intraventricular mass that had been diagnosed as anaplastic ependymoma on open biopsy at another hospital.
He had been followed because of diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, and carotid artery stenosis but had been otherwise well. Two months before admission to our department, he had undergone magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head, which incidentally revealed a mass lesion in the right lateral ventricle, for which he had been referred to the neurosurgery department at another hospital. He underwent a biopsy and the tumor was diagnosed as an anaplastic ependymoma. Although he had been initially referred to a Radiation Oncology Department for adjuvant radiation therapy, the provider referred him to our Department of Neurosurgery because of concerns that the residual tumor was not suitable for radiotherapy without prior cytoreduction.
Physical examination showed some short-term memory impairment, and ophthalmological examination revealed a visual field compromise (quadrantanopia) likely related to access corridor chosen for the biopsy. There was no focal motor weakness, major sensory deficit, dysmetria, or ataxia.
Computed tomography (CT) showed two hyperdense foci in the inferior horn and the atrium of the right lateral ventricle with peri-lesional edema of the ipsilateral temporo-occipital parenchyma [Figure and ]. The intraventricular lesions showed heterogeneous enhancement on postcontrast T1-weighted imaging (T1WI), on which the lesions appeared to arise from the choroid plexus [Figure –]. The postcontrast T1WI also showed additional tumor dissemination in the left lateral ventricle and around the brain stem . Further whole-spine imaging showed leptomeningeal dissemination in the lumbar region (not shown).
The patient was taken to surgery and underwent subtotal removal of the tumor in the right lateral ventricle via an inferior temporal gyrus approach [Figure and ]. The tumor was solid, densely adherent to the choroid plexus but floating in the ventricle .
Histopathologically, the tumor showed diffuse, tightly packed monotonous neoplastic cells with large, round, or slightly irregular nuclei and a scant to moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm . There were numerous mitotic figures and foci of focal necrosis. Perivascular pseudorosettes were not discernible. On immunohistochemical staining panels, the tumor cells were positive for leukocyte common antigen (LCA), CD20 , CD30, CD79a, bcl-2, bcl-6 , and MUM-1; and negative for cytokeratins, epithelial membrane antigen, S-100 protein, and glial fibrillary acidic protein.
Ophthalmological examination showed no intraocular lesions. CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was interpreted as normal and bone marrow biopsy showed no atypical lymphocytic infiltrate. The patient was thus diagnosed with primary diffuse large B-cell CNS lymphoma likely originating in the choroid plexus.
The patient underwent chemotherapy with high-dose methotrexate (3500 mg/m2) every 14 days for three courses, followed by a course of chemotherapy with carboplatin (360 mg calculated by using the Calvert formula) and etoposide (80 mg/m2) 14 days after the third administration of high-dose methotrexate. After chemotherapy, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples were obtained for cytology, which was negative for malignant cells. After the patient had undergone whole-brain irradiation (1.8 Gy × 22), postcontrast T1WI showed complete resolution of all previously visible CNS disease. Physical examination showed persistent quadrantanopia—unchanged from the patients status prior to subtotal removal of tumor—and amelioration of his short-term memory impairment. Because meningeal dissemination recurred during the follow-up period, the patient is currently again receiving chemotherapy with high-dose methotrexate in our department (8 months after surgery).