A 42-year-old Thai man was referred to the Oral Medicine Clinic, Faculty of Dentistry, Chulalongkorn University, Thailand for the evaluation of ulcers in the mouth. The lesions had been present for more than six months and had been diagnosed as gingivitis.
His medical history was significant, with a diagnosis of hypertension and diabetes mellitus for a year. He had been treated with atenolol at 50mg per day, for one year and enalapril at 10mg per day for one week. He was on a controlled diet for diabetes mellitus. He did not smoke or drink and his medical history was otherwise unremarkable. Our patient’s extra-oral examination (skin, genitalia, eyes) was unremarkable. An intra-oral examination revealed generalized erythema, desquamation, and multiple large ulcers of the gingival mucosa covered with yellowish slough tissue. We found multiple disrupted bullae on the labial mucosa, buccal mucosa, and ventral surface of the tongue (Figure ). Our patient was experiencing severe pain from these lesions and could not clean his mouth well or perform proper oral hygiene.
Our patient’s blood test results revealed normal range findings for complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, creatinine and liver function tests (aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase). Based on our patient’s history and examination findings, the differential diagnosis included allergy induced by chlorhexidine mouthwash, erythema multiforme, or vesiculobullous lesions.
Our patient was misusing chlorhexidine mouthwash by rinsing his mouth with it for longer than 10 minutes, so at our patient’s first visit, he was asked to stop the use of chlorhexidine mouthwash and was given diphenhydramine elixir mouthwash as a palliative treatment. This change resulted in the relief of pain after one week; however, the oral lesions were unchanged.
An incisional biopsy was taken from the tissue adjacent to the ulceration on the left buccal mucosa for histopathologic and direct immunofluorescence studies. The histopathological section of the biopsy was stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). H&E staining showed an ulcerated parakeratinized stratified squamous epithelium overlying fibrovascular connective tissue. The underlying connective tissue was edematous, and was infiltrated by acute and chronic inflammatory cells, including neutrophils, eosinophils, plasma cells, and lymphocytes. These features indicated a non-specific subacute inflammation.
Direct immunofluorescence showed the deposition of IgG, IgA, and C3 in a homogeneous linear pattern at the dermoepidermal junction (Figure A-C). These findings can be associated with bullous pemphigoid, mucous membrane pemphigoid, bullous systemic lupus erythematosus, and epidermolysis bullosa acquisita. Our patient was given prednisolone 20mg every other day, with the dose increasing to a final level of 50mg per day after six weeks, with the lesions slightly improved; we then decided to stop prednisolone at the eighth week.
From the overall history, clinical presentation, result of direct immunofluorescence and slight response to prednisolone, we suspected a drug-induced condition, which might be caused by our patient’s current medication. Our patient was referred to his physician to discuss changing medications or to stop atenolol treatment altogether. Our patient discontinued atenolol use and was given enalapril at 10mg per day instead. We recommended the use of sodium bicarbonate mouthwash to our patient.
At one-month follow-up after atenolol cessation, the oral lesions showed a dramatic improvement; however, asymptomatic desquamative lesions of the attached gingiva remained. Our patient continued using sodium bicarbonate mouthwash. At three-month follow-up, all lesions were clear. We continued to follow-up our patient at six months, and one and two years with no recurrence of lesions observed. Figure shows the patient’s oral condition at the two-year follow-up.