A 68-year-old woman presented with right-sided abdominal pain. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed an 86 mm tumor in the right retroperitoneal space that extended into the IVC; superiorly, it reached the right atrium, and inferiorly, it extended to the confluence of the iliac veins . On chest and abdominal CT, no findings suggestive of metastasis were observed. Percutaneous needle biopsy confirmed a diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma. Echocardiography revealed tumors in the IVC and atrium; however, adhesions could not be definitively assessed. We conducted cine MRI to assess tumor invasion into the IVC wall. The cine MRI comprised two different types of steady-state free precession images, and the parameter details are presented in Table . Cine MRI demonstrated that the uppermost part of the tumor was located within the right atrium; this part of the tumor exhibited mobility and was not adherent to the right atrial wall. Furthermore, we observed blood flow between the tumor and the intraluminal wall of the upper segment of the IVC, and no adhesions were detected . Based on these findings, tumor resection was considered feasible.
The surgery was performed via an abdominal approach. The tumor was contiguous with the IVC inferior to the renal vein. Following a diaphragmatic incision, palpation of the IVC near the right atrium revealed the mobility of the intravascular tumor. This affirmed our pre-surgical predictions. The tumor's adherence to the right kidney necessitated en bloc resection. Clamping sites were obtained as shown in Figure , with the upper IVC clamp achieved by manually pressing down the tumor. After clamping, blood pressure remained stable at around 110/90 mmHg. The IVC inferior to the renal vein was strongly adherent to the tumor, so it was resected together, while the tumor superior to the renal vein was withdrawn. The artificial vascular replacement was performed from the inferior border of the left renal vein to the bifurcation. The operative time was 628 min, and the blood loss was 2750 mL.
The final histopathological diagnosis revealed pleomorphic leiomyosarcoma with a Ki-67 index of 60% and negative margins. Some areas exhibited identifiable smooth muscle characteristics, while other regions were notably pleomorphic, suggesting highly undifferentiated zones. CT on postoperative Day 49 showed tumor recurrence in the right retroperitoneum. The subsequent CT on postoperative Day 65 showed metastases in the lung, liver, and right ischium. The patient died on postoperative Day 106.