The patient was a 40-year-old Moroccan man who had been vaccinated with bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG). He did not have any signs of previous TB infection or a history of sexually transmitted infections. The patient visited our hospital for a urology consultation and presented with dysuria, purulent discharge and a meatic penoscrotal fistula that had developed over a one-year period. The physical examination at admission found nodular lesions, urethral induration on the urethral path extending laterally to the cavernous bodies with multiple fistulas, and penoscrotal pus excretion . The external genitalia examination, testis, epididymis and ductus deferens, were without remarkable signs. His prostate volume was normal with a soft consistency. His prostate volume was normal with a soft consistency.
The initial biological assessment revealed an inflammatory syndrome corresponding to a sedimentation speed of 80 associated with a urinary tract infection with Escherichia coli susceptible to fluoroquinolones. First, the patient received antibiotherapy based on ciprofloxacin and benefited from urinary drainage by suprapubic catheter. A retrograde and voiding urethrocystography (UCG) was then performed and revealed an extended narrowing of the whole anterior urethra associated with multiple fistulous portions toward the scrotum and perineum. The bladder control showed a bilateral secondary vesico-ureteric reflux . At this stage, we reached a diagnosis of nonspecific sclero-inflammatory urethral stricture with complicating fistulas. After six weeks of urinary drainage and antibiotherapy, we decided to perform a urethroplasty enlargement to clear the narrowing urethral sinus tracts .
The evolution was marked by delayed wound healing associated with the persistence of fistulas extending into the corpus cavernosum with purulent discharge. It was at this point of the treatment that we suspected TB and we carried out a biological assessment in this regard. His test result for Koch bacillus (BK) in the urine was negative. His tuberculin assessment result was positive. Multiple biopsies were then performed on the periurethral tissue and fistula tracts.
The histological examination confirmed urethral TB and showed the presence of giant cell epithelial lesions with caseous necrosis characteristic of TB. The treatment for TB was immediately established and marked by a localized, rapid and significant improvement. A second-stage urethroplasty was scheduled for two months after the start of his anti-TB treatment.