A 32-year-old previously healthy female patient from the North Central Province of Sri Lanka presented with gradual onset of visual impairment in both eyes for 2 months. The blurred vision was initially unilateral, involving the right eye, and within the next few weeks, it progressed to involve the left eye. Both near and far visions were impaired, however, her color vision remained unimpaired. It was later associated with persistent, mild frontal headache without aura, photophobia, or focal neurological deficits. There was no redness or pain in the eyes. Over the following weeks, her symptoms progressively worsened to a degree that affected her instrumental activities of daily living.

Eye examination revealed a best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 6/36 in both eyes. Fundoscopic examination revealed bilateral cotton wool spots, predominantly over the posterior pole and along the vascular arcades; arteriolar narrowing; venous segmentation; and a few areas of flame-shaped hemorrhages. The pupils were normal in size without evidence of relative afferent pupillary defects. The visual fields and color vision were normal. The rest of the neurological examination results were normal. A fundal fluorescein angiogram (FFA) revealed retinal vasculitis with occlusive retinal arteriolitis and phlebitis.

A total of 2 months after the onset of her initial symptoms, while undergoing evaluation for retinal vasculitis, the patient developed a constellation of constitutional and musculoskeletal complaints. This included low-grade fever (101 °F) with chills, fatigue, and loss of appetite. She also experienced arthralgia, involving both small and large joints bilaterally, without objective signs of joint inflammation. Then, 1 week later, the patient developed an erythematous malar rash and a painless ulcer on the hard palate. It was then followed by bilateral periorbital and ankle swelling, which were worse in the morning.

She did not have a history of chronic cough, hemoptysis, or a past or contact history of tuberculosis. She had no history of valvular or congenital heart disease, and she did not have a history to suggest inflammatory bowel disease. She denied a history of contact with household pets or livestock or recent foreign travel. She also denied high-risk sexual behaviour, unhygienic tattooing, or intravenous drug abuse.

She also did not have photosensitive rashes, increased hair loss, Raynaud’s phenomenon, proximal muscle weakness, sicca symptoms, painful or red eyes, recurrent oral or genital ulcers, neck pain, or limb claudication. She had no symptoms suggesting thyrotoxicosis or diabetes mellitus. She had regular menstruation since menarche. She experienced an uneventful pregnancy 1 year prior. She did not have a history of recurrent miscarriages or intrauterine death. There was no family history of autoimmune diseases. She is a non-smoking teetotaler. She had good family support and no significant psychosocial stressors.

On examination, her body mass index was 19 kg/m2. She was febrile but not pale. There were bilateral erythematous rashes over the malar area of the face sparing the nasolabial folds suggestive of acute cutaneous lupus. Oral examination revealed an oral ulcer over the hard palate of the mouth. She did not have redness in her eyes. Mild periorbital swelling was noted along with bilateral pitting ankle edema. Examination of the neck revealed a few subcentimeter, nontender, enlarged lymph nodes. There were no clubbing or peripheral stigmata of infective endocarditis. None of the joints were actively inflamed, nor were there any joint deformities.

Her blood pressure was 112/78 mmHg, and her pulse rate was 82 beats per minute and regular. The radial, carotid, and femoral pulses were palpable in normal volume, and there were no audible bruits or radio-radial or radio-femoral delays. The rest of the peripheral pulses were palpable. There was no tenderness in the carotid artery. Cardiac examination was normal, with no audible murmurs or pericardial rubs. The lung fields were clear. Abdominal and neurological examinations were unremarkable. There were no genital ulcers.

Rheumatological work-up revealed a high antinuclear antibody (ANA) and anti-double stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) titers with low complement levels.

The urine-protein-to-creatinine ratio (UPCR) showed a nephrotic range proteinuria. The renal biopsy confirmed class III LN. Blood and urine cultures were sterile. A transthoracic echocardiogram excluded infective endocarditis. A comprehensive workup was undertaken to exclude infectious and inflammatory aetiologies of retinal vasculitis. This included evaluation for Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and C viruses, toxoplasmosis, syphilis, and tuberculosis. Additionally, the rheumatologic workup excluded Behçet's disease, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA)-associated vasculitis, sarcoidosis, Sjögren's syndrome, and rheumatoid arthritis.

The patient fulfilled the 2019 European League Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology (EULAR/ACR) classification criteria for SLE with a score of 37 points on the basis of the constellation of fever, leukopenia, oral ulcers, acute cutaneous lupus, arthralgia, class III LN on biopsy, low C3 and C4 levels, and anti-dsDNA antibody positivity. Furthermore, the Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index 2000 (SLEDAI-2 K) score of 29 points, driven by fever, visual disturbance, evidence of vasculitis, proteinuria, inflammatory rash, oral ulcers, low complement levels, and high DNA binding, categorized the disease activity as severe.

The patient was started on pulsed intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g per day) for 3 days followed by oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) with a tapering regime. She was simultaneously treated with hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) at the discretion of the rheumatology, ophthalmology, and nephrology teams. Treatment resulted in a favorable clinical response within 1 month. The patient experienced an improvement in systemic symptoms and proteinuria, with UPCR falling below 2.5 mg/kg. Additionally, BCVA improved from 6/36 to 6/12 at 2 months, accompanied by a corresponding resolution of retinal changes. A total of 3 months after initiating treatment, the patient achieved disease remission, as evidenced by a SLEDAI-2 K score of two points. Following the initial management, steroid dosages were gradually tapered off. MMF and HCQ were continued for long-term disease control. The patient underwent regular monitoring for HCQ-induced retinal toxicity. At the 1-year follow-up, the patient demonstrated excellent long-term disease control, with significant improvement in vision (BCVA improving to 6/6) and no evidence of HCQ-induced retinal toxicity. Additionally, LN remained in remission.