A 43-year-old Chinese man, who complained of shortness of breath on exertion for 7 d and a 13-year history of peripheral blood eosinophilia, was admitted to our hospital.
The patient was treated at a local hospital in August 2005 because routine blood examination showed a white blood cell count of 8.5 × 109/L, with 24.2% of eosinophils (2 × 109/L). In a bone marrow biopsy, eosinophils accounted for 13.5%, most with normally segmented rod nuclei. Once oral triamcinolone was initiated (4 mg, tid), the eosinophil counts rapidly normalized. After gradual dosage reduction in a span of 6 mo and eventual discontinuation, hyperplastic and nodular changes developed in both breasts, accompanied by abnormal lactation and bilateral axillary node enlargement. This condition was sufficiently burdensome to require surgery. Bilateral mastectomy was subsequently performed (January 2006) for chronic mastitis. Postoperative pathology examination disclosed male breast development and severe chronic inflammation (i.e., dilatation of mammary ducts with interstitial influx of eosinophils) .
One month later, the patient presented with joint pain of the trunk and limbs, movement dysfunction, and an exacerbated skin rash. Dexamethasone and prednisone were prescribed. An herbal extract (Tripterygium wilfordii) was also used shortly and then abandoned due to severe treatment-related alopecia. Thereafter, the joint symptoms gradually relented, allowing the patient to resume work. In April 2017, however, bilateral lower extremity edema developed spontaneously (blood pressure, 150/100 mmHg; plasma albumin, 15.6 g/L; low-density lipoproteins, 6.87 mmol/L; and 24-h urinary protein, 14.78 g/d), prompting a clinical diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome. A kidney biopsy was performed, establishing a pathologic diagnosis of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, non-specific type . A second bone marrow puncture again was indicative of eosinophilia, but qualitative polymerase chain reaction failed to detect the FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene. The patient was given prednisone orally at an initial dose of 60 mg (12 tablets) per day. This was gradually reduced and discontinued in March 2018, at which time all parameters of nephrotic syndrome were stable.
One month after medication withdrawal, hospital readmission was brought on by shortness of breath (April 2018).
He initially presented in December 2004 with constipation, abdominal distension, and persistent vomiting. Gastroscopic inspection revealed superficial gastritis, duodenal bulbar inflammation, and gastric retention. Enteroscopy was then performed, showing rectosigmoid mucositis. Interstitial inflammatory infiltrates were prominent in gastric and colonic mucosal biopsies. After symptomatic treatment, the digestive symptoms gradually abated and disappeared. Several months later, the patient developed an erythematous papular skin rash and vitiligo. The rash coalesced in places but was largely confined to the dorsa of hands and limbs in a symmetric distribution, without itching. Vitiligo chiefly affected the face and trunk.
Historically, the patient’s birth was premature (8 mo of gestation). There was one episode of pertussis during childhood and many instances of pneumonia. The patient’s father had succumbed to gastric cancer at the age of 50.
Physical examination revealed alopecia, loss of facial and trunk pigmentation, and an erythematous rash on the dorsa of both hands and limbs . No dry or wet rales were detected in either lung.
Pertinent laboratory results were as follows: Blood eosinophil count, 0.41 × 109/L; total IgE, 1491 IU/ml; PaO2, 53.6 mmHg; and SaO2, 91.2%. In bronchoscopic alveolar lavage fluid, eosinophils represented 30.0% of cells (CD4+/CD8+ = 0.15).
Chest computed tomography (CT) showed interstitial pneumonia .