A 68-year-old man with a history of hypertension, diabetes, and chronic kidney failure was undergoing treatment as an outpatient for angina pectoris and atrial fibrillation that was diagnosed 2 years prior to the carcinosarcoma. He reported a history of heavy smoking for approximately 40 years; moreover, his father had a history of lung cancer. The patient did not have any clinical symptoms of cancer, and no remarkable changes were noted on physical examination. However, a routine blood test done 3 months earlier indicated anemia (hemoglobin: 9.6 g/dL), and the patient’s stool sample tested positive for occult blood. We tested for tumor markers and found the squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) antigen was slightly elevated at 3.3 ng/mL, but the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA 19–9 were within the reference range. An upper GI endoscopy showed a bleeding, irregular, protruding lesion located on the posterior wall of the lesser curvature within the body of the stomach ; the lesion was biopsied and identified as a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Moreover, at the lower part of the esophagus, there was a slightly concave lesion that was entirely separate from the gastric tumor. Biopsy specimens from the esophageal lesion indicated SCC. The patient was scheduled for surgical tumor excision. First, en bloc resection via endoscopic submucosal dissection was performed for the esophageal cancer, and the pathological diagnosis was well-differentiated SCC with negative margins and slight infiltration of the mucosal lamina propria. At a later date, segmental gastrectomy was performed for the gastric tumor. The proximal gastric surgical margin was confirmed to be negative by rapid assessment. The resected gastric tumor was subjected to histopathological examination. Macroscopically, the gastrectomy specimen had a protruding lesion measuring 41 × 29 × 18 mm3 . The cross-section showed a grayish-white tumor with growth mainly on the mucous membranous surface as well as areas with a cystic appearance and a translucent cartilage-like matrix in parts . Histologically, the tumor was a carcinosarcoma with mixed adenocarcinomatous and sarcomatous components . Tumor invasion was limited to the submucosa. The adenocarcinomatous component exhibited tubular, papillary, and, in some parts, solid growth patterns. The adenocarcinoma cells were acidophilic and cylindrical; however, some regions comprised adenocarcinoma cells with clear cytoplasm. The adenocarcinomatous component resulted in diffuse lymphatic and venous invasion. The sarcomatous portion showed proliferation of atypical spindle cells and atypical round cells with a high nucleus-to-cytoplasm (N/C) ratio . In the sarcomatous portion, some parts showed chondrogenesis, and dyskaryosis was observed in chondrocyte-like cells . Immunohistochemically, the adenocarcinomatous component with clear cytoplasm comprised areas with alpha-fetoprotein (AFP)- and Sal-like protein 4 (SALL4)-positive AFP-producing gastric carcinoma . Moreover, there were synaptophysin- and chromogranin A-positive adenocarcinomatous regions that showed neuroendocrine differentiation . The sarcomatous portion was predominantly composed of undifferentiated areas as indicated by unstained regions, but included smooth muscle actin-positive leiomyosarcomatous areas composed of spindle cells with acidophilic cytoplasm as well as areas of desmin- and MyoD1-positive atypical round cells with rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation . Furthermore, a proliferative focus with atypical “bare nucleus” cells that was partly composed of SALL4-positive germ cell-like cells did not indicate any specific differentiation in immunostaining . Histopathological analysis of the background stomach revealed chronic gastritis with intestinal metaplasia and negativity for Helicobacter pylori. There was no dysplasia around the gastric tumor.
Approximately 1 month following the post-gastrectomy, a chest CT showed a ground glass opacity in the inferior lobe of the patient’s right lung; after 6 months, the lung lesion grew, and therefore the patient underwent a right lower lobectomy. Histopathology of the resected tumor indicated a lepidic growth pattern rather than a gastric tumor metastasis. Further examination revealed that the tumor was a primary lung adenosquamous carcinoma with a well-differentiated lung adenocarcinoma component, positive for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) on immunohistochemical staining, that was admixed with an SCC component . Fourteen months after the segmental gastrectomy, a flat, protruding lesion appeared in the anastomotic region of the patient’s remaining stomach portion. This lesion was identified as a local recurrence, and a total gastrectomy was carried out . Examination of the resected specimen from the local recurrence showed the growth of only the adenocarcinomatous component, without a sarcomatous component . The recurrent tumor extended into the subserosa, and we observed 1 very small site of lymph node metastasis . The patient started adjuvant chemotherapy by TS-1, and at the time of writing this report, the patient had survived for 3 months after the total gastrectomy. Although he had been diagnosed with three independent cancers, he did not undergo further evaluations for inherited cancer syndrome.