Two cases of STS of the lower limb characterized by DVT and pulmonary embolism (PE) as the initial presentation were observed in our Orthopedic department: a 47-year-old man diagnosed with an idiopathic DVT of the right distal femoral vein and the popliteal vein and a 44-years-old woman with a massive PE . The patient with DVT was treated with therapeutic doses of subcutaneous enoxaparin for 6 months. After 2 months of enoxaparin, the case with PE was referred to our outpatient clinic for worsening of leg swelling and dyspnea. Neither of the patients had a past or family history of VTE. Physical and radiographic examination did not reveal any mass in either case, but only the signs of DVT or PE. Due to the persistence of symptoms and the inefficacy of anticoagulant therapy, patients underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lower limbs and excisional biopsy of the visualized mass.
In the first case , MRI showed a large mass in the anterior muscle compartment of the right thigh, with inhomogeneous appearance after gadolinium administration. The lesion was associated with multiple lymphadenopathy in the inguinal and external iliac region, and thrombosis of the right common femoral vein involving the ipsilateral common iliac vein and the inferior vena cava until the confluence of the renal veins. An excisional biopsy of the mass was performed. The lesion was found to be adherent to the femoral vein. The dissection of the vein showed a thrombus that obliterated the lumen of the common iliac vein. The histological examination revealed a high-grade leiomyosarcoma. The patient subsequently underwent chemotherapy and radiotherapy. A computerized tomography (CT) scan performed 6 months after surgery showed multiple pulmonary metastases. The patients is currently receiving chemotherapy in the Oncology division of our hospital.
In the second case, MRI showed a large mass located in the middle third of the right thigh, with low signal intensity in T1- and T2-weighted sequences and enhancement after gadolinium administration . The lesion was in close proximity to the superficial femoral artery that appeared deformed and was adherent to the superficial femoral vein that appeared compressed and showed signs of thrombosis. After arterial embolization, an excisional biopsy was performed, followed by intraoperative brachytherapy. The histological examination of the bioptic specimen revealed a high-grade leiomyosarcoma. At one year of follow-up the patient was asymptomatic and showed no evidence of recurrence of malignancy at MRI.