A 76-year-old Caucasian female with known hypertension and dyslipidaemia presented with 2 weeks of intermittent palpitations, orthopnoea, and New York Heart Association functional class III–IV shortness of breath. On exam, the patient was not in acute distress; however, extremities were cool and clammy. Heart auscultation revealed normal heart sounds, no murmurs, rubs, or gallops but the rhythm was irregularly irregular at ∼100 b.p.m. The jugular venous pressure was elevated at the angle of the jaw and there was a positive abdominojugular reflux sign. Auscultation of the lungs revealed bilateral crackles up to mid chest with decreased air entry at the bases. The abdomen was soft, non-tender, and non-distended.
In the emergency department, she was in uncontrolled atrial fibrillation (AF) with a left bundle branch block with clinical evidence of decompensated heart failure and her chest X-ray confirming evidence of pulmonary oedema with bilateral pleural effusions. There was no prior electrocardiogram for comparison. She was admitted for intravenous diuresis [initially with Furosemide 80 mg intravenously (IV) once then Furosemide infusion 20 mg/h] and rate control (initially with metoprolol 5 mg IV once then transitioned to oral metoprolol with an intravenous digoxin load). Over the next few hours, she became increasingly diaphoretic, tachycardic, and hypotensive at 60/30 mmHg. High-sensitivity troponin increased to 2040 ng/L (reference value ≤30 ng/L) from 13 ng/L, and serum lactate was 7.1 mmol/L (reference value 0.5–2.2 mmol/L). She also developed anuric acute kidney injury with an increase in serum creatinine from 58 to 122 μmol/L (reference value 50–98 μmol/L). Other admission labs are shown in . She was started on dual antiplatelet therapy (ASA 81 mg orally daily, clopidogrel 75 mg orally daily, and fondaparinux 2.5 mg subcutaneously daily) for suspected acute coronary syndrome and vasopressors to maintain perfusion. Point-of-care ultrasound demonstrated significant biventricular systolic dysfunction, a plethoric non-collapsible inferior vena cava, and diastolic flattening of the interventricular septum suggesting volume overload of the right ventricle.
The following differential diagnoses were considered at that time:
Acute coronary syndrome and possible mechanical complication with right ventricular (RV) infarction.
Underlying cardiomyopathy and/or pulmonary hypertension and superimposed acute decompensation.
Massive pulmonary embolism.
As the patient was in extremis, she was intubated for emergent cardiac catheterization. She was initiated on epinephrine, norepinephrine, and vasopressin prior to arrival to the catheterization lab. Angiographically, the left main coronary artery (LMCA), left anterior descending (LAD), and left circumflex (LCx) arteries were very large, ectatic vessels with no flow-limiting stenosis. The right coronary artery (RCA) ostium could not be engaged from the aorta despite multiple attempts. Contrast injection into the left coronary system showed what appeared to be retrograde filling of the RCA via multiple left-to-right collateral vessels ( and Video 1A and B). On further review, it was felt that the RCA was emptying back into the pulmonary artery/right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT).
The possibility of an anomalous coronary artery (ACA) as the underlying aetiology of the patient’s shock prompted an ad hoc right heart catheterization for haemodynamic assessment. Measurements are shown in . An oximetry run did not suggest the presence of an intra-cardiac left-to-right shunt. Pulmonary artery angiography did not identify any pulmonary embolus or fistula involving the RVOT. The pulmonary vascular resistance was 0.87 Wood units and the systemic vascular resistance was 6.39 Wood units. An RV angiogram demonstrated significant tricuspid regurgitation (TR) with a dilated and severely dysfunctional right ventricle. It was felt that the cause of the patient’s cardiogenic shock was due to underlying severe RV dysfunction with either AF or other catecholaminergic state triggering decompensation. The elevated cardiac index prompted consideration of sepsis on the differential diagnosis and the patient accordingly received empiric antibiotics (Piperacillin/Tazobactam 4.5 g IV every 6 h, Vancomycin 1 g IV every 12 h, and Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice daily). She returned to the cardiovascular intensive care unit (CVICU) for further physiologic support.
Formal echocardiography while in the CVICU demonstrated severely reduced RV systolic function, right atrial dilatation, and severe TR. The overall left ventricular systolic function was low-normal with an ejection fraction between 50% and 55% and no regional wall motion abnormalities. A transoesophageal echocardiogram ruled out vegetations but corroborated findings from the patient’s cardiac catheterization including a dilated and tortuous LMCA and branches, as well as a dilated and tortuous vessel draining into the pulmonary artery. This vessel was felt to be likely the RCA. Overall, these findings were consistent with a diagnosis of ARCAPA (see and Video 2).
In the CVICU, the patient was maintained on inotropes and vasopressors. High-sensitivity troponin plateaued at 26 040 ng/L and this was felt to be consistent with an RV infarction. In the setting of concomitant volume overload and anuric acute kidney injury, continuous renal replacement therapy was initiated. She was subsequently found to be bacteremic with positive blood cultures for Streptococcus bovis but not stable enough to pursue a colonoscopy to rule out a gastrointestinal malignancy; management consisted of antimicrobial therapy (ceftriaxone/metronidazole) with consultation from infectious diseases.
The patient’s clinical status eventually stabilized enough to be extubated and transferred to the cardiology ward, although she remained dependent on intermittent haemodialysis without expected renal recovery. Potential therapeutic options for ARCAPA were discussed at interdisciplinary heart team rounds but unfortunately, she was felt not to be a surgical candidate in view of her age and clinical status. The patient decided to pursue comfort measures and requested cessation of dialysis. She was transferred to a hospice for palliative care and passed away just over a month later.