A 12-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital on September 10, 2018 with a chief complaint of calvarial mass for 2 mo and multiple masses around the whole body for more than 1 mo.
At 2 mo before hospital admission, a mass with a diameter of 2 cm on the left parietal was found in the patient, without local swelling, heat, or pain. The mass was considered a “scalp cyst” by the local hospital and was surgically resected without a pathological diagnosis. The masses resurfaced on the scalp on day 7 after surgery and quickly involved the whole body within 4 wk. The masses were hard and in progressive enlargement. The patient suffered fever, low back pain, sensory and motor dysfunction in the lower limbs, left eyeball protrusion, poor appetite and weight loss of 4 kg (13.3%). Ceftizoxime (1.3 g, intravenous infusion every 12 h [Q12H]) for anti-infection and mannitol (100 mL, intravenous infusion Q8H) for decreasing intracranial pressure were not effective.
According to the past medical history, the patient was in good health.
He had no family history of hematological diseases or tumors.
Physical examination on admission was as follows: clear mind, weak reaction, appearance of malnutrition, painful expression, and passive position. The superficial lymph nodes around the whole body appeared a multiple, enlarged, and qualitative hard, with a diameter of 1.5-5 cm. Multiple subcutaneous nodules and masses were observed throughout the body, with sizes of 1-3 cm in diameter and tough/hard in texture. The left maxillofacial area was swollen with exophthalmos of the left eyeball. Cardiopulmonary and abdominal examinations showed no abnormalities. Muscle tension in both lower limbs was reduced with a muscle strength grade of 0. Abdominal reflexes and cremasteric reflexes still exist, but bilateral patellar tendon and Achilles tendon reflex are absent. Tests results were positive for Kernig sign, bilateral Babinski sign and Chaddock sign; and negative for Brudzinski’s sign.
There were normal peripheral white blood cell counts and hemoglobin levels, elevated platelet 822 × 109/L (normal reference range 100-300 × 109/L), significantly elevated lactic dehydrogenase 1345 U/L (normal reference range 110-295 U/L), normal blood coagulation, and test results for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, hepatitis E, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, human immunodeficiency virus were negative. The cerebrospinal fluid was pale yellow and transparent with normal white blood cells, glucose, chloride, and protein levels, and no tumor cells were found. Bone marrow smears indicated 7%-47.5% of tumor cells, with large cell bodies, large amount of gray-blue cytoplasm, and fine nuclear chromatin . Flow cytometry analysis of bone marrow demonstrated that 4.48% of the cells expressed CD4dim but not CD45, CD56, CD8, CD3, CD2, CD7, CD30, cCK, GD2, CD15, cCD3, CD20, cCD79, Ki67, and so on, malignant hematopoietic system cells should be considered.
Positron emission tomography/computed tomography revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the neck, mediastinum, abdomen, pelvis, and inguinal region; and nodular lesions with increased level of 18-fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism in the encephalon, left posterior pharyngeal wall, left external rectus muscle, left lateral femur muscles and left kidney .
Bone marrow biopsy revealed the absence of hematopoietic cells, infiltration of diffuse tumor cells, large volume of tumor cells, few lightly stained cytoplasm, some of which were vacuolar, presenting immunoblast-like appearance; round or irregular cell nuclei, light staining, prominent nucleoli; mononuclear and multinuclear tumor cells. Immunohistochemistry performed using lymphohematopoietic system markers indicated as follows: positive for CD45, weakly positive for CD10 and CD163; T-cell markers: negative for CD3 and CD5; B-cell markers: negative for CD20, CD79a, and paired box 5 (PAX5); immature cell markers: negative for CD34, CD117, TDT, CD123 and CD43; other markers: negative for CD56 and CD30. Lymphohematopoietic tumor should be considered, if it was unable to classify, myeloid sarcoma should be considered.
To obtain a definite diagnosis, a neck lymph node biopsy was performed. Microscopic analysis showed the structure of the lymph node was destroyed, and it consisted of single large immunoblast-like cells, with round and light nuclei, large nucleoli and abundant cytoplasm; plasmoblast differentiation appeared; atypical multinucleated tumor giant cells were observed occasionally; presented as intrasinusoidal growth patterns. Immunohistochemistry analysis indicated as follows: T/natural killer cell markers: negative for CD2, CD3, CD43, CD4, CD8, TIA-1, and CD56; B/plasmocyte markers: positive for OCT2, BOB1, CD38 (focal weak), and MUM1; and negative for CD20, CD79a, PAX5, CD138; other immunomarkers: positive for LCA (leukocyte common antigen), ALK (cytoplasm, granular), immunoglobulin A, Ki-67 (> 90%), EMA, CD31, and FLI-1 ; negative for CD30, CD163, S-100, CD34, and TDT.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) study with ALK break apart probe (Wuhan HealthCare Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Wuhan, China) showed ALK gene disruption in the cervical lymph node. B-cell clonality assays revealed monoclonal IGH rearrangement. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) high-throughput RNA sequencing was performed for genetic testing of tumor cells in bone marrow, and in combination with Sanger first-generation sequencing, the CLTC-ALK fusion gene in the bone marrow of the patient was observed positive , in addition to the PGS1-CLTC fusion gene.