A 32-year-old female with non-diabetic chronic kidney disease was on regular hemodialysis for 3 years, via a right forearm arteriovenous fistula. The patient was admitted to our department due to involuntary movement for 5 days. Starting 5 days prior to admission, the patient’s shoulder and neck displayed a resting tremor, which became increasingly severe, with the limbs beginning to move uncontrollably. The patient’s vital signs were stable, with no complaints of headache, fever, blurred vision or mental disorder. Myodynamic examination and deep tendon reflexes in both legs were normal, and the Babinski reflexes were suspiciously positive. Significant fluctuation of blood creatinine levels (predominantly due to inadequate dialysis), along with altered hyperthyroidism [intact parathyroid hormone (iPTH) levels of almost 3200 pg/mL], were reported 1 week ago with no accompanying history of hypertension, DM, respiratory tract infection, fever, stoke, liver disease, hypoxia or toxic fume exposure. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed 5 days after the onset of symptoms in the local hospital, and showed symmetrical T2-weighted imaging (T2WI; Fig. ) and T2/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (T2FLAIR; Fig. ) hyperintense non-hemorrhagic lesions in bilateral basal ganglia, as well as corona radiata lesions showing mild diffusion restriction. Both T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and diffusion-weighted images (DWI) were normal.
Blood analysis immediately after admission revealed high levels of uremic toxins (urea nitrogen 25.80 mmol/L, serum creatinine 1206 μmol/L, uric acid 548 μmol/L, phosphorus 1.88 mmol/L, calcium 2.33 mmol/L,anion gap 23.9 mmol/L), and severe hyperthyroidism (iPTH 2487 pg/mL). Bicarbonate, arterial blood gas indices, hemoglobin, albumin, lactic acid, B-vitamins and liver function were all normal.
The patient was diagnosed with UE as a symptom of bilateral basal ganglia lesions. She did not suffer from DM or other diseases such as cerebrovascular events, intoxication or hyperlactacidemia. Thus, UE was possibly due to a combined effect of uremic toxins and hyperthyroidism. The patient was treated with high frequency and high flux dialysis (4 h hemodiafiltration with APS 15 uc dialyzer, 4 times per week), hyperbaric oxygen therapy (1.5 h per day), declining parathyroid hormone (1 μg of calcitriol injection every 2 days), and treatment for symptom relief (2 mg of haloperidol, 2 mg of clonazepam and 2 mg of benzhexol administered orally twice per day). Gradually, the symptoms reduced in frequency, and the amplitude of involuntary movement decreased. Fourteen days after admission, a subsequent brain MRI revealed high signal in the bilateral basal ganglia on T2WI and T2FLAIR , which were significantly weaker compared to the initial MRI signal.
About 1 month later, the patient achieved complete remission and restoration of normal body movement, and was discharged. Upon discharge, blood test results showed relatively stable uremic toxins (urea nitrogen 10.48 mmol/L, serum creatinine 641.5 μmol/L, uric acid 435 μmol/L, phosphorus 1.43 mmol/L, calcium 2.30 mmol/L,anion gap 15.9 mmol/L), and relieved hyperthyroidism (iPTH 1609 pg/mL). Brain MRI was performed again upon follow-up, with T2WI and T2FLAIR showing an almost complete resolution of the lesions with slightly hyperintense signal in the bilateral basal ganglia.