A 12-year-old girl presented with non-progressive congenital flexion deformities of bilateral elbows and complaints of difficulty in writing, typing, jogging, and difficulty in using the Indian toilet such that she had to sit with one leg extended for balance. She was the firstborn child of a second-degree consanguineous marriage. Her mother gave a history of delayed and decreased fetal movements during pregnancy. Her motor milestones were delayed though social adaptive and language milestones were normal. She was good at academics. She had attained menarche at the age of 12 years and has normal menstrual cycles. Family history was unremarkable. On clinical examination, she had prominence in the suprascapular region on both sides with trapezii contracture and mild-to-moderate restriction of cervical spine range of motion in rotation and lateral bending. She had 20° of internal rotation deformity bilaterally and abduction was restricted to 120° at both the shoulders. She had 22° of fixed flexion deformity at the left elbow and 20° at the right elbow. Bilateral passive forearm supination was restricted to 60° with passive wrist dorsiflexion restricted to 35° on both sides. Clinodactyly was noticed in bilateral ring fingers and her fingers were hyperextensible at the interphalangeal joints. Otherwise, there were no signs of generalized ligamentous laxity. She had hypoplastic left thenar eminence with MRC Grade III power of the thenar muscles. She had bilateral tendo Achilles contractures with no passive dorsiflexion possible from neutral though the plantar flexion was full. She had a propulsive gait with a restricted arm swing on both sides. Mirror movements were demonstrated in bilateral fingers, elbows, toes, and ankles. ( & ) Mirror movements of the toes and fingers worsened with fatigue, but at the elbows and ankles, the mirror movements became less frequent as the voluntary movements were continued. Neurological examination was otherwise normal. Her height for her age was normal. There were no craniofacial malformations, hearing impairment, or visual defects.
X-rays and 3-D computed tomography (CT) scan revealed bilateral Rigault Grade II Sprengel deformities and mild scoliosis at the cervical spine segment, cervicothoracic junction, and thoracolumbar junction . There was no fusion at any vertebral level. MRI revealed no central nervous system (CNS) or spinal cord malformations. Ultrasonography revealed no renal or genitourinary anomalies. ECHO showed mild aortic regurgitation.
She started on regular joint range of motion exercises, muscle stretching and strengthening physiotherapy, and retraining therapy with techniques for increasing wanted movements while focusing on restricting unwanted movements.
Her frequency of mirror movements decreased and writing and typing co-ordination was getting better. She is compliant with therapy and on regular follow-up.