We describe an 80-year-old woman who presented with acute epigastric pain. She had a past medical history of hepatitis C-related liver cirrhosis and HCC in segment 6. She underwent multiple ultrasonography-guided percutaneous RFA sessions using LeVeen Super Slim 3.0 (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, Massachusetts, US). The initial treatment for HCC was performed 25 months previously, without artificial pleural effusion or ascites. The duration of the procedure was 114 min. Three months later, she underwent second treatment for recurrent HCC in segment 6/7 using the identical device with artificial pleural effusion. The duration of the procedure was 125 min. Follow-up computed tomography (CT), which was performed 1 month before admission (21 months after the 2nd RFA treatment), did not show HCC recurrence and DH. No history of trauma was reported. On the day of admission to our institution, she experienced sudden-onset, intense epigastric pain and visited the family doctor. Chest radiography revealed a massive abnormal intestinal gas above the right lobe of the liver . She was transferred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. Her vital signs, including blood pressure (100/70 mmHg), pulse rate (80/min), and SpO2 (94% at room air), were unremarkable. Physical examination revealed mild tenderness around the umbilicus, with no peritoneal signs. No findings of trauma were noted. Laboratory findings, including white blood cell count and C-reactive protein level, did not demonstrate abnormalities. Regarding hepatic function, she was classified as Child–Pugh Class B, with slight hypoalbuminaemia (3.2 g/dL) and prolonged prothrombin time (63% increase). Contrast-enhanced CT showed small intestine herniation into the thoracic cavity and an atrophic liver. The mesenteric fat of the small intestine was congested; however, no evidence of bowel perforation was noted . Emergent surgery was performed owing to the suspicion of strangulated DH. In the supine position, the patient underwent laparoscopic surgery under general anaesthesia. A 12-mm port was introduced above the umbilicus using the open Hasson technique. After creating a pneumoperitoneum by carbon dioxide insufflation, we inserted ports in the epigastric region and the left and right flanks. Laparoscopic observation revealed that the small intestine was herniated into the right thoracic cavity through the diaphragmatic defect. The location of the RFA-treated tumour matched the site of the DH . We gently reduced the contents of the hernia. Pneumothorax occurred, but her haemodynamics and oxygenation were stable. The intruded small intestine showed ischaemic change and partial necrosis, although no fragility was noted. We performed mini-laparotomy and resected the ischaemic small intestine (approximately 100 cm). A chest drain tube was inserted. The diameter of the hernial orifice was approximately 2 cm . We confirmed by tactile sensation using forceps that the diaphragmatic tissue around the hernial orifice was not fragile. Ascitic fluid accumulated, and abdominal irrigation was performed with a normal saline solution. The defect was completely repaired using 1–0 absorbable braid polyglactin sutures via a continuous suture technique . The operative time was 161 min, and the blood loss was minimal. The patient was discharged on the 10th postoperative day without complications. Recurrent hernia was not noted in the patient 15 months after surgery.