A 45-year-old male patient, without any past medical conditions, presented with a severe burning sensation on the hallux, 2nd, 3rd digits, and dorsum of the right foot. The patient, who works in a chemical plant, was replacing a worn-out flowmeter connected to the EO tank. The patient was not wearing personal protective equipment (PPE), such as chemical-resistant clothing and shoes. According to the Material Safety Data Sheets, EO is supplied through an automatic isolation line. During the incident at 2 PM, a large amount of water mixed with EO solution spilled on his right shoe. The patient did not experience any immediate symptoms and continued working with the wet shoe until approximately 5:30 PM. He returned home around 7 PM (approximately 5 hours after the exposure) and took a shower, effectively decontaminating the region. The next morning, the patient woke up to a severe burning sensation and pain in the dorsum of the right foot and proximal area of the digits. He discovered desquamation, redness, and oozing. The patient then presented to a nearby hospital .
The patient did not provide any specific family history and was not under treatment for any disease or condition. He reported a smoking habit (10 pack-years) with occasional social alcohol consumption.
The patient had worked in restaurants since his mid-20s. Since 2013, he had been employed at a chemical plant for trial runs of facilities and indicator system maintenance and repair. In 2018, he started to work in production of basic petrochemicals such as surfactants and concrete hardeners. He was responsible for the EO supply from the ingredient tank to the production line, replacement of indicator systems, and facility maintenance. Typically, there is no risk of EO exposure, as it is supplied through an automatic isolated pipeline, but workers may be exposed during the replacement of indicator systems.
The patient had stable vital signs within the normal limits and was alert. However, the patient appeared acutely ill at presentation and had subcutaneous tissue damage on the right dorsum of the foot and digits, with severe redness and dark pink dermal surfaces, serosanguineous exudates, blisters, and desquamation . The burn area was calculated to be 3.5% of the total body surface area. He did not report dyspnea and had clear breathing sounds upon auscultation.
Hematological analyses (complete blood count, blood chemistry), urinalysis, and plain chest radiograph performed at the emergency department were all within the normal limits.
The area was irrigated and disinfected. Topical antibiotics, silver sulfadiazine, was applied to unhealed burn wounds to protect the burn from becoming infected and the patient was followed-up in the outpatient clinic for 4 weeks. Normal skin was restored without any defects, and at the 9-month follow-up, there were no notable findings in the area other than hyperpigmentation . At a general health assessment 9 months after the incident, the patient reported reduced sensation in the right foot. After an outpatient consultation at our department of occupational and environmental health, he was referred to hematology-oncology, pulmonology, and neurology. There were no abnormal findings in the peripheral blood smear, bronchial provocation test, nerve conduction study, and electromyography. Follow-up was therefore concluded.
For this study, we obtained approval from the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Dankook University Hospital (IRB No. 2021-05-009).