Five-year-old male patient from the district of Independencia in Lima, Peru, referred to the Instituto Nacional de Salud del Niño San Borja with a diagnosis of very severe myelopenia, clonal nocturnal paroxysmal hemoglobinuria (HPN), no response to immunosuppressive therapy (TIS) and no HLA-matched donor. In addition, he had a history of receiving polytransfusions and did not report allergies or adverse reactions to medicines.

The patient underwent a first haploidentical T-cell receptor (TCR) α/β - CD19 - conditioning regimen with fludarabine, rabbit antithymocyte globulin, cyclophosphamide and total body irradiation. However, the transplant failed and subsequently he developed persistent febrile neutropenia requiring broad spectrum antimicrobial treatment and even required surgery for acute appendicitis. The patient recovered and three months after the first T-cell receptor (TCR) haploidentical transplant, a second haploidentical transplant was performed which also failed due to failure of engraftment and developed profound neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count (ANC) = 0 cells/µL), with intermittent fever episodes and partial response to broad spectrum antimicrobial treatment regimens for neutropenic colitis, central venous catheter-associated infection and probable invasive pulmonary aspergillosis, serum galactomannan positive, 2.1 optical density (OD).

On day 110, after the TPH, following episodes of persistent fever and with elevated C-reactive protein values, the patient was afebrile for several days and reached the lowest C-reactive protein value in weeks of antimicrobial therapy (C-reactive protein = 30 mg/L, normal value = < 5mg/L), receiving meropenem, ciprofloxacin, linezolid and voriconazole for prolonged time.

Subsequently, the progressive withdrawal of antimicrobials was decided, but he again presented fever, the values of C-reactive protein increased progressively and, from day 140, the deterioration of renal function (creatinine: 3.17 mg/dL; urea: 117 mg/dL; urea nitrogen: 54.64 mg/dL) was exacerbated, with bilateral eyelid oedema and oral mucositis. Despite the reintroduction of antimicrobials, on day 146 post-TPH, intense abdominal pain with a predominance of epigastrium, disseminated maculo-papular lesions of reddish skin, and pain in the right knee without evidence of signs of phlogosis, but which increased when performing extension movements, appeared. Due to the abdominal compromise, the patient did not continue receiving oral prophylaxis with posaconazole and, due to the clinical deterioration, caspofungin was initiated empirically (day 147) at a dose of 70 mg/SC/day (loading dose), then 50 mg/SC/day. According to the laboratory results, the patient persisted with ANC=0 cells/µL, C-reactive protein increased to 180 mg/dL, the galactomannan study was negative (0.08 DO), the viral loads for cytomegalovirus (CMV), adenovirus (ADV), and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) were undetectable.

Four sets of blood cultures were taken (including peripheral blood, proximal and distal lumen transcatheter), the first three were negative and the last one (taken from transcatheter blood only) on day 147, three days after the sample was taken, was identified as abundant pseudohifes in blood from the proximal and distal lumen catheters, with identification of Saprochaete capitata/Magnusiomyces capitatus. It should be noted that the central venous catheter did not show signs of inflammation in the insertion area, but that it was prolonged (57 days) and was not removed. Other laboratory examinations at the time of diagnosis are shown in Table 1. The patient died of septic shock (day 150), the same day that the identification of the causative agent of invasive fungal infection was reported.
