A 71-year-old man presented to our emergency center with a history of diffused abdominal pain with intermittent hematochezia for 38 h. The patient denied other GI or genitourinary complaints, had an unremarkable medical history, and did not undergo prior abdominal surgery. On physical examination, the abdomen appeared tender with extensive rebound tenderness. Unfortunately, his groin areas were ignored to check due to lack of specific complaints. The blood investigation revealed a decreased hemoglobin level (9.6 g/dL). A contrast-enhanced CT scan indicated a lower GI bleeding resulting from a ruptured mass (5.2 × 4.1 × 3.0 cm3) located in small intestine. Meanwhile, CT imaging showed a minimal mass (2.0 × 1.5 × 0.5 cm3) in his right groin but failed to mention in the emergent report .
The patient was immediately managed with an emergent laparotomy in light of the hemodynamic instability. During the surgery, the primary tumor was found arising from the third jejunal segment (220 cm distant from the duodenal-jejunal flexure), with disseminated, multi-focal progression of tumor seeding recorded. A palliative resection of primary tumor and seeding tumors (> 2 mm) in abdomen was achieved (R1 resection), followed by a side-to-side bowel anastomosis. The patient was discharged at the 11th post-operative day without any complications. The histopathologic report of primary tumor suggested a GIST of spindle cell nature, with high mitotic count (25/50 HPF) and significant tumor necrosis (Additional file : Fig. S1). The immunohistochemical (IHC) staining evaluation indicated severe positivity for CD117, DOG-1 and SDHB, mild positivity for actin and desmin, but negative for CD34 and S-100. The Ki-67 index was 20%. The molecular analysis reported a mutation rate of 18.22% for the c-KIT, mainly located on A502_T503dup exon 9. The tumor was hence categorized as high-risk jejunal GIST.
The patient received imatinib chemotherapy (400 mg/day) postoperatively for three months until a complaint of persistent pain in the right groin. On physical examination, a painful, irreducible, non-pulsatile mass (2.0 × 2.0 × 1.0 cm3) was felt in right groin, with negative finding in contralateral side. He was referred to the hernia unit of our department. Additional CT imaging was performed to exclude abdominal recurrence. Afterward, a definitive herniorrhaphy with Lichtenstein’s approach was accomplished , with the mass along with sac removed before placing a self-gripping polyester mesh (TEM1208GR, Parietex ProGrip™, US). The intraoperative diagnosis was right indirect inguinal hernia, Gilbert II classification . The patient was discharged at the second post-operative day. The final pathological report of resected specimen in his groin indicated a metastasized GIST in inguinal hernia. The tumor was spindle cells morphology, with high mitotic count (> 40/50 HPF) and strongly positive immunostains of CD117, DOG-1, Bcl-2 and CD99. The Ki-67 index was 30%, with partial positivity for SDHB .
The patient continued the imatinib chemotherapy as mentioned ahead, with planed outpatient clinic visits scheduled. At the last follow-up visit on February 14th, 2020, he was survived and capable of daily work, without a recurrent inguinal hernia observed.