A 35-year-old African (Congolese) woman was admitted to the Panzi Hospital with a 4-day history of continuous urinary incontinence and dysuria, having previously been continent. The patient described a violent sensation of tearing whilst voiding and a popping sensation akin to the opening of a bottle cap immediately prior to becoming incontinent with blood-stained urine.

Clinical Findings and Diagnostic Investigations
The patient was G9/P9 with her last normal childbirth 18 months prior to presentation. There was no evidence of genital prolapse and otherwise she had no significant medical or surgical history. On arrival, she looked unwell. Her BP was 95/64 mmHg, pulse rate at 126 beats per minute, temperature 36°C and BMI 17.6.

Initial vaginal examination revealed labia stained with urine and blood. There was a suburethral haematoma above a 2 cm vesico-vaginal fistula. We noted severe anemia (Hb: 6.4 g/dL). In addition, her urine culture was negative.

Management
She was treated immediately on arrival with two units blood transfusion and became hemodynamically stable antibiotic therapy, hygienic and dietary measures were instituted. After two weeks of conservative measures, the edges of the fistula became clean and rosy, delineating a semi-circumferential fistula involving a portion of the trigone, the bladder neck and the urethra. The urethral length was 1.3cm, the vesico-vaginal fistula size was 3.5cm with the ureters situated 0.5 cm from the edge. She underwent an examination under anaesthetic after initial resuscitation and biopsies were taken for the edge of the fistula. A double check analysis was done in two regional pathology laboratories. Biopsy results revealed a squamous mucosa with an epithelium without notable histological lesions. The dermis was characterized by extensive angiogenic activity, congestion and mixed moderate inflammatory infiltrates diagnostic of lobular capillary hemangioma.

We performed a repair of the vesico-urethro-vaginal fistula, using sharp dissection after the incision around the edge of the fistula. The ureters were protected with ureteric stents. The bladder was mobilized and the edge of the fistula trimmed. In contrast to classic obstetrical and gynecological traumatic fistula repair, the bladder wall on this fistula was found to be haemorrhagic and friable. Haemostasis was obtained using diathermy. Interrupted sutures in one layer were performed using vicryl 2/0 with longitudinal approximation of the fistula edges and the reconstruction of the vesico-urethral junction by lengthening the urethra (narrowing) under a metallic catheter. The urethral length established was approximately 3.5cm. A size 12 French Foley bladder indwelling catheter was left for 14 days. After a negative dye test, the vaginal mucosa was closed. A vaginal pack was placed for 24 hours.


Outcome
Following her catheter removal, the patient was able to void normally with no stress or urge incontinence. She received counseling on fistula prevention as well as contraception. Genital examination was normal and she was discharged 48 hours later. We reviewed the patient 3 months post operatively and found that she was continent with no voiding dysfunction.