A 60-year-old postmenopausal woman was referred to our hospital with massive vaginal bleeding. Before menopause at age 43, she had a history of 2 cesarean deliveries. She also had a history of hydatidiform mole, 4 years prior to her first viable pregnancy, for which dilatation and curettage was performed and chemotherapy administered. The patient had a medical history of idiopathic portal hypertension and portal thrombosis and a surgical history of esophageal transection and splenectomy. She was on anticoagulation therapy.
Three years prior to the current presentation, she was seen in another prefecture and found to have dilated vessels around the uterus. There was no further follow-up by gynecology. On the day of her current presentation, she went to a local hospital complaining of sudden-onset continuous vaginal bleeding; she was transported to our hospital by helicopter. Speculum examination revealed continuous bleeding from the cervical os. On bimanual examination, the uterus was the size of a man’s fist, soft and spongy, and non-tender. A urine hCG test was negative. She was anemic, with a hemoglobin of 7.6 g/dL, but no tumor markers were elevated (CA 19–9, CEA, CA 125, SCC).
Transvaginal sonography showed several 2-cm low-echoic cystic lesions in the anterior uterine body. Color-flow Doppler revealed a mosaic pattern of blood flow within these cystic spaces . Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple tortuous vessels surrounding the uterus and in the anterior uterine wall . The patient underwent CT angiography which suggested multiple expanded vessels around the uterus . Based on these findings, a uterine AVM was suspected. Given the large vessels supplying the uterus, we anticipated a significant intraoperative blood loss and decided against immediate hysterectomy. We decided to perform UAE.
Pelvic angiography showed that this patient’s AVM was supplied by many arteries, including the right uterine artery, right internal iliac artery, right external iliac artery, and left uterine artery . We performed UAE in the conventional fashion, using coils and gelatin sponges, and found no significant flow to the AVM after the procedure . Eight days after embolization, we repeated pelvic angiography and unfortunately found newly established arteries and collateral vessels feeding the uterus . A second embolization was performed using coils, with n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) for residual blood flow, but the abundance of feeding and collateral arteries made it difficult to thrombose every vessel. Finally, we concluded that hysterectomy was the better choice and asked the patient for her consent to attempt it as elective surgery. However, 3 days later, a sudden onset of massive vaginal bleeding indicated rupture of the patient’s uterine AVM and we performed an emergency hysterectomy. There were numerous dilated vessels surrounding the uterine corpus. Surprisingly, it was not difficult to ligate and cut the dilated vessels and we were able to perform the hysterectomy with little bleeding in the operative field. The intraoperative blood loss was 2670 mL, but most of this was transvaginal bleeding from the AVM.
The location of the rupture in the AVM could not be identified, either on macroscopic or microscopic examination . Microscopy revealed many dilated thick-walled vessels of varying caliber in the myometrium, extending into the endometrium. The final diagnosis of uterine AVM was established. The patient has had no further episodes of atypical vaginal bleeding and no evidence of intraperitoneal hemorrhage 1 year after surgery.