A 56-year-old woman of North African origin, with no medical and surgical history, was admitted to the Department of Internal Medicine for investigation of a Raynaud phenomenon evolving for 3 months, associated with inflammatory arthralgias involving the wrists, elbows, and ankles; the patient also reported pain and progressive proximal muscle weakness in her lower limbs when climbing stairs, which extended to the upper limbs. There was no rash. Neuromuscular examination revealed proximal tetraparesis, mild neck flexion, and extension weakness. Strength at the neck was 4/5; at the shoulder 3/5; at the wrist 4/5; at the hips 2/5; and at the ankle 4/5; dorsiflexion/plantar flexion was normal. Tendon reflexes were normal. A few days after her hospitalization, the patient developed slight dysphonia and dysphagia; then this symptomatology was accentuated over time.
Nail fold capillary microscopy was normal. Blood tests showed significant levels of muscle enzymes [creatinine kinase (CK) 40,000 IU/L]. Autoimmune screening for myositis-specific and myositis-associated autoantibodies was negative. Electromyography (EMG) showed a decrement in compound muscle action potential on repetitive stimulation and clear signs of myopathy. The diagnosis of inflammatory myopathy was confirmed by muscle biopsy, which showed myositis . The patient was treated with prednisone 60 mg daily; we observed a slight improvement in muscle weakness and a significant decrease in CK serum level.
A month later, she developed intermittent diplopia, ptosis, and mild dysarthria during the conversation. Serum acetylcholine receptor (AChR) antibodies were positive (5.59 nmol/L), and muscle-specific kinase antibodies were negative. A broader workup performed with computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed a large anterior mediastinal mass (114 × 57 × 100 mm) , which a subsequent biopsy revealed as B1-type thymoma .
Inflammatory myositis associated with myasthenia gravis was diagnosed. Pyridostigmine in combination with steroids was started, with significant improvements in generalized weakness, ptosis, and dysarthria. The patient underwent thymectomy as part of the additional treatment. Currently, she is on a low dose of steroids and pyridostigmine and is asymptomatic. The features of myositis have not relapsed.