The donor was a 35-year-old male, Maastricht category III, who died after cardiac arrest (DCD) due to intracranial haemorrhage secondary to trauma. The right kidney was sent to another centre first and declined due to vascular damage. It then went through the fast-track scheme and was accepted by our team at Guy's Hospital. Once we had the kidney, the initial evaluation showed a right kidney, with three veins in a single cava patch, three renal arteries, the main artery with aorta patch that is 8 cm long, a small lower pole artery, which was sectioned during retrieval surgery at approximately 1 cm from its origin, and a third small mid-lower pole artery. The ureter had bifid renal pelvis.
During bench surgery the kidney was well perfused well with Soltran solution. From the three veins in the single cava patch, it was decided to ligate the posterior branch in order to allow the single patch to be more mobile. The small mid-lower pole artery was already damaged and was deemed unreconstructable and was therefore tied off. The main artery was left with a 1 cm aortic patch. The lower pole damaged artery was reconstructed using tubularised aorta patch to a total length of 5 cm. No additional donor vessels had been sent.
Although the inferior epigastric artery is sometimes preferred for this kind of reconstruction, in this case, it would probably have been too small for the reconstruction; also, the availability of a long and healthy aortic patch and the fact that during benching we did not know the status of the recipient vessels made us decide to take this approach.
The reconstruction was carried out with an aorta patch that is 5 cm in length that was part of the main artery patch of the organ. Using an 8 ch Nelaton bladder catheter as a mold a 5 cm long aorta segment was tubularised using 3 7-0 Prolene interrupted stiches in the distal area to avoid stenosis and Prolene 7-0 continuous suture in the rest of the patch to minimize bleeding risk. After construction of the tubulised aorta, E-E anastomosis to the damaged polar artery was done with interrupted 7-0 Prolene .
The recipient was 68-year-old male, with past medical history of ESRD secondary to IgA nephropathy on peritoneal dialysis and no other medical issues nor surgical procedures. After a detailed discussion with the patient, regarding the benefits and the risks due to the surgery and donors/organ characteristics, the patient was happy to proceed and signed the consent.
Transplant surgery was performed in the right iliac fossa with an extraperitoneal approach to the iliac vessels. The common cava patch was anastomosed to the recipient's external iliac vein. The main artery was anastomosed to the common iliac artery. Finally the reconstructed artery with the tubulised patch anastomosed the external iliac artery. After completion of all three vascular anastomoses the kidney was reperfused . The ureter was anastomosed to the bladder over a double J stent. A Robinson drain was left and wound was closed. The cold ischemic time was 27 hours and 15 minutes and warm ischemic time was 75 min.
There were no immediate postoperative complications. The first ultrasound was performed two hours after finishing the surgery in the recovery ward, showing good perfusion of the kidney.
After 48 hours a second ultrasound was performed. The presence of a superficial haematoma within the subcutaneous tissues and slightly reduced perfusion within the interpolar region was reported; otherwise appearance of the transplant kidney was satisfactory.
Haemoglobin fell from 11.2 (preoperatively) to 6.4 gr/dl. A decision to transfuse two units of blood cells and a relook surgery was reached. There was subcutaneous and perigraft haematoma and no active bleeding. The three vascular anastomoses were identified, both arteries, main and reconstructed, had good thrill, and the vein was soft and had good outflow. A new drain was left at the surgical site and wound closure was performed.
Three days later, the ultrasound was repeated showing that the right iliac fossa transplant kidney had normal cortical thickness and appearance. There was no pelvicalyceal dilatation. The previously demonstrated superficial collection was no longer present. There was satisfactory global vascularity. The sampled interlobular and arcuate vessels demonstrate normal flow with resistive indices between 0.65 and 0.8. The two renal arteries and veins had normal spectral waveforms, with a final impression of normal appearances of right iliac fossa transplant kidney.
Ureteric stent was removed at week 4 after transplant. Three months after transplantation the patient was stable and had no dialysis requirements with creatinine of 187.