A 38-year-old woman with a medical history of type I diabetes mellitus and SPS initially presented to inpatient rehabilitation with intractable and painful muscle spasms due to SPS. The diagnosis of SPS was confirmed by elevated anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody levels (>250 IU/mL). Her symptoms were episodic in nature and triggered by light palpation along the lower limbs. Emotional distress also worsened symptoms. Episodes would last up to 8 h per day. Examination was notable for severe and painful muscle flexor spasms, which were clonic and diffuse. The spasms were particularly notable in her left lower limb with corresponding left ankle inversion, and right upper limb with elbow flexion and forearm supination. The patient underwent serial up-titration of oral baclofen up to 15 mg 3 times a day and diazepam up to 20 mg every 6 h, with concurrent IVIG cycles, with only transient symptom control. Her symptoms made her non-ambulatory and limited her tolerance to using a wheelchair for mobility. She also required moderate-to-maximum assistance for bed mobility, transfers and lower limb dressing. The patient was subsequently referred to the spasticity clinic to be assessed for ITB therapy. She underwent a trial of a single bolus of 50 μg baclofen via a lumbar puncture at the L3–L4 interspace , resulting in a significant decrease in spontaneous spasms, which lasted for hours. She demonstrated modified independence on transfers and ambulation following the test dose procedure, without requiring an assistive device. The patient was then referred to neurosurgery and ultimately implanted with a SynchroMed II intrathecal delivery system (Medtronic, Inc. Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA), with the catheter tip placed at the T8 spinal level. Her post-procedural course was complicated only by a transient post-dural puncture headache. To date, her ITB has been titrated to 186 μg per day with simple continuous delivery. The patient was weaned off oral baclofen and required only intermittent oral diazepam, with 5 mg once or twice daily. To date, she has mild allodynia in the left lower limb. She attained complete functional independence with ambulation and continues ambulating without needing an assistive device. She remains independent in bed mobility, lower limb dressing, and transfers. She continues ITB therapy with occasional IVIG cycles, directed by neurology. Her baclofen dose has been stable for 36 months following the titration phase of therapy. She has experienced no lasting adverse effects from ITB therapy.