A 40-year-old man, a building worker, presented with acute right-sided body weakness without obvious inducement for 6 days. Weakness of the right limb occurred 16 h prior to admission to the hospital, presenting as inability to lift the right upper limb and inability to stand on the right lower limb.
There was no history of trauma and neck massage, no surgical history, and no previous infectious symptoms. He did not have diabetes and he was normotensive. The patient was a smoker for 10 years.
Neurologic examination showed that the patient’s consciousness and speech were normal. Cranial nerve examination was normal. According to the Medical Research Council muscle scale, the right upper proximal limb had muscle power grade 4/5; distal limb, muscle power grade 2/5; right lower limb, muscle power grade 0/5; and contralateral upper and lower limbs, muscle power grade 5/5. Joint position and vibration disappeared in the right lower limb, and position was weakened in the right hand. Deep sensation was normal in the left side of the body. The right ankle reflex was weakened. Pain and temperature sensation were decreased on the left below the level of C3. The patient tested negative for the Kernig sign. These results indicated Brown-Séquard syndrome on the right at the level of C3.
Laboratory studies, including hematologic, biochemical, and immunologic investigations were normal. Lumbar puncture cerebrospinal fluid was unremarkable.
There were no obvious abnormalities on head computed tomography (CT) and MRI examinations.
Sagittal T2-weighted MRI of cervical spine revealed spinal cord swelling with hyperintense lesion at the level of C1–3 . T2 axial scan showed hyperintensity of right spinal cord, consistent with SCI . Further, high-resolution MRI volumetric isotropic turbo spin echo acquisition (HR-MRI VISTA) showed narrowing of the right vertebral artery at the level of C1–3 with eccentric high signal parallel to the narrowed lumen resulting from VAD with intramural hematoma . Therefore, we diagnosed this condition as SCI resulting from VAD.
The patient underwent anticoagulant (AC) and antiplatelet (AP) therapy for 3 months. MRI reexamination showed a diminished range of abnormal signals of the spinal cord , and HR-MR VISTA sequence revealed lumen recanalization of the right vertebral artery . The patient recovered well and was discharged with a modified Rankin scale score of 1. We advised the patient to keep following up, but he refused.