A 56-year-old man presented with numbness and pain in both lower limbs for 2 wk and dysuria for 1 wk.
Two weeks previously, the patient developed numbness and pain in both lower limbs with no obvious origin and dysuria for 1 wk. Gradually, the symptoms of both lower limbs extended upward to the root of the thigh and the hips. There was no fecal incontinence at that time. The patient was referred to a local hospital, where he tested positive for serum syphilis antibody, but enhanced lumbosacral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as well as brain MRI showed no obvious abnormalities. The patient was first considered to have neurosyphilis and received 2 d of anti-syphilis therapy (ceftriaxone 2 g b.i.d and dexamethasone 5 mg b.i.d, combined with long-acting penicillin 2.4 MU, intramuscular injection). However, the patient’s symptoms did not improve; thus, he came to our hospital to seek further diagnosis and treatment.
The patient previously had TB, chest computed tomography (CT) found similar lesions 7 years ago, but the patient had no symptoms and no standardized treatment was added.
The patient had no relevant personal history and denied a family history of TB or myelitis.
The muscle strength of the patient’s bilateral lower limbs was graded as level 3 using the muscle strength grading scale (maximum score 5). The examination also revealed impaired pinprick sensation (bilateral) below the T10 dermatomes and hyporeﬂexia in both legs. The patient had a neurogenic bladder, and his temperature ranged between 37.5 and 38.8C since the disease onset. Other physical examination showed no abnormality.
The patient’s results indicated positive serum syphilis and tuberculous serology [Toluidine red unheated serum test (TRUST) 1:8 and Treponema pallidum particle agglutination assay (TPPA)+, Mycobacterium tuberculosis specific T lymphocyte (T-SPOT)+, respectively]. The rapid HIV test and other blood tests revealed no obvious abnormalities. Lumbar puncture was performed, and the pressure was 185 mmH2O (June 4, 2020). CSF analysis revealed high WBC count (310 × 106/L) with lymphocytic predominance (90%), high protein level (159.2 mg/dL; normal range, 8–43 mg/dL), low glucose (0.99 mmol/L, normal range 2.2–3.9 mmol/L), and low chloride levels (118.3 mmol/L; normal range, 120–130 mmol/L). CSF TRUST and TPPA were also reactive with a titer of 1:1 for the TRUST. Subsequently, tuberculous-infected T cells indicated a positive T-SPOT result. For making a definitive diagnosis, mNGS was conducted and MTB DNA was detected in the CSF sample. Routine urine/fecal test and urinary ultrasound were normal.
MRI of the thoracic cord showed multiple lesions along the cervicothoracic junction on T2-weighted imaging . Chest CT also showed patchy cord shadows in the apical posterior segment of the left upper lobe and the dorsal segment of the lower lobe . Re-examination of brain MRI did not reveal any abnormalities.