A 27-year-old Burkinabe woman from the north of Burkina Faso had consulted for a recurrent scalp nodule that had been evolving for 13 years. The scalp nodule had relapsed for the seventh time 6 months ago after six surgeries. It began as a painless nodule of the scalp that would have benefited from iterative surgical resections without histologic analysis.
The patient presented to our institution complaining of a dry cough lasting for 1 month. She was afebrile and in good condition. We noted an atrophic, indurated, scarring alopecic plaque measuring 15 cm in diameter in the center of her scalp, topped by a firm erythematous nodule measuring 3 × 2 × 2 cm in projection of the right parietal region. The nodular mass was slightly movable to the deep plane and painless.
Three other nodules were also observed that were more palpable than visible, each measuring 1 cm in diameter, on the indurated alopecic plaque . The patient’s physical examination revealed a painless mobile nodule located in the axillary tail of the right breast. The result of the patient’s respiratory system examination was normal. The results of the rest of her physical examination were normal.
Cranioencephalic computed tomodensitometry (CT) was performed, which showed a soft tissue mass in the exophytic right parietal skin, measuring 30 × 24 × 17 mm, enhanced after iodine contrast agent injection. There were no signs of damage to the cranial vault or the brain .
Thoracic CT revealed four intrathoracic tissue masses that were straight to pleural contact and a nodule of the axillary tail of the right breast, measuring 23 × 22 × 18 mm . The breast and chest nodules had the same characteristics before and after iodine contrast agent injection. There were no evolutionary lesions in the abdominopelvic region. Ultrasound of the breast nodule revealed an oval hypoechoic formation with regular contours. The result of an abdominopelvic ultrasound was normal.
A histologic study of the scalp nodule biopsy showed a proliferation of fibrous background fusiform cells carrying a storiform pattern. These cells had elongated, dark nuclei and showed some mitosis without atypia (three mitoses per 10 high-power fields at × 40 magnification). An immunohistochemical study demonstrated that the cells expressed CD34 intensely and diffusely, but the result was negative for PS100 and smooth muscle actin.
Histologic and immunohistochemical study of the breast nodule revealed the presence of a breast mesenchymal tumor with the same characteristics as the scalp nodule, and the result was positive for CD34 . The combination of clinical, imaging, histologic, and immunohistochemical findings led us to a diagnosis of scalp DP with breast metastasis and probably pleuropulmonary metastasis. Surgery and chemotherapy with imatinib are being considered for our patient. ​﻿﻿Af﻿ter three rounds of chemotherapy, the breast and chest nodes partially regressed in size.﻿