JLLP, a 49-year-old man, industrial worker, resident in Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil, was admitted to the emergency at Hospital Adventista de Manaus (HAM). The patient showed skin rash, pruritus, arthralgia, headache, myalgia, bilateral conjunctivitis, fever (38.5 °C) and hypertensive crisis with blood pressure (BP) of 240/120 mmHg, but heart rate and cardiac auscultation were normal. The patient had no travel history and described the appearance of symptoms 3 days before seeking medical attention. Besides, the patient reported the absence of hypertensive episodes or any other cardiac disorder in the past.
Immediately, the treatment for the hypertensive crisis was initiated with sodium nitroprusside (250 ml glycated serum 5% + Nipride – 1 ampoule = 2 ml) administered 5 ml/h by continuous infusion. In the following two, three and 4 hours it was administered 7 ml, 10 ml and 15 ml of sodium nitroprusside, respectively, but the blood pressure was still elevated. No abnormalities in electrocardiogram (ECG) and chest radiography (CR) were observed.
The patient was still refractory to blood pressure control (BP 238/120 mmHg) 4 hours after starting treatment, and showed elevated blood glucose levels (250 mg/dL), therefore, he was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Suddenly, the patient suffered a cardiac arrhythmia (atrial fibrillation - AF) which was chemically reversed with an attack dose of two ampoules (6 ml) of intravenous amiodarone hydrochloride (50 mg/ml). For the maintenance dose, six ampoules of amiodarone (8 ml/h) were administered in 5% glycated serum (250 ml) by continuous infusion for 12 h.
Due to the symptoms presented at the time of attendance, and the ongoing Zika outbreak in course, the patient and his wife, an asymptomatic contact, were inserted into the protocol for ZIKV surveillance. Both had samples of blood, urine, and saliva collected for arboviral testing by the reverse transcription real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR).
On the sixth day of hospitalization, the patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); echocardiographic doppler (DE) and coronary angiography (CA). Only the MRI was altered with bilateral supratentorial microangiopathic gliosis. A second ECG was performed on the eighth day of hospitalization, which presented no alterations and the patient was discharged. Serological tests for other infectious diseases were negative and the RT-qPCR results showed positivity for ZIKV in the saliva sample. Although still asymptomatic, his wife also tested positive for ZIKV in the serum sample.