A 14-year-old female came to our facility with concerns about difficulty in walking owing to weakness in both lower limbs, an erythematous, pruritic rash that covered her face, neck, axilla, elbows, and knees, and photosensitivity that had been present for eight months. It was unknown if she had any allergies. Patient underwent surgery 1.5 years after being diagnosed with retinoblastoma two years prior. After the enucleation, the patient underwent 40 cycles of radiation therapy and 13 cycles of chemotherapy with the drugs cyclophosphamide, etoposide, carboplatin, vincristine, and dactinomycin. In addition to developing proximal muscular weakness in both the upper and lower body after undergoing chemotherapy for 10 months, the patient also got a rash over their face that progressed.
The patient was brought with these issues to our facility. Indicators of the patient's weakness in the proximal muscles of the upper and lower limbs were difficulty in rising from a sitting position and lifting the arms over the head. Her lower limbs had grade II muscle power and her upper limbs grade III, according to the examination. The CMAS score for childhood myositis was 36. Her vital signs were normal, and she had no underlying systemic issues. On inspection of the joints, there were no indications of active synovitis. At presentation, her neck flexor strength was higher than grade IV. Findings of skin examination showed hallmark manifestations consistent with DM, well defined to ill defined hyperpigmented scaly lichenified plaques over the neck, face, axilla , elbows, knees, including the V neck sign/Shawl sign, heliotrope eruption over the face especially on the forehead and periorbital region , Gottron papules over the digits of upper limb on both sides , calcinosis cutis involving the extensor aspect of elbows .
The initial blood tests, such as complete blood counts, liver and renal functions, were all normal. Both lactate dehydrogenase (578 U/L) and creatine phosphokinase (171.61 U/L) levels were high. Positive antinuclear antibodies were found. Features of Dermatomyositis with interface dermatitis and mucin deposition in the dermis was consistent in the skin punch biopsy. Electromyography was done which showed small polyphasic motor unit potentials with fibrillations, positive sharp waves suggestive of Dermatomyositis. A muscle biopsy revealed fibres of the muscle that were necrosed and fragemted [Fig. ].
According to the online calculator of EULAR/ACR classification for Juvenile Idiopathic Inflammatory Myopathies(IIM), the criterion score was 15.7, which was suggestive of Definite IIM . According to the Bohan and Peter criteria , JDM was determined to be the cause of the symptoms, which included the characteristic heliotrope rash with Gottron papules, symmetrical proximal weakness, raised muscle enzyme levels, electromyographic alterations, and even JDM-related changes in the muscle biopsy.
Prednisolone oral 2 mg/kg/day and methotrexate oral 15 mg/m2 once weekly were started on the patient. After beginning the therapy for a week, the youngster displayed a slight improvement in symptoms as shown by lessened joint discomfort, stiffness, and erythema. Exercises for muscle strengthening and physiotherapy were started. During the patient's future hospital visits, it was seen that the patient's muscle strength had significantly improved.