We presented the case of a 55-year-old man with left peripheral facial nerve palsy. The symptoms appeared one week earlier, along with viral upper respiratory infection.
Otalgia started after two days accompanied by hearing loss and tinnitus on the left side; on the third day, vesiculoerosive lesions manifested itself in the left auricle , followed by the incidence of left side FNP .
The patient also suffered from true vertigo. On the same day of FNP incidence, the case developed hoarseness and fluid aspiration that became worse in the following days. The case had a surgery on the other ear (right side) 20 years earlier and 20 pack-year history of smoking. There were no diplopia, ptosis, headache, and the weakness of limbs or loss of consciousness. In addition, the patient had no history of diabetes or tuberculosis.
The physical examination revealed a left peripheral FNP grade VI based on House-Brackmann (HB) grading. In the right ear, he had previous surgical scar, along with central perforation with otorrhea. In the left ear, herpetic vesicles, as well as papules and pustules, associated with erythema and edema were observed in the ear canal and the conchal bowl . The laryngoscopic examination confirmed left vocal cord paralysis that was fixed in the paramedian position. The audiological evaluation verified left side profound hearing loss .
The patient was managed with RHS diagnosis associated with the paralysis of cranial nerves VIII and X, and the treatment started with acyclovir and prednisone 1mg⁄kg.
The FNP recovered after 2 weeks and the synkinesis totally improved following 4 weeks. Although fluid aspiration remarkably improved, left recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis persisted on indirect laryngoscopy, with the compensation from opposite vocal cord. The case’s vertigo improved after 4 days of treatment; however, occasional non-pulsatile tinnitus still lingered on. The vesicles changed into scabs within 5 days and the inflammation and erythema disappeared after 2 to 3 weeks. The left side sensorineural hearing loss and also recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis sustained for a year of follow-up.