A 40-year-old Japanese woman developed numbness in both legs, back pain, and gait disturbances after experiencing these symptoms for a month and visited her previous hospital. She had a prior diagnosis of NF1. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a spinal tumor located in the left thoracic spinal cord at the Th9-10 level, prompting her to undergo a laminectomy at Th8-9, intradural tumor resection, and partial resection of the epidural tumor. Pathological evaluation showed no malignant findings, and the tumor was diagnosed as a neurofibroma. On the 37th day after surgery, the patient was referred to our hospital for rehabilitation therapy.

She had multiple raised skin lesions all over her body, including her face. Neurological examination revealed muscle weakness at the Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 4 level in the bilateral iliopsoas, left quadriceps, bilateral hamstrings, and left anterior tibialis. There was increased tendon reflex activity in both lower limbs, a positive right Babinski sign, positive right foot clonus, and paresthesia in both lower limbs. No cranial nerve deficits, upper limb paralysis, or ataxia were noted. Although the patient experienced some difficulty with urination, they were able to defecate independently. She used a walker for mobility due to lower limb weakness. We initiated rehabilitation therapy with the short-term goals of promoting independence in basic activities of daily living (ADLs), improving muscle strength and range of motion, and long-term goals of returning to daily life, providing psychological support and encouraging social participation, and enhancing the quality of life. Specifically, we planned to implement muscle strengthening exercises, range of motion exercises and stretching, balance training and exercises for fall prevention, gait training, and instruction in ADLs (bathing, dressing, eating, etc.). These rehabilitative efforts led to some improvement in the patient's walking function. She was able to walk independently for short distances and train with a walking stick for longer distances. However, over a period of 15 days, starting on the 46th day after surgery, she tried various laxatives but was unable to have a bowel movement. On the 67th day after surgery, walking deteriorated, and the patient was no longer able to walk using a walker. Thoracic spine MRI revealed a 63 x 55 mm sized, lobulated mass extending from the Th9 vertebral body, arch, and epidural space to the left posterior mediastinum through the left foramina of Th9/10. This mass demonstrated hypointensity on T1-weighted images and hyperintensity on T2-weighted images with internal heterogeneity. On the 75th day after surgery, she was transferred back to her previous hospital.

On the 80th day after her initial surgery, she underwent a second surgery for spinal tumor removal. The tumor, which had progressed from the epidural space into the Th9 vertebral body, was resected. Pathologists deemed no malignant findings, and the tumor was diagnosed as a neurofibroma. A postoperative MRI performed at the previous hospital confirmed that spinal cord compression had been alleviated. As a result of postoperative rehabilitation at her previous hospital, she regained walking with a walker. On the 113th day after the initial surgery, the patient was transferred back to our hospital for rehabilitation. Neurological examination revealed spasticity in both lower limbs with the following MRC grades (right/left): iliopsoas 3/2; gluteus maximus 2/2; quadriceps 4/4; tibialis anterior 3/2; gastrocnemius 3/2; left-dominant hypoesthesia in both lower limbs; and hyperreflexia in both lower limbs. In terms of ADLs, the patient was independent in getting in and out of bed and transferring with the use of handrails. While they could use a walker, they exhibited instability, requiring supervision. However, after transferring to our hospital, the patient's back pain, lower limb numbness, and paralysis in both legs worsened progressively. She and her family sought a second opinion and visited another advanced medical center on the 125th day after the initial surgery, where she was diagnosed with MPNSTs. The thoracic spine MRI on the 126th day showed significant tumor enlargement (diameter 98 mm). By the 127th day after the initial surgery, both legs had reached MRC grade 1. On the 128th day, she returned to her previous hospital; however, surgery was deemed impossible, and the focus shifted to palliative care, leading to her death several days after readmission.