A 36-year-old female patient with a history of “cardiac cyst (70 × 30 mm)” presented to our hospital for treatment of recurrent episodes of chest pain. The “cardiac cyst” was discovered 3 years earlier by echocardiography when the patient experienced slight dyspnea and palpitation at 37 weeks’ gestation. At that time, the electrocardiogram was normal, and blood coagulation function tests revealed slightly increased fibrinogen and D-dimer levels (4.10 g/L and 1252 μg/L, respectively). Before parturition, these values were 4.07 g/L and 1875 μg/L, respectively. Because uterine inertia could not be resolved during natural delivery, cesarean section was performed. Delivery was successful, and the patient was asymptomatic. Annual check-ups during the following 3 years revealed no abnormity other than an enlarged heart shadow on chest radiographs. Anticoagulation therapy was not administered during the 3-year follow-up period.
Two months before presentation at our hospital, the patient developed gradually worsening chest pain. The electrocardiogram remained normal; however, transthoracic echocardiography (iE Elite, Philips Healthcare, Bothell, WA, USA) revealed a long oval structure attached to the left atrium (LA) adjacent to the left ventricle (LV) and compressing the anterolateral left ventricular wall during the entire cardiac cycle . No other structural abnormalities were observed. Contrast echocardiography showed that the long oval structure and the LA were enhanced simultaneously with no filling defect . Transesophageal study confirmed a 3.9-cm2 channel between the LA and the structure, which measured 96 mm in length and 55 mm wide . Migration of blood along the channel was observed with Doppler imaging . LAAA was diagnosed definitively, with no thrombi or spontaneous echo contrast observed. Computed tomography (CT) was performed to evaluate the status of the pulmonary veins and other surrounding structures .
The patient was hospitalized and scheduled to undergo cardiac surgery. Preoperative blood testing, including coagulation function tests, were normal. Median sternotomy was performed, exposing the giant LAAA with intact overlying pericardium. During cardiopulmonary bypass, the base of the LAAA was simply clamped and then resected with a stapler (Echelon 60, Johnson & Johnson, Guaynabo, Puerto Rico, USA). No thrombus within the LAAA or other cardiac anomaly was detected. Anatomical pathology identified the LAAA as a thin-walled and dilated aneurysm of the left atrial appendage. Histopathology described the wall as being composed of myocardium and fibrotic tissue, indicating a true atrial aneurysm . The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. At the 6-month follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic and in sinus rhythm, and transthoracic echocardiography (Vivid E9; GE Healthcare, Strandpromenaden, Horten, Norway) revealed good correction of the LAAA and a normal size for the LA, with no evidence of abnormality .