A 66-year-old female visited the outpatient clinic with one year history of painful swelling of right ankle and a draining sinus around lateral malleolus. Her medical history was not significant except dyslipidemia and she had no apparent trauma before the onset of the symptoms. Five months and three months before the initial visit, she had undergone arthroscopic synovectomy and bursectomy in other hospital for chronic bursitis , but no causative organism was revealed from the intraoperative tissue cultures. No limitation of range of motion or fever was observed at the initial presentation but the patient had intermittent pain with walking. Her laboratory tests showed no evidence of prominent infection, as white blood cell (WBC) count of 3700 /μL, Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 15 mm/hr., C-reactive protein (CRP) of < 0.3 mg/dL. No suspicious radiolucent lesion was observed on plain radiograph of her right ankle. From her magnetic resonance image (MRI), high signal intensity in Proton density fat suppression images and T1-weighted double fat suppression images was found on subcutaneous tissue over lateral malleolus with intra-articular fluid effusion, synovial hypertrophy and localized bone edema around the ankle joint. Chronic bursitis with sinus tract and nonspecific synovitis of ankle were diagnosed, with suggestion of differential diagnosis of inflammatory arthritis, septic arthritis, early tuberculous arthritis and reactive synovitis due to ankle instability.
Open bursectomy and sinus tract excision were performed, followed by 1st generation cephalosporin administration after the surgery. (Cefazedone 1 g BID [bis in die]) Bone biopsy was obtained from discolored distal fibular tip, which showed chronic inflammation and degeneration. Gram positive rods were identified in 1 out of 3 bacterial culture samples, one tissue culture sample and two swab cultures, and was interpreted as contamination as only one of the two swab samples showed gram positive bacilli, which seemed to be normal skin flora or contamination from surrounding environment according to the laboratory medicine department of the institution. Tuberculosis-polymerase chain reaction (TB-PCR) test was negative. The patient showed no fever postoperatively and CRP of < 0.3 mg/dL. 1st generation cephalosporin was administered intravenously until 2 weeks after the surgery and changed to oral agent for 1 more week. The patient was followed until 22 weeks postoperatively without any symptoms or signs of recurrence.
The patient revisited the clinic two years later from the surgery for recurred painful swelling and pus drainage. Plain radiograph, computed tomography (CT) and MRI were taken and multiple huge cystic abscess surrounded by sclerotic rim and osteomyelitis of talus and medial malleolus were identified. Lateral malleolar bursectomy, debridement and drainage of talus abscess were done and intraoperative frozen biopsy obtained from periarticular soft tissue and bursae showed low grade infectious soft tissue. Permanent tissue biopsy was interpreted as chronic osteomyelitis with fibrinoid exudate, fibrosis and necrosis with abscess and foreign body reaction. Anti-nuclear antibody, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody and rheumatoid factor were tested to exclude autoimmune disease and other inflammatory arthritis, which turned out to be negative for all three markers. Bacterial culture, acid fast bacteria stain, TB-PCR, potassium hydroxide (KOH) mount and fungal culture were obtained and C. krusei was identified 1 out of 2 fungal culture samples. Antifungal drug sensitivity and resistance test were requested and the pathogen confirmed to be sensitive to amphotericin B, micafungin and voriconazole, intermediate for caspofungin, and resistant to fluconazole and flucytosine. Even though in vitro susceptibility against caspofungin was intermediate, caspofungin was recommended by the infectious disease specialist of the hospital according to the sensitivity test result, considering the potential toxicity of amphotericin B to which the pathogen was more susceptible. After two weeks of intravenous caspofungin 50 mg QD [quaque die] administration, the patient was discharged with patellar tendon bearing cast and oral voriconazole 200 mg BID for 6-month period, which was tolerable with only minor adverse effects like dry mouth, reported by the patient. The patient had regular liver function tests to monitor hepatotoxicity of voriconazole during antifungal administration at local clinic, all of which were within normal limits according to the patient. Her last outpatient clinic visit after one year and four months from the last surgery was uneventful with no clinical symptom recurrence. Plain radiographs and CT scan showed stationary cystic lesions of talus without evident talar roof collapse, and when compared to the radiographic studies of 10 months after the last surgery , slightly thickened cortical lining of the talar cysts was observed. Possibility of bone graft to the void was explained to the patient for prevention of potential talar collapse, but she refused to undergo another surgery as she had no clinical symptoms or functional impairments.