A 19-year old Caucasian male presented to the University Hospital of Muenster emergency department after being unresponsive for 5 h. After consuming liquid methadone intravenously the night before, the patient awoke and immediately complained of partial bilateral hearing loss, walking impairment and numbness of both inner thighs.
According to third-party history obtained from two accompanying friends (the patient was amnestic regarding the night before) the patient had consumed 3 × 2.5 mL of liquid methadone (produced for substitution therapy) intravenously. They reported observing unconsciousness, urinary incontinence, and a twist of his eyes. The patient and accompanying friends admitted to occasionally orally using illegally obtained methadone and cannabis but credibly denied consuming these substances or other opiods and illegal drugs in the days before. This was the first event of intravenous methadone abuse. The medical history of the patient was otherwise unremarkable.
In the neurological examination the patient presented fluctuating consciousness, severe psychomotor and cognitive slowing (slowed speech, increased response latency, concentration deficits), mild paraparesis of the lower limbs, clonus when testing the left patellar reflex and symmetrical bilateral hypoesthesia of the inner thigh. Medical examination showed a heart rate of 76 beats per minute, blood pressure 121/73 mmHg, peripheral oxygen saturation of 97% and temperature of 36.8 °C. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed only unspecific change of the ST-segment in V2 and V3. FAST-ultrasound did not reveal any abnormalities.
Blood tests revealed a slightly elevated c-reactive protein (5.2 mg/dl; reference < .5 mg/dl), an elevated GOP (400 U /l; reference: < 30 U/l), GPT (118 U/l; reference < 40 U /l) and an increased creatin-kinase (7104 U/l; reference: < 174 U/l) and lactatdehydrogenase (563 U/l; reference 117–217 U/l). Sodium and potassium levels were within normal range. Intoxication screening of the urine was positive for methadone (2.55 mg/l) and cannabinoids (THC-COOH: 29 μg/l) but was negative for other drugs including non-methadone opioids and barbiturates, benzodiazepines, tricyclic antidepressive drugs, methamphetamines, cocaine, phencyclidine and paracetamol. An initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multifocal, bilateral edema of the basal ganglia , of both cerebellar hemispheres as well as the capsula interna with diffusion restriction and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) signal reductions and fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) imaging revealed hyperintense alterations in those areas. In addition, DWI and FLAIR imaging presented mild, confluent white matter abnormalities above the lateral ventricle (Supplementary figure A, B). A time-of-flight (TOF)-angiography was normal. An initial spinal tap and subsequent cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed a disturbance of the blood-brain barrier but normal total protein (542 mg/l) and normal lymphocyte counts (4/μL) and no intrathecal antibody synthesis. An electroencephalogram (EEG) revealed intermittent deceleration without epileptic discharges.
After admission, the patient was continuously awake and responsive and did not require intensive care treatment. Initially, walking was impaired without a need for a walking aid.
A transesophageal echocardiography revealed no cardiac abnormalities and especially no endocarditis. Repeated blood cultures were negative. Ear-nose-throat consultation revealed an injury of the inner ear with a diminished ability to hear below 55 dB. We performed treatment with prednisolone for 3 days (days 7–9) at 1 mg per kilogram body weight, which did not cause any immediate conceivable improvement of hearing but the hearing ability improved continuously. The unsteady gait improved to an almost normal level between days 9–11 of inpatient treatment. In contrast, cognitive deficits remained unchanged with increased response latency, slowed speech and concentration deficits. Additionally, the hypoesthesia of the inner thigh remained unchanged.
An additional MRI after 11 days revealed the known FLAIR-hyperintense lesions of basal ganglia, capsula interna and subtle abnormalities above the lateral ventricles (Supplementary figure C, D) as well as the cerebellar hemispheres , which were now ADC increased. Interestingly, new lesions were found in the crura cerebri bilaterally . Another spinal tap revealed an increase of lymphocytes (11/μl), but otherwise no pathological findings with a normal blood-brain barrier. Flow cytometry analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cells revealed a shift in monocyte subtypes with a significant increase of the non-classical CD14 + CD16+ monocyte-fraction and decrease of the CD56bright natural killer cell-fraction in the lymphocyte subset in the CSF . Reference values had been previously collected from 29 patients (female: 58%, mean age: 24.1y + − 5.0 standard deviation (SD)) with psychsosomatic disorder (exclusion of inflammatory CNS disorder; CSF: less than 5 cells/μl, normal protein, no intrathecal antibody synthesis).
With improved walking and hearing but considerable neurocognitive impairment we discharged the patient after 13 days to subsequent rehabilitation.
A neuropsychological assessment on day 18 revealed mild-to-moderate overall cognitive impairments when compared with normative data stratified for age and education . Particularly tests assessing cognitive processing speed (e.g., TAP, SDMT, TMT, Time to copy a complex figure) showed consistent alterations from the norm. Learning efficiency of both verbal (RAVLT) and visual material (BVMT-R) was also impaired whereas recall from memory was only reduced for verbal but preserved for complex visual material. Interestingly, the patient showed preserved performance in tests for complex attention and higher executive functions such as planning abilities (D-KEFS Tower Test).