A 17-year-old female college student presented to her GP with a one-year history of weight loss and poor appetite. She had a past medical history of pulmonary atresia and ventricular septal defect, surgically corrected at the age of 4 with a 18 mm Contegra conduit and was transitioning from paediatric to adult congenital cardiac care. She was initially suspected to have an eating disorder due to low mood and decreasing weight (from 53 to 39 kg). She subsequently developed a lower limb vasculitic rash. At that time urinalysis demonstrated haemoproteinuria (urine PCR 116 mg/mmol) resulting in an urgent renal referral. Her serum creatinine was 128 μmol/l (estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 58 ml/min/1.73 m2), however Cystatin C (which estimates GFR independent of muscle mass low muscle mass) estimated her GFR at 16 ml/min/1.73 m2 and accordingly she was admitted to hospital urgently for further urgent investigations.
On admission, she had a low body mass index (BMI 15) and was found to be pyrexial and have massive splenomegaly (19 cm). Initial immunological workup revealed a weakly positive ANCA PR3 (PR3 positive 2.3 (reference range 0–0.9)). She was commenced on a reducing regime of prednisolone on the second day of her admission empirically for presumed ANCA vasculitis, which resulted in a rapid resolution of the rash and improvement in her creatinine levels.
Rheumatology review was requested in view of a history of intermittent joint pains and ocular dryness. Blood tests were requested, the results of which are illustrated in Table .
A renal biopsy showed focal segmental proliferative and necrotising lesions with double contours and fibrocellular crescents. Tubulointerstitium was normal with no acute tubular necrosis or chronic changes. Immunofluorescence showed C3 (3 +), Lambda (2 +), IgM (1 +), C1q (+ / −). Immune complexes were seen in paramesangial, mesangial and subepithelial locations. These biopsy features were in keeping with an infection related membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (Type 1) pattern.
Given the clinical features, renal biopsy findings and immunological abnormalities a potential diagnosis of cryoglobulinaemic, rather than ANCA vasculitis, was made with further testing confirming a Type 3 cryoglobulin (polyclonal IgG). Serial blood cultures were negative and initial investigations for an infectious cause (e.g., Hepatitis B, C serology and HIV antibody screen) were also negative. Bone marrow biopsy showed reactive changes and excluded haematological malignancy.
Additional investigations to identify an infective cause resulted in an echocardiogram showing vegetations on her conduit. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan was then requested as the changes seen on the conduit could have been due to conduit degeneration, which is common after 13 years. The PET scan showed uptake around the conduit valve in the pulmonary position supporting an infectious or inflammatory aetiology, with a CT pulmonary angiography (CTPA) demonstrating septic emboli in the anterior basal right lower lobe.
Empirical antibiotics treatment for endocarditis (vancomycin, gentamycin, and rifampicin) were commenced. Inflammatory markers and renal function failed to improve following two weeks of intravenous antibiotics for bacterial endocarditis and accordingly the patient was referred for surgical revision of her conduit. This was performed at a tertiary paediatric cardiothoracic unit. Tissue samples cultured positive for Bartonella and aspergillus species. Antibiotic therapy was altered to doxycycline and anti-fungal therapy whilst oral steroids were continued. Following completion of antibiotic treatment and steroid taper, she achieved resolution of her cryoglobulinaemia and normalization of renal function, RhF and C4.
The unifying, final diagnosis was, therefore, Type 3 Cryoglobulinaemia with crescentic glomerulonephritis secondary to Bartonella endocarditis + / − fungal infection of conduit. On reviewing the social history, the patient’s mother revealed that she had adopted several stray cats in the preceding year; this was identified as the cause of the Bartonella infection.
The patient was subsequently reviewed in the Rheumatology outpatient clinic, approximately six months following her initial admission. She was found to be progressing well; her splenomegaly had resolved, appetite improved, she had regained weight and her antibiotics and steroids have been stopped. Her biochemical markers have also improved; with creatinine of 51 μmol/l (from 128, peak creatinine 192 μmol/l), CKD-EPI-eGFR > 90 ml/min/1.73m2 (from 16) and her most recent cryoglobulin remains negative. Her post-operative follow up in the adult congenital cardiac clinic has shown an excellent outcome. She has returned to college, however, has continued to house stray cats at home despite medical advice.