A 30-year-old woman visited the hospital due to right lower quadrant pain over the period of 1 week. A laparoscopic myomectomy was performed 4 years ago because of a broad ligament leiomyoma, which was about 10 cm in size. Laboratory findings included a routine blood examination, and a C-Reactive Protein (CRP) test, with tumor markers all found to be within normal ranges. The pelvic Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan showed some nodules at the posterior margin of the bladder that were considered to be endometriosis, and some pelvic effusion that was significant on the right side. It was also noted that there was a mass shadow at the lower right ureter (medial to the iliopsoas muscle), with distention of the lower right ureter . The patient also underwent computed tomography (CT) scans to enable the practitioners to observe the size of the abdominal mass and its surroundings. The CT images revealed a region occupying the middle right ureter that was considered to be a retroperitoneal aggressive fibroma, which led to severe hydronephrosis on the right kidney and upper ureter, and a right pelvic effusion . After more detailed examinations were conducted, there were no obvious abnormalities detected in the brain, heart, liver, gallbladder, spleen, pancreas or blood. The color Doppler ultrasound demonstrated that there was a hypoechoic mass next to the right iliac vessels that was closely related to the adjacent ureter. This resulted in severe hydronephrosis of the right kidney and a right upper ureteral dilatation . Ndzengue et al. reported a case of a pelvic desmoid tumor simulating a uterine leiomyoma recurrence. The patient that presented at our hospital had a history of uterine leiomyoma. We subsequently organized a multidisciplinary consultation to determine the next stage of her treatment plan. According to the patient’s surgical history, the next step would be determined after reviewing the results of the last surgical pathological wax, because the pathological nature of the retroperitoneal mass was uncertain.
Consequently, a laparoscopic pelvic tumor resection with assistance from a Da Vinci robot was successfully conducted. A local peritoneal protuberance was observed in the right iliac vascular area. The parietal peritoneum was incised above the mass and it was carefully freed along the edge of the mass. The size of the tumor was about 6.0 cm × 5.0 cm × 3.0 cm. It had invasively grown and it was wrapped around the right ureter and the right ovarian arteries and veins. It was stuck to the psoas muscle and the iliac vessels. According to preoperative preparations and intraoperative conditions, a decision was made to cut off the right ureter, the right ovarian arteries and veins, and completely remove the tumor and the two masses that were located in front of the broad ligament on the right hand side of the uterus. The sizes of the masses were approximately 1.5 cm × 1.0 cm × 1.0 cm. The right ureter was anastomosed and put into a double J tube. A pathological diagnosis of an intraoperative frozen sample determined that it was a spindle cell soft tissue tumor, and the two masses were leiomyomas. Postoperative pathology tests of the pelvic mass determined that it was aggressive fibromatosis that had invaded the ureteral wall . The uterine surface nodules were also leiomyomas. Microscopically, the tumor cells were arranged sparsely in a spindle shape with blood vessels of different sizes found in the interstitial tissue. Immunohistochemical findings were found to be partially positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and desmin, and less than 5% ki-67 of positive cells were seen in the lesion. A detailed re-examination was performed 3 months after the initial surgery, to determine the structure and function of the ovaries. The transvaginal color Doppler ultrasonography was able to determine that the ovaries were normal in size with several follicular echoes. The blood supply to the right ovary was good. There were no obvious abnormalities in the uterus or pelvic cavity . The pelvic MRI and the CT scan of the whole abdomen determined that there were no abnormal lesions in the pelvis. Simultaneously, the endocrine function of the patient’s ovaries was found to be normal, and she was able to self-maturate after removing the double J tube.