A 57-year-old Caucasian woman reported a decrease in visual acuity for 2 weeks. Her best-corrected visual acuity for her right eye was 20/20 and for her left eye 20/100. A slit-lamp examination and intraocular pressure were unremarkable in both eyes. Fundus examination of her left eye revealed temporal intraretinal infiltrates and vitreous opacities . Her right eye was unremarkable.
Fluorescein angiography showed hyperfluorescence of her optic disc, leakage along the vessels, and chorioretinal hyperfluorescent infiltrates . The diagnosis of OT was based on the typical morphology of her ocular lesions and a positive serological testing for Toxoplasma gondii (immunoglobulin G concentration = 537IU/mL).
She was treated with clindamycin (Clindamycin® H) 4 × 300mg daily over 3 days without any significant improvement of visual acuity. On the fourth day of hospitalization, she received 100mg prednisolone-21-hydrogensuccinate (Solu-Decortin® H) intravenously in addition to her treatment with clindamycin (Clindamycin® H). Within 2 minutes she developed an acute erythema, particularly of her legs and abdomen , angioedema, hypotension (blood pressure 80/40mmHg), tachycardia (heart rate 140/minute), hyperthermia (38.8°C), and respiratory distress. Subsequently, she was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit to be monitored and treated with clemastine fumarate (Tavegil®), ranitidin (Ranitic®), and intravenous fluids. After 1 hour she recovered and after 12 hours she was transferred back to the ophthalmological ward. Her erythema and angioedema persisted for 32 hours. She had no history of previous steroid use. Subsequent allergy testing was conducted after 3 months in the Department of Dermatology in our hospital. The testing showed a positive skin-prick test for prednisolone and methylprednisolone in the form of a 5mm wheal, and negative results for dexamethasone and hydrocortisone , which confirmed her suspected allergy to prednisolone. Because of her allergic reaction to class A (prednisone-type) corticosteroids and possible complications due to cross-reactions to class D2 (prednicarbate-type) corticosteroids, we avoided any further treatment with systemic or intravitreal corticosteroids.
In addition, an oral exposure test with a step-by-step elevation of doses up to 2.0mg of dexamethasone (Fortecortin®) and 1.5mg betamethasone (Celestamine®) was conducted to find alternative corticosteroids for future treatments. For both substances, no local or systemic side effects were observed.
After 1 month of treatment with clindamycin (Clindamycin® H) monotherapy without any increase in visual acuity, the patient underwent a vitrectomy with balanced salt solution filling because of heavy vitreous opacities, and to obtain a sample of the vitreous body. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on the sample was positive for Toxoplasma gondii.
The postoperative examination of her left eye revealed chorioretinal scars and infiltrates . Her right eye was still unremarkable. Fluorescein angiography of her left eye also revealed hyperfluorescent intraretinal infiltrates of the temporal hemisphere and a scar of the inferotemporal retinal vein branch . Her visual acuity recovered to right eye 20/20 and left eye 20/40.