A 56-year-old woman, of Moroccan nationality, a chronic cigarette smoker consuming an average of one pack a day for 38 years, was hospitalized for a large right-sided hemifacial swelling. Her early symptoms dated from 4 months previously, by the appearance of straight facial neuralgia, treated as dental neuralgia without any improvement. The evolution was marked by rapid aggravation of the pain, which then became disabling, and the emergence of a right-sided maxillary swelling rapidly increasing in size and accompanied by a limitation of mouth opening, and a nasal obstruction with episodes of epistaxis.
A clinical examination determined a painful and inflammatory right-sided hemifacial swelling, right exophthalmus without notion of decreased visual acuity, and hypoesthesia at the second and third trigeminal nerve areas. An endonasal examination detected a tumor mass in her right nasal cavity, friable and bleeding at contact. An oral examination, very difficult because of the limited mouth opening, showed an erosion of the hard palate. Cervical lymph node areas were free and an endoscopy examination of the upper aerodigestive tract did not show any lesions. Otoscopy and audiometry test results were normal. Our patient was hospitalized and placed immediately on morphine.
A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed the presence of a large heterogeneous mass occupying her infratemporal fossa as well as the masticator space and right maxillary sinus, lysing the walls of the maxillary sinus, the ascending branch of the mandible and the orbital floor with ethmoidonasal, parapharyngeal and intraorbital extension.
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed an aggressive and invasive tumor occupying her right infratemporal fossa and maxillary sinus with irregular boundaries, heterogeneous intermediary signal at T1 and T2 weight, with sphenoidal, ethmoidonasal, nasopharyngeal and intraorbital extension. This process infiltrated the jugal and temporozygomatic soft parts, with heterogeneous contrast enhancement and areas of necrosis .
A nasal endoscopic biopsy was performed. A pathological examination was in favor of a malignant process, poorly differentiated and invasive . An immunohistochemical examination demonstrated a total cytoplasmic positivity to anti-S100 protein antibody, concluding in a diagnosis of malignant schwannoma . The staging, including a cervico-thoraco-abdominal CT scan, did not find any distant metastasis. According to the clinical and radiological data obtained, palliative radiotherapy was decided, delivered by a linear electron accelerator, at a total dose of 30Gy, 10Gy by fraction, over 3 days, with one field including the tumor mass. The outcome was favorable with improvement of symptoms. Unfortunately, our patient died 10 days later after severe respiratory distress.