A 19-year-old female had a subcutaneous implant placed one year prior to a visit to her physician. During the implantation of the device, abnormal cutaneous bleeding was noted. After the physician was unable to locate the implant, an ultrasound was performed. The ultrasound was unable to locate the contraceptive device. A thoracic CT scan revealed that the implant had migrated into the lower left lobular segmental pulmonary artery. The patient reported no symptoms related to the migration of the implant. After a multidisciplinary consultation involving a cardiac surgeon, anaesthesiologists, a gynaecologist, a cardiologist, and an interventional radiologist, an endovascular approach was considered. The patient underwent a preoperative consultation with a gynaecologist, an anaesthesiologist, and an interventional radiologist to explain the removal procedure and the known risks of pulmonary arterial catheterization. The procedure planning included the de-sterilization of a Nexplanon® to assess its flexibility. The team decided to perform the removal under bi-planar fluoroscopic guidance, as routinely done in our department for foreign body retrieval. Both right and left anterior obliquities were chosen to ideally expose the contraceptive implant . The procedure was conducted under general anaesthesia. Following a right femoral venous puncture under ultrasound guidance, a long 8F NeuronMax® introducer (Penumbra, Inc., Alameda, CA, USA) was placed under fluoroscopic guidance into the right inferior vena cava. The left pulmonary artery was catheterized using a 5F 145° angled Pigtail catheter (Merit Medical, UT, USA). An angiogram confirmed the position of the contraceptive implant, without thrombosis. After guide exchange with a stiff guide wire (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan), the NeuronMax® catheter was subsequently advanced to the left pulmonary artery, just upstream of the foreign body. A 25-mm diameter loop snare (One Snare®, Merit Medical, UT, USA) was deployed. Once captured, the contraceptive implant was removed under fluoroscopic guidance without removing it into the NeuronMax® catheter. The procedure lasted 60 min. The fluoroscopic dose was 261 mGy, and fluoroscopy time was 10 min. The following day, a thoracic CT scan showed no procedure-related complications, and the patient was discharged. The patient did not receive any medical treatment before, during, or after the procedure.