A 42-year-old Caucasian man presented to our hospital with acute onset of fatigue, nausea, vomiting, early satiety, diarrhea, and weight loss 3 months after LCH had been diagnosed on the basis of biopsy of an asymptomatic lesion on the left arm. His physical examination was pertinent for tender hepatosplenomegaly and multiple eczematous papular lesions on the trunk and extremities. His complete blood count (CBC) results and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level were normal. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) demonstrated herpes esophagitis and Helicobacter pylori gastritis. Biopsies of the duodenum and esophagus showed involvement by LCH with features suggestive of LCS . The BRAF V600E mutation was not detected. Imaging did not demonstrate any suspicious bone or central nervous system (CNS) involvement. His bone marrow biopsy (BMBx) showed no LCH or acute myeloid leukemia (AML). He was started on intravenous cytarabine 100 mg/m2 daily for 5 days every 4 weeks, which led to improvement but no resolution of his skin lesions or gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms. After four cycles, his therapy was adjusted to every 2 weeks in view of kinetic failure. This adjustment led to clinical improvement, but his LDH level continued to rise, leading to repeat BMBx performed after cycle 8, which showed no evidence of AML.
Three weeks later, he presented with acute left hemianopia resulting from an ischemic cerebrovascular accident. Workup demonstrated circulating blasts, spontaneous tumor lysis syndrome, and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). BMBx confirmed acute monoblastic leukemia with a complex karyotype. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) showed no additional mutations. The patient was started on induction 7 + 3 (daunorubicin/cytarabine), which led to transient resolution of skin lesions that quickly worsened by day 15. The lesions appeared as multiple erythematous papules and nodules throughout the back. Histological sections showed heavily epidermotropic and bandlike dermal infiltrates of leukemic cells in the dermis with pseudo-blisters formed by tumor necrosis . A subset of tumor cells showed features of Langerhans cells, including reniform nuclei and atypical large and hyperchromic nuclei . Immunophenotyping revealed that the tumor cells were positive for langerin, S100, and CD1a with intratumoral heterogeneity and a Ki67 showing a nearly 80% cell proliferation rate . The tumor cells were also positive for CD56, CD117, and CD123 in a subset of cells. The immunophenotype supported both myelomonoblastic and Langerhans cell differentiation. Marrow cytogenetics detected t(13:14) in all tumor cells and additional structural abnormalities involving chromosomes 1, 8, 9, 10, and Y. In this particular context, the cutaneous lesions were best classified as cutaneous involvement of leukemia. Cytogenetic profiling with NGS showed nonsynonymous mutation p.E69K affecting the PTPN11 gene (SHP2), homozygous loss of CDKN2A at 9p21, and a tumor mutational burden of 26%.
He was started on salvage therapy with CLAG-M (cladribine 5 g/m2, cytarabine 2 g/m2, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), mitoxantrone 10 g/m2), and after the first dose of filgrastim (G-CSF), he developed acute diplopia with leptomeningeal involvement by AML as identified by brain magnetic resonance imaging and lumbar puncture . Intensive intrathecal therapy with methotrexate (MTX) was initiated twice per week for six cycles. The patient’s skin lesions and neurologic symptoms resolved with restaging consistent with complete remission. However, 1 week later, his skin lesions recurred, followed by recurrence of neurologic deficits that responded poorly to salvage therapy, including high-dose cytarabine, further intrathecal therapy, and CNS radiation. The patient died 1 year after diagnosis of LCH while undergoing treatment with MTX and cytarabine as a bridge to marrow transplant. Table summarizes the cardinal features associated with this case.