A 66-year-old female presented to the ER for abdominal pain and vomitting.
She had a 4-d history of food intolerance with post-prandial vomiting and diffuse colic type abdominal pain, her bowel movements were maintained. She denied having previously experienced similar symptoms or symptoms suggesting of cholecystitis during her post-operative interval.
She is known to have bipolar disease treated with Perphrenazine 8 mg and known to be a 5 pack/year smoker. She was operated of OAGB 6 years ago for morbid obesity [body mass index (BMI): 66.7 kg/m2]. Previous comorbidities that included hypertension and diabetes mellitus were rectified after her weight loss of 90 Kg (BMI: 26.66 kg/m2). Previous surgical interventions include 2 C-section deliveries.
She has no significant family history.
On physical examination, her abdomen was soft with mild tenderness in the lower right quadrant. She had a supra-umbilical hernia from her previous intervention.
Her labs showed a mild hyper-leukocytosis white blood cell 12000 and C-reactive protein level was 80.8, her liver enzymes were in the normal range.
An abdomino-pelvic computed tomography scan with injection and ingestion of contrast was ordered . It showed a fistulous tract between the gallbladder and the duodenal bulb, extending over 15 mm. The fistula was confirmed with the leakage of the ingested contrast in the lumen of the gallbladder, which was not distended and contained an air-fluid level. It was associated with pneumobilia and small bowel dilation of 42 mm in diameter, with an intestinal segment in the right lower quadrant showing parietal thickening and submucosal edema upstream of a transition zone located at the level of the right iliac fossa, downstream of a probable oval intraluminal calculus of 45 mm. The previous findings evoking a GI with a probable gallstone located at the level of the efferent alimentary loop. It is associated with a trabeculation of the fat at the level of the two flanks, especially on the right, with perihepatic and pelvic ascites of low abundance. Sequelae of gastric surgery with gastro-jejunal anastomosis (Roux en Omega) was identified.