A ten-year-old girl with a history of cystic fibrosis (CF) with gastrointestinal and pulmonary involvement, presented to her pediatrician with newly diagnosed growth retardation, fatigue and frequent headache. An arginine growth hormone-releasing hormone test confirmed growth hormone (GH) deficiency, and after further laboratory analysis, a central hypothyroidism and hypercortisolism was diagnosed. Substitutional therapy with levothyroxine and hydrocortisone was initiated, which improved the patient’s headache and fatigue. Ophthalmologic examination revealed bitemporal hemianopia. Further work-up with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 3 × 3 × 2.5 cm cystic space-occupying lesion in the sellar and suprasellar compartment with compression of the optic chiasm, with partial calcifications in computed tomography (CT), highly suspicious of a craniopharyngioma (CP) . Hydrocephalus was not present at the time of presentation. Due to the compression of the chiasm causing clinical hemianopia, the indication for surgical decompression was given. We weighed the possibilities of a neuroendoscopic transventricular (NET) cyst fenestration and partial tumor resection versus an endonasal endoscopic approach (EEA) or an open transcranial approach. The advantage for the transventricular neuroendoscopic approach is its minimal-invasive nature and straight-forward decompression of the cyst, which is causing compression of the optic chiasm. However, the patient presented with very small ventricles, making neuroendoscopy cumbersome, and the neuroendoscopic approach would only allow a partial tumor resection. EEA shares the advantage of being minimal-invasive. However, due to her age and the concomitant diagnosis of CF, known to be associated with hypoplasia and markedly reduced pneumatization of the paranasal sinuses, a non-pneumatized (conchal type) sphenoid was present , making the AAE more challenging . In addition, gross total resection (GTR) was not considered achievable through an EEA, due to a supra-chiasmatic tumor extension. Still, both an NET or EEA seemed superior to an open approach (e.g. subfrontal or interhemispheric) given the invasiveness and associated morbidity of such approaches, while similar to the EEA and NET approach, GTR would most probably not be achieved either [–]. We ultimately decided to perform an EEA together with our colleagues from ENT. The conchal configuration of the sphenoid sinus required meticulous drilling of squamous intrasphenoidal bone, exposure of the harder sellar bone, and a superior trans-chiasmatic sulcus extension to achieve satisfactory exposure of the suprasellar tumor cyst . Intraoperatively, crystals and cystic fluid, suspicious of CP, were drained from the cyst, and the cyst was dissected from the cavernous sinus walls, the sellar diaphragm, and the dorsum sellae without risking injury of adjacent structures. At the end of the operation, a symmetrical diaphragmal descent was achieved as indirect sign for the decompression of the optic chiasm . Postoperative MRI showed the expected near total tumor removal. While the cyst was completely drained, tumor remnants extending posteriorly to the superiorly displaced chiasm remained as expected . Postoperatively, the patient developed diabetes insipidus (DI) for which she received desmopressin under the supervision of the pediatric endocrinologists. During her inpatient stay, she recovered from her DI with stable sodium levels but required vasopressin substitution. Overall recovery was good, while the hemianopia persisted. No signs of rhinorrhea resulting from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) fistula were noted. We were able to discharge the patient to her home 11 days after surgery. Unexpectedly, the histopathologic analysis found conspicuous areas of skin with formation of hairs and squamous epithelia, compatible with a mature teratoma . The cytokeratin staining was positive for epithelial cells consistent with the finding in a mature teratoma . These findings led to the diagnosis of a rare case of infantile mature teratoma originating from the sellar region After discussion in our interdisciplinary pediatric neuro-tumor-board, no further treatments (e.g. chemotherapy, radiation therapy) were indicated and a clinical and radiological follow up was initiated.
At her first postoperative follow-up appointment after 6 weeks the patient was back in school, without any complaints. The hemianopia remained unchanged, and cortisol, vasopressin and thyroxin substitution was still required one year postoperatively. She was also started on growth hormone (GH) replacement therapy 6 months postoperatively. MRI follow-up one year after surgery showed stable appearances without any sign of progression .