A 23-year-old man of Chinese descent presented to the emergency department for dyspnoea and pain in the left upper back. He had initially presented to the emergency department after an episode of severe vomiting following alcohol consumption and mild back pain three days prior, and was treated symptomatically and discharged. The patient denied any recent trauma. He had no other past medical issues nor known congenital conditions.
Upon review, the patient was in severe respiratory distress and haemodynamically unstable with blood pressure of 95/70 mmHg, heart rate 162 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 40 breaths per minute and peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 87% on 100% oxygen administered via non-rebreather mask. Although unable to lie still, he was oriented and able to speak in short phrases. His trachea was deviated and lung sounds were absent over his left chest.
A chest X-ray (CXR) performed was interpreted as a moderately large left-sided pneumothorax with herniation of bowel into the left hemithorax . Due to patient instability, no computer tomography (CT) scan was performed after the CXR. A 14-gauge intravenous cannula was inserted into the second intercostal space along the mid-clavicular line for needle decompression in the sitting position.. However, air, followed by approximately 900 ml of faecal fluid, was aspirated, with no improvement in the patient’s symptoms. A repeat CXR showed a slight improvement of tracheal deviation, but with further bowel herniation taking up most of the left lung field. There was still concern that the pneumothorax had not been completely relieved.
Arterial blood gas (ABG) indicated severe combined respiratory and metabolic acidosis (pH 7.212, PaCO2 34.6 mmHg, PaO2 282 mmHg, base excess -14 and serum bicarbonate 13.9 mmol L-1. Serum lactate levels were elevated at 3.2 mg dL-1).
The patient was immediately transferred to the operating theatre for surgical intervention of his left diaphragmatic rupture, complicated by visceral herniation and possible left tension pneumothorax, with iatrogenic puncture of the herniated bowel. After discussion with the surgeons, a repeated needle decompression or chest tube insertion prior to induction of anaesthesia was not attempted due to the high failure rate attributed to the herniated bowel’s position, uncertain anatomy and the patient’s inability to cooperate.
After adequate preoxygenation, rapid sequence induction was performed with cricoid pressure and intravenous propofol 150 mg, rocuronium 50 mg, and remifentanil target-controlled infusion at 1 ng ml-1. The SpO2 before induction was 92%, and the lowest SpO2 obtained while the airway was being secured was 80%. A left-sided double-lumen tube (DLT) was inserted and both the tracheal and bronchial cuffs were inflated immediately prior to the commencement of one lung ventilation. Rapid deflation of the left lung using a suction catheter was then carried out. Position of the left bronchial cuff was finally confirmed to be in the left main bronchus with a fiberoptic scope. Although the SpO2 improved to 100%, there was significant hypotension post-induction to lowest 63/45 mmHg, which was quickly addressed with boluses of phenylephrine and adrenaline to a total of 1000 μg and 30 μg respectively. An ABG obtained after induction showed pH 7.091, PaCO2 61.5 mmHg, PaO2 194 mmHg, base excess -11 and serum bicarbonate 18.7 mmol L-1.
Intraoperatively, a 10 cm by 6 cm Bochdalek diaphragmatic hernia defect with herniation of the greater curve of stomach, spleen and long loop of transverse colon into the left hemithorax was found. A large perforation with necrotic edges in the greater curve of the stomach was also noted, with feculent material in the pleural and peritoneal cavity. No other obvious defects of the small and large bowels were seen.
Simultaneous assessment and resuscitation of his persistent hypotension, tachycardia and hypoxia was carried out while surgery was ongoing. Based on the patient’s clinical history and operative findings, it was likely that he had a combination of obstructive, hypovolemic and distributive shocks due to tension pneumothorax, intravascular depletion and feculent peritonitis. He was aggressively fluid resuscitated with 1.8 litres of intravenous crystalloids and 2 litres of colloids. Noradrenaline and adrenaline infusions were commenced shortly after induction and maintained on 0.2 μg kg-1 min-1 for both infusions. His antibiotics were escalated from intravenous (IV) ceftriaxone and metronidazole to IV piperacillin-tazocin, and additional fungal coverage with IV anidulafungin was given. IV hydrocortisone was also administered. At the end of the surgery, he remained on noradrenaline 0.2 μg kg-1 min-1 and vasopressin 0.03 units kg-1 hr-1.
As the tension pneumothorax could not be surgically relieved until the herniated abdominal structures had been reduced, attempts were made to decompress the left pleural cavity with continued suction via the bronchial lumen of the left-sided DLT, to limited success. Eventually, a wedge gastrectomy of the stomach, diaphragmatic hernia reduction and left chest tube insertion was performed, followed by a temporary abdominal closure with the diaphragmatic defect being reinforced with surgical towels. Estimated blood loss was 800 ml and surgery lasted approximately 3 hours.
A repeat ABG at the conclusion of the surgery showed persistent combined respiratory and metabolic acidosis (pH 7.153, PaCO2 54.5 mmHg, PaO2 128 mmHg, base excess -10 and serum bicarbonate 19.1 mmol L-1). The double-lumen tube was exchanged for a single-lumen tracheal tube and the patient was sent to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) for continued resuscitation. Postoperatively, a repeated CXR showed reduction of the left diaphragmatic hernia with re-expansion of the left lung . Dual vasopressor support was weaned off on Day 2 of admission and the patient did not have high ventilatory requirements.
The patient returned to the operating theatre for a relook surgery on Day 3 of admission. The hernia defect was repaired with a synthetic mesh and primary abdominal closure was performed uneventfully. The patient was extubated on Day 5 of admission and discharged from the ICU on Day 6 of admission. CXR on Day 6 of admission showed resolution of pneumothorax and reduction of diaphragmatic hernia . After an additional 2 weeks’ stay for total parenteral nutrition and post-operative recovery, he was discharged home 22 days after admission.