A 59-year-old hypertensive white female was diagnosed with CLL in 2009. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for being included in the study.
Chemotherapy with fludarabine was initiated 3 months earlier and corticotherapy with methylprednisolone 2 months earlier for hemolytic anemia secondary to fludarabine treatment. The patient presented with a 24 h history of confusion, agitation, and mild right-lower extremity weakness.
Physical examination was notable for grade 1 obesity and subfebrility (99.32 ºF; 37.4 ºC).
Neurological examination revealed a grade 4 right-lower extremity weakness with reflex asymmetry and right-sided Babinski sign. No signs of meningeal irritation were detectable.
Laboratory findings included: white blood cell (WBC) count of 3.5 × 103/μL; hemoglobin 7.1 g/dL; hematocrit 21.5%; platelets 109 × 103/μL; aspartate aminotransferase 59 U/L; alanine transaminase 79 U/L. Serum glucose, urea nitrogen, creatinine, bilirubin, sodium, and potassium were normal.
Cerebral computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a hypodense lesion in the left frontal lobe suggestive of an ischemic stroke .
During the second day after admission, the patient developed fever (101.12 ºF; 38.4 ºC) and neurological examination revealed signs of meningeal irritation (positive Kernig’s sign).
Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a hyperintense lesion in the left frontal lobe with extension toward the basal ganglia (T2 and Fluid-Attenuated Inversion Recovery [FLAIR] sequences) , and small nodular enhancing lesions after gadolinium infusion in the affected territory .
Lumbar puncture was performed on the second day and the CSF analysis revealed the following abnormalities: red blood cells (RBCs) 24 cells/mm3; WBCs 829 cells/mm3 (76% lymphocytes, 22% neutrophils, 2% monocytes); protein level 111.2 mg/dL; glucose level 10.2 mg/dL (serum glucose 86 mg/dL). CSF and blood samples were sent to laboratory for culture. Empiric anti-infection treatment was started with intravenous (i. v.) ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacine, aciclovir, and fluconasole. The neurological status of the patient was unchanged 2 days after the initiation of anti-infection therapy and the patient presented septic fever. CSF examination was negative for fungal infections, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and JC virus. Both blood cultures and CSF cultures were positive for L. monocytogenes. The microbial identification was performed with Vitek 2 automated analyzer system (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France). The culture was not verified by molecular methods. The serotype of L. monocytogenes was not determined. There was no history of consumption of high-risk foods for L. monocytogenes infection (such as soft-cheeses made with unpasteurized milk, frankfurters, sliced deli meats, etc.) in the past 10–14 days. The infection was not associated with any known food outbreaks.
The diagnosis of Listeria meningoencephalitis was established and antibiotic therapy with ampicillin was started (12 g/day). Forty-eight hours after the initiation of antibiotic treatment with ampicillin, the patient was afebrile with significantly improved neurological status. CSF analysis after 1 week of treatment revealed: RBCs 0 cells/mm3; WBCs 80 cells/mm3; protein level 73 mg/dL; glucose level 49 mg/dL (serum glucose 90 mg/dL). One month later, the neurological examination of the patient was normal.