An 85-year-old man visited our hospital with dysuria including urinary hesitancy, difficulty and pain during urination, and hematuria. He had no family history of cancer, including prostate cancer, and had undergone a prostate biopsy 13 years earlier owing to an elevated PSA level of 7.18 ng/mL. Pathological evaluation revealed an adenocarcinoma with a Gleason score of 4 + 5 and a clinical stage of T3aN0M0. At that time, he elected to undergo 3D conformal radiation therapy up to a dose of 70 Gy combined with ADT for a total of 2.5 years. Thereafter, his serum PSA level dropped to 0.20–0.25 ng/mL for approximately 7 years.
At the present visit, digital rectal examination revealed a swollen and enlarged prostate with a smooth surface; the PSA level was 0.41 ng/mL. Whole body computed tomography revealed no enlarged lymph nodes or visceral metastases; prostate magnetic resonance imaging showed an unclear boundary between the prostatic urethra and the transition zone border, and decreasing signal intensity from the middle to the apex . Magnetic resonance imaging findings did not clearly indicate malignant disease. Urethrocystoscopy, performed to assess the prostatic urethra for hyperplasia or stenosis, revealed bulging irregular mucosa in the prostatic urethra ; urine cytology and culture were negative. The location of the lesion almost corresponded to that of the diagnostic positive biopsy.
TURP was subsequently performed for diagnosis as the PSA level was not elevated, and the differential diagnoses included radiation-induced inflammatory responses or hyperplasia rather than malignancy on magnetic resonance imaging findings. Histopathological examination revealed SCC based on proliferation of atypical squamous epithelial cells with keratinization . Microscopic sections of the prostate revealed p40-positive cells on immunohistochemical staining, indicative of SCC ; however, the PSA recurrence was negative . The AJCC-UICC stage of the SCC was stage II (T2cN0M0) and serum SCC level after TURP was 0.6 ng/mL (normal range: <1.5 ng/mL). PSA and SCC values were not increased at 0.16 and 0.7 ng/mL, respectively. Radiographic progression was also not seen for 3 months. He subsequently underwent total pelvic exenteration for severe prostatic pain and recurrent urinary retention owing to secondary cancer of the prostate. The pathological findings revealed that the SCC had invaded the subserosal layer of the rectum.