A girl, now 20 years old, presented to our hospital for the first time at the age of 7 years and 8 months, with multiple-joint swelling and limited motion for more than 5 years and recurrent fever for 18 months. Her long-term history of arthritis could be traced back to when she started to suffer from symmetrical polyarthritis at the age of 2 years, and her arthritis was in both knees, both wrists, the metacarpophalangeal joints, the proximal and distal phalangeal joints. She presented to the pediatric doctors in the local hospital by her parents and was diagnosed with juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA). The doctor treated her mostly with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and methotrexate (MTX). During the following 5 years, her symptoms were not well controlled. At the age of 6 years, she had repeated and unexplained fevers. Anti-infection and symptomatic treatment were given but were ineffective. She was taken to her local pediatrician many times and received steroid treatment for several months. When she was 7 years of age, she complained of attacks of redness in both eyes but denied any history of vision loss. She was diagnosed with anterior uveitis of both eyes and her ocular symptoms disappeared after receiving ophthalmic treatment (tobramycin dexamethasone eye drops). Regarding her complete past medical history, in addition to the above manifestations, she had a squamous rash once at 10 months of age, which was ignored by her parents at that time.
In August 2009, when she was 8 years and 9 months old, the girl was referred to our hospital for the first time regarding recurrent arthritis in the absence of ocular complaints, rash and other symptoms. There was no other contributory past medical or history or family history. Physical examination revealed swan neck deformities of all fingers , limited joint mobility, swelling of the wrists, elbows, and knees, and a positive right 4-word test. No other remarkable findings were observed on physical examination. Blood tests showed a significant increase in the C-reactive protein (CRP) level and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). Her rheumatoid factor and human leukocyte antigen B27 (HLA-B27) were negative. No positive findings were found on her ophthalmic examination. MRI and other imaging examinations supported the manifestations of arthritis. With a diagnosis of JIA (polyarticular, RF negative), treatment was initiated and consisted of Etanercept, recombinant human tumor necrosis factor-Fc (rhTNFR:Fc), 0.8 mg/kg per week combined with MTX and NSAIDs. She showed improvement in her joint swelling and fever, but these symptoms still had recurred. In the following 10 years, the patient was followed up irregularly, and she had stopped etanercept on her own. Between 2015 and 2019, she was intermittently treated with prednisolone at doses ranging from 2.5 mg to 10 mg per day. Regrettably, the girl had vision loss in both eyes in 2018. An ocular examination showed obsolete iridocyclitis in both eyes and left eye cataracts. She underwent left eye cataract surgery in May 2018 in the Ophthalmology & Otorhinolaryngology Hospital, and her visual acuity recovered after the operation. In October 2019, she developed unexplained hypertension, which was found on a routine physical examination at school. She was referred to the local hospital and given nifedipine, but her blood pressure was not controlled.
On October 24, 2019, the girl was transferred to our hospital. Physical examination revealed that her blood pressure (BP) was 140/70 mmHg in the left upper limb, 139/79 mmHg in the right upper limb, 167/76 mmHg in the left lower limb, and 165/67 mmHg in the right lower limb. Before this, her blood pressure was increased once in a visit in 2017 in the only few outpatient visits, and was normal at other times. Moreover, she had painless fixed flexion deformities of multiple joints on physical examination. Additionally, ophthalmologic checks showed bilateral band-shaped degeneration of the cornea, with a corrected visual acuity of 0.4 in the right eye (OD) and 0.3 in the left eye (OS). She was diagnosed with bilateral panuveitis by an ophthalmologist. Various laboratory tests were ordered, and the results were as follows: her 24-h urinary protein excretion was 0.19 g and her serum creatinine was 102 μmol/L. We collected data on the serum creatinine (Scr) and eGFR of the patient during the past 10 years . According to the results, her Scr began to increase (ranging from 75 to 92 μmol/L) in approximately 2017 and finally increased to 102 μmol/L in October 2019. Her renin–angiotensin–aldosterone, CRP, ESR and thyroid hormone were within the normal ranges. Her autoantibodies were negative. Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) showed that the 24-h average BP was 143/83 mmHg (> 130/80 mmHg), the daytime average BP was 144/86 mmHg (> 135/85 mmHg) the and nighttime mean BP was 140/76 mmHg (> 120/70 mmHg).
B ultrasound demonstrated that the right kidney (8.85*3*3.42 cm) was smaller than the left kidney (10.2*3.86*4.05 cm). The difference in length between the two kidneys was 1.35 cm. We searched and summarized all the renal B ultrasound data of the patient in the past 10 years compared with kidney length normative values in children . The sizes of the kidneys did not increase with age, the right kidney gradually decreased in size, and the size difference of both kidneys gradually increased. 99mTc-DTPA renography demonstrated that the right kidney was smaller than the left kidney with poor renal perfusion and impaired renal function . The GFR [ml·min-1·(1.73 m2)-1] of the kidneys was 74.4 (right kidney 30.8, left kidney 43.6). A significant difference was observed in the two splits of renal function: the renal function was 41.4% in the right kidney and was 58.6% in the left kidney. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the renal artery illustrated that the branches of the renal artery in the right hilum had mild stenosis , and the right kidney was smaller than the left kidney . No significant abnormalities were observed in the thoracic aorta, abdominal aorta, or cerebrovascular system. No remarkable findings were revealed on echocardiography and during an electrocardiogram. To further clarify the situation of the patients’s renal vessels, we also suggested performing digital angiography. However, her parents refused this invasive examination. The patient was diagnosed with right renal vasculitis through CTA of the renal artery (mild stenosis in the branch of the renal artery of the right renal hilus) and 99mTc-DTPA renography (difference in bilateral renal function and GFR) based on her two unequally sized kidneys (the gradually shrinking right kidney and the normal left kidney).
In view of the clinical manifestations mentioned above, including recurrent polyarthritis, fever, bilateral panuveitis and kidney involvement in medium-vessel vasculitis, it was obvious that this girl might in fact not have JIA. The diagnosis was likely an autoinflammatory disease. Thus, we performed whole genome sequencing (WGS) for the patient and her family. The results revealed that she had a de-novo heterozygous mutation in the NOD2 gene (c.1538 T > C, p.M513T) , with her parents presenting with the wild type. The M513T (1538 T/C) mutation was a heterozygous mutation and has been reported previously. According to the presentation and genetic test results, she was finally diagnosed with Blau syndrome and renovascular hypertension.
Considering her ocular lesions and unsatisfactory therapeutic effect, we suggested treating her with an anti-TNF-α monoclonal antibody (adalimumab) based on the previous studies . However, the patient refused the treatment because of financial reasons. Finally, she temporarily accepted a low dose of oral prednisolone, MTX, metoprolol and plendil. Her BP was gradually decreased and was controlled at approximately 130/80 mmHg. The OD and OS corrected vision were gradually restored to 0.6 after approximately 3 months. Her serum creatinine level slightly decreased and remained between 80–90 μmol/L after nearly 3 months of follow-up. In February 2020, she was referred to an adult hospital after reaching the age of 18. In the latest telephone consultation with the patient in December 2022, she stated that she was receiving prednisolone (15 mg/day) and tofacitinib (5 mg bid), and MTX had been discontinued because of abnormal transaminase. There were no new symptoms in the joints or eyes. There were also no rashes. Hematology examinations indicated that the patient’s ESR (25 mm/h) and serum creatinine (138 μmol/L) had increased. Her blood pressure was maintained at approximately 140/90 mmHg without any antihypertensive therapy.