A 30-year-old woman with a body mass index (BMI) of 22.5 was hospitalized due to secondary amenorrhea and infertility. Having been married for 10 years with regular intercourse, she delivered a baby girl in 2009. After that, the patient could not become pregnant again in spite of not using contraception. She experienced amenorrhea for 6 years after giving birth, and had been treated with drugs and contraceptive rings without success. The patient could only adjust her menstrual cycle with medication. The results of basic endocrine examination showed that the serum level of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) was high. Examination in April, 2019 indicated that serum FSH was above normal, while the anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) concentration remained normal. Ultrasound scanning indicated that the uterine volume was relatively small (4.0 × 3.9 × 3.3 cm), while both ovaries were normal in size and more than 10 antral follicles were observed in both ovaries . Blood tests and genetic analysis excluded lupus erythematosus, multiglandular insufficiency, diabetes, myasthenia gravis, and chromosomal abnormalities (Fragile X syndrome, Turner syndrome, and Swyer syndrome). The patient had a normal karyotype of 46, XX. Sanger sequencing did not identify associated candidate variants in the FSHR gene. Serological tests, combined with clinical diagnosis and the characteristics of the patient’s infertility suggested ROS.
According to the 5th semen analysis standard of the world health organization, the husband’s sperm concentration and motility were in the normal range, and sperm acrosomal enzyme activity was normal. The study was conducted in accordance with the ethical guidelines of the institution and with the informed consent of the patient.
After admission on March 4th, 2019, the patient underwent two cycles of ovarian hyperstimulation treatment . The first one (May 19, 2019) was initiated with 3.75 mg of GnRH analogue triptorelin acetate injection (Ferring, Switzerland), followed by gonadotropin (300 IU/d, 15d) on cycle day 30. During the ovarian hyperstimulation period, the follicle growth was followed by ultrasound scanning, and the serum hormone levels were determined at the same time. Unfortunately, after 15 days of stimulation, no follicles larger than 14 mm were seen, and this treatment cycle was cancelled.
Due to the failure of the first cycle and a lack of FSHR associated variants in the genetic investigation, we tested the patient’s serum for antibodies directed against FSHR via dot blot analysis, which showed strong reactivity with FSHR . Consequently, we adjusted the procedure for the second cycle. During the whole period of downregulation and controlled ovarian hyperstimulation, the patient was orally administered dexamethasone at 0.75 mg daily. The second cycle was started on July 6, 2019, at which time the patient was first given a 3.75 mg injection of triptorelin acetate for downregulation on the second day of menstruation. Controlled ovarian hyperstimulation was initiated on day 30 with daily subcutaneous injections of 375 IU of gonadotropin (Gonal F® 225 IU/d plus HMG 150 IU/d) for 3 days, which was then increased to 525 IU (Gonal F® 225 IU/d, HMG 225 IU/d and Luveris 75 IU/d) for 7 days. During the stimulation period, the patient underwent regular ultrasound follicle tracking and hormone measurements (estradiol, luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone and progesterone) to monitor follicular maturation. A subcutaneous injection of hCG 10,000 IU (Livzon Pharmaceuticals, China) was administered and oocyte retrieval was scheduled 36 h later, ultrasound guided transvaginal follicular aspiration was performed under negative pressure of 110 mmHg (14.7 kPa) using a single lumen aspiration needle (Cook; William Cook Australia Pty Ltd., Australia). A total of 8 Metaphase II (MII) oocytes were collected. After in vitro fertilization, 3 embryos were vitrified and cryopreserved, and the remaining embryos were discarded.
After 2 months following the second ART cycle, a hormone replacement cycle for endometrial preparation was started on day 3 of menstrual cycle with estradiol valerate tablets (Bayer, Germany, 4 mg for 5 days and then 6 mg for the same period). The addition of oral estradiol (Bayer, Germany) at a dose of 8 mg daily for the next 3 days was successful in achieving an endometrial thickness of 9 mm. The serum E2 on day 16 was 346 pg/ml. Progesterone (0.05 ng/ml) and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG, 10000 IU) were injected at night. Then, daily progesterone luteal support with vaginal tablets containing 40 mg of progesterone (Utrogestan, Besins, Paris, France) was started.
One embryo was thawed on day 20 (14 CII, grade II embryo with 14 cells) and transplanted. The serum value of β-hCG was 246.7 mIU/mL on the thirteenth day after the embryo transfer, and vaginal ultrasonography showed clinical pregnancy after 28 days. The pregnancy evolved without complications until the 35th week, at which point the patient exhibited oligohydramnios and gave birth to a baby girl by Caesarean section. The baby weighed 2200 g and was in good health.