A 26-year-old male presented with severe dyspnea, palpitation, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. He had hypertension, medical history of ischemic stroke 5 months ago, and repeated hospitalization caused by congestive heart failure. His blood pressure in the right arm was 180/64 mmHg. The heart rate was irregular with 150 beats/min. The jugular venous pulse was elevated to 9 cm of water. There was murmur systolic on intercostal space (ICS) 5 anterior axilla line (AAL) sinistra and murmur diastolic on ICS 2 parasternal line (PSL) dextra. Respiratory rate of 28 breaths/min, oxygen saturation at the right arm was 92% without supplemental oxygen, and body mass index of 19,5 kg/m2.
An electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation (AF) with a rapid ventricular response. A routine laboratory examination did not show any abnormality. Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with calcification aortic arch and pulmonary edema. Echocardiography found that left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was decreased (48,5%) with left atrial and ventricular dilatation. Echocardiography also found severe aortic and mitral valve regurgitation . He was diagnosed with congestive heart failure with mildly reduced ejection fraction (HFmrEF) and classified in New York Heart Association (NYHA) class IV.
After one day of hospitalization, the patient also complained of intermittent claudication in the left arm. Clinical examination found an absence of the left brachial pulse and the left carotid artery bruit. Four limbs blood pressure discrepancy was present (right arm 163/50 mmHg, left arm 96/55 mmHg, right leg 90/60 mmHg, left leg 95/55 mmHg). Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed calcification in the left common carotid artery leading to stenosis and total occlusion of the left subclavian artery with the collateral artery branch from the left common carotid artery that supplies vascularization of the left arm. There was vascular thickness and calcification from the peri-aortic valve, ascending aorta, aortic arch, and thoracic descending aorta until abdominal aorta with high-grade stenosis on the inferior side of the renal artery branching accompanied by a post-stenotic dilatation . Inflammatory markers evaluation that needed notable are elevation C-reactive protein (CRP) level (45,1 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) level (25 mm/h). Other laboratory evaluations were antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer, antistreptolysin O (ASO) titer, and interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA) showed negative results. He has subsequently diagnosed with Takayasu arteritis according to the American College of Rheumatology criteria.
For treatment of hypertension and HFmrEF, beta-blocker bisoprolol 2,5 mg/day, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I) ramipril 5 mg/day, and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRA) spironolactone 25 mg/day therapy were initiated. Loop diuretic furosemide 40 mg/day is given to treat congestive symptoms of heart failure and glycoside digoxin 0,25 mg/day is given as rate control of atrial fibrillation. Anticoagulant warfarin 2 mg/day was given to prevent thromboembolism. A combination of methotrexate 7,5 mg/week and high-dose methylprednisolone at 48 mg/day with subsequent tapering was given for induction of remission to inhibition vasculitis of TA. After 3 months of high-dose steroid and methotrexate therapy, the patient showed a decrease in symptoms of NYHA class II for heart failure and a decrease in the frequency of rehospitalization. The patient also did not complain of claudication in the left arm. On physical examination, the patient's right arm blood pressure was 146/55 mmHg and the left arm was 105/50 mmHg. Follow-up evaluation of inflammatory markers CRP and ESR showed normal results.