In May 2018, a 43-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital with lumbago and inguinal lymph node enlargement. Figure summarizes the important events of this patient according to the timeline. The blood routine examination showed an increase in lactate dehydrogenase (LDH; 887 U/L) and a decrease in hemoglobin (Hb; 105 g/L). PET/CT showed multiple lymph nodes enlargements, including a large abdominal mass which was 13.9 × 10.6 cm in size, together with multiple bone lesions. The biopsy of cervical lymph node demonstrated that the lymph node structure was destroyed completely, which was mainly composed of small to medium-sized lymphocytes with round or slightly irregular nucleus, deeply stained chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, scant pale cytoplasm and rare apoptosis . Also, significant hyperplasia of large cells with centroblastic and immunoblastic morphology was seen in the focal areas, with large and round nucleus, condensed chromatin, one or more small nucleoli . Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining demonstrated the cells were positive for CD20 , CD19, CD10, BCL6 , BCL2 and negative for TdT , C-MYC, Cyclin D1, SOX11, CD23, LEF1, CD21, CD43, CD3, CD5 and EBER. Ki-67 was 10% in small cell areas and 40% in large cell areas. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) showed the cells were positive for BCL2::IGH fusion , without translocation of MYC or BCL6 . Also, the biopsy of bone marrow was performed, and we observed the hyperplasia was extremely active with almost no adipose tissue, and the central mother large cells presented a diffuse growth pattern. The IHC result demonstrated that the cells were positive for CD19, CD20, CD79a, CD10, MUM1, Ki-67, BCL6, C-MYC and BCL2, while negative for CD3 and TdT. Thus, this patient was diagnosed with low grade FL (account for 80%) combined with DLBCL (20%) at a stage of IVB, and given R-CHOP regimen (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vindesine, prednisone). After 1 cycle of R-CHOP treatment, lumbago was significantly relieved and the treatment regimen was changed to HD-MTX (high dose methotrexate) combined with 80% dose R-EPOCH (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vindesine) due to the high IPI (international prognostic index) score of 4. The abdominal mass reduced to 7.5 × 3.5 and this patient achieved partial remission (PR) following 1 cycle of HD-MTX/R-EPOCH treatment. In the following 5 cycles of HD-MTX/R-EPOCH treatment, the abdominal mass was treated with additional 30 Gy radiotherapy. However, multiple masses in the abdominal cavity, many nodules around both kidneys and the right adrenal gland, were found after 6 cycles of the treatment, together with the increased glucose metabolism. Thus, he achieved progression disease (PD).
In Jan. 2019, a fine needle aspiration biopsy of the abdominal mass was taken. The biopsy demonstrated that the tumor cells presented with diffuse growth pattern, mainly composed of uniformly medium-sized blastoid cells with round or slightly irregular nuclei, dispersed chromatin, unclear nucleoli and scant bluish-grey cytoplasm . The cells were negative for CD20 , BCL6 and CD3 staining, while positive for TdT (Fg. I), PAX5, CD38, CD10, BCL2, C-MYC and MUM1 staining. Ki-67 was about 60%. FISH revealed fusions of BCL2::IGH and translocation of MYC , without BCL6 translocation . According to the 5th WHO classification, a diagnosis of TdT positive HGBL with MYC and BCL2 rearrangements (“double hit”) transformed from FL/DLBCL was made after 8 months of FL/DLBCL confirmation. Then, chidamide and pembrolizumab were given and the disease was mitigated, but he discontinued chemotherapy for 3 months due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the disease progressed. The biopsy of the abdominal neoplasm was taken once again in Apr. 2020, and the diagnosis of TdT positive “double hit” HGBL remained valid. This patient died in Jul. 2021, with an OS time of 37.8 months.
To further understand the pathogenesis of TdT positive “double hit” HGBL after the treatment of FL/DLBCL, the targeted sequencing of 571 lymphoma-related genes (Supplementary Table 1) were carried out on Nova-seq (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Variants, including SNVs (single nucleotide variations) and Indels (Insertion and deletion) were screened by Shanghai Rightongene Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China) based on the following filter conditions: (1) SNVs or Indels with a mutation allele frequency (MAF) ≥ 0.001 in databases of 1000 genomes project , 1000 genome East Asian, ExAC all or ExAC East Asian and gnomAD were removed; (2) SNVs or Indels with a variant allele frequency (VAF) ≥ 5% was retained; (3) SNVs or Indels including stopgain, stoploss, frameshift, non-frameshift and splicing sites were retained; and (4) Missense mutations with sift ≤ 0.05, Polyphen2_HVAR_pred ≥ 0.447 and CADD > 4 were retained. KMT2D, FOXO1, CREBBP, ATM, STAT6, BCL7A, DDX3X, MUC4, FGFR3, ARID5B, DDX11 and PRKCSH were the co-mutations detected in both the primary and transformed tissues, while mutations in CCND3, BIRC6, ROBO1 and CHEK2 genes emerged when transformed into HGBL .