A 53-month-old Sudanese female presented with progressive bilateral breast enlargement and accelerated growth since the age of 9 months. Her family had sought medical advice several times in different primary health care facilities and were reassured. She had no vaginal bleeding and no pubic or axillary hair.
Examination showed a well-looking girl, vitally stable with normal blood pressure. Her weight was 17 kg (50th centile) and height 108 cm (90th centile) using the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention growth chart. Mid-parental height was 175 cm and predicted adult height was 167 cm using the JM Tanner formula. No previous documented follow-up growth data were available. Her Tanner staging was A1, P1, and B3. She had reddish mucoid vagina. She had no clitoromegaly, acne, hirsutism, or palpable abdominal mass .
Left wrist X-ray revealed a bone age of 8 years.
The hormonal evaluation using fluorometric enzyme immunoassay showed basal luteinizing hormone of 3.1 mIU/L, which increased to 8.8 mIU/L 45 minutes post-gonadotrophin-releasing hormone stimulation. Elevated levels of estradiol E2 29,000 pg/ml (5–15 pg/ml), and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate 90 ng/mL (2.3 ng/mL), with normal early morning cortisol level 16 ng/mL (7–28 ng/mL). Due to financial difficulties, we did not measured the follicular-stimulating hormone level.
Abdominal ultrasound revealed a right-sided hypoechoic suprarenal mass, an ovarian volume of 1.8 cm3, uterine volume of 3 cm3, and endometrial thickness of 1.2 cm. The abdominal CT scan showed a 25 × 22 mm well-defined rounded focal lesion with a smooth outline, at the level of the right adrenal gland with homogeneous attenuation, HU-7 on a noncontrast scan, and no evidence of local tissue invasion . The left adrenal gland and ovaries were normal.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging was done to exclude a central cause of precocious puberty and was normal. Complete hemogram, liver, and renal functions were normal.
A diagnosis of an estrogen-secreting right adrenocortical tumor was made, and we referred the patient to surgery.
During laparotomy a 3 cm diameter tumor in the right adrenal gland was completely excised. The histopathological examination showed well-circumscribed tumor forming nests with trabeculae and sheets of polygonal cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm. The tumor was not infiltrating the capsule, with no mitosis, atypia, or necrosis (Wieneke index score = 0). Findings suggestive of benign adrenal cortical adenoma.
The postoperative evaluation revealed normal cortisol and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate. Estradiol E2 40 pg/mL was consistent with secondary central precocious puberty, so the patient was started on monthly gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist, with a regular follow-up plan for the possibility of recurrence of adrenal adenoma.
Six months after the operation, the patient was well and compliant to monthly gonadotrophin agonist injections. She showed partial regression of her secondary sexual characters and a growth velocity of 5 cm/year. The abdominal CT scan was normal with no evidence of recurrence.