A 60-year-old Caucasian male patient was admitted to the Neurology Department at the Academic Medical Centre because of speech impairment and right limb weakness. Onset was sudden and symptoms had already been present for approximately 4 hours. The patient’s medical history revealed long-standing arterial hypertension, ischaemic heart disease and nicotinism.
An examination performed after hospital admission revealed right progressive CNVII paresis, mixed aphasia and paresis of right limbs [2/5 in Medical Research Council Muscle strength scale]. Computed tomography (CT) of the head revealed an acute ischaemic focus in the left hemisphere and white matter lesions, a surrogate for cerebral small-vessel disease. The electrocardiogram recorded atrial fibrillation with a ventricular rate of 70 beats/min. Ultrasound examination and angio-CT scan (arterial and venous phase) of the head revealed a left-sided occlusion of the common carotid artery (CCA), external carotid artery, and the internal carotid artery (ICA) at the cavernous section (with an extended thrombus in the ICA above the embolism) . At this time, preserved blood flow was confirmed in the middle cerebral artery (MCA) and anterior cerebral artery (ACA) on the left side . In the ultrasound duplex Doppler examination, the material occluding the CCA was hyperechogenic, with thrombus extension into the ICA, suggesting the presence of fibrous embolic material migration into the CCA, occlusion of the ICA and propagation of the thrombosis into the distal part of the carotid artery. The movement of the embolism in the CCA was visible during the ultrasound examination with distal CCA bulb occlusion and no signs of dissection or aneurysm.
Because of the duration of the symptoms, the unstable neurological condition of the patient, the extent and nature of lesions occluding the arteries, and the newly created cerebral ischaemia focus, a decision was made to undertake combined interventional treatment involving surgical and endovascular therapy. Because of the size and nature of the embolic material (mostly hyperechogenic, probably fibrous and non-compressible lesion), surgical embolectomy was undertaken in the first step of the procedure with the endovascular methods reserved for adjunct treatment if required.
The procedure was performed in a hybrid operating room under fluoroscopic control (started in the 6th hour from the start of symptoms). From the incision on the front edge of the left sternocleidomastoid muscle, the ICA and its division were dissected. A transverse cut on the CCA was made, just below the ostium of the ICA. Through arteriotomy, an extensive embolism of the CCA bulb was removed: 10 × 7 mm in size, hard, with fibrous structure. After removing the embolism, a good inflow and lack of back flow were recorded. Using a 3 F Fogarty catheter, a 10-cm thrombus was removed from the ICA; after removing the embolus, arteriography showed restored flow in the ICA, but lack of contrast in the cerebral circulation corresponding to the ACA and MCA . Based on the arteriographic image, a decision was made to implement thrombolytic treatment: 0.3 mg/kg of recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA; Actylise, Boehringer Ingelheim, Germany) was administered through a catheter placed in the ICA. Follow-up angiography revealed blood flow in the ICA and the ACA . The arteriotomy was sutured using a vascular suture (Prolene 5–0). Because of parenchymatous bleeding from the wound caused by administering rt-PA and heparin (2500 U; as a routine surgical measure), haemostatic dressing and suturing were used, while closure was delayed until the next day to allow normalisation and prevent clotting abnormalities.
Systematic improvement of the neurological condition continued in the post-surgery period without complications. During anticoagulant therapy, unfractionated heparin was used at an initial daily dose of 15000 U/24 h, which was later changed to 25000 U/24 h based on the activated partial thromboplastin time. Through continuous heart rate monitoring, atrial fibrillation was observed. Follow-up ultrasound and angio-CT of the head (1st day following the intervention) revealed proper blood flow in the affected arteries, but a CT scan of the head revealed a marked ischaemic focus . On the 10th day from the onset of the symptoms, the patient left the ward in a neurologically good condition, with discrete aphasia, yet able to move independently. Based on the clinical course and results of additional tests (imaging and electrophysiological testing), it was determined that the stroke occurred in the patient as a result of cardiogenic embolism from atrial fibrillation (diagnosed de novo during hospitalisation). As a further prophylaxis against stroke, dabigatran in daily dose of 300 mg was introduced from the 10th day. The written informed consent of the patient was obtained for participation in this study and for publication of the results.