A 53-year-old man (85 kg and 170 cm) was admitted for rupture of spleen caused by an accidental fall.
Emergency splenectomy was planned under general anesthesia. Preoperative emergency ultrasound examination including the heart, chest, and abdomen were performed, and it was found that spleen had been ruptured and was accompanied by active bleeding, complicated with progressive hemochrome reduction, which was the main reason for the patient to undergo emergency surgery. Preoperative ultrasound showed no heart or chest abnormalities. The patient did not complain of dyspnea preoperatively, and preoperative CT showed no hemothorax or pneumothorax . Initial vital signs before anesthesia were a blood pressure of 126/82 mm Hg, heart rate of 75 bpm, and an oxygen partial pressure (SpO2) of 95% while inhaling air. Anesthesia was induced with sufentanil 0.3 µg/kg, rocuronium 0.1 mg/kg, and propofol 3 mg/kg. Tracheal intubation was successfully performed with video laryngoscopy, and positive pressure ventilation was performed with an airway peak pressure of 14 cm H2O. Because the patient's thick chest wall, breath sounds were difficult to auscultate. About 2 min after tracheal intubation, it was difficult to ventilate. The airway peak pressure increased progressively, reaching a maximum of 50 cm H2O and SpO2 dropped, reaching a minimum of 70%. Because of obesity and the thick chest wall, the cause of respiratory failure could not be determined by traditional auscultation. Following the BLUE protocol, a recommended area of the chest was scanned by bedside ultrasound. The pleural slide sign disappeared in the upper and lower blue points of the left lung, and in M-mode, an obvious parallel line sign could be seen below the pleura. The boundary of pneumothorax (lung points) was rapidly confirmed by ultrasound. To avoid lung injury and secondary pneumothorax, a closed thoracic drainage tube was placed in the area guided by ultrasound. The interval from suspicion of pneumothorax to placement of the drainage tube was less than 3 min. After many bubbles had emerged from the water seal bottle, the airway pressure dropped to 20 cm H2O and the SpO2 returned to 96%-100%. After the patient's vital signs stabilized, the splenectomy continued and was successfully completed. The patient was sent to the intensive care unit (ICU) with a endotracheal tube for further treatment after surgery. On day 1 after surgery, the endotracheal tube was removed. On day 6, the closed thoracic drainage tube was removed. On day 9, the patient was discharged from the hospital without any complications.
Anemia (hemoglobin 85 g/L).
Focused assessment with sonography in trauma (FAST) has been extensively utilized and studied in blunt and penetrating trauma. Following the FAST protocol, organ damage can be rapidly evaluated by the amount of free fluid in the chest, abdominal, and pelvic cavities. In this case, preoperative emergency ultrasound examination of the heart, chest and abdomen found that spleen had been ruptured and active bleeding was complicated by progressive hemochrome reduction, which was also the main reason for the patient to undergo emergency surgery. Preoperative ultrasound showed no abnormalities in the heart or chest. Following the BLUE protocol, LUS confirmed that the pleural slide sign had disappeared in the recommended area of the left lung, and in M-mode, an obvious parallel line sign was seen below the pleura . The boundary of the pneumothorax (lung points) was rapidly confirmed by ultrasound .