A 78-year-old male with chronic kidney disease, dementia and sequelae of cerebral hemorrhage presented to his family doctor complaining of back pain; however, there were no abnormal findings on physical examination. Three days later, the back pain worsened and an ambulance was called. When the ambulance crew (including an emergency doctor) arrived at his home, his systolic blood pressure was 50 mm Hg, and the doctor performed portable echocardiography on site. Cardiac tamponade was diagnosed, and pericardiocentesis was performed using a puncture needle via the subxiphoidal approach. After draining ~ 500 ml of bloody pericardial fluid, the patient’s blood pressure immediately increased to 124/98 mm Hg. The patient was transferred to our hospital by helicopter with the outer cannula of the puncture needle placed in the pericardial cavity, and his hemodynamic status was stable at the time of arrival. We immediately started intravenous administration of saline (200 mL/h) to prevent the decrease in blood pressure due to blood loss. Electrocardiogram revealed negative T waves with slight ST elevation in II, III, and aVF leads, and echocardiography revealed severe hypokinesis at the left ventricular inferior wall and a small pericardial effusion. Laboratory tests showed the abnormal values in white blood cell (12.5 × 109/L, reference range, 3.3 to 8.6 × 109/L), C-reactive protein levels (68.5 mg/L, reference range < 1.4 mg/L), creatinine (1.24 mg/dL, reference range, 0.46–0.79 mg/dL), and highly sensitive troponin I (6559 ng/L, reference range < 34.2 ng/L). Creatinine phosphokinase levels (101 IU/L, reference range, 41 to 153 IU/L), hemoglobin (12.3 g/L, reference range, 11.6 to 14.8 g/L), and platelets (254 × 109/L, reference range, 158 to 348 × 109/L) were within reference range. We quickly performed contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the chest. A small protrusion of contrast media was observed on the inferior wall of the left ventricle, suggesting cardiac rupture due to acute myocardial infarction (AMI) . The tip of the outer cannula was confirmed in the pericardial cavity and appeared to reach epicardial adipose tissue around the right ventricle . Emergency coronary angiography was then performed, which confirmed occlusion of the posterior descending branch of the left circumflex coronary artery . Stenotic or occluded lesions were not found in other coronary arteries, and the patient's coronary tree was left side dominant. In addition, extravasation of contrast medium due to Ellis type III coronary artery perforation was observed in the acute marginal branch of the right coronary artery . We considered that coronary artery perforation had occurred as a complication of the pericardial puncture, and we performed transcatheter coil embolization of the perforated branch. A hydrophilic microcatheter (internal diameter, 0.018-in.; MIZUKI standard, KANEKA, Japan) was advanced selectively immediately proximal to the site of leakage in the acute marginal branch. One 0.018-in. and 20-mm-long tapered microcoil (diameter, 2 mm; Hilal, Cook, USA) was quickly released using the microcatheter, and angiography confirmed immediate vessel sealing and hemostasis 170 min after the emergency pericardiocentesis . After the coil embolization, there was no new bloody pericardial effluent and the patient was hemodynamically stable. Therefore, we reduced the rate of intravenous saline administration to 1 mL/kg/h. The total amount of drained bloody pericardial fluid was 610 ml including the first 500 ml. Hemoglobin level decreased to 8.9 g/L, and we performed blood transfusion. The total amount of contrast medium used in contrast-enhanced computed tomography and coronary angiography was 165 ml. Creatinine increased to 1.89 mg/dL 48 h after the use of contrast medium, and the urine volume decreased. Therefore, intravenous administration of saline continued, and then the urine volume gradually increased. Consequently, Intravenous administration of saline had been performed for 7 days. Timeline of clinical presentation and treatment was presented in Table .
Oozing-type cardiac rupture due to AMI was considered as a cause of the cardiac tamponade, but the time of onset of AMI could not be identified, and subsequent blood tests had shown no increase in cardiac enzyme levels. Considering the general condition of the patient, who had dementia and comorbid chronic kidney disease, and the requests of the patient and his family, the patient underwent conservative treatment without cardiac surgery for oozing-type cardiac rupture and any procedure for occlusion of the posterior descending branch of the left circumflex coronary artery. Although the patient made steady progress without a further increase in pericardial effusion after the procedure, the patient needed treatment for a concomitant aspiration pneumonia (from day 3 to day 24 of admission) and rehabilitation for muscle weakness due to protracted bed rest. Finally, the patient was discharged on the 50th day after admission. Creatinine level was 1.28 mg/dL at the time of discharge.