A 78-year-old male Caucasian patient presented at our clinic with multifocal HCC in a cirrhotic liver, Child A due to HCV genotype I infection. Prior to AMT treatment our patient was treated with radiofrequency ablation (RFA) and four transarterial chemoembolizations (TACE) over a four-year period. Due to tumor progression, further TACE or local ablation therapies were no longer viable.
At that time our patient refused sorafenib therapy due to the well documented side effects, such as fatigue, diarrhea, hand-foot-syndrome and others. Therefore, he was included in an ongoing AMT trial. Physical examination revealed an enlarged liver, no clinical signs of ascites or hepatic encephalopathy, no peripheral edema but a slight scleral icterus. Laboratory tests showed a normal blood count, an international normalized ratio of 0.95, albumin 3.5g/dL, bilirubin 1.9 mg/dL, aspartate transaminase 148U/L and alanine transaminase 96U/L. His α-fetoprotein level was elevated (29.5ng/mL) and remained so throughout follow-up.
Twice daily intramuscular injections of AMT were started on an outpatient basis for two months.
A baseline computed tomography (CT) scan of his abdomen performed prior to the initiation of AMT identified three target lesions (TL) that fulfilled the Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria. Two lesions had increased in size since the previous CT scan of his abdomen, performed two months before at the end of the last treatment . TL1 was situated in the right dorsal liver margin, segment 8, and measured 20 mm (previously 12 mm). TL2 was in the right lateral margin of segment 4b, and measured 12 mm (no change from previous CT). TL3 was in the anterior margin of segment 4b, and measured 12 mm (previous 6 mm).
The right liver lobe showed marked atrophy, whereas the left lobe revealed hypertrophy. No extrahepatic manifestations were discovered. His peri-aortacaval lymph nodes were slightly enlarged.
After eight weeks of AMT treatment the first tumor staging was performed and his abdomen and chest CT scans showed a partial remission. Both target lesions T1 and T2 had disappeared. TL3 had shrunk to 7 mm (40% reduction) with a contrast medium enhancement in the boundary area of the lesion. Again, no extrahepatic involvement was discovered .
According to RECIST, remission has to be confirmed by a second scan at least four weeks later. This scan confirmed the partial remission. The HCC volume in his liver had further decreased with unchanged morphology, in other words, atrophy of the right lobe and hypertrophy of the left lobe. TL1 and TL2 were still invisible, while TL 3 was unchanged in size. In his chest CT scan there was no evidence of lung metastases. Neither bone involvement nor any other extrahepatic manifestation was discovered. Our patient complained about dizziness during AMT and requested to terminate treatment.
Six weeks later, a CT scan revealed several new early arterial hyperperfusion areas in both lobes of his liver, for example, a lesion with 24 mm diameter was found at the right dorsal margin of segment 8. The two defined lesions TL1 and TL2 that had been in complete remission remained in remission. TL3 that had been in partial remission had increased in size to 16 mm. Adrenal involvement was suspected, but lung, spleen, kidney, bones and lymph nodes were free of metastases. Unfortunately, our patient refused to restart AMT despite the remarkable previous tumor control.
Three months later, a follow-up CT scan showed continued tumor control. TL3 had again disappeared, despite having shrunk and re-grown in the preceding months. The other lesions TL1 and TL2 remained in remission. The adrenal metastasis was unchanged and no further tumor progress was observed.
Again, three months after that, progressive disease was once again documented by CT with recurrence of TL3 with a size of 11 mm and several new lesions in both liver lobes up to 22 mm . There were no new extrahepatic metastases except for the adrenal lesion that was unchanged in size. Our patient now agreed to sorafenib therapy.