A 62-year-old woman was found to have an elevated serum CA125 level of 50 U/ml (normal < 35 U/ml) at a local hospital in November 2018. Her serum CEA and CA19-9 levels were within normal limits, and no obvious abnormalities were found on transvaginal ultrasound (TUS). In November 2019, at the same hospital, her CA125 level had increased to 75 U/ml. TUS performed at the local hospital revealed a large pelvic mass.
She was then referred to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment. Laboratory test results, including assessment of tumour markers, routine reproductive hormone examination and routine blood tests, were within the standard levels. The patient was asymptomatic, and a physical examination revealed no abdominal mass. The patient’s family history indicated that the patient’s mother died from ovarian cancer.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a right adnexal well-circumscribed hypodense mass . On a contrast-enhanced CT scan, slight enhancement of the mass was noted and a fluid–fluid level sign was observed. Routine and contrast-enhanced MRI demonstrated well-defined lobulated cystic mass in the right pelvic cavity that was approximately 4.9 × 4.8 cm in size . The mass was of mixed signal on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) and T1-weighted imaging (T1WI). Nodular hypointensity on both T1WI and T2WI was observed within the lesion. Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) showed severe hyperintensity. A fluid–fluid level sign was also observed in the cystic mass. The patient was suspected of having a chocolate cyst according to the clinical CT and MRI results. Routine preoperational TUS showed a right adnexal mass with a size of approximately 5.6 × 4.4 × 5.5 cm. Conventional ultrasound showed a well-defined cystic mass with mural and septal nodules. The largest size of internal papillary excrescences was 3.0 × 1.4 × 1.7 cm. Doppler flow could be detected in the internal septation, cystic wall and papillary excrescences. The resistive index of the cyst wall was 0.9. The right ovary was visible. There was no ascites. Considering the appearance and features on TUS, a primary diagnosis of malignant neoplasm was made. To further clarify the nature of the lesion, the patient underwent a CEUS examination, during which 2.4 ml of ultrasound contrast agent (SonoVue; Bracco SpA, Milan, Italy) was injected from the peripheral vein by bolus injection. Hyperenhancement of cystic wall, septations, and papillary excrescences were observed in the arterial phase on CEUS. The mass becomes hypo-enhancement in the late phase. The mural-nodule-like solid component measured approximately 1.7 × 1.7 cm and the smaller one 0.5 × 0.5 cm . Based on the contrast ultrasound results, the diagnosis of cystadenocarcinoma was first considered.
Surgical resection of the retroperitoneal mass was performed. During the operation, a mass approximately 5 cm in diameter was found in the Douglas cul-de-sac. It was soft and had no obvious adhesion to surrounding tissues. The tumour was cystic and solid, the cyst wall was thick, and the cyst contained solid tissue. Both ovaries and fallopian tubes are normal. Frozen biopsy showed (pelvic) adenocarcinoma, mainly with papillary growth. Da Vinci robot-assisted laparoscopic pelvic tumour resection was conducted. Expert pathologists with more than 10 years of experience determined the pathologic results. Grossly, the tumour was multi-cystic, well-encapsulated and filled with serous fluid. The inner surface contained several papillary nodules protruding into the cavity. Under microscopic examination, the tumour tissues were arranged in a papillary shape; a glandular tube, invasive growth, haemorrhage and necrosis were observed. The tumour cells were abnormally shaped, nuclear division was visible, and nucleoli were obvious. The immunohistochemistry results were as follows: CK20(−), CK7(−), p53(+), CA125(+), CDX2(−), PAX-8(+), ER (+), PR(−), WT(+), calretinin CR(−) and vimentin(+) . The final pathological finding was high-grade serous adenocarcinoma. The patient’s serum CA125 levels decreased after the operation, but the level was slightly higher than the normal range (< 35 U/ml). The patient was treated with a combination of adjuvant carboplatin and paclitaxel (544 mg carboplatin and 268 mg paclitaxel intravenously every 3 weeks) at 3-week intervals for eight cycles. After two cycles of chemotherapy, her serum CA125 level decreased to a normal level. The patient has completed all chemotherapy cycles and is now in good condition. Her serum CA125 level has remained within the normal range as of publication of this report. Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of the case.