Three years ago, a 59-year-old male Moroccan presented to the hospital with a dyspnea, dry cough, and a chest pain that had started 6 months before. He had smoked about 30 cigarette packs a year. He was diagnosed non-insulin dependent diabetes 1 year before and was under oral anti-diabetics. He had undergone a successfully surgical intervention for priapism 4 years before the current episode of sickness. His sister is known to have a breast adenocarcinoma. Physical examination at admission revealed a patient with performance status according to World Health Organization (WHO) quote one, and dyspnea type II according to NYHA (New York Heart Association). The pulmonary examination was poor. Head and neck examination found a right thyroid nodule without clinical signs of hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism. Chest and neck computed tomography (CT) scan were performed and revealed a tumor in the left upper lobe of the lung, in contact with the pulmonary artery . The pulmonary tumor measured 5.5 × 6 cm without mediastinal lymph nodes . The neck CT-scan showed one nodule in the right lobe of the thyroid plunging into the superior mediastinum measuring 8 × 4 cm with homolateral cervical lymph nodes . The level of the thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) was normal. For the pulmonary tumor, we performed transbronchial biopsies. Pathological examination of the biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma of the lung, positive thyroid transcription factor (TTF-1).
Other explorations conducted such as brain CT and bone scan and abdominal ultrasound were normal. We concluded a diagnosis of pulmonary adenocarcinoma classified T4N0M0 with a suspected nodule of the thyroid right lobe. We performed a repeated fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of the thyroid right lobe but the anatomopathologic results were negatives. We decided to performed a total thyroidectomy and lymph node dissection after extemporaneous anatomopathologic exam, confirming the malignancy of the thyroid right lobe nodule. The pathologic examination revealed a moderately differentiated tubulopapillary adenocarcinoma and three lymph nodes with extracapsular effraction. The immunohistochemistry showed positive tumor cells with TTF1 and cytokeratin (CK) 7 but negative tumor cells with thyroglobulin and CK20 . Thus, the pulmonary tumor was classified stage IV (T4N0M1) according to the 2009 UICC (Union for International Cancer Control) staging. The multidisciplinary team found that lung tumor was inoperable because it was in contact with the pulmonary artery. The decision to administrate chemotherapy followed by the chemoradiation was retained because there was lack of places on the linear accelerator. A chemotherapy based on the combination of cisplatin and etoposide was administrated along with supportive care. The chemotherapy consisted of the combination of cisplatin and etoposide that were administered according to the following schema: for every cycle, cisplatin 75 mg/m2 on day 1 and etoposide 100 mg/m2 on day 1–3. The length of time between the treatments was 21 days. In total, two cycles of this chemotherapy were performed. We didn’t report any side effect regarding this chemotherapy. After the two cycles, the patient presented dizziness and headaches. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed and showed multiples brain metastases. The cranial palliative radiotherapy 10 × 3 grays including five fractions per week was realized with best supportive care. This radiation therapy was well tolerated. Particularly, there was no deleterious effect on cognition. After the radiation therapy, we decided to go on with the chemotherapy administration. But the performance status of the patient was poor. Unfortunately, despite reanimation measures and best supportive care, the patient died 2 months later after brain radiotherapy.