Our patient is a 48-year-old female who has a history of localized early stage right renal cell carcinoma and had undergone an open right radical nephrectomy in 2002 via a right flank incision. She is in remission currently.
During her surveillance, an MRI done in August 2010 detected an incidental lesion in her spleen measuring 3.9 cm. A follow up MRI done 3 months later showed the lesion to have increased in size to 4.5 cm. Interventional radiology performed a CT guided biopsy and the pathology showed it to be a possible spindle cell tumor or an inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor. A PET CT done showed low level activity in the splenic lesion. She denied any other local or constitutional symptoms.
She had previously undergone a left oophorectomy and salphingectomy for an ectopic pregnancy, both via a Pfannenstiel incision. She has 3 children, all vaginal delivery.
Due to her menorrhagia for the past couple of months, an ultrasound of her pelvis was done which showed large uterine fibroids. She was scheduled for a laparoscopic hysterectomy in 3 weeks.
Physical examination was unremarkable except for her previous Pfannenstiel and right flank incisions.
Due to the indeterminate nature of her splenic lesion with concerns for malignancy, patient was agreeable to undergoing a splenectomy. Discussion with her gynecologist then yielded the possibility doing both surgeries on the same day, possibly doing the laparoscopic splenectomy first, then the laparoscopic hysterectomy. After a careful review of the literature, we also pursued the idea of transvaginally extracting the spleen after the hysterectomy was performed. Pneumococcal and Hib vaccines were given 2 weeks prior to surgery.
She underwent surgery in February 2011. Pre-operatively, the left ureter was stented to protect the left ureter in view of her single remaining kidney. The laparoscopic splenectomy was conducted with the patient in the supine position. One 12 mm port and 3 other 5 mm ports were placed in a diamond configuration in the left upper quadrant.
The splenectomy was performed with standard laparoscopic dissection techniques. Hem-O-Lok clips (Weck Closure Systems, Research Triangle Park, NC) were applied to the splenic vessels. No complications were encountered.
The remaining attachments were taken down and the spleen was passed into a 15 mm Endo Catch bag (Covidien, Dublin, Ireland). The splenic hilum was hemostatic and the bag containing the spleen was parked above the liver. The case was then turned over to the gynecologist for the hysterectomy.
The vagina was cleansed and a Rumi II (Cooper Surgical Inc®, Trumbull, CT) uterine manipulator was introduced. The left lateral umbilical, sub-xiphoid and left anterior axillary line ports were reused for placement of the robotic instrument trocars. Laparoscopic transvaginal hysterectomy was performed in the standard fashion with no complications. The right adnexae were conserved. The colpotomy incision was extended till complete and the uterus was flipped forwards and amputated. The uterus was then removed via an Endo Catch bag placed through the vagina and a septal bulb on a sponge stick was placed to tent up the vaginal cuff to maintain pneumoperitoneum .
Total operative time was 245 min and estimated blood loss was 50 mls.
Patient had an uneventful post-operative course and was discharged home on post-operative day 2.
Pathology showed a benign fibrous lesion in the spleen measuring 4.7 cm × 4.0 cm × 3.1 cm and this was called to represent either a sclerotic splenic hamartoma or a burned out inflammatory pseudotumor. The spleen weighed 175gms and measured 10.5 cm × 7.8 cm × 5.1 cm. The uterus weighed 210 gm with multifocal adenomyosis as well as intramural leiomyoma.
Her first post-operative clinic visit was in March and she was doing well, back to her regular physical activities. Abdominal incisions were well healed. She resumed sexual activity at 6 weeks post procedure and noted no dyspareunia or any abnormal change in sensation. She was seen in June where she noted an episode of post-coital bleeding. Physical exam revealed some raw granulation tissue at the colpotomy incision site which was managed with topical creams and postponement of sexual activity for 2 weeks. Since then, no recurrence of her vaginal bleeding was noted after resumption of coitus. To date, she remains well with no symptoms related to her surgery.