A 33-year-old previously healthy male with no history of travel presented with abdominal pain, hematochezia, peripheral eosinophilia (6200 eos/µL), mesenteric, splenic, and portal vein thromboses resulting in ischemic colitis. Approximately 1 month prior to his hospitalization he had a self-limiting illness lasting five days with fever, nonproductive cough, myalgias, chills, and sweats. After resolution of this illness, he developed right upper thigh pruritus and bruising along with polyarthralgias which was unresponsive to prednisone. He did not have any rashes or angioedema. He was admitted for four days to an outside hospital after significant thrombocytopenia (20,000/μL) and eosinophilia (6200 eos/µL) were noted on CBC .
Upon admission he was thought to have idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura (ITP) and treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), dexamethasone, and transfused one unit of platelets. Computed tomography (CT) showed nonocclusive right and left portal vein, mesenteric, and splenic vein thrombi. Bone marrow biopsy showed increased eosinophils accounting for 25% of granulocytes and 20% of total cells with no significant immunophenotypic abnormalities of myeloid cell populations and no abnormal B cell, T cell, or plasma cell populations identified. He was discharged from the outside hospital on warfarin after having completed a course of dexamethasone 40 mg daily for four days. His eosinophil count at discharge was 0 eos/µL.
Two weeks later, he again presented to the outside hospital after having severe abdominal pain, hematochezia, and fevers. Upon admission, noted to have eosinophil count of 5700 eos/µL. Endoscopy and subsequent pathology showed patchy eosinophilic infiltrates from esophagus through the colon along with evidence of ischemia. His eosinophil count continued to climb to a high of 10,000 eos/μL. He was placed on IV corticosteroids. Due to ongoing abdominal pain and concern for possible HES, he was transferred to our hospital for further evaluation and management.
Upon admission, he developed worsening abdominal pain and contrast CT abdomen/pelvis revealed necrotic ascending colon and small bowel with ascending colon perforation, prompting emergent laparotomy, right hemicolectomy, and segmental small bowel resection. Pathology of the transverse colon showed increased eosinophils in the laminal propria with eosinophilic cryptitis along with eosinophils in the sigmoid colon. Additionally, pathology revealed thrombi involving submucosal, subserosal, and mesenteric elastic arteries and arterioles. No parasitic organisms were identified on any of the pathology slides. His troponin-I was negative (< 0.03 ng/mL) and his EKG showed normal sinus rhythm with no ST segment elevation or depression. His echocardiogram was normal. His chest radiographs were normal. Abdominal CT showed normal-sized spleen.
Primary and secondary causes of eosinophilia were excluded by hematology/oncology, infectious disease, and rheumatology .
Evaluation also excluded genetically based myeloproliferative disorders and malignancies .
The patient was diagnosed with idiopathic HES and treated with 60 mg of IV methylprednisolone daily while continuing anticoagulation therapy as an inpatient. He was transitioned to 60 mg daily of prednisone prior to discharge while maintaining an eosinophil count of 0 eos/µL with no further evidence of coagulopathy. Shortly after discharge, benralizumab was started at 30 mg subcutaneously every 4 weeks for three doses then every 8 weeks. As benralizumab was started, he was simultaneously weaned off corticosteroids over the course of several months while maintaining peripheral eosinophil count of 0 eos/µL. After remaining asymptomatic for 10 months while on benralizumab, anticoagulation therapy was discontinued. His eosinophils have remained at 0 eos/µL and has had no further evidence of coagulopathy after 1 year of therapy with benralizumab. He will continue benralizumab indefinitely.