A 77-year-old Japanese man presented with a follicular thyroid tumor, and the blood thyroglobulin level was 1800 ng/ml. He had no medical history or medications, but his mother and brother had history of colorectal carcinoma and prostate carcinoma. He had smoked three cigarettes for 3 years, and he did not consume alcohol regularly. He received right thyroid lobectomy, and the pathological examination showed no malignant findings such as vascular invasion or capsular invasion. The thyroglobulin level decreased to 14 ng/ml postoperatively. Follow-up at our hospital was discontinued.
Nine years after the operation, he presented to our hospital again with numbness of the right leg and difficulty of walk. On examination, weakness of the right lower limbs was observed but no mass was palpable on the lower back and lower limbs. CT showed a tumor 90 mm in size from the lumbar spine to the sacrum, causing spinal cord compression . Blood tests showed that the thyroglobulin level was increased to 11,600 ng/ml. Ultrasonography of thyroid showed a 14 mm iso-echoic mass in the residual left lobe suggesting follicular tumor. We diagnosed him with thyroid cancer with bone metastases. External beam radiotherapy (39 Gy/13 Fr) was performed on the bone metastases, followed by total thyroidectomy and radioactive iodine therapy (RAI; 131-I 100 mCi).
The pathology of the residual thyroid gland was follicular tumor. Although we examined the whole thyroid, including the previous specimen of right lobe, we could not find any malignant features such as vascular invasion or capsular invasion. However, we diagnosed follicular thyroid carcinoma owing to the presence of bone metastasis. Scintigraphy of RAI therapy showed high accumulation on the right pelvis and the thyroid bed . The numbness in the right thigh and weakness of the lower limbs improved after the start of treatment, and the thyroglobulin level decreased to 3940 ng/ml. However, 4 months after RAI therapy, the symptoms of numbness and weakness in the lower extremities recurred. The tumor size of pelvic bone metastasis was re-increased, and the thyroglobulin level increased to 5270 ng/ml. The patient was diagnosed with RAI-resistant thyroid follicular cancer, and lenvatinib was introduced.
Lenvatinib was introduced at dose of 24 mg per oral once daily, and he was started on calcium blocker and angiotensin II receptor blocker because of hypertension. Two weeks later, he developed National Cancer Institute (NCI) Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Event (CTCAE) grade 3 paronychia of the right foot, which was improved by partial nail avulsion, intravenous administration of ceftriaxone, and discontinuation of lenvatinib for 3 weeks. Lenvatinib was reduced to 14 mg and resumed. Although no significant adverse events occurred after dose reduction, emphysema was found in the intestinal wall of the ascending colon on a scheduled CT image taken 14 weeks after the introduction of lenvatinib to determine the therapeutic effect .
The patient visited our hospital 9 days after the CT examination as planned. He had no abdominal or digestive symptoms. On examination, temperature was 36.8 °C, blood pressure 115/75 mmHg, and pulse 63 beats per minute. Physical examination of neck and abdomen was normal, and neurological abnormalities of the legs were not observed. Laboratory testing revealed a white cell count of 4400/μL (reference range 3900–9800/μL), hemoglobin level of 11.4 g/dL (reference range 13.5–17.6 g/dL), and platelet count of 279,000/μL (reference range 131,000–362,000/μL). Blood levels of electrolytes and C-reactive protein were normal, as were results of tests for renal function and liver function. Urinalysis was normal, including urine protein. Re-examination of CT was performed, and it showed the air in the intestinal wall was reduced. Because there were no findings suggestive of intestinal ischemia or perforation, he was diagnosed with pneumatosis intestinalis and lenvatinib was discontinued. He was not hospitalized and did not need any medications.
The numbness of the right leg worsened after withdrawal of lenvatinib, so the patient was required to restart lenvatinib at a dose of 10 mg after a week of withdrawal. Three weeks later, we tried increasing the dose of lenvatinib to 14 mg. However, we needed to reduce back to 10 mg because of anorexia . Two months after the diagnosis of pneumatosis intestinalis, CT showed that the emphysema of the intestinal tract had completely disappeared. Three years and 5 months passed since the introduction of lenvatinib; we continued lenvatinib treatment, and the therapeutic effect remains partial response. There was no recurrence of PI.