The Columbia University Medical Center IRB (AAAR0802) exempted this retrospective case report from review.
A 36-day-old female was fussy for a day and then developed respiratory distress. She was born at term, and a New York State newborn screen was negative. In the Pediatric ER, she was tachycardic (260 beats/minute) and hypothermic (32.4 degrees C) with prolonged capillary refill and faint distal pulses. She was placed on continuous positive airway pressure via nasal prongs. Adenosine was given twice via an intraosseous line for supraventricular tachycardia with conversion to sinus rhythm. She was then intubated for worsening respiratory distress and placed on an FiO2 of 1.0. An echocardiogram was notable for decreased biventricular systolic function and left to right shunting through a patent foramen ovale. A dobutamine infusion was started. Arterial cannulation was unsuccessful; transcutaneous pulse SO2 was consistently 100% during rewarming. Results from the first blood gas (all blood gas results were reported uncorrected for temperature) drawn from a catheter placed in the IVC (by Seldinger technique; sutured in place after advancing to its full length overlying the L3 vertebral body; ) were pH 7.01, PCO2 33 mm Hg, PO2 101 mm Hg, SO2 94%, and lactate 18 mmol/L. Early during rewarming, the IVC SO2 remained above 90% and was as high as 99% ; declines in IVC SO2 and lactate during the first 3 hours of rewarming correlated (Spearman r: 0.94; p = 0.002). An arterial catheter was then placed, and the FiO2 weaned. B-type natriuretic peptide was increased (4578.5 pg/mL). Capillary refill and distal pulses improved, and dobutamine was discontinued at 8 hours; a repeat echocardiogram the next day showed improved (though still diminished) biventricular systolic function with continued left to right shunting through a patent foramen ovale. Hypothermia and hyperlactatemia resolved over 10 and 12 hours, and IVC SO2 was 80% on hospital day 2. The patient was diagnosed with supraventricular tachycardia secondary to Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. Prior to discharge a week later, serum acylcarnitine profile, lactate, pyruvate, thyroid stimulating hormone, and thyroxine were all normal.
IVC PO2 values were corrected retrospectively for the patient's temperature .