A 53-year-old man with a long-lasting history of objective vertigo and neck pain accessed to emergency care because of a severe headache, disabling vertiginous crisis with falls, increasing neck pain also in lateral head movements and decline in health-related quality of life. Clinical examination showed hyperreflexia in lower limbs, diffuse burning paresthesia of the four limbs, bilateral Babinski sign, and downbeat nystagmus. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) scans showed a complex CVJ malformation with the basilar impression and radiological signs of myelopathy at the C2 level . Furthermore, a dynamic cervical spine X-ray proved that there was no instability in flexion and extension movements of the CVJ .
The patient underwent a transnasal image-guided fully 3D endoscopic approach . Intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring was used: Somatosensory evoked potentials of the four limbs and motor evoked potentials. The technique to reach the CVJ has been described elsewhere.
The lowest part of the clivus and the upper-medial portion of the C1 anterior arch were removed. After subperiosteal preparation of the C1 anterior arch, every effort was made to preserve the anterior arch integrity, drilling only its anterior–superior portion in the midline but keeping its continuity. At this stage, the partial drilling of the uppermost part of the odontoid peg was safely performed. After image guidance confirmation of the odontoid, a 3 mm coarse diamond burr was used to enter its anterior cortex. An ultrasonic bone curette was used to remove the tip of the odontoid, the base and the interface between the posterior cortex of the dens and the soft tissues covering the spinal dura. The decompression of the medulla and spinal cord was performed by using the neuronavigation system.
Furthermore, pulsatility of the dura during surgery confirmed the achievement of sufficient decompression.
After the procedure, the reverse U mucosal nasopharingeal flap harvested at the beginning of surgery was reapproximated and fixed with fibrin glue. A Foley catheter was held in place for 2 days to compress the mucosal flap. No tracheostomy was needed, and the patient received food orally the day after surgery
Immediately after surgery, a dynamic X-ray scan was performed: The anterior atlas-dens interval (AADI), posterior atlas-dens interval (PADI), and C1–C2 total lateral overhang were measured as morphological criteria to determine the upper cervical spine stability. AADI and PADI remained stable after surgery, and the total C1–C2 overhang was no more than 7 mm, thus demonstrating no difference in CVJ motility compared with the preoperative radiographic pictures . Therefore, we did not proceed to posterior cervical stabilization, postponing the eventual decision in light of the clinical status in the follow-up.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged showing a significant improvement in paresthesia and the disappearance of nystagmus.
Postoperative dynamic CT and MRI confirmed complete CVJ decompression, and the patient underwent a nasal endoscopic follow-up 1 month after surgery and another one 6 months after surgery .
After an 18-month follow-up, the patient reported neither other vertiginous episodes, nor neck pain. Clinical examination showed normoreflexia in lower limbs, the absence of paresthesia of the four limbs, normal motor functions, bilateral negative cutaneous plantar reflex, and mild downbeat nystagmus.
At the 18-month re-evaluation, a new dynamic X-ray scan showed no difference in CVJ motility in comparison with the preoperative and immediately postoperative ones .