The proband was an 18-year-old female who was hospitalized with abnormal behavior for 3 d beginning October 19, 2021.
Three days before she visited the local psychiatric hospital, she suddenly refused to eat, accompanied by glazed eyes and with no definitive causes.
She was born by cesarean section at the 33rd week of her mother’s second pregnancy. Her weight was 3.8 kg [+1 standard deviation (SD)], and her height was 48 cm (-1 SD) at birth. Fontanel closure was delayed until she was 5 years old. During her childhood, she was always shorter than other children of the same age, but her body weight was overweight. She had occasional muscle tetany and limb numbness. Her studying ability in school was slightly poorer than that of her classmates. Menarche started at the age of 13 years, followed by irregular periods (cycle of 28-90 d).
Her parents were not consanguineous and were in good health. The growth and development of her two sisters were normal, and there was no family history of hereditary diseases.
The patient’s blood pressure was 104/78 mmHg; her height was 132 cm (-5 SD), weight was 40 kg (-2 SD), waist circumference was 80 cm, and head circumference was 48 cm; and some peculiar clinical characteristics were observed, including cheek freckles, high anterior hairline, sparse scalp hair, prominent forehead, depressed nasal bridge, low-set ears, partially absent dentition, small mandible, slightly higher mandibular arch, increased quilt hair, stubby limbs, small hands and feet and short bilateral 4th toes . She had no cubitus valgus, no nail thickening or roughness and no scoliosis. Gynecological examination showed breast development at Tanner stage 4 and pubic hair at Tanner stage 4. Her Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score was 28 points after her symptoms improved.
The patient had low calcium, low potassium, low magnesium, and high phosphorus levels. Her serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level was 94 U/L (reference range: 0 to 40), and her serum alanine transaminase (ALT) level was 70 U/L (reference range: 7 to 40). Serum potassium was 2.57 mmol/L (reference range: 3.5 to 5.3), chlorine was 96.4 mmol/L (reference range: 99.0 to 110.0), corrected calcium level was 1.06 mmol/L (reference range: 2.11 to 2.52), magnesium was 0.45 mmol/L (reference range: 0.75-1.02), and phosphorus was 1.86 mmol/L (reference range: 0.85 to 1.51). Details of laboratory findings are listed in Table . Therefore, she was referred to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment.
Ophthalmological examination revealed hyperopia. Visual acuity was 0.15 in the left eye and 0.8 in the right eye. No evidence of cataract or papilledema was observed. Her hearing test results were normal. Cranial computed tomography showed sporadic symmetrical calcifications in the cerebellar hemisphere, frontotemporal parietal lobe, basal ganglia, and thalamus. Thyroid ultrasonography showed a cystic-solid mixed nodule measuring approximately 2.3 mm × 1.2 mm in the right lobe, with a Thyroid Imaging Reporting and Data System grade of 2. X-rays of the left knee, anteroposterior pelvis, left hand, and both feet showed a smaller right ilium compared to the contralateral side, shallow acetabular fossa on both sides, and no obvious abnormalities in the bone structure of the remaining pelvis or the structures of the sacroiliac and hip joints on either side . No abnormal density was observed in the pelvis. The phalanges of the left little finger were short, with thickening of the cortex of the tubular bone and narrowing of the medulla. The 4th and 5th metatarsal bones and the corresponding phalanges of both feet were short and small. Ultrasonography of the pelvic cavity showed an anteverted uterus measuring approximately 2.7 cm × 1.9 cm × 3.0 cm. Uniform endometrial echogenicity was observed with no obvious tumor-like structures. The endometrial thickness was approximately 0.4 cm. The bilateral ovaries were normal in size, with no obvious space-occupying lesions in the bilateral adnexal areas.