Routine ultrasound found a left hepatic mass with multiple hepatic cysts.
A 56-year-old female was admitted to our hospital after a mass in the liver was detected by routine ultrasonographic examination a month prior, with a chief complaint of occasional abdominal distension.
The patient was diagnosed with hypertension at 51 years old and reported no history of hepatitis, tuberculosis, or AIDS.
The patient reported no family history of liver malignancy or hepatitis.
The patient exhibited stable vital signs, and no issues were detected following a physical examination.
Tumor marker tests used can be seen in Table .
An abdominal CT scan showed a slightly low-density mass at the junction of the left and right lobes of the liver, existing behind multiple scattered, hypoattenuating, and round lesions with clear boundaries. Portal venous phase CT showed the lesion with progressive heterogeneous enhancement . An abdominal MRI identified a hypo-vascular mass at the junction of the left and right lobes of the liver with multiple hepatic cysts of various sizes, which could not be ruled out as malignant . Imaging diagnoses of hemangioma, angiomyolipoma, hemangiosarcoma, and hepatocellular adenoma were considered but dismissed. Moreover, computer tomography (CT) also showed multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum, who presented in uniform density without the signs of calcification and necrosis.
The primary diagnoses are primary hepatic neoplasm and simple hepatic cysts.
The patient underwent a left hemihepatectomy to remove the tumorous lesion in segment 4 of the liver, without any other unique perioperative treatments.
The hepatic specimen from the resection was 17 cm × 12.5 cm × 7 cm in size and contained a tumorous lesion of the size of 5.5 cm × 5 cm × 4.7 cm. The cut surface of the specimen showed a hard gray-reddish tumorous lesion within the soft gray-yellowish hepatic tissues. Additionally, numerous cystic cavities were observed in the liver, with the largest one being 2 cm × 1.8 cm × 1.5 cm in size with clear fluid inside.
Routine pathological examination of H&E tissue staining showed that the hepatic tumor cells were oval and spindle and were distributed around the hepatic blood vessels in concentric circles, without degenerative stromal changes, such as fibrosis, hyalinization, or myxoid changes; mitotic figures; tumor necrosis; or vascular invasion being observed . The blood vessels were branched, just like those in hemangiopericytoma. Meanwhile, a plurality of cystic cavities lined with single cuboidal epithelium could be seen below the liver capsule . Immunohistochemical staining showed that the spindle cells expressed SMA and H-caldesmon but did not detect the expressions of Bcl-2, CD34, S-100, Desmin, HHV-8, CD117, Dog-1, CD21, CD23, CD1a, CgA, Syn, HMB45, and MelenA. The Ki-67 index was low (about 1%). EBER in situ hybridization was performed, and the spindle tumor cells were negative.
Gene + OncoFusion tumor gene-fusion RNA examination with 555 gene fusions revealed the presence of PDGFRB mutations but not of SRF-RELA gene fusions. Overall, the gene fusion RNA examination did not unveil any common gene mutations or arrangements on the genes, including common mutations in genes related to malignancy or myopericytoma, such as PRKCSH, SEC63, LRP5, ALG8, and SEC61, or common germline mutations associated with autosomal dominant polycystic liver disease (ADPLD) .
No recurrence or metastasis was observed, and the enlarged mediastinal lymph node remained unchanged within the subsequent 29 months of follow-up.