The patient, a 59-year-old female, presented with bilateral symmetrical low-key tinnitus and accompanying hearing loss three years ago. Over the past year, she experienced a progressively worsening blowing or running sound in her right ear, resembling a “murmur,” along with synchronous with her heartbeat rhythm. Concurrently, her original symptoms worsened, manifesting as slightly decreased visual acuity, insomnia, anxiety, depression, and suicidal ideation. She had previously been diagnosed with sudden deafness and received microcirculation treatment but did not experience any improvement.
The patient reported that the persistent tinnitus in his right ear was seriously affecting his normal life and urgently needed treatment. The patient had suffered from hypertension and hyperlipidemia in the past and was taking medication regularly to keep his blood pressure and blood lipids within normal limits, with no history of other illnesses, no history of allergies to medications or food, and no history of such hereditary diseases in his family. We assessed the patient's tinnitus, sleep and anxiety levels using the Tinnitus Handicap Inventory(THI), the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) and the Hamilton Depression Scale(HAMD), with the following results: THI: 56/100 points (Grade 3); PSQI: 14/21 points; and HAMD: 10 points, confirming moderate tinnitus handicap, sleep disorder, and mild anxiety state.
After admission, we performed neurological examinations: (1) intracranial pressure was normal; (2) otoscopy: bilateral external auditory canals were patent, tympanic membranes were intact, grayish-white in color, and no congestion or fluid flatness was seen; the hearing loss was observed in both ears by pure tone audiometry, and tympanic ventricular conductance mapping showed a pattern of 3C; (3) A computed tomography (CT) scan of the right ear showed: normal right sigmoid sinus wall and stenosis at the junction of the right internal jugular vein(IJV) and the sigmoid sinus, as well as a high JB on the right accompanied with Jugular bulb wall dehiscence (JBWD) . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed moderate-to-severe sigmoid sinus stenosis(SSS) at its junction with the IJV (stenosis of approximately 50%–70%) and a high JB , and distal venous sinus manometry was performed. Initially, we thought that the PT in the right ear might be due to the SSS increasing the blood flow velocity creating a vortex in the high JB, so that the PT sound entered the inner ear. Two other evidences supported our diagnosis: first, during DSA venography, the contrast catheter passed through the stenosis site, and when the pressure was measured at the distal end, it changed the direction of blood flow at the site, and the venous vortex flow was reduced, and the patient's PT disappeared; second, by the right side neck-pressure test, when the pressure was increased to a certain degree, the PT disappeared on the patient's right side after the venous reflux was blocked, and the left side hearing was not changed. However, the results of subsequent interventions confirmed more than just what was previously stated.