A 60-year-old male patient complained of a painless mass under the nipple for more than four months. No pain, itching or nipple discharge were noted. The patient had no history of cancer and no specific family history but felt that the tumor was growing. Further immunohistochemistry investigations were recommended because a diagnosis of an invasive breast carcinoma does not exclude breast polymorphic invasive lobular carcinoma or cancer with syngenetic differentiation. The results of these investigations showed that ER, PR, HER2, E-cadherin, P120, CK5/6, and P40 were all negative, although a high expression of Ki-67 was noted. The results obtained from the local hospital that initially treated the patient showed that these immunohistochemistry results were not specific to the liquid obtained from the biopsy, with histological analysis revealing an aggressive cancer morphology. Following intradepartmental consultation, the patient was diagnosed with a highly aggressive breast cancer consistent with a triple-negative breast lesion. The patient decided to receive a new adjuvant treatment, although his relatives complained and asked for further treatment options as there were no other obvious symptoms due to the patient’s preexisting health conditions. This led to the patient seeking treatment at our hospital. An ultrasound examination carried out on admission showed that the larger gland was located below the nipple and measured 4.4 cm x 4.4 cm x 1.4 cm. Striped blood flow signals were observed in the region, with low echoes seen in the shallow fat layer measuring 1.1 cm x 0.5 cm. The integrated ultrasound diagnosis based on the mammography reports and data systems (BI-RADS) was a type 4C right breast parenchymal occupying lesion.

Only a small number of tumor tissue biopsy samples were obtained for histology. Light microscopy showed a greater number of tumor cells and reduced stroma. The tumor cells were linear or trabecular, with some areas being monoline. The local lesions harbored a mixture of cells, with the tumor cells being large and containing fine chromatin and multiple mitotic images. The tumor cells exhibited deep staining and were disproportionate in size. Necrosis and bleeding were not observed. The results of the immunohistochemistry investigations were as follows: AE1/AE3 (-), EMA (+), S-100 (-), CD68 (-), CD3 (weak+), CD20 (-), Pax5 (-), CD30 (+), Bcl-2 (-), CD2l (-), CD23 (-), Bcl-6 (-), MUM1 (+), CD2 (-), CD4 (+), CD8 (-), CD5 (-), CD7 (-), TIA-1 (-), GrB (+), ALK (+), CD56 (-), EBER (-), and Ki-67 (70%+). Based on the above results the pathologic diagnosis was non-Hodgkin’s anaplastic large cell lymphoma in the right breast, ALK-positive.

Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analyses were then performed using the two-color fusion probes IRF4 and DUPS22, obtained from Ambipycin Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd., Guangzhou, China. Where possible, at least 100 nuclei were evaluated for each probe. The FISH analyses were evaluated and recorded using ISIS Digital Image Analysis version 5.0 (MetaSystems, Altusheim, Australia). To analyze the whole genome for imbalance, DNA was extracted from the FFPE material using the QIAmp DNA FFPE tissue kit (Qiagen, Lab Division, America) and processed using the Oncoscan™ FFPE express 3.0 kit (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Processing involved analysis of copy number aberrations (CNA) and constructing copy TuScan algorithms using Nexus Express for Oncoscan 3 software (Beijing Yuxin Biotechnology Co., China). The human reference genome GRCh37/hg19 was used for gains and deletions smaller than 100 Kb or containing less than 20 probes, and CNN-LOH for those smaller than 5000 Kb or containing deletion regions not considered in the analyses. Molecular cytogenetic analysis using interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis showed that the vast majority of cells in the tissue sections had chromosomal breakpoints that affected the fusion of the IRF4 motif and DUPS22, and chromosomal breakpoints that affected the DUPS22 motif. We also detected an additional signal for the nonrecombinant allele, suggesting a gain in the DUPS22 locus. In addition, we observed a gain in the IRF4 locus without breaks. Based on these results and with reference to the current classification of lymphoma of the World Health Organization (WHO), we changed the diagnosis to “non-Hodgkin’s mesenchymal metaplastic large cell lymphoma, ALK-positive”. This malignancy was not associated with an IRF4/DUPS22 rearrangement. Chromosomal imbalance mapping using the Oncoscan™ Chromosomal Imbalance Mapping platform revealed mutations in the following genes: BCOR_p.Q600X, DNMT3A_p.F609fs, NOTCH1_p.P2320fs, and IDH2_p.R140Q. Finally, we attempted to sequence the whole exome of the tumor, although unfortunately, this failed due to technical reasons.