The proband, female of 1 year and 3 months old, was referred to the Research Centre for Medical Genetics because of severe failure to thrive. She was born from a first pregnancy. Parents were nonconsanguineous and had normal growth. The threat of miscarriage took place at 27 weeks. Delivery was emergent at 38 weeks and 5 days by cesarean section. The condition at birth was severe. Respiratory failure was increasing. The child was on a ventilator for five days. In total, respiratory support was required for five months. The patient was diagnosed with pulmonary hypertension.
Body weight at birth was 1490 g (Z-score −4.50), 40 cm in length (Z-score −4.54). Head circumference was 32.5 cm (Z-score −2.59). Chest circumference was 24 cm. She had hydrocephalic head, short palpebral fissures, ocular and nipple hypertelorism, depressed nasal bridge, epicanthus, microstomy, high-arched palate, hypoplastic low-set ears, short neck, low hair line, and arachnodactyly. The baby had a pronounced progeroid appearance. The subcutaneous fat layer was not pronounced. An external examination of the genitals revealed hypoplasia of the labia majora, and the clitoris was hypertrophied. The liver protruded 3 cm below the edge of the right costal arch and 1 cm below the edge of the left costal arch. Motor activity was reduced.
Upon screening at 9 months, the patient’s condition was severe, but her consciousness was clear, and her posture as active. The baby was responsive to communication. She had a body weight of 3.3 kg (Z-score −6.54), a height of 54 cm (Z-score −6.61), and a body mass index of 11.32 (Z-score −4.67). Her head circumference was 43.5 cm (Z-score −0.76), and her chest circumference was 30 cm. The patient’s physical development was extremely low, disharmonic. Pseudohydrocephalus, high forehead, triangular face, exophthalmos, narrow nasal dorsum, smooth philtrum, microgenia, microtia, and arachnodactyly were observed in the child during the examination. The skin was clean and dry. The girl had cyanosis of the face and upper half of the trunk when crying. The subcutaneous fat was underdeveloped. The patient’s chest was barrel-shaped. Hepatomegaly was observed. The child could not support her head but tried to turn her body from prone to supine. She had a pronounced interest in toys. Her speech consisted of babbling, with chains of syllables. X-ray showed delay in bone age – less than three months vs the patient’s actual age of 9 months. The bone structure was sparse. Valgus deformity of the knee joints was observed. Data on the condition of the patella were not provided because these bones are transparent on X-ray scans in young children, and ultrasonography was not performed. EEG recordings contained no epileptiform or focal pathological activity. Echocardiography showed no signs of heart defects. Patent foramen ovale and diagonal trabecula in the left ventricular cavity were observed.
Another examination was performed at 1 year and 3 months was performed. The girl had a height of 58 cm (Z-score −7.06), a weight of 4 kg (Z-score −6.44) and a head circumference of 45 cm (Z-score −0.5). Hydrocephalic head, high forehead, triangular face, exophthalmos, narrow nasal dorsum, microgenia, microtia, severe hypotrophy, and areas of alopecia on the head were observed. Subcutaneous fat was not developed. The baby did not sit independently and could not steadily support herself on her feet, but she was able to stand with support. She played with toys, held objects in her hands, collected pyramids, and transferred small objects.
The last time the patient was examined when she was 1 year 11 months old. Short stature (63 cm, Z-score −7.04) and growth retardation (5 kg, Z-score −6.16) were noted. Clinical examination revealed dysmorphic facial features, microtia. Absent patella was noted by palpation. .
Initially, chromosomal abnormality was suspected in the child. Cytogenetic testing was performed. Karyotype 46, XX was detected. Hutchinson-Gilford progeria was assumed. A corresponding study of the LMNA gene was performed. No pathogenic changes were observed. Clinical exome sequencing was ordered, identifying two variants in the CDC6 gene. Parental examination revealed that they were heterozygous carriers of relevant changes in the nucleotide sequence.
Neither variant had been registered in either the GnomAD database (v.2.1.1), the clinical databases (Clinvar, HGMD Professional (v.2021.1)), or the database of variants obtained by exome sequencing (WES, CES) in the Research Center for Medical Genetics – RuExac (1337 samples). The exon 3 nucleotide sequence variant of the CDC6 gene (chr17:38447363C>T) results in a premature translation termination site (p.(Gln78Ter), NM_001254.3). According to the pathogenicity criteria, ACMG is classified as pathogenic (PVS1, PS3, PM2). The criterium PS3 was used due to the previously functional study that demonstrated pathogenicity of LoF variants in the CDC6 gene. A variant in exon 3 of the CDC6 gene (chr17:38447361A>G), resulting in a missense replacement of (p.(Lys77Arg), NM_001254.3), is classified as a variant with uncertain clinical significance (ACMG: PM2, PM3).