We describe a 57-year-old right-handed female presenting to a neurology outpatient clinic with a chief complaint of weakness. She initially began to experience hypophonia, weakness and subsequent difficulty walking approximately one year prior, with hoarseness of speech starting even earlier. Initial onset of symptoms also involved bradykinesia, including speech and ambulation. She noted that her left upper and lower extremities were predominantly affected at onset, with subsequent spread to the right upper and lower extremities. In particular, she had difficulty typing, especially with her left hand, and over time developed micrographia with somewhat illegible handwriting. She experienced impaired gait and balance with a tendency to fall backwards and reported difficulty lifting her legs getting in and out of vehicles. She also endorsed stiffness and cramping in her legs.
Review of systems was notable for vague lightheadedness, which she described as a "fuzzy feeling" or slowed mental processing. She had a history of constipation with infrequent bowel movements for several years and exhibited frequent episodes of yelling out at night for which the patient was amnestic. Remarkably, within about six months of disease onset she developed laughing involuntarily out of context. Throughout her symptomatic progression, she did not experienced fevers, chills, or other constitutional symptoms. Past medical history was limited to a diagnosis of shingles several years earlier without residual symptoms, and family history was negative for neurologic disorders including motor neuron disease and movement disorders.
Physical exam included normal orthostatics. Hypomimia was observed with no abnormalities of eye movements. Cognition was normal by Montreal Cognitive Assessment, but speech was hypophonic, slow and mildly dysarthric with hoarse monotone quality. Jaw jerk was absent, and there was no evidence for tongue atrophy or fasciculations. Power was normal without muscle atrophy or fasciculations. Hyperreflexia with Hoffmann's and suprapatellar reflexes were noted bilaterally. Mild bilateral lower extremity spasticity was slightly greater on the left with bilateral extensor plantar responses present. Gait was slow en bloc with bilaterally decreased arm swing. Mild bradykinesia was seen in the upper extremities but without cogwheeling or resting tremor appreciated. Subsequent further evaluation showed severely impaired finger tapping bilaterally and moderate postural instability.
Laboratory studies including routine blood work and other testing were negative for autoimmune and paraneoplastic processes, vitamin deficiency, and metabolic disorders . Genetic analysis revealed a variant of uncertain significance in the PSEN2 gene . Electromyography was completely negative for lower motor neuron findings. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain both at nine months and two years from disease onset revealed atrophy mildly greater than expected for the patient’s age, particularly in the frontal and parietal cortices bilaterally symmetrical with a normal-appearing brainstem, including pons. Neither a hot cross bun nor putaminal rim sign was visualized . MRI of the cervical spine was essentially normal with minimal disc bulging and no intrinsic cord findings. A DaTscan roughly one year from symptom onset was markedly abnormal with no activity in the putamen bilaterally and diminished uptake in the caudate bilaterally, moderate on the right and mild on the left, confirming nigrostriatal dysfunction .
Follow-up 2.5 years after initial symptom onset, the patient’s clinical course has been a very slow progression. She continues to have pathologically brisk reflexes with spasticity limiting functionality and increased tone impacting her dexterity and gait. Neuropsychological testing reveals normal cognition with exception of mild slowing in verbal construction and cognitive processing. Ocular motor function remains normal. She continues to exhibit mild asymmetry with both spasticity and bradykinesia slightly worse on the left, still without tremor. She ambulates independently and functions well in her job though challenged by hypophonia and difficulty typing. She has not developed orthostatic hypotension or other signs of autonomic failure. Treatment with tizanidine has helped symptoms of stiffness and cramping, and her bradykinesia has subjectively responded to levodopa titrated up to tolerance.