A 54-year-old Caucasian female proceeded to our institution with epigastric pain, nausea and vomiting along with pain located around the lumbar area lasting for one week. No previous surgical history or commorbidities existed. Clinical examination did not reveal any palpable abdominal masses or abdominal tenderness and the patient’s vital signs were within the normal spectrum. Blood test detected hypercalcemia (serum calcium: 10.2 mg/dL) and parathyroid hormone level of 111.8 pg/mL. All the findings in conjunction with the clinical presentation lead to the assumption that the patient had primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT).
Then, an ultrasound was performed but it was negative for any thyroid or parathyroid abnormalities. Subsequently, the thoracic and abdominal CT revealed a soft tissue in the anterior mediastinum 7 × 1 cm. Additional Tc-99m-MIBI scintigraphy followed, which detected an ectopic adenoma located in the lower anterior mediastinum, on the left of the median line . Following these, a mid-sternal thoracotomy was finally scheduled.
During the operation, after the thoracotomy, surgeons attempted to detect deep into the mediastinum the parathyroid adenoma according to the preoparative localization. Indeed, the mediastinal mass was detected on the left of the median line, at the anterior mediastinum, in front of the anterior surface of the pericardium and close to the left pericardiophrenic vessels and the left phrenic nerve . The adenoma was covered by a thin fibrous capsule. When surgeons removed the capsule, a dark red mass of 7 × 2.8 × 1 cm was finally revealed . The detailful preoperative localization of the present mediastinal adenoma which was in close relation with various anatomical structures of the thorax, reduced effectively the difficulty of the mass excision and the potentiality of accidental surgical injuries which may lead to thoracic bleeding and subsequent obstructive symptoms.
Then, the operation continued in the usual fashion and a drainage was placed into the left side of the thoracic cavity. The patient was discharged the 5th postoperative day with instructions, when the drainage was finally removed.
Histology of the mass confirmed the diagnosis of ectopic parathyroid adenoma that was composed predominantly of oxyphil cells arranged in an acinar pattern. Serum calcium level was 2.60 mmol/L and iPTH 17.6 pg/mL 12 h after the operation. Serum calcium and iPTH remained normal after 6 months’ follow-up.