66-years-old male.
A sudden onset of the right hemiplegia and dysarthria.
Nothing significant.
Smoked 30 cigarettes/day for 45 years.
At 7:30 a.m. while driving, the patient suddenly experienced right hemiplegia and dysarthria and was rushed to our hospital.
Right facial paralysis, dysarthria, right upper extremity paralysis, right upper and lower extremity paresthesia, and National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score 6/42.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed slightly high signal areas in the left putamen, corona radiata, and part of the middle cerebral artery region. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed an occlusion of the left middle cerebral artery [ and ]. The T2-weighted images showed no obvious thrombi in the occluded area.
The patient was admitted to the hospital at 8:25 a.m. Based on the MRI findings, we determined that there was a mismatch between the perfusion area of the left middle cerebral artery and the high signal DWI lesion. An intravenous alteplase therapy was deemed appropriate without any cautionary or contraindicated items as per the guidelines. Alteplase was administered at 9:27 a.m. following the management of hypotension with nicardipine. The primary strategy was to pursue an endovascular recanalization.
A 9 Fr sheath was placed in the right femoral artery, and a 9 Fr OPTIMO (Tokai Medical Products, Aichi, Japan) was guided into the left internal carotid artery. Internal carotid arteriography revealed that the left middle cerebral artery was distally occluded . In the delayed phase, an anastomosis of the cerebral pia mater provided the collateral blood flow from the anterior to the middle cerebral arteries . The rebar (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was guided distal to the occlusion with a CHIKAI 14 200 cm (Asahi Intec, Aichi, Japan) to secure the distal vessel, and a Trevo XP ProVue Retriever 4.0 × 30 mm (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA) was deployed. The post deployment imaging showed an immediate flow restoration but poor stent dilation in the occluded area, suggestive of arterial stenosis .
The proximal and distal diameters of the stenosis were 2.6 mm and 2.1 mm, respectively . After retrieving the Trevo, a 1-min amount of thrombus was retrieved. Although reperfusion was achieved, a significant degree of stenosis persisted . A diagnosis of ICAD was established, and an angioplasty using a balloon catheter was proposed.
Crushed aspirin and clopidogrel (300 mg each) were administered orally. A 6 Fr Cerulean catheter DD6 113 cm (Medikit, Tokyo, Japan) was guided to the pyramidal segment of the internal carotid artery as a distal access catheter. Subsequently, a Gateway 2.0 × 12 mm monorail (Stryker, Kalamazoo, Michigan, USA) was placed at the stenosis region using a CHIKAI. A gradual dilatation and retraction were performed under nominal pressure . Subsequent imaging revealed a temporary recanalization ; however, restenosis was observed after 7 min .
The strategy was to use a coronary perfusion balloon for prolonged angioplasty while maintaining the peripheral perfusion. Ryusei 2.5 × 20 mm monorail (Kaneka Medix, Osaka, Japan) was navigated toward the stenotic lesion. After dilating to 2 atm, the wire was drawn anterior to the proximal perfusion hole, and the perfusion lumen was subsequently unsealed .
The angiography performed in this state showed that peripheral perfusion was achieved using balloon dilation [ and ]. The patient was maintained in this state for 15 min, during which intermittent angiography was performed to monitor the patency of the perfusion lumen. Ozagrel sodium 80 mg was administered intravenously. The Ryusei was then deflated and adequate vascular dilation was observed . After an additional waiting period of 20 min, we confirmed the absence of restenosis and concluded the procedure.
Heparin was administered while monitoring activated clotting time (ACT) during the procedure, with a minimum ACT value of 200. The total dose was 6,000 units.
The patient’s symptoms resolved to an NIHSS score of 0 on the day after the procedure. Postoperative echocardiography and electrocardiography revealed no evidence of cardiogenic cerebral embolism. Based on the intraoperative findings, the patient was diagnosed with ICAD. Postoperatively, aspirin 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg prescriptions were continued, and cilostazol 200 mg and atorvastatin 10 mg were added. Postoperative MRI showed a clearly defined high signal DWI without significant enlargement of the infarcted area and although a mild stenosis remained, the MRA also showed a satisfactory peripheral perfusion .
The patient was discharged without a neurological deficit on the 7th day.
Clopidogrel medication was discontinued at discharge. Three months later, the MRA indicated an improvement in the stenosis , and the patient was prescribed antithrombotic therapy with cilostazol as a single agent. No specific events were observed for more than 1 year after the procedure.
An application for an unapproved new medical device was submitted to the hospital’s committee for the evaluation of highly difficult new medical technology, and approval was obtained. Furthermore, during patient consultations regarding surgical procedures, we explicitly conveyed that we may employ nonconforming medical devices if adequate substitutions proved arduous and secured informed consent accordingly.