A 54-year-old woman presented with intermittent left-sided chest discomfort over 2 years. She described this symptom as a “pressure” sensation in the anterior chest which was brought on by physical strain such as heavy lifting. She also reported that this discomfort was more noticeable and severe during air travel over recent years, with discomfort peaking during the middle of the flight and easing with descent. The most recent flight-related.
Episode was particularly severe and this is what prompted her presentation. She had no dyspnoea or other symptoms of note.
On further discussion, she revealed that she had been followed-up in the respiratory outpatient clinic of a different hospital some 10 years previous for an incidentally noted large bulla in her left lung. Following 5 years of annual surveillance imaging, she was discharged as she had remained asymptomatic and the bulla had not increased in size.
She was a smoker in her youth, accumulating a 5-pack-year history and quitting before the age of 30. She had no medical history and no exposures of note. There was no family history of pneumothorax, lung or connective tissue disease.
Examination revealed no hypoxia, digital clubbing or peripheral stigmata of respiratory disease. Auscultation revealed equal bilateral air entry with normal breath sounds.
A chest X-ray was done which revealed a large bulla in the left upper zone. This was followed by a high-resolution CT of the thorax which demonstrated a large avascular, air-filled region occupying the upper half of the left hemithorax, consistent with a large bulla. A diagnosis of iGBE was made. There was compression of surrounding lung. There was no evidence of emphysematous lung disease (paraseptal or centrilobular) in the remainder of both lungs.
Pulmonary function tests showed normal spirometry and diffusion capacity. Lung volumes were not performed. A connective tissue disease blood panel and α1 anti-trypsin level were unremarkable.
She was referred for surgical assessment and a VATS Bullectomy was performed . This was a two-port procedure. The bulla was intentionally ruptured, creating space in the hemithorax. Adhesions within the surrounding structures were divided. The bulla was resected with a small rim of normal tissue. A 24 french drain was sited and the patient was then extubated. She tolerated this procedure well and without complication. At her recent 6-month follow-up, she was doing well and her previously described symptoms had completely resolved. Repeat spirometry is significantly improved and lung volumes are within normal limits .