A 63-year-old female patient with a medical history of type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia visited our hospital complaining of chest, waist, and back pain radiating to both groin for 15 days. It aggravated on bending over, but there was on obvious cause. No nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or discomfort, such as numbness or fatigue of the lower limbs, was reported. The initial treatment administered was for back pain. After admission, the patient developed a fever and abdominal pain. Peripheral leukocyte count was 12.92×109/L(normal range, 3.5–9.5×109/L) with 11.51×109/L neutrophils (normal range, 1.8–6.3×109/L) and an elevated C-reactive protein of 101.59 mg/L, and Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 120mm/hour. The computed tomography angiography (CTA) examination revealed a thoracic aortic pseudoaneurysm. Abdominal CTA confirmed the formation of a pseudoaneurysm in the aorta, approximately in the T10-T11 vertebral body plane .
Blood was drawn during fever, gram-negative bacilli were Gram-stained, and Salmonella paratyphi A was cultured. Susceptibility testing by the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) gradient method revealed that the isolate was susceptible to piperacillin/Tazobactam, Imipenem, ampicillin, and gentamicin based on the Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing criteria (piperacillin/Tazobactam MIC≤8ug/mL; Imipenem MIC≤1ug/mL; Ampicillin MIC≤2ug/mL). Furthermore, susceptibility testing by Kirby-Bauer drug-sensitivity test showed that the isolate was susceptible to Cefotaxime, Ceftriaxone, Ciprofloxacin, and Levofloxacin based on the Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing criteria (Cefotaxime inhibition zone diameter = 28mm; Ceftriaxone inhibition zone diameter = 30mm; Ciprofloxacin inhibition zone diameter = 26mm; Levofloxacin inhibition zone diameter = 28mm).
The endovascular stent-graft treatment was performed immediately. After inducing local anesthesia, the left femoral artery was punctured using the Seldinger’s method. 5F arterial sheath was implanted, and a pigtail catheter was inserted in descending aorta for aortography, which showed signs of a thoracic aortic pseudoaneurysm. An oval-shaped soft tissue-density mass measuring 2.5×2.1 cm was detected in the descending thoracic aorta at the level of the T10-T11 vertebral body. The right femoral artery was then exposed, and Ultra Stiff Wire (ASAHI, Japan) was put in. After that Hercules™ Sterile Thoracic Stent-Graft System (Microport, Shanghai) was put in along Wire and then released to cover pseudoaneurysm. The procedure lasted 45 min. Aortography was conducted again, which revealed that the pseudoaneurysm had almost disappeared without leakage.
Moreover, piperacillin sulbactam sodium 5 g was administered once every 8 h intravenously for 14 days in combination with levofloxacin 0.4 g once a day intravenously for 7 days. Abdominal pain was relieved, and the body temperature returned to normal. The treatment was well tolerated by the patient, and she was discharged on postoperative Day 10.
At the 2-month follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic, and CTA confirmed the total exclusion of the pseudoaneurysm with no signs of endoleaks . After discussion with the institutional research office, formal ethical approval was deemed unnecessary if written informed consent was obtained from the patient. Verbal and written informed consent were obtained from the patient for publishing the report.