A 12-year-old boy presented with a complaint of swelling above his left upper lid from a few months prior to admission. He did not experience pain, diplopia, irritation, and itching. Past medical and ophthalmic history were unremarkable. Visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes. Slit lamp and fundus exams were normal. There was fullness above the medial part of left upper lid and globe was displaced laterally [Figure 1a]. Ocular motility was intact.
Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a heterogeneous ill-defined mass in the superomedial part of the mid-orbit, involving the medial rectus and superior oblique muscles. The approximate size of the lesion was 1.51.21.2 cm. Magnetic resonance imaging showed an indistinct orbital lesion. The lesion had low signal in T1-weighted and high signal in T2-weighted imaging. It showed severe enhancement after gadolinium injection [Figure 2]. Considering the patient's age, and the clinical and imaging characteristics, malignant orbital neoplasms including rhabdomyosarcoma was on the top of the list of possible diagnoses. The high signal part of the lesion in T2-weighted acquisition was considered as a probable associated necrotic area. We assumed the worst-case scenario and decided to perform an orbitotomy and excision of the lesion. Under general anesthesia, an upper eyelid crease incision was made, and tissue dissection exposed the mass between the superior oblique and superior rectus muscles [Figure 3a]. A meticulous dissection was done with special attention to keep the integrity of globe, extraocular muscles, and the lesion [Figures 3b & 3c]. The mass had tight adhesion to the surrounding structures and was finally excised in toto. Upon bisection of the mass on the operating table, the lesion showed as a multilayered wall, consisting of fibrotic bands, and a gelatinous center with a threadlike structure inside the core. There was putrid fluid and a thread-like object in the center of the lesion [Figure 3d], which were sent for histologic, parasitology, and microbiology laboratory work-up.
Histopathologic examination showed the mass to be composed of granulomatous inflammation and the thread-like object to be D. repens [Figure 4]. On the first follow-up visit, there was no palpable mass, nor any motility or visual disturbance. No other systemic involvement was found in the systemic evaluations. Considering the resolution of signs and symptoms and after consulting with infectious diseases specialists, systemic anti-parasite medications were not administered. At this time, when inquired about contact with probable infected animals, the boy disclosed that he was taking care of a stray dog. On the last follow-up about six months after the operation, the patient had no complaints, normal orbital exams, extra-ocular movements, and there was no recurrence of the disease [Figure 1b].