A 30-year-old man presented to the emergency trauma room following a motor vehicle collision in which he was the front-seat unrestrained passenger. At the time of presentation, the patient was vitally stable, conscious, alert, oriented with a Glasgow Coma Scale 15/15 . A cervical collar and spinal board were applied by the paramedics at the scene. The trauma surgery team assessed the patient initially and implemented the advanced trauma life support protocol ; he was deemed to be hemodynamically stable with no other systemic injuries. The patient was, however, complaining of moderate left hip and thigh sharp pain as well as left shoulder pain. On examination, he was noted to have abducted, shortened and internally rotated left lower limb. Active and passive movements of the left thigh were not possible due to pain with no neurovascular deficits detected distally. There were no significant examination findings of the left shoulder and upper limb. X-rays of the pelvis and left femur revealed a posterior fracture dislocation of left femoral head with an ipsilateral femoral mid-shaft fracture and a computed tomography (CT) scan of the pelvis showed large and small fracture fragments within the acetabulum originating from the medial aspect of the femoral head . A shoulder X-ray also revealed a non-displaced left scapular body fracture. An attempt of left hip closed reduction was made while the patient was still in the emergency department and it was, however, unsuccessful.
After being cleared by the trauma team, the patient was admitted to the orthopedic service with a working diagnosis of left posterior hip dislocation with a Pipkin Type 1 ipsilateral femoral head fracture and an ipsilateral femoral shaft fracture. The patient was taken to the operating theater for closed versus open reduction and intramedullary nailing of the left femur. Within 5 h of his injury, the patient underwent closed reduction of the left hip with the aid of a temporary external fixator applied on the femoral shaft proximal to the fracture . The external fixator rod was used as a handle, and the reduction was successful after the first attempt, as confirmed by the C-arm and CT reconstruction . Subsequently, the external fixator was removed, and intramedullary nailing of the left femur was carried out. After completion of the procedure, the left hip was examined and found to be stable with the femoral head fragment not affecting the movement. The patient was discharged after 3 days with a clean, dry wound and full weight bearing ambulation as tolerated. Unfortunately, he was lost to follow-up and attempts to contact the patient were unsuccessful.