A 24-year-old southeast Asian woman was admitted with a history of a white spot on the right cornea and increasing discomfort. On examination, her vision was 6/36 on the right and 6/9 on the left. She had a corneal ulcer measuring 5.5 × 2 mm on her right cornea. A small localized area of scarring was present lateral to where the defect was present . There was a +1 cell reaction in her right anterior chamber. She had a history of bilateral anterior uveitis. Corneal sensation was normal in both eyes. There were early bilateral posterior subcapsular cataracts.
In view of the findings, corneal scrapes were taken for microscopy, culture, and sensitivity. Virology assays inclusive of herpes simplex virus and varicella-zoster virus polymerase chain reaction were performed. Our patient had normal C-reactive protein, rheumatoid factor, anti-nuclear antibody, extractable nuclear antigen, syphilis, and hepatitis B and C serology. She was started on topical g. cephalothin 5% and g. gentamicin 0.9% hourly for 48 hours. She made a mild initial improvement and was changed to topical g. chloramphenicol 1% four times each day and g. prednisolone 0.5% four times each day once her microbiology and virology results were negative. A bandage contact lens was inserted to facilitate healing .
In the third week of admission, she complained of a headache and was found to be mildly tachycardic. She was apyrexial with no reported malaise. A urinary dipstick analysis was performed, and her urinary glucose level was 21 mmol/L. Blood glucose was urgently requested and was found to be 23 mmol/L. A blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.38, a partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) of 44.7 mmHg, and a partial pressure of oxygen (pO2) of 89.5 mmHg.
She was transferred to the care of the medical team and a diagnosis of type 1 diabetes was made. She was started on treatment with insulin. Her corneal ulcer persisted and punctal plugs were inserted to increase the tear film and facilitate healing. Autologous serum drops were started every two hours during waking hours. There was a rapid reduction of the epithelial defect as her blood glucose levels normalized .
Four days after insulin treatment was started, her ulcer had healed and she was discharged from the hospital and follow-up was conducted at her local diabetes clinic. At a one-month review in the eye clinic, her ulcer remained healed, leaving a localized area of subepithelial scarring .