A 32-year-old man who experienced a recurrent fracture after sudden syncope was admitted to the First Hospital of China Medical University. Six months before the current time, he had sudden syncope while lying in bed; he felt low back pain after regaining consciousness. A computed tomography (CT) scan in the local hospital indicated multiple thoracolumbar fractures, and he was treated with external belt fixation. One month prior, he experienced another sudden syncope episode when he while sitting in the driver’s seat but before driving; he felt pain in his left shoulder upon waking. X-ray analysis indicated multiple fractures of the left proximal humerus, and he was treated with external fixation. He was then admitted to our hospital for further examination.
Laboratory assessment revealed elevated β-C-terminal telopeptides of type I collagen (β-CTX) (981.8 pg/ml; normal range<584 pg/ml) and N-terminal propeptides of type I collagen (P1NP) (81.93 ng/ml; normal range 20.00–80.00 ng/ml) and decreased 25(OH)D3 (12.99 ng/ml); serum calcium (2.3 mmol/L), phosphorus (1.27 mmol/L), magnesium (0.96 mmol/L), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) (93 U/L; normal range 35–100 U/L) and parathyroid hormone (PTH) (24.92 pg/ml; normal range 15.00–65.00 pg/ml) levels were normal. HLA-B27, arterial blood gas, kidney function, and liver function were all within normal ranges.
X-ray radiographs of the skull, bilateral hands, left shoulder joint, and bilateral hips were performed. The skull image revealed a suspicious light transmission shadow at the left frontal bone. A bone island was detected in the left thumb proximal phalanx. The bilateral hips showed mild degenerative changes, and a comminuted fracture of the left greater tuberosity of the humerus were observed on X-ray and CT scans of the left shoulder joint. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of thoracic and lumbar vertebrae is shown in Fig. , revealing L3 vertebral compression fracture, local kyphosis, spinal canal stenosis, and cauda equina compression. Vertebral endplate alterations were found in L1 to S1, and L2-S1 disc bulges and slight L4-S1 disc protrusions were noted. Schmorl’s nodes were observed in multiple thoracic and lumbar vertebrae (T8, T12, L1, and L5). Although bone mineral density (BMD) examined by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) of the hip joint was normal, the L2 (0.820 g/cm2, Z-score − 1.4) and L4 (0.877 g/cm2, Z-score − 1.7) BMD values were low.
The electrocardiogram performed indicated sinus tachycardia, and his heart rate was 107 beats/min. Cardiac ultrasound showed ventricular septum hypertrophy (9–11 mm), but left ventricular systolic function was normal in the resting state. CT angiography of the head and neck arteries indicated thinning of the right vertebral artery.
The patient had a 4-year history of hypertension. The patient had not suffered from any fracture in the past. His father had hypertension and cerebral thrombosis, and he had a 9-year-old son with Kawasaki disease. His mother and sister were healthy. The patient presented with normal stature and appearance (height, 173 cm; weight, 72 kg; BMI, 24 kg/m2; lack of blue sclera). The patient also had normal teeth and hearing, and no obvious kyphosis was observed.
Blood samples were collected from the patient and his family members, and genomic DNA was extracted using a blood extraction kit (Tian Jing Biochemical Technology Beijing, Ltd.). Gene regions, including splicing and coding regions of exons, of a panel of genes associated with bone metabolism were amplified by PCR and then sequenced using the Illumina NextSeq 500 system (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Variations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing (ABI 3730, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). This analysis revealed a heterozygous mutation in COL1A2 (NM_000089; c.4048G > A, (p.G1350S)) in the proband. Family investigation revealed that the proband’s sister and her daughter (his niece) carry this mutation. The proband’s sister was found to be an asymptomatic heterozygous carrier, and the niece previously experienced a fracture of the ankle and had mild dentinogenesis imperfecta without blue sclera . Predictions for the c.4048G > A mutation in COL1A2 are as follows: PolyPhen2 (Probably damaging, score = 1), FATHMM (Tolerated, score=-1.11), SIFT (Deleterious, score = 0.002) and PROVEAN (Deleterious, score=-4.84).