On the 5th of August, 2020, a 58-year-old woman presented in our emergency department with seizures and hemiparesis. She had a prior fever, malaise, and dry cough a week before admission. She has had a history of hypertension since a year ago. The vital sign is within normal limit except the blood pressure is 170/110 mmHg.
The results of the laboratory test were high blood glucose 254 mg/dL and HbA1C 6.5%. Leukocytosis with white blood cells (WBC) was 14/L and neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) was 33. Increase level of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 93 mm/h, D-dimer 21,176 ng/mL, and fibrinogen 446 mg/dL. The result of the reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-PCR) test from the nasal swab was observed to be positive for SARS-CoV-2. The completed laboratory results are listed in Table
Head contrast computed tomography (HCCT) showed cerebral edema at the right parietal lobe . There were hyperdense veins and sinuses at the right parietal lobe area, superior sagittal sinus (SSS), and bilateral transverse sinuses (TS), which suggested the presence of a cerebral sinus venous thrombosis (CSVT) , with a sign of venal hypertension. CT venography (CTV) was also confirmed CSVT at SSS, bilateral TS, and bilateral sigmoid sinus . Furthermore, the thorax CT scan showed ground-glass opacity and subpleural bilateral, with a fibrotic appearance in the left lung .
During the patient’s treatment of COVID-19, 60 mg subcutaneous enoxaparin was administered twice daily, for 5 days. On the 5th day of treatment, D-dimer was decreased to 2092 ng/ml. The decision was made to continue with enoxaparin until the normal D-dimer or the patient’s negative status for the COVID-19 virus is attained. Other clinical manifestations also improved and the patient was discharged from the hospital on the 10th day.
The second case, a 72-year-old male, was consulted from the intensive care unit (ICU) because of sudden decreases in consciousness. He had a history of high fever, dry cough, and shortness of breath a week before hospitalization. The patient was being treated as severe COVID-19 with ARDS for 10 days in ICU. He had no previous history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or cardiovascular disease. He already received heparin intravenously for 10 days and halted, due to good recovery of shortness of breath and hypoxemia. A day after heparin cessation, the patient suddenly unconscious and intubated due to severe hypoxia.
Upon examination, his consciousness is coma with a slow response to the light of both eyes. He had hypothermia with a temperature of 35.4 °C, blood pressure of 140/69 mmHg on vasoconstrictor epinephrine support, and 90% oxygen saturation.
Laboratory test showed, critical increase level of WBC (53.09 × 103/L) and NLR 58.1. We did not do a peripheral blood smear to examine any hematological disorder. Coagulation function tests were APTT 20.2 s, PT 11.9 s, INR 1.11, D-dimer 5.308 ng/mL (previous was > 50,000), and fibrinogen 525 mg/dL. The rt-PCR test from a nasopharyngeal swab sample was negative for SARS-CoV-2 on the 11th day. The laboratory results are listed in Table .
Head non-contrast computed tomography (NCCT) showed hyperdense at superior sagittal sinus and right transverse sinuses, which suggested the manifestations of CSVT . Furthermore, there was associated cerebral edema at the left frontal, parietal lobe, and cerebellum . Thorax CT scan showed ground-glass opacity and subpleural bilateral with the fibrotic appearance in both lung and pulmonary angiography. Thrombosis at segments 8 and 9 of both lungs was also observed . The pulmonary CT-angiography (CTA) results were pulmonary embolism and thrombosis of both the left and right pulmonary arteries. Due to the massive thrombosis, a decision was made to administer streptokinase and heparin, to the patient intravenously. After 3 days of this treatment, the patient became desaturated (40% oxygen saturation) with spontaneous pneumothorax and passed away the next day.