A 55-year-old Caucasian man presented with an episode of hemospermia. Our patient had a complex urological history with bilateral inguinal hernias and undescended testes as a child. At the age of 11 years he underwent a right orchidopexy; but the left intra-abdominal testis could not be located during the operation. At the age of 26 years, our patient presented with a large mass in his abdomen, which was removed surgically and confirmed as a testicular cancer arising within an intra-abdominal testis. Postoperative treatment with cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy was delivered and regular check-ups showed no evidence of disease relapse.
Our initial investigations for hemospermia included a cystoscopy, which revealed a 9cm mass present within his bladder. The result of a biopsy of this mass was suggestive of adenocarcinoma of the seminal vesicle, because the tumor appeared to arise from the seminal vesicle epithelium. Computed tomography imaging revealed no evidence of metastatic spread. His serum prostate-specific antigen level was normal at presentation, but his serum CA-125 was 783kU/L. Following diagnosis, a referral was made to Charing Cross Hospital for specialist surgical input, resulting in a radical cystoprostatectomy and orchidectomy (required for local disease clearance) with the formation of an ileal conduit.
Histopathology confirmed the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of the seminal vesicle (Figure ) with immunohistochemical studies positive for CK-7 and CA-125, while staining for prostate-specific antigenand CK-20 was negative. The tumor was noted to be widely infiltrative, involving the bladder, perivesical fat, prostate, prostatic urethra and ductus deferens, with additional pelvic lymph node metastases and a positive biopsy from an inoperable peritoneal deposit.
In view of the biopsy-proven distant metastasis (the peritoneal deposit), adjuvant radiotherapy was considered inappropriate and the initial management was of expectant observation. After three months observation, updated imaging demonstrated disease progression with malignant lymphadenopathy in his pelvis and a recurrence of the intra-peritoneal nodule combined with a rising CA-125 level.
Androgen withdrawal was commenced using goserelin, but after an initial response of five months, the tumor demonstrated evidence of progression with rising CA-125 levels and enlarging lymphadenopathy. Despite the serological and radiological progression, our patient remained asymptomatic and a decision regarding the role of chemotherapy treatment in disease palliation was deferred. Approximately six weeks later, our patient presented as an emergency with a short history of nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. The admission investigations showed his previously normal creatinine levels to now be elevated at 537μmol/L and urine testing revealed proteinuria >300mg/dL and hematuria with red cell casts. Imaging did not demonstrate an obvious cause for this rise in creatinine: ultrasound showed no hydronephrosis or evidence of obstruction, and computed tomography continued to show enlarging abdominal lymphadenopathy but was not significantly altered from the imaging that took place six weeks earlier.
A renal biopsy (Figure ) showed pauci-immune crescentic glomerulonephritis with a segmental glomerular necrosis suggestive of ANCA-associated disease. A serum ANCA screen was ANCA IIF positive with a cytoplasmic ANCA pattern, while proteinase 3 and myeloperoxidase antibodies were negative.
Renal replacement therapy (hemodialysis) and immunosuppressive therapy was commenced with prednisolone, cyclophosphamide and rituximab but his renal function did not significantly recover. His glomerular filtration rate remained less than 10mL/min. A repeated renal biopsy performed in July 2011 after three months of therapy showed glomerular and tubulointerstitial scarring secondary to ANCA-mediated glomerulonephritis but no active ANCA-mediated disease.
An updated computed tomography scan performed at this point demonstrated significant tumor progression, with new sites of disease in his liver, bones and adrenal glands. In view of these findings and the challenges of delivering chemotherapy while on dialysis, attempts at disease palliation with chemotherapy were withheld. Our patient was referred to our community palliative care team for end-of-life care and died at home two months later.