A 19-year-old male was referred to our department after initial physical examination to a military training center as part of his compulsory enlistment for the Greek military service. During the examination, he reported having a solitary right kidney but was otherwise asymptomatic with no further relevant details. Neither a history of trauma nor previous surgeries were reported. Physical examination was unremarkable. He had no scars on the trunk and normal external genitalia. No pain provoked or masses felt during palpation. A digital rectal examination was not performed due to the patient’s preference. No sexual intercourse was reported at the time. Furthermore, no previous notable medical history for hereditary or acquired diseases was mentioned. The whole blood count and urinalysis results were within normal limits.
Abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis were performed. CT depicted only a right kidney with absence of left kidney . Additionally, CT demonstrated a large lobulated multicystic lesion of left seminal vesicle without enhancement on contrast-enhanced images . A saccular dilated ectopic ureter opening into the left cystic seminal vesicle and extending centrally up to the level of L3 vertebral body was revealed with a length of approximately 16 cm .
MRI was performed with a Siemens Magnetom Avanto (1.5 Tesla) MRI unit (Siemens Inc., Germany) using a pelvic phased-array coil. The imaging protocol comprised T1-weighted, T2-weighted, T2-weighted with fat saturation (FS) and T1-weighted FS images on axial, sagittal and coronal planes. Finally, images on T1-weighted FS sequence after intravenous administration of contrast medium (gadolinium) were added.
MRI demonstrated a large lobulated multicystic lesion in the anatomic region of left seminal vesicle. The lesion measured approximately 7.2 cm × 6.1 cm with low signal intensity on T2-weighted FS and high signal on T1-weighted images, corresponding to a dilated seminal vesicle cyst (SVC). The high signal intensity on T1-weighted sequences was strongly suggestive of proteinaceous or hematic content. In contrast, the normal right seminal vesicle exhibits high and intermediate signal intensity on T2-weighted FS and T1-weighted images, respectively, corresponding to fluid . An enlargement of the left ejaculatory duct communicating with the dilated SVC was well depicted on sagittal T2-weighted images . A saccular dilated ectopic left ureter with tortuous morphology, which was also filled with proteinaceous or hematic content, was revealed on all T1-weighted images, communicating with the SVC and extending centrally .
Unfortunately, the patient declined additional investigation by means of transrectal ultrasonography (TRUS), which might have assisted in clarifying the ejaculatory duct obstruction.
Semen analysis revealed cryptozoospermia (volume < 1 ml, pH 8.0, total sperm count 126 /ml) of obstructive origin. Nevertheless, fertility was not the patient’s primary concern. He declined further management, although he was made aware of the rarity of the syndrome and the possible future need of surgical management. Despite detailed analysis of the importance of cryopreservation and fertility maintenance, he had no intention to cryopreserve sperm or undergo microsurgical sperm retrieval at the time. Therefore, annual semen analysis was recommended for as long as he presented with altered fertility status. Although SVCs are generally benign and rarely symptomatic, cases of malignant transformation and late diagnosis due to the absence of warning symptoms have been described . Thus, we adequately informed our patient about the possibility of the carcinomatous evolution of SVCs. Finally, we advised him to undergo ultrasonographic monitoring on an annual basis.