A 74-year-old male, known case of diabetes mellitus (DM), hypertension (HTN), bronchial asthma and hypothyroidism who was diagnosed with para-umbilical hernia. The defect size was 1 × 2 cm, after of which he underwent a laparoscopic hernia repair at our hospital using a 15 × 20 cm eTPES mesh Bard® Composix™ E/X Mesh (Warwick, RI) with no complications. The patient had uneventful admission period and was discharged home in good condition at day 2 post-op.
Postoperatively day 10, he presented to the Emergency Room (ER) complaining of colicky abdominal pain in the right iliac fossa for 1 day associated with diarrhea (5 times/day). No other symptoms were reported by the patient. On physical examination, patient had normal vital signs and generalized mild abdominal tenderness. The maximum tenderness point was at the right iliac fossa. A Computed Tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis was done which showed diffuse wall thickening of the cecum and terminal ileum with abnormal configuration of the cecum and ill definition of its anterior wall with small free air worrisome for perforation . The decision was made in the ER to discharge him home on antibiotics.
Ten weeks post-operation, the patient presented again to his primary surgeon at our institute with the same complains where CT scan was ordered again and showed the same findings. Colonoscopy was ordered which showed small polyp that was removed and revealed benign adenoma, also showed a small solid structure in the cecum . Biopsy of that solid structure showed granulating tissues.
Three months after surgery, the patient returned back to his primary surgeon complaining of bleeding per rectum for which he underwent further investigations including second colonoscopy. The colonoscopy showed a polypoidal mass that was biopsied and showed granulating tissues . The patient was sent back to the surgeon’s clinic and reassured.
Ten months post operation, the patient was seen in the outpatient clinic complaining of persistent vague abdominal pain and bleeding per rectum. CT scan of abdomen and pelvis was repeated which demonstrated opacity at the level of the cecum with dense opacity medial to it of low attenuation and contains some air bubbles . Another colonoscopy was done which showed a small mass in the cecum that was biopsied and revealed to be granulating tissues, the patient was referred to the primary surgeon who reassured the patient and gave him a follow up appointment in one-year time.
Follow up after more than 2 years of surgery indicated iron deficiency anemia and B12 deficiency. Thus, a colonoscopy was scheduled but the patient could not tolerate the bowel prep. A CT Colonography was ordered which showed a foreign object in the colon, possibly caused bleeding per rectum where the patient was referred back to the surgeon . A CT scan revealed recurrence of a periumbilical hernia and thickening of the medial wall of the cecum with mesh graft material that could suggest a complication of the previous ventral hernia repair with extension of the mesh graft through the cecal wall . Exploratory laparotomy was offered to the patient but he refused and was discharged against medical advice.
Ten months later, we received the patient in our service for the first time when he was complaining of persistent abdominal pain and bleeding per rectum. After reviewing his previous investigations, we told the patient about the mesh graft migration and we discussed with him the mandatory of exploratory laparotomy and mesh graft removal with bowel resection and the possibility of stoma creation at any point of surgery. The patient was informed that he would have higher rate of hernia recurrence and a mesh graft will not be used in this procedure to avoid further complications like wound/mesh infection due to the risk of bowel contents spillage in the surgical field on top of his other comorbidities like DM and bronchial asthma.
The patient then was taken to surgery by his primary surgeon, and intra-operative findings revealed migration of almost 50% of the mesh graft size to the cecum and part of the mesh graft was eroding the distal part of ileum just proximal to the ileocecal junction. Adhesolysis and limited right hemicolectomy with ileocolic anastomosis was done. Fascia closure was obtained primarily without mesh graft application. Skin closure completed with skin clips . The patient had an uneventful recovery after revisions surgery without any perioperative complications. He was discharged home on postoperative readmission day 5 and followed up at 2 weeks and 3 months without any delayed complications or subjective complaints.