A 71-year-old woman visited our hospital with a complaint of left ophthalmalgia, left ptosis, and diplopia. Around six weeks before the first admission, she suddenly noticed left ophthalmalgia. A few days later, she noticed diplopia in all directions when she drove a car. Left ophthalmalgia had been gradually waned, but she noticed left ptosis . She had a history of chronic sinusitis, and a nasal voice had been persisted for several years. Alteration in visual field was not presented. On the first visit, neurological findings revealed left oculomotor, trochlear and abducent nerve palsies. Her pupils were round, not anisocoric, and prompt consensual and direct light reflexes. Pupillary reflexes were bilaterally normal. Basal laboratory test suggested the central hypothyroidism (TSH 1.37 μIU/ml (reference range, 0.61–4.23 μIU/ml), Free T3 (FT3) 1.10 pg/ml (reference range, 2.52–4.06 pg/ml), Free T4 (FT4) 0.33 ng/dl (reference range, 0.75–1.45 ng/dl). Two weeks later, she was admitted to our hospital. In the physical examination, her body mass index was 21.2 kg/m2 and blood pressure was 121/62 mmHg. Neither swelling nor of lymph node pain was founded. Slight left ptosis and diplopia (horizontal) remained, but the symptoms were improved compared with those at the first visit. The nasal voices persisted, but no other definite abnormalities were detected in physiological or neurological examination.
Initial laboratory test results were within the normal range of ACE, sIL-2R and IgG4, suggesting no obvious evidence of infiltrative disease such as sarcoidosis, lymphoma or IgG4-related disease . Biochemistry results were otherwise unremarkable, as shown in Table . Basal endocrine test showed a decrease in FT3, FT4, and LH . Low levels of FT3 and FT4 with anti-Tg antibody positivity suggested the presence of Hashimoto's disease. However, sustained TSH level for low FT3 and FT4 levels suggested the co-presence of central hypothyroidism. To investigate the pituitary function further, CRH (100 μg) /TRH (200 μg) /GnRH (100 μg) and GHRP-2 (100 μg) load tests were performed . ACTH and cortisol showed normal reactions after CRH load. TSH had a peak value of more than 6 μIU/ml, but a delayed response to the peak value after TRH load, suggesting central hypothyroidism. Both LH and FSH had a delayed response to the peak value after GnRH load, suggesting central hypogonadism. GHRP-2 load test revealed a low peak value of GH (less than 9 ng/ml), suggesting severe adult GH deficiency. Together, pituitary endocrine test revealed partial hypopituitarism. Oral administration of 25 μg levothyroxine per day was initiated.
Initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the hypothalamus and pituitary gland indicated a heterogeneous enhancement of supra-sellar regions with a mass on the left sphenoid sinus wall and involvement of the left cavernous sinus . The pituitary gland was homogeneously enhanced, and slightly compressed by the infiltrated mass from the sphenoidal sinus. The stalk was median and not enlarged . Hyperintensity of posterior pituitary on T1 weighted intensity was preserved . Purulent reservoir and polyp-like mass were detected in the left sphenoidal and frontal sinuses. CT also showed the purulent reservoir in left sphenoidal and frontal sinuses, as shown in MRI. Furthermore, the osteolytic lesion of the sphenoid bone was observed as shown in Fig. E. These images suggested the presence of the infiltrative neoplastic lesion. However, because all the symptoms related to cranial nerve palsies were gradually waned, biopsy of the mass at the sphenoidal sinus was not performed based on the discussion with the patient with specialists of the otorhinolaryngology and neurosurgery. At around four weeks after the first admission, most of the symptoms had disappeared, except very slight left ptosis .
Around seven weeks later, she noticed the worsening of the left ptosis and had high fever, cervical lymph node (CLN) swellings, and night sweats. She was secondary admitted to our hospital . Laboratory tests revealed elevated serum sIL-2R (781 U/ml, reference range, 122–496 U/ml) and LDH (467 U/l, reference range, 124–222 U/l) levels. Since hematological or otorhinolaryngological disease was strongly suspected, CLN biopsy was performed. Immunohistological examination of CLN revealed the presence of CD20, BCL-6, focal CD5 positive but CD23 and cyclin D negative B-cells. Cell proliferation index Ki-67 was about 90%. Based on the pathophysiological findings, she was diagnosed as having DLBCL. In cerebrospinal fluid analyses, cytology examination revealed no evidence of malignant cells. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) revealed elevated uptake in systemic lymph nodes, including the left sphenoidal and cervical lesions, which corresponded with the osteolytic lesion of the sphenoid bone and CLN swelling lesions, respectively, but not in the pituitary gland. After diagnosis of DLBCL, she was treated with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin hydrochloride, vincristine sulfate, and dexamethasone plus rituximab (R-CHOP) for six courses in total. After initiation of chemotherapy, there was improvement of all the symptoms associated with systemic lymphoma except hypopituitarism. Elevated serum sIL-2R and LDH levels were decreased to within the normal range .
Ten months after the initiation of chemotherapy, endocrine function test was re-examined and revealed sustained severe GH deficiency and central hypogonadism, but improvement of central hypothyroidism. After cessation of levothyroxine, her thyroid function remained within normal range (TSH 3.19 μIU/ml (reference range, 0.61–4.23 μIU/ml), free T4 0.98 ng/dl (reference range, 0.75–1.45 ng/dl)). MRI showed intact pituitary and nasopharyngeal site. PET/CT showed almost complete remission of elevated uptake at the left sphenoidal lesion . One year after the treatment, there has been no recurrence of DLBCL nor cranial nerve palsies.