A 74-year-old man with sick sinus syndrome and a St. Jude Abbott DCPPM, placed 8 months prior, presented for routine device check. Presenting rhythm was atrial paced (AP) ventricular sensed (VS) at 70 b.p.m. Atrial and ventricular impedance, sensing, and thresholds were appropriate and consistent with prior values. Device settings were DDDR with base rate 70 b.p.m., maximum tracking rate 105 b.p.m., and maximum sensor rate 130 b.p.m., and paced and sensed AV delays were 250 ms. Ventricular intrinsic preference was enabled, allowing intermittent AV delay to promote intrinsic conduction and mitigate ventricular pacing. A ventricular high rate episode with corresponding electrogram (EGM) was noted . This episode commenced with a 1:1 atrial tachycardia (AT) at a rate of 150 b.p.m. with prolonged AV conduction, prompting AMS from DDDR to DDIR. Unexpectedly, this was followed by a period of rapid atrial pacing at 180–190 b.p.m., well exceeding the maximum tracking and sensor rates. Notably, there was no atrial anti-tachycardia pacing programmed on this device, and the native AV conduction was longer than the programmed AV delay. In addition, the observed AV interval during rapid atrial pacing appeared implausibly short. To understand the mechanism for this phenomenon, one must consider how pacemaker timing cycle parameters determine the pacing rate.
In ventricular-based timing modes, the cycle length between two atrial-paced events is determined by the calculated VAI, not the A–A interval as in atrial-based timing. This calculation depends on the base rate, or sensor indicated rate, and the programmed paced AV delay. This patient’s device was initially set to DDDR. While in an episode of AT, the device mode switched from atrial-based timing mode to a ventricular-based timing mode (DDIR). As shown in , the initial AT cycle length was ∼395 ms triggering AMS to DDIR, and intrinsic AV time was prolonged at 285 ms. Then, a perfectly timed premature atrial complex (PAC) fell within the post-ventricular atrial blanking period (PVAB) and was not sensed, thus failing to reset the VAI timer. With further AV nodal decrement, this PAC conducted with an AV time of 320 ms. However, the calculated VAI (atrial escape interval) had already elapsed at 258 ms, leading to an AP beat just before the PAC conducted to a ventricular-sensed event. This ‘pacemaker crossover’ created a short ‘pseudo-AV interval’ of 66 ms, and the ventricular-sensed event from the conducted PAC resets the VAI timer just after the AP beat. Ventriculo-atrial interval was then reached again at ∼260 ms, triggering another AP event with even slower AV time of 398 ms, once again ‘crossing over’ with AP occurring before VS event from the preceding paced beat. This consistent but prolonged AV conduction led to repetitive crossover with short pseudo-AV intervals resetting VAI. The VAI was calculated based on sensed activity, due to enabled rate responsive pacing, and an assumed paced AV time of 250 ms, leading to atrial pacing well above the max sensor rate.
This event was stored as a ventricular high rate episode because the ventricular rate exceeded 175 b.p.m.; however, it lasted <20 s, and the stored EGM did not capture the termination. Presumably, it terminated with an atrial-paced beat that failed to conduct, or due to a spontaneous PAC or pemature ventricular contraction. Importantly, there were no associated symptoms with this brief episode, nor were there any other similar episodes recorded before or within 6 months following. To prevent this episode from happening again, multiple programming changes could be made including changing the AMS from DDIR to a non-sensor setting such as DDI or VVI; reducing the maximum sensor driven rate, or shortening the programmed AV delay. However, each of these changes would have other implications. Therefore, another option would be to make no programming changes given that this was a single short episode with no associated symptoms. Even if lightning did strike twice, these episodes would be unlikely to sustain for any significant length of time given reliance on extremely long yet necessarily fixed 1:1 AV conduction. In the case of this patient, the company representative was contacted and agreed with our proposed mechanism and potential programming changes to prevent recurrence. However, ultimately no changes were made, and the phenomenon has not recurred since this initial episode.