A 75-year-old, male patient with metastatic RCC was admitted to our hospital with new-onset dysphagia and weight loss. His first surgical resection of RCC was a right nephrectomy with adrenalectomy which he underwent 20 years ago, and the second resection was a left partial nephrectomy for metachronous primary left RCC performed 12 years ago. Nine years later, computed tomography (CT) showed a 4-mm, early enhancing tumor in the pancreatic head and a 6-mm, early enhancing tumor in the pancreatic tail. PM-RCC was diagnosed. Total pancreatectomy was proposed, but he declined it. He also declined receiving tyrosine kinase inhibitors and interferon therapy was started. Although its adverse events were minimal, the patient discontinued the treatment on his own discretion. He declined any further anticancer drug therapy and was followed up every 3 months as an outpatient. The pancreatic metastases gradually increased in size and number, but were asymptomatic. Multiple pulmonary metastases also appeared 3 years ago, and dyslexia caused by a brain metastasis developed 9 months ago. The brain metastasis was resected 6 months ago. The patient also had a history of a total gastrectomy with Roux-en Y reconstruction and a splenectomy for gastric cancer 23 years earlier.
His oral intake of food was insufficient, and his Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status was 2. The laboratory tests on the day before the operation showed the patient had mild anemia (Hb 9.1 g/dL) and hypoalbuminemia (Alb 2.6 g/dL). His blood coagulation, kidney and liver function, and electrolytes were normal. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy demonstrated a massive, reddish tumor on the distal side of the anastomotic site in the lumen of the jejunal limb . CT revealed that one of the metastases in the pancreatic tail had markedly enlarged compared with previous CT. PM-RCC invaded the jejunal limb and extended into the lumen. A tumor thrombus completely filled the jejunal limb, increasing its diameter to 7 cm. The proximal side of the jejunal limb had also expanded, with the tumor thrombus causing bowel occlusion . Although preoperative biopsy of the tumor was not performed because of concern about hemorrhagic complications, based on CT findings and course of tumor growth, jejunal limb obstruction due to a tumor thrombus from PM-RCC was diagnosed. The size and number of the pulmonary metastases were stable, and no new metastases were detected.
Palliative surgery was considered as means of ameliorating the patient’s symptoms. However, because the tumor thrombus was located at a site immediately distal to the esophagojejunal anastomosis, bypass surgery would have been difficult. To remove the bowel occlusion, distal pancreatectomy with concomitant resection of the jejunal limb and re-anastomosis were considered to be necessary. Although the patient had multiple RCC metastases, his general condition remained fairly good, and tumor progression was slow. After the surgical indications were discussed in detail, palliative resection of the tumor thrombus was chosen as the method of treatment.
Exploratory abdominal surgery revealed no peritoneal metastases. First, adhesiolysis of the upper abdominal cavity was done. The jejunal limb showed enlargement due to the tumor thrombus, which extended from the pancreatic tail, and the jejunal wall showed thinning and pallor . Intraoperative sonography (IOUS) showed a massive pancreatic mass extending into the jejunal limb . To remove the patient’s symptoms, jejunal limb resection was performed concomitantly with a distal pancreatectomy. After dividing the pancreas using reinforced staples at the site closest to the tumor based on IOUS findings, the jejunal limb was resected from a point proximal to the jejunoesophageal anastomosis to the distal side of the tumor thrombus . The jejunal limb remnant was approximately 30 cm long and was re-anastomosed to the esophagus using circular staplers while avoiding excessive tension. Blood perfusion at the anastomotic site and transverse colon was confirmed by indocyanine green (ICG) fluorescence imaging .
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful except for an intraabdominal infection, which was treated with intravenous antibiotics. He was discharged after achieving sufficient oral intake on postoperative day 24. Histologic examination revealed metastatic RCC of the pancreas involving the jejunum . At a follow-up examination in the outpatient clinic at postoperative 8 months, he had no gastrointestinal symptoms.