A 69-year-old woman developed a sudden drooping on the left side of the face while having dinner with her family. Her daughter noticed slurred speech and alerted emergency medical services immediately. The patient was pre-announced to the stroke service by the responding emergency medical technician and immediately admitted to the emergency room. Her home medication consisted of pantoprazole only. Upon admission to the emergency room, the patient was alert but slightly confused. Further neurological examination revealed a left-sided hemiparesis and motor speech disorder. The remaining cranial nerves were unaffected. No sensory or coordinative dysfunctions were detected. Muscle stretch reflexes revealed no lateral differences, and plantar reflexes were normal (NIHSS score: 4 points). Shaved hair over the right temple exposed a well-healing, 10-cm-long recent wound. The patient reported having had brain surgery two weeks earlier, but upon further questioning denied a preceding trauma, infection, tumor disease, or cerebral bleeding.
The non-contrast computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed hypodense areas in the circulation of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) with territorial pattern (mainly pre-Rolandic, but also Rolandic, parietal, and insular branches), moderate swelling, and hemorrhagic transformation of the anterior portion (see Fig. ). A vascular clip in projection on the middle cerebral artery was visible. There was no sign of a subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). The CT-angiography revealed no high-grade stenosis or vessel occlusion of the cerebral blood flow in the area of the right middle cerebral artery, even though the presence of a vascular clip reduced reliability of assessment. The cerebral duplex ultrasonography/transcranial Doppler sonography (TCD) showed, in contrast to the left side, markedly increased blood flow velocities in the right MCA with mean values up to 180 cm/s (Vmax up to 300 cm/s), while the blood flow in all of the other cerebral arteries was undisturbed. The increased velocities were traceable along the entire M1 segment as well as in the M2 segments of the right MCA. In contrast to the preoperative transfemoral catheter angiography (TFCA), the subsequent right internal carotid angiogram showed clear signs of vasospasm along the M1 and M2 segments of the right MCA (see Fig. ). However, neither delayed cerebral blood flow nor hypoperfusion were found. A vessel narrowing with consecutive stenosis due to a suboptimally placed clip was ruled out.
The patient’s recent medical history included the microsurgical treatment of a right-sided MCA aneurysm 12 days prior. The patient had never experienced any episodes of uncommon or severe headaches. The unruptured intracranial aneurysm (UIA) was found incidentally via magnetic resonance imaging ordered after the patient complained of a short period of slight gait disturbances. To avoid an SAH and consecutive complications like vasospasms, the patient elected surgical treatment (see Fig. ). Endovascular management was not feasible due to the configuration of the aneurysm. The review of the operative report and the medical discharge letter attested to an uneventful perioperative course. Clipping was managed by keyhole approach. A craniotomy 30 mm in diameter was performed over the right Sylvian fissure. The aneurysm was dissected after securing proximal control of the distal M1 segment of the right MCA. Temporal clipping of the M1 was not necessary. After clip placement, appropriate flow in all distal segments was confirmed by indocyanine green video-angiography and micro-Doppler. The postoperative imaging showed no sign of decreased cerebral blood flow. The patient was discharged seven days after surgery without neurological deficits. No other vascular diseases were known.
After admission antithrombotic treatment with acetylsalicylic acid was begun. In accordance with guidelines for the treatment of subarachnoid hemorrhage and vasospasm, nimodipine was added. Periodically performed transcranial duplex sonography showed a further increase of blood flow velocity in the MCA and its branches for four days before a continuous decrease and normalization of flow velocity was observed. Treatment with nimodipine was continued for an additional two weeks. Within this time the symptoms disappeared completely. The patient made a full recovery, which is remarkable in such a major stroke. After 11 days the woman was discharged with no symptoms.