A four-year-old girl who had been experiencing fever, frequency, and dysuria for a week was brought to the pediatric clinic. Her parents also mentioned having a headache beginning from 5 days ago. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain were not mentioned. She was first in birth order and was delivered vaginally at 39 gestational weeks. Her birth weight was 3630 g, and measurements of her weight (16 kg), height (98 cm), and head circumference (48 cm) were normal. Her family did not recently have any gastrointestinal or urinary complaints. She was toilet trained but had infrequent voiding. She had no recent history of traveling or playing in rivers or seawater. The mother of the patient mentioned the patient's consumption of salmon over the last month, which did not result in any gastrointestinal issues. A common goldfish was kept in a tank in residence for almost 2 weeks, and it died about a week ago. The patient’s parents stated that she had put her hand into the fish tank several times. The child had been hospitalized twice for UTI since last year. During the second hospitalization, which was 8 months ago, a voiding cystourethrogram was conducted for the patient, and no signs of vesicoureteral reflux were observed.
On arrival, the patient's general condition was good. Her vital signs were heart rate of 98 beats per minute, 115/65 mmHg blood pressure, respiratory rate of 23 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 97% in ambient air, and 38.6 °C axillary temperature. During the examinations, no costovertebral tenderness was detected. Neck rigidity was also negative. The examination of the abdomen and genital area revealed no notable findings.
According to a urinalysis performed four days prior at a different center, the patient's urine specimen contained 3–4 red blood cells, many white blood cells, and many bacteria per high-power field, as well as 1+ protein and positive nitritite. Urine culture (UC) had also been performed, and the results revealed E. tarda species of more than 100,000 colony-forming units resistant to cefixime, ciprofloxacin, cotrimoxazole, and nalidixic acid, but sensitive to meropenem, tetracycline, and nitrofurantoin. However, the blood culture was negative. According to a later call made to the center's microbiologist for diagnostic information, the specimen was cultured on MacConkey and blood agar containing 5% sheep red blood cell, and it was later determined to be E. tarda via chemical tests as follows: The organism was motile and rod-shaped, and hydrogen sulfide production and indole production tests were positive for the organism. Mannitol could not be fermented by the organism, but glucose could. Additionally, the urease, O-nitrophenyl-beta-d-galactoside, cytochrome oxidase, citrate, and Vogeus-Proskauer (VP) tests yielded negative results. Figures , and illustrate a portion of the urine culture findings.
The patient's parents had been advised to bring their child to the children's hospital for treatment. Prior to admittance, the patient had not been administered any medication. The patient was hospitalized due to her symptoms and the above tests. Initial blood tests revealed a white blood cell count of 11.93 × 103/µL with a differential of 59% neutrophils and 36% lymphocytes, hemoglobin level of 13.32 gr/dL, platelet count of 359 × 103/µL, blood sugar level of 96 mg/dL, and C-reactive protein level of 3+. Due to the patient's headache complaint, which did not improve despite medication use at home, a magnetic resonance imaging of the brain was performed, which indicated no abnormalities.
The patient was administered 600 mg of intravenous ceftriaxone every 12 h along with fluid therapy. On the second day of hospitalization, due to the elimination of fever and improvement in the patient's symptoms, the patient was discharged with the instruction to take nitrofurantoin suspension 25/5 mg, 9 cc every 8 h for 1 week. After a week, the urinalysis results were as follows: 3–4 white blood cells, 0–1 red blood cell, and no bacteria per high power field, and also negative protein and nitrite. The UC revealed no growth after 24 h.