An 87-year-old Asian woman in good general health presented with a progressively enlarging mass located in her left preauricular region. Fine needle aspiration (FNA) cytology analysis performed in the clinic suggested malignant cells of uncertain origin, but the tumors showed a rapid and consistent regression after FNA. During six months of observation, the tumor regrew and the patient was referred to our hospital.
A physical examination revealed a 55-mm tumor located in the parotid with extension to the retroparotid area, and swelling of her left laterocervical lymph node. A computed tomography scan showed a peripheral enhanced mass in her right parotid gland. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and iso-high signal intensity on T2-weighted images. The images showed the lesion to be clearly circumscribed, with homogeneous hypo-iso signal intensity on T1-weighted images and heterogeneous high signal intensity on T2-weighted images. The tumor demonstrated circumscribed and heterogeneous enhancement on gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted images . Computed tomography scans of her thorax and abdomen did not reveal involvement of other sites.
FNA was performed again and a cytological examination revealed a Papanicolaou classification of Class V, suggesting SmCC. A total parotidectomy and modified neck dissection were performed. On histopathology, the tumor showed diffuse growth with confluent necrosis in the salivary gland. The tumor cells had scant cytoplasm and hyperchromatic nuclei without prominent nucleoli. Mitotic figures were frequently observed . Neoplasmic elements reveal positivity for cluster of differentiation 56, neuron specific enolase, synaptophysin and a dotted staining pattern with cytokeratin 20 . Based on our histopathological findings, a diagnosis of a Merkel-cell-like SmCC of the parotid gland was made. Additional studies were positive for Maspin.
Our patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and no postoperative radiotherapy was administered. The nine-year clinical follow-up, which is the longest follow-up of head and neck SmCC in our knowledge, revealed no locoregional recurrence or distant metastasis.