A 69-year-old Hispanic male with no documented past medical history presented to the emergency department with a 3-week history of shortness of breath, intermittent chest pain, and lower extremity edema. Initial vital signs were notable for an elevated blood pressure of 150/86 mmHg and a heart rate of 73 bpm. Jugular venous distention was markedly elevated to 12 cm of water (cm H2O), alongside sparse bibasilar crackles on pulmonary exam and 1 + pitting pedal oedema. Brain natriuretic peptide was as high as 881 pg/mL [reference range (RR): 0–100 pg/mL] with a high sensitivity troponin I of 16 ng/L [RR: 0–20 ng/L], which peaked to 18 ng/L 2 h later. Chest radiograph revealed trace pulmonary vascular congestion and cardiomegaly. Electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus rhythm with non-specific T-wave abnormalities . Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated a left ventricular systolic ejection fraction (EF) of 68%. Left ventricular diastolic function was found to include an E/A ratio of 2.91, E/e′ ratio of 11.15, and deceleration time of 151 msec. Additional findings included a dilated left and right atrium with severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR), moderate mitral regurgitation (MR), malcoaptation of the tricuspid valve leaflets, and a myxomatous mitral valve (, , ). There was a moderately enlarged right ventricle with moderately reduced systolic function and evidence of pulmonary hypertension (see , ). The patient was subsequently hospitalized for newly diagnosed acute decompensated right heart failure with preserved left ventricular EF.
Two days after the initiation of aggressive diuresis with intravenous furosemide, a right heart catheterization demonstrated mildly elevated right heart pressures (mean right atrial 8 mmHg, right ventricle 31/8 mmHg, pulmonary artery 31/12 mmHg, and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 10 mmHg). A coronary angiogram revealed normal coronary arteries. The aetiology of this patient’s heart failure remained unclear. Given the significant valvular abnormalities, thyroid studies were sent for further workup. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) was significantly low at <0.010 uIU/mL (RR: 0.45–4.12 uIU/mL), along with an elevated free T4 of 1.96 ng/dL (RR: 0.60–1.12 ng/dL).
Subsequent serological data revealed slightly elevated thyroid peroxidase antibody of 11 IU/mL [RR: <9 IU/mL], negative thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI index <1.0), and negative thyroglobulin antibody (<1 IU/mL). Thyroid ultrasound showed a 4.9 cm lesion in the left thyroid lobe . The patient’s thyrotoxicosis was believed to likely be attributed to toxic adenoma. It was determined that the patient’s heart failure and valve abnormalities were likely consistent with thyrotoxic heart disease. Methimazole 10 mg once daily was initiated for treatment in addition to furosemide for diuresis and carvedilol and losartan for hypertension. The patient was discharged to a shelter, but unfortunately, he was lost to follow-up and did not obtain a TTE after completion of treatment due to social circumstances.