A 43-year-old female presented to the Department of Neurology of the Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University in March 2021. She was diagnosed with WD 12 years ago. Physical examination showed the patient had reduced facial expression and impaired articulation. The patient's left hand mildly trembled when she was asked to raise it flatly. She was also found to have increased extremity muscular tension, upper extremity tendon reflex +++++, and was unable to walk straight. Laboratory tests showed a low ceruloplasmin level (23 mg/L, reference 200–600 mg/L), and no abnormal serum copper concentration was found. Skull MRI showed hepatolenticular degeneration. Abdominal ultrasound revealed liver cirrhosis and splenomegaly. The patient was hospitalized and given sodium dimercaptopropane sulfonate for copper removal, zinc gluconate to inhibit copper metabolism, and supportive treatment such as amantadine and vitamin C supplements. During hospitalization, the patient complained of progressive bilateral vision decrease over 10 years, for which she was referred to our Eye Center. She volunteered that the night blindness began in early childhood, and her parents were close relatives. Her parents and sister were healthy, denying a similar medical history. The patient's best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) at presentation was 0.8 (logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution, logMAR) in both eyes, and intraocular pressure (Non-contact tonometer, Topcon CT-80, Topcon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) was 10.0 mmHg in the right eye (OD) and 13.5 mmHg in the left eye (OS), respectively. Slit lamp biomicroscopy (SL-D8Z; Topcon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) revealed bilateral corneal K-F ring and sunflower-like cataract . Fundus photography (TRC-NW8; Topcon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) showed thinner retinal blood vessels and retinal osteocyte-like pigmentation in bilateral eyes . Cystoid macular edema (CME) and outer retina atrophy was observed in both eyes via optical coherence tomography (OCT) . Visual field examination (Octopus 900, Haag-Streit, USA) revealed binocular tunnel vision . The patient was subsequently diagnosed with WD combined with binocular RP and complicated cataract.
After informed consent form the patient, phacoemulsification and posterior chamber intraocular lens implantation was performed in the right and left eye, respectively. Postoperatively, topical Tobradex (Tobramycin and Dexamethasone, Alcon) and Pranoprofen (Senju Pharmaceutical Co.Ltd, Japan) eyedrops were prescribed four times a day for anti-inflammatory treatment. Drug therapy for CME was not started before the surgery, and there was no significant change in the central retinal thickness (CRT) of both eyes during the 8-months follow-up. Unfortunately, there was limited improvement in her visual acuity. The BCVA remains 0.8 logMAR for both eyes at her last visit .
Whole exome sequencing (WES, by Beijing Giantmed medical diagnostics Lab) was performed on the patient and her parents . The results showed an ATP7B gene c.G2333T: p.R778L homozygous mutation, CNGA1 gene c.C453A: p.Y151X homozygous mutation, RP2 gene c.T248C: p.l83T heterozygous mutation, and SNRNP200 gene c.C1898T: p.A633V heterozygous mutation in the patient . Both parents were heterozygous carriers of ATP7B and CNGA1 genes. The mother was of the RP2 heterozygous genotype, and the father was of the SNRNP200 heterozygous genotype, which were both found in the patient. However, the parents did not show any WD or RP-related manifestations.