A 50-year-old man was referred to our institution with several years of right heart failure symptoms, AF, and liver disease of unknown aetiology. He was a fisherman and had contact with contaminated water in the past. He had lower limb oedema, significant ascites, jugular vein distention, and 3/6 pansystolic murmur heard loudest at the left lower sternal edge suggestive of tricuspid regurgitation. The patient came from the northeastern region of Brazil, where there is high prevalence of schistosomiasis. Considering the local epidemiology and the presence of hepatosplenomegaly, schistosomiasis was suspected. Due to the symptoms of right heart failure mentioned, cardiac investigations were performed as a primary cause of the liver disease.
The electrocardiogram showed AF rhythm and there was cardiomegaly noted on chest radiograph, with gross enlargement of the right atrial shadow. Blood tests showed thrombocytopenia of 75 000/mm3 [normal values (NV): 150 000–400 000], normal renal function and liver enzymes, and brain natriuretic peptide of 198 pg/mL (NV ≤ 35). The TTE showed a left ventricle of normal dimensions with a preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) (, ). However, the RV cavity was small secondary to a large homogeneous hypoechoic mass with evidence of severe tricuspid insufficiency, secondary to dilatation of the annulus, and severe tethering of the valve leaflets. Besides, the TTE exhibited an intracavitary thrombus adhered to the roof of the right atrium (RA; ; , ). The cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging showed severe RA dilation. This examination confirmed that RV had small cavity with reduced indexed end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes (38 and 13 mL/m2, respectively), normal systolic function (EF 65%), and moderate pericardial effusion . The late gadolinium enhancement sequence showed diffuse and heterogeneous subendocardial fibrosis in the RV apex . The patient was diagnosed with EMF and schistosomiasis by positive IgG ELISA and treated with praziquantel, but declined endocardiectomy. His heart failure symptoms improved on diuretics (furosemide 120 mg/day, spironolactone 50 mg/day, and hydrochlorothiazide 50 mg/day). In addition, the patient was commenced on warfarin with adequate international normalized ratio control for the presence of AF and thrombus.