A 37-year-old female patient was admitted to local hospital on January 28, 2023, due to chest tightness and dyspnea for 4 h. The patient reported no previous history of HIV/AIDS, organ transplantation, corticosteroid use, or immunosuppressive medications. Before admission, the woman had a car accident and drowned in a private fishpond. After being rescued, she developed chest tightness and breathing difficulties which were assumed to be due to water aspiration. The lung computed tomography (CT) scan showed bilateral pulmonary edema with multiple high-density nodular shadows. The head CT showed no apparent abnormalities . She was then started on corticosteroids, diuretics, and antibiotics for 12 days which was discontinued when her respiratory symptoms were improved. However, she developed a new headache and subsequently, rapid cognitive decline, aphasia, lethargy, and impaired consciousness. Physical examination revealed significant muscle weakness in the left limb (grade 2), compared to her right limb (grade 4). The second head CT showed multiple annular high-density shadows with slightly low-density shadows around it. A head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple ring reinforcement nodules with cerebral edema, which raised the concern for multiple intracranial metastatic lesions. Thus, a positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET/CT) was performed and revealed multiple hypermetabolic nodules within the cranium and lungs, suggesting a high probability of infection. The metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) and culture of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) detected no specific pathogen.
After a course of antibiotics treatment, her headache aggravated, fever and vomiting occurred, and muscle strength further decreased (left limb: grade 1, right limb: grade 3). Additionally, decreased vision of the left eye and mild conjunctival congestion appeared. She was then transferred to the Department of Neurosurgery of our hospital.
The puncture drainage of intracranial lesions was performed and the pus was tested by mNGS. A total of 600ul brain abscess drainage fluid samples were collected and mixed by glass beads. DNA was extracted by column extraction method. The libraries were constructed using end repair, and specific tag sequences were introduced at the end of each library. The size of library inserts to be sequenced was determined using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (G2939BA, Agilent, USA). DNA nanospheres were prepared using a one-step DNB preparation kit (1,000,025,076, Huada Gene Technology Co. Ltd, Shenzhen, China). Sequencing was performed on the MGISEQ-200 sequencing platform. Then the reads containing sequencing adapter, low quality, short (length < 35 bp) and low complexity were removed, and aligned to the human reference genome (hg38) using STAR software (v2.7.1a) to remove the host reads. The remaining non-host reads were searched and classified against four self-built pathogenic microorganism genome databases, including bacteria, fungi, parasites and viruses. Finally, S. apiospermum was detected with a coverage of 99.45%. At our hospital, the patient was conscious, but with difficulty speaking, grade 2 muscle strength of the left limb, grade 4 for the right limb, and positive Babinski’s sign on the left side. The neck rigidity was present and the Kernig sign was positive. Antifungal therapy started (voriconazole 200 mg bid, ivgtt). Dehydration (mannitol) to reduce intracranial pressure and low-dose glucocorticoids (methylprednisolone 40 mg qd, ivgtt) were also used. Two days later, the patient developed severe conjunctival congestion of the left eye with no light perception, and in less than one day, the left eye rapidly progressed to yellow-green vitreous opacity, with an unclear pupil .
Ophthalmic physical examination revealed no light perception in the left eye, hyperemia and Tyndall’s. The cornea was clear, however, a thick exudative membrane in the pupil was present, and the fundus was unclear. Eye ultrasound showed vitreous opacity in the left eye. The patient was treated with fluconazole and voriconazole eye drops combined with antibiotics. The infection was resolved, but her visual acuity was not improved. One week after the antifungal treatment, a head MRI showed that the brain lesions became smaller in size, however severe edema around the lesions was still present. The lung CT showed the lung lesions were significantly improved compared to the previous CT. The headache and dizziness were alleviated, and there was no significant change in muscle strength. Two weeks later, an orbital MRI showed an abnormal signal of the left eyeball with enhancement. The patient’s muscle strength was significantly improved as the muscle strength of the left limb was grade 4-, and the right limb was grade 5. Two weeks later, the head MRI and lung CT showed that the abscess lesions became smaller. The pupil of the left eye was clear, but the eyeball atrophy and vision did not improve . After discharge, the patient was prescribed to continue voriconazole (200 mg bid po) and rehabilitation therapy.
The patient has been followed up for over 7 months, and the brain and lung lesions were smaller than before, but have not completely disappeared . Figure summarizes the timeline of the case.