A 7-year-old neutered male, mixed-breed cat presented with subcutaneous oedema and
erythema of the right axilla extending to the abdomen, and swelling of the right
forelimb .
Clinical examinations revealed mild fever (39.7°C) and a subcutaneous soft mass (3.0
× 2.0 cm) on the back. A complete blood count revealed anaemia (packed cell volume
[PCV] 26%) and thrombocytopenia (96,000 platelets/μl) . A blood smear examination
revealed a small number of large atypical round cells. The cells had
small-to-moderate amounts of basophilic cytoplasm and large nuclei with finely
diffused chromatin and several nucleoli. The cells rarely contained fine azurophilic
granules in the cytoplasm . Examinations for feline immunodeficiency
virus antibodies and feline leukaemia virus antigens were not performed. Thoracic
and abdominal radiography and abdominal ultrasonography showed no significant
findings. Cytological analysis with fine-needle aspiration from the subcutaneous
lesion of the right axilla and the dorsal subcutaneous mass revealed the presence of
large atypical round cells. The cells had small-to-moderate amounts of basophilic
cytoplasm and irregular nuclear membranes, and were occasionally binucleated . The nucleus had one
or several distinct nuclei with finely diffused chromatin. Azurophilic granules were
not observed in the cytoplasm. The cells were thought to be lymphoid cells and the
presumed diagnosis was lymphoma. A PCR-based clonality analysis for TCR-gamma (TCRγ)
and immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) genes with DNA extracted from the subcutaneous
lesions revealed no clonal rearrangement of both genes. All PCR products were
assessed by heteroduplex analysis as previously described.
The cat was treated with prednisolone at a dose of 1.0–1.5 mg/kg/day and
L-asparaginase at a dose of 400 U/kg, four times in total at various intervals. The
treatment led to a transient improvement of oedema and regression of the dorsal
mass. However, the cat died after 78 days of initial treatment owing to loss of
appetite, severe anaemia (PCV 8.9%) and liver dysfunction. A complete necropsy was
performed on the day. At necropsy, the cat presented with severe jaundice and an
oedematous subcutaneous mass in the right chest. Moderate hepatomegaly,
splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy of the mediastinal (1.2 × 0.8 cm) and left axilla (0.8
× 0.8 cm), and haemorrhage in multiple organs were also observed .
The subcutaneous tumour tissue, visceral organs and brain were fixed in 10%
neutral-buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 4 μm thickness, and
stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Immunohistochemistry was performed using
primary antibodies listed in . The following normal tissues without lesions were used as
positive controls: normal thymus, spleen, lymph node, bone marrow, liver, intestine
and brain. A horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-labelled polymer system (EnVision+ System;
Dako) was used as a secondary antibody. Labelled complexes were visualised with the
3,3′-diaminobenzidine chromogen, and the sections were counterstained with
haematoxylin. Double immunofluorescence was performed on normal thymus, spleen and
liver tissues of cats to detect CD56+ and CD3− cells. Alexa
488-conjugated donkey anti-mouse IgG (1:200; Invitrogen) and Alexa 594-conjugated
donkey anti-rabbit IgG (1:200; Invitrogen) were used as secondary antibodies and
counterstained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (Vector Laboratories). Western
blotting analysis was performed to confirm the reactivity with an appropriate
molecular weight antigen of anti-CD56 and anti-CD57 antibodies using feline and
canine brain tissues. The membranes were incubated with each antibody (1:1000) at 4°C overnight,
and then incubated with HRP-conjugated sheep anti-mouse IgG (1:5000) (Bethyl
Laboratories, Montgomery, TX) at room temperature for 1 h.
Histologically, extensive necrosis, oedema and focal infiltration of large atypical
round cells were observed in the subcutaneous mass . The tumour cells had scarce
cytoplasm, an irregular nuclear membrane, coarse nuclear chromatin and a distinct
nucleolus. The cells were occasionally binucleated, and anisocytosis and
anisokaryosis were moderate. The nucleus of the tumour cell was approximately three
times the diameter of a red blood cell. The tumour cells were also observed in the
liver, spleen, bone marrow and lymph nodes of the mediastinal and left axilla. In
the liver, the tumour cells were diffusely infiltrated . Multifocal haemorrhage and bile
plugs in the capillary bile duct were also observed. In the spleen, neoplastic cells
were diffusely infiltrated and replaced the red pulp, with multifocal haemorrhage.
The bone marrow was hypoplastic and the tumour cells were diffusely infiltrated,
comprising approximately 10% of nucleated cells . The tumour cells diffusely
infiltrated the sinus with haemorrhage in the mediastinal and left axilla lymph
nodes. The number of mitotic figures was two per field (× 400 magnification).
Immunohistochemically, in normal cat tissues, CD3 labelling was detected in the cell
membrane and cytoplasm of lymphocytes . CD56+ lymphoid cells were
detected in the thymus , spleen and liver. CD57+ lymphoid cells were detected in
the thymus ,
intestinal mucosa, spleen and lymph node. In the brain, neuropil was positive for
CD56 and CD57 . CD34+ lymphoid cells were
detected in the thymus , spleen and lymph node. CD10+
lymphoid cells were detected in the thymus, spleen, lymph node and bone marrow. Monocytes, macrophages and
interstitial dendritic cells were positive for CD204 . Myeloid cells in bone marrow , neutrophils, monocytes and macrophages
were positive for myeloperoxidase. In the present cat, the cell membrane of tumour
cells was strongly positive for CD56 but negative for a
T-cell-associated marker (CD3) , B-cell-associated markers (CD20, CD79a, Pax5 and BLA36),
macrophage/histiocyte markers (Iba-1 and CD204), a major histocompatibility complex
class II antigen presenting cell marker (HLA-DR), mast cell-associated marker
(CD117), a myeloid cell-associated marker (myeloperoxidase), haematopoietic
progenitor-associated marker (CD34), lymphocyte precursor cell-associated markers
(CD10), mature NK cell marker (CD57) and cytotoxic cell markers (granzyme B and
perforin).
In double immunofluorescence, CD56+ CD3− lymphoid cells were
detected in the thymus , spleen and liver. By Western blotting
analysis, in both brain samples of cat and dog, anti-CD56 antibody labelled bands of
100–120 kDa, 140 kDa and 180 kDa, and anti-CD57 antibody labelled a band of 110 kDa,
consistent with the molecular weights of CD56 and CD57 .