Patient history
An 11-year-old female patient diagnosed with high-grade osteosarcoma of the left distal femur underwent wide resection and subsequent prosthetic reconstruction with an endoprosthesis. Six months after the index surgery, immediately after completing the last cycle of adjuvant chemotherapy, the patient was admitted to the hospital with septic shock due to an acute deep infection. Extensive pus formation led to skin tearing on the anteromedial aspect of the knee exposing the implant.

First stage - explantation of the infected endoprosthesis
Surgical revision was indicated for infection control. The original implant was removed, and thorough debridement of soft tissues and intramedullary canals was performed, including high-pressure lavage irrigation. A reinforced temporary cement spacer with antibiotics was used to fill the defect after explanting the prosthesis. Calcium phosphate beads with Vancomycin (STIMULAN®) were placed inside the medullary canals as well as into the soft tissues. A vacuum-assisted device was used to cover the surgical site. Microbiological and bacterial PCR testing turned positive for polymicrobial flora including Staphylococcus Epidermidis, Neisseria Mucosa, Cutibacterium Acnes and Bacillus sp. Genetic testing turned negative for all tested genotypes of antibiotic resistance. Laboratory tests showed standard antibiotic sensitivity.

Interim period
Empiric antibiotic therapy with Ciprofloxacin and Metronidazole was started. These were switched to Linezolid and Cefixime once cultures were finalized. Clinical improvement with wound healing and normalization of inflammatory markers was achieved. Unfortunately, despite the recommended activity restriction, the patient developed a Salter-Harris type V-like fracture of the proximal tibia due to independent transition to full weight-bearing. This resulted in the formation of a bony bridge across the lateral half of the physis eliminating the growth potential of proximal tibia.

The treated lower extremity had now lost the distal femur and the proximal tibia physes, resulting in a 5 cm leg length discrepancy at the time of the planned second stage. The length of the cement spacer was 10 cm, which is too short for an expandable prosthesis as the shortest distal femur implant is 18 cm in length.

The expected length discrepancy at the end of growth was calculated at 10 cm which is unmanageable without the use of a lengthening implant. However, we wanted to avoid resecting additional bone and using a massive implant in the setting of a previous deep infection. A decision was then made to use the bioexpandable MUTARS® BioXpand prosthesis (Implantcast, Germany). The prosthesis is 10 cm long and connected to the FITBONE® extendable motorized nail (Wittenstein, Germany), allowing non-invasive lengthening through callus distraction. The total lengthening potential of this implant is 8 cm.

Second stage - implantation of the bioexpandable endoprosthesis
The cement spacer was removed and a reconstruction with the BioXpand prosthesis was performed. Since the tibia growth plate was nonfunctional we used a definitive cemented proximal tibial MUTARS component, which is fully compatible with the BioXpand system. A femoral osteotomy site was marked with a Kirschner wire according to the manufacturer’s manual. The osteotomy was performed through a separate anterior thigh incision. The FITBONE® nail was then inserted into the femoral canal and connected to the BioXpand femoral component. The nail was proximally fixed with one bicortical screw, and the distal femoral fragment was fixed to the prosthesis using screws and plates. A receiver for transcutaneous energy transmission was placed subcutaneously on the lateral side of the knee. The implant was lengthened intraoperatively 1 cm. A medial gastrocnemius muscle flap was advanced over the femoral component. All intraoperative cultures were negative.

Five days after the surgery, the nail elongation at 1 mm per day started. The distraction consisted of external transmission of electromagnetic pulses to the subcutaneous receiver. Unfortunately, a bony callus was observed at the 3-month follow-up at the osteotomy site. Following a discussion with the family, this was attributed to poor compliance of the family with the recommended protocol. The lengthening intervals were inconsistent, and they avoided using an stethoscope for auditory control.

A re-osteotomy was performed from a lateral incision to protect the medial gastrocnemius flap. The functionality of the lengthening mechanism was verified intraoperatively and the nail elongated by 1 cm. Postoperatively all subsequent elongations were carried out by the medical team without complications.

Conversion to definitive endoprosthesis
Once the maximum lengthening of 8 cm was reached, an exchange of the bioexpandable prosthesis for the definitive modular MUTARS® Distal Femur MK implant (Implantcast, Germany) was performed. An extended lateral approach including the previous approach used for the re-osteotomy was utilized. The newly formed bone was noted to be firm. Additionally, we enhanced the regenerated bone with iliac crest cancellous graft and bone from the reamers. The final uncemented stem was inserted with good primary stability and secured proximally with two bicortical screws. The final adult-size femoral component was connected to the previously implanted tibial part. Primary closure of the wound was achieved. All intraoperative cultures were negative.

Outcomes
At the 12-month follow-up after implantation of the definitive endoprosthesis the patient was doing well with no evidence of infection or tumor recurrence. Despite the initial arthrofibrosis resulting from the infection and multiple surgical procedures, the patient progressively regained knee range of motion (0-100°) with full active extension allowing her to independently climb stairs. The affected left leg was 1.5 cm longer in the immediate postoperative period, however, this discrepancy decreased over time with a subsequent discrepancy of less than 1 cm at the last follow-up. Nevertheless, the proximal tibia growth arrest led to an unequal knee joint level of approximately 3 cm. At the last follow-up the patient was painless, full weight-bearing and had resumed all daily routine activities including recreational sports. Final Musculoskeletal Tumor Society (MSTS) and Toronto Extremity Salvage Scores (TESS) were 27/30 and 87%, respectively.