A 73-year-old male (174 cm, 47 kg) with the American Society of Anesthesiologist physical classification of 3 was scheduled for elective left nephroureterectomy. A left calyx tumor was incidentally discovered during a routine medical examination, and a biopsy performed 1 month ago during ureteroscopy suggested a urothelial carcinoma. Past medical history includes intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the liver that was surgically removed 6 years ago. A preoperative evaluation was performed, and chest computed tomography (CT) revealed pulmonary thromboembolism in the left lower lobe. A lower extremity ultrasonogram showed no evidence of deep vein thrombosis, and arterial blood gas analysis and D-dimer were within the normal ranges. The patient was instructed to fast for 8 hours (nothing by mouth) before undergoing general anesthesia. Premedication involved administrating an intramuscular injection of glycopyrrolate (0.2 mg) and famotidine (20 mg). In the operating room, noninvasive monitoring devices were placed on the patient, including a blood pressure cuff, electrocardiogram, a pulse oximeter, a bispectral index signal device, and a quantitative monitor for neuromuscular blockade. General anesthesia was induced using 80 mg propofol, followed by 30 mg rocuronium for neuromuscular blockade after confirming no response to stimuli. Then, sevoflurane (1.7%) was used to maintain the appropriate anesthesia depth after intubation. Because of the risk of bleeding from renal artery surgery, an arterial line was inserted into the right radial artery. Furthermore, right internal jugular vein central venous catheterization was planned. Real-time ultrasound-guided catheterization was initially planned; however, the hospital’s portable ultrasonography device was in use in other operating rooms; therefore, a blind catheterization technique was used based on the patient’s anatomical structure without ultrasound guidance. The patient was positioned in the Trendelenburg position with the head 15° below the horizontal plane and tilted 40° to the left. The Bermuda triangle, an anatomical structure formed by the posterior margin of the sternal muscle belly of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, the anterior margin of the clavicular muscle belly, and the upper margin of the clavicle, was clearly identified. The carotid artery pulse was palpated at the superior angle of the triangle and followed to the center of the triangle, where a 10 ml syringe connected to a 23-gauge finder needle was inserted perpendicularly to the surface while aspirating. The presence of dark venous blood was confirmed at a depth of 2.2 cm, and no pulsation was observed after separating the finder needle from the syringe. Then, the 18-gauge puncture needle connected to the syringe was inserted toward the nipple at a 75° angle from the skin while targeting the finder needle tip, and the aspiration of venous blood flow was confirmed. After removing the finder needle, a guidewire was inserted to a depth of 20 cm from the skin through the puncture needle without any resistance felt during the procedure. The puncture needle was removed while leaving the guidewire in place. Prior to inserting the dilator, the practitioner and colleagues, experiencing a sense of unease during the procedure, attempted to investigate the anatomy of the puncture site by utilizing ultrasonography to detect the previously inserted guide wire, prompted by their concern that the depth of the finder needle, measuring 2.2 cm, is deeper than observed in other patients, which contributed to their uneasiness. The guidewire was found to be located in a vein as which we presumed the vessel based on its location that was lateral from the common carotid artery and collapsibility when pressure was applied using the probe. However, a larger vessel presumed to be a vein was located superiorly and more laterally than the identified vessel. Real-time ultrasound-guided guidewire insertion was performed at the same view in this vessel using another central venous catheter kit. Both guidewires were left in place while the probe was tilted to visualize their paths, and it was confirmed that they were both descending toward the right brachiocephalic vein . The first guidewire was removed, and manual compression using sterile gauze was applied for over 5 min. No resistance was felt during the removal. The second guidewire was used to complete the central venous catheterization, and free regurgitation was observed at each port. The central venous pressure (CVP) measured using the central venous catheter was 15 mmHg. The surgery was successful, and the patient was transferred to the post-anesthesia care unit after extubation. A simple anterior-to-posterior chest X-ray (CXR) taken immediately after the surgery confirmed that the catheter tip was located near the right atrium, following the superior vena cava (SVC) . We reviewed the contrast-enhanced chest CT performed for preoperative evaluation and confirmed that the right internal jugular vein coursed laterally to the right common carotid artery on the axial view. A large vessel was also observed behind the common carotid artery and internal jugular vein, and it was traced upward and downward, confirming that it enters into the transverse foramen at the level of the sixth cervical vertebra and drains into the right brachiocephalic vein, consistent with the known course of the cervical vertebral vein. The same findings were observed in the coronary view . The radiologist indicated this vessel as the vertebral vein. After considering the ultrasonographic findings and the radiologist’s official reading, we confirmed that the vein that we had initially punctured was indeed the right cervical vertebral vein. On the third day after surgery, the central venous catheter was removed, and the patient did not exhibit any complications, such as bleeding, swelling, and neurological symptoms.