A 48-year-old Chinese woman with a history of a right parasagittal meningioma with surgery and gamma knife excision done, was first put on valproate but then stepped up to topiramate 26 months later for uncontrolled seizures. The initial dose was topiramate 25 mg twice a day, which was eventually stepped up to 100 mg twice a day for adequate seizure control. She was referred to our ophthalmology clinic for dry eyes before the use of topiramate, with an examination showing a baseline visual acuity of 1.2 in both eyes with unremarkable anterior segment and fundoscopy examination. There was no family history of retinal diseases.
She complained of blurring of vision in both eyes after using topiramate for 9 months. She was not on other medications when her visual symptoms developed. On examination, her visual acuity was 0.7 in both eyes. Her pupils were equal with no relative afferent papillary defect. The intraocular pressure, Ishihara test, and anterior segment examination were within normal limits. A fundus examination revealed there was bilateral diffuse pigmentary retinopathy . Automated perimetry showed bilateral peripheral constrictions while microperimetry showed normal macula sensitivity . Autofluorescence fundus pictures showed loss of autofluorescence at the periphery, which is compatible with areas of pigmentary retinopathy . A fundus fluorescein angiogram also showed blocked fluorescence in the areas of pigmentation . Optical coherence tomography was unremarkable. A full field electroretinogram (ERG) according to International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision (ISCEV) standard was performed at 16 months after onset of symptoms (25 months since topiramate was first given). Both photopic and scotopic responses were found to be within normal limits. Administration of topiramate was immediately ceased due to suspected correlation with her eye signs and symptoms. She was switched to levetiracetam monotherapy. There was no more seizure recurrence after this treatment change.
All investigations were repeated 1 year after discontinuation of topiramate. Bilateral diffuse pigmentary retinopathy was still present, with visual field test showing similar peripheral constriction, although her visual acuity improved back to 1.0 in both eyes and she reported subjective improvement in vision.