A 67-year-old healthy woman was referred to the division of thoracic surgery at our hospital for an abnormal shadow detected during a regular annual medical check-up. The abnormal shadow was not apparent on the chest radiogram performed 7 years ago before this visit . A series of previous chest radiograms showed protrusion of the left 3rd arch that had progressed in size over the past 4 years. Computed tomography (CT) image taken 2 years prior to this visit for close examination of the protrusion showed a 4-cm mass ( and ), although it was not noted by the physicians. She did not experience angina, either at rest or with exertion, or other symptoms. Her medical history was unremarkable from a cardiovascular perspective. Computed tomography revealed a mass ∼5 cm in size in the mediastinum bordering the left side of the pulmonary artery, suspicious for lymphoma, neurogenic tumour, or germ cell tumour. Positron emission tomography-CT demonstrated negative uptake of 18F-FDG. The inside of the mass showed contrast enhancement equivalent to that of a blood vessel and thrombus formation, suggesting an aneurysm. The patient was referred to the Division of Cardiology.
The physical examination results were normal. No abnormalities were observed in the blood tests, e.g. troponin I, 3.3 pg/mL (normal <70 pg/mL). Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a large mass connecting to the left anterior descending artery (LAD). Blood flow into the mass cavity was detected, suggesting a coronary artery aneurysm. Coronary flow velocity by transthoracic Doppler echocardiography demonstrated a dominant systolic component at the left main coronary trunk proximal to the fistula and inside the mass, suggesting a steal phenomenon. . The left ventricular wall motion was normal, and the ejection fraction was estimated to be 72%.
A 64-slice coronary CT angiography revealed a giant coronary aneurysm with coronary fistula (48 × 45 × 55 mm), with internal homogeneous contrast enhancement on arterial phase and thrombus formation, connected to the mid-portion of the LAD . The aneurysm branched into a tortuous vessel connected to the main pulmonary artery. Another fistula from the proximal portion of the right coronary artery (RCA) drained into the left atrium and the main pulmonary artery.
Adenosine triphosphate stress myocardial perfusion scintigraphy identified reversible perfusion defects in the anterior wall, representing myocardial ischaemia in the territory of the LAD . Conventional coronary angiography confirmed a giant aneurysm originating from the LAD, to which blood flow was supplied during systole . The aneurysm outflow was obscured due to the dilution of the contrast dye by the large aneurysmal sac. Other anomalous vessels started from the proximal portion of the RCA , as shown by CT. No occlusive atherosclerotic lesions were observed. Mean pulmonary artery wedge pressure and pulmonary artery pressure were measured to be 9 and 23/9/14 mmHg (systolic/diastolic/mean), respectively. The Qp/Qs ratio was calculated to be 1.2.
Because of the risk of rupture due to progressive enlargement of the aneurysm and the presence of ischaemia, the patient was immediately transferred to the cardiac surgery department without receiving additional medical treatment other than bisoprolol. The patient underwent elective surgery via median sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass. The fistula vessel between the proximal RCA and the main pulmonary artery was ligated. A 50-mm aneurysm was identified in the fistula vessel originating in the LAD and incised; a mural thrombus largely occupied it. Inflow path from the LAD was ligated. Two outflow vessels were identified and ligated; one connected to the main pulmonary artery, the other had not been detected during preoperative imaging tests. The aneurysm was resected, and subsequently, a left atrial appendage closure was performed due to paroxysmal atrial fibrillation detected during her hospitalization. The patient recovered uneventfully, except for a transient atrial fibrillation, and was discharged from the hospital. Edoxaban and bisoprolol were administered for 3 and 7 months, respectively. The patient has been in good health, and no cardiovascular events were reported for 10 months since her discharge.