A 45-year-old Caucasian woman with typical bleeding and pressure symptoms caused by a solitary intramural fibroid contacted our Interventional Radiological Department, asking whether she could be offered UFE. A gynecological examination with ultrasound verified the diagnosis of a fibroid on the back wall of her uterus measuring about 7 cm and confirmed the indication for UFE.
After standard preparation, arterial access was obtained by the retrograde puncture of her right femoral artery and insertion of a 5-Fr sheath (Radifocus Introducer II, Terumo Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). Angiography of the left internal iliac artery was performed in a crossover maneuver with a 4-Fr diagnostic catheter (Cobra II, Terumo Corporation). This revealed that her left uterine artery was relatively small but exceptionally twisted and tortuous . Selective arteriography using a microcatheter (2.7-Fr; Progreat, Terumo Corporation) revealed a bifurcation of her left uterine artery prior to the junction of the descending and transverse portions, with one branch crossing several centimeters above the other before rejoining at the ascending portion . Superselective catheterization of both branches of the transverse portion of the uterine artery confirmed the unusual anatomic variant . In particular, the lower transverse branch showed all the characteristic criteria for a uterine artery, in form and shape, supplying blood solely to the uterus. Because only the lower segment of the transverse portion had additional small vaginal branches, the upper segment was chosen for embolization of her left uterine artery.
The embolization was subsequently performed using calibrated microspheres measuring 500–700 μm (Embosphere Microspheres, Biosphere Medical, Paris, France). Access to her right uterine artery was also obtained using a coaxial technique and a 5-Fr diagnostic catheter (RUC, Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) and the above-mentioned microcatheter. Embolization of her right uterine artery was performed in the appropriate manner. Angiography showed that the fibroid had a strongly right dominant vascular supply.
Our patient’s post-intervention course was uneventful and she was discharged 2 days later. In the follow-up questionnaire 3 months later, our patient expressed herself sufficiently satisfied with the result of the UFE and stated that she would choose the procedure again.