A 60-year-old female experienced an acute onset headache that was temporarily relieved with ibuprofen but presented to the emergency department 3 days later due to headache persistence. It was noted that she had a medical history of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) and ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction, as well as a family history of lung cancer and thyroid cancer. Head computed tomography (CT) revealed a small volume subarachnoid hemorrhage within the sulci overlying the posterior left cerebral convexity . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed a 3.9 × 3.5 × 4.2 mm aneurysm or pseudoaneurysm involving a bifurcation point of a distal M4 segment of the left MCA [ and ]. Mild stenosis of the distal parent vessel and branch vessel origins was also noted.
Embolization through distal navigation was attempted with a Headway® DUO microcatheter over a Synchro2® Soft microwire. However, due to the distal location, navigation was ultimately unsuccessful. Surgical clipping with intraoperative DSA guidance was then performed. The aneurysm was successfully clipped and resected, and the sample was sent for histopathology [ and ]. A postoperative CT scan of the head demonstrated expected postoperative changes involving the parietal lobe . Histopathological examination of the aneurysm sample confirmed triple-negative invasive ductal breast carcinoma . After surgery, the patient remained neurologically intact. Six weeks after surgery, she underwent CyberKnife stereotactic radiosurgery to the region of the resected aneurysm and began treatment with chemotherapy.
Four months later, the patient presented once again with acute severe headache. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed multiple small lesions within the brain parenchyma, compatible with new metastatic deposits. Catheter angiography showed bilateral cerebral aneurysms, including a new mixed fusiform and saccular pseudoaneurysm arising from a distal M3 posterior division branch of the right MCA. In addition, there was a mixed fusiform and saccular pseudoaneurysm arising from a distal branch of the left callosomarginal artery with a saccular component measuring up to 2 mm in maximum dimension [ and ], as well as a 1 mm saccular outpouching arising from a distal M2 anterior division branch of the right MCA, suspicious for an additional small pseudoaneurysm .
Given the patient’s medical condition, these aneurysms were not felt to be amenable to open surgical repair, and endovascular therapy would have required parent artery sacrifice with associated risk of stroke. The patient was seen by an oncologist and radiation oncologist, and it was suggested by the team that there was a chance the aneurysms would be responsive to radiation therapy. The patient was subsequently treated with whole-brain radiation therapy and chemotherapy with capecitabine (Xeloda®). Radiation was well-tolerated other than headaches and fatigue, although the patient was capable of limited self-care and confined to a bed or chair >50% of waking hours. A short-term follow-up DSA was recommended to be sure that there was no unexpected, dramatic enlargement or change in configuration of the lesions. Although a nonsurgical course had been chosen, given the paucity of data regarding these unusual aneurysms, we felt that it was important to be able to modify our recommendations to the family if a significant change had occurred, potentially indicating a very high risk of imminent bleeding. Follow-up cerebral angiography 6 days after initiation of radiation therapy demonstrated interval decreased size of the right MCA posterior division distal M3 segment aneurysm.
Over the ensuing 4 months, CT revealed progression of malignancy in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Termination of chemotherapy and radiation therapy was decided, and the patient was offered palliative care. She was placed on a tapering schedule of dexamethasone (Decadron®) to control inflammation and the anticonvulsant medication levetiracetam (Keppra®). The patient died 6 months later while receiving palliative treatment.