The case in question concerns a 64-year-old Caucasian postmenopausal woman presenting with pain, abdominal distension, and an altered intestinal transit.
Thoracic and abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) scans revealed massive peritoneal carcinomatosis, extensive ascites, involvement of the major omentum, extensive involvement small intestine mesentery, diffuse involvement of the parietal peritoneum, implants at the bottom of the Douglas pouch, and probable implants on the ovarian surface, although of normal size . Her plasma CA-125 tumour marker levels were 1,110.9 U/mL, and those of the remaining tumour markers fell within a normal range. An omentum biopsy was compatible with high-grade serous carcinoma, with positive expression for WT-1, p53, CK-7 and negative expression for CK20 and TTF-1, with tube-ovarian-peritoneal origin.
Given the confirmed diagnosis of a primary peritoneal carcinoma of gynaecological origin stage IIIC and after assessment by a multidisciplinary committee that considers unresectable disease due to mesenteric involvement, neoadjuvant chemotherapy with intravenous (i.v.) paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 and i.v. carboplatin AUC 6 at three-week intervals was prescribed. The patient received three cycles of this treatment, showing a significant partial response on the follow-up CT scans, and plasma CA-125 tumour marker levels of 65 U/mL (levels at diagnosis: 1110.9 U/mL).
Surgery was subsequently performed, achieving optimal cytoreduction, and the patient had a catheter placed for the administration of the intraperitoneal chemotherapy. The pathological study of all samples obtained during the procedure revealed a high-grade serous carcinoma.
Following the intervention, a total of four cycles of adjuvant intraperitoneal (i.p.) chemotherapy consisting of i.v. paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 (day 1), i.p. cisplatin 75 mg/m2 (day 2), and i.p. paclitaxel 60 mg/m2 (day 8) were administered. The patient achieved a complete response, although she developed grade-2 asthenia and grade-3 neutropenia due to treatment-related toxicity that mandated a delay in the dosing and support with granulocyte-colony stimulating factors (G-CSFs).
Seven months after receiving the last cycle of platinum-based chemotherapy, her CA-125 tumour marker levels were 104 U/mL, and mediastinal lymph node and peritoneal recurrence were identified in the follow-up CT scans. At this time, a germline mutation study was carried out in BRCA, being negative. Given that these findings were considered to be indicative of progression after a PFI of seven months, second-line chemotherapy was started with i.v. trabectedin 1.1 mg/m2 (day 1) in combination with i.v. PLD 30 mg/m2 (day 1) at 21-day cycles. The patient achieved a partial response after the third cycle (CA-125: 11.8 U/mL) .
Chemotherapy with trabectedin and PLD was continued; however, given that the patient experienced haematological toxicity (grade-4 neutropenia), the dose of PLD had to be reduced to 25 mg/m2 and that of trabectedin to 0.9 mg/m2 during the sixth cycle. PLD was subsequently discontinued altogether due to the onset of toxicity associated with this drug (grade-2 mucositis and grade-3 asthenia). From then on, she received i.v. trabectedin 0.9 mg/m2 in monotherapy at 21-day cycles, with good tolerance and referring only grade-1 asthenia that resolved within two to three days and did not limit her during her basic activities of daily living.
After ten cycles of treatment, and specifically four cycles of trabectedin in monotherapy, the dose of trabectedin had to be reduced to 0.75 mg/m2 every 21 days due to the onset of grade-3 neutropenia and grade-2 thrombopenia, which mandated frequent delays in the dosing and even G-CSF support. Nevertheless, the subsequent follow-up CT scans performed periodically continued to show evidence of complete response. The patient received a total of 35 cycles of trabectedin (six in combination with PLD and then 29 in monotherapy). During this time, she maintained an excellent quality of life, experiencing no late or cumulative toxicity, and being able to perform her usual activities.
Because peritoneal progression was subsequently detected after a PFI of three years, a third line of treatment with i.v. carboplatin (area under the curve [AUC] = 4) (day 1), i.v. gemcitabine 1,000 mg/m2 (days 1 and 8 of every 21-day cycle), and i.v bevacizumab 15 mg/kg (day 1) was started. A subsequent follow-up CT scan carried out after the third cycle of this therapy showed signs of partial response. Given that the response persisted after six treatment cycles, chemotherapy was suspended and treatment with bevacizumab in monotherapy was started. The patient has received a total of 12 cycles of maintenance treatment with bevacizumab in monotherapy to date, having tolerated the treatment well and maintained a partial response.