A 45-year-old male prisoner presented with necrosis on the penile shaft secondary to using a non-metallic penile constriction object. The patient reported a 5-day history of progressive penile pain, edema, and skin injury but no urinary symptoms. There was no notable medical background or history reported.
Upon penile examination, the patient showed signs of malodor, purulent exudate, infected necrotic skin, and missing dermis on the dorsal and ventral aspects of the penile shaft . The distal penis was edematous and tender. The patient's vital signs were stable, and laboratory investigations were normal, with no fever present.
Immediate treatment involved prescribing a combination of cephalosporin, gentamicin, and metronidazole, along with potent analgesia. Prompt operative management was then undertaken, which included urgent EUA, rigid cystoscopy, SPC insertion, and complete penile skin degloving. The procedure was performed under general anesthesia in the Lloyd Davis position, and a 16 Fr SPC was inserted under cystoscopy guidance. Complete skin degloving from the glans edge to the penile base and midline anterior scrotal skin was undertaken, along with circumcision. Buck's fascia was found to be intact . Following the procedure, a Jelonet dressing, blue gauze, and crepe bandage were applied.
No early postoperative complications were reported, and the patient's laboratory investigations were normal. The patient remained afebrile and had stable vital signs. The patient was continued on the same antibiotics regimen.
On the third- and seventh-day post-penile degloving, the patient had EUA, which revealed no necrotic tissue or infection. The penile tissue was healthy, and the wound was granulating. The penile wound was irrigated with peroxide, iodine, and saline and redressed. The microbiology team advised starting the patient on meropenem and clindamycin based on the penile skin microbiology results which showed the presence of Staphylococcus aureus and Beta-haemolytic streptococcus.
On the eleventh day following penile degloving, a FTSG was performed from the groin area in a joint procedure involving the urology and plastic surgery teams. The wounds on the penile shaft and scrotum were found to be granulating and healthy. The wound edges and base were refreshed, and minimal excision of irregular benign subcutaneous tissue was performed. Hemostasis was achieved, and the wound was washed out with chlorhexidine and saline.
Scrotal skin was mobilized with a sub-dartos layer to enable scrotal wound closure in layers. A urethral catheter was inserted to protect the urethra. The base of the penis was mobilized a few centimeters to enable penile fixation sutures at the base. The urethral and dorsal neurovascular bundle was identified and protected. The area of penile skin deficit was measured. Elliptical incisions were made in the bilateral groin creases to FTSG, which was then defatted. The FTSG was spirally inserted into the penile shaft, and Tisseel fibrin sealant (4 cc) was used. An Adaptic dressing and sponge gauze were applied and secured to the abdominal skin by prolene sutures. Groin closure was completed using staples.
No early postoperative complications were reported, and the patient's vital signs and laboratory investigations were normal. The penile dressing was kept dry, and the penile glans were healthy with preserved sensation. The patient's hips were kept flexed to reduce tension in his groin wounds. Meropenem and clindamycin were continued.
After a 20-day hospital admission, the patient was discharged back to the prison without antibiotics. The patient was clinically and vitally stable with clean wounds, which were healing . His laboratory investigations were normal, and a leg bag was attached to the SPC. The wound management plan was given to the prison medical team.