A 56-year-old postmenopausal woman presented with a history of intermittent mastalgia, mild lumpiness, and clear nipple discharge of the right breast, which started a year ago. She has a previous known history of right breast intraductal papilloma without atypia 8 years ago, for which she refused the intervention at that time. Her mammogram two years ago was reassuring.

An ultrasound scan revealed a highly suspicious mass at the 2 o’clock position of the right breast periareolar area, measuring 17 mm, with a hypoechoic dilated duct measuring over 50 mm in length and 3.4 mm in diameter at the medial aspect of the right nipple. The axilla appeared normal on the ultrasound scan.

Upon comparison of mammograms from eight years ago and two years ago, the lesion was identified as a new development. An ultrasound-guided core biopsy of the right breast mass was performed. The histopathological evaluation revealed a Grade II Invasive Ductal Carcinoma.

After a multidisciplinary team meeting, a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and breast tomosynthesis were ordered to assess the disease extent. The known malignancy of the upper inner quadrant was identified, measuring 26 mm in the longest dimension. The MRI study identified an anterior extension accounting for an overall extent of 31 mm.

A SS reflector was placed at the site of the tumour under ultrasound guidance. No immediate complications were noted. Post-insertion mammogram has been obtained.

Imaging revealed that the scout was successfully placed in the lesion.

Two days later, the patient presented to the breast clinic complaining of severe stabbing pain in the right nipple. An ultrasound and mammogram scan revealed that the scout had migrated from the site of the cancer into the duct at the tip of the nipple.

Under local anaesthesia, a small incision was made on the skin over the tip of the scout, and it was removed. The patient visited the clinic the next day and reported reduced pain and discomfort since the scout was removed.

The patient declined to have another SS reflector due to distress during the initial procedure. The decision has been made to proceed with skin marker-guided wide local excision, which she has had. Postoperative histopathological evaluation showed 27 mm grade 2 invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) no special type, with no associated ductal carcinoma in situ, which is completely excised, and sentinel node biopsy was negative.