A 17-year-old female with a history of allergy and systemic reactions to peanuts unknowingly ate a plate of Spaghetti in a Chinese restaurant cooked with groundnut oil. She immediately developed an anaphylactic shock with dyspnea, agitation and cardiac arrest. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was begun upon arrival of the medical emergency team, 10 minutes after collapse-the first rhythm was asystole. Intravenous Epinephrine (total dose 10 mg) and fluid administration (total 2.5 L) were administered and although transient return to spontaneous circulation was achieved at 22 minutes, the patient rearrested with recurrent pulseless electrical activity and then asystole. Only mild laryngeal edema was noted on intubation. She was transferred to our tertiary care facility, under continuous CPR with the Lund University Cardiac Arrest System–Version 2 device (LUCAS 2; Jolife AB, Lund, Sweden). Immediate femoro-femoral, veno-arterial extra-corporeal life support (ECLS) was surgically implanted (RotaFlow, Maquet, Hirrlingen, Germany). No-flow was estimated to be 10 minutes and total low-flow from CPR initiation to full ECLS support 95 minutes. Soon after the establishment of the VA-ECLS, the patient regained an effective sinus rhythm. However, the transesophageal echocardiography performed during the implantation procedure showed a bilateral ventricular dysfunction with global hypokinesia (Additional file ). In order to maintain both a left ventricular drainage and a mean arterial pressure (MAP) above 65 mmHg, a hemodynamic support with dobutamine and norepinephrine was necessary during the first 12 hours. There was no sedative or analgesic administration at any point during pre- or in-hospital care.
Clinically, the patient was deeply comatose-Glasgow Coma Scale 3–with bilaterally dilated pupils unresponsive to light. Complete clinical examination and brain death assessment were performed according to the guidelines of the Swiss Academy of Medical Sciences . The apnea test was carried out in accordance with previously published data on apnea test and brain death testing in patients under ECLS . The clinical diagnosis of brain death was established 16 h after hospital admission and the parents consented to organ donation. Thyroid hormones, low dose corticosteroids and desmopressin were administered for the organ preservation and diabetes insipidus.
Cardiac assessment for heart donation was made by transthoracic echocardiography (TTE). Given the young age, coronary angiography was not performed. TTE displayed normal findings with no inotropic or vasoactive support and ECMO flow lowered to 1.5 L / min (Additional file ). Left ventricular function was assessed by measuring the left ventricular outflow tract velocity time-integral (16 cm), visual assessment of the left ventricular ejection fraction (60 %) and measurement of the systolic peak velocity of the mitral annulus (TDSa) (> 6 cm/s). Right ventricular function was assessed visually and by tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) (18 mm). There were no segmental anomalies as well as normal valves. The heart was retrieved 50 h after hospital admission (total ECLS support of 50 h, ECLS support prior to organ assessment 16 h and time from assessment to transplant 34 h). Warm and cold ischemia times were 23 and 202 minutes respectively. The heart was transplanted in an 11-year-old female with anthracyclin-induced cardiomyopathy following treatment for high-grade osteosarcoma of the tibia. The immediate post-operative course was favourable allowing extubation on day 2, she required milrinone but no mechanical support for a total intensive care length of stay of 21 days. The patient was discharged 56 days post transplantation, she is symptom-free at 6-month follow-up with normal cardiac function.