A 51-year-old Caucasian left-handed housewife lady (weight 61 kg, height 159 cm) was admitted to our institution because of severe sudden onset headache followed by transient loss of consciousness and vomiting. On examination she was fully conscious and oriented and complained of severe headache. Nuchal rigidity was evident. No focal neurological deficit was found. Temperature was 38°C and other vital signs were stable. Past medical history was negative and she did not consume any medication.
CT scan of the head revealed acute subarachnoid hemorrhage prominently occupying the right sylvian fissure. CT angiography was performed . The cerebral vasculature was found to harbor three saccular aneurysms at: (1) right MCA trifurcation, (2) left ICA bifurcation, and (3) distal basilar artery. The right MCA aneurysm was presumed to be the ruptured aneurysm due to location of subarachnoid clot and irregular shape of the aneurysm.
A right pterional craniotomy was performed with the patient in the supine position and head rotated 30 degrees to left. After elevation of the craniotomy flap, the sphenoid ridge was drilled flush with the orbital roof to facilitate exposure of the basilar tip aneurysm. After duratomy, gentle frontal lobe retraction allowed CSF drainage from the optic and carotid cisterns. Right optic nerve and right ICA were identified and the Sylvian fissure was opened from medial to lateral, following the bifurcation of right ICA to MCA trifurcation. A saccular aneurysm was found in the MCA trifurcation projecting inferolaterally. After dissection of the neck it was clipped. Next, opening the membrane of Liliequist, let to the distal basilar aneurysm from the corridor between the right optic nerve and right ICA. The aneurysm was located between the right PCA and right SCA with a wide neck, and its dome projected laterally to right. Successful clipping was achieved. The left ICA bifurcation aneurysm was identified after following the right A1, anterior communicating and left A1 arteries with minimal brain retraction, and gaining benefit from favorable neuroanesthesia. The aneurysm projected superiorly and was also clipped .
The patient experienced an uneventful post-operative period and was discharge within 5 days of surgery. A follow-up CT angiography confirmed successful obliteration of all lesions and preservation of normal cerebral vasculature .