A 26-year-old African American woman with accidental ankle subluxation presented to our emergency department with foot pain. As a part of her work-up, she was incidentally found to have an elevated serum creatinine level of 2.2 mg/dL and proteinuria. Therefore, our patient was referred to a nephrologist for further evaluation.
Her medical history included morbid obesity, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. The hypertension had been present for 5 years, and was controlled with metoprolol (25 mg, twice a day) and amlodipine (10 mg, daily). Her other medications included ranitidine (150 mg, daily), lovastatin (20 mg, daily) and norgestimate ethinyl estradiol (one tablet, daily). Moreover, she took ibuprofen once a month, as needed, for shoulder pain. We did not note any personal or family history of kidney disease, autoimmune disease, or diabetes. The results of her physical examination were relatively unremarkable, except for obesity and moderate edema limited to her lower extremities. Her blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg. Examination of a 24-hour urine collection showed 11 g of urinary protein and hematuria. Her serum albumin level was 1.8 g/dL.
A kidney ultrasonography indicated normal size kidneys. Thereafter, she underwent a kidney biopsy, which showed severe noncaseating epithelioid granulomatous necrotizing interstitial nephritis, necrotizing vascular lesion , and cellular crescent formation that were related to the underlying sarcoidosis. Immunofluorescence studies were negative for immunoglobulin (Ig) IgA, IgM, kappa, lambda, C1q, C3, and fibrinogen but mild diffuse linear glomerular capillary staining for IgG was suggestive of pauci-immune crescentic glomerulonephritis.
Electron microscopy revealed no immune complex deposits. Mycobacterium tuberculosis studies indicated negative results. Serologic testing showed normal complement levels and negative results for anti-nuclear antibody, double-stranded DNA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), human immunodeficiency virus, Sjogren’s syndrome, rapid plasma reagin, and viral hepatitis. Urine protein electrophoresis showed nonselective proteinuria related to combined glomerular and tubular damage. Her level of rheumatoid factor was <3 units/mL. Moreover, she was found to have elevated levels of angiotensin converting enzyme of 78 U/L (normal, 16–68U/L), but her levels of calcium, vitamin D, and parathyroid hormone were normal. A subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan of her chest showed patchy ground-glass opacities within both the lower lobes, with multifocal air trapping, as well as mild thickening of the bronchioles and mild hilar fullness, consistent with stage II pulmonary sarcoidosis. CT of her abdomen showed diffuse pelvic, para-aortic, and mesenteric lymphadenopathy. Examination of a pelvic lymph node biopsy specimen demonstrated no evidence of any lymphoproliferative disorder. Flow cytometry reported a predominance of T-cells in the tissue, with a normal 3.9:1 ratio of CD4 and CD8. Her lactate dehydrogenase level was within normal limits. Childhood records indicated a history of bilateral uveitis, which was treated with prednisolone.
Owing to the multisystem involvement, our patient was referred to a university-based sarcoidosis center. Because the renal pathology was predominant in her case, the management of immunosuppression was deferred to a nephrologist. She was initially treated with prednisone (60 mg, daily for 1 month), along with the subsequent addition of azathioprine (150 mg, daily). The prednisone administration was gradually tapered to 5 mg/day over 12 months. Subsequently, her nephrotic syndrome improved, her serum albumin levels improved to 3.8 g/dL, and her urinary protein levels markedly reduced from 11 g/24 hours to 1 g/24 hours. After 1 year, the concentration of interlukin-2 receptor in her peripheral blood was assessed, and the findings were suggestive of persistent disease activity. Hence, her azathioprine dose was increased to 200 mg/day.
Thirty months after diagnosis, our patient remains in partial renal remission, with stable stage 4 chronic kidney disease (creatinine, 2.5 mg/dL; glomerular filtration rate, 28 mL/min/1.73 m2) and minimal proteinuria.