The patient, a 3-year-old female, visited the dentistry and pediatric clinics in the Uji-Tokushukai Medical Center, Uji, Japan. She had no fever, right jaw pain, mild trismus, and preauricular facial swelling around the right mandible, but had neither acne nor pustulosis. She was the only child in her family, and her family history was unremarkable. She had healthy dentition and no history of trauma or recurrent aphthous ulcer. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a hyperostotic right mandible, with osteolytic and sclerotic changes associated with periosteal reactions, which led us first to suspect bacterial osteomyelitis (BOM), although she did not have high C-reactive protein (CRP) values with normal white blood cell counts, and her blood culture was negative. Serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and uric acid were within the normal ranges, while alkaline phosphatase was slightly elevated. Vitamin C levels were not examined.

Physically, there was no apparent abscess or fistula at the jaw lesion. Though she received oral antibiotics (AMPC) for 1 month, her symptoms did not improve. From CT images, Langerhans’ cell histiocytosis was thought to be improbable, rather, CNO was highly likely. Consultation with otolaryngologists led to some debate about whether a biopsy of the affected mandible was required to reach a correct diagnosis, as reported by several authors; however, we chose no invasive measures. During the following 5 months, no clinical features of BOM manifested, and the follow-up of blood tests remained normal. At 6 months after the initial visit, MRI (STIR image) revealed a low-density hyperostotic right mandible. In addition, inflammation had spread to the right masseter muscle, and to the right interior and exterior wing pterygoid muscles, which was suggestive of CNO rather than BOM.

Under a probable diagnosis of CNO, the patient received flurbiprofen (Froben; 3 mg/kg/day), which is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). During the 6 months of treatment with flurbiprofen, she was doing well; the facial swelling was ameliorated, with only occasional mild pain in the involved jaw. However, to obtain a better outcome, we then switched treatment after 12 months; the patient received a combined treatment with oral alendronate jelly (2/5 adult dose; 14 mg; 0.7 mg/kg/day), which is normally used for adults at 35 mg/day, plus flurbiprofen. This alendronate treatment was administered once per week. After 1 month of treatment with this regimen, her symptoms subsided markedly, with normalized serum CRP levels and no acceleration of the erythrocyte sedimentation rate. At the age of 4.5 years (18 months from the initial visit), the patient was almost symptom-free. Thereafter, both drugs were tapered.