A 75-year-old man who received pembrolizumab (a humanized monoclonal anti-PD-1 antibody) for lung squamous cell carcinoma (T2aN3M1b, stage IV) presented with limb weakness. At the age of 72, he showed slowly progressive difficulty in climbing stairs, but his creatine kinase (CK) level was within normal limits 7 months before the pembrolizumab introduction. At the day of the first infusion of pembrolizumab, his CK level was mildly elevated to 552 IU/L, but he showed no additional symptoms. After the first infusion of pembrolizumab, his CK levels increased to 1054 IU/L at day 44 . Neurological examination demonstrated diffuse limb weakness including the quadriceps (Medical Research Council [MRC] grade 4/4) and finger flexors (MRC grade 3/3) and atrophy of the quadriceps and paraspinal muscles. Myositis-specific autoantibodies and anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies were negative. Electromyography indicated an irritable myopathy. Echocardiography showed normal left ventricular function. Muscle biopsy at day 59 demonstrated prominent variation in muscle fiber size, rimmed vacuoles , endomysial CD8-positive cell infiltration with invasion of non-necrotic fibers , overexpression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I antigen in non-necrotic fibers , and p62-positive inclusions . Abundant endomysial PD-1-positive cell infiltration fiber , programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1) overexpression in the invaded fibers, and PD-L1-positive cells were also observed. The localization of PD-1-positive cells was consistent with that of CD8-positive cells (data not shown).
The patient was diagnosed with clinicopathologically defined sIBM and suspected exacerbation of sIBM due to anti-PD-1 therapy. Pembrolizumab was discontinued without introduction of immunosuppressive therapy. His CK levels decreased to 489 IU/L at day 64. The patient had been stable disease of his lung cancer after the first infusion of pembrolizumab. However, his brain metastasis was revealed at day 94. After gamma knife radiosurgery for the metastasis, pembrolizumab was restarted at day 122; 12 additional infusions were administered. His limb weakness gradually worsened without further elevation of CK levels. The primary lung lesion progressed after the additional treatment with pembrolizumab and led to the evaluation of progressive disease. The patient died of sepsis, shortly after a 15-month follow-up.