In June 2020, a 21-year-old male was admitted to our department after 2 weeks onset of headache, mild paraparesis (right side worse than left side), tactile, and thermic hypoesthesia with a D2 level. A contrast-enhanced MRI scan of the brain and spine showed an intramedullary lesion extending from D1 to D5. The cranial portion of the tumor presented an apparently exophytic extramedullary component which extended on the right posterolateral side up to C7 . A diffuse craniospinal leptomeningeal thickening was also present . A total-body CT scan ruled out lesions outside the CNS and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis excluded infection. Corticosteroid therapy was administered with no clinical improvement. After a week, the neurological status deteriorated rapidly with paraparesis worsening and onset of hydrocephalus with headache, emesis, and lethargy. The patient, therefore, underwent external ventricular drain positioning, once again, cultural and cytologic CSF analysis was not diagnostic. A C7-D4 laminectomy was subsequently performed. Intraoperatively, the spinal cord appeared swollen and distorted, with difficult to identify the apparent exophitic nodule. The tumor was then approached with intraoperative ultrasound and functional mapping with direct electrical stimulation with a monopolar probe.[,] The procedure was interrupted due to sudden deterioration of the motor evoked potentials; then, to decompress the spinal cord, a duraplasty was completed using a dural patch and a pedicled multifidus muscle flap was performed to decrease the risk of CSF leakage.[,]
Postoperatively, the patient showed an immediate mild worsening of the lower limbs deficit. After a few days, severe further neurological deterioration occurred with progressive motor deficit to the upper limbs and ultimately respiratory failure. Mechanical ventilation was necessary and the patient was, therefore, transferred to the Intensive Care Unit. During the following weeks, he developed tetraplegia and underwent surgery for ventriculoperitoneal shunt positioning. By the time, the histological diagnosis was available; the clinical status would not allow radiotherapy (RT) or chemotherapy (ChT). The patient deceased approximately 90 days after hospitalization due to respiratory complications.