Painless and progressive visual impairment of both eyes over two years.
A 27-year-old man presented to our hospital because of painless and progressive visual impairment of both eyes over two years. The patient had no other positive symptoms apart from blurred vision. The patient had no other positive symptoms apart from blurred vision. The patient had no history of ocular diseases.
He was diagnosed with hypocalcemia when he was young but did not know exactly when and the serum calcium concentration at that time. He relied on a diet of milk or calcium-containing foods and calcium tablets to supplement his calcium levels at that time but subsequently did not take regular calcium supplements. He started to experience muscle cramps in his upper extremities, less markedly in his thighs and calves approximately ten years ago. However, he did not seek help for these symptoms until the occurrence of epilepsy. Seven years ago, he underwent cerebral surgery for epileptic seizures.
The patient denied any diagnoses of personal or family history.
The ocular examination revealed a preoperative binocular visual acuity of 16/200, and the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was not improved. The intraocular pressure in the right and left eyes was 15 mmHg and 16 mmHg, respectively. There was bilateral symmetrical opacity of the lens presenting as punctate opacity in the posterior subcapsular cortex together with radial opacity in the peripheral cortex. Fundus examination showed no pathological changes.
The biochemical analysis indicated a serum total calcium level of 1.21 mmol/L (serum ionized calcium level 0.72 mmol/L in arterial blood gas analysis), a serum phosphorus level of 1.67 mmol/L and a serum magnesium level of 0.62 mmol/L, indicating significantly low levels of serum calcium and magnesium but high serum phosphorus. His intact PTH level was 0 pg/mL. Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), cortisol hormone at 8:00 am, thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyroid hormones (TT3, TT4, FT3, FT4), whole blood count, coagulation function, renal and liver function tests were within normal limits . An electrocardiogram showed that there was a prolonged QT interval.
Anterior segment photography revealed punctuate opacity in the posterior subcapsular cortex together with radial opacity in the peripheral cortex .