A previously healthy 64-year-old male was admitted to the hospital with headache, fever and later imbalance, blurred vision and general slowness. Patient’s neurological examination revealed nuchal rigidity and general clumsiness. Blood tests showed leukocytosis (11.90 × 109/l) and an increased C-reactive protein (47 mg/l). A computer tomography (CT) scan of the brain showed normal results. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was clear but yellowish and had a slightly elevated count of erythrocytes (10 × 106/l), high levels of leukocytes (940 × 106/l; 40% lymphocytes and 56% granulocytes), elevated protein levels (1,696 mg/l), and hypoglycorrhachia (0.9 mmol/l). Bacterial cultures and CSF staining remained negative.
Meningitis was suspected, and the patient was treated with intravenous (IV) dexamethasone (10 mg four times a day), ceftriaxone (4 g daily), and acyclovir (750 mg three times a day). Four days after admission, when his C-reactive protein had decreased to 10 mg/l, viral meningitis was considered the most probable cause. As a result, the treatment with ceftriaxone and dexamethasone was discontinued, but the acyclovir treatment continued.
Nine days after admission, the patient’s general condition slowly deteriorated, and he became increasingly somnolent. The patient was restarted on IV ceftriaxone (2 g daily, which was increased to 4 g daily one day later), in combination with doxycycline (100 mg twice a day) due to the suspicion of borreliosis. On the following day, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, and it revealed signs compatible with ventriculitis in the right lateral ventricle and the third ventricle .
Eleven days after admission, the patient’s consciousness rapidly declined. A new CT scan of the brain revealed hydrocephalus and a mild midline shift, attributed to the enlarged right lateral ventricle , so an emergency ventriculostomy was performed. Cerebrospinal fluid obtained during the operation appeared clear but yellowish, with later debris observed in the CSF collector bag. Doxycycline was discontinued. Due to the neurosurgeon’s suspicion of a poor clinical response to ceftriaxone, it was switched to IV cefotaxime (2 g three times a day), with the dosage increased to 2 g four times a day by an infection consultant two days later. No signs of renal dysfunction were detected, and serum creatinine levels remained within the normal range. The patient’s condition rapidly improved after the ventriculostomy and antibiotic treatment. On the 21st day after admission, the ventriculostomy was closed.
In the Gram staining of the CSF sample obtained from the ventriculostomy at the time of the operation, chains of gram-positive cocci were observed inside polymorphonuclear leukocytes. The bacteria’s morphology resembled that of streptococci. Bacterial cultures of both CSF and blood remained negative. The sample, which displayed bacteria in the Gram staining, and another CSF sample taken one day later, were analyzed using in-house bacterial 16s ribosomal RNA gene amplification by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with high sensitivity for both aerobic and anaerobic bacteria, followed by sequencing. The analysis of both samples tested positive for S. intermedius.
No clinical signs of infective endocarditis were observed in further assessments, and echocardiography was not performed. The patient mentioned a history of chronic dental problems. An orthopantomography revealed advanced periodontal destruction in several teeth, and periapical abscesses were found in teeth 33 and 31 . Maxillary teeth 15 and 16 were urgently extracted, followed by the extraction of teeth 17, 23, 24, 31, 32, 33, and 43. During the latter operation, prophylactic metronidazole (500 mg three times a day) was initiated for three days. The patient continued to improve and was discharged in good condition one month after admission, with only slight left-sided hemiparesis. The clinical time course, and the most important examinations and interventions of the patient during hospitalisation are illustrated in Fig. .