A woman in her 50s was kicked in the right upper quadrant of her abdomen by a horse that weighed approximately 600 kg. The patient was initially transported to a local hospital. Pancreatic injury was suspected due to the nature of the injury, physical examinations, and contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT), and the patient was referred to our hospital 3.5h after the accident. Upon arrival, the patient was alert with a blood pressure of 165/92 mmHg, heart rate of 82 bpm, SpO2 of 92% under room air, and body temperature of 37.4°C. Her abdomen had a bruise in the upper right quadrant with tenderness in the same area; however, no signs of peritoneal irritation were observed. Blood test findings were as follows: white blood cell count, 8160/μL; hemoglobin, 11.7g/dL; platelets, 25.8×104/μL; aspartate aminotransferase, 265 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 213IU/L; amylase, 247 IU/L; lipase, 408 IU/L; creatine phosphokinase, 180IU/L; and C-reactive protein, 0.03mg/dL. Repeat contrast-enhanced CT was performed after admission, which revealed pneumoperitoneum and hematoma near the duodenum, discontinuity of the duodenal wall, and a poorly contrasted area in the pancreas head. Because duodenal laceration was suspected, the patient underwent emergent laparotomy 6h after the accident without additional examinations, such as magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), to evaluate pancreatic duct injury, for the purpose of time-saving.

The operative findings were as follows: the first portion of the duodenum was completely lacerated (American Association for the Surgery of Trauma Organ Injury Severity Scoring System [AAST-OIS] Grade III). An extended Kocher maneuver was performed, and the presence of any other organ injuries including the pancreatic head, was investigated. No contamination around the pancreatic head, saponification of fat tissue, or other injuries to major vessels and other organs were observed. We planned to evaluate the patient with intraoperative endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) if any surgical findings suggested biliary or main pancreatic duct injury; however, no obvious injury to the pancreatic head was observed on intraoperative findings; therefore, intraoperative ERCP was omitted. Because the patient’s vital signs were stable and the condition of the damaged tissue was favorable, primary anastomosis was performed for repair.

The ruptured duodenum and pyloric portion of the stomach were trimmed and repaired by hand-sewn end-to-end anastomosis between the gastric remnant and duodenum using 4-0 Polydioxanone. Then, an antegrade decompression tube for gastric and duodenal juice drainage and a feeding jejunostomy tube were placed. Considering the possibility of bile congestion secondary to edema of the ampulla of Vater, delayed biliary injury, and anastomotic leakage, cholecystectomy was performed to place a C-tube (cystic duct tube) for biliary drainage as an adjunctive procedure. Two drains were placed around the pancreas.

The patient’s postoperative course was favorable. The serum amylase and lipase levels were normalized on postoperative day (POD) 2. An oral contrast study on POD 8 revealed no leakage from the injury site and normal passage of contrast into the jejunum. A bile duct contrast study on POD 16 revealed normal passage of contrast into the duodenum. The decompression and feeding tubes were removed on POD 15, followed by the C-tube on POD 16. The patient was discharged on POD 20 in stable condition. At an outpatient visit 3 months postoperatively, the patient reported no abdominal pain or stenosis symptoms.