A 49-year-old Sri Lankan man with a history of long standing type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension, presented with fever, loss of appetite and generalised body aches for 1 week duration. He had a past history of right medial malleolar screw fixation 10 years ago following a traumatic uncomplicated closed fracture. He was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus 20 years ago; however, he was lost to follow-up with poor glycaemic control demonstrated by a HbA1c on admission of 8.5%. He was a non-smoker and consumed alcohol occasionally. He did not have any history of chronic lung disease or steroid use. There was no recent history of trauma or break in skin integrity and there were no cutaneous lesions or ulcers evident on examination. However, he was a tractor driver and had a history of exposure to mud in paddy fields. Due to the presence of fever with considerable myalgia and exposure to mud in paddy fields, he was initially suspected to have leptospirosis and was started on intravenous ceftriaxone at the local hospital. Four days later, he developed right ankle swelling and discolouration and was transferred to the tertiary care centre for further management.
On admission, he was febrile (103 °F) and tachycardic with a pulse rate of 104 / min. His other haemodynamic parameters were normal with a blood pressure of 140/80 mmHg and was mildly dehydrated with a urine output of 0.5 ml/kg/hour. He was not haemodynamically compromised due to sepsis and his urine output improved with fluid resuscitation. He had a white blood cell count of 15 × 103/uL with a neutrophil leucocytosis; C-reactive protein was 190 mg/dl and erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 86 mm/hour. His platelet count was 148 × 103/uL. His liver enzymes were mildly elevated and rest of the basic biochemistry was unremarkable (alanine transaminase: 252 U/L, aspartate transaminase: 222 U/L, serum creatine: 0.46 mg/dl). The X-ray of the right ankle revealed a healed fracture with two screws which were in position. There was no evidence of osteomyelitis .
He underwent a wound debridement of the right ankle and the necrotic skin and subcutaneous tissue were excised. The pus collection in the subcutaneous tissue plane was removed. Aspiration of the ankle joint revealed purulent fluid. Therefore, an arthrotomy and washout was done. One loosely fitted screw was removed and the wound was left open. Removal of the second screw was considered but this procedure was abandoned due to technical difficulties and concern about iatrogenically causing a fracture in the process.
The pus culture and the peripheral blood culture was positive for Burkholderia pseudomallei sensitive to meropenem and co-trimoxazole. Direct smear showed gram-negative bacilli with bipolar appearance. Non-lactose fermenting colonies with a metallic sheen were isolated on blood and MacConkey agar, and Burkholderia pseudomallei species were isolated using the latex agglutination test . The BD PHOENIX (Becton Dickinson Diagnostic Systems, Sparks, Md.) automated microbiology system for direct identification also confirmed the presence of Burkholderia pseudomallei.
His melioidosis antibody titre using the indirect haemagglutination assay was > 10,240. He was empirically managed with intravenous ceftriaxone 1 g 12 hourly and metronidazole 500 mg 8 hourly for 7 days. This was because Leptospirosis or anaerobic infection of the lower limb was thought possible given his environmental exposure history. Following the bacterial culture reports and the antibiotic sensitivity patterns, a diagnosis of melioidosis was made and the antibiotics were changed to intravenous Meropenem 1 g 8 hourly and Metronidazole 500 mg 8 hourly. Metronidazole was continued due to the presence of necrotic tissue and suspicion of superadded anaerobic infection. However, after 1 week he clinically deteriorated with worsening wound infection, fever and septic shock. He was resuscitated with fluids and commenced on noradrenaline. He required inotropic support for 4 days. He underwent another wound debridement and the dose of intravenous Meropenem was escalated to 2 g 8 hourly while continuing intravenous Metronidazole 500 mg 8 hourly and oral Co-trimoxazole 1920 mg 12 hourly was also added. He improved after a few days following the second wound debridement and supportive management. Fortunately, he did not develop any other organ dysfunction. All three antibiotics were continued for a period of 8 weeks.
He was screened for other foci for infection with chest radiograph, transthoracic and trans-oesophageal echocardiogram, abdominal ultrasonography and urine culture and all were negative. A computed tomography of the chest and abdomen was not performed as he did not have any clinical features to suggest a chest or abdominal foci of infection and the basic imaging were negative.
His temperature normalised 4 days after the second wound debridement and escalation of antibiotic therapy. However, he further required repeated wound debridement and removal of necrotic and infected tissue. His inflammatory markers became normal after 5 weeks of antibiotics (C-reactive protein of 2.6 mg/dl). Wound healing with secondary intention was achieved after 6 weeks . He was given a total course of intravenous antibiotics for 8 weeks and was discharged on oral co-trimoxazole 1920 mg 12 hourly. Repeat X-rays at 2 months showed features of chronic osteomyelitis . Due to the high risk of recurrence, the eradication phase was continued for a period of 6 months.
At 6 months follow up, he had satisfactory functional outcome with acceptable range of motion. There was no clinical evidence of relapse. However, the plain radiographic changes were persistent without any worsening.