A previously healthy 45-year-old woman had an cesarean section delivery. She underwent total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingectomy and adhesiolysis 3 days after admission because conservative treatment of adenomyosis was ineffective. The patient had a positive cephalosporin skin test and was given clindamycin to prevent postoperative infection. However, she developed a sudden onset chills, a high fever (39.0 °C), and a fast heart rate (115 bpm) but had normal blood pressure (118/69 mmHg) 14 h after the surgery. Laboratory blood samples obtained when the patient was febrile showed that the patient’s white blood cell (WBC) count was 8.0 × 10^9/l with 94.4% neutrophils, and the serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 7.0 mg/l. Levofloxacin was added to expand the antibacterial spectrum. However, these symptoms did not improve, and she subsequently developed nausea, vomiting, abdominal distension, abdominal pain, diarrhea and oliguria. At that time, the serum laboratory tests showed that the WBC count (1.9 × 10^9/l) fell below the normal range, and CRP (152 mg/l) was further elevated. Twenty-four hours later, the patient showed anuria. Physical examination detected tachycardia (152 bpm) and hypotension (72/39 mmHg). The patient’s hemodynamic parameters, fever chart and antibiotics administered are shown in Fig. .
The patient was rapidly admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). Arterial blood gas indicated high anion gap metabolic acidosis with respiratory alkalosis with a pH of 7.33, anion gap of 16.8 and lactic acid of 4.4. Her laboratory tests showed low albumin (22.3 g/l), high serum creatinine (251.9 μmol/l), dysfunction of coagulation (INR1.97, PT22.4 s), and markedly elevated D-dimer (13.477 mg/l). Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis was performed to rule out the presence of a possible occult abscess . She was instantly placed empirically on imipenem/cilastatin and linezolid, given fluid resuscitation and started on noradrenaline via a peripheral intravenous catheter. Afterwards, she received intravenous infusion of albumin (80 g) and virus inactivated plasma (300 ml). Three days after surgery, two sets of blood cultures were positive for S. mitis in the aerobic and anaerobic bottles with a time to positivity of less than 72 h. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing revealed resistance towards clindamycin, moderate resistance towards erythromycin and sensitivity towards penicillin, levofloxacin, vancomycin and linezolid. Henceforward, the patient was diagnosed with STSS caused by S. mitis. Frequent replacement of antibiotics may lead to the emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, so we did not use penicillin immediately.
On day 4 after surgery, the patient developed moderate acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) with a PaO2/FiO2 ratio of 162.5 mmHg. Pulmonary edema and bilateral pleural effusions were observed on chest radiographs. It was necessary to intubate and ventilate the patient. As the PaO2/FiO2 ratio increased to 377 mmHg and pulmonary edema and pleural effusions were improved on day 8 after surgery, ventilation could be stopped.
Due to new-onset thrombocytopenia (48 × 10^9/l) thought to be associated with STSS and continued fever despite receiving adequate antibiotic therapy, linezolid was discontinued, and imipenem/cilastatin, vancomycin and penicillin were administered on day 5 after surgery. Two days later, her temperature dropped to the normal range. Additionally, there was no evidence of gram-negative bacilli infection, so we replaced imipenem/cilastatin with levofloxacin based on antimicrobial susceptibility testing. However, her temperature rose again 1 day later . Soon afterwards, her temperature fluctuated between low and medium heat. On day 13 after surgical intervention, physical examination showed that she developed skin redness and subcutaneous induration on the upper left side of the incision. We considered it to be cellulitis of the incision according to ultrasound imaging and the clinical manifestation, for which she underwent debridement. In addition, we used piperacillin/tazobactam instead of penicillin and levofloxacin. The hemolytic streptococcal spread of infection to the incision cannot be excluded, although the local secretion smear and cultures were sterile. Her temperature gradually dropped, and her blood pressure and lactic acidosis recovered to the normal range; hence, she was transferred to the general ward on the 15th postoperative day.
One day later, her temperature suddenly rose to 38.8 °C again despite adequate drainage of the incision . We considered that the reason for the fever was still related to cellulitis of the incision. Therefore, linezolid was used in place of vancomycin to increase the drug concentration in the skin and soft tissues. Her temperature no longer rose to 38 °C 18 days after surgery . The antibiotics were stopped on the 27th day after surgery. In summary, the patient was treated with antibiotics for a total of 4 weeks. She was discharged when her vital signs were stable, and the incision healed on day 40 after surgery.