The patient was a one-day-old boy with a prenatally diagnosed omphalocele. A 34-year-old pregnant mother was referred to our hospital at 17 weeks (approximately 4 months) of gestation with the chief concern of a singleton fetus with a 30 mm (approximately 1.18 in.) cystic lesion near the umbilical cord base. A fetal magnetic resonance image (MRI) scan (25 weeks of gestation) revealed a 30 × 33 mm (approximately 1.3 in.) cystic lesion as shown in Fig. which was suspected to be an umbilical cyst. A follow-up MRI (at 34 weeks) revealed an umbilical cord hernia instead of a cystic lesion. The baby was born vaginally at 38 weeks, weighing 2956 g, with APGAR scores of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. An omphalocele (hernial orifice diameter, 4 cm × 3 cm) with bladder prolapse was recognized as shown in Fig. . Based on appearance of umbilical site, physical examination and abdominal ultrasonography, the patient was diagnosed with a small omphalocele with bladder evagination. The small intestine prolapsed only while straining associated with crying, however, this was minimal, and we estimated that there would be low risk for hernia incarceration. So we planned the surgery for omphalocele with bladder evagination 1 day after birth.
Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in supine position. After hernia sac excision, the intestine was naturally reducible and there were no other structural anomalies. In order to secure sufficient bladder volume, we estimated the minimum residual volume as 21 ml after bladder plasty. For bladder capacity, the simplified formula: Capacity (mL) = 7 × weight (kg) was a reliable estimate of expected bladder capacity in infants independent of age . As shown in Fig. a, 8Fr. tube (Atom Multipurpose Tube, Atom Medical Corp, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted and the bladder was clamped as the maximum residual volume remained. And then clamped bladder was confirmed to be kept within the abdominal cavity. The bladder volume was also confirmed to be 30 ml using contrast medium. After the resection line was determined as shown in Fig. b, partial cystectomy was performed. The prolapsed bladder was resected and closed with two-layer continuous sutures with 4-0 PDS. The actual remaining bladder capacity was confirmed to be 30 ml by injecting a contrast dye and saline into the bladder. The patient had no associated cardiac, urogenital or skeletal anomalies. On pathological examination, bladder wall which was composed of mucosa and muscular layer was detected in the entire resected specimen.
Postoperative course was uneventful. He was regularly followed up for 2 years after surgery , and underwent umbilicoplasty at 2 years old of age . He had no trouble with urinary function.