An 85 years old woman was brought to the emergency department after collapsing at home with breathing difficulties. On arrival she was dyspnoeic with oxygen saturation of 75% on room air and a respiratory rate of 40 per minute. She also had minor bruising to her forehead as a result of her fall. She had a past history of a porcine aortic valve replacement 17 years previously, hypertension and atrial fibrillation for which she was on warfarin. On examination she was tachycardic, hypertensive and her jugular venous pressure was elevated. She had coarse crackles throughout both lungs. Arterial blood gases on 15 litres oxygen showed severe type 2 respiratory failure with pH of 7.15, pC02 9.12, p02 10.22 and bicarbonate of 22.8 mmol/l. Laboratory results showed a haemoglobin of 11.9 g/dL and INR of 4.9. ECG showed atrial fibrillation, right bundle branch block and widespread ST depression. Findings on chest radiograph were compatible with pulmonary oedema. She was commenced on a nitrate infusion, intravenous diuretics and Bi-level Positive Airway Pressure ventilation. Her condition improved rapidly and the Bi-level Positive Airway Pressure ventilation was discontinued. An hour later her breathing deteriorated and she newly developed stridor. She was noted to have developed bruising of the neck. Urgent nasoendoscopy showed a normal larynx with a slight bulge narrowing the trachea anteriorly. She was immediately intubated and ventilated. An urgent computerized tomography (CT) scan of the neck showed a large retropharyngeal haematoma causing anterior compression of the airway, extending into the posterior mediastinum and terminating behind the left atrium. Evidence of pulmonary oedema and a right pleural effusion were also seen on CT. .
Intravenous Vitamin K at a dose of 5 mg and Prothrombin Complex Concentrates (PCCs) at a dose of 50 units per kilogram were given on diagnosis of the haematoma for the reversal of anticoagulation. The INR was 1.1 when repeated subsequently 2 hours later. Due to complications of a ventilation-related pneumonia the patient stayed in intensive care for 10 days after which she was extubated uneventfully. A decision was made not to recommence anticoagulation with warfarin due to the past history of recurrent injurious falls and the high risk of complications from future haemorrhagic events. The patient was commenced instead on aspirin and was discharged two weeks later to her own home.