A 78-year-old Japanese man with ischemic heart disease, chronic heart failure, and type 2 diabetes was presented with a complaint of fever for 2 days. He had reportedly completed a 12-day course of intravenous ceftriaxone treatment for E. coli pyelonephritis without bacteremia, 8 days earlier. He had persistent fever despite having received empirical oral levofloxacin for the last 2 days and was admitted for further investigations and management. Physical examination revealed a body temperature of 38.9 °C, respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute, heart rate of 116 beats per minute, and tenderness of the prostate gland. Laboratory findings showed a white blood cell count of 10,810/μL (neutrophils, 90.1%); C-reactive protein, 316 mg/L; hemoglobin A1c, 9.5%; urinary leukocytes, 0–1/HPF; and no evidence of urinary nitrites.
A full-body enhanced computed tomography scan showed no evidence of infectious foci, including abscesses. However, blood culture results revealed the presence of E. coli bacteremia. Therefore, we initiated intravenous cefmetazole, considering suspected bacteremic prostatitis. However, transthoracic echocardiography was performed as part of the workup for recurrent fever, which revealed moderate mitral regurgitation and a high echoic structure (measuring 13 mm × 5 mm diameter) on the posterior mitral leaflet . Since the structure was not detected in the previous transthoracic echocardiography performed 3-months earlier, we also conducted transesophageal echocardiography. It revealed a high and low echoic heterogenous immobilized structure (measuring 10.2 mm × 11.7 mm in diameter) attached to the annulus of the mitral valve from P2 to P3 and showed hypermobile vegetation (measuring 18 mm × 4.2 mm in diameter) attached continuously to the immobilized structure . With bacteremia evidence and echocardiography findings, we diagnosed the patient with infective endocarditis associated with a suspicious calcified amorphous tumor. Antibiotic treatment was modified to ceftriaxone and gentamicin following the diagnosis because E. coli was not a multidrug-resistant strain. E. coli was detected on blood culture samples taken on day-1 and day-5 of hospitalization, confirming persistent bacteremia. On day-6 of hospitalization, the patient developed altered mental status. A head magnetic resonance imaging scan was performed, which revealed bilateral acute multiple cerebral infarctions . Since no acute hemorrhagic transformation after the stroke was identified by the follow-up computed tomography, we performed removal of the vegetation and mitral valvuloplasty on day-7 of hospitalization. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established with the initial intravenous administration of heparin (300 U/kg) and maintained the activated clotting time above 400 s. Intravenous heparin was switched to oral warfarin postoperatively. There was no intraoperative or postoperative cerebral hemorrhage. Histopathological examination of the specimen showed calcified deposits and inflammatory granulation tissue infiltrated by neutrophils . The patient experienced renal insufficiency 21 days after admission, and the treatment was changed from ceftriaxone with gentamicin to ceftriaxone with ciprofloxacin. Antibiotic treatment was administered for 6 weeks from the day of the first negative blood culture result (7 days after admission). The patient recovered fully from the infection and was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital 77 days after admission.