The proband was a 22-year-old Iranian woman (south of Iran, Fars province) with DHP deficiency whose parents are a first-degree cousins. There was not any symptoms in the proband until 20 years of age, when during her first pregnancy, elevated liver enzymes was detected during her routine laboratory evaluations (ALT of 147 U/L, reference range: < 31 U/L, AST of 108 U/L, reference range: < 31 U/L and Alk-P of 350 U/L, reference range: 64–306 U/L). She also had increased level of serum iron of 227 μg/dL, reference range: 50–170 μg/Dl and PT of 14.5 s, reference range: 10.5–11.5 s. A spontaneous abortion happened to her during the first trimester of pregnancy. She was evaluated and tested for autoimmune antibodies in which the negative results excluded autoimmune hepatitis as a disease leading to liver dysfunction. Thereafter, she was presented with bloody vomiting, diarrhea, jaundice, weight loss and bilateral mild mid frequency sensorineural hearing loss. Abdominal and pelvic ultrasonography was in favor of cirrhosis and in liver biopsy cryptogenic cirrhosis was confirmed. The patient was initially diagnosed as having glycogen storage disease by considering the clinical evaluation, and referred to genetic counseling where whole-exome sequencing was conducted to discover the underlying etiology. According to NGS results, for confirming the genotype-phenotype correlation, the patient was referred to evaluate the levels of dihydrothymine and dihydrouracil by HPLC tandem-mass spectrometry in which elevated levels of both were identified in the patient’s urine in comparison with the mean concentration observed in control group’s urine (dihydrothymine (μmol/mmol creatinine): patient = 148, controls = 1.4 ± 1.1 (n = 106), dihydrouracil (μmol/mmol creatinine): patient = 254, controls = 4.9 ± 3.2 (n = 106)). There was no history of such condition in other family members.
All exons of protein coding regions and flanking introns belonged to the extracted DNA from the proband were captured and enriched by Whole Exome Sequencing method (Agilent sure select v5 exome capture kit). Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) method was conducted using illumina sequencing platform to sequence the libraries with mean > 80-100X coverage. The human reference genome (GRCH37/hg19) was downloaded in order to perform the alignment to Sequence reads using BWA program [, ]. Picard and GATK version 3.6 were used to identify the relevant variants [, ]. The VEP program was used to annotate the variants . In order to perform further annotation a set of related disease databases including OMIM, HGMD, GWAS, SwissVar and Clinvar as well as published variants were used. Filtering of common variants was done according to allele frequency in ExAC, 1000 Genome phase3, dbSNP147 and EVS. Some bioinformatics online softwares such as SIFT, polyphen2, LRT, mutation assessor and mutation taster2 were also used to discover the disease causing variants.
In order to segregate the mutation, Sanger sequencing was conducted using ABI BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems®, USA) on extracted DNA (QIAamp DNA minikit, Qiagen, Germany) belonged to the patient and her family members (parents, sister and brother). Epoch Microplate Spectrophotometer (Bio Tek Instruments, USA) was utilized to calculate the quality of extracted DNA. Desired genomic region was amplified using following oligonucleotide PCR primer pairs: DPYS-E9-F: 5′-CACAAAAAGTGGGACAATCC-3′, DPYS-E9-R: 5′-GTGAAGCCTCTGACCTTGAT-3′. The obtained sequences were analyzed using Finch TV software and NCBI Blast.
Liver biopsy specimens underwent RNA (total RNA) extraction via Invitrogen TRIzol Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) based on the company protocol. Quality of RNA was evaluated by Epoch Microplate Spectrophotometer (Bio Tek Instruments, USA). Normalized RNA samples were used to synthesis cDNA by Fermentas cDNA synthesis kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) per manufacturer’s instructions. In order to assess the DPYS gene expression SYBR Green Master Mix (Invitrogen) was used to perform the Real Time PCR in Rotor-Gene Q (QIAGEN, Germany) Real Time PCR cycler. The experiment was conducted in triplicate. In the current study, GAPDH (Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase) was used as an internal control gene. The following intron-spanning primer pairs were utilized in our study: DPYS-F: 5′-ACCCGACTTCCTCATGAATCT-3′, DPYS-R: 5′-CATCCGATCTTCAACACCATTCA-3′, for the gene of interest and GAPDH-F: 5′-ACAACTTTGGTATCGTGGAAGG-3′, GAPDH-R: 5′-GCCATCACGCCACAGTTTC-3′ for the reference gene (GAPDH PrimerBank ID: 378404907c2, ). Comparative threshold cycle method (2-∆∆CT) was used to compare the relative expression of DPYS gene between the patient’s liver tissue and her sister’s liver tissue who genetically confirmed to be unaffected (the liver biopsy was performed in her sister due to the increased levels of ALT, AST, Alk phosphatase and she was suspected to be affected with Autoimmune hepatitis due to a positive test for ANA and ASMA (titers ≥1:160)).