In June 2022, a 65-year-old female patient with a history of hypertension and dyslipidemia came to the outpatient department with a complaint of chest pain and shortness of breath. According to the patient, she was in a normal state when suddenly she started having chest pain that was sharp, high in intensity, and radiated to the left arm, worsened with exertion, and was relieved by relaxation and medication. She also has shortness of breath. After taking history and examination, the patient was found to have paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea and orthopnea. Her pulse was 68 and her blood pressure was 140/100. Past medical history revealed she had hypertension, cholelithiasis, and dyslipidemia. In 2008, she was diagnosed with class II angina according to CCS (Canadian Cardiovascular Society) grading. Coronary angiography was carried out in 2008, which revealed triple vessel coronary artery disease, valvular heart disease, and ostial stenosis, for which she underwent CABG-AVR in 2009. In CABG, the long saphenous vein was harvested from the right thigh and left leg. The pieces were joined to create an appropriate length. The left internal mammary artery was 1.5 mm, with excellent flow. LAD was found to have a diameter of 1.75 mm and was clean and located within the heart muscle (intramyocardial). The LAD was grafted with left internal mammary artery while the obtuse marginal was grafted with a reversed saphenous vein graft. In 2013, myocardial perfusion imaging was done using 8 mCi of Tc-99m isotope, which revealed normal findings. After this period, the patient remained asymptomatic upon examination in the outpatient clinic till June 2022. Transthoracic echocardiography and a Doppler study were done in June 2022, which revealed normal size left ventricle, an ejection fraction of 55%, and diastolic dysfunction grade I. A graft study was done, which revealed left main and right coronary artery were normal, the left circumflex artery with mild stenosis and obtuse marginal with subtotal stenosis and severe ostial stenosis of the LAD was observed in the proximal portion which can be seen in Figure . The patient was found to have ischemic heart disease with an increased risk of myocardial infarction. The patient is currently on drug therapy of risek, ascard, lipiget, flexiflow, monis, cancos, and sofvase. The echocardiogram of the patient is shown in Figure .