Female, 50 years old, admitted for dyspnoea associated with a week-long history of antiphospholipid syndrome, lymphoma B-type of parotid gland (free of disease), SARSCoV-2 mild, resolved without need for admission, and placement of a pin and crown three weeks prior to consultation. The patient did not report allergies or intolerances to any medication. She was using acenocoumarol 2 mg daily and clonazepam 2 mg at night. On physical examination, she was lucid, saturation 93% ambient air with correction to 98% with oxygen cannula of 2 liters per minute, tachycardia (heart rate = 120 beats/minute), no tachypnoea (respiratory rate = 18 respiratory cycles/minute). Good ventilatory mechanics with hypoventilation in the left lung. She was admitted to the general admission ward for diagnosis and treatment. Blood cultures were taken and were positive for Staphylococcus aureus sensitive to methicillin (SAMS). A chest X-ray was requested and showed bilateral pleural effusion with a predominant left side. A thoracentesis was performed and a pleural effusion was found with 6 mm vegetation on the mitral valve. Antibiotic treatment with cefazolin 2 g every 8 hours was initiated. She required pulmonary decortication and laminectomy plus drainage of a bilateral pleural effusion. After 48 hours of initiating treatment with cefazolin, a gradual decrease in platelets, leukocytes and red blood cells was observed without apparent clinical repercussion. On day 14 of treatment, she presented with a tricytopenia (leukocytes = 2400/µl, haemocrit = 26%, platelets = 106 000/µl), so a peripheral blood smear was performed that did not show immature elements. The temporal evolution of the blood series was observed, and on day 19, a marked tricytopenia was found. Given the existence of publications that describe cytopenia secondary to cephalosporins6, cefazolin was discontinued and it was decided to continue treatment with vancomycin 1 g every 12 hours. However, it had to be discontinued 48 hours later due to acute renal injury (glomerular filtration rate - GFR = 39.8 ml/min/1.73m2 for a previous value of 217 ml/min/1.73m2). Antibiotic treatment with daptomycin 10 mg/kg/day was initiated. After seven days of initiating the same, the CPK control value was 70 488 U/L (previous value = 105 U/L). At that time, renal function had improved with creatinemia of 0.98 mg/dL and GFR of 60.1 ml/min/1.73m2. Although the patient did not present myopathy symptoms or new renal impairment, it was decided to rotate daptomycin to linezolid 600 mg every 12 hours orally. Two days after initiating said antibiotic, a change in the hepatic panel was observed with elevation of hepatic transaminases (GOT = 698 U/L and GPT = 296 U/L) from previous normal values (GOT = 14 U/L and GPT = 6 U/L). Cefazolin was discontinued due to hepatoxicity associated with it. After two days without active antibiotic treatment, an improvement in the hepatic panel was observed (GOT = 171 U/L, GPT = 180 U/L) and, due to clinical stability, the patient was discharged with a cotrimoxazole 160/800 mg indication every 8 hours orally as an outpatient treatment and control by external consultations with the objective of completing 8 effective weeks of antibiotic treatment. After 12 days of discharge and still on active antibiotic treatment, the patient attended the hospital after falling from her own height with a traumatic encephalocranium, without loss of consciousness. A subdural haematoma was observed in a brain tomography and thrombocytopenia was detected in the laboratory (3000/µl) associated with leucopenia (leucocytes = 900/µl), so it was decided to re-admit the patient. Considering her background, having overcome the cytopenias associated with cefazolin and the chronology of findings, it was interpreted that the bicytopenia could be due to cotrimoxazole treatment, so it was discontinued. In Table 1, the laboratory parameters associated with the different treatments are detailed for each admission. Finally, once the subdural haematoma was resolved and the laboratory findings improved, the patient was discharged from the second admission with antibiotic treatment with clindamycin 600 mg every 12 hours orally, being able to resolve the endocarditis without new RAM. In all cases, drug interactions that could explain what was observed were discarded, and RAM was reported to the national pharmacovigilance system.
