A 77-year-old man presented with multiple pancreatic tumor lesions with a maximum diameter of 13.8 mm. The lesions had been identified by periodic ultrasonographic check-ups. He had undergone laparoscopy-assisted right nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma 11 years previously and had since been free of tumor recurrence. His medical history also included dyslipidemia; however, he had no history of diabetes. Laboratory data showed no remarkable changes, including changes in tumor markers. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple (at least 10) hypovascular tumors located in the whole pancreas and swollen regional lymph nodes . Endoscopic ultrasonography depicted these lesions as hypoechoic tumors, and fine-needle aspiration proved that they were pancreatic metastases from renal cell carcinoma. Extrapancreatic organ metastasis was not detected by positron emission tomography. Thus, TP with regional lymph node dissection was performed as a curative treatment. The pancreas was soft. The operation time was 425 min, and the blood loss was 510 mL.
Arterial blood gas analysis at the end of the operation was within normal limits (pH, 7.37; pCO2, 36.0 mmHg; HCO3, 20.5 mEq/L; and base excess, − 3.9). After the patient had recovered from general anesthesia, he was transferred from the operating room to the intensive care unit. His vital signs and consciousness were normal immediately after this transfer. Fifteen minutes after entering the intensive care unit, however, he suddenly and completely lost consciousness and stopped breathing with no prodrome. His oxygen saturation dropped to 34% despite oxygenation at 3 L/min using a face-covering mask; therefore, high-flow oxygen was administered. He spontaneously regained consciousness after 4 min. Arterial blood gas analysis during this episode revealed mild metabolic acidosis (pH, 7.34; pCO2, 42.6 mmHg; and HCO3, 22.1 mEq/L). His lactate (2.6 mmol/L) and glucose (233 mg/dL) concentrations were higher than upon completion of the operation. Intravenous administration of fentanyl was terminated because of the concern that it may prevent spontaneous ventilation. Ten minutes after recovery of consciousness, the acidosis became exacerbated (pH, 7.29; pCO2, 44.5 mmHg; and HCO3, 20.8 mmHg). The patient’s lactate (3.1 mmol/L) and glucose (246 mg/dL) concentrations increased further. Twenty minutes after the first episode, he lost consciousness and stopped breathing again. Because his consciousness did not improve (unlike the first episode), reintubation for forced ventilation was performed. Blood gas analysis showed severe acidosis and hyperglycemia (pH, 7.21; pCO2, 55.9 mmHg; HCO3, 21.4 mmHg; base excess, − 6.7; lactate, 2.9 mmol/L; and glucose, 302 mg/dL). His serum ketone (β-hydroxybutyrate) concentration after the second episode of TLOC was high (0.713 mmol/L). Head CT after reintubation revealed no remarkable change. An electrocardiogram and transthoracic echocardiogram revealed no arrhythmia or abnormal cardiac function. Continuous electrocardiographic monitoring and arterial pressure measurement throughout the episodes showed no arrhythmia or cardiac shock. Continuous insulin infusion was initiated immediately after the second episode of TLOC. The patient’s blood glucose and pH returned to the normal range, and he regained consciousness and spontaneous ventilation. The patient’s clinical course is summarized in Fig. . Estimated concentration of fentanyl at the central nerve system and plasma analyzed by Tivatrainer (version 9.1, Digital River GmbH Scheidtweilerstr, Cologne, Germany) is shown in Fig. . The next day, he was extubated without needing reintubation. An electroencephalogram recorded on postoperative day (POD) 10 revealed no signs of epilepsy or other neurological diseases. Head magnetic resonance imaging and angiography on POD 11 were devoid of sites of infarction or signs of epilepsy, and the blood vessels in the head and neck were clearly depicted without narrowing. On POD 31, the patient was discharged from the hospital with no severe postoperative complications besides the above-mentioned episodes. The final pathological diagnosis was metastases of clear cell renal cell carcinoma to the pancreas and surrounding lymph nodes with a negative surgical margin. He underwent no adjuvant therapy, and he was alive without recurrence 6 months after surgery. At the time of this writing, he had experienced no loss of consciousness since then.