A 45-year-old Caucasian man, a welder, was admitted to our hospital with the chief complaint of a painless right scrotal wall mass from 15 months ago, which had been, recently, increased in size. He denied any coexisting symptoms such as fever, chills, cough, dyspnea, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. He also denied any previous history of trauma, surgery, radiation exposure, and medications including anabolic steroids. Social history was positive for smoking tobacco use at 10 pack-years. His family history was negative for a similar condition. Initial physical examination on admission revealed body temperature 36.8 °C, heart rate 70 beats per minute, and, blood pressure 135/86 mmHg. Head and neck examination showed no evidence of lymphadenopathy. Heart and lung sounds were normal. Thorough abdominal examination findings were unremarkable, and the inguinal lymph nodes were not enlarged on palpation. Neurologically, the patient was completely normal. Genital examination showed a firm, nontender, mobile mass in the posterior wall of the right hemiscrotum, while penis, bilateral testes, epididymis, and the spermatic cords were clinically normal.
Initial laboratory work-up included complete blood count with leukocyte count of 7200/μL, hemoglobin of 14.5 g/dL, and platelet count of 186,000/μL, renal function tests with blood urea nitrogen of 12.6 mg/dL and serum creatinine of 1.1 mg/dL; blood glucose of 99 mg/dL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 12 mm/hour, and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 8 mg/L; biochemistry of Na 135 mEq/L, K 4.3 mEq/L, Ca 8.7 mg/dL, serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) 32 IU/L, serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) 36 IU/L, and alkaline phosphatase 214 IU/L. Urinalysis revealed no pathologic findings. The testicular tumor markers were within normal range: lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 150 units/L, alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) 12 ng/mL, and beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin (β-HCG) less than 2 mIU/mL. Transscrotal ultrasonography revealed a 35 18 12-mm oval-shaped, hypoechogenic, solid mass with blood flow and well-defined border. Chest x-ray examination and abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) scan were both normal, while whole-body bone scan showed no systemic metastasis .
Subsequently, the patient underwent an excisional biopsy, during which the mass was felt to be a 30 25 15-mm oval-shaped and well-circumscribed mass without capsule formation . Afterwards, the tumor was reported pathologically to be malignant spindle cell tumor, more probably of smooth muscle origin, which was attached to the surgical margins in some areas. Therefore, we did a second, wider marginal excision of the tumoral bed, which was reported to be free of residual tumors.
Preoperatively, we prescribed intravenous cefazolin (2 g) as the prophylactic antibiotic that was converted to oral cephalexin (500 mg per day) after discharge. The patient did not receive any neoadjuvant chemotherapy or radiation. Postoperative close follow-up was planned, and during the 20-month period, there was no evidence of recurrence or distant metastasis.