A 63-year-old male married , smoker , non-drinker was admitted to the hospital for the evaluation of a fever and a small amount of melena and hematemesis. This was accompanied by generalized weakness, constant fatigue and shortness of breath. Note that the patient did not suffer from any dysphagia, dyspepsia, abdominal pain or any abnormal change of bowel habits. And the patient does not have any history of continuous use of NSAIDs, according to the patient, he used them when necessary. and he was found to have anaemia depending on a medical report done before hospital admission on the background of a medical history of the juxtarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm with synthetic grafting aortobifemoral bypass 1 year earlier, hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, glaucoma, lens transplantation, and ischaemic heart disease with 6 times of catheterization with 4 stents. Note that the patient is committed to taking blood pressure, diabetes, lipid and anticoagulant medications. A medical workup, including an upper GI endoscopy and CT angiogram , was done. There were a few millimetres of opening in the second-third portion of the duodenum, through which pus discharge and blood were coming out, which was compatible with an aortoenteric fistula. It also showed caecal air bubbles. On admission, the patient was transferred to the Surgical ICU as a case of sepsis (his vital signs were a blood pressure of 90/50 mmHg, tachycardia of 135 bpm, and a temperature of 38°C, and his lab report was white blood cell 5.56 with neutrophil 96.8, haemoglobin% 11.41, ESr35 mm/h, and C-reactive protein 185.4 mg/dl), managed with IV antibiotics, and referred to the surgical ward after patient stabilization. After a few days, the patient underwent the first stage of the operation, in which an exclusion aortic limb graft with endarterectomy was performed, then an axillofemoral bypass was done, and then a femoro-femoral bypass was done using polytetrafluoroethylene. Following surgery, the patient was transferred to the ICU for close monitoring. During the second stage of the operation, we found intestinal adhesion, an aorto-duodenal fistula at the second-third part, an aortocecal fistula with severe inflammation and unhealthy tissue, an infected aortobifemoral graft with pus discharge, and large infrarenal AAA (aneurysm remnants after juxtarenal abdominal aorta repair). Then we did infrarenal aortic neck control. That is, the remainder of the juxtarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm has been removed, along with the old infected aortobifemoral graft, closure of the infrarenal abdominal aorta with double layers of prolein, fistula management, primary repair of the second-third part of the duodenum, and right hemicolectomy with primary anastomosis. The patient was kept in the SICU post-operation for further intensive care management and daily labs, and the patient started on total parental nutrition, stabilized, and was transferred to the surgical ward, where he started on an oral diet gradually and tolerated it. A follow-up CT scan was done, which had acceptable results: no leak and intact vascular supply to the lower limb and bowel. then the patient was discharged, in good general condition, afebrile, and with stable vital signs.