A 39-year-old male with a history of osteoarthritis, on as-needed non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, presented to the emergency department (ED) around 3 am with acute onset of bilateral lower extremity proximal muscle weakness. The patient reported going to bed that evening without any issue and awoke around 2 am to go to the bathroom, which was not unusual for him. However, he noticed profound weakness of the lower extremities. He could not flex at the hips and was unable to swing his legs out of bed. Eventually the patient was able to pull himself out of bed and slowly guide himself to the bathroom, noting continued severe weakness in his lower extremities. He also noted lacking the usual shoulder strength to wipe himself after using the bathroom. Approximately 18 hours prior to presentation to the ED, he had undergone a fluoroscopy-guided, intra-articular steroid injection of his right shoulder. The injection consisted of 7 milliliters (mL) of triamcinolone/ropivacaine mixture containing 2 mL of triamcinolone 40 milligrams per milliliter (mg/mL) (total of 80 mg of triamcinolone) and 5 mL of ropivacaine 0.75%. The procedure was uncomplicated, and he reported a 1/10 pain level post-procedure, down from 5/10 pre-procedure.
Upon presentation to the ED, he was well appearing, well nourished, and in no acute distress. He was afebrile and vital signs were as follows: heart rate 110 beats per minute; blood pressure 140/80 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg); respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute; oxygen saturation 98%; and temperature 97.5°F. Neurologic exam revealed 5/5 strength in his bilateral upper extremities, as well as at the knees and ankles bilaterally. However, he possessed only 3+/5 flexion strength of the bilateral hips. Patellar and Achilles reflexes were 2+ bilaterally. Vibratory sense was intact in both feet. Rectal tone was normal. The rest of his physical exam was unremarkable.
A differential diagnosis was formulated to include stroke, spinal compression syndrome, Guillain-Barré syndrome, rhabdomyolysis, electrolyte derangement, including hypokalemic periodic paralysis, transverse myelitis, myositis, and myopathy.
Emergency department diagnostics included a complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, creatine kinase (CK), erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein level, all of which were within the reference ranges. Peak flow was 500 liters per minute (L/min) (normal range 300–660 L/min), and post-void residual volume on point-of-care ultrasound was 70 mL (normal <200 mL). Urinalysis showed greater than 500 mg/dL glucose (reference range negative), trace ketones (reference range negative), and small protein (reference range negative). Given the patient’s history of glucocorticoid use, exam with decreased hip flexion strength, reassuring lab work, peak flow, and post-void residual, a diagnosis of acute steroid-induced myopathy was made.
The internal medicine team was consulted to evaluate the patient in the ED. They agreed with the diagnosis of acute steroid-induced myopathy. The patient reported some improvement in his strength while in the ED, although not back to baseline, but he was able to ambulate. Neurology was consulted by the internal medicine team. Given his improvement in the ED, it was recommended by neurology that the patient follow up as an outpatient. The patient was discharged from the ED and followed up in the neurology clinic three days later. At that time, he reported complete resolution of his symptoms about 48 hours after presentation to the ED without residual deficits. Neurology ultimately diagnosed him with a transient myopathy and recommended that he avoid intra-articular glucocorticoid injections in the future.