A 41-year-old woman was diagnosed with asthma and allergic rhinitis five years ago. She received medium-dose inhaled corticosteroids, long-acting β2-agonists, and leukotriene receptor antagonists. Her asthma gradually deteriorated. During the last month before her admission in the hospital, she experienced exertional dyspnea, continuous nasal congestion, and loss of smell. During the last seven days before her admission in the hospital, she experienced dyspnea at rest and paresthesia as well as pain in the bilateral lower legs and arthralgia in both knees. She was admitted to our hospital with complaints of severe dyspnea. During admission, a wheeze could be confirmed in the bilateral lung field and the patient experienced progressive paresthesia and pain in the bilateral lower legs and arthralgia in both knees. These neurologic symptoms occurred simultaneously, while no other symptoms were observed. Neurological examination revealed normal cranial nerve and manual muscle testing results were normal. The patient never experienced any neuropathic or residual neuropathic symptoms. Her blood pressure was 94/62 mmHg, pulse rate was 109 beats/minute, respiratory rate was 20 breaths/minute, oxygen saturation was 95% on room air, and body temperature was 36.7 °C. Laboratory findings revealed a white blood cell count of 22,200/μL with 66.7% eosinophils, hemoglobin 10.8 g/dL, C-reactive protein 8.48 mg/dL, and IgE 722 IU/mL. Myeloperoxidase ANCA and proteinase-3 (PR3)-ANCA were within normal ranges. Arterial blood examination at room air showed a pH of 7.434, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) of 38.8 mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) of 73.5 mmHg, and bicarbonate (HCO3−) of 25.9 mEq/L. A chest X-ray revealed reticular shadows in the bilateral lungs , which improved after the initial prednisolone treatment . Computed tomography revealed ground glass opacity and consolidation in the bilateral lung fields and paranasal sinusitis , which improved after prednisolone treatment . Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) contained a high percentage of eosinophils (90.0%). Transbranchial lung biopsy specimens showed eosinophilic infiltration ; the same was also observed on nasal polyp biopsy . Electrocardiogram and echocardiography were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed no dural thickening related to hypertrophic pachymeningitis. The patient was diagnosed with EGPA as her condition matched the characteristic clinical course described by the American College of Rheumatology classification criteria with symptoms due to vasculitis following asthma and elevated eosinophils in the peripheral blood.
Figure A shows the patient’s clinical course. Pain scores on Numerical Rating Scale (NRS) were assessed . Quality of life was assessed using the Euro quality of life 5-dimension (EQ-5D) -3L scale . The Japanese version of EQ-5D has been validated previously . On admission, NRS score was 5 and EQ-5D score was 0.607. After admission, NRS peaked to 7 and EQ-5D was minimal 0.501. The patient was initially administered with 50 mg/day of prednisolone that resulted in the improvement of symptoms. However, considerable bilateral paresthesia remained (NRS: 3, EQ-5D: 0.769), and the patient was advised for a follow-up. After prednisolone was tapered, the patient was discharged. When prednisolone was tapered to 7 mg (10 months from treatment initiation), she again experienced increased eosinophil count in the peripheral blood and recurrence of symptoms (NRS: 5, EQ-5D: 0.667) such as paresthesia and pain in the bilateral lower legs and arthralgia in both knees. She then initiated treatment with mepolizumab (300 mg every four weeks). After administration of mepolizumab, her paresthesia, pain, and arthralgia gradually improved (NRS: 1, EQ-5D: 1.000). A nerve conduction test performed 3 months after prednisolone treatment showed motor and sensory nerve conduction amplitudes were decreased to 12.7 mV, 9.2 mV, and 12.6 μV in the right tibial ankle, right tibial popliteal, and right sural nerves, respectively . The test was repeated after 4 months of mepolizumab treatment, at which time these conduction amplitudes increased to 18.8 mV, 13.8 mV, and 28.3 μV, respectively .