In 2019, a 69-year-old Italian woman presented to our ENT Clinic with a 1-month history of sore throat. She was a smoker with the consumption of 15 cigarettes per day for several years. As for the rest, her past medical history was unremarkable.
So, a nasopharyngoscopic examination was performed with the incidental finding of multiple, grey-brown, irregular and slightly elevated lesions, ranging from 2 to 4 mm in the maximal diameter, with clearly identified margins, near the right Eustachian tube opening .
The overlying mucosa was intact, without signs of necrosis or bleeding when touched. Melanoma, melanosis or malignant tumour were suspected on macroscopic evaluation. Examination of neck, nasal cavity and larynx didn’t reveal abnormalities. Under local anaesthesia, one of the larger lesions was biopsied for histological assessment. The surgical specimen was a single, grey-brown, mucosal piece measuring 0.2x0.2x0.1 cm. Microscopic examination revealed a well demarcated lesion, covered by normal respiratory epithelium and composed by several seromucinous glands with diffuse oncocytic metaplasia. Moreover, scattered brown pigments was found in the cytoplasm of oncocytic cells. They were positive for Fontana-Masson staining and negative for Pears’s ones, confirming the melanin nature. There weren’t either cytological atypia nor mitotic figures in the epithelial cells of the glands. Immunohistochemically, dendritic cells were immunoreactive to S-100 protein and negative for HMB-45. Thus, based on these findings, the lesion was assessed as melanotic oncocytic metaplasia of the nasopharynx. Considering the benign nature of MOM, other similar lesions around the right Eustachian tube opening weren’t excised but only followed with periodic nasoscopic examinations. As previously stated, after diagnosis, the patient was controlled with nasopharynx endoscopy each three months. Thus, at nine-month follow-up, lesions in nasopharynx, near the right Eustachian tube opening, were unchanged, without progression to malignancy.