A 10-day-old boy was born at 38 weeks’ gestation and had tachypnea at 65 breaths per minute. The liver margin was palpable 4 cm below the left costal margin. The heart rhythm was normal but a grade II-IV systolic murmur could be heard. Laboratory tests showed that his brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level was greater than 5000 pg/ml. His CKMB was 110 U/L, C-reactive protein was 23.4 mg/L, alpha fetoprotein was greater than 1210 ng/ml, PTA 54%, INR 1.6, APTT 50 s, FIB 1.5 g/l, D-dimer 1064 μg/L, HGB, 123 g/L, MCH 36.4 pg, total bilirubin (BilT)196.7 umol/L, BilD 13.2 umol/L, ALT 44 U/L, and AST 23 U/L. Blood gas analysis revealed that the carbon dioxide pressure was raised to 53.4 mmHg and the oxygen partial pressure was 62.5 mmHg.
Echocardiography demonstrated a small PDA of 1.5-1.8 mm with right to left shunting, a large ASD with left to right shunting, and severe right atrial and right ventricular enlargement. A severe systolic pressure gradient of 70 mmHg suggested marked elevation of pulmonary artery pressure at the near systemic level. Color Doppler scanning of the liver displayed abundant blood flow in the lesion. The left hepatic vein was dilated to 8 mm with two great branches feeding the mass. The right hepatic artery and a branch arising from the abdominal aorta were also in close association with the lesion.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed that the lesion enhanced irregularly in the left lobe of the liver. It was irregularly hypodense on plain scan with peripheral enhancement in the arterial phase and centripetal fill-in in the portal venous phase. In the delayed phases, the density of the leision was slightly higher than that of the liver parenchyma. The patient received diuretic therapy, fluid restriction, low-flow oxygen, and infection control for the management of the heart failure. After treatment his breathing difficulty improved. Then the patient was transferred to Beijing Children’s Hospital for surgery and the adhesion between the tumor and the intestine was found during the operation. The patient eventually died due to postoperative complications and multiple organ failure.