A seven year old girl presented with a lump in the right lateral forehead of two weeks duration. The mother of the patient noticed the lump while combing the child’s hair. There was no reported fever, pain, redness or tenderness over the lump indicating an inflammatory process. The patient denied any history of trauma or contact with chemicals, especially cosmetics reducing suspicion of a cutaneous hypersensitivity reaction. There was no reported visual impairment, diplopia, blurred vision, visual field defect, or opthalmoplegia to suggest ocular involvement. She strongly denied parafunction of the facial muscles like brukshism. Past medical history was non-contributory the patient reported intermittent headaches that were relieved with simple analgesics. The headache history was not compatible with migraine type or tension type headaches. The lump had not previously detected by her parents or medical practitioners. The most recent available photograph that was taken at 3 years of age revealed no evidence of hypertrophy of the right temporalis region. Physical and neurological examinations were unremarkable. The child was of average build (height 128 cm, 90th centile, weight 25 Kg, 75th centile) and healthy appearing without dysmorphism. There was marked enlargement of the right temporalis muscle, preserving the shape of the muscle, without evidence of inflammation. There was no evidence of hypertrophy of the other facial muscles on the same side or opposite side. There was no visual impairment or visual field defect. The cranial nerve examination was intact upon exam; the left side temporalis muscle was not hypertrophied. Hematological and biochemical tests were unremarkable. A complete blood count revealed a white blood cell count 9.4 × 1000 cells/mm3 (μL) (normal 4–12 × 1000 cells/mm3(μL) with 35% neutrophils and 48% lymphocytes, hemoglobin 13.2 g/dl (normal 11.5–14.5 g/dl),platelets 230 × 103/mm3(μL) (normal 150–400 × 103/mm3(μL), C-reactive protein 3 mg/L (normal 5 - 10 mg/L), clotting profile revealed Bleeding Time (BT) 2.5 min (normal 2–8 min), INR 1.06 (normal 0.8–1.2), activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (aPTT) 28.4 Seconds (normal 21.0–34.0 s). Liver function tests were within normal limits, including Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT) 20 U/L (normal 3–45 U/L) and Aspartate Aminotransferase (AST) 18 U/L (normal 15–50 U/L). Ultrasound Scan revealed uniformly enlarged right temporalis muscle. Cranial Magnetic Resonance Imaging (cMRI) revealed that the entire right temporalis muscle was hypertrophied compared to the left (right 9 mm vs. left 5.7 mm), preserving normal muscle morphology and normal signal intensity without abnormal contrast enhancement. No intracranial abnormalities or involvement of the bones were detected . The diagnosis was confirmed by an incision biopsy, which demonstrated unremarkable skeletal muscle with preserved architecture. Available treatment modalities were discussed with the parents, and since the child was asymptomatic no immediate interventions were planned. She will be followed up regularly in the clinic (Additional file : Time line of events).