A 54-year-old woman was brought to the emergency department after a syncope at home. The patient had been cleaning the barbecue in the garden when she felt ‘hard heart beats’ and passed out without further warning. The patient had no memory of the incident that had resulted in a mild head trauma.
Her past medical history was remarkable for deep vein thrombosis (∼10 years earlier), ankylosing spondylitis, depression, and a recent transient ischaemic attack (TIA). Approximately 5 years earlier the patient had undergone a coronary angiogram following an episode of chest pains. The angiogram had identified no atheromatosis. Cardiovascular risk factors encompassed hypertension, well-controlled hypercholesterolaemia, and depression. The patient had never smoked and did not have diabetes or a family history of heart disease or sudden premature death. The physical examination, including a cardiac and neurological examination, showed no abnormalities.
At admission, the patient was prescribed the following: citalopram 40 mg/day, adalimumab 40 mg subcutaneously/2 weeks (for ankylosing spondylitis), paracetamol p.n. 1 g max 4 times/day, enalapril 10 mg/day, atorvastatin 40 mg/day, and clopidogrel 75 mg/day.
A CT scan of the cerebrum showed no cerebral damage. The ECG showed sinus rhythm and QTc interval +600 ms . Blood tests were largely normal [serum: potassium 3.4 mmol/L (ref 3.5–4.6 mmol/L) and magnesium, 1.01 mmol/L (ref 0.71–0.94 mmol/L)]. Haemoglobin, leucocytes, creatinine, sodium, alanine transaminase, basic phosphatase, and C reactive protein were within normal ranges. Also, troponin I and D-dimer were not elevated. A transthoracic echocardiography was performed, showing no abnormalities.
After 1 day of telemetry, an episode of self-terminating Torsade de Pointes (TdP) lasting 18 s was recorded . The patient was conscious during the episode but reported feeling dizzy and that symptoms were similar to what she had felt before her syncope the previous day. Empirical treatment with 16 mmol intravenous magnesium and 3 g of potassium chloride was immediately given. Serum potassium increased to 3.8 mmol/L on the following day but the QTc interval remained prolonged (640 ms).
The case was conferred with a psychiatrist, and citalopram was tapered under simultaneous rapid titration of sertraline to 100 mg/day. Citalopram was completely discontinued from Day 5. At 1 week from admission, the QTc duration was within normal range , but the QTc duration fluctuated and was found outside normal range at Day 9 (600 ms), before normalization at Day 15 (460 ms). Earlier ECGs were available for evaluation; previous recordings showed QTc between 440 and 580 ms .
At this point, it was considered possible that the patient was afflicted with the congenital long QT syndrome; even though two known triggers of induced QTc prolongation were present, correction of these did not clearly normalize QTc duration. In addition, previous ECG recordings clearly documented intermittent, significant QTc prolongation over an extended time period. On Day 8 treatment with atenolol 25 mg was initialized. On Day 9, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (VVI-ICD) was implanted. Genetic testing was ordered and the proband was found to be heterozygote carrier of the KCNE1 D85N (c.253G>A) variant.
The patient was closely followed the first 6 months after the TdP episode and seen monthly in the out-patient clinic. Currently, the patient is scheduled for follow-up with her cardiologist yearly, her ICD is interrogated in clinic every 6 months and by remote monitoring every 4 months. In 18 months of follow-up, the ICD has not registered any arrhythmias.