A 42-year-old man with no previous medical history presented with mild dyspnea on exertion and abdominal distension that lasted for a week. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a huge homogeneous mass completely obstructing the right ventricle and extending into the pulmonary trunk . CT findings showed little evidence of blood clots and moderate amounts of pericardial effusion . The patient was admitted via the emergency room for further evaluation and scheduled for echocardiography the next day. However, he suddenly collapsed the next day while on his way to an echocardiography. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was performed immediately by medical staffs, but heart rhythm did not recover. Accordingly, an extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) device was inserted percutaneously via the left femoral artery and right femoral vein and ECMO support was urgently initiated. Subsequently, a pericardial window was created at bedside, and about 350 cc of dark blood colored effusion was drained. Soon afterward, blood pressure stabilized but consciousness was not confirmed. But his light reflexes remained intact. Based on consideration of right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) obstruction in the initial CT scan, we decided to remove the mass from the right ventricle immediately. Surgery was performed using a median-sternotomy approach. Initially, an arterial cannula was placed in the distal aspect of the ascending aorta, and the superior and inferior venae cavae were cannulated to establish cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). After aortic cross-clamping, the pulmonary trunk and RVOT were incised. By intra-operative gross visualization, the tumor was located in the RVOT and protruded from endocardium of the right ventricle out of epicardium of the right ventricle and also extended toward and was attached to the right leaflet of the pulmonary valve . The tumor was fragile and considered highly likely to be malignant and impossible to completely control, and thus, we planned chemotherapy after surgery. The main mass was resected to relieve the RVOT obstruction, and after the operation, the ECMO was removed from the operation room. However, the patient failed to regain consciousness and electroencephalography (EEG) and subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated severe hypoxic brain damage. We assume CPR was unsuccessful because the mass completely blocked the RVOT. Pathology revealed the mass was an undifferentiated spindle cell sarcoma .