A man in his early 40s with no past medical history presented with a mild headache that had persisted for two days. He was diagnosed with a SAH that corresponded to the World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies Grade I. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a bilateral VADA . We confirmed that the left VADA ruptured by hematoma localization on images. Therefore, the left VADA was surgically trapped via a left lateral suboccipital approach on admission. Fresh bleeding was found under adventitia of the left VADA, consistent with a rupture. The posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) was not involved in the VADA. Therefore, we performed proximal clipping distal to the PICA. The trapping was completed without any intraoperative complications. Follow-up CTA revealed left PICA and obliteration of the left VADA on postoperative day 2 . However, on postoperative day 11, follow-up CTA revealed asymptomatic enlargement of the contralateral VADA . The perforating arteries from the distal part of the right VADA to the medulla oblongata, fetal-type posterior communicating arteries (PCOMs), and hypoplastic precommunicating segment of both the posterior cerebral arteries (P1) were revealed on digital subtraction angiography . We planned proximal clipping of the right VADA with a right superficial temporal artery (STA)–superior cerebellar artery (SCA) bypass on postoperative day 17. The right STA–SCA bypass was performed first using a subtemporal approach [ and ]. Ultrasonic pulse Doppler velocimeter intraoperatively detected a graft flow rate of 25 mL/min. Proximal clipping distal to the PICA was performed after completion of the STA–SCA bypass . Parts of the proximal VADA vessel walls were thin, indicating a high risk of rupture. Although the VADAs extended up to the vertebral junction, neither of the VADAs was a continuous lesion. We found perforating arteries in the right VADA . Ultrasonic pulse Doppler and indocyanine green imaging revealed a PICA, and the perforating arteries from the VADA were preserved. Motor and somatosensory evoked potentials and auditory brainstem response remained stable throughout the surgery. The bilateral VADA was obliterated, and the patent STA–SCA bypass flow was observed using CTA . No infarction was observed on postoperative magnetic resonance imaging. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged about a month after rehabilitation. He received a modified Rankin scale score of 0 at both the 1-year and 6-month follow-up assessments.