A 79-year-old white man presented to clinic with macroscopic hematuria for over 3 months. The patient denied a history of bladder cancer and physical examination revealed no palpable abdominal or renal masses. On multiparametric Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), a lesion measuring 3.6 × 3.1 × 2.7 cm was seen in the interpolar region of the left kidney without involvement of the renal vein or collecting system . No left sided hydronephrosis or intraabdominal metastasis were appreciated. The right kidney was found to be atrophic. The patient’s medical history was significant for CKD as well as coronary artery disease (CAD) status post coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG). Serum creatinine was 1.3 mg./dL, Ca 9.2 mg/dL, albumin 4.2 g/dL, and hemoglobin was 13.7 g/dL. Urine culture was negative. Chest CT revealed no signs of thoracic metastasis.
Initial workup cystoscopy was negative for a bladder mass or bloody efflux from either ureteral orifice, however prostatomegaly was noted. In addition, abdominal MRI images noted endophytic complex cystic mass with solid components making renal cell carcinoma the most likely suspected diagnosis. Considering the patient's comorbidities and the significance of preserving adequate renal function in patients with a solitary kidney, he elected for renal mass biopsy followed by immediate cryoablation as the treatment modality.
The patient was taken to the Interventional Radiology suite for biopsy and cryoablation of the left renal lesion. Under Computerized Tomography (CT) guidance with the patient prone, three 18-gauge core pretreatment biopsies were obtained from the renal mass. Subsequently, three ice-rod probes were distributed across the lesion to maximize treatment margins and two freeze–thaw cycles were carried out. Repeat unenhanced and contrast enhanced CT showed evidence of complete lesion ablation with satisfactory margins. The pathology of the biopsy later confirmed low-grade UTUC. Given this diagnosis was not anticipated, further discussion was warranted regarding the patient’s increased risk of recurrence due to the pathology of his disease. Retrograde ureteroscopy, biopsy, and laser fulguration three months after cryoablation was elected as the next step in management.
Under general anesthesia, full and thorough surveillance cystoscopy was negative for any bladder lesions and left retrograde pyelogram demonstrated no filling defects but an interpolar calyx appeared compressed . A Wolf fiber optic ureteroscope was utilized for complete pyeloscopy. Yellow-white discoloration with surrounding mucosal edema was visualized in the interpolar calyx consistent with necrotic tissue after cryoablation; however, no obvious papillary fronds of tumor were seen. A Segura four wire basket was deployed to biopsy the superficial necrotic and edematous mucosa followed by BIGopsy biopsy forceps for deep tissue samples. Holmium laser fulguration was applied for bleeding control and obliteration of any potential residual disease. The collected specimens were sent separately. Pathology results from the superficial biopsy demonstrated fragments of non-invasive low-grade papillary urothelial carcinoma. Deeper biopsies revealed cells of uncertain malignant potential in a background of extensive hyaline necrosis and fibrin deposition, corroborating scar hyperplasia and tissue transformation after cryoablation.
The patient was monitored over a 5 year period with annual surveillance cystoscopy, bladder cytology, and multiparametric MRI/MRU. To our satisfaction, no visible recurrence of the lesion was observed, and the patient's renal function remained stable , suggesting the success of this unconventional treatment approach to achieve favorable outcomes. The lack of disease recurrence and preservation of renal function attest to the success of cryoablation in this case.