An 86-year-old man was treated for symptomatic (transient left hemiparesis) right internal carotid artery (ICA) with CAS in his local hospital. One month after stenting, he suffered aspiration pneumonia and septicemia, and Klebsiella oxytoca was isolated on blood culture. Three months after stenting, swelling and tenderness of the right side of his neck appeared. His general condition deteriorated due to septicemia and he was unable to ingest anything by mouth because of his decreasing level of consciousness. Five months after stenting, he was transferred to our hospital . Doppler ultrasound showed an iso-and high-echoic mass around the stent and multiple arterial fistulas between the right ICA and the mass. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a pseudoaneurysm around the stent . The distal edge of the stent was at the level of the superior aspect of the C2 vertebral body. Balloon test occlusion revealed no tolerance to scarification of the affected right ICA. The neck mass rapidly increased in size, getting larger every day , and this growth of the neck mass was confirmed with CTA and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) [ and ]. Therefore, 15 days after admission, we performed an interposition with a tapered (4–6 mm) type PTFE synthetic vessel graft (ADVANTA VXT: GETINGE group, Gothenburg, Sweden).
The operation was performed under general anesthesia. A skin incision was made over the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle extending to the root of the zygoma. First, the common carotid artery (CCA) proximal to the stent was secured. Then, the styloid process and mandibular angle distal to the stent and pseudoaneurysm were cut to secure the ICA . After securing both sides of the stent and pseudoaneurysm, we attempted to detach the pseudoaneurysm from the surrounding tissue to the greatest extent possible. A massive amount of purulent material emerged during detachment, and K. oxytoca was later isolated by bacterial test. The external carotid artery was cut at the distal aspect of the pseudoaneurysm . After clamping the proximal CCA and distal ICA , the pseudoaneurysm was removed and interposition of the PTFE synthetic vessel graft through a continuous suture using CV-5 Gore-Tex suture was performed . The wound was thoroughly lavaged and then closed over a subcutaneous drain. The patency of the graft was confirmed at 1 and 35 days after surgery through CTA and DSA, respectively [ and ]. The patient returned to his local hospital 36 days after surgery and had a modified Rankin score of 5.
Histopathological investigation showed rupture of the arterial wall and formation of a pseudoaneurysm [ and ]. Infiltration of plasma cells, hemosiderin-laden macrophages, and neutrophils was confirmed in the neck of the aneurysm. These results indicated that inflammation around the stent caused the arterial wall to rupture, and then form a pseudoaneurysm [ and ].