A 29-year-old female, gravida 3 para 2 at 29 weeks gestation presented to the emergency department (ED) with left arm and neck swelling. Her pregnancy had been complicated by hyperemesis gravidarum requiring a left-sided PICC. Her medical history was significant for prior pregnancies complicated by hyperemesis and a reported history of opoid use disorder on buprenorphine. The PICC had been removed at another ED approximately three days prior to presentation at our ED after the site had become erythematous and painful. She was placed on oral antibiotics and recommended to follow up with her obstetrician. Despite removal of the the PICC, the site had become severely swollen and erythematous extending over her left neck. In addition, she had begun to experience chest pain, worsening shortness of breath, fever, chills, and left arm paresthesias, which prompted her to seek evaluation.
On arrival her heart rate (HR) was in the 160s beats per minute (bpm) and blood pressure (BP) 95/67 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg); otherwise, her vital signs were within normal limits. On physical exam, the PICC site was erythematous, swollen, and tender. She had marked swelling involving her left upper extremity, chest, and left side of the neck. Given the patient’s vitals and physical exam, there was significant clinical suspicion for deep venous thrombosis (DVT). We used point-of-care-ultrasound to perform a bedside DVT assessment with noted extensive clot burden extending through the basilic vein into the axillary vein , as well as in the IJ vein . Serum labs were notable for a white blood count of 20.7 × 103 cells per microliter (uL) with 80% neutrophils (reference range: 3.7–11 ×103 cells/uL).
The findings prompted a recommendation that she undergo a computed tomography (CT) pulmonary embolism protocol, which she consented to. Cross-sectional imaging demonstrated extensive clot burden encompassing the left brachiocephalic, left subclavian, and left internal and external jugular veins . The CT was also concerning for septic pulmonary emboli. Given the combination of extensive clot burden encompassing the IJ, in addition to septic emboli, we were able to confirm the diagnosis of Lemierre’s syndrome. The patient was immediately initiated on heparin and broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Obstetrics was consulted at the time of the patient’s arrival and was bedside shortly thereafter. She received dexamethasone six milligrams intramuscular in the event of an emergent cesarean section. Fortunately, neonatal stress testing demonstrated no evidence of fetal distress, and the patient continued to improve. She was subsequently admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) by which time her HR had improved to 116 bpm and BP to 105/52 mm Hg. Interventional radiology was also consulted for possible thrombectomy vs thrombolysis at time of arrival; however, given the patient’s improvement by time of admission to the ICU the recommendation was for conservative therapy. While inpatient, blood cultures resulted positive for methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA).
Ultimately the patient did very well without requiring procedural intervention or cesarean section. She was continued on enoxaparin and discharged on six weeks of cefazolin.