Male patient from a rural area in the department of Antioquia, Colombia, born at term, with weight and size appropriate for the gestational age and without hospitalization in the neonatal period. Subsequently, no significant antecedents and with normal psychomotor development. He entered the emergency department at the age of 4 years with a 15-day history of vomiting, asthenia, adynamia, myalgia and ataxic gait. On admission, he presented hypotension (arterial pressure lower than the 5th percentile for age and height percentile), hyperpigmentation of skin and mucous membranes, male genitals with normal size and thickness of the penis, but with bilateral cryptorchidism. In addition, he presented alopecia plaques in the left fronto-temporal region. Initial laboratory examinations with hyponatraemia (serum sodium 128 mEq/L) and mild hyperkalaemia (serum potassium 5.05 mEq/L) associated with low serum cortisol.

Based on clinical and laboratory findings, an adrenal crisis was diagnosed and a hydric resuscitation with normal saline and hydrocortisone was initiated (initial dose of 100 mg/m2/day, followed by a maintenance dose of 50 mg/m2/day every 6 h). Due to persistence of hyponatraemia, fludrocortisone was added in doses of 0.1 mg every 12 h, with which haemodynamic and electrolytic stability was established.

Neurological evaluation showed no central or peripheral nerve involvement and ataxic gait resolved, so it was assumed to be secondary to hyponatraemia.

The case was considered consistent with primary adrenal insufficiency and within the etiologic possibilities, congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency was ruled out by normal levels of 17-hydroxyprogesterone. Given the possibility of an adrenoleucodystrophy by age, gender and the history of ataxia, brain magnetic resonance imaging and very long chain fatty acids were performed, which ruled them out. Autoimmune etiology was ruled out with anti 21-hydroxylase antibodies negative. The images of the adrenals by tomography were negative for lesions or hemorrhages. Infectious etiologies were ruled out (with studies negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, cytomegalovirus and human immunodeficiency virus). No medicines were found involved in the genesis of the adrenal insufficiency, nor other causes of secondary adrenal insufficiency.

With the debut of the IAP without established etiology, it was considered necessary to rule out a genetic cause due to probable congenital adrenal hypoplasia and clinical exome sequencing was requested. This identified a “probably pathogenic” variant c.1275A > T; p.Arg425Ser in the NR0B113 gene.

At the time of the report, the patient was 11 years old, the cryptorchidism had been corrected, the testicular volume was 2 to 3 ml bilateral, and he continued to be monitored by paediatric endocrinology, with treatment with hydrocortisone at a dose of 13 mg/m2/day and fludrocortisone 0.1 mg every 12 h, with adequate clinical evolution, without new adrenal crises and with adequate growth pattern. The laboratory studies indicated normal electrolyte and plasma renin values. He had not yet begun clinical puberty and had prepubertal levels of luteinizing hormone (LH).
