A 65-year-old male Caucasian patient was admitted with respiratory distress and suspected non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. His medical history revealed arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus type 2 and cholecystolithiasis.
On clinical examination our obese patient (body mass index 41.5) suffered from dyspnea at rest. He presented with enlarged cervical and axillary lymph nodes, hepatosplenomegaly and diminished breath sounds over his right lung. A blood count revealed a leukocytosis of 35,000 leukocytes/μL of blood, with 80% partially atypical small lymphocytes and Gumprecht's shadow cells. Hemoglobin concentration and thrombocytes were within normal range. Immunophenotyping revealed that 67% of leukocytes were CD19+ B-lymphocytes, with co-expression of CD5, CD20, CD23 and a clonal restriction for the lambda light chain. This established the diagnosis of CLL. Bone marrow puncture demonstrated a medium degree of infiltration, with monoclonal B-cells beginning to replace the normal hematopoiesis.
A chest X-ray was performed and showed a right-sided complete opacity suggesting a pleural effusion . Thoracentesis produced a milky pleural fluid . The cellular content consisted of 80% lymphocytes, two thirds of which expressed the B-CLL phenotype. Further analysis of the pleural fluid revealed triglyceride levels over 700 mg/dL and cholesterol levels below 70 mg/dL, establishing the diagnosis of chylothorax. Our patient received a pleural drainage, which initially produced nearly 3 liters of chyle per 24 hours. A computed tomography (CT) scan depicted enlarged lymph nodes in the cervical, axillary and mediastinal region, and suspected splenic involvement with several hypodense lesions. Taking the findings into account, our patient was diagnosed with a right-sided chylothorax caused by a concomitantly diagnosed CLL, stage Binet B or Rai II.
The chylothorax represented a major complication of the CLL, and so immunochemotherapy consisting of fludarabine (25 mg/m2 on days one to three), cyclophosphamide (250 mg/m2 on days one to three) and rituximab (375 mg/m2 on day one) was initiated. Our patient received four courses, repeated every four weeks. Since the therapeutic effect of reduced dietary intake on chylothorax had been described previously, our patient received total parenteral nutrition for two weeks, starting with the first cycle of the immunochemotherapy. The chylous effusion disappeared nearly completely, and the chest drain could be removed after 10 days. After two weeks an enteral low-fat diet enriched with medium-chain triglycerides was started, to continue therapy on an out-patient basis. Unfortunately the chylothorax relapsed and thoracentesis of a volume of 1 L to 1.5 L once to twice a week became necessary. Due to the low-fat intake the appearance of the pleural effusion had changed from milky-white to clear amber-colored .
Our patient received four cycles of immunochemotherapy and regular thoracentesis on an out-patient basis. Since patients with protracted chylothorax are at risk of malnutrition and immunosuppression, our patient received antifungal and antiviral prophylaxis in addition to vitamin supplementation. However, the chylothorax persisted, despite a good clinical response of the CLL, with normalized blood counts and complete regression of the lymphadenopathy .
In light of this, percutaneous radiotherapy of his mediastinum and thoracic duct, with an overall dose of 24 Gy, was initiated. Radiation induces an inflammatory response which can result in an obliteration of the disrupted thoracic duct . However, up to eight weeks after completion of the radiotherapy the chylothorax still persisted with continued requirement for regular pleural tapping.
Finally our patient agreed to a surgical intervention. A supradiaphragmal ligation of the thoracic duct via a right muscle sparing thoracotomy was carried out. In addition, a decortication of his right lung was necessary because, during his surgery, a pleural fibrosis was diagnosed. The pleural fibrosis was most likely caused by the long-term chylothorax with repetitive thoracenteses. Our patient quickly recovered and the pleural effusions ceased completely. The time from the first diagnosis of chylothorax until the final surgical intervention was six months. Our patient is still in complete remission after 24 months of follow-up.