An 84-year-old female patient was admitted to the accident and emergency (AE) department of our hospital complaining of painful restriction of movement in the left hip for the past month. She had undergone a left cement less THA (reflection cup, synergy stem, 28 mm ceramic on XLPE bearing coupling, Smith and nephew, Memphis, Tennessee, USA), through an ordinary posterior approach, 14 years previously. The immediate post-operative period had been uneventful. In the 8th post-operative year, during a follow-up evaluation, the patient was found to be asymptomatic, but signs of PE wear were recorded on radiological evaluation. The patient was advised, by her surgeon, to attend outpatient clinics at regular intervals and she was informed about the possibility of an early revision of the bearing surface. Despite this, she failed to attend any other appointments. On admission to the AE, the patient reported that she had experienced increasing restriction of movement and functional impairment during the previous year without having sustained a recent hip injury. On clinical examination, painful restriction of movement, no signs of soft tissue injury or infection, and a leg length discrepancy of 4 cm were recorded. Laboratory blood workout was found to be normal. On radiological examination, a left THA dislocation was found and the patient underwent three unsuccessful attempts at closed reduction, under anesthesia, in the AE department. During these attempts, the patient sustained an undisplaced fracture of the neck of ipsilateral fibular head. The following day, during an open reduction under anesthesia in the operating theater, a central dislocation of the head of the prosthesis was found. The PE liner was found to be worn and broken, and the ceramic head had centrally perforated the metallic acetabular shell and was located behind the shell in an osteolytic area full of PE and metallic debris. Excessive soft tissue metallosis was also found. The femoral stem and the perforated metallic shell were found to be stable. A thorough soft tissue debridement was performed, the retro-acetabular bone defect was filled with cement and a PE liner was cemented into the damaged metallic shell . The prosthesis was then reduced and evaluated for stability using a 32 mm ceramic head. The patient experienced an uneventful post-operative clinical and functional recovery.