A 25-year-old Sri Lankan woman presented with several episodes of central abdominal pain, abdominal fullness, and non-projectile vomiting for 1-week duration. The vomitus was non-bilious, with undigested food particles and was noted particularly 1 to 2 hours after meals. Episodes of vomiting were accompanied with colicky central abdominal pain but these symptoms were only mild and between attacks she was completely asymptomatic. As she had had at least five similar episodes over the last 3 years, she sought medical advice. Most of those episodes were self-limiting, but she had a couple of hospital admissions during which she was managed conservatively. During one episode, she had noticed pruritus and darkening of urine as well, which again resolved spontaneously. She had undergone an upper GI endoscopy 1 year earlier which did not provide a positive finding. She had a past history of rectal polypectomy, at the age of 16 years, when she was investigated for painless per rectal bleeding, the histology of which was consistent with a tubular adenoma. Follow-up colonoscopies had not detected any further polyps.
On examination, she had a body mass index of 20.3 kg/m2. She had a few scratch marks on her trunk and upper limbs confirming pruritus. She was not icteric or febrile. An abdominal examination was unremarkable and her gall bladder was not palpable. Succussion splash was not elicited. There was no mucocutaneous pigmentation.
There was biochemical evidence of biliary obstruction with alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 896 IU/L, a total bilirubin of 2.6 mg/dl and direct bilirubin of 2.2 mg/dL. An ultrasound scan of her abdomen detected intrahepatic and extrahepatic duct dilatation with a dilated common bile duct (CBD) of 11.5 mm without evidence of gallstones or CBD stones. She was found positive for fecal occult blood and was subjected to upper GI endoscopy and colonoscopy both of which were negative. Plain radiographies of her chest and abdomen were unremarkable. She was further investigated with a computed tomography (CT) enterogram and a magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatogram (MRCP). The CT enterogram revealed a large soft tissue mass causing duodenal intussusception into her proximal jejunum. Her CBD was found to be stretched to the left of the midline resulting in its dilatation of up to 12 mm at the lower end. MRCP also confirmed the absence of gall stones and other filling defects in her CBD . Based on these findings she underwent a small bowel enteroscopy which demonstrated a large duodenal polyp, originating from the second part of her duodenum and intussuscepting into the proximal jejunum beyond the duodenojejunal junction. The major duodenal papilla appeared stretched and elongated along the long axis of her duodenum. The rest of the enteroscopy study was normal. A biopsy was not taken because of the presence of intussusception.
Even though it was possible to negotiate the scope beyond the polyp it was decided to go ahead with open surgery after two multidisciplinary team meetings because of the large size of the polyp, its critical location, and the presence of the intussusception. An intraoperative upper GI endoscopy was performed to localize the polyp because the polyp was not readily palpable through her duodenal wall. An oblique duodenotomy was done and a large polyp with a broad and long stalk was found. The origin of the stalk was at the second part of her duodenum, 1 cm below the ampulla. A polypectomy was done and the intussusception was reduced and the duodenum was closed transversely with 5/0 polydioxanone sutures . She had an uncomplicated recovery and was discharged on sixth postoperative day.
On macroscopic examination the specimen was a polyp of 50 × 45 × 30 mm in size with a broad, 20 mm long stalk . On microscopic examination it was composed of a branching villous structure of small intestinal mucosa containing a core of smooth muscle. The overlapping mucosa was histologically normal. Thus, microscopically this was a hamartomatous polyp consistent with a Peutz–Jeghers polyp .
Our patient became completely asymptomatic following surgery. She is followed up in general surgical clinic and is scheduled for routine upper GI endoscopy surveillance every 3 years.