A 49-year-old man (122.9 kg, BMI 39.1 kg/m2) presented to our hospital wishing to undergo LSG and VHR. His medical history included diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. He had undergone urgent surgery for an umbilical hernia with incarcerated small bowel 18 months ago. The surgery included small bowel resection and direct closure of the defect without mesh reinforcement. Six months later, the umbilical hernia recurred. Physical examination revealed a tennis ball-sized lower midline defect. Computed tomography (CT) scans revealed a hernia orifice 5 cm in width and 10 cm in height in the infra-umbilical region . As mesh reinforcement was essential to repair the ventral hernia, we planned for him to undergo VHR after LSG.
LSG was performed using a standardized surgical technique with a 37.5 Fr bougie. Intraoperative findings revealed adhesion between the omentum and the hernia sac, which was not dissected during LSG. His postoperative course was uneventful, and after 9 months, he showed satisfactory weight loss (84.2 kg, BMI 26.8 kg/m2) and his comorbidities such as diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia were in remission. We then performed VHR using the eTEP technique.
After induction of general anesthesia and intubation, he was positioned with the bilateral upper extremities tucked at his sides. Figure shows the port placement in this case. A 1.5-cm skin incision was made just below the left costal margin, and the anterior rectus sheath was identified and incised sharply. A 12-mm trocar was inserted posterior to the rectus abdominis muscle, and the left retrorectus space was developed followed by insertion of two 5-mm trocars at the port 2 and port 3 positions medial to the linea semilunaris. The left posterior rectus sheath was incised close to the linea alba, and then the right posterior rectus sheath was opened over the falciform ligament. After the preperitoneal and two retrorectus spaces were connected, a 12-mm trocar was inserted at port 4, and lateral dissection of the right posterior rectus sheath was done. Two 5-mm trocars were inserted at the port 5 and port 6 positions. The sac was opened, and intraabdominal adhesions were dissected . Bilateral transversus abdominis muscle release was performed . The posterior layer defect was closed with 3-0 multifilament suture material . Then, the linea alba was restored with 1-0 barbed sutures . BARD™ Mesh (Davol Inc., Warwick, RI, USA 02,886), a medium-weight small-pore (0.44 mm) polypropylene mesh of 26 cm width × 35.5 cm height, was positioned to cover the dissected area with no fixation . A 19 Fr drain was placed over the mesh. The operating time was 452 min, and the amount of blood loss was nearly 0 g. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, the drain was removed 4 days after the surgery, and he was discharged on the same day. A CT scan 4 months after eTEP repair did not show recurrence or seroma . At 1-year follow-up, he was doing well.