A 34-year-old female with recurrent ischaemic stroke, type 1 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, dyslipidaemia and stage 2 chronic kidney disease, presented to the outpatient stroke clinic in June 2020 with a history of recurrent transitory right leg weakness and right hand shaking. These episodes occurred several times per day lasting approximately 30 s whilst mobilising and resolved on sitting. Neurological examination demonstrated recovering dysphasia and mild pyramidal right-sided weakness requiring a walking stick for gait assistance.
Previously, in March 2019, she presented with slurred speech, left-sided weakness and visual neglect with confirmed bilateral embolic middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory infarcts on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Computer tomography (CT) carotid angiography and Digital subtraction angiogram (DSA) identified severe ICAD with bilateral occlusion of the supraclinoid segment of the internal carotid arteries but no features of moyamoya disease . She had no family history of stroke, a negative thrombophilia screen and no cardioembolic source identified. Secondary prevention was commenced including aggressive lipid lowering with rosuvastatin aiming for low density lipoprotein < 1.8 mmol/L, dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel for three months, antihypertensive treatment aiming for blood pressure < 130/80 mmHg and augmentation of her diabetic regime. She recovered to a point of supported independent living but was unable to return to work.
In March 2020 she represented to the emergency department with reduced consciousness in a state of diabetic ketoacidosis secondary to a lower respiratory tract infection and episodes of vomiting. On presentation her blood pressure was 70/40 mmHg and she was found to have new right-sided weakness. Diffusion weighted MRI identified multiple acute embolic infarcts in the left MCA territory. Her deficits improved with a period of neurorehabilitation but she had ongoing high-level language and cognitive difficulties, marked post stroke fatigue as well as reduced high-level balance. She was independent in personal care.
In neurorehabilitation initial concerns were for post stroke focal motor seizures causing her transient symptoms and she was commenced on levetiracetam. However, these brief episodes spared the face, did not exhibit Jacksonian march and were precipitated by periods of reduced cerebral perfusion such as changing position and dehydration. When reviewed in stroke clinic the leading differential diagnosis was cerebral hypoperfusion syndrome. A 99mTc-ethyl cysteine dimer cerebral perfusion single photon emission CT (SPECT) with CT acetazolamide challenge was performed . Baseline perfusion was reduced in the left frontal, temporal and parietal lobes in keeping with recent infarction as well as a small fixed perfusion defect in the right frontal lobe corresponding to previous established infarct. Although asymptomatic during scanning, worsening hypoperfusion to the left frontal lobe and to a lesser extent the left temporal and anterior parietal lobes, was evident with acetazolamide challenge, indicative of reduced vascular reserve in these territories. Given her ongoing symptoms and declining quality of life a repeat DSA was performed to assess for possible sites of surgical revascularisation. The second DSA demonstrated progressive intracranial stenosis with opacification of the left posterior communicating artery and collateral supply to the left hemisphere predominantly from the posterior choroidal artery and posterior cerebral artery . No feasible site for surgical revascularisation was identified. She was managed on maximal medical therapy including long term dual antiplatelet therapy, consolidated antihypertensive regime, tight glycaemic control and avoidance of dehydration. Over the following six months a systolic blood pressure between 120 and 130/70 mmHg was achieved, with a low-density lipoprotein of 1.0 mmol/L and high-density lipoprotein of 1.2 mmol/L. Glycaemic control remained an ongoing challenge, with a glycosylated haemoglobin level of 9.5% (80 mmol/mol). The patient has recently trialled a continuous infusion pump device. Levetiracetam was ceased. During this period the limb-shaking TIAs settled.