An 83-year-old man with psoriatic arthritis presented with persistent and progressive gait instability, impaired motor dexterity, and hand numbness for 2 months. He underwent C3-C5 laminoplasty for myelopathy with multilevel cervical stenosis and a L2-L4 laminectomy for radiculopathy with lumbar stenosis 4 and 3 years prior, respectively.
The patient spent 5 months in a wheelchair prior to consultation due to multiple falls. Examination revealed 4/5 bilateral strength in his deltoids, shoulder external/internal rotators, wrist flexors/extensors, abductor/flexor pollicis brevis, finger extensors, and opponens. He had full biceps/triceps strength bilaterally with intrinsic wasting in his dominant left-hand; left forearm and upper arm showed atrophy. Hand and finger numbness noted bilaterally with positive Hoffmann’s signs. His brachioradialis reflex was inverted bilaterally and biceps/triceps reflexes were brisk (3+). Meniscal and Achilles reflexes could not be elicited and clonus was absent. Babinski signs were equivocal. Light touch sensation was present bilaterally from L1-S1. Lower extremity strength was recorded bilaterally for his gastrocnemius (5/5), quadriceps (5/5), iliopsoas (4/5), tibialis anterior (4/5), and extensor hallucis longus (3/5). The patient’s pre-operative modified Japanese Orthopedic Association (mJOA) scale score was a 9. Cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging revealed an eccentric right pannus posterior to his C1 arch causing cord compression to a 6–7 mm space. A ponticulus posticus was absent and the C1 lateral mass had sufficient height for fusion. Vertebral arteries entered at C6 with normal codominant courses. The subaxial spine was open from prior laminoplasty .
Given the presentation, surgical intervention was indicated. A microsurgical C1 laminoplasty and decompression with posterior C1–C2 atlantoaxial fusion (AAF) was performed (Pre-operative Planning-). The patient was placed in the prone position with his head elevated. A midline incision was made from the skull base down to the C2 spinous process with dissection at the midline raphae sparing the extensor muscles. The C1 lamina was exposed and dissected using curettes and Cobb elevators protecting the vertebral arteries superior to the C1 lamina. Next, a translaminar C1 lateral mass screw was drilled to 28 mm (2 mm increments) and a ball-tip probe was used to ensure the lateral mass walls and floors were not violated; a 3.5 mm screw was placed. This process was repeated contralaterally to obtain lateral mass fixation and placement was confirmed . The C2 pars were then dissected to the C1–C2 joint. The joint was decorticated bilaterally and demineralized bone matrix was placed into the space to promote facet fusion. The pedicles were then cannulated bilaterally and two 3.5 mm screws (26 mm) were placed into the C2 pedicles. Proper screw placement was confirmed intraoperatively and postoperatively (-).
Attention was, then, turned to decompressing the spinal cord through laminoplasty at the C1 arch; to visualize this portion of the procedure see additional file 1: Movie 1. Bilateral hinges were made on either side of the C1 lamina while protecting the vertebral arteries. A midline defect was made in the lamina and both sides of the lamina were hinged open. A custom allograft bone block was placed to hold the hinges open which was secured with suturing; both sutures were tied down on either side through a small bone tunnel made on both sides of the hinge. A 3.5 mm titanium rod was then placed across the lateral mass with a pedicle screw between C1 and C2 bilaterally. Set screws were placed, completing the C1–C2 fixation. The remaining marginal C1 lamina and the C2 spinous process, lamina, and pars were decorticated. A combination of autograft, BMP, and demineralized bone matrix were placed across the decorticated bone.