A 23-year-old female presented to our hospital with bilateral congenital malformed thumbs. The patient had understood her condition since she was a child and refused to undergo surgical correction. In adulthood, the patient encountered two main problems. First, she usually felt unconfident due to the cosmetic appearance of her thumbs. Second, those thumbs disturbed her activities when precise movements were needed, such as sewing. This activity, sewing, is essential for her job as a tailor. As time went on, the patient felt more uncomfortable with her thumbs since they made sewing difficult. Finally, the patient and her parents sought medical advice for her thumbs.
Physical examination showed that the left thumb deviated 25° to the ulnar side, while the contralateral thumb deviated 15° to the radial side without any swelling in either thumb . There was no sign of pain or inflammation in either thumb. Both thumbs also did not suffer from limited movement in abduction and flexion. Other than the malformation, there was no medical condition such as anemia or a history of trauma. The Disability of Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) score was evaluated to assess the specific disability of the extremity, and the result was 17.5. The Sollerman Hand Function (SHF) and Michigan Hand Outcome were also evaluated, giving scores of 56 and 60 for the left and right hand on the SHF test, and 65.6 and 66.6 for the left and right hand on the Michigan Hand Outcome.
Under the plain x-ray of the thumb , it was revealed that both thumbs had an extra delta-shaped bone between two normal bones at the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint. Hence, the patient was diagnosed with bilateral delta-type TPT.
The patient underwent operation for the correction of both thumbs. In general anesthesia, an H-shaped incision was made on the dorsal side. To expose the accessory phalanx, the extensor tendon was split longitudinally from the PIP joint through the DIP joint. Then, the accessory phalanx was removed, followed by ligament and tendon reconstruction.
The distal phalanx and the proximal phalanx were placed close together with denudation of the articular surface. The first K-wire was introduced retrogradely to the distal phalanx intramedullary with the joint flexed to gain an optimal view, then with an antegrade fashion, advanced the K-wire to the proximal phalanx. After the IP joint was in adequate contact, the IP joint was bent in a 10°–15° flexion position. The first K-wire was the primary fixator for longitudinal alignment. Then, the second K-wire was introduced obliquely over the IP joint. The second K-wire acted as an antirotation wire to stabilize the joint . After 3 days of observation, there were no complications.
Six months later, during the follow-up, the K-wire was removed . There were no chief complaints or adverse events before or after the K-wire removal. To examine the function of the hand after the correctional surgery, the SHF test was executed. The patient also performed tasks with her hands, such as inserting a thread into a pinhole precisely, and returned to work earlier. Both of her hands had a satisfying outcome, with an overall score of 80 and 79 in the dominant and non-dominant hands, respectively. The Michigan Hand Outcome score was 97.2 and 98.9, and the DASH Score was 7.