A 55-year-old man was admitted to hospital as a stroke call, presenting with sudden-onset left sided cheek, arm and hand sensory loss, visual blurring, and worsening headache. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 3. His past medical history was significant for multiple co-morbidities including coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery, hypertension, type 2 diabetes, and hypercholesterolemia. An urgent head CT excluded intracranial haemorrhage , and intravenous thrombolysis with alteplase was administered. Within 2 hours of thrombolysis, his features of visual disturbance and headache worsened, with increasing confusion. A repeat CT of the head showed multiple areas of intracerebral haemorrhage, mainly in the bilateral posterior regions . No benefit from neurosurgical intervention was expected. Despite intensive multiple organ support therapy, he deteriorated over his admission, developed chest infection, and died 4 days after the initial presentation. The case was referred to HM Coroner and detailed neuropathological examination was performed.
Informed consent was obtained from the relatives for research and medical education. Post-mortem examination confirmed marked cardiovascular disease, demonstrated by severe coronary artery sclerosis evident in the left main stem and right coronary arteries with associated critical stenosis (luminal diameter < 1 mm). The right coronary artery bypass graft was patent. There were no acute or healed myocardial infarcts. There was mild concentric left ventricular hypertrophy consistent with the history of hypertension. Examination of the lungs revealed an area of possible bronchopneumonia. Other internal organs showed no relevant alterations.
The brain was fixed in buffered formalin for 4 weeks and weighed 1466 g. On external examination, the brain was swollen and smooth with shallowed sulci and mild subarachnoid haemorrhages in the right anterior frontal pole, the right middle temporal and the right posterior parieto-occipital lobes. At the base of the brain both unci were bulged with prominent grooving, petechial haemorrhages on the right side and soft necrotic brain fragments on the left side. The cerebellar tonsils were also prominently grooved but without haemorrhages or softening. There was moderate calcifying atherosclerosis in the right vertebral artery without luminal narrowing. The rest of the basal arteries were normal with no evidence of thrombotic occlusion, vascular malformation or aneurysm.
Coronal sections of the cerebral hemispheres revealed mild midline shift to the left associated with compressed ventricles in the anterior and central parts . The right inferior horn and the posterior horns were filled with blood clots . There were multiple recent intracerebral parenchymal haemorrhages, various in size and widespread in distribution, affecting the right frontobasal area, the right temporo-occipital lobe, left superior parietal lobe, both posterior occipital lobe areas and the left cerebellar hemisphere. These haemorrhages probably occurred at the same time, and the atypical distribution suggested that they were secondary to the thrombolysis. Furthermore, a soft, cavitating area was identified in the subcortical white matter of the superior temporal gyrus and the insula slightly extending to the putamen, measuring 20x10x10mm. Timing was uncertain but appeared to be older than the haemorrhages, probably representing an ischaemic infarct. The hippocampi, the inferior part of the thalamus and the midbrain were haemorrhagic, soft and fragmented. Typical Duret’s haemorrhages were noted in the central part of the pons. The fourth ventricle contained a moderate amount of clotted blood. Summarizing the macroscopical findings, the direct cause of the death was given as brainstem herniation secondary to widespread recent intraparenchymal haemorrhages, probably related to thrombolysis. Alternative causes of the haemorrhages were also considered and further histological examination was performed.
Microscopic evaluation confirmed extensive recent intracerebral haemorrhages, most of them thought to be due to the thrombolysis therapy, surrounded by marked oedema and hypereosinophilic (red) neurons. Haemorrhages were also detected in the subarachnoid space and the ventricles, in keeping with secondary propagation of parenchymal haemorrhages. In addition, the histology examination also revealed severe CAA (Vonsattel grade 3), which was confirmed by Aβ immunostaining . The CAA was particularly prominent in the occipital lobe and was associated with focal, perivascular and vaguely granulomatous inflammation, in keeping with ABRA . Further, probably subclinical, complications of CAA were noted in the left occipital lobe and in the white matter between the insular cortex and the putamen in form of old (at least 6 months) haemorrhagic microinfarcts . In addition, there were also two separate acute ischaemic lesions, estimated between 3 to 5 days old, in the right insular cortex and the basal ganglia and in the right occipital lobe, which might have caused the new onset neurological symptoms prior to hospitalisation. The parenchymal β-amyloid pathology was not significant, consisting of sparse mainly diffuse and fleece-like plaques throughout the neocortex. No characteristic cored plaques were identified and there were no neurofibrillary tangles by hyperphosphorylated tau, which excluded the possibility of underlying AD. Histological examination of the lung confirmed extensive bronchopneumonia which developed in the terminal stage and also contributed to death.