A 33-year-old woman, a nurse, was referred to our hospital due to headache for 10 days. She had a brain CT scan at a local hospital on June 5, 2018, which revealed a hypodensity lesion in the right frontal lobe . Brain MRI was also performed on the same day. An irregular lesion, hypointense on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI), was observed. Enhanced scans showed irregular enhancement with perifocal edema . Besides, tunnel-shaped focus was observed, involving the bilateral brain . The patient was suspected to have demyelinating pseudotumor and was treated with 10 mg dexamethasone for 5 days. After the treatment, her headache relieved.
When she was admitted to our hospital on June 12, 2018, the general physical examination and neurological examination revealed no abnormality. Routine haematological and biochemical investigations were normal. The brain MRI performed in our hospital on June 15 revealed similar findings to that performed on June 6. Lumbar puncture revealed normal cranial pressure. CSF analysis disclosed 166 cells/μL and protein concentration of 0.742 g/L. The levels of glucose and chloride were normal. Bacterial and fungal cultures were negative. A postcontrast MRI was ordered. The tunnel-shaped lesion involving the contralateral hemisphere caused our attention, which was clearly seen in the body of corpus callosum. Based on her CSF and imaging findings, parasitic infection was suspected. ELISA showed positive anti-sparganum antibody in both blood and CSF.
The patient was thus diagnosed as cerebral sparganosis. However, it remained unclear how she got infected by this rare parasite. She denied having drunk contaminated water, eaten raw or undercooked frog, snake, chicken, or pork meat, or used the flesh of them as a poultice to open wounds. The patient refused to have the surgery. She received praziquantel 25 mg/kg/dose 3 times daily for 2 days. Lumbar puncture and brain MRI were performed again to evaluate the treatment effects 1 week later. CSF analysis showed 120 cells/μL and protein concentration of 0.264 g/L, which was better than before. MRI showed that the lesion size was markedly reduced. The two-day course of praziquantel treatment was repeated, and she was then discharged with no signs or symptoms. A follow-up brain MRI on July 25 showed that the punctate enhancement was further reduced and the tunnel sign almost disappeared, indicating significant therapeutic effect of the treatment . No headache relapse or other neurological deficits were observed during six-month follow-up.