A 47-year-old man, with a 9-year history of UC was referred to Huai’an First People's Hospital, Nanjing Medical University in March 2017. It was not the first time for him to our hospital for medical help. During the past 9 years, he had received 5-ASA including sulfasalazine and mesalazine and irregular oral steroid therapy. However, administration of 5-ASA led to red itchy rash on his face and torso, although the rash disappeared after 5-ASA was stopped. But it appeared again if 5-ASA was re-used, suggesting that he was allergic to 5-ASA. Owing to reluctant use of immunosuppressive agents and tumor necrosis factor inhibitors, he routinely received intravenous steroid therapy every 2 to 3months because of worsening condition. On March 25th, he was hospitalized again because of suffering from gradually aggravated abdominal pain and frequent bloody diarrhea with an average of 8 times daily. Colonoscopy showed that a continuous distribution of superficial erosion and ulceration . As previous, we gave him intravenous steroid therapy (methyl-prednisolone, 60 mg daily). Unlike before, his symptoms did not improve after 3-day use of steroid. The following treatment was limited. Considering all that, after informed consent, FMT was performed after stopping steroid treatment.
The fecal microbes for FMT were obtained from a healthy 13-year-old boy according to the selection criteria described in our previous report.[ Fecal microbes were purified in our laboratory according to Filtration Plus Centrifugation method.[ The donor stool (about 200 g) was dissolved in 1000 mL of sterile saline, then the suspension was poured into several filters with different apertures to remove the scum. The filtered liquid was separated into several 50-mL tubes for centrifugation (2000 rpm/min, 3 minutes), and then we removed the supernatant, added sterile saline, and mixed for centrifugation again. This process was repeated 3 times. Finally, the sediment was obtained and diluted with 200-mL sterile saline. The whole processing time was about 1 hour. Thus, fresh fecal microbes’ suspension was prepared and immediately transplanted into the terminal ileum and the right colon by colonoscopy. The endoscopic image during fecal microbes’ infusion is shown in Figure B.
After FMT, food intake was limited to 500 g semi-liquid in the first 24 hours and then normal diet was followed. One week after FMT, the patient was assessed by gastrointestinal symptoms. We found that the frequency and severity of abdominal pain significantly reduced. The stool frequency decreased to 2 to 3 times daily and the bloody stool was also significantly improved. At one month after FMT; reviewed colonoscopy revealed significant improvement in colonic mucosal lesions . During the colonoscopy, the patient received the second FMT as planned using the same donor . Three months after the second FMT, the patient had no diarrhea and any blood in stool. He underwent colonoscopy again and the damaged colon mucosa had reached full healing . During the 9-month follow-up, his condition did not recur without any treatment. No adverse event was observed during the FMT and follow-up.
To evaluate the disease activity and efficacy of FMT, Mayo scores were calculated before and after FMT. The score that ranges from 0 to 12 point was based on the total of stool frequency, rectal bleeding, endoscopic findings, and a physician's global assessment. The total Mayo score and sub-item score were listed in Table . As shown, clinical and endoscopic remission was induced and maintained by FMT. The clinical response of this patient to FMT was considered effective.