A 46-year-old obese woman presented to an outside hospital in August of 2005 with significant abdominal pain and diarrhea. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a 17 × 13 cm mass in the left upper quadrant that appeared to arise from the body and tail of the pancreas. The patient was taken to the operating room at an outside institution, but the mass was deemed unresectable due to reported involvement of the SMA, stomach, and colon. Wedge biopsy of the mass was consistent with pancreatic VIPoma. Over the next 2 years, the patient was treated with long-acting somatostatin with some improvement in her symptoms. The patient, however, developed repeat episodes of upper and lower gastrointestinal bleeding with associated anemia and ongoing transfusion requirements. Repeat CT scan revealed thrombosis of the splenic vein with numerous large splenic and gastric varices consistent with sinistral portal hypertension. In the summer of 2007, the patient underwent a failed transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) procedure at an outside institution. The patient was therefore referred to the Johns Hopkins Department of Interventional Radiology for variceal embolization.
The patient's case was reviewed at the Johns Hopkins multi-disciplinary pancreas tumor board. A repeat three-dimensional (3-D) pancreas protocol CT scan revealed an 18 × 12 cm mass abutting the liver, stomach, spleen, left adrenal, colon and invading the distal duodenum – proximal jejunum at the ligament of Treitz. The splenic vein was occluded. Large collateral vessels surrounded the mass and were associated with extensive gastric collaterals . The mass displaced the SMA and SMV, but these vessels were patent and uninvolved . As such, there were no obvious contraindications to resection and surgery was recommended.
Given the size of the mass and the associated extensive varices, the patient underwent preoperative proximal splenic artery embolization . Twenty-four hours following this, the patient was taken to surgery where she was found to have a very large mass arising from the body and tail of the pancreas that invaded the left diaphragm, stomach, left adrenal, fourth portion of the duodenum – first portion of the jejunum, transverse colon, and spleen. In order to better expose the SMV at the inferior border of the pancreatic neck, the right colon and root of the small bowel mesentery were mobilized in the fashion of Cattell and Braasch. The SMA medial to the SMV was exposed as it coursed into the small bowel mesentery. The tumor was noted to closely abut and displace both the SMV and SMA, but the vessels were not encased. After developing the retro-pancreatic plane over the SMV – portal vein, the pancreatic neck was transected. The mass was subsequently resected en bloc with a portion of the left diaphragm, entire stomach, spleen, left adrenalectomy, fourth portion of the duodenum – proximal jejunum and transverse colon. Gastrointestinal continuity was restored using a Roux-en-Y method with a hand sewn end-to-side esophago-jejunostomy, a duodeno-jejuneal anastomsis (50 cm distally), and a stapled colo-colonic anastomosis. The pancreatic remnant was closed with pledgeted sutures. Estimated blood loss was 500 ml. Final pathology confirmed a VIPoma originating from the pancreatic body with invasion of the stomach, spleen, small bowel, and colon . All margins were uninvolved by tumor. The patient is alive and disease-free.
The patient tolerated the procedure well. On post-operative day four, a swallow study demonstrated a normal post-surgical esophago-jejunal anastomosis with no evidence of leak. The patient was discharged home on post-operative day ten tolerating a post-gastrectomy diet. She received no adjuvant therapy and is currently alive and disease-free at 6 months of follow-up.