The patient is a 67-year-old male who underwent surgical mitral repair and tricuspid annuloplasty due to severe mitral regurgitation (MR) and moderate tricuspid regurgitation. The procedure involved the use of a 36 mm Edwards Physio annuloplasty ring (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA). Three months ago, the patient was admitted to our department with fatigue, chest tightness, and exertional dyspnea (New York Heart Association functional class IV). Echocardiography showed recurrent severe MR (volume = 36.0 mL; Vmax = 167 cm/s), and maximum transvalvular gradients were 13 mmHg. The left ventricle was dilated and showed a systolic ejection fraction of 46%.
A multidisciplinary cardiac team performed a meticulous evaluation of his transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) scans and computed tomography angiography scans and obtained the informed consent after having discussed all available treatment methods. Since the patient was highly symptomatic and at very high risk of secondary thoracotomy surgery, it was decided to perform the TMViR due to the possibility of the need for a high-risk surgical reoperation (based on Society of Thoracic Surgery score, 11.192%; European System for Cardiac Operative Risk Evaluation Score II, 8.3%) (A–E). Meanwhile, a patient-specific3D-printed model was created using computed tomography angiography data. The image data, in Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine format, were collected and processed using Materialise Mimics 21.0 software (Materialise, Leuven, Belgium). The software was used to segment the images and export them in the Standard Tessellation Language (STL) format. Post-processing of the STL files was performed using Materialise 3-Matic software (Leuven, Belgium, version 14.0). The final STL files were then imported into a Polyjet 850 multimaterial full-color 3D printer (Stratasys, Inc., Eden Prairie, MN, USA). The printer utilized materials with different flexibilities to accurately represent the structural characteristics of different parts, such as the annuloplasty ring and myocardial tissue (F–H). Then, the procedures were simulated during the bench test. After its release, the unfolded bioprosthetic valve was observed clearly. The information obtained was used to evaluate and prognosticate major perioperative complications. Because the area of a 36 mm Physio ring was 7.0 cm2, and in addition, because the ring was D-shaped and semirigid and had a high risk of complications for the transcatheter aortic valve-in-ring concept, we decided to implant the Mi-thos system (I) via a transapical approach.
The procedure was conducted with the patient under general anesthesia and mechanical ventilation. Intraoperative guidance was provided using fluoroscopic images and TEE. A 4 cm left anterior mini-thoracotomy incision was made to access the puncture point at the apex of the left ventricle. Puncture and cannulation were carried out using 6F sheaths on both the right femoral artery and vein. Subsequently, a temporary pacemaker electrode was carefully inserted into the right ventricle through the vein sheath. At the same time, a 6F pigtail catheter was advanced from the right femoral artery to the left ventricle. We successfully obtained standard apical access and secured the entry site using a hexagonal suture. To optimize visibility of both the left ventricle and atrium, we made adjustments to achieve a cranial right-anterior-oblique angulation. Ventriculograms were performed to evaluate the MR and to assess the shape of the left ventricle and the mitral annuloplasty ring. Based on the preoperative assessment and simulation conducted using the patient-specific3D-printed model (A–C), the assembly of a 33 mm Mi-thos bioprosthesis onto the delivery system was performed in vitro. To begin the procedure, an apical puncture was made, and a 6 Fr sheath was inserted. A 6F pigtail catheter, along with a J-tipped 0.035-inch guide wire, was then guided across the mitral surgical ring and into the left atrium. Following this, a 260 cm Lunderquist super stiff wire (Cook Medical Inc., Bloomington, IN, USA) was then used for exchange. The delivery system was inserted over the Lunderquist guide wire and advanced in a retrograde manner across the mitral annuloplasty ring via the transapical approach, ultimately reaching the left atrium. By retracting the outer sheath of the delivery system, the atrial skirt, which was specifically designed to fit the D-shaped mitral annulus, was released. It completely covered the mitral annulus and the annuloplasty ring, guided by TEE and fluoroscopy, while the ventricular portion of the device remained partially confined to the sheath. After confirming the position and alignment of the Mi-thos valve, the entire system was retracted and properly seated on the mitral annuloplasty ring. Subsequently, under rapid pacing at a rate of 140 per minute, the ventricular portion of the bioprosthesis was released and securely anchored to the native MV using secure barbs.
Immediately ventriculograms confirmed the excellent position and shape of the Mi-thos valve, with no evidence of transvalvular regurgitation, paravalvular leak (PVL), or left ventricular outflow tract obstruction (LVOTO) (the area of the neo-left ventricular outflow tract was 374.6 cm2). The valve’s position and function were further assessed using TEE, which indicated a mean pressure gradient of 3 mmHg (D–I, ). Subsequently, the delivery system was carefully removed through the apex incision, and hemostasis was achieved using the apical strings that were previously placed. After closing the incision, the patient was successfully weaned off the ventilator and transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit. The postoperative recovery was smooth, and the patient was discharged in good clinical condition 5 days after the operation. At the time of discharge, the transthoracic echocardiogram examination confirmed the excellent position and function of the valve. Additionally, there was no evidence of any significant transvalvular or paravalvular regurgitation, as well as no LVOTO, and the maximum and mean gradients were measured at 6 mmHg and 2 mmHg, respectively. The patient’s symptoms had improved (NYHA functional class II).