A 50-year-old female presented with a 2-month history of progressive left foot drop and mild tenderness over the left fibular head, with the gradual development of swelling in the area. On examination, there was a soft to firm, poorly defined swelling in the area below the fibular head. There was a weakness in foot eversion and dorsiflexion, particularly of the great toe. Foot plantar flexion and inversion were normal. The swelling was screened with an ultrasound, which showed a hypoechogenic cystic mass. Nerve conduction study showed delayed latency and decreased conduction velocity compared to the contralateral limb. An electromyogram was done which demonstrated a denervation potential the right tibialis anterior and extensor digitorum longus muscles. The patient was diagnosed with peroneal nerve palsy and was initially conservatively managed with ankle-foot orthosis for protection and expectant spontaneous recovery. The symptoms did not resolve, and subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an elongated tubular, cystic-appearing mass near the fibular neck extending down till the middle third of the leg . The cyst was excised using an incision starting just posterior to fibular head. The fascia of the posterior compartment was incised, and the peroneal nerve was identified just beneath the cyst . The nerve was traced distally as well as proximally to prevent any inadvertent injury while cyst excision. The cyst was followed distally till its stalk and removed in toto . Loop magnification was used to prevent any injury to the fine branches arising from nerve along its course. The mass measured approximately 13.0 cm×2.0 cm×2.0 cm. It was then explored for its proximal extension and removed, which measured 2.0 cm×2.0 cm×2.0 cm (, , ).The peroneal nerve was inspected and found to be completely intact. The specimen was sent for histopathology which confirmed the diagnosis of a ganglion cyst . There was an immediate clinical improvement in motor function within the 1stweek. Repeat electromyography (EMG) showed long-duration polyphasic motor unit potentials in tibialis anterior and extensor digitorum and clinical recovery of foot drop. At 6-month follow-up, the patient reported full clinical recovery , there were no signs of recurrence on ultrasonography (USG) even at 24-month follow-up.