A 55-year-old male patient, who present to our hospital in August 2021, because of repeated infection at multiple incisions for more than 1 year after laparoscopic cholecystectomy surgery done for gallstone complicated with cholangitis. On examination, the incisions under the xiphoid process were red and swollen, the incisions were dehiscent, local tenderness, high skin temperature and a little suppuration .
The patient had multiple incisions infections and repeated purulent exudates after surgery, with an average recurrence about 25 days, but the blood routine results shown no abnormality. According to the B-ultrasound results , considering the formation of sinus tract under xiphoid process. In September 2021, laparoscopic re-surgery and abdominal exploration were performed, the sinus trace was cut and drainage of abscess. Then given piperacillin sodium and tazobactam sodium anti-infection treatment, but the effect was still poor after a period of time. We discovered the surgical incisions still were not healing, the skin surrounding the incisions was red, swollen and painful, and suppuration was present .
Since admission, the patient's body temperature and blood routine results were normal . Additionally, regular bacterial culture and acid-fast bacillus (AFB) staining were negative, but blood samples for the tubercle bacillus antibody (TB-Ab) test were positive. Combined with the patient's chest CT , tuberculosis related examination and the patient's clinical symptoms, they did not support tuberculosis-related diseases. In order to further resolve the question and determine the pathogens, the mategenomic sequencing technology covering the pathogen is used to accurately identify pathogens.
On November 29, 2021, the tissue from the incisions of the patient was sampled for DNA metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) (KingMed Diagnostics, Changsha, China). It detected 53 sequences that could be mapped to M. senegalense in a total of 113 sequences, and the coverage was 0.09%, making up 58.76% of the total microbe sequences . Targeted PCR of M. senegalense using two pairs of primers was applied: 16S RNA forward 5′-AGCGGCGGAGCATGTGGATTA-3′, reverse 5′-GCTGATCTGCGATTACTAGCGACTC-3′ (GenBank: ); rpoB forward 5′-TGCGTGCCATCTTCGGTGAGA-3′, reverse 5′-GTCGATGTTCCAGCCTGCCTTG-3′ (GenBank: ). The primers were designed and verified using Primer-BLAST based on the reference genome sequence of M. senegalense in NCBI. Subsequently, the capillary electrophoresis technique (Qsep 100TM; Bioptic) also curtained the M. senegalense infection .
According to the results, the patient was initiated with oral clarithromycin (500 mg, twice daily), moxifloxacin (400 mg, once daily), rifampicin (450 mg, once daily) and doxycycline (100 mg, once every 12 hours). Then the swelling gradually subsided and there was no obvious purulent exudation. After 20 days, the patient's incisions healed well, and there was no sign of recurrence in the 60th day after quadruple therapy .