A previously healthy 48-year-old woman, with no significant past medical history and no family history of colorectal diseases, presented to the emergency room with abdominal distension, colicky pain, and a history of repeated episodes of lower gastrointestinal hemorrhage for as long as couple of months. She also complained of 8 kg weight loss in the last 2 months. She denied taking any prescription or over-the-counter medications. Clinical examination revealed a malnourished woman in severe distress due to diffuse abdominal tenderness. Signs of colonic obstruction were apparent. Digital rectal examination was indicative for rectal bleeding. Her vital signs were temperature 38°C, pulse 118/min, blood pressure 105/60 mmHg, and respiratory rate 20/min. Blood counts showed Hb 7.4 g/dl and a white blood count of 16.000. Serum electrolytes, liver function tests, and urinalysis were unremarkable. A plain abdominal X-ray and abdominal CT scan confirmed the signs of large bowel obstruction, along with a polypoid mass fully occluding the lumen of the terminal sigmoid colon. The patient was taken to the operating room where a standard left hemicolectomy was performed because of the malignant appearance of the mass and the extensive lymph node involvement that was found intraoperatively .
Histological examination revealed a branching polypoid lesion characterized by mucosa projections with a central muscular core . Additionally, misplaced mucosa was encountered within the submucosa forming cystic structures, while partly preserved continuity with the polypoid part of the lesion could be demonstrated . The colonic epithelium both of the exophytic and the endophytic component showed extensive adenomatous transformation with high-grade dysplasia . A lesion-restricted transmural Crohn-like inflammation with prominent lymphoid aggregates was also present. The final diagnosis was consistent with a solitary hamartomatous polyp of Peutz-Jeghers type characterized by an inverted component, analogous to colitis cystica profunda, and by extensive high-grade dysplastic changes. The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery and complete resolution of her symptoms. Follow-up colonoscopy 3 months after surgery showed no abnormal findings. The patient remains free of symptoms.