A 38-year old white female with type 1 diabetes mellitus complicated by retinopathy, gastroparesis and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) underwent deceased donor SPK transplantation in November of 2007. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) serology was negative in both donor and recipient. Patient was not sensitized and received perioperative induction therapy with rabbit-antithymocyte globulin followed by maintenance immunosuppression with tacrolimus (dose adjusted for targeted trough level of 8-10 ng/mL during first year, 6-8 ng/mL during second year and 4-7 ng/mL subsequently) and mycophenolate mofetil (500 mg twice daily) with early steroid withdrawal. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (400/80 mg) once daily was used for prophylaxis against Pneumocystis jiroveci infection. Allografts started functioning soon after transplantation without delayed graft function. Serum creatinine stabilized at 1.3 mg/dL and patient remained euglycemic. Six years later, serum creatinine increased to 1.8 mg/d with a blood urea nitrogen level of 20 mg/dL. Urinalysis showed evidence for proteinuria and microhematuria. Other pertinent laboratory values were as follows: WBC 3.29 µ/mL, hemoglobin 10.7 g/dL, platelets 209 µ/mL, serum albumin 3.7 g/dL, serum total cholesterol 167 mg/dL, fasting blood glucose 102 mg/dL, and trough tacrolimus level 5.4 ng/mL, along with negative CMV, BK virus and Epstein-Barr virus PCR. She had proteinuria of 5 g/d. Patient underwent extensive work-up. Serum ANA, anti-double-stranded DNA, cryoglobulins, rheumatoid factor, anti-streptolysin O, proteinase-3 and myeloperoxidase ANCA, as well as hepatitis B and C antibodies were negative. Levels of serum complements and immunoglobulins were normal and no monoclonal bands were observed on serum and urine immunofixation electrophoresis. Serum free light chain assay revealed elevated free kappa (33.8 mg/dL, normal range 3.3-19.4) and normal lambda (25.1 mg/dL, normal range 5.7-26.3) fractions. Patient subsequently underwent kidney allograft biopsy. Light microscopy showed increased mesangial matrix and hypercellularity. Immunofluorescence revealed mesangial 2+ staining for IgG with specificity for IgG3 subclass, C3, C1q, IgM and 1+ staining for kappa light chains with negative staining for lambda light chain, IgA and subclasses of IgG1, IgG2 and IgG4 as well as peritubular capillary C4d. On electron microscopy, abundant mesangial granular electron dense deposits without substructures were seen. These findings were consistent with a diagnosis of PGMNID .
We opted for conservative treatment in our patient. She was initiated on lisinopril which she tolerated well. She remained normotensive. Her serum creatinine remains at 1.8 mg/dL with <100 mg/d proteinuria 14 months later.