A 47-year-old male presented to the Outpatient Department of our hospital with a complaint of experiencing a burning sensation during urination for the past 12 days. Additionally, he mentioned that urine dribbled out after he finished voiding, causing his undergarments to become soaked. He had no associated complains of increased urinary frequency, urgency, reddish discoloration of urine, fever, urinary incontinence, or flank pain. He had no history of diagnosed comorbidities like hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, or thyroid disease. However, the patient did mention experiencing recurrent urinary symptoms resembling the current episode for approximately the past 12 years.
The patient had an episode of severe lower abdominal pain and had previously undergone a cystoscopic litholapaxy procedure 5 years ago to remove calculus in the prostatic urethra. . He was advised for a computed tomography (CT) scan of the pelvis prior to the surgery but was unable to follow the recommendations due to his financial constraints. The patient underwent the procedure under spinal anesthesia. After proper positioning and ensuring anesthesia, the cystoscope was inserted and advanced into the prostatic urethra where the stone was visualized and fragmented and the fragments were flushed out by the use of saline irrigation. The postoperative course was uneventful.
The patient was born at home with no antenatal care visits attended by the mother. The patient vaguely recalled experiencing some urinary problems during childhood, but there were no documented records of those episodes. There was no known history of genital anomalies, difficulty in vision, developmental delay and behavioral disorders. No identifiable precipitating factor for the formation of renal calculus was found in the patient’s medical history.
Upon physical examination no abnormalities were detected in the patient. A urine routine examination was requested, revealing 8–10 pus cells per high-power field. The results of the renal function test (RFT) were within normal limits. Abdominal and pelvic ultrasonography (USG) detected a cystic dilation of the distal part of the left ureter measuring 2.7×2.6 cm which raised concerns about a possible underlying abnormality . Based on the USG findings, a CT urography was conducted, which was now accessible in the rural setting, to obtain a more comprehensive evaluation of the condition. The CT urography results revealed a left intravesical ureterocele measuring 3.4×2.3 cm. Furthermore, it demonstrated a partial duplex collecting system in the left kidney, with the fusion of the upper and lower pole moiety observed at the level of the pelvic ureteric junction. Mild dilatation of the proximal ureter was also noted . He was then diagnosed with a UTI believed to be secondary to the underlying anatomical abnormality.
A urine sample was collected for culture, and the patient received medical management for an UTI with antibiotics. He was also advised to drink plenty of fluids which led to an improvement in his current symptoms. The diagnosis was explained to him, and regular follow-up visits were scheduled to monitor for symptoms and assess his RFT and USG. After a thorough discussion of the available options, the patient consented to undergo an endoscopic incision of the ureterocele. Subsequently, a cystoscope-guided puncture of the ureterocele was successfully performed without encountering any intraoperative or postoperative complications. The most recent RFT report was within the normal range. The patient has diligently attended follow-up appointments since being informed about his cause of recurrent symptoms and the need to monitor him for future symptoms and hence has expressed willingness to undergo further interventions if necessary. The patient has been symptom-free since the endoscopic incision.