A 14-year-old male patient was admitted for extraction of the third molars in January 2022. During the clinical evaluation, a non-painful restriction of oral opening was observed, which made it difficult to eat solid food and to carry out adequate oral hygiene. There was also an interincisal separation of 15 mm at the maximum oral opening, anterior overbite, mandibular deviation to the right side and restriction of lateral movements. During the examination, the patient stated that the restriction had been gradually and slowly developing for approximately 3 years, with a sensation of “scraping” under the zygomatic arch when opening the mouth.

In the initial panoramic radiograph, the image of both coronoid processes was observed to be superior to their respective zygomatic arches, so a computed tomography (CT) was requested. In the volumetric reconstructions of the patient with the mouth closed in maximum intercuspidation, an increase in volume of the AC was observed, of homogeneous density, with an attenuation coefficient ranging from 633.7 UH to 208.9 UH. In axial images, towards the inner face of the zygomatic bone on both sides, a hyperdense image suggestive of exostosis was observed, of greater size in the zygomatic arch of the right side, closely related to the enlargement of the coronoid processes. In the closed mouth, the position of the AC was posterior to the exostosis, while on the left side it was in an anterior position in relation to the ipsilateral exostosis.

A bilateral coronoidectomy was performed via intraoral approach through the anterior border of the mandibular branch and subperiosteal dissection to expose the coronoid processes. At this time, mouth opening movements were performed and the premature contact of the processes with the posterior face of the zygomatic bone was observed. The disinsertion of the temporal muscle and an ostectomy at the base of the processes were performed and the processes were removed. The specimens were sent for histopathological analysis, which revealed normal morphology of trabecular and cortical bone tissue with abundant adipose tissue.

In the immediate post-surgical control, performed by means of clinical evaluation, the increase in millimetres of the oral opening was observed, 30 mm and, through the orthopantomography, the sharp and precise cut of both coronoidectomies was verified.

The patient came for evaluation at 12 months with a 30 mm oral opening, which was not painful. He had orthodontic appliances as a surgical preparation for the correction of dento-skeletal deformity class II. A CT was indicated, and a recurrence of bilateral hyperplasia of coronoid apophysis was observed. The pre-surgical images were compared.

In the comparative study of the exostoses observed in axial image, towards the inner face of both zygomatic arches, a significant reduction of the same was observed, with greater evidence on the right side.

Conservative management was decided upon, with physiotherapy and clinical monitoring by measuring the mouth opening with a vernier caliper every three months for the duration of the orthodontic treatment.
