The patient was a 37-year-old male from a non-consanguineous Chinese family. Since the age of 35, he had experienced progressive weakness of his hands and a reduction of grip strength, especially in his right hand. Six months later, muscle atrophy and muscle fibrillation were noticed in his hands, and he was unable to hold things or to write. One year later, he experienced weakness in his lower extremities with no sensory disturbance. He currently experiences difficulty in climbing the stairs and standing up from a squatting position, is unable to lift his foot upward, and trips over easily. Physical examination revealed that the cranial nerves were normal, and that orolingual fasciculations and atrophy were absent. The neck flexion strength was 5 (MRC muscle scale, grades 0–5). The muscle strength of both sides of the body was as follows: triceps and biceps 3/3, forearm flexors 2/2, intrinsic hand muscles 1/1, iliopsoas muscles 4/4, quadriceps muscles 3/3, tibialis anterior and gastrocnemius muscles 2/2. Deep tendon reflexes were absent. There was no sensory abnormality or coordination difficulty of any of the limbs. Atrophy was seen in most of the muscles, especially the interosseous muscles of the hands, bilateral gastrocnemius and anterior tibial muscles . Muscle fibrillation was observed in the biceps and quadriceps muscles.
The patient’s serum level of creatine kinase was 668 U/L (normal range, 50–310 U/L). Extractable nuclear antigens were negative, and serum sex hormone levels were normal. Peripheral neuropathy antibodies such as GM1-antibody and GQ1b-antibody were also negative, and there was no albuminocytological dissociation of his cerebrospinal fluid. The nerve conduction velocity revealed severe reduction in compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitudes and motor conduction velocities in bilateral median nerves, ulnar nerves, and radial nerves, while the sensory conduction was normal (Additional file A and B). Right ulnar nerve F-waves were absent. Chronic denervation/reinnervation (e.g., motor unit action potentials of increased amplitude and duration, with reduced inference patterns) was observed in three regions on the electromyogram (EMG), including the bilateral extremities and sternocleidomastoid muscles (Additional file C, D and E). And spontaneous activity (positive sharp waves) was recorded from these muscles. Echocardiography and electrocardiogram evaluations did not detect any cardiac abnormalities. Lower limb muscle MRI showed marked involvement of the gastrocnemius muscle at the calf level. There was a strongly increased signal intensity in turbo inversion recovery magnitude (TIRM) sequences, indicating muscular edema. A mild increase in the signal intensity of soleus and tibialis anterior muscles was observed in the T2 sequence, indicating fat replacement . At the proximal leg level, slight fatty degeneration was detected in the posterior compartment, such as the semimembranosus and semitendinosus muscles .
After providing written consent, a skeletal muscle biopsy was taken from the patient’s gastrocnemius muscle, precooled with isopentane, and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen sections of 8 μm were then prepared and examined by light microscopy. A marked variation in fiber size was observed, with many angular atrophic fibers. Some fibers also showed structural changes with abnormal material deposits after staining with hematoxylin–eosin . On Gomori trichrome-stained sections, these abnormal deposits appeared as purple inclusions. They varied in size, shape, and thickness, and were either single or multiple . In the NADH-tetrazolium reductase reaction, oxidative activity was reduced in fibrous areas occupied by the inclusions, showing core-like lesions . Neurogenic changes, such as the grouping of angular atrophic fibers, were also present. Immunohistochemical analysis showed prominent FLNC immunoreactive deposits accumulating at subsarcolemmal and sarcoplasmic levels . Electron microscopy of the available transverse sections showed an inordinate myofibrillar structure and dissolved myofilaments. Subsarcolemmal accumulations of lipofuscin were also present .
Next-generation sequencing identified a heterozygous missense mutation (c.7123G > A, p.V2375I) in the Ig-like domain 21 of FLNC . Confirmation of the variant was undertaken by Sanger sequencing using an ABI 3730XL DNA Sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The mutation was absent in the DNA of 100 healthy unrelated controls, and the allele frequency in the Asian population is zero according to the Exome Aggregation Consortium . The p.V2375I missense mutation affects valine at position 2375, which is highly conserved from mice to humans . To exclude other hereditary diseases similar to LMN disease, we also tested for mutations in the genes disrupted in SMAs and the androgen receptor gene, but none were found. Since the patient had no immediate family members and loses contact with other family members, further co-segregation analyses among the family cannot be conducted.