A previously healthy 9-year-old boy from Trujillo, Peru, fully vaccinated according to the vaccination schedule for his age, presented to the emergency department with respiratory problems and suspected COVID-19.

The mother and child were tested for the presence of antibodies to SARS-CoV-2. The results showed that both were positive for IgG antibodies to SARS-CoV-2. In the child, the reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) molecular test for SARS-CoV-2 was negative. According to the mother, the child had a fever, abdominal pain, diarrhea and vomiting for 3 days. The patient was admitted to the surgical center for acute examination of the abdomen without major findings.

Twenty-four hours after surgery, the child was tachypneic with respiratory rate of 40 breaths per minute, subcostal retractions, low oxygen saturation (SatO2) of 80% in room air and 85% on high flow oxygen support, heart rate of 138 beats per minute and blood pressure of 790/550 mmHg. Due to his clinical deterioration, he was admitted to the paediatric intensive care unit (ICU), where he was urgently intubated for mechanical ventilation and presented low SatO2 at 85% and peripheral signs of hypoperfusion. Initial analysis of the venous blood gases showed pH of 7.29, carbon dioxide partial pressure (pCO2) of 39.8 mmHg, oxygen partial pressure (pO2) of 37.3 mmHg, bicarbonate levels of 17.8 mmol/L, base excess of -7.8 and inspired oxygen fraction of 100%, consistent with protective mechanical ventilation measures. Serial chest radiographs were performed, which showed bilateral parenchymal involvement, along with a thoracic tomography result consistent with a consolidated parenchymal inflammatory process and bilateral pleural effusion.

No improvement in oxygenation was observed with the initiation of mechanical ventilation with sedoanalgesia and optimal relaxation; therefore, it was decided to place him in the prone position for 48 hours, increasing the SatO2 to 92%. The child presented circulatory collapse and received several vasoactive agents (epinephrine, norepinephrine and dobutamine), achieving mean arterial pressure within the 50th percentile for his age. The vasoactive inotropic score (EVI) was 50, and the echocardiogram showed left ventricular dysfunction and vasoplegia, which reversed after 5 days with normal values of arterial pressure for his age and remained so until hospital discharge.

The respiratory pathogenic nucleic acid amplification panel was negative. Blood, urine and peritoneal fluid samples were negative. Blood tests showed a hemoglobin level of 9.9 g/dL, a leukocyte count of 10,680/mm3 and lymphopenia (640/mm3). The blood tests showed elevated levels of inflammatory markers, with a C-reactive protein level of 243 mg/L, a fibrinogen level of 410 mg/dL, a ferritin level of 1,260 ng/mL and hypalbuminemia (2 g/dL). In addition, the patient had a high level of D-dimer of 9.4 mg/L with signs of coagulopathy, a prothrombin time of 49 seconds and an international normalized ratio of 1.51. There were also elevated levels of pro-BNP (282 pg/mL), troponin (0.24 pg/mL) and a high level of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). The fever persisted while the patient was on mechanical ventilation, and clinical, gas and radiological improvements were observed after 15 days. The patient was weaned off the mechanical ventilator to spontaneous ventilation with the support of a 30 L high flow cannula, and the inspired oxygen fraction was 60%. After 3 weeks, the child had neurological deterioration, with a Glasgow coma scale of 11/15 (M4/O4/V3), pupils of 3 mm in diameter, bilateral plantar fasciitis, delusions and suicidal ideation, psychomotor agitation and the incidence of two convulsive events of approximately 2 minutes in duration each, with no recovery of consciousness between the events, for which the patient received intravenous (IV) midazolam 0.1 mg/kg and then phenytoin bolus 20 mg/kg/dose with a maintenance dose of 8 mg/kg/dose. This prescription was maintained after hospital discharge. Psychomotor agitation was controlled with antipsychotics; haloperidol was administered orally at 5 mg every 8 hours. No immunosuppressive treatment was used.

Brain MRI showed bilateral occipital involvement in hyperintense T2 and FLAIR images, which affected subcortical white matter symmetrically, especially at the posterior level, and did not stand out with contrast or show significant changes in diffusion. These findings were consistent with vasogenic edema and indicative of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES). Electroencephalographic findings showed a generalized slowing of theta/delta frequency activity.

To treat the multisystem inflammatory syndrome, he received immunoglobulin at 2g/kg in a single dose and methylprednisolone at 2mg/kg/dose for maintenance. Subsequently, we focused on the therapeutic management of PRES by the IV administration of antiepileptic drugs to maintain blood pressure levels at normal tension, preserving an adequate homeostasis of the internal environment with special emphasis on the treatment of volume overload and the prevention of electrolyte disorders.

During follow-up at 4 weeks after discharge, at the time of neuropsychological evaluation, abilities such as attention, concentration, memory, language, visuoconstructive abilities, calculation and orientation were assessed, and motor deficits of 4/5 in the legs were preserved. MRI abnormalities of the brain were reversed 21 days after discharge.
