66-year-old woman referred to the endocrinology department in 2001 for polynodular goiter and osteopenia, with increased sweating in the last year and mild, nonspecific polyarthralgia. She presented a subtle acromegaloid face (enlarged nose, thick lips and prominent superciliary arches) on physical examination. She reported that she had been wearing rings with a larger diameter in the last few years, but did not have an increase in the number of shoes. The biochemical profile showed a calcium level of 9.1 mg/dL (normal value: 8.5-10.5), phosphate level of 4.8 ng/dL (normal value: 2.5-4.5), 236 mg/24h calcium excretion (normal value: < 250) and 95% renal tubular reabsorption of phosphate (normal value: 85-94). Based on the clinical presentation, hyperphosphatemia with renal tubular reabsorption of phosphate at the upper limit of normal was suspected to be acromegaly. A measurement of plasma IGF-1 was requested and found within the normal range. PTOG/GH did not show suppression of the same: basal GH: 4.4 ng/mL, 30 minutes: 3.6, 60 minutes: 5, 90 minutes: 7.1 and 120 minutes: 5.5 (normal value: < 1 at all times of the test); confirming a hypersecretion of GH. The blood glucose levels were normal throughout the test: 97 and 139 mg/dL (basal and 120 minutes, respectively). The MRI of the hypophysis was normal, so the possible source of ectopic secretion of GH was sought. The MRI of the thorax and abdomen did not show a GH-producing tumour. Based on these results and with a patient who was oligosymptomatic for acromegaly, clinical and biochemical monitoring of the same was decided. In her clinical evolution there were no changes: she persists with hyperphosphatemia between 4.6 and 5.5 ng/dL, IGF-1 levels were slightly elevated to 2.3 (normal value: 2) and with annual PTOG/GH curves that were pathological (without suppression of GH). The oscillations in the serum phosphate and IGF-1 levels in the monitoring were modified in parallel. Annual MRI of the hypophysis was performed until 3 years of monitoring when a picture compatible with a 4 mm pituitary microadenoma was found, and an endoscopic transsphenoidal resection of the same was performed with good surgical resolution and without complications. The histopathological report reported somatotrophic adenoma of densely granulated cells, with immunohistochemical positivity for GH and with Ki67 labelling of 1.5%. Remission of acromegaly was achieved, maintaining IGF-1 levels within the normal range and PTOG/GH curve with suppression of GH. Clinical improvement was observed, normalisation of phosphatemia in parallel to normalisation of IGF-1 dosages. The patient remains in control and clinical monitoring in the institution for 18 years without recurrence of acromegaly. Informed consent of the patient and approval of the institution's ethics committee for the publication of the case was obtained.
