A 51-year-old previously healthy male was brought by his family members following sudden loss of consciousness. On admission his Glasgow coma scale (GCS) was 7/15 (eye 1, verbal 2, and motor 4). Neurological examination revealed bilateral symmetrical sluggish pupils of 3 mm. We could do only a limited neurological examination due to low GCS. He moved all four limbs to a painful stimulus and the deep tendon reflexes were normal. Bilateral flexor plantar response was present. With the suspicion of any drug overdose, a urine sample for toxins was sent urgently, but all the tested toxins including opioids, benzodiazepines and amphetamines were negative. An urgent NCCT brain was done within two hours of symptom onset to exclude intracranial hemorrhage and it turned out to be normal.
After four hours of admission, his GCS improved to 11/15 (E3V2M6). However he was drowsy and there was bilateral asymmetrical ptosis, right more than left. Third nerve palsy without pupillary involvement was evident on the right side. Right eye medial and downward gaze were impaired. He also had bilateral upward gaze palsy, but had no nystagmus . These findings suggested a right-sided nuclear third nerve palsy. He did not have pyramidal or cerebellar signs and the visual fields were normal.
As the NCCT brain was normal, we proceeded with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) brain. It was reported as acute infarction in bilateral paramedian thalami and medial rostral mid brain, suggesting AOP territory infarction. MRA showed hypoplastic right vertebral artery. Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) images and diffusion weighted images (DWI) showed the paramedian thalamic infarctions in the index case due to AOP involvement. Here the rostral mid brain involvement is asymmetrical as was suggested by the clinical findings as well .
Over a week, his hypersomnolance gradually improved but his diplopia persisted. After the diagnosis of ischemic stroke, the underlying risk factor assessment was performed. He had hypertension, but no diabetes mellitus. Lipid profile was deranged with a low density lipoprotein of 140 mg/dL. Electrocardiogram did not show any evidence of arrhythmia or past cardiac ischemic events. Transthoracic echocardiogram was normal except for the left ventricular hypertrophy. He did not have polycythemia or thrombocytosis. As he had conventional risk factors for a stroke, we did not further evaluate for other thrombophilic conditions. He was discharged after 1 week of hospitalization with out-patient speech and physiotherapy. We started aspirin 75 mg, clopidogrel 75 mg and atorvastatin 40 mg daily. At the clinic visit scheduled 3 weeks after the discharge, clopidogrel was withheld and aspirin 75 mg and atorvastatin 40 mg were continued. By the time of clinic visit he had a marked recovery and could engage in his day-to-day activities. However he could not resume his work as a taxi driver even 3 months after the initial stroke.