The patient is a 51-year-old white man with a medical history significant for severe coronary artery disease resulting in cardiogenic shock (at one point requiring a short-term left ventricular assist device), heart failure with reduced ejection fraction estimated at 20%–25%, hypertension and schizophrenia who presented with his brother to the emergency department with 5-day history of fatigue, ataxia, altered mental status and abnormal behaviour.

His brother states that he has been getting steadily worse, with multiple near falls and unsteadiness in 2 days leading up to admission. He has never had any symptoms like this before, and has poor insight into his symptoms. His behaviour and mental status have also been inappropriate, as the brother states he has been unable to complete activities of daily living such as bathing or feeding himself. His affect has also been more flat than normal, with the patient’s brother reporting significantly longer time to respond to questions than his baseline. He also reported one episode of hyper elation and agitation that resolved after several hours. He has been alert and oriented to only person and place, but not time (normally he is fully oriented). The patient denies any shortness of breath, chest pain, nausea, headache, vomiting, diarrhoea or decreased oral intake. He and his brother deny any trauma. The patient denies any hallucinations, delusions, depressed mood or worsening negative symptoms of schizophrenia. His medication regimen is notable for spironolactone 25 mg daily, torsemide 200 mg two times per day and metolazone 2.5 mg daily for diuresis. This large dose of diuretics was due to a recent hospitalisation for congestive heart failure exacerbation with volume overload. It was during this hospitalisation that torsemide was increased, and spironolactone was added with metolazone. His other home medications included atorvastatin 80 mg daily, clopidogrel 75 mg daily, hydroxyzine 25 mg as needed for itching, mirtazapine 30 mg daily, olanzapine 10 mg daily, trazodone 50 mg as needed for sleep, metoclopramide 5 mg as needed for nausea and pantoprazole 40 mg two times per day for heartburn. While the patient does have a history of poor medication adherence and health literacy, his brother states that he has been taking his medications as prescribed leading up to the onset of these symptoms.

The patient had a blood pressure of 91/73 mm Hg on admission, with his normal baseline systolic blood pressure being around 100 mm Hg. His pulse, temperature, oxygen saturations and respiratory rate were within normal limits. On physical examination, he was generally in no acute distress. He was alert and oriented, with no focal neurologic deficit, and a flat affect. He had very dry mucous membranes, decreased skin turgor and no oedema. His cardiac examination was notable for an irregular rhythm, no appreciated jugular venous distention with equal peripheral pulses. His pulmonary examination was overall clear to auscultation. Abdomen was non-distended, with normal bowel sounds.

Basic metabolic panel on admission was notable for a serum sodium of 108 mmol/L, potassium of 1.5 mmol/L, chloride of 65 mmol/L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 82 mg/dL and a creatinine of 2.32 mg/dL (baseline 1.2 mg/dL). His serum osmolality was 242 mOsm/Kg H2O. His urine sodium was 20 mmol/L, urine potassium 25.6 mmol/L, urine chloride 20 mmol/L and urine osmolality 204 mOsm/kg H2O. His brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) was 2113 pg/mL, which is around his baseline. His glucose on admission was 119 mg/dL. His most recent lipid panel from 8 months prior had a total cholesterol of 263 mg/dL, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) of 37 mg/dL, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) of 183 mg/dL and triglycerides of 217 mg/dL.

Notable imaging includes a non-contrast CT head that was unrevealing for acute abnormalities, and his ECG was found to have no changes from the previous studies. In the setting of the patient’s presenting symptoms and severe hyponatremia, he was admitted to the internal medicine teaching service.


Outcome and follow-up

Given his significant electrolyte abnormalities, prerenal azotemia, extensive and recently advanced home diuretic regimen and hypovolemic physical examination, the patient was assessed to be in severe hypotonic hyponatremia due to hypovolemia from over-diuresis as the cause of his presenting symptoms. In concordance with cardiology consultation, he was treated with gradual sodium correction with isotonic fluids. Normal saline was introduced at 100 mL/hour, with sodium checks in every 4 hours to avoid correction greater than 8–10 mmol/L in 24 hours. His home diuretics were held while correcting sodium. We also held his other home medications, including his schizophrenia medication olanzapine due to the risk of syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), which may worsen his hyponatremia. In addition, with the patient’s hypokalemia requiring aggressive repletion, we were concerned with continuing his olanzapine and its inherent risk of QT-interval prolongation. His electrolytes improved on this therapy, with a peak in sodium to 119 mmol/L on the morning of hospital day 4. However, by that afternoon, his sodium actually decreased to 116 mmol/L. At this point, his potassium and chloride had corrected, and his creatinine returned close to baseline. His presenting symptoms of ataxia, altered mental status and fatigue had slightly improved. He was able to walk around the room with supervision and had no falls. He was awake throughout the day and did not report fatigue. However, given that he was a poor historian with a very flat affect secondary to his schizophrenia history, it was difficult to ascertain his insight into his symptoms. It was also difficult to tell if his negative symptoms had worsened while holding olanzapine, but his brother confirmed that he was around his baseline in this regard. While he was oriented to person, place and time, his lack of insight and inability to describe his concerns remained a challenge throughout the hospitalisation.

Following his initial presentation and volume repletion, his physical examination, symptoms, labs and imaging supported an euvolemic aetiology of his hyponatremia. He remained clear on pulmonary auscultation and did not have any abdominal distention, jugular venous distention or lower extremity oedema. He also did not report any cough, orthopnea, or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea. His BNP had decreased to 1837 pg/mL. A chest radiograph showed right basilar atelectasis with possible infiltrate, but was mostly stable compared with baseline. In conjunction with an euvolemic hyponatremia, an evaluation for SIADH was started. This was not only supported by his current examination status, but he was also being treated with olanzapine prior to admission, which has a risk for SIADH. His intravenous fluids were stopped and he was placed on a 1000 mL/day fluid restriction. However, his hyponatremia failed to significantly improve with a value of 117 mmol/L on the morning of hospital day 5, and 118 mmol/L on the morning of day 6. His urine electrolytes included a urine sodium of less than 20 mmol/L, urine potassium 26.9 mmol/L, urine chloride 23 mmol/L and urine osmolality 315 mOsm/kg H2O. His low urine sodium suggested that SIADH was not the aetiology of his hyponatremia. He remained clinically euvolemic on physical examination on hospital day 6, including normal pulmonary examination to auscultation, no jugular venous distention, no oedema, normal capillary refill and no abdominal distention. He also did not report cough, orthopnea or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, and continued to state that he had been resting comfortably every night.

In the setting of likely mismanagement of this patient’s hyponatremia, the primary inpatient teaching service used point-of-care ultrasound on the morning of hospital day 6 to better assess the patient’s volume status. The patient was found to have a moderate-sized right pleural effusion and diffuse pulmonary parenchymal B-lines suggesting pulmonary oedema. His inferior vena cava appeared plethoric and its diameter measured 2.5 cm with no respiratory variation. His estimated Caval Index was 1, given this lack of respiratory change, which is significantly higher than the estimated 0.35 in euvolemic patients.2 In all, the ultrasound findings supported hypervolemia. As a result, a diuretic regimen was started with oral torsemide 60 mg two times per day and his volume response and sodium were monitored closely. His sodium improved to 126 mmol/L on hospital day 7, and then he was successfully discharged home with a sodium of 132 mmol/L on hospital day 8. He was stable at time of discharge, with discharge summary stating to monitor volume status closely in upcoming appointments. He was also counselled on medication adherence, frequent weight monitoring and fluid restriction. Home health services were called prior to his discharge to discuss assisting his mother and brother with his care.

While the internal medicine teaching service and the cardiology service recommended discharge to skilled nursing facility to help manage his medications and chronic debility, he wanted to be discharged home to his mother and brother. He followed up with his cardiologist 2 weeks after discharge, and was scheduled with his primary care physician but never arrived at that appointment. At the time of his cardiology follow-up, his diuretic regimen was torsemide 100 mg two times per day (down from 200 mg two times per day), spironolactone 25 mg daily (same as prior to hospitalisation) and metolazone 2.5 mg daily (same as prior to hospitalisation). In setting of his heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, he was started on 25 mg daily of metoprolol succinate. He had also resumed his home medications that were held during the hospitalisation, most notably olanzapine 10 mg daily and mirtazapine 30 mg daily for his schizophrenia. He had no complaints of fatigue, altered mental status, ataxia or abnormal behaviour. His sodium at this visit was 130 mmol/L, somewhat stable since discharge. Medication non-adherence remained an issue at follow-up, with patient having little understanding of his medical history or current medications. Home healthcare services assisted with medication adherence.