A 48-year-old Japanese woman had a sudden onset of severe headaches early in the morning during work and was transported to a local hospital. She was alert-oriented and had no neurologic deficits. She had a medical history of atopic dermatitis and metal allergy that had discouraged her from wearing any jewels.
A head computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) around the basal cistern with predominant SAH in the left sylvian cistern. A three-dimensional-CT angiography revealed a left internal carotid artery (ICA)-posterior communicating artery (Pcom) aneurysm. Although an emergent aneurysm clipping surgery was scheduled, the patient preferred a coil embolization rather than an open surgery so that she was referred to us for a coil embolization.
On the next day after the onset, a coil embolization was performed using a simple technique under the general anesthesia. The left ICA angiogram confirmed an irregular-shaped aneurysm measuring 7.7 mm in the maximum diameter at the left ICA-Pcom junction. Besides the ICAPcom aneurysm, aneurysms at the bilateral middle cerebral artery (MCA) bifurcations and at the top of the right ICA were also revealed. Given the distribution of SAH as well as the size and the shape of the aneurysm, the left ICA-Pcom aneurysm was believed to be the cause of the SAH.
A guiding sheath (Flexor shuttle 7F × 90 cm ST 0.100”/2.54 mm) was advanced to the pre-petrous portion of the left ICA. A microcatheter (Excelsior SL-10 pre-shaped 90°) was placed in the aneurysm using a manual-shaped intermediate catheter (TACTICS 120 cm STR). Seven coils were used for the complete obliteration of the aneurysm (Raymond-Roy occlusion classification class I) and are listed in . The patient recovered well without any neurologic deficits. The head CT scan right after the embolization showed no abnormal findings, as shown in
Despite no neurologic deficits after the surgery and no abnormal findings on a MRI 7 days after the coil embolization, an MRI study performed 24 days after the embolization demonstrated a round lesion beside the posterior horn of the left lateral ventricle, as shown in . The lesion showed homogeneously moderately high intensity on the T2-weighted image (T2WI) and the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence, mildly high intensity on the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map but isointensity on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI). An MRI taken 44 days after the surgery showed multiple patchy lesions at separate locations of the left frontal and parietal lobes. The lesions demonstrated high intensity on FLAIR as the previous one. An MRI obtained 70 days after the surgery still demonstrated an even larger high intense lesion on T2WI, FLAIR, and ADC map and an isointensity on DWI in the left frontal lobe, though the previous lesion had disappeared. An MRI taken 146 days after the surgery showed complete disappearance of the abnormal high intense lesions finally.
Meanwhile, the ratio of eosinophils (EOS) among the leukocytes was 3.0% (0.0–7.0%) before the surgery, and it elevated up to 9.7% 16 days after the coil embolization and got back to 2.6% 147 days after the surgery, as shown in .
Despite the MRI findings, the patient showed no neurologic deficits and complained of only mild headaches throughout the course. No specific treatments were performed, and the headaches gradually subsided and finally resolved completely.
The patient subsequently underwent a metal skin patch test that showed positive against only zinc though the patch test covered neither titanium, tungsten, nor molybdenum, as shown in .