A 42-year-old man with no other significant medical history was diagnosed with metastatic melanoma that was BRAF V617F mutated, with metastasis to liver, lung and adrenal glands. He had a past history of early stage melanoma that was initially diagnosed eight years ago, for which he underwent wide local excision with a negative sentinel lymph node biopsy. He did not receive any adjuvant chemo or immunotherapy. Subsequently, he started noticing multiple cutaneous lesions that were positive for melanoma, which led to a complete staging work up that revealed metastatic disease. Patient had an excellent performance status with no known history of endocrinopathies, including diabetes mellitus. He had normal fasting glucose levels, which was checked by his primary care physician. He was started on first line systemic immunotherapy with the combination of ipilimumab and nivolumab. He completed three out of the four planned cycles of combined regimen, that was administered at ipilimumab 3 mg/kg IV and nivolumab 1 mg/kg IV every three weeks, prior to emergency room presentation. Chief complaints at this presentation included intractable nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. He reported to having more than 8 loose bowel movements a day, some of which were associated with blood streaking. In the ER his serum glucose was elevated to 728 mg/dL and he was in DKA with significant anion gap metabolic acidosis, for which he was admitted to intensive care unit for further management. He was given intravenous insulin as bolus and started on insulin drip along with IV fluids as per DKA protocol. His blood glucose levels subsequently improved. Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) level from admission was 6.5%, indicating a rather new onset diabetes mellitus. Stool studies returned negative for infectious etiologies and he was started on anti-motility agents (Imodium and Lomotil), which failed to provide any relief from diarrhea. Computerized tomography of abdomen and pelvis showed pan-colitis and he was started on prednisone 1 mg/kg daily for presumed immune mediated colitis. Despite steroids he continued to have diarrhea, which were intermittently bloody. He was then started on octreotide (50 mcg subcutaneous injection TID, which was later increased to 100 mcg TID), with which his diarrhea was controlled. We had planned to start him on infliximab (a tumor necrosis factor inhibitor) if he failed the octreotide trial.
Subsequently, he was discharged home on an insulin regimen for presumed new onset insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) and prednisone taper for colitis. Initially he had trouble controlling blood glucose levels while on prednisone taper. But, once he was off prednisone, his IDDM was better controlled. One month later into follow up repeat hemoglobin A1c was 7.9%, but his glucose levels were much better controlled. Since no testing for autoimmune diabetes was done during his initial presentation, anti-GAD65 antibody, ZnT8 antibody, and IA-2 antibody testing was done during his subsequent clinic follow up. Anti- GAD65 antibody was <5 IU/ml, ZnT8 antibody was <10 U/Ml, and IA-2 antibody was <0.8 U/ml, all being within normal limits. Though DKA is more common with autoimmune or type 1 diabetes mellitus, it can be seen with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Since, patient had no evidence of diabetes or pre-diabetes prior to immunotherapy, we think treatment with combined checkpoint blockade is what led to DKA.