A 21-year-old female patient with abdominal pain, irregular menstrual cycles, hyperestrogenemia, and recurrence of an ovarian mass was transferred to our hospital in July 2020.
Four months prior, the patient was referred to another hospital because of abdominal pain and irregular menstrual cycles. Ultrasonography revealed a large multilocular cystic mass in the abdominal cavity. As the abdominal pain increased, the patient underwent single-port laparoscopic removal of the bilateral ovarian cysts. During surgery, the bilateral ovaries were enlarged in a multilocular mass with yellow fluid inside, and histopathology revealed multiple luteinized follicular cysts of the ovary.
After one month of clinical treatment, the patient experienced abdominal pain again. Pelvic ultrasound indicated recurrence of enlarged ovaries with multiple large cysts, and its upper edge reached 20 mm above the umbilicus; both sides reached the midclavicular line, while the thickness of the endometrium was 17.4 mm. Biochemical evaluation demonstrated normal serum levels of LH, FSH, progesterone (PROG), cortisol, Free T4 (FT4), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), parathyroid hormone (PTH), calcium, phosphate, and growth hormone (GH), and elevated levels of plasma CA125, estradiol, and prolactin (PRL). Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed the presence of a pituitary macroadenoma (17 mm × 27 mm × 19 mm), and visual field examination after brain MRI revealed bitemporal hemianopsia. Ultrasound showed a 48 mm × 30 mm × 23 mm mass in the right breast, and histopathology revealed breast fibroadenoma. Ultrasound imaging revealed no abnormalities in the thyroid, adrenal, or parathyroid glands. The female patient was then treated with oral bromocriptine (2.5 mg) three times a day.
The patient had no significant history of illness, medical history, drug allergy, transfusion, injury, pregnancy, or other complications.
The patient had smoking history for over four years and had no remarkable personal or family history.
The patient had menarche at age 12 years, and she had a regular menstrual cycle. In the past year, the menstrual cycle of the patient had extended to 2–3 months, accompanied by progressively increased dysmenorrhea.
The patient was 167 cm tall, weighed 68 kg, and had a body mass index of 24.38 kg/m2. temperature was 36.7 °C, heart rate was 96 beats/min, respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min, and blood pressure was 98/68 mmHg.
Biochemical evaluation showed that plasma estradiol and CA125 levels were elevated, while PRL, LH, FSH, PROG, cortisol, FT4, TSH, PTH, and GH levels were maintained at normal levels.
An ultrasonographic study of the pelvis revealed multicystic ovaries, similar to the typical signs of spontaneous ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS). Computed tomography confirmed a large cystic mass in the abdominopelvic cavity , with a range of 19.4 cm × 7.9 cm × 15.9 cm. A homogeneously enhancing 21 mm × 16 mm× 28 mm sellar mass imaged by Brain MRI was presented .