An 18-year-old female patient noticed a dull red mass on her left leg three years ago, which developed without any clear cause. The mass was occasionally tender and exhibited slow growth. The patient has no family history of tumors, no surgical history, and no chronic diseases. In July 2022, she underwent a B-ultrasound examination at our hospital, revealing a hypoechoic nodule in the subcutaneous soft tissue of the proximal left leg. The nodule measured approximately 1.2 × 1 cm, with a distinct boundary, uneven internal echo, and enhanced posterior echo, CDFI shows no clear blood flow signal. Initially, a benign lesion was suspected, and no significant lymphadenopathy was detected in the bilateral popliteal fossae or groin . The patient underwent subcutaneous tumor resection, followed by an extended resection due to incomplete initial removal.Postoperative pathology indicated a small residual tumor in the dermis, approximately 0.3 cm in diameter, with negative resection margins. A six-month postoperative follow-up revealed no local recurrence or metastasis.
Under low power magnification, a well-circumscribed nodular mass was observed in the dermis. High power magnification revealed the neoplasm to be composed of nests, fascicles, bundles, or sheets of epithelioid cells. The tumor cells displayed round or oval nuclei, abundant cytoplasm, prominent nucleoli, and visible mitosis, with local nevus cell clusters . The basal margin of the lesion was positive. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) results were positive for S-100, SOX10, MelanA, and focally positive for HMB45. INI1 and H3K27Me3 showed retention of nuclear expression, and the proliferation index hotspot area was approximately 10% . Initially, the tumor was considered a melanocyte-differentiated neoplasm with local nevus cell clusters. Primary and metastatic melanoma, Clear cell sarcoma (CCS), or malignant transformation of a Spitz nevus were considered as differential diagnoses. However, tests for EWSR1 rearrangement (FISH) and BRAF V600E mutation (PCR-ARMS) were negative. Consequently, we concluded that this was a rare melanocyte-differentiated tumor, distinct from melanoma, CCS, or malignant transformation of Spitz nevus. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) detected a CRTC1::TRIM11 fusion, and CRTC1 FISH confirmed positive fracture rearrangement , leading to the final diagnosis of a cutaneous melanocytic tumor with CRTC1::TRIM11 fusion.