A 53-year-old Chinese woman had health checkups, including gastroscopy examinations, and then was hospitalized in our hospital following the finding of a submucosal lesion in upper endoscopy. She had no complaint of dysphagia, odynophagia, abdominal pain, poor appetite or weight loss.
Gastroscopy performed in another hospital showed a submucosal protruding mass in the esophagus 25 cm from the incisors, and a diagnosis of external pressure esophageal apophysis was considered.
The patient had a history of hypertension for more than 2 years, and was treated daily with oral antihypertensive drugs in the form of 2.5 mg levamlodipine dispersible tablets.
The patient’s family history and past medical history were both unremarkable. She had no history of esophagitis or esophageal tuberculosis.
The patient’s temperature was 36.8°C, heart rate was 80 bpm, respiratory rate was 19 breaths/min and blood pressure was 125/80 mmHg. The breath sounds of both lungs were clear, no dry and wet rales were heard, the abdomen was soft, with no tenderness, no rebound pain and no palpable mass.
During hospitalization, routine laboratory parameters were within the normal range. Tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen and cancer antigen 125 were negative.
In order to help reveal the nature of a cyst, enhanced thoracic computed tomography (CT) was done, and it revealed an ovular low-density shadow with a clear boundary of about 3.6 cm × 1.8 cm in the upper middle part of the esophagus, with mild to moderate enhancement. There was no obvious thickening of the esophageal wall, no obvious dilatation or obstruction of the esophagus, and no obvious enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum . Thus, a diagnosis of esophageal leiomyoma was considered.
Upon upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, a submucosal mass was observed about 28 cm from the incisor with a gourd-like appearance, and the size was about 4.0 cm × 2.0 cm .
EUS with a 12-MHz radial probe revealed a hypoechoic irregular mass arising within the propria muscularis in the middle segment of the esophagus (28 cm from the incisor), with a clear boundary, cystic wall, uneven echo, spot-like echo, and a separation zone inside. The measured area was 3.2 cm × 2.0 cm. Contrast-enhanced US showed enhancement around the lesion but no internal enhancement .