A 12-year-old boy with KD and major acquired coronary abnormalities was admitted to our hospital for follow-up at the request of his former physician in Ukraine. Initial diagnosis of KD was in 2019. He was initially treated with immunoglobulins and acetylsalicylic acid (ASA). Despite the treatment, follow-up cardiology assessments revealed giant CAAs, whereupon antiplatelet therapy and oral anticoagulation with warfarin were started. Computed tomography performed in November 2021 (images are not available), and cardiac catheterization in February 2022 showed chronic occlusion of the right coronary artery (RCA) with bridging collateral vessels ( and ). In 2022, the patient and his family fled Ukraine to Germany because of the war. At our initial encounter, the patient was asymptomatic and clinical examination was unremarkable except for mild right ventricular conduction delay . Cardiopulmonary exercise testing showed reduced functional capacity but no ECG changes suspicious for myocardial ischaemia. Blood test showed an International Normalized Ratio (INR) value of 2.8, which lays within an effective therapeutic range (2.0–3.0). Additional cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging was performed and confirmed RCA and left anterior descending artery (LAD) aneurysms with a maximum transverse diameter of 11 × 12 mm (RCA) and of 11 × 15 mm (LAD). In addition, there was also evidence of chronic occlusion of the RCA with bridging collateral vessels and mural thrombi in LAD (; also see ). Late-gadolinium enhancement imaging did not show any evidence for myocardial infarction suggesting a chronic aetiology of coronary artery disease and not an acute thrombotic event ( and ). No obvious perfusion defect was detected during stress perfusion imaging. Physical stress echocardiography did not show significant wall motion abnormalities. Further history revealed that he is on antiplatelet medication since spring 2021 and that oral anticoagulation was started in October 2021. Thus, we suspect that inadequate antithrombotic medication contributed to CA thromboses. The patient’s findings were discussed in a multidisciplinary team meeting. As there was no clear evidence for myocardial ischaemia, a decision against CABG and for continuing warfarin and ASA was made.
Follow-up assessments are performed in accordance with the American Heart Association consensus statement (3). Currently, the patient is seen in the paediatric cardiology clinic every 3–6 months with investigations for inducible myocardial ischaemia every 6–12 months. Follow-up CMR was performed 5 months after the first study including stress perfusion and did not differ compared to the first scan. Clinically, the patient is well and free of cardiac symptoms.