A 50 year-old Caucasian American man with history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease was admitted for loss of consciousness. He was found on the floor by his son, who brought him to the emergency department. The son denied noticing any tongue bite or bowel or bladder incontinence. The patient was unresponsive on arrival to the emergency department.
The patient's home medications included albuterol inhaler as needed. He was smoking two packs of cigarettes daily, but the son denied history of alcohol or illicit drug intake. His vitals on presentation were: BP - 90/50 mmHg, HR - 116/min, RR - 28/min and Temp - 98.8°F, and he was saturating 92 percent on 2L oxygen via nasal cannula.
His physical examination was significant for unresponsiveness, crackles in his left lung base and scattered wheezes throughout the lungs. His lab work showed a high WBC of 26,400/L, with 72.5% neutrophils and 13.5% bands, potassium of 5.3 mEq/L, BUN of 15 mg/dL and creatinine of 1.9 mg/dL (his baseline creatinine was 1.1 mg/dL). Urine toxicology screen was positive for opioid. Other labs included elevated creatine kinase of 15,860 U/L and elevated myoglobin of 46,651 ng/ml. Urine was positive for pneumococcal antigen. CT scan of the head without contrast was normal. Chest x-ray showed an infiltrate in the left mid lung field.
The patient was admitted with a diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation secondary to pneumonia, fall with loss of consciousness secondary to severe sepsis, opioid abuse and acute renal failure secondary to rhabdomyolysis. He was started on intravenous steroids, antibiotics and bronchodilators. He was given intravenous fluid for his rhabdomyolysis and hypotension. Despite aggressive treatment of rhabdomyolysis his creatine kinase increased from 15,000 U/L on the day of admission to 45,000 U/L on day two and 80,000 U/L on day three. His serum creatinine level increased from 1.9 mg/dL on admission to 2.3 mg/dL on day two and 2.6 mg/dL on day three.
On day three, the patient became slightly responsive and started complaining of pain in his right hip. On inspection, the patient's right hip was swollen, and it was very firm and tender on palpation .
CT scan of pelvis was done which demonstrated fullness of the right gluteal muscles secondary to edema or inflammation or compartment syndrome .
An MRI of the pelvis was recommended for further evaluation which showed enlargement of right gluteus minimus and medius muscles secondary to edema or hemorrhage with compartment syndrome . Gluteal compartment pressure was not checked as there seemed to be enough evidence from physical examination and rising serum creatinine and creatine kinase levels, that the patient's worsening rhabdomyolysis was secondary to the gluteal compartment syndrome.
The patient was taken to the operating room where he underwent multiple fasciotomies. A large area of clot was noted between gluteus maximus and medius which was evacuated and the area was irrigated. The patient's creatine kinase and serum creatinine level improved to normal on discharge to home, five days after the surgical procedure. On follow-up visit to the office, two weeks after the patient's discharge, he was doing fine with normalization of his renal function and absence of gait abnormality, sensory dysfunction or muscle weakness.