A previously healthy 51-year-old Hispanic female with a significant history of hypothyroidism presented with acute onset chest pain for 1 day. She described the chest pain to be pressure-like in nature, retrosternal, and radiating to her left arm and shoulder without associated shortness of breath. She reported to be sitting at rest when the pain occurred suddenly. She has been an active individual most of her life, but has had intermittent chest pain with exertion for the past 2 months. She has had to stop exercise for relief and has minimized her physical activity. The chest pain on presentation was reported to be similar in nature to the chest pain she had previously. According to the patient, she did not have any syncope, palpitations, racing of the heart, lightheadedness, anxiety, diarrhea, weight loss, or brittle hair. The reason she sought medical care this time was due to increased severity of pain.
Two months prior to presentation, she was diagnosed with hypothyroidism with a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of ~500 U/mL and given levothyroxine 137 mcg daily. The dose was reduced a few days after labs indicated supranormal triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) levels, but low TSH after starting the medication. She had most recently been on levothyroxine 100 mcg daily, which she was compliant with. She also reported taking omeprazole 20 mg daily for gastroesophageal reflux disease. She did not use oral contraceptive pills. She has never had hypercholesterolemia and had a negative fasting lipid panel from ~1 year prior to presentation. She denied any other past medical or surgical history. She does not have allergies. She was a lifelong non-smoker, did not consume alcohol, and did not use illicit drugs.
On presentation, her vitals were normal. Her BMI was 27.3 kg/m2. The physical exam is only significant for a woman who appears in her stated age in mild distress due to chest pain. The electrocardiogram was consistent with normal sinus rhythm without any abnormalities. Troponins were elevated and trended upward from 0.080 to 0.120 to 0.222 ng/mL each 8 hours apart. TSH was nearly undetectable at <0.015 U/mL consistent with hyperthyroidism. T3 and T4 were not measured on presentation. Levothyroxine was stopped. Chest x-ray was unremarkable. Bedside 2D echocardiogram showed a normal left ventricle with EF of >60% without any regional wall motion abnormalities. The left atrium was mildly dilated, and right ventricular systolic pressure was 32 mm Hg. Non-ST elevation MI was diagnosed and patient was given atorvastatin 80 mg, heparin drip, clopidogrel 600 mg, and aspirin 324 mg. Sublingual nitroglycerin 0.4 mg was given, which improved the chest pain from a 10/10 on presentation to a 6/10. Coronary angiogram was done on the day of presentation, which showed an anomalous RCA arising from the left coronary cusp of the sinus of Valsalva, but no evidence of occlusion ( and ).
A follow-up coronary computed tomography angiogram was done, which confirmed this finding and showed the anomalous RCA taking an inter-arterial course originating from the coronary ostium with a slit-like deformity and at least 50% luminal stenosis .
Troponins trended downward and chest pain resolved. Due to known poor outcomes with this type of symptomatic coronary anomaly, the patient was referred to a cardiothoracic surgeon for definitive surgical correction. The patient was discharged home with levothyroxine 50 mcg daily, metoprolol 25 mg BID, and recommendation against aggressive physical activity.
Informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.