A 43-year-old woman visited the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology because of fluid collection in her cul-de-sac that was incidentally found 6 months ago at a routine health check. She did not complain of any other symptom except for dull abdominal discomfort. During physical examination, a mass-like hardness could be palpated on the level above the umbilicus. Routine blood analysis was within normal limits.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen was performed, and it revealed a 9.0-cm enhancing mass in the omentum at the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. The mass showed a relatively demarcated margin and some minute cystic changes. The radiologist thought the mass was a gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) or neurogenic tumor. Additionally, there was a noted 2.5-cm corpus luteal cyst in the left ovary but otherwise there were no other abnormalities in the abdominal and pelvic cavities. The clinicians decided to excise the mass due to its huge size and to accurately diagnose the tumor.
In the operative field, the mass was located around the distal antrum along the greater curvature of the stomach but was easily separated from the stomach wall itself. On the other hand, it was densely adhered to the omentum and mesocolon. The tumor was far away from the reproductive organs, such as the uterus and both ovaries, and urinary structures.
On gross pathological examination, the excised mass measured 9.5 × 8.0 × 7.5 cm. On sectioning, the cut surface of the mass was yellow pink and showed a solid lobular portion and focal small cystic areas. Its margin was well demarcated from the attached omental fat tissue .
Microscopically, the tumor showed two histologic components. The first cellular part consisted of well-defined nests of round or polygonal epithelial cells and numerous ill-defined lobular islands of epithelial cells with short spindled features . The nests of polygonal epithelial cells were intimately related to the surrounding epithelial cells with short spindled features . In the well-defined nests, the epithelial cells had elongated nuclei and rather pale eosinophilic cytoplasm. Characteristically, many cells showed a longitudinal groove in the nuclei and frequent perinuclear haloes . Their cytologic features were similar to that of normal urothelial cells. Some nests showed cystic changes of varying degrees . The epithelial cells with short spindled features were arranged into ill-defined lobules or scattered singly and showed poorly defined cytoplasmic outlines . In the nuclei, the nuclear chromatin was fine and the nucleoli were small or inconspicuous. The cells also displayed occasional nuclear grooves. Neither cytologic atypia nor mitotic activity was noted in both types of cells. The second component was densely hyalinized fibrous stroma occupying areasbetween the cellular parts. The microscopic features of this tumor as a whole closely resembled an ordinary ovarian Brenner tumor.
We performed immunohistochemistry on a Leica Bond-Max automatic slide immunostainer (Leica Biosystems Melbourne Pty., Ltd. VIC, Australia) using a standard protocol. The list of antibodies used is as follows: calretinin (Novocastra, diluted 1:200), CK7 (NeoMarkers, 1:400), CK20 (Novocastra, 1: 100), pancytokeratin (Novocastra, 1:100), CD10 (Novocastra, 1:150), CD34 (DAKO, 1:400), DOG-1 (Cell Marque, 1:250), c-KIT (DAKO, 1:300), p63 (Novocastra, 1:100), PAX-8 (Cell Marque, 1:200), SMA (DAKO, 1:400), vimentin (Zymed, 1:200), WT-1 (DAKO, 1:100), uroplakin-III (Cell Marque, 1:50), and GATA-3 (Cell Marque, 1:100).
The cellular parts, including the urothelium-like cells and spindled epithelial cells were positive for pancytokeratin, p63, and WT-1 but negative for CD34, CD10, CK20, calretinin, c-KIT, DOG-1, and PAX-8. The urothelium-like cells were positive for CK7 but the spindled epithelial cells were negative. The cytoplasm of the urothelium-like cells was weakly to moderately positive for uroplakin-III, and their nuclei were diffusely strongly positive for GATA-3. The immunoprofiles of the urothelial-type cell nests in this tumor were the same as those of ovarian Brenner tumors. The spindled epithelial cells were negative for both uroplakin-III and GATA-3. The stromal cells only showed focal positivity for SMA .
Using a representative paraffin block of the tumor, we performed mutation analyses for exons 9, 11, 13, and 17 of the c-KIT gene by polymerase chain reaction (GeneAmp PCR System 2700, USA) using a direct sequencing method (Applied Biosystems 3500 Genetic Analyzer, USA). The results of the c-KIT gene mutation analyses were negative.
After surgery, the patient had recovered well and showed no recurrence during the 17-month follow-up.