A 24-year-old gentleman with no past medical history had been experiencing debilitating chest pains for 2 years. He described these as varying in intensity, worsened by exercise, and relieved partially by analgesia. They were not associated with palpitations or syncope.
Unfortunately, due to his symptoms he had to give up his studies and minimize his physical activity. He had trialled multiple analgesics (daily paracetamol and tramadol) with partial relief of symptoms.
He underwent serial investigations at his local cardiology unit, including a cardiac CT which identified an absence of pericardium on the left side of the heart. He was referred to the Adult Congenital Heart Disease (ACHD) team at The Royal Brompton Hospital.
When first reviewed in the ACHD clinic he was not cyanosed, in sinus rhythm with no evidence of cardiovascular decompensation. His apex beat however was grossly displaced to the left and more so on lying supine. His first heart sound was normal, second split, there was also a soft one-sixth systolic heart murmur. The rest of his examination was unremarkable.
His electrocardiogram showed him to be in sinus rhythm at 78 b.p.m., with normal conduction times but a poor R wave progression and an intermittently changing axis.
A chest radiography which showed situs solitus, levocardia, with a left aortic arch, no displacement of the heart to the left, and a protrusion at the level of the left atrial appendage at the left upper quadrant of the heart.
His echocardiogram showed a structurally normal heart with maintained ventricular function. Stress echocardiography showed mild right ventricular dilatation at rest with increase in right ventricular volume directly after exercise. A cardiac CT revealed a partial absence of pericardium on the left side with a small layer of pericardium on the upper right heart border. The heart was grossly shifted leftwards and posteriorly, highly suggestive of enhanced heart mobility. Similarly, no pericardium could be seen on cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR). There was lung tissue in between the base of the heart and diaphragm , the heart was displaced to the left of the chest and the RV appeared dilated .
The patient’s symptoms were thought to be due to his absent pericardium and related to cardiac mobility. We were struck by the discrepancy of the erect Chest X-ray (CXR) and supine CMR with regards to cardiac position, mobility, and the severity of disabling symptoms. We thus discussed the patient at our ACHD Multidisciplinary Team meeting and offered him surgery, in an attempt to immobilize his heart, hoping to improve his symptoms and quality of life.
The heart was exposed via a left postero-lateral thoracotomy. There was complete pericardial agenesis on the left side and on the diaphragmatic surface. Several 0.4 mm thickness Gore-tex® patches were sutured together to create a large sheet and this was sutured down with widely spaced interrupted 3-0 Prolene® sutures to the posterior mediastinum, starting at the level of the left pulmonary artery, posterior to the left atrial appendage and along the left hilum and inferior pulmonary ligament, to the diaphragm and down. This was then brought forward to the anterior chest wall and then fixed anteriorly along the anterior chest wall with the superior end free (see Figure ). A left pleural drain was inserted and a paravertebral catheter for analgesia, followed by routine multilayered chest closure.
The post-operative course was uneventful apart from a small left apical pneumothorax with a small pleural effusion. Both resolved spontaneously within days.
Echocardiography on Day 5 showed that the RV was of normal size with no evidence of pericardial effusion nor compression of cardiac chambers. The patient was discharged 8 days after his procedure on simple analgesia, mobilizing well with improved symptoms.
Three months from surgery the patient had come off analgesia completely, with resolution of his debilitating chest pains. He was resuming his University studies and restoring normality in his life.