A 67-year-old man with a history of intrinsic asthma, but who otherwise had very good health condition, was admitted to our intensive care unit with an acute asthma attack. Peripheral oxygenation saturation had been 80–89% without oxygen, and he then received supplemental oxygen, combined with inhalative salbutamol, as well as intravenous prednisolone, dimetindene, and ranitidine by an emergency physician at his home.
On admission to the intensive care unit, the patient was still awake, but severely tachy- and orthopnoic. Oxygen, 4 l min−1, resulted in 95% SpO2, but blood gas analysis showed a respiratory acidosis (pH 7.29, pCO2 55 mmHg, pO2 84 mmHg, HCO3−26.4, BE −1.6). Chest X-ray was normal, but severe expiratory wheezing could be heard on both lungs. The patient was on theophylline and formoterole/budesonide. Other relevant comorbidities were diabetes type 2 treated with metformin and coronary heart disease (1-vessel disease). He repeatedly inhaled salbutamol, ipatropiumbromide, and budesonide and received intravenous prednisolone, reproterole (bolus plus continuous), and magnesium. The patient was directly put on non-invasive ventilation (NIV; EVITA-4, Draeger®), facilitated with a cumulative dose of 4 mg morphine. While at first sight, the therapeutic regimen seemed to work and an ongoing deterioration with increasing pCO2-levels and signs of respiratory exhaustion were recognized. The patient’s vigilance became more and more impaired, and respiratory acidosis was later accompanied by a slight metabolic acidosis (blood gas analysis before ECCO2R: pH 7.24, pCO2 61 mmHg, pO2 289 mmHg, HCO3−26.1, BE −3.0). Meanwhile, other possible contributing causes, like pneumonia, lung embolism, and cardiac attack, were ruled out.
After careful consideration, and with the consent of the patient and his family, a ECCO2R system was prepared. Under non-invasive ventilation conditions and local anesthesia, a 22 French double lumen cannula (Twinport®, Novalung, Heilbronn, Germany) was placed in the right upper jugular vein under sonographic guidance. The system was started with a blood flow of 1 l min−1 and a sweep gas flow of 1 l min−1 oxygen, (ILA-activve®, Xenios, Heilbronn, Germany). Due to the respiratory effort of the patient along with hypovolemia, blood flow initially fluctuated between 0.6 and 1.5 l min−1. Fluid repletion was therefore conducted with balanced crystalloids combined with albumin to achieve a better intravascular effect. With the circuit running, a rapid improvement in almost all former deranged qualities was noticed: breath rate decreased from 40 to 16 per minute, SpO2 rose to 100%, and pCO2 was intentionally lowered very slowly (with 2 l min−1 sweep gas flow). Due to the sudden relief, the patient fell asleep for a few hours and NIV was down-graded to nasal oxygen (4 l min−1). Three hours after starting the ECCO2R circuit, blood gas analysis was normal (pH 7.39, pCO2 44 mmHg, pO2 93 mmHg, SpO2 97%, BE 1.2). On day two, the patient was put on oral prednisolone (50 mg day−1). There was no more dyspnea or wheezing and both, nasal oxygen and sweep gas flow, could be reduced. Early mobilization and physiotherapy was started the very same day. Thirty-four hours after initiating the ECCO2R system, the patient was completely weaned, and the cannula could be removed without any complication. On day 4, the patient could be discharged from the ICU without need for supplemental oxygen and 6 days later, he left the hospital without any impairment.