An 82-year-old patient was referred to our clinical immunology department – internal medicine for advice regarding a possible systemic disease. Her main medical history included a Horton disease diagnosed in 2006, for which she received long-term corticosteroid therapy, which was permanently discontinued in 2021, and a pancreatitis of undetermined etiology in 2011.
The current story began in 2021, with the incidental discovery of multiple hepatic nodules that led to a first liver biopsy in a peripheral hospital. The pathological examination was in favour of ischaemic necrosis lesions of undetermined origin. A few days after the biopsy, the patient presented hepatic cytolysis at 20 times the normal, without cholestasis, with a spontaneous and rapidly favourable evolution, but also with intense pruritus, persisting after several weeks. The diagnosis of prurigo nodularis was made by dermatologists. Dupilumab treatment was then initiated in this indication.
The patient was re-admitted in July 2022 due to the discovery of hyponatraemia on a follow-up assessment. The abdominal scan showed the persistence of hepatic nodules, motivating a second liver biopsy whose results confirmed an aspect of ischaemic necrosis, as well as a few contributing factors. The thoraco-abdomino-pelvic scan showed a lower right lobar pulmonary image evoking a pulmonary infarction in the first place, as well as a calcifying chronic pancreatitis. The Pet-scanner (18F-FDG) found a moderate hypermetabolism of the pulmonary lesion, leading to the realization of a biopsy in September 2022, showing chronic fibro-inflammatory changes with epithelioid and gigantocellular granulomas very focally necrosing. Bronchoscopy was without particularity and all infectious samples and especially mycobacterial cultures were negative. A tuberculosis was however evoked in view of the whole picture, and a test antituberculous treatment was started at the end of the year 2022, quickly complicated by a cutaneous reaction with pancreatitis and medicinal hepatitis motivating the cessation of treatment.
She was referred to us in this context for a diagnostic and therapeutic opinion. She was receiving treatment with perindopril, bisoprolol, levothyrox, magnesium, oral iron, and dupilumab (300 mg subcutaneously every two weeks) at the time of the consultation. Her main complaints were persistent asthenia and the reappearance of severe pruritus for several months with dupilumab. She remained very active, however, with estimated walking distance of 10 kilometres per day. She had gained weight since the last hospital admission. She did not have fever or night sweats. The clinical examination was without notable anomalies.
Biologically, the NFS was unremarkable, CRP negative. Renal function and liver profile were normal, no electrophoresis peak, no hypo- or hypergammaglobulinemia. IgG4 was elevated at 2.21 g/L (N < 1.03 g/L). Autoimmune profile including antinuclear antibodies and ANCA was negative. There was no biological argument for granulomatosis (low ACE, 1.25-OH vitamin D in the norm). Quantiferon was negative. There was no significant proteinuria.
Following the consultation, the diagnosis of tuberculosis was ruled out by the panel. A thoraco-abdomino-pelvic control scan was performed, revealing the presence of irregular and retractable lower right lobar alveolar condensation of 35 mm. In the abdominal level, there was a general stability of all known hypodens liver nodules. A liver MRI was performed as a complement, without additional diagnostic contribution, including after a specialised re-reading of all previous imaging.

In the case of an IgG4-associated disease, a re-read of the biopsy pieces was also requested, with additional IgG4 marking. The re-read of the pulmonary biopsy confirmed a chronic granulomatous, epithelioid and gigantic cellular inflammation, which was focally necrotic. The re-read of the hepatic biopsies was in favour of foci of non-tumour necrosis with inflammatory fibrosclerous shell, rich in IgG4 plasma cells, with an IgG4/IgG ratio > 40. However, the overall aspect was not in favour of an IgG4-associated disease, due to the absence of a storiform fibrosis or obliterative phlebitis, and the non-classical presence of a granulomatous epithelioid inflammation in the course of this disease.
The patient was re-admitted to hospital to discuss a new pulmonary biopsy, especially for the purpose of microbiological documentation, in order to exclude a tuberculosis with certainty in the absence of an alternative diagnosis. During the hospital stay, a complete infectious assessment was proposed. Finally, echinococcosis serology was positive in Western blot with a single band at 7 kDa, not allowing a species diagnosis (ELISA Em2+ and Em18 negative). The performance of molecular biology examinations was not possible at that time due to a failure to preserve the biopsy samples. In the case of an alveolar echinococcosis, treatment with albendazole was introduced in March 2023 in consultation with the infectiologists, and treatment with dupilumab was stopped.
During follow-up, the patient developed a hepatic intolerance to albendazole treatment, then to mebendazole introduced in August 2023 (resolutive cytolysis at the end of treatment), as well as a hyper-eosinophilia. A control scan carried out in January 2024 showing an increase in size of the hepatic lesions, a new hepatic biopsy was proposed. The histology showed essentially a chronic non-specific inflammation, but the PCR E. multilocularis was positive, allowing the diagnosis of alveolar echinococcosis to be confirmed definitively.
