A 22-year-old female Caucasian patient was diagnosed with UC 3 mo ago, complaining of bloody diarrhea, abdominal pain and weight loss, and discontinued mesalamine due to the gastric intolerance. The patient underwent a colonoscopy 2 wk before the admission to the hospital, which revealed lesions consistent with UC of moderate endoscopic activity (Mayo endoscopic score 2).
She was admitted to the emergency department in due to frequent liquid and bloody stool and intense abdominal pain for 2 mo, with worsening of the symptoms during the last week, in poor condition with nausea, vomiting, and weight loss (10 kg) and without the improvement from the previous use of antibiotics.
At hospital admission (day 1 of hospital admission), the patient presented in poor condition, dehydrated, tachycardic (110 beat/min), blood pressure 100/60 mmHg, temperature > 37.8 °C, with distended and diffusely painful abdomen, and rebound tenderness.
Laboratory tests showed inflammatory process (C-reactive protein 20.3 mg/dL) and anemia (hematocrit 25.8%, hemoglobin 8.1 g/dL) at admission .
Abdominal X-ray revealed colonic dilation of 7 cm, consistent with megacolon .
Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) A and B toxin was positive, and the treatment with oral vancomycin 250 mg qid was initiated. However, the patient presented with worsening of diarrhea and rectal bleeding (> 10 episodes/d), increased abdominal distension, and fever. A flexible sigmoidoscopy was performed (day 4 of hospital admission) and inserted up to 25 cm with no insufflation, showing ulcers covered by fibrin, mucosal friability, edema, and intense enanthem with spontaneous bleeding in sigmoid and rectum, consistent with UC of severe activity (Mayo endoscopic score 3) . Histopathological evaluation showed chronic colitis in intense activity with structural abnormalities of the mucosa, presence of crypt micro-abscesses and plasmacytosis, consistent with severe inflammatory activity without the evidence of C. difficile or cytomegalovirus infection.