A 25-year-old woman with liver cirrhosis secondary to autoimmune hepatitis diagnosed at a local hospital presented with fatigue, painless jaundice and lower limb swelling for two weeks, there was no evidence of hypertension or protenuria excluding the possibility of pre-eclampsia or eclampsia. There was no history of ascites, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis or hepatic encephathy. Pregnancy was terminated at 27th week at the local hospital. She was on 40 mg of Prednisolone daily for possible autoimmune hepatitis, soon after, she developed steroid induced diabetes. She was referred to our hospital after 6 weeks of the intial presentation with two episodes of hematemesis, tachycardia (heart rate 120) and blood pressure of 84/50. The patient was admitted to ICU and started on octreotide and Piperacillin/Tazobactam. Gastroscopy revealed gastric varices and bleeding was endoscopically controlled. During admission, liver function tests worsened, and transjugular liver biopsy showed established liver cirrhosis with no obvious active pathology. We started tapering the steroids slowly after being on 40 mg for 4 weeks with no improvement of jaundice without evidence of active inflammation on liver biopsy. During admission, she developed painful, erythematous lesion on her right forearm at the IV access area that became necrotic and spread quickly and increased in size over a period of 24 hours. The lesion included the skin and subcutaneous tissue and was flecked with tiny black spots. Vital signs: temp 37.4ºC, BP 128/80 mmHg, pulse 66 /min, RR 20 /min, SaO2 100% on room air.
Chest was clear to auscultation and cardiovascular exam was normal. Abdomen was soft and lax, distended with ascites but no tenderness. Extremities showed mild lower limb edema. Her investigations showed a white cell count 14.24 x 103/mm3 with Neutrophils of 86%, hemoglobin 9.2 g/dl, and platelets of 103000 /mm3 , LFT: total bilirubin 457 umol/L, direct 321, alkaline phosphatase 430U/L, ALT 174U/L, AST 248U/L, gamma GT 227, total protein 51g/L, albumin 18g/L, PT 19.4 and INR was 1.7, PTT 58, renal function test was within normal, fasting glucose 9.8 mmol/L. ESR was 2, Blood culture showed no growth after 5 days.
MRI of the right upper extremity showed inflammatory changes through the anterior compartment of the forearm suggestive of fasciitis.
She was taken to the operating room for debridement after 24 hours, delay was due to anesthesia issues in this high risk patients. At this point after 18 days of admission, Prednisolone dose reached 20 mg daily and antibiotic changed from Piperacillin/Tazobactam to Imipenem when the culture results from tissue biopsy grew Klebsiella Pneumonia extended spectrum b lactamase producer (ESBL).
Histopathological examination of the debrided soft tissue revealed necrotic subcutaneous fat and skeletal muscle fibers invaded by broad hyphae, irregularly branched, with rare septations suggestive of mucormycosis ( and ). There were no clinical symptoms or signs of visceral dissemination of infection to warrant further imaging or biopsy. The patient started on Amphotericin B (Abelcet®) 300mg IV OD after 20 days of admission and was continued on imipenem. In spite of surgical debridement, her condition continued to deteriorate and ended up after 6 days with above elbow amputation, tissue-cultures for both bacteria and fungi were negative. Amphotericin B was stopped after amputation as it was considered that the source of infection was eliminated but was restarted again 3 days after discontinuation with imipenem continued all through with the addition of vancomycin. The patient continued to deteriorate and the stump showed signs of disseminated infection, which proved to be invasive mucormycosis infection. Right shoulder disarticulation done but she passed away 2 days later due to multi-organ failure after 35 days in the hospital.