A 37-year-old G9P0171 (seven spontaneous abortions reported) with a history of chronic hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, neuropathy with Charcot foot, class III obesity with a BMI 52, and prior preterm delivery for superimposed preeclampsia transferred her care to our high-risk practice at 24w2d. During her initial prenatal visit, she also disclosed a history of multiple MRSA containing skin abscesses on her chest that she reported had originated from spider bites.
Prior to transferring her care, she first presented to the Emergency Department with shooting left upper back and flank pain at 18 weeks. At that time at the outside institution, a CT scan without contrast was ordered to evaluate for nephrolithiasis, but the abdomen visualized inferiorly from the diaphragm was largely unremarkable. She presented to the Emergency Department six more times from 18 through 34 weeks gestation with complaints of ongoing pain, occasionally describing the pain shooting down her legs and causing lower extremity numbness. Throughout her visits no motor or sensory deficits were elicited on exam, and she was repeatedly afebrile with no pain on spine palpation. She was treated with acetaminophen and cyclobenzaprine for possible paraspinal muscle spasm. During one of these visits at 33 weeks a urine drug screen was obtained by the triage provider due to their concerns about the patient’s poor compliance with prenatal care appointments, as she had not presented to scheduled visits for over eight weeks. This screen resulted positive for fentanyl and was negative for all other substances included in the basic toxicology screen. She adamantly denied any opioid use, presenting a diagnostic challenge, and requested repeat testing the following day as well as five days later. Both subsequent tests were positive. The patient continued to deny any opioid use, however the placement and number of infected skin lesions on her chest raised suspicion for injection drug use. At a much later date, she disclosed she had been a restrained passenger in a motor vehicle collision during the first trimester of her pregnancy and stated this was the first time she noticed the back pain.
At 36w1d, she was directed to the Obstetrics Emergency Department for evaluation after a biophysical profile score of 2/8 and amniotic fluid index of 0.7 was noted during routine antenatal testing. At this time, she also reported that her back pain had been significantly exacerbated by a fall en route to the hospital. Due to reactive non-stress test upon arrival, decision was made for observation until delivery via repeat cesarean section at the next available scheduled OR slot. Anesthesia attempted to place a combined spinal and epidural block at L2-L3, as was the standard of care for obese patients. Following the initial spinal dose, placement of the epidural catheter was abandoned after the patient experienced pressure and pain with local anesthetic infusion. The procedure continued under single-shot spinal anesthesia. Her mean arterial pressure (MAP) dropped to 75 mmHg for a few minutes following the spinal, and then corrected to her baseline MAP of 115–125 mmHg with fluid resuscitation prior to the procedure. The repeat cesarean section was then completed and was overall uncomplicated. Final quantitative blood loss was 910 mL. Her neonate had 1 and 5 min APGAR scores of 3 and 7, respectively, initially requiring some positive pressure ventilation but with an overall uncomplicated neonatal course.
While in the post anesthesia care unit, she developed severe range blood pressures (systolic pressures persisting in the 170 s over fifteen minutes apart) requiring acute treatment with labetalol and hydralazine. Complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, lactate dehydrogenase, urine protein to creatine ratio (U P:C) were obtained which were unremarkable aside from a significant increase from baseline in her U P:C. Superimposed pre-eclampsia with severe features was diagnosed and intravenous magnesium sulfate was initiated for seizure prophylaxis and continued over the next 24 h. Her MAP nadired at 68 mmHg during this 24 h period, and she did not require further acute treatment of severe range blood pressures. Throughout treatment she continued to complain of back pain at a similar severity to the antepartum period. Since reflexes in the bilateral lower extremities were poorly elicited and this was thought to be her baseline, reflexes in her upper extremities were used for her serial examinations while receiving magnesium. She was noted to have full voluntary motor function in all four extremities during this time.
On post-operative day one, after completion of magnesium treatment, the patient complained of inability to move her legs. Physical examination demonstrated impaired pain and light touch sensation below the umbilicus, no voluntary strength in bilateral lower extremities, no Babinski or ankle jerk reflex, and the patient was unable to void after Foley catheter removal. MRI of the spine showed discitis osteomyelitis at T9-T10 with phlegmonous change in the soft tissues anterior to the vertebral column. This phlegmonous area extended into the ventral and dorsal epidural space resulting in severe spinal cord narrowing at T9-T10. There was also focal kyphosis in this region, indicating chronicity of some of these changes. MRI images are displayed in Figs. and . Orthopedic surgery was consulted and the patient was taken for emergent T9-T10 laminectomy, wound debridement, and T7-T12 fusion for suspected spinal cord infarction secondary to arterial disruption in the setting of infection. Intra-operatively, a “thick phlegmon” was noted overlying the dura which was dissected away to decompress the cord. She received 4 units of packed red blood cells and 2 units of fresh frozen plasma intraoperatively due to neurogenic shock. Cultures collected during surgery grew Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. Postoperatively, she had persistent bilateral lower extremity motor and sensory deficit and was admitted to inpatient rehabilitation. Her lower extremity function and sensation improved over months of physical therapy. As of four months following the initial injury, the patient had been discharged from the hospital and was undergoing home physical therapy. She was not ambulatory but could stand with support equipment. Please refer to Fig. for a visual of the clinical timeline.