A 71-year-old male with past medical history significant for diabetes mellitus,
coronary artery disease, chronic hypotension, hyperglycemia, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, nicotine use, obstructive sleep apnea, and peripheral artery
disease presented to the ED with right buttock and scrotal swelling for three days,
associated with generalized weakness, shortness of breath, and urinary retention
with dysuria. One day prior to presentation, the patient noticed non-traumatic
bruising to his scrotum. He additionally reported increasing buttock pain that was
not controlled by home oxycodone/acetaminophen 5/325 milligram (mg) tablets.
Upon arrival, his vital signs were notable for an oral temperature of 38.2°
Celsius, blood pressure of 119/54 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), and heart rate of
93 beats per minute. He was also tachypneic with a respiratory rate of 25 breaths
per minute; oxygen saturation was 97% on room air. The physical examination
was notable for an ill-appearing gentleman. He was awake and alert. Heart sounds
were unremarkable aside from tachycardia, and lungs were clear to auscultation.
Abdominal examination was soft, protuberant, and nontender. A focused genitourinary
examination revealed an edematous, erythematous and exquisitely tender scrotum. Of
note, there was a coin-sized, ecchymotic-appearing lesion on the scrotum with
erythema and induration extending from the scrotum and perineum to the right
buttock. No crepitus or fluctuance was palpated on examination.
Laboratory results were remarkable for leukocytosis to 15,000 thousand per
millimeters cubed (K/mm3) (reference range: 4–10 K/mm3), lactic
acidosis of 3.4 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (0.4–2.0 mmol/L), marked acute
kidney injury with creatinine of 5 mg per deciliter (mg/dL) (0.55–1.3mg/dL),
and venous blood gas pH of 7.22 (7.310–7.410) secondary to the lactic
acidosis and severe sepsis. The patient was mildly hyponatremic at 133 mmol/L
(136–145 mmol/L) and hyperkalemic at 5.3 mmol/L (3.5–5.1 mmol/L),
with the remainder of electrolytes within reference range. Intravenous antibiotics
were initiated and emergent consultations with surgery and urology promptly
obtained. Despite initial fluid resuscitation with administration of 30 milliliters
per kilogram (ml/kg) of normal saline, the patient decompensated into septic shock.
His blood pressure decreased to 88/41 mm Hg during the ED course; thus, he was not
stable for transport or advanced imaging. By this time, the ecchymotic-appearing
lesion and edema had expanded across his scrotum and perineum.
We used POCUS for the rapid assessment of the patient’s presumed clinical
diagnosis of Fournier’s gangrene, a specific type of necrotizing fasciitis
involving the perineum. Transverse and sagittal views of the perineum and scrotum
were obtained using a high-frequency linear probe and revealed diffuse hyperechoic
foci with posterior “dirty” shadowing, representative of
subcutaneous air, and small fluid collections tracking along the fascial planes
.
After confirming the diagnosis using POCUS imaging, the patient was taken directly
from the ED to the operating room for immediate surgical debridement within three
hours of his arrival at the hospital. An area of tissue measuring 25 centimeters
(cm) × 30 cm that included both fascia and muscle was debrided from the
scrotum, perineum, and right buttock. Dark, necrotic tissue and foul-smelling fluid
were noted during surgery, consistent with Fournier’s gangrene. The patient
was admitted to the intensive care unit until being transferred to a tertiary care
center where he ultimately died of complications related to his illness.