A 13-year-old child with learning disability was referred for ophthalmic assessment as she complained of bilateral blurring of vision. At presentation, her visual acuity was 1/60 in the right eye and 6/18 in the left eye. Relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) was present in the right eye. Both eyes anterior segment examination findings were normal. Grade 1 vitritis was noted in the right eye. Funduscopic examination of the right eye revealed a pale optic disc and pigmented scar over the macula with salt and pepper appearance. Intense retinitis with focal areas of haemorrhage was present nasally . There was mild pallor of the left optic disc with macula and peripheral granular retinitis .
Systematically, she was diagnosed with combined T and B cell deficiencies by the immunologist at the age of 11. At that time, she presented with high fever, recurrent episodes of diarrhoea, oral thrush, and failure to thrive, with the weight of only 12kg. PIDD screening showed low T cell, very low B cell counts, and low immunoglobulin levels . Her systemic therapy consisted of 3 weekly intravenous immunoglobulin, sulfamethoxazole, and trimethoprim prophylaxis as well as empirical therapy for fungal infection which include syrup fluconazole 6mg/kg/day and syrup nystatin 1ml QID. She was also treated for CMV colitis as HPE of the colon showed CMV inclusion bodies. She completed 6 weeks of intravenous ganciclovir 3 months prior to presentation of her ophthalmic symptoms.
We diagnosed the child of having bilateral eye CMV retinitis based on typical fundus features and history of treated CMV colitis. She was planned for right eye intravitreal ganciclovir injection in view of poor visual function with posterior pole involvement. However, she was deemed unfit to undergo general anaesthesia due to concomitant hospital acquired pneumonia. IV ganciclovir 75mg (6mg/kg) 12 hourly was started and good response was noted after 2 weeks of therapy . The treatment was continued for 8 weeks until the retinitis lesions had healed with scarring . However, the right visual acuity reduced to light perception and improved to 6/9 in the left eye.