A 24-year-old male with no past medical history, who had been diagnosed with COVID-19 five days previously, presented with right-sided facial droop, left-sided extremity tingling and weakness, and the sensation of falling to the left when walking. Onset of the left-sided extremity tingling and weakness and ataxia had been three days earlier; the patient had been seen at an outside hospital and prescribed gabapentin without effect. Two days later, our patient experienced right-sided facial droop and again sought emergent care. Although our patient had experienced nausea and vomiting for a week or more prior to his positive test for COVID-19, his only respiratory symptom of COVID-19 on presentation was a dry cough.
In our Emergency Department, the patient’s vital signs were: temperature 36.7°, heart rate 85 bpm, respiratory rate 20 bpm, blood pressure 139/93, and oxygen saturation 100%. Physical exam was significant for a right-sided lower motor neuron (peripheral) seventh nerve palsy, mild left-sided weakness, ataxia, and increased left-sided reflexes. He was diagnosed with CN VII palsy and started on prednisone.
Because of the severity of his initial symptoms and the known risk of coagulopathy in patients with COVID-19, our patient also received an emergent MRI without contrast, which showed a T2 FLAIR hyperintensity in the splenium of the corpus collosum, mammillary bodies, periaqueductal gray matter, tectum, and ventral and dorsal medulla, in a pattern concerning for Wernicke's encephalopathy. See Figs. , , , and . He was admitted for workup.
While admitted, the patient received prednisone with improvement of his CN VII palsy by the next day. The patient also received 300 mg IV thiamine for 3 days, increased thereafter to 500 mg after he reported diplopia, and nystagmus was noted.
A second MRI of the brain, with and without contrast, four days after his first, showed overall improvement with significant resolution of the T2 FLAIR hyperintensity in the splenium of the corpus collosum, hypothalamus, and dorsal brainstem. Mild enhancement of the mamillary bodies and dorsal pons was present, as was an increase in the T2 FLAIR hyperintensity in the inferior olivary nuclei, which was concerning for hypertrophic olivary degeneration. An MRI of the cervical spine with contrast was unremarkable.
The balance of our patient’s workup was unrevealing. An MR angiography head without contrast was negative for stenosis, branch occlusion, or aneurysm. A transthoracic echocardiogram was negative. No lumbar puncture was performed. The patient’s thiamine level was high at 266; however, this was not collected until after he had received IV supplementation. Vitamin B12 level was high at 1369, his ALT was mildly elevated at 64, and his ferritin level was high at 406. The remainder of his labs were within normal limits, including his white blood cell count, D-dimer, ANA, rheumatoid factor, CRP, HIV, syphilis, toxicology screen, folate, and TSH.
Throughout his course, the patient’s only symptom of COVID-19 was a dry cough. His oxygen saturation on room air was within normal limits, and his chest X-ray was negative for an acute cardiopulmonary process. He was not treated for COVID-19 while inpatient.
Our patient was diagnosed with Wernicke’s encephalopathy and cranial nerve VII palsy and discharged on oral thiamine with outpatient follow-up with neurology. His condition on follow-up was stable. Informed consent for this publication was obtained.