A 3-month-old male Chinchilla cat weighing 0.8 kg was admitted for pain in the right hindlimb. Radiographs revealed an oblique diaphyseal fracture of the right femur. After closed reduction, two Kirschner (K)-wires of 1.5 mm diameter were inserted in a normograde fashion. The inserted K-wires were removed 1 month after the surgery. Several days after removing the implants, the patient was presented with a fracture of the distal metaphysis of the right tibia after falling from a low height. Surgical repair was performed in the same way using two K-wires 1.6 mm in diameter. After the second operation, as additional fractures occurred owing to unknown reasons or suspected slipping events, several additional surgeries were carried out inserting K-wires into intact long bones to aid stress distribution on those bones. K-wires with a diameter of 1.2 to 2.0 mm were used and applied in a normograde fashion after closed reduction .Blood tests were performed to identify other diseases that could cause pathological fractures. Complete blood count revealed no particular abnormality. Serum total calcium, serum total phosphorus, ionised calcium, parathyroid hormone and 25-hydroxy vitamin D levels were all normal . As blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels were within the reference intervals and renal ultrasonography confirmed no specific findings, secondary renal hyperparathyroidism was deemed improbable. Trabecular bone mineral density was measured from the 12th thoracic vertebra and the fourth lumbar vertebra using CT (Hi Speed QX/I; GE Medical). Relatively low trabecular bone mineral density was confirmed in the patient (219.8 Hounsfield units [HU] at the 12th thoracic vertebra and 169.46 HU at the fourth lumbar vertebra), compared with normal cats of a similar age. Bone biopsy was performed from the patient’s humerus during surgery and the sample was submitted for histopathological examination. Irregular and thin cortical bone with increased diameter of Haversian canals and replicated cement lines was identified . Based on these results, OI was tentatively diagnosed.Radiography was performed for follow-up or when the patient showed clinical signs. Follow-up radiographs were taken for 2 years. The patient showed spinous process fractures on several thoracic vertebrae 3 months after the first operation. After 5 months, the patient showed fractures on the ribs. As alignment was unchanged, no additional surgery was performed. Seven months later, a pelvic fracture not disrupting the pelvic cavity was revealed. The patient showed a fracture of the proximal ulna which had the K-wire inserted, luxation of thoracic vertebrae 4–5, changes in the morphology of the thoracic cavity and a fracture of the canine tooth of the right mandible, implying dentinogenesis imperfecta 1 year after surgery. Loosening of an inserted pin often occurred and irritated the adjacent joint and soft tissues, which then required cutting of the pin and/or re-insertion. The last radiographs taken 2 years postoperatively suggested repeated fractures and bone unions . Follow-up complete blood count and serum chemistry, except parathyroid hormone and 25-hydroxy vitamin D, were performed regularly but failed to reveal any abnormalities. During the 3-year follow-up period, although the patient often showed lameness or ataxia due to fractures and required medical management using tramadol (Tridol 2 mg/kg q12h; Yuhan Corporation) and/or meloxicam (Metacam 0.05 mg/kg q24h; Boehringer Ingelheim), it was able to walk until it died due to undetermined reasons.