A 63-year-old Caucasian female patient with no past medical history was diagnosed in 2014 with cutaneous melanoma on her right heel, Breslow thickness 8.5 mm, Clark level V, mitotic figures 10/mm2. Following primary diagnosis, she underwent wide local excision with sentinel lymph node dissection that was negative for residual disease. She subsequently received adjuvant high dose interferon (5 days/week for 4 weeks), according to approved guidelines at the time. Three years later, whole body computerized tomography (CT) scanning revealed a lesion of 45 mm in the lower lobe of the left lung. Patient underwent lobectomy and histology confirmed metastatic melanoma, BRAF wild type on molecular analysis. At that point, no adjuvant treatment was provided. A year later, CT restaging revealed several pulmonary nodules scattered on both lungs, enlarged lymph nodes in the left hilum and gastroesophageal area. Given melanoma relapse, the patient received pembrolizumab intravenously (iv), 200 mg flat dose every 3 weeks, without any immune-related complications except of a mild elevation of transaminases. Three months post pembrolizumab initiation, lesions and lymphadenopathy were increased in size and therefore anti-PD1 was discontinued. The patient was scheduled to receive 4 cycles of iv ipilimumab, 3 mg/kg every 3 weeks, as second-line treatment. Approximately 2 weeks after the second administration of ipilimumab, she complained of nausea, persistent diarrhea and shivering fever and was admitted to our clinic for further evaluation and management. On physical examination, fever reached 38 °C and her abdomen was distended with hyperactive bowel sounds. The white blood cell count was 6.48 × 109/L with 71.3% neutrophils; C-reactive protein (135 mg/L, normal value < 5 mg/L) and lactate dehydrogenase (379U/L, normal range: 135–215 U/L) were increased while serum albumin was low (27.5 g/L, normal range: 35–50); transaminases and cholestatic enzymes were elevated (AST: 56 U/L, ALT: 45 U/L, GGT: 307 U/L, ALP: 170 U/L) with normal bilirubin (0.74 mg/dl, normal range: 0.3–1.2 mg/dl). Thyroid-stimulating hormone was increased (17.83 mU/L, normal range: 0.27–4.5 mU/L)] giving the suspicion for immune-mediated thyroiditis with the rest of serum endocrine parameters being normal [adrenocorticotropic hormone = 35 pg/ml (normal range: 10–65 pg/ml) and cortisol = 221.9 mmol/L (normal range: 173.6–505 mmol/L)]. Approaching her as an immunocompromised case, wide-range antibiotics were empirically delivered without resolution of her symptoms. Stool cultures for bacteria, ova and parasites, Clostridium difficile toxins (A and B), as well as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for cytomegalovirus (CMV) were all negative. Abdominal CT scan was negative for visceral metastasis showing thickening of the large bowel wall, a finding supportive of colonic inflammation. The patient underwent sigmoidoscopy that revealed mucosal edema, hyperemia and erosions of the rectum and sigmoid colon. Representative biopsies were obtained for histological evaluation.
Histological examination revealed multiple small, non-necrotizing epithelioid granulomas within the crypts with partial or complete destruction of the crypt epithelium and derangement but not total disruption of the basement membrane, depicted in Periodic Acid-Schiff (PAS) histochemical stain. Some intracryptal granulomas were accompanied by rupture of the crypt wall and pericryptal expansion . Active inflammation was also present characterized by moderate lamina propria lymphoplasmacytic infiltrations, focal cryptitis and rare crypt abscesses. Basal plasmacytosis, intraepithelial lymphocytes or crypt architectural distortions were not apparent while neutrophils and eosinophils were scarce. Few apoptotic bodies were occasionally seen at the crypt base. Histochemical PAS and Ziehl–Neelsen stains were negative for fungi and acid-fast bacteria respectively.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on 4 μm-thick sections using Dako Envision Flex system (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark). The following antibodies were applied: CD20 (Dako, clone L26, mouse monoclonal, 1:700 dilution, Glostrup, Denmark), CD3 (Dako, rabbit polyclonal, 1:50 dilution), CD4 (Dako, clone 4B12, mouse monoclonal, 1:50), CD8 (Dako, clone C8/144B, mouse monoclonal, 1:200 dilution) and SMA (Dako, clone 1A4, mouse monoclonal, 1:800 dilution). Based on the above immunostains, the vast majority of lymphocytes were T cells (CD3 +) predominately CD4+. SMA highlighted the attenuation of the pericryptal myofibroblasts .
In view of the patient’s clinical history, the lesion was reported as granulomatous colitis probably induced by ipilimumab.
Anti-CTLA4 was discontinued and iv prednisone at a dose of 75 mg/d was initiated with immediate clinical improvement of the diarrheic syndrome. The patient was subsequently treated with chemotherapy with no reported serious adverse events till September 2019, when radiology showed new disease progression. A re-challenge with another anti-PD1 agent, namely nivolumab, was decided, and currently the patient is under immunotherapy with stable disease regarding melanoma status and without any sign of colitis recurrence.
Running through the literature on PubMed and using the following terms (CTLA4, PD1/PD-L1, ipilimumab, pembrolizumab, nivolumab, immune-related adverse events, granulomatous reactions, granulomatous colitis and colon granulomas), we ended up to 5 studies that described in total 14 cases with immunotherapy related colon granulomas. A flow diagram of the performed systematic review is illustrated in Fig. . In these cases, melanoma was commonly the underlying cancer treated with ICPIs, while the median time to colitis onset exceeded 30 days with one exception of ir-colitis presentation 27 days after the initiation of a combination immunotherapy.
Of the 14 reported cases of colitis with granuloma formation, 1 was associated with PD1 inhibitor , 2 with nivolumab/ipilimumab combination , 3 with an anti-PD1 regimen without being clearly mentioned if the patients were receiving also ipilimumab , and 5 with anti-CTLA4 treatment [, ]. For the remaining 3 cases it is not clear whether patients received ipilimumab alone or in combination with melanoma peptide vaccines to enhance host’s immunization , therefore granuloma formation could be related to ipilimumab, to vaccination or both. Table summarizes the data of the studies reporting colon granulomas in patients under ICPIs.
Apart from colon, granulomatous/sarcoid-like reactions (G/SLR) have also been described in different organs of cancer patients treated with ICPIs. Table presents a synopsis of published series with 3 or more patients under immunotherapy reporting at least one case of ICPIs-associated G/SLR in organs other than GI tract [–]. Lungs, lymph nodes and skin were the main tissues with granuloma formation, while melanoma was the main underlying malignancy.