A 52-year-old female, 153 cm tall, weighing 57 kg, American Society of Anesthesiologists score of 2, was scheduled to undergo lumpectomy for adnexal uterine surgery. The preoperative laboratory findings showed that her complete blood count was normal with hemoglobin at 138 g/L, erythrocyte volume at 42.4%, WBC count at 3.8 × 109/L, and platelet count at 134 × 109/L. There were no significant abnormalities in coagulation, renal, and liver functions. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a normal range ECG. The computed tomography (CT) examination of the mandible/part (spiral) (CT imaging + 3D reconstruction) and neck (spiral) (CT plain + 3D reconstruction) showed that the patient had arthritis of the temporomandibular joint, which was obvious on the right side, and degenerative degeneration of the cervical spine with central type herniation of cervical 3 to 5 disc .
During the preoperative visit, the patient had a Mallampati grade IV due to severe mouth opening restriction with only 1 finger of mouth opening . After a thorough preoperative evaluation and preparation, the patient was prepared for surgery and anesthesia after discussing the associated risks with the surgeon, the patient, and her family. Vital signs before induction of anesthesia included a heart rate of 82 beats per minute, arterial blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. After preoxygenation with 100% oxygen, anesthesia was induced with 20 mg of etomidate, 2 mg of midazolam, 25 µg sufentanil, and 12 mg cisatracurium benzoate. After induction, laryngoscopy was first attempted with a visual laryngoscope, but the attempt failed because the mouth opening was too small to place the visual laryngoscope lens in. Then, the anesthesiologist tried to guide the intubation via the lightwand. The left hand lifted the lower jaw, and the right hand inserted the lightwand along the pharynx. The tip of the lightwand was bent 90 degrees along the tongue root at the midline, and the red light at the tip of the lightwand was transmitted and positioned at the cricothyroid membrane of the neck. The tracheal tube was then gently inserted into the neck where there was light, and finally, the tube was successfully intubated. Heart rate, oxygen saturation, ECG, end-tidal carbon dioxide, invasive arterial blood pressure, and temperature were monitored intraoperatively. Additionally, intraoperative anesthesia was maintained with a combination of remifentanil 0.1 ug·kg−1·min−1, dexmedetomidine 0.5 µg·kg−1·h−1 continuous pumping, and 2% sevoflurane by static inhalation. The operation progressed smoothly with a fluid intake of 1000 mL of sodium lactate Ringer solution and blood loss of 50 mL. The operation lasted 1.25 hours. After extubation, the patient was transferred to the postanesthesia care unit. After awakening, the patient was in good condition and returned to the ward without any significant perioperative complications.