An 84-year-old man with primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) developed decompensated IOP in the right eye. Since 2003, his topical regimen has included tafluprost (15 ug/mL once daily), brinzolamide, and timolol (in combination, twice daily) and, during the last year, oral acetazolamide (250 mg twice daily) was added to the topical treatment. The preoperative best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 6/10 in the right eye and 4/10 in the left eye (Snellen chart). The slit-lamp examination of the anterior segment revealed transparent cornea, normal anterior chamber, and nuclear lens opacity in both eyes with no other notable findings. The preoperative IOP was 24 and 20 mmHg in the right and the left eyes, respectively. On fundus examination, both eyes showed a large cup-to-disc ratio (CDR = 0.9) and neuroretinal rim narrowing in all the disc sectors. Despite the maximally tolerated medical therapy (both oral and topical), a noticeable bilateral visual field progression, most evident in the right eye, was confirmed in June 2020 .
Considering the patient’s demographic and ocular characteristics and ideal IOP target, XEN45 implantation was selected as the most suitable glaucoma filtering surgery. In July 2020, XEN45 implantation with a subconjunctival injection of mitomycin C (0.2 mg/mL) was performed in the right eye. No intraoperative complications occurred. The day after surgery, the IOP was 10 mmHg, the filtration bleb appearance was excessively diffuse, and the anterior chamber was flat. Nasal and temporal CDs were visible on fundus examination, and their serous nature was confirmed by eco-B scan .
To counter possible inflammation and complications due to surgery and hypotony, topical dexamethasone (2 mg/mL, three times a day), atropine 1% (once a day), and oral prednisone (50 mg) were added to the routine postoperative antibiotic–corticosteroid combination. The patient was examined every week and showed a gradual improvement; after one month, the prednisone was gradually tapered, the IOP was 13 mmHg, and the CD completely resolved.
In March 2021, the left eye (similar to the fellow eye) underwent an uneventful ab interno XEN45 device implantation. The day after surgery, the IOP was 7 mmHg, the bleb morphology was diffuse, and the anterior chamber was deep. Seven days later, similar to the right eye, nasal and temporal CDs were observed on fundus examination and confirmed as serous CDs on eco-B scan .
The same topical and systemic therapies based on corticosteroids and cycloplegics were prescribed. However, due to persistent left CDs, surgical transscleral drainage was performed 2 months later to restore normal anatomy and avoid vision loss. After surgery, the IOP of the left eye stabilized between 10 and 12 mmHg, and the CD resolved permanently. On the slit lamp, the bleb appeared diffuse and normally vascularized, the anterior chamber was deep, and the gonioscopy evaluation showed a well-positioned XEN45 device in both eyes. BCVA in the left and right eye was affected by a dense subcapsular and nuclear lens opacity, so the best visual acuity could not be accurately assessed.
In April 2022, phacoemulsification and intraocular lens (IOL) implantation were performed in the right eye after the risks and benefits of further surgery were discussed with the patient. During surgery, immediately after the capsulotomy, the lens material was aspirated through the hole with a small (30 gauge) needle to avoid the rupture of the capsulae due to swelling of the lens material. Then, capsulodesis and hydrodissection were performed, and phacoemulsification was completed. One week later, the BCVA in the right eye was 10/10 (Snellen chart), and the IOP was 10 mmHg. With the addition of the spherical lens + 3.00, the patient could read the 1° De Wecker (DW). Amsler’s test was slightly positive because of the pre-existing degeneration of the retinal pigment epithelium, but hypotony maculopathy apparently did not affect vision clinically.
The phacoemulsification and IOL implantation were performed in the left eye in November 2022 using the same cataract surgical approach. One week after surgery, the BCVA was 6/10 (Snellen chart) and with the spherical lens + 3.00, the patient could read the 2° DW. Amsler’s test was positive because of the perifoveal accumulation of lipofuscin, classifiable as age-related macular degeneration (AMD), which was already observed in 2018.