A 44-year-old female factory worker presented to our clinic complaining of a 1 year history of repeated, temporal and parietal headache characterized by bursting sensations. She had previously presented to a local hospital 6 months prior, in April 2016. The patient’s initial brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) were normal. CSF studies revealed 68 white cells per microliter and a pressure of 310 mmH2O. Viral encephalitis was suspected and she received acyclovir intravenously (500 mg Q8H for 7 days), but symptoms showed no signs of relief.
The patient visited the local hospital again 3 months later, in July 2016, complaining of an aggravated headache and paroxysmal numbness of her left face and arm. She was diagnosed with an ischemic stroke of the right thalamus and administered oral aspirin 100 mg and atorvastatin calcium 20 mg daily . Her numbness improved while the headache showed no improvement.
She visited the local hospital for the third time 5 days prior to presenting to our hospital due to the severity of her headache on October 26, 2016. Lumbar puncture was remarkable for a CSF pressure greater than 400 mmH2O, white cell count of 40 per microliter, and a protein level of 1171 mg/L. Cerebral magnetic resonance venography (MRV) revealed underdevelopment of her right lateral sinus and sinus thrombosis was considered as a possible etiology. She was treated with low molecular heparin and her headache was slightly relieved. She was then admitted to our hospital for further treatment.
The patient had no significant past medical history, denied a history of blood transfusions and consumption of raw food. Her physical examination was unremarkable, and no abnormal neurologic signs apart from horizontal nystagmus was noted.
Laboratory tests revealed the proportion of eosinophils to be slightly elevated (3.35%) while other indices were within normal limits. HIV, syphilis, and Herpes simplex virus-1 and 2 antibodies were absent. In addition, the T-Cell spot test, purified protein derivative test for Mycobacillus Tuberclosis and Latex agglutination test for the cryptococcal capsular antigen were all negative. She underwent three lumbar punctures after admission to our clinic and results revealed a high intracranial pressure and an increased white cell count .
No abnormalities were found on cerebral MRA, while MRV imaging suggested underdevelopment of the right lateral sinus. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed the arterial system to be normal and confirmed dysplasia of the right lateral sinus . Cerebral MRI with contrast revealed several small, hyperintense lesions involving the right cerebellar hemisphere and bilateral occipital lobe, with gadolinium ring enhancement . NGS of CSF sample was further carried out and suggested several possible pathogens including parasites and virus . Serum was subsequently evaluated for presence of cysticercal antibodies and CSF also confirmed positivity, but negative for Echinococcus granulosus. Review of the patient’s previous imaging records revealed several additional anomalies: her pulmonary CT revealed multiple densities in chest wall soft tissue , and her chest radiographs take 6 months prior to admission to our hospital revealed multiple calcifications on the left side of the neck and right chest wall . A diagnosis of cerebral cysticercosis was therefore finally established. Oral praziquantel (2.5 mg/Kg/d × 7 days for one procedure) was administered thrice. Her headache was recovered markedly. Three months after she was discharged, her secondary cranial MR scan revealed persistence of the aforementioned ring-enhancing lesions . She underwent a repeat lumber puncture that revealed a CSF pressure of 220 mmH2O and 10 white blood cells per microliter. Meanwhile, CSF cysticercal antibodies remained positive. Repeat CSF NGS revealed that the T. solium index dropped considerably compared to initial NGS readings. On follow-up 6 months later, she reported no persisting symptoms.
CSF was collected via standard procedures. DNA was extracted from 300 μL CSF samples using the TIANamp Micro DNA Kit (DP316, Tiangen Biotech, Beijing, China) and sonicated to a size of 200–300 bps fragments (Bioruptor Pico protocols). DNA libraries were then constructed via end-repaired adaptation added overnight and application of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification to extracted DNA. An Agilent 2100 Bio-analyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) in combination with quantitative PCR was utilized to quantify DNA libraries. Sequencing was performed using the BGISEQ-100 platform (BGI-Tianjin, Tianjin, China) .
Most high-quality sequencing data were generated and computational subtraction of human host sequences was performed using a Burrows- Wheeler Alignment tool . Remaining sequencing data were aligned with Microbial Genome Databases, which is composed of 2700 whole genome sequences of viral taxa, 1494 bacterial genomes or scaffolds, 73 fungi and 47 parasites associated with human infectivity. The total number of reads from different samples was standardized as 20 M for comparison. After alignment, previously obtained files were filtered and duplicates removed. ThMmapped data were further processed and with the depth and coverage of each species calculated using Soap Coverage . A control sample from a non-infected patient was obtained and subjected to the aforementioned procedures. The DNA of CSF samples before and after drug treatment was extracted to construct a complementary DNA (cDNA) library for sequencing. The number of reads from the cDNA library of the patient’s CSF was 37,781,754 (before drug treatment) and 19,043,412 (after drug treatment) respectively. Those of the control sample were 25,962,600. As a result of pathogen detection, T.solium was identified as the most predominant parasite with 3.495% coverage of the T.solium genome in the first detection; however this reduced to 0.078% in the second detection after specific drug therapy. No reads of T.solium were detected from control samples. Reads of viruses were also detected in the CSF samples, later identified as human herpesvirus 4 (HHV-4). After drug therapy, the number of HHV-4 reads decreased approximately 20-fold. The results of CSF NGS prior to and after praziquantel therapy are shown in Table .