A 15-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital complaining of severe headaches since the eighth month of pregnancy, which had worsened in the last five hours. The following information was observed in the prenatal card: G1P0A0; gestational age: 37 weeks (estimated by date of last menstrual period); type O+ blood and negative serology. On examination our patient presented an arterial blood pressure of 180/120 mmHg, her uterine cervix was 20% effaced, with impervious external orifice and cephalic presentation. The diagnostic hypothesis was pre-eclampsia and routine investigations were requested to diagnose the HSP. After the tests, the diagnostic hypothesis changed to gestational hypertension. As our patient continued with elevated blood pressure levels, she was submitted to a cesarean section on the fourth day in hospital, delivering a male live baby with no intercurrences. After the procedure, she was referred to our infirmary, presenting a blank distant look and with no interaction with the environment. On examination she presented with dyslalia, and labial and upper and lower right limb paresis. During an examination six days after hospital admission, our patient was confused and unable to speak, but responded to painful stimuli as she conveyed abdominal pain at superficial and deep palpation. Moreover, she had a hematoma on the upper region of the surgical wound and physiological lochia. The hypothesis of post-partum psychosis was suggested and a careful neurological evaluation requested. She was administered the following drugs in hospital: nifedipine 1 mg, methyldopa 500 mg, 750 mg paracetamol, betamethasone, oxytocin, tenoxicam, promethazine, diclofenac sodium, cephalexin, and haloperidol. She was then transferred to the teaching hospital on the same day, and admitted to our intensive care unit, maintaining an impassive attitude in bed but reacting to external stimuli. She also emitted incomprehensible sounds, presented a blank look, with upward conjugated deviation of the eyes and mydriatic pupils reactive to light. She had Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of nine points (2 +5 +2). Our patient was then submitted to orotracheal intubation with mechanical ventilation and central venous access through her right internal jugular vein, in addition to continuous sedation. Computed tomography (CT) of her skull and pelvis were requested. Results revealed tomography findings consistent with ischemic infarction of the territory of her left middle cerebral artery, but no pelvic alterations were observed. Our patient showed progressive worsening of the neurological symptoms, hyperthermia, tonic-extensor crisis, difficulty in breathing and scored four points in the GCS. A repeat skull CT revealed ischemic lesions in the mean cerebral system affecting her basal ganglia and parietal lobe, with proper filling of venous sinuses and no signs of meningeal inflammation. During this period, her blood pressure levels remained elevated (MAP 140-150 mmHg) and refractory to medication. In addition, our patient presented with neuropsychomotor agitation and periods of tachycardia and systemic arterial hypertension alternating with bradycardia and normotension. An urgent selective cerebral arteriography was requested; this showed bilateral occlusion of her internal carotid artery in the intracranial position, pre-bifurcation and angiodysplasia in the cervical segments of the internal carotid artery. Sixteen days after hospital admission, there was a worsening of our patient's condition and she died. Brain death as a consequence of bilateral obstruction of the internal carotid was certified as the cause of death.