A 33-year-old Caucasian woman, gravida 3, para 1, was admitted to our clinic. Her obstetric history mentioned a miscarriage and a pregnancy complicated by intrauterine growth restriction, without signs of preeclampsia. At 37 weeks' gestation, cesarean section was performed because of fetal distress. A boy was delivered, weighing 2015 g, with Apgar scores of 9 and 10 at one and five minutes, respectively. Histology of the placenta revealed 10% infarctions and a thrombus in the umbilical cord. Blood analysis after three months showed no hemostatic abnormalities associated with an increased risk of thrombosis.
Ultrasound examination of the index pregnancy at 112 weeks' gestation showed a dichorionic diamniotic twin pregnancy with measurements consistent with gestational age. The Crown Rump Lengths were 39 mm, consistent with 106 weeks, and 45 mm, consistent with 112 weeks. Nuchal translucency thickness measurements were not performed. No abnormalities of the placenta were documented.
Her blood pressure was 125/70 mmHg. The pregnancy was complicated by episodes of vaginal bleeding at 16 weeks' gestation. Ultrasound showed one fetus with normal growth and one with early growth restriction and measurements consistent with 13 weeks. An echogenic area was interpreted as blood clots. At 20 weeks' gestation, fetal death of the abnormal fetus was noticed. One week later, the patient was asymptomatic but her blood pressure increased (154/98) which prompted the suspicion of a partial molar pregnancy. An enlarged placenta of 10 cm × 12 cm with some cysts was prominent on the anterior wall. Blood flow had ceased in this placenta. Urinary protein excretion was 2.5 g/L. Maternal serum beta-human-chorionic-gonadotropin (β-hCG) was markedly raised: 423,000 IU/L. Other laboratory investigations were normal.
The patient was sent to a University Hospital because of early preeclampsia and suspicion of a triploid twin. We decided to perform a chorionic villous biopsy because the placenta of the dead fetus was on the anterior wall. We did not perform a chorionic villous biopsy of the placenta of the healthy twin because no abnormalities were noticed by ultrasound and the placenta was located on the posterior wall.
Chorionic villus biopsy confirmed triploidy, 69, XXY. Without pharmacological interventions, the blood pressure stabilized, proteinuria decreased, and β-hCG decreased to 222,835 IU/L. At 22 weeks, the patient was discharged. She was reviewed twice a week. Urinary protein excretion was positive until 23 weeks, and blood pressure slowly decreased and normalized at 30 weeks. The β-hCG further decreased to 27,600 IU/L at 33 weeks. Episodes of some vaginal bleeding and cramps occurred up to 28 weeks' gestation. The placenta of the triploid twin was still enlarged until 23 weeks: 8 cm × 12 cm .
At 35 weeks, the patient developed preeclampsia again and was hospitalized. Her blood pressure increased to 170/105 mmHg and proteinuria to 0.8 g/L. Methyldopa 3 × 250 mg was initiated to control the blood pressure with good result . Blood analysis showed no signs of hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets (HELLP) syndrome. At 38 weeks, a cesarean section was performed for fetal distress. A healthy girl weighing 2,710 g was born with Apgar scores of 9 and 10 at one and five minutes, respectively. The placenta of the triploid fetus was necrotic and as a result of autolysis, no further histologic information on fetus and placenta were available. β-hCG follow-up showed no signs of persistent gestational trophoblastic disease (pGTD). Four days after delivery, the level had already decreased to 440 IU/L.