A 77-year-old woman visited her local doctor complaining of decreased visual acuity in her left eye for 1 month. She was referred to our Department for further examination and treatment of vitreous opacity in the left eye. She has been on treatment for dermatomyositis, diabetes mellitus, and right parotid tumor with prednisolone (6 mg/day) and tacrolimus hydrate (2 mg/day) for 3 years.

On the initial visit, the best-corrected visual acuity was 0.04, counting fingers, and the intraocular pressure was 17.0 mmHg and 13.3 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Slit-lamp microscopy revealed Grade 4 (Emery-Little classification) nuclear cataracts in both eyes, and kerato-precipitates and tan vitreous opacity in the left eye. The left optic nerve head was vaguely observed due to vitreous opacity. B-mode echography of the left eye showed relatively dense vitreous opacity and membranous material on the surface of the retina.

We considered the tan-like vitreous opacity to be an old vitreous hemorrhage and performed a phacovitrectomy. When the cataract and vitreous opacity were removed, almost total retinal detachment, except for a part of the superior periphery, was observed. Since no retinal break was found and a wide range of thin membrane-like tissue was found on the surface of the retina, the surgeon considered possible PIOL for the first time and performed an unplanned biopsy. The peripheral vitreous was collected as a sample that had already been diluted with irrigating fluid. Therefore, the subretinal fluid was collected through an intentional break to prevent mixing with other fluids. Silicone oil was injected at the end of the surgery. Because the subretinal fluid had slightly increased and involved the macula, re-PPV was performed to further aspirate the subretinal fluid, and the subretinal strand close to the inferior arcade vessel was gently pulled out and collected as a sample. These samples were submitted for cytology, IL-10/IL-6 ratio measurement, and AIGHR. Cytology revealed class II vitreous specimens and class III subretinal fluid (mainly lymphocytes with mild karyotype but no atypia). The pathologist ascertained that the specimen from subretinal fluid was class III, considering the possibility of low-grade MALT lymphoma, which suggests severe dysplasia, carcinoma in situ, or cancer. Cytokine measurements showed that the vitreous fluid was unmeasurable, and the subretinal fluid had a low IL10/IL6 ratio <1.0. The results of AIGHR in the subretinal fluid were positive for monoclonality. The subretinal fluid was gradually reduced, and subtenon injection of triamcinolone acetonide was effective for macular edema. Although the outer retinal layer was atrophic in the macular area, visual acuity in the left eye improved to 0.3. Fundus autofluorescence imaging showed localized hypofluorescent areas corresponding to intentional breaks and surrounding photocoagulated scars. No leakage was observed on fluorescein and indocyanine green fluorescence angiography, and the location of typical subretinal infiltration was unclear. The right eye underwent cataract surgery and visual acuity improved to 0.9. Fundus examination revealed no abnormal findings including IOL-related changes. There were no positive findings on head-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging or whole-body fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-computed tomography, and a diagnosis of PIOL was made. No relapse of intraocular inflammation was observed, and the patient was carefully monitored.