The patient was a 71-year-old woman. She did not keep any birds or animals, and had been treated for diabetes for over 30 years. She was on diet therapy and insulin therapy, but her diet appeared inadequate and her hemoglobin (Hb)A1c levels were within the range of 7.9%–8.5%. She was therefore admitted to her family hospital for dietary and lifestyle guidance in April 2019. During that hospitalization, she repeatedly developed pneumonia and bronchitis. In addition, findings of moon face, central obesity, and red skin lines led to a suspicion of Cushing's syndrome. During early morning fasting, plasma ACTH increased to 104 pg/mL (normal, 7.2–63.3 pg/mL) and serum cortisol increased to 23.5 μg/dL (normal, 6.2–19.4 μg/dL). In August 2019, at the time of consultation at our hospital (Fukushima Medical University Hospital), the patient showed: weight, 52.1 kg; height, 139.9 cm; body mass index, 26.6 kg/m2; blood pressure, 125/60 mmHg; and heart rate, 81 beats/min with regular rhythm. At this time, 24-h urinary free cortisol (UFC) was slightly increased to 128 μg (normal, 20–100 μg).
We performed screening tests for Cushing's syndrome. No diurnal variation was seen in serum cortisol (values on 1 day: 8.15 μg/dL at 08:00; 12.30 μg/dL at 16:00; and 11.85 μg/dL at 23:00), and after a 0.5-mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test, serum ACTH and cortisol were not suppressed (ACTH: 67.80 pg/mL; cortisol: 11.28 μg/dL). Based on these findings, ACTH-dependent Cushing's syndrome was suspected and we performed testing to confirm the diagnosis. After 8-mg overnight dexamethasone suppression testing, serum cortisol was suppressed (ACTH: 31.79 pg/mL; cortisol: 4.12 μg/dL). No response to ACTH was seen in the corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) loading test (after CRH loading: basal plasma ACTH, 85.84 pg/mL; peak plasma ACTH, 87.18 pg/mL). Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed no abnormal enhancement of the pituitary gland.
High-resolution computed tomography (CT) showed two pulmonary nodules in the left lung apex and lingual regions . The results of blood tests were normal, showing: white blood cell count, 5.2 × 103/μL; C-reactive protein, 0.04 mg/dL; carcinoembryonic antigen, 4.9 ng/mL; squamous cell carcinoma antigen, 0.5 ng/mL; cytokeratin 19 fragment (CYFRA 21-1), 3.09 ng/mL; and neuron-specific enolase (NSE), 208 pg/mL. Only NSE was elevated. Positron emission tomography/CT showed no significant accumulations of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose in those lung nodules or other sites. SRS was performed using 111In-octreotide, and no positive lesions were found throughout the entire body.
Although serum cortisol was suppressed in the high-dose dexamethasone suppression test, Cushing's syndrome due to an ectopic ACTH-producing tumor was suspected. However, the patient did not agree to selective venous sinus blood sampling from the cavernous sinuses or inferior petrosal sinus due to the invasiveness of the procedures. In addition, the possibility of ectopic ACTH-producing tumor could not be ruled out due to the presence of lung tumors. However, CT findings suggested these tumors would be difficult to sample by bronchoscopic lung biopsy and we therefore performed surgical biopsy in December 2019.
With the patient under general anesthesia, two nodules in the left lung underwent wedge resection with free margins under thoracoscopy. Intraoperatively, the easily resectable pulmonary apex lesion underwent wedge resection first, and frozen section diagnosis revealed pyogenic granuloma. We therefore determined that the entire left lung was infected, and surgery was finished after adding only wedge resection of the lingual region.
In the definitive diagnosis on histopathological examination of the resected specimens, the lesion in the left lung apex showed caseous necrosis, and no mycobacteria were observed on Ziehl–Neelsen staining. Grocott staining and periodic acid-Schiff staining showed numerous oval-shaped fungi positive for mucicarmine staining, indicating fungal infection by Cryptococcus. Lesions in the lingular segment comprised spindle cells proliferating in ribbons and foci , and immunohistochemistry showed strong positivity for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, CD56, and ACTH . No necrosis was present in the tumor, and the mitosis count was 1/2 mm2. The patient was diagnosed with ACTH-producing pulmonary typical carcinoid (p-T1bN0M stage IA2) with pulmonary cryptococcosis. Although this was before the diagnosis of ACTH-producing tumor, hydrocortisone was started at 50 mg/day immediately after surgery as a precaution. On postoperative day 4, basal plasma ACTH decreased to 6.67 pg/mL and serum cortisol levels decreased to 3.64 μg/dL. Although hydrocortisone might have had some effect, ACTH and cortisol remained at normal levels. Hydrocortisone dosage was gradually decreased to 20 mg/day, and the patient was discharged 15 days postoperatively. Subsequently, 24-h UFC levels were also normal, diabetes control was improved, and clinical symptoms resolved. Finally, at 6 months postoperatively and on hydrocortisone at 15 mg/day, the 0.5-mg dexamethasone suppression test suppressed ACTH and cortisol levels (ACTH: 14.55 pg/mL; cortisol: 0.288 μg/dL), confirming improvement of Cushing's syndrome. Furthermore, basal plasma concentration of ACTH was 20.05 pg/mL and cortisol was 10.32 μg/dL, so secretions were considered to be adequately maintained and hydrocortisone dose was further tapered and terminated 2 years postoperatively. Preoperatively, we did not test for cryptococcal antigen in the serum because we did not strongly suspect infection. Results for cryptococcal antigen in the serum examined 2 days postoperatively were negative. Cerebrospinal fluid was also examined after discharge, but no cryptococcus was found. The patient did not request additional lobectomy. As of July 2022, 18 months postoperatively, the patient was alive with no tumor recurrence and no clinical or laboratory evidence of elevated ACTH or Cushing's syndrome. She remains on insulin therapy for diabetes, but HbA1c is hovering around 7%. She patient is living independently and we will continue careful observation with laboratory data and CT.