A 68-year-old woman without previous relevant medical or traumatic history consulted the orthopedic surgery department for the left upper limb numbness and left neck pain. Noncontrast brain computed tomography and cervical vertebral X-ray were normal. She was prescribed analgesics and followed for about a year, but her symptoms worsened. The patient underwent cervical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and was found to have abnormal blood vessels. Thus, she was referred to our neurosurgery department for further evaluation and management.
Neurological examination revealed left C5 radiculopathy and worsening pain and hyperesthesia in the left arm and scapula. Other neurological findings included left deltoid and biceps brachii weakness. A vascular murmur was also heard in the left neck. Cervical spine MRI revealed an extramedullary structure, demonstrated by flow voids with abnormal vascular morphology, adjacent to the left neural foramen from C4 to C6, with compression of nerve roots and spinal cord . MR angiography (MRA) revealed a left VVAVF with left VA ectasia, but could not accurately identify the fistulous point. Subsequently, the left VA digital subtraction angiography demonstrated a high-flow VVAVF connecting the left VA to the vertebral venous plexus, with a single fistulous point at the C5 level of the V2 segment , and large venous plexus with drainage into the anterior internal vertebral venous plexus. The anterior cerebral circulation was normal in all angiogram phases. There was no filling of the fistula from the anterior circulation. The contralateral vertebrobasilar circulation was normal with no steal flow into the fistula, except the VVAVF.
We chose compact microballoon-assisted coil embolization of the left expanded paravertebral venous plexus, that is, target shunt occlusion. Heparin (3000 IU intravenously) was administered preoperatively. Under general anesthesia, a 10 cm 7-French femoral short sheath (TERUMO, Tokyo, Japan) was placed into the right common femoral artery. A 90 cm 7-French Guider Guiding Catheter ST (Stryker Japan K.K., Tokyo, Japan) was placed in the left VA. A 150 cm 2.5-French Renegade-18 microcatheter (Stryker Japan K.K., Tokyo, Japan) was transarterially guided to the left paravertebral venous plexus through the shunt using a 180 cm 0.016-inch GT wire double angle (TERUMO corporation, Tokyo, Japan) through the guiding catheter. In addition, a 4–15 mm HyperGlide microballoon catheter (Medtronic, Tokyo, Japan) was introduced into the left VA shunt point to regulate blood flow, prevent coil migration, and stabilize the microcatheter, so coils would not prolapse into the parent artery. While controlling shunt flow by inflating the microballoon placed in the left VA, the left vertebral venous plexus was embolized tightly and stably over a short distance with the Axium 3D coils 4 × 100 mm and 3.5 × 120 mm (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA), and Tornado embolization coil 4 × 20 mm and 3 × 20 mm (COOC Medical, Tokyo, Japan). The microcatheter was gradually pulled back while placing the coils, and the fistula was firmly embolized with ED coil 10 ExtraSoft Type R 3.5 × 80 mm, 3 × 60 mm, 3 × 30 mm and 1.5 × 20 mm (Kaneka Medics, Osaka, Japan). The final angiogram from the left VA demonstrated complete disappearance of the VVAVF, with stable coils . Immediately after the procedure, the vascular murmur disappeared and we did not prescribe antithrombotic therapy. The patient was discharged 3 days postprocedure.
Pain and numbness in the left upper limb were diminished at 1 month after the procedure. More than 4 years after the procedure, the patient remained well, without any complaint attributable to the endovascular embolization, and equally importantly, her symptoms, such as numbness and weakness, had improved. MRI 4 years postprocedure revealed that the flow void on the left side of the spinal canal had completely disappeared and compression of C4-6 nerve roots and spinal cord released . Likewise, no recurrence of the shunt was confirmed by MRA, with patency of the right VA .