49-year-old male with a history of severe bicuspid aortic disease type 1, symptomatic for syncope, angina and dyspnoea, who consulted for progression of dyspnoea from class II to class IV of 3 weeks evolution. The case was interpreted as a secondary retrograde biventricular heart failure due to progression of the underlying disease. On admission to the coronary unit, he was stable hemodynamically, with a negative balance and a good response to intravenous furosemide. In order to determine the appropriate therapeutic conduct, a transthoracic Doppler echocardiogram was performed, which showed a dilated left ventricle with a ejection fraction of 20%, areas of non-compaction of the myocardium from the middle segments to the apex, a pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 51 mmHg, a dilated right ventricle with preserved systolic function, a bicuspid aortic valve with calcified raphé at 2 o'clock and a severe valvular stenosis, with a low flow-low gradient (aortic valve area of 0.8 cm2). The maximum gradient was 23 mmHg and the mean 16.7 mmHg, and the patient also had moderate aortic and mitral insufficiencies and a severe tricuspid insufficiency. The coronary angiography showed coronary arteries without significant angiographic lesions. Subsequently, during the hospital stay, he developed a cardiogenic shock requiring dual inotropic support and continuous infusion of furosemide, with an improvement in the hemodynamic condition. He was evaluated by the cardiac transplant service, which determined, in accordance with the required histocompatibility studies, that the patient had a high probability of rejection of the graft. A stress echocardiogram with dobutamine was performed to evaluate the contractile reserve of the left ventricle, which reported a severe aortic stenosis with a severe deterioration of the systolic function of the left ventricle with contractile reserve. In the presence of a patient with a high surgical risk (EuroScore: 4.76%, STS: 2.47%, ArgenScore: 26) and an increased risk of rejection of the cardiac implant, an interdisciplinary team (Heart Team) was formed between the Cardiology, Cardiovascular Surgery and Haemodynamic services, where the treatment was decided by means of a TAVR. Aortic balloon valvuloplasty No. 25 was performed and, subsequently, a successful and uncomplicated percutaneous implant of a self-expandable aortic valve (CoreValve - Evolut-R®) No. 34, with peak pre- and post-procedural gradients of 41 mmHg and 0 mmHg, respectively).
In the control ETT, a transaortic prosthesis with normal gradients and no signs of regurgitation was observed, with no changes in the rest of the parameters evaluated. Due to good clinical evolution, the patient was discharged for outpatient follow-up. After 6 months of follow-up, the patient is asymptomatic, with no record of new admissions and no significant changes in the control ETT, although with a decrease in the PSAP to 29 mmHg.
