A 79-year-old right-handed male visited our outpatient clinic with severe pain and limited range of motion (ROM) of both shoulder joints.
The patient’s symptoms started 2 wk ago without a traumatic event.
Six years ago, this patient underwent bilateral repair for a massive rotator cuff tear at a one-year interval in a local clinic. The patient visited our hospital complaining of worsening both shoulder pain 6 mo ago; an active ROM of the right shoulder was 20° of forward flexion, 30° of abduction, 45° of external rotation, and the 4th lumbar vertebra level of internal rotation on physical examination. Active ROM of the left shoulder was 20° of forward flexion, 20° of abduction, 60° of external rotation, and the 4th lumbar vertebra level of internal rotation. Based on plain radiographs and magnetic resonance images, the preoperative diagnosis was bilateral CTA with failed rotator cuff repair. No preoperative acromial pathology was observed. This patient was treated with staged bilateral RTSA [right shoulder: Equinoxe (Exactech, Gainesville, FL, United States), left shoulder: Delta Xtend (DePuy, Warsaw, IN, United States)] at a two-month interval .
The patient reported being satisfied with significant pain relief and functional restoration after RTSA. At 3 mo after right RTSA, active ROM increased to 140° of forward flexion, 100° of abduction, 50° of external rotation, and the 5th lumbar vertebra level of internal rotation. At 6 wk after left RTSA, active ROM increased to 100° of forward flexion, 80° of abduction, 50° of external rotation, and the 5th lumbar vertebra level of internal rotation.
The patient underwent RTSA on the right shoulder 5 mo ago and left shoulder 3 mo ago.
Physical examination revealed tenderness on the posterolateral area of both shoulders without soft tissue swelling or redness. Active ROM was not able to be assessed due to severe pain. Visual Analogue Scale for pain, American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score, and Subjective Shoulder Value of both shoulders were 8%, 15%, and 15%, respectively.
The results of preoperative laboratory tests were normal.
Plain radiographs revealed no definite fractures or bony abnormalities compared to previous plain radiographs. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed non-displaced acromial base fractures of both shoulders . The t score of bone mineral density for lumbar spine was -2.9.