A 35-year-old male presented to the ocular emergency room two days after sustaining a wire-related trauma while working in an industrial setting. He complained of redness, blurred vision, a sensation of a foreign body in his eye, and photophobia. The initial assessment revealed visual acuity of 20/50 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye, with a negative Marcus Gunn's reflex in both eyes. The patient had no previous history of ophthalmologic diseases or surgeries and was not on medication.

Detailed ocular examination with a slit lamp showed conjunctival hyperemia, a 3 mm self-sealed corneal laceration in the temporal-corneal area at zone 1, with no signs of active corneal infiltration, an irregular pupil, and the presence of two eyelashes in the anterior chamber, with a 3 plus anterior chamber reaction but without fibrin or hypopyon formation. The Seidel test was negative. Vitreous and retinal appearance appeared normal, and intraocular pressure on the Goldmann Applanation Tonometer was within normal limits at 14 mmHg. The X-ray orbit showed no evidence of additional IOFB. All other eye examinations were normal.

We performed surgical removal of the eyelashes and repaired the cornea. During the procedure, an intracameral antibiotic regimen (ceftazidime/vancomycin) was administered to reduce the risk of endophthalmitis. The patient received topical ciprofloxacin and betamethasone drops post-operatively and underwent 24-h monitoring. The immediate postoperative period was uneventful, with no signs of intraocular infection.

After two days, the patient was discharged, and the visual acuity of the operated eye improved to 20/30. At a follow-up visit one month later, the corrected visual acuity reached 20/20, and the anterior chamber reaction had significantly decreased, indicating a successful intervention and recovery.

This figure illustrates the rare occurrence of eyelashes inside the anterior chamber of a 35-year-old male patient following a wire-induced trauma. A close-up of the slit lamp examination shows two eyelashes in the anterior chamber, along with an irregular pupil and iridocorneal adhesion. The pre-operative image captures the self-sealing corneal laceration and conjunctival hyperemia.