5-year-old girl with no relevant perinatal history, who presented with slurred speech and gait instability, with a paternal history of a diagnosis of HD, as well as three uncles and her grandmother, all from the paternal branch, with some degree of motor disability or psychiatric disorder. She had normal development until the age of 3, when she began to regress in previously acquired language patterns. At the age of 5, she added a motor disorder with frequent falls and dystonic gait, which is why she was referred. The condition progressed gradually and at the time of the evaluation she was dependent on almost all activities of daily living. Her language skills were below what was expected for her age in terms of expressive aspects (slurred speech). Her comprehension was also affected, although it improved with visual supports. She had a communicative intention and good eye contact, which showed reciprocity in her communicative abilities and interest in peers, using non-verbal resources such as pointing and gestures, sometimes accompanied by words. There was also difficulty in gait secondary to dystonia with frequent falls. She associated sporadic choreic movements of the upper limbs, with a low frequency of occurrence. There was evidence of drooling and a lack of oral closure, and slow and poorly coordinated oral movements. Her behaviour was usually calm, but she presented sporadic episodes of irritability in response to frustrating situations.

Within the complementary studies requested, the magnetic resonance of the brain showed atrophy of the caudate and lenticular nuclei in a symmetrical way, and the electroencephalographic study was normal. The molecular study (expansion of triplets CAG) showed 51 ± 1 repetitions of the triplet CAG in the locus 4p16.3, which confirmed the diagnosis and showed a phenomenon of anticipation by the early appearance of the disease in the patient.

The family was advised on the use of alternative-augmentative communication systems to promote communication and behavior. Phonoaudiological and kinesthetic treatment was indicated in their area of residence, and continued in the regular school with a support for inclusion modality.
