A 62-year-old man was treated with pembrolizumab for right lung adenocarcinoma, which showed high PD-L1 expression (80%), with multiple intestinal, lymph node, and bone metastases. The TNM classification for NSCLC was cT2N3M1c (OSS, LYM, PER, OTH), stage IVB (eighth edition). Tumor reduction was observed, but pembrolizumab was stopped after three courses owing to drug-induced pneumonitis. Dexamethasone was used for the treatment of pneumonitis. One month after drug withdrawal, the patient was transported to the emergency department of our hospital with the complaint of severe stomachache. On physical examination, he had a rigid abdomen and generalized tenderness. His blood pressure was in the normal range (110/82 mmHg), the heart rate was elevated but regular at 100 beats per minute, and the body temperature was elevated at 38.9 °C. The peripheral capillary oxygen saturation was 98% at room air. Laboratory evaluation showed a high inflammatory response with a white blood cell count of 18,200/mm3 and C-reactive protein level of 20.8 mg/dL. CT examination showed abdominal free air and ascites with perforation of the existing lung adenocarcinoma metastasis . We diagnosed bowel perforation with acute diffuse peritonitis. Emergency laparotomy was performed, and multiple small intestinal metastasis with mesenteric lymph node metastasis and ascites containing intestinal fluid were observed. The perforation site was located in the metastatic jejunum about 40 cm on the anal side from Treitz’s ligament. We resected this part about 20 cm and anastomosed with functional end-to-end anastomosis. There was no complication after surgery, and he was discharged on post-operative day 15. Pathological examination indicated lung adenocarcinoma metastasis in the perforated intestine, and the metastasis was partly scarred owing to the effect of pembrolizumab . Tumor cells in the perforation site had a high degree of degeneration and necrosis, and the pathological response for the efficacy of pembrolizumab was grade 1b (Japanese Classification of the Colorectal Carcinoma, seventh edition) . In the perforated part, the tumor cells were observed in all layers, but in the vicinity on the serosa side. Inflammatory change due to enteritis was not found in this site. Pembrolizumab was re-administrated about 1 month after discharge. To prevent drug-induced pneumonitis, dexamethasone was used daily.