A 73-year-old woman with past medical history of hypertension and rheumatoid arthritis stage 4 under regular anti-hypertension medication and long-term corticosteroid therapy, presented to us in August 2010 with the chief complaint of decline of visual acuity of her right eye and right periorbital pain for 2 months. At the beginning of the clinical course, she had brain computed tomography (CT) scan and orbit magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) done in June 2010, which disclosed a small enhancing lesion, about 1.2 cm × 1.1 cm × 1 cm in size, near the right side orbital apex and adjacent right side superior orbital fissure with mild encasement of the right optic nerve, and this lesion showed mild extension to the adjacent right side posterior ethmoid sinus [Figure , ]. She had pulse steroid therapy in ophthalmology service, but it was ineffective. On admission, her neurological examination showed that she had right eye blindness, right ptosis, right ophthmaloplegia, and tingle in the territory of ophthalmic branch of right trigeminal nerve. Repeated MRI of orbit after admission in August 2010 showed the progression of the lesion which enlarged up to 1.5 cm × 1.3 cm × 1.2 cm [Figure , ]. She underwent endoscopic endonasal transethmoid approach with the removal of the lesion on 19 August 2010 under general anesthesia. After the surgery, she recovered well and her right periorbital pain was much released. However, 5 days after surgery, she experienced a severe headache followed by loss of consciousness. After endotracheal tube intubation and resuscitation, brain CT was checked which showed diffuse high-density acute SAH in the basal cistern, pre-pontine cistern, ambient cistern, quadrigeminal cistern, cerebellomedullary cistern, and right sylvian fissure, with acute hydrocephalus . Emergent external ventricular drainage was done followed by performing CT angiography which showed several bleb-like wide base aneurysms over right supraclinoid internal carotid artery (ICA), and one aneurysm, about 4 mm in size and located at the medial side of the right supraclinoid internal carotid artery, showed extravasation of contrast medium. The dome of the ruptured aneurysm projected medially and superiorly . On the same day, the histology examination reported that the lesion was composed of many fungal septate hyphae demonstrated on both HE stain and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain [Figure , ]. Fungal infection was diagnosed and the culture turned out to be Aspergillus fumigatus. Her intracranial aneurysms were probably fungal aneurysms, which are one of the sequels of central nervous system (CNS) fungal infection. Unfortunately, after the event, she remained in deep coma and finally she expired due to central failure.