We report the case of a 59-year-old female patient of Southeast-Asian descent who underwent deceased donor renal transplantation at our institution in August 2016. At the time of initial referral for transplant evaluation in 2011, she had advanced chronic kidney disease but had not started dialysis. Medical records indicated that she had a slow rise in serum creatinine since 2006 but had never undergone a renal biopsy. No specific etiology had been ascribed to her kidney disease. Due to a history of 5 pregnancies that culminated in 3 live births and 2 miscarriages, she was broadly sensitized to human leukocyte antigens (HLA). Routine screening for anti-HLA antibodies with a Luminex-based solid-phase assay using single-antigen beads detected multiple class I and class II HLA antibodies in April 2016. Based on our institutional policy to denote HLA, to which antibodies of a strength greater than 4,000 mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) units are detected in the transplant candidate serum, as unacceptable, our patient's calculated panel reactive antibody (CPRA) level was 93%.
After an approximate wait-time of 5 years, she received an organ offer from a 46-year-old male deceased donor, who succumbed to a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head. The deceased donor had a terminal creatinine of 1.2 mg/dL, and the organ offered was assigned a kidney donor profile index of 38%. Pre-implantation biopsy of the transplanted kidney demonstrated glomerulosclerosis in 4 out of 78 sampled glomeruli. Fibrosis affecting up to 10% of the tubule interstitium, mild arteriosclerosis, and patchy areas of acute tubular necrosis were also noted. Donor and recipient were blood type compatible (ABO type A). Complement-dependent cytotoxicity and flow cytometry-based cross-match testing of the current recipient's serum with donor T and B lymphocytes were negative. However, donor-specific antibodies (DSA) to class I antigen-HLA B45 (MFI 3,182) and class II antigen-DQ6 (MFI 3,802) were detected by Luminex-based solid-phase assay in the serum sample from April 2016. We consider antibody strength of MFI 2,000 or greater to be clinically significant. Since this suggested prior sensitization to donor HLA, the risk of early antibody-mediated rejection (AMR) due to a memory B-cell response was predicted to be high. Transplant surgery was uneventful with minimal intra-operative blood loss, and the organ incurred a cold-ischemia time of 15 h.
Immunosuppressive therapy for induction consisted of 6 mg/kg of intravenous (IV) antithymocyte globulin given in divided doses over 4 days; tapering doses of IV methylprednisolone given on postoperative days (PODs) 0–4. In addition, 375 mg/m2 of rituximab was administered on POD 1 to suppress humoral alloimmune response. For maintenance immunosuppressive therapy, the patient began receiving 1,000 mg of oral mycophenolate mofetil twice daily from POD 0. Excellent urine output of 1.3 L was noted in the first 12 h after transplant, and tacrolimus was initiated on POD 1. Tapering doses of oral prednisone were started on POD 5. The serum creatinine levels declined steadily from 7.9 mg/dL (pre-transplant) to 1.9 mg/dL by POD 5, and the patient did not require dialysis.
However, the hemoglobin trended down to 6.8 g/dL (baseline: 9.8 g/dL), and the platelet count gradually decreased to 61,000/µL (baseline: 302,000/µL) by POD 6. Alarmingly, the patient's creatinine rose to 2.9 mg/dL and then to 3.3 mg/dL in the 24-h period between POD 5 and POD 6. Lactate dehydrogenase was elevated at 1,016 U/L (reference range: 313–618 U/L), and haptoglobin was <10 mg/dL (reference range: 30–200 mg/dL). The corresponding tacrolimus trough level was 5 ng/mL. Renal allograft ultrasound demonstrated mildly heterogeneous echotexture of the transplant kidney, and Doppler evaluation of the intraparenchymal vessels showed resistive indices ranging from 0.80 to 0.83. One unit of apheresis platelets was transfused, and the patient underwent an urgent ultrasound-guided renal allograft biopsy. In the 6 h preceding the biopsy, the patient's recorded urine output was 100 mL. The patient's blood pressure remained stable with a systolic blood pressure of approximately 140 mm Hg throughout the hospitalization leading up to the biopsy.
An adequate biopsy sample consisting of 2 cores of cortical tissue exhibiting 26 glomeruli and 4 interlobular arteries was obtained. No immediate biopsy-related complications occurred. The most prominent finding on light microscopic examination was the demonstration of fibrin thrombi involving 1 arteriole and capillary loops in 2 glomeruli . Isometric cytoplasmic vacuolization of tubular epithelial cells and arteriolar myocytes was also apparent. There was no evidence of microvascular or tubulointerstitial inflammation. C4d was negative by immunofluorescence microscopy. Electron microscopy revealed diffuse swelling of glomerular capillary endothelial cells and cytoplasmic vacuolization of tubular epithelial cells. Histologic correlates of acute AMR were striking in their absence. DSA that were scored positive in the pretransplant serum sample were not detectable in the serum sample tested on the day of the biopsy (HLA B45: pretransplant MFI 3,182 vs. POD 6 MFI 1,438; DQ6: pretransplant MFI 3,082 vs. POD 6 MFI 640). Histopathologic features noted on the renal allograft biopsy, taken together with clinical and laboratory findings, suggested that CNI-induced de novo post-transplant HUS was the most proximate cause of acute oliguric renal failure in this case .
Tacrolimus was discontinued. A reversal of the upward trend in creatinine was immediately apparent after withholding the CNI. Creatinine improved to 2.4, 1.8, and 1 mg/dL in the 3 succeeding days. The patient received a transfusion of 1 unit of packed red blood cells after the kidney biopsy following which hemoglobin improved from 6.8 to 8.6 g/dL and steadily improved to 10.1 g/dL in the following 2 weeks. In the same period, a significant improvement in platelet count occurred (61,000–348,000/µL). Substitution of tacrolimus with another CNI, cyclosporine (CsA), was considered, but we favored the introduction of maintenance immunosuppression with a costimulatory blocker, belatacept, instead, given emerging evidence of its efficacy in highly sensitized renal transplant recipients. The first dose of IV belatacept (5 mg/kg) was administered on POD 9 (3 days after the diagnosis of TMA). The patient received 5 mg/kg of IV belatacept every 2 weeks thereafter for 2 months and was then transitioned to a 5 mg/kg once monthly dosing regimen. Twelve months after transplant, she continues to have excellent renal allograft function with a serum creatinine of 0.7 mg/dL and has had no recurrence of hematologic abnormalities. Her most recent hemoglobin and platelet count were 12.3 g/dL and 271,000/µL, respectively .