A 24-year-old female with no significant past medical history initially presented to an outside hospital with severe abdominal pain and scantly bloody stools. She was transferred to a tertiary care center for further work-up and management. Contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen and pelvis showed findings of colitis extending from the splenic flexure to the rectum . The patient was empirically treated for infectious and inflammatory etiologies of colitis without improvement. Flexible sigmoidoscopy demonstrated inflammatory changes in the descending colon and rectum with biopsy samples suggestive of ischemic colitis. A small external hemorrhoid was noted. Differential diagnosis for possible ischemic colitis included thrombosis and vasculitis, but there were no definitive imaging findings of either on CT imaging. Hematologic and rheumatologic work-up were nonspecific but notable for elevated rheumatoid factor and positive antinuclear antibodies.
Interventional radiology was consulted for further angiographic evaluation of the mesenteric vessels given the ischemic findings on pathology. IMA angiography was performed, and prompt filling of the IMA and paralleling mesenteric venous branches was observed . A few abnormal-appearing, tortuous distal IMA branches were noted. Hepatofugal flow was observed in the IMV.
Given these findings, the patient was empirically treated with steroids and anticoagulation. She showed marginal improvement and had persistent severe abdominal pain. Based on the prompt venous filling seen on conventional angiography, it was hypothesized that the presence of an arteriovenous connection may be causing mesenteric venous congestion. After a multidisciplinary team discussion, it was decided to pursue further angiographic investigation and attempt endovascular embolization of a suspected arteriovenous connection.
The patient returned to interventional radiology for further diagnostic imaging and potential intervention. The right common femoral artery was accessed using standard micropuncture technique with a 5 French micropuncture set (Merit Medical, South Jordan, UT). Digital subtraction angiography of the IMA was performed using a 5 French catheter. Using a microcatheter, further selective angiography of the IMA branches was performed. Filling of the venous system was again seen along with a tangle of small vessels compatible with a nidus connecting small arterial feeders to the venous system . Glue embolization of this nidus was performed using n-butyl cyanoacrylate (n-BCA) (TruFill, Codman and Shurtleff Inc., Raynham, MA) diluted in a 3:1 lipiodol to n-BCA concentration. Post-embolization imaging demonstrated decreased venous filling, although there was persistent venous filling from several smaller IMA feeding branches, which were small and not amenable to embolization .
The patient’s pain significantly improved the day after embolization, and she was discharged 5 days post-embolization. Unfortunately, her pain returned in 11 days and rose to pre-embolization levels approximately 26 days post-embolization. She was readmitted for pain management, and her deteriorating condition resulted in a multidisciplinary medicine, interventional radiology, and surgery team decision to proceed with colonic resection. Extended left colectomy with partial proctectomy, end transverse colostomy, and rectal stump was performed. The patient tolerated the procedure well, and her pain completely resolved. Pathological analysis of resection specimens was consistent with venous insufficiency, as it indicated prominent concentric intimal smooth muscle hyperplasia with colonic perforation. Dilated capillaries, thickened hyaline walls, and ischemic changes were visualized without evidence of malignancy or thrombosis. Van Gieson’s stain along with venous presence of lymphocytic phlebitis, fat necrosis, and organizing thrombi confirmed IMHMV diagnosis (Genta and Haggitt ).