A 37-year-old Caucasian female nonsmoker with no known past medical history presented to our emergency department with 4 months of dyspnea and back pain. At her initial presentation 4 months prior to an outside facility, she underwent a chest C-ray and chest computed tomography (CT) scan, which showed a right upper lobe consolidation. She had been treated for and discharged with a diagnosis of pneumonia. Two months after her initial presentation, she underwent an outpatient bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and transbronchial right upper lobe biopsy owing to persistent symptoms and a concern for malignancy. Fungal studies and acid-fast bacilli fluorochrome smears were negative, and biopsy results were negative for malignant cells; the pathology results were consistent with chronic inflammation. Upon arrival to our emergency room, she again reported similar symptoms. Physical examination was notable for neck pain on palpation and tachypnea. A chest CT with intravenous (IV) contrast was performed, revealing near-complete right upper lobe collapse, right upper lobe consolidation, enlarged subcarinal lymph node, and enlarged station 6 lymph node . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine was performed, demonstrating a C7 50% compression fracture and lytic lesions throughout the spinal vertebrae, concerning for metastatic disease. A CT of the abdomen and pelvis was also performed, revealing a single 15-mm hypodense nodule on the liver .
The patient subsequently underwent a transthoracic right upper lobe biopsy, which showed dense fibrous pleural bits, samples of alveolar parenchyma showing interstitial fibrosis, and a patchy dense lymphocytic infiltrate; no malignant cells were seen on histopathological examination. Next, the patient underwent bronchoscopy and endobronchial ultrasound with transbronchial lymph node sampling, as well as brushing and BAL of the right upper lobe. Most studies were unremarkable except the BAL cytology exhibit, which was positive for poorly differentiated neoplastic cells, raising the possibility of a poorly differentiated carcinoma; however, the material on the cell block was insufficient to run immunostains. As the concern for metastatic disease remained high on our differential diagnosis, we pursued a liver biopsy to better characterize the malignancy. The patient underwent a fluoroscopy-guided liver biopsy of the aforementioned liver nodule, which demonstrated a malignant undifferentiated neoplasm with epithelioid morphology and weak neuroendocrine differentiation.
The cells formed nests/cords in a background of hyalinized sclerotic stroma, frequently demonstrating eosinophilic cytoplasm and round-to-ovoid nuclei . These ancillary studies were insufficient to rule out epithelioid synovial sarcoma, breast malignancy, renal malignancy, thyroid malignancy, gynecologic primary tumors, and epithelioid osteosarcoma. The neoplastic cells were weakly reactive for synaptophysin, and CD99 staining showed a membranous pattern . In a subset, GATA-3 was positive and PAX-8 was weakly positive . However, the neoplastic cells were nonreactive to ER (breast marker) and SATB2 (lower gastrointestinal and osteosarcoma marker). Moreover, the tumor cells were negative for Oscar pankeratin, CK7, CK20, Moc-31, TTF-1, WT-1, HMB45, Melan-A, SOX-10, S100, Inhibin, SMA, MyoD1, CD117, CD45, CD30, and CD34. Thus, the liver tissue was sent for a second opinion for evaluation by a pathologist with expertise in gastrointestinal, liver, soft tissue, and cardiothoracic pathology in a state-of-the-art center at the national and international levels. They found that a specialized panel of immunohistochemical stains revealed that the tumor cells were reactive to MUC4 expression. BRG1 and INI1 immunostains revealed preserved nuclear staining; however, claudin-4, ERG, CD31, CAMTA1, P40, ETV-4, and NUT stains were negative. Subsequently, a diagnosis of sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma was concluded.
Based on our diagnostic workup, the patient was promptly started on doxorubicin therapy. The patient ultimately joined a genetic research protocol at a major cancer research center. Next-generation sequencing (Tempus genetic testing) was completed to evaluate for any variant known to increase her risk for cancer. There were no genes identified that would increase her risk for cancer. However, there was an identified variant of unknown significance of the WRN gene, an autosomal recessive gene associated with Werner syndrome (WS). She has not had any clear manifestations of WS other than malignancy and has yet to be assessed for osteoporosis. At 3-month follow-up, she is in the early stages of her treatment course and has tolerated her regimen without issues.