A 58-year-old Japanese woman complaining of pain and numbness in her left mandible was referred to our hospital in 2014. For a couple of months prior to her visit, she had been aware of an abnormal sensation in her left mandible, which gradually progressed to mild pain and numbness. She visited a general dental practitioner, who diagnosed her condition as osteomyelitis and referred her to our department. Her medical and family histories were unremarkable. On initial assessment, no obvious systemic symptoms were evident. A panoramic radiograph showed a widening of the periodontal ligament space, periapical bone loss in tooth #37, and a diffuse radiolucent lesion involving the left body of her mandible, with an indistinct cortical margin and ill-defined cortical borders of the inferior alveolar nerve canal . Moreover, the radiograph also showed that tooth #37 had previously been treated endodontically. Therefore, a diagnosis of apical periodontitis was suggested and endodontic treatment was performed; however, her symptoms were not relieved. Consequently, a neoplastic lesion was highly suspected and findings of a biopsy of the apical tissue after extraction of tooth #37 resulted in a histopathological diagnosis of tissue inflammation. However, after the biopsy, a gradual progressive swelling of the left mandible occurred . Computed tomography (CT) showed an enhanced lesion on the left mandible, and magnetic resonance image (MRI) showed abnormally high-intensity signal in the bone marrow, with surrounding soft tissue mass . Therefore, we performed an incisional biopsy of the swollen area, the findings of which resulted in a histopathological diagnosis of osteoblastic-type osteosarcoma of the mandible. She was then scheduled for radical surgery combined with neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy based on the regimen used in a multi-institutional clinical study of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in extragnathic osteosarcoma (NECO study) in Japan . In the NECO study, neoadjuvant chemotherapy consisted of two courses of high-dose (HD) methotrexate (MTX) followed by a course of cisplatin (CDDP) and adriamycin (ADR) as phase I chemotherapy. After phase I chemotherapy was completed, the response to induction chemotherapy was evaluated. If the treatment response was assessed as complete response (CR), partial response (PR), or stable disease (SD), four courses of HD-MTX and a course of CDDP and ADR were administered. In contrast, if the treatment was assessed on the basis of the response as “not effective, with progressive disease (PD),” the chemotherapy regimen was changed to HD ifosfamide (IFO). Toxic effects during chemotherapy were graded according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events Version 4.0. Following neoadjuvant chemotherapy, tumors were assessed using response evaluation criteria in solid tumors (RECIST) after determining their sizes using CT and MRI. In the current patient, the swelling increased rapidly during the phase I neoadjuvant chemotherapy . CT and MRI also revealed marked progression of the lesion , and laboratory data showed marked elevation of serum alkaline phosphatase. On the basis of these data, we assessed the response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy as not effective, with PD. Therefore, the neoadjuvant chemotherapy was suspended and radical surgery took precedence before the lesion grew to an unresectable size. She was then treated with radical surgery consisting of a hemimandibulectomy and reconstruction using a free vascularized latissimus dorsi pedicle flap and rigid titanium reconstruction plate. On histologic examination, the tumor was composed of stellate cells, which were large and atypical . Highly atypical cells produced osteoid and immature bone. Moreover, chondroid matrices were also observed. Taken together, these findings indicated that the therapeutic response was poor, assessed as grade 0 (tumor necrosis area <90%). On postoperative day 25, adjuvant chemotherapy was started. Adjuvant chemotherapy was also performed in accordance with the NECO study regimen, with slight modifications. The adjuvant chemotherapy regimen included two courses of HD-IFO followed by a course of CDDP and ADR, and the same regimen was repeated for a total of three cycles. During chemotherapy, hematologic toxicities, grade 4 leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia were detected and the frequency of febrile neutropenia increased, requiring red blood cell and platelet transfusions and the use of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor. The treatment schedule and our patient’s clinical course are summarized in the Table . No evidence of local recurrence and distant metastasis was found at 14 months follow-up after initial treatment.