A 49-year-old Japanese man visited our department in November 2017 with chief complaints of indolent right scrotum enlargement and a right inguinal mass. History showed that the patient visited our department of gastroenterology with chief complaints of blackish feces and ill complexion in February 1997. Gastrointestinal fiberscopy was used to treat duodenal ulcer bleeding. Computed tomography (CT) showed a right retroperitoneal tumor, which was removed in the same month.
Histopathological examination showed a teratoma and yolk sac tumor . He was diagnosed with primary retroperitoneal EGCT and underwent three courses of chemotherapy (bleomycin/etoposide/cisplatin; BEP) starting in May 1997. He was closely followed using procedures including periodic imaging, tumor markers determination, and self-palpation.
He was followed up on an outpatient basis 5 years after treatment and was subsequently lost to follow-up. In August 1999, he underwent surgery of the right hydrocele. At that time, perioperative findings were unremarkable, indicating no clear tumor in either testicle.
At the first visit, his height was found to be 163 cm, and weight was 58.5 kg.
Blood pressure was 128/78 mmHg, heart rate was regular at 62 beats per minute, and body temperature was 36.4 °C.
He had no history of smoking or drinking, and there was nothing remarkable in the family history.
On physical examination, the right testicle was found to be elastic, hard, and enlarged to the size of 40 × 40 mm. A 45 × 40 mm sized induration was palpable in the right inguinal area and was adequately mobile. Neurological examination showed no abnormal findings. Blood biochemistry examination, urinalysis, and tumor markers (alpha-fetoprotein [AFP], human chorionic gonadotropin [HCG], and lactate dehydrogenase [LDH]) showed no abnormal findings.
Ultrasound findings showed a mosaic shadow inside the right testicle, with no abnormal findings in the left testicle.
During other diagnostic imaging procedures, enlargements of the right external iliac lymph node (24 × 14 mm) and right inguinal lymph node (43 × 29 mm) and a 31 × 22 mm mass with uneven contents were found in the right testicle . There was no evidence of any distant metastasis.
For the right testicular tumor, the patient underwent high orchiectomy and resection of the right inguinal lymph nodes in November 2017. The testicular tumor was 40 × 40 × 30 mm in size and weighed 34 g. The lymph node was 40 × 40 × 30 mm in size and weighed 21 g. The cut surfaces of both specimens were yellowish and solid, and the testicular tumor was localized in the testicle .
Histopathological findings showed irregular cobblestone proliferations of germ cell-like atypical cells with clear nucleoli and massive necrotic changes that partially resulted from self-destruction. The tumor did not extend into the tunica albuginea, and no vascular infiltration was found. Spermatic cord stumps were negative. Tumor diagnosis was a classical seminoma with no other elements. Lymph node metastases were also diagnosed as a result of the seminoma .
Based on the above findings, this seminoma was diagnosed as pT1, pN2, M0, S0, and TNM stage IIB .
The patient received postoperative chemotherapy with one course of BEP therapy and three courses of etoposide and cisplatin (EP) therapy at the Japan Community Health care Organization Kani Tono Hospital starting in January 2018.
Post-chemotherapy CT confirmed a complete clinical response (cCR) at the right external iliac lymph node, and this response continued 12 months later .