A 64-year-old Japanese woman was brought to the emergency department of our hospital in a deep coma. Six years before this admission, the patient presented at another hospital with transient right hemispatial neglect and, based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), was diagnosed with left ICA obliteration immediately distal to the carotid bifurcation and unilateral moyamoya disease of the ipsilateral intracranial arteries, without any aneurysm formation or cerebral infarction . Quantitative 15O gas-inhalation positron emission tomography at the time showed no apparent misery perfusion, so the patient was initially treated medically with cilostazol for probable transient ischemic attack (TIA). However, cilostazol was subsequently stopped due to increasing microbleeds in the brain on follow-up MRI. No aneurysm was detected up until the last follow-up MRA evaluation 3 months before the event described in this report.
Computed tomography (CT) of the head showed severe intraventricular hemorrhage with subarachnoid hemorrhage . CT angiography (CTA) showed obliteration of the left ICA with a hypoplastic carotid canal and foramen lacerum, suggesting congenital ICA agenesis rather than acquired ICA obliteration . The left posterior communicating artery (PComA) was not a single vessel, instead forming a vascular plexus . The peduncular, ambient, and quadrigeminal segments of the left PCA and the horizontal, infracallosal, and precallosal segments of the left ACA looked like a network of small tortuous vessels that replaced the main trunks of the left PCA and ACA, respectively. In the distal portion of the left PCA and ACA, these aberrant networks seemed to coalesce and formed hypoplastic but definite cortical branches of the PCA and supracallosal segment of the ACA. These anomalous arteries were located in the subarachnoid space, unlike moyamoya disease or arteriovenous malformation. From these findings, we diagnosed the anomaly as rete mirabile in the PComA, PCA, and ACA. Intriguingly, the appearance of the MCA was not rete-like in this patient . There was a saccular aneurysm (4.3 mm in size) arising from the inferior aspect of a perforating branch of the pericallosal artery and protruding into the left lateral ventricle that was presumed to be the source of the hemorrhage . Because of her critical condition (dilatation of pupils and hypothermia), the patient immediately underwent urgent bilateral external ventricular drainage to reduce the intracranial pressure, but soon deteriorated to brain death. Thus, we did not proceed with catheter angiography and further treatment of the ruptured aneurysm. The family refused an autopsy.