The patient was a 70-year-old Japanese man (172.0 cm tall, weighing 68.0 kg, body
mass index 23.0 kg/m2) who had smoked 20 cigarettes a day for 47 years
until 5 years ago. He was under treatment and follow-up for essential hypertension,
dyslipidemia and chronic kidney disease, and his blood pressure and lipid levels
were well controlled with administration of 40 mg of olmesartan medoxomil (Olm) and
5 mg of atorvastatin calcium hydrate. His renal function was stable. The patient
presented with nasal discharge, malaise and a mild cough, and tested positive for
SARS-CoV-2 by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test three days after coming in
extended contact with a colleague who was also diagnosed with SARS-CoV-2. Since he
had many risk factors for disease aggravation, he was urgently admitted to our
hospital (Day 1) the day after symptom onset and confirmation of the diagnosis.
At admission, his body temperature was 36.4 °C, blood pressure was 185/72 mm Hg,
pulse was 86 beats/min, respiratory rate was 20 beats/min and peripheral oxygen
saturation on pulse oximetry (SpO2) was 97.0%. Laboratory findings at
this time showed lymphocyte depletion and coagulation abnormalities [lymphocytes
8.5%, fibrinogen 518 mg/dL, fibrinogen degradation products 5.26 μg/mL and D-dimer
(D-D) 1.68 μg/mL] . In addition, iron deficiency anemia was observed (he was
scheduled for close examination of the gastrointestinal tract after COVID-19 was
cured), and hence, it was difficult to evaluate the clinical implication of the
observed low ferritin level . CT showed emphysematous changes in the lung field. Ground
glass opacities with neither a crazy-paving pattern nor consolidation was found
below the dorsal pleura of the upper right lobe, and the total CT score was 1/25
points (upper right lobe 1/5 points, middle lobe 0/5 points, lower right lobe 0/5
points, upper left lobe 0/5 points and lower left lobe 0/5 points), based on the
scoring system described by Pan et al. In addition, fibrosis, subpleural lines, the reversed “halo sign”, pleural
effusion and lymphadenopathy were not observed. It was considered to be a typical
findings of early mild COVID-19 pneumonia .
Although no decrease in SpO2 was observed, administration of favipiravir
(Fav) 3600 mg daily was started from the evening of the same day, due to the
presence of mild pneumonia as seen on CT and the presence of multiple comorbidities.
In addition, since SpO2 decreased a little the following day, 1 L/min
oxygen administration via a nasal cannula was also started. Weakness and a decreased
level of consciousness (tendency to somnolence) appeared from the early morning of
Day 2, but a neurologist ruled out stroke. Since somnolence and weakness were
considered as side effects of Fav, the drug was discontinued on the evening of Day
2, and his symptoms improved by the morning of Day 3. Thereafter, since his
temperature increased again, the frequency of administration of acetaminophen 500 mg
was increased from 0 to 3 times a day. In addition, his CRP level increased and
SpO2 decreased, requiring an increase in oxygen flow rate from 1 to
3 L/min by nasal cannula. CT performed on Day 4 showed slight deterioration in the
pneumonia. The total CT score was 2/25 points (ground-glass opacities only below the
dorsal pleura of the upper right lobe) . Therefore, 200 mg of remdesivir
(Rem) was administered on Day 4, with 100 mg daily being administered from Day 5
until Day 10, for a total of seven days . On Day 7, blood gas data under
administration of 4 L/min oxygen by nasal cannula showed that the alveolar-arterial
oxygen difference (A-aDO2) had increased to 122.1 mm Hg , indicating an
imbalance between ventilation and blood flow. However, no pulmonary hypertension was
observed on electrocardiogram or echocardiography. Furthermore, since a tendency of
increasing D-D levels was also observed , the combination of nafamostat
mesylate (Naf) 100 mg daily by continuous intravenous infusion and dexamethasone
(Dex) 6 mg daily was administered for four days from Day 7 . The treatment was remarkably
effective, resulting in fever reduction and a decrease in CRP and D-D levels (, c and d). On Day
10, oxygen administration could be discontinued, and at the same time , his blood
pressure control improved . By Day 13, A-aDO2 had also significantly improved
to 33.2 mm Hg without supplementary oxygen , and CT showed a tendency for
improvement in pneumonia. The total CT score at this time was still 2/25 points
(ground-glass opacities only below the dorsal pleura of the upper right lobe) .
For blood pressure control during the course of his hospitalization, continuous
intravenous infusion of pernidipine (4-9 mg/h) was performed for two days when oral
intake was difficult due to the decreased consciousness level, and from day 4, Olm
40 mg and nifedipine 20 mg were administered in combination. With the treatment of
COVID-19, his blood pressure gradually stabilized, and the dose of nifedipine was
reduced from Day 14 to 10 mg, and nifedipine was discontinued from Day 19 .
It took some more time for SpO2 to stabilize, but it eventually improved
and the patient was discharged on Day 21 .