A 49-year-old non-smoker female with known afibrinogenemia and antithrombin (AT) deficiency was admitted to the emergency room (ER) for acute substernal chest pain. She had a history of pyelonephritis, had received treatment for a multinodular goiter that had caused hypothyroidism, and also had congenital deafness. Her parents were consanguineous, and her father died from a surgically-induced pulmonary embolism. Her brother suffered from the same combined afibrinogenemia and AT deficiency. Her sister died from pulmonary embolism during her first pregnancy, at the age of 22, and had also suffered from AT deficiency yet with normal fibrinogen levels.
Afibrinogenemia was diagnosed when the patient was 3 months old, following a trauma-induced intracranial hemorrhage. DNA sequencing, performed several years after the diagnosis, highlighted a homozygous (c.510 + 1G > T) substitution in the splicing site of the 4th intron of the fibrinogen alpha-chain. Routine coagulation test results revealed dramatically-prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) (>240 s) and a prothrombin time (PT) >120 s, with undetectable levels of either fibrinogen activity or antigen <0.1 g/L, and normal platelet count of 240.10 /L. Thrombin time and reptilase time were also significantly prolonged (>120 s; normal values below 20 s).
The patient had a history of several severe thromboses and bleeding episodes. Her bleeding history started with intracranial bleeding induced by severe head trauma suffered at 3 months old, which was followed by several trauma-induced hematomas, spontaneous meningeal hemorrhage at 11 years old, intra-alveolar pulmonary hemorrhage at 23, menorrhagia, two episodes of hemoperitoneum induced by ruptured ovarian cysts, six first-trimester miscarriages due to severe hemorrhagic complications, and acute unprovoked cerebellar hemorrhage at 30 years old. Most of the bleeding episodes that occurred during her childhood and youth were treated with cryoprecipitate and fresh frozen plasma. She was shown to be hepatitis C antibody- and RNA-positive, with normal liver enzyme levels. The patient was taking several supplements for iron deficiency anemia due to heavy menstrual blood loss, and refused prophylaxis with fibrinogen concentrates, as they require regular intravenous infusions. Moreover, she was working in the traveling family circus with a lifestyle of “perpetual traveler”, rendering clinical follow-up very difficult.
At the age of 30, she exhibited a spontaneous cerebellar hemorrhage and received her first replacement therapy with fibrinogen concentrates, after which she developed a proximal deep vein thrombosis (DVT) complicated by pulmonary embolism (PE) four days after the introduction of fibrinogen concentrate, while her plasma fibrinogen level was 1.2 g/L. The fibrinogen infusions were immediately stopped, and unfractionated heparin (UFH) was initiated. When her fibrinogen level dropped to <0.5 g/L, 24 h following withdrawal of the fibrinogen concentrate, fibrinogen replacement therapy was reinitiated, with a target plasma fibrinogen of 0.5–0.8 g/L, and UFH was concomitantly administered for a total duration of 6 weeks. No bleeding complications occurred, and her cerebellar bleeding was not aggravated during UFH therapy. The patient fully recovered from this episode.
Two years later, at 32 years, she presented an acute coronary syndrome (ACS) with an ulcerated atheromatous plaque in the left anterior descending coronary artery. However, due to there being only a limited perfusion defect and no occlusion on coronary angiography, reperfusion therapy was not initiated given her high risk of bleeding. She had no cardiovascular risk factors, except for slightly-elevated cholesterol levels. A combined treatment of low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) and fibrinogen was prescribed. On replacement therapy, the patient exhibited bilateral calf DVT, which was treated with LMWH until complete resolution of the venous clots, achieved in 10 days. Following hospital discharge, the patient pursued a treatment at home consisting of 40 mg atorvastatin per day, with a target LDL cholesterol level < 1 g/L. No aspirin was prescribed for this patient due to her high bleeding risk. As several thromboses were reported in the patient’s family, and given the known AT deficiency of her sister, thrombophilia testing was then performed, revealing heterozygous antithrombin (AT) deficiency at 65% by means of chromogenic assay (Biophen AT anti-(h)-Xa LRT, Hyphen BioMed, Neuville sur Oise, France). The reference AT in adults ranges between 80 and 120%. Genetic sequencing revealed a point mutation L131F in the 2nd exon of the AT gene. As a result, this proved to be a very rare case of combined afibrinogenemia and AT deficiency. Plasma AT was therefore measured in her brother, confirming similar combined inherited AT and fibrinogen deficiencies.
Thrombin generation was measured using Calibrated automated thrombin generation assay (Stago, les Asnières, France) in the presence of a low concentration of tissue factor 1pM, in accordance with the recent recommendations of the ISTH . Thrombin generation (TG) assay revealed the patent had a higher TG capacity compared to other afibrinogenemia patients . The area under the thrombin generation curve (ETP) representing the enzymatic activity of thrombin was very high (ETP = 2670 nM.min) in the patient, in accordance with her clinical history of thrombosis. AT deficiency was probably the main reason of the increased thrombin generation capacity in our patient. A slight TG decrease was observed following infusion of AT concentrate at 30 U/Kg . In light of these clinical and laboratory findings, we decided to normalize the patient’s AT level prior to any fibrinogen concentrate infusion, in an effort to reduce the risk of thrombosis related to replacement therapy.
At 49 years old, the patient consulted at the ER for severe acute chest pain. Her blood pressure on admission was 87/57 mmHg, her heart rate 87 bpm, and her physical examination unremarkable. Upon admission, laboratory tests revealed increased alanine aminotransferase activity (50 U/L [normal: 3–26 U/L]) and aspartate aminotransferase (121 U/L [normal: 6–18 U/L). Her troponin-T level was dramatically increased (24,693 ng/L [normal: <20 ng/L]). Her C-reactive protein was 62.6 mg/L (normal <5 mg/lL). Routine coagulation tests showed activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) >240 s and prothrombin time (PT) >120 s. The patient’s plasma fibrinogen level was undetectable for both activity and antigen assays. The electrocardiogram (ECG) was normal. Non-ST-elevated myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) was suspected. Echocardiography confirmed the diagnosis and revealed an impaired ejection fraction of 45%, with akinesia in the anteroseptal, anteromedial, and apical segments. The CT coronary angiogram revealed 80% stenosis in the common trunk of the left coronary artery and 50% stenosis in the anterior interventricular branch of the left coronary artery . The right coronary artery and circumflex coronary artery were normal. A diagnosis of NSTEMI was established, and double coronary artery bypass surgery was scheduled.
The surgery was performed, following replacement therapy with 30 U/Kg antithrombin concentrate (Aclotine®, LFB-Biomedicaments, Les Ulis, France) and 1.5 g fibrinogen (Clottafact®, LFB-Biomedicaments), along with UFH at the typical coronary bypass dosage. The surgery was successful, whilst carefully controlling the combined anticoagulant and procoagulant molecules. No excessive bleeding occurred. UFH was maintained for 3 weeks following surgery. Antithrombin and fibrinogen infusions were calculated following laboratory results with the aim of maintaining plasma AT >80% and fibrinogen between 0.5 and 1 g/L. All pro- and anti-coagulant treatments were discontinued 2 days before hospital discharge, on post-op Day 23. Two days after treatment withdrawal, the patient developed a segmental PE treated with LMWH in association with antithrombin and fibrinogen concentrates for 2 months, as described above.
In this patient who had suffered two acute coronary heart attacks, secondary prophylaxis with 75 mg aspirin/day was recommended, combined with antithrombin and fibrinogen infusions administered at least once a week, in order to keep plasma fibrinogen >0.5 g/L. However, the patient refused fibrinogen and AT prophylaxis, for his would require weekly injections. Therefore, antithrombotic prophylaxis with antiplatelet therapy (APT) was not initiated.
Five months later, the patient was admitted to the ER for spontaneous left upper limb monoplegia associated with left-sided facial paralysis, dysarthria, and left homonymous hemianopia. Cerebral computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple hypodense ischemic lesions in the right frontal and parietal lobes associated with a thrombus in the right internal carotid artery. Echocardiogram, Holter ECG, and supra-aortic branch evaluation using Doppler ultrasonography disclosed no additional lesions indicative of stroke. On admission, plasma fibrinogen was <0.1 g/L, and daily aspirin at 75 mg was initiated. No fibrinogen replacement therapy was prescribed, given her several previous VTE episodes following fibrinogen concentrate infusions. The follow-up CT, performed one week after starting aspirin, revealed an acute subdural hematoma (SDH) measuring 27 mm, probably induced by aspirin. As the patient was asymptomatic, aspirin was immediately discontinued, and she was administered antithrombin and fibrinogen concentrates twice a week for 4 months, resulting in significant regression of the SDH to 10 mm in its largest diameter. Eventually, she accepted long-term antithrombin and fibrinogen prophylaxis based on weekly infusions (30 U/Kg and 1.5 g, respectively), rendering anti-thrombotic prophylaxis with aspirin again possible, which was very carefully reintroduced at low doses of 75 mg, arbitrarily, administered every 3 days. Under prophylaxis, her fibrinogen trough levels were ≥0.3 g/L. The patient has not reported any breakthrough bleeds with the current prophylactic regimen. No recent thrombosis has occurred and follow-up cerebral CTs have shown that the SDH is remaining stable.