A 66-year-old Japanese man presented to a general hospital, where mucosal melanoma of his right maxillary gingiva was confirmed on biopsy. The mass was present in his right maxillary gingiva, and a black lesion was present across a wide extent of his palate . At presentation, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a mass of 16×10 mm on his maxillary gingiva . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography revealed abnormal accumulation in the tumor . He was diagnosed with T4aN0M0, stage IVA mucosal melanoma of his right maxillary gingiva. Surgery with a safe margin was possible; however, C-ion RT was selected based on postoperative functional and aesthetic considerations and our patient’s preference . A total dose of 57.6 Gy (relative biological effectiveness; RBE) in 16 fractions was administered. Physical dose calculations were performed using the pencil beam algorithm. The clinical dose distribution was calculated according to the physical dose and the RBE. The dose of C-ion RT was expressed as “Gy (RBE)”: physical C-ion dose (Gy)×RBE. He was positioned in customized cradles (Moldcare, Alcare, Tokyo, Japan) and immobilized using a thermoplastic shell (Shellfitter, Kuraray, Osaka, Japan). A customized mouthpiece was used to fix the teeth of both his jaws and to maintain the position of his lower jaw. Computed tomography (CT) images with a 2-mm thickness were acquired for treatment planning, which used MRI as a reference. A margin of at least 5 mm was added to the gross tumor volume (GTV) to define the clinical target volume (CTV). CTV1 included the whole of each anatomical site (gum, palate, and maxillary sinus), while CTV2 was limited to the GTV and mucosal melanosis. Planning target volume (PTV) 1 and PTV2 had margins of 2 mm added around CTV1 and CTV2, respectively. PTV1 was irradiated initially with 32.4 Gy (RBE)/9 fractions, and thereafter; PTV2 was irradiated to a total dose of 57.6 Gy (RBE)/16 fractions. Organs at risk (OARs; the eye, optic nerve, optic chiasm, inner ear, brain stem, spinal cord, mandible, palate, and tongue) were outlined on the planning CT scan for treatment planning and dose-volume histogram analysis. Treatment planning was performed using a XiO-N system (Elekta AB, Stockholm, Sweden). The composite dose distribution is shown in Fig. .
Acute radiation mucositis at his palate and acute radiation dermatitis were observed, both of which were classified as grade 2 based on the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE), version 4.0 . His mucositis and dermatitis resolved 1 month after C-ion RT treatment. Three-course concomitant chemotherapy (Day 1, 120 mg/m2 dacarbazine, 70 mg/m2 nimustine, and 0.7 mg/m2 vincristine; Day 2 to 5, 120 mg/m2 dacarbazine) with a 4-week interval was administered, with the first course administered at C-ion RT initiation, the second course at C-ion RT completion, and the third course 4 weeks after the second course.
Our patient did not experience any chronic adverse events, and a complete disease response was apparent 35 months after the C-ion RT without any signs of recurrence . There were no other adverse events such as dysgeusia, xerostomia, radio-osteonecrosis, or the loss of a tooth.