A 40-year-old man presented with painful inflammation of the right toenail for 3 years. He had undergone several nail extractions and long-term antibiotic treatment. However, the pincer nail continued to recur after several surgeries. The patient had no relevant family history of genetic disorders and the absence of skin diseases such as nail moss on the right foot. Physical examination revealed a pincer-like deformity of the right great toenail with peri-nail redness and swelling without pus exudation. The rest of the toes did not show pincer deformity. Measurement using a method proposed by Yabe in 2013 to assess the severity of the PN revealed a curvature index of 64.5%. It belonged to type 1 according to the Baran classification . At the same time, the patient was evaluated with a VAS score of 6.
The patient underwent the procedure under combined spinal and epidural anesthesia with tourniquet control. First, the ingrown nail plate was turned up and removed with mosquito forceps. When removing the nail, we need to protect the nail root, which has the nail matrix. Proliferation, keratinization, and forward migration of the nail cells determine the growth of the toenail. We then trimmed the edges of the nail bed and separated the nail bed from the lateral nail fold by cutting through the border of both sides of the embedded segment. We suggest the incision be at least 3-mm-long from the nail root. Too long an incision will affect the nutrient supply to the nail bed, while too short an incision will not adequately correct the ingrown nail. Subsequently, the nail bed was dissected from the phalanx with a scalpel at the edge of the incised nail bed along the nail grooves bilaterally. We made the separation to preserve the nail midline at least 5 mm wide to minimize the disruption of blood circulation to the nail bed. Be careful to maintain the integrity of the nail bed. We turned over the nail bed to expose the sub-bed tissue. After that, the DLAD from Lando, Shenzhen was soaked in saline for 5 min, and the surface silicone layer was removed. The remaining multinull matrix complex composed of depsipeptide-activated collagen and chondroitin sulfate was filled with the subnail bed tissue. There needs to be sufficient filling below the nail bed in both inset nail grooves to bring the nail bed closer to the physiological curvature. It is also vital to ensure that the proper width of the nail groove is retained to allow for nail plate growth. Finally, the nail bed was re-covered back onto the toe bone and checked again to see whether the nail bed was level. The shape of the nail bed determines the shape of the new toenail, and if the nail bed is still ingrown, the pincer nail may recur. Next, the nail bed was resutured with its original corresponding lateral nail crease using 4-0 absorbable sutures to form a new nail groove (avoiding dislodgement of the filled multivessel matrix complex). Finally, we covered the surface with oiled gauze and bandaged the surgical incision. The whole operation process is shown in . After the procedure was completed, antibiotics and anti-inflammatory pain management were given to the patient. The schematic diagram of this procedure is shown in .
The dressing was replaced every 1–2 days postoperatively, and the patient was told to wear loose shoes postoperatively. The follow-up 1 month after surgery showed complete healing of the surgical wound and well growth of the nail with the DLAD . About 3 mm of nail plate growth could be observed at this time. Then, at the 3-month postoperative follow-up, about 15 mm of nail plate growth was seen. The growth rate of the bilateral area of the nail was lower than that of the middle part of the nail, and the nail plate was abnormally thickened . Probably because of the damage to the nail grooves on both sides of the affected toe after repeated nail extractions. Nine months after the operation, we saw that the nail plate growth improved obviously, the curvature index reached 87.5%, and the VAS score reduced to 1 . So far, the nail plate is fully grown and looks good; the patient has not felt pain and is back to work, feeling satisfied with this operation .