A 58-year-old female had a three year-history of multiple stress fractures and muscle weakness. Her medical history included well-controlled type 2 diabetes (HbA1c 43 mmol/mol) for nearly 20 years. Her BMI was 39 kg/m2 and she was on metformin, long-acting insulin and pioglitazone. She was a current smoker with a smoking history of 27 pack years and her dietary calcium intake was considered normal. Skeletal growth had been normal, and she had not suffered from bone fractures or abnormal skeletal pains previously. She did not have a family history of skeletal, metabolic or hormonal disorders.
Three years prior to diagnosis the patient presented with multiple fragility fractures and increasing bone pain. Fractures were found in the vertebrae , right femur, sacrum and lateral condyle of the right tibia, and in the left talus. She complained of progressive muscle weakness and diffuse bone pains in her back and lower extremities.
One year later, dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) demonstrated osteopenic bone mineral density (T-scores of lumbar vertebrae 3-4 and the femoral neck were -0.8 SD, and -2.3 SD, respectively). Basic biochemistry in primary care was unremarkable (data not shown). Pioglitazone treatment, initiated four years before the first fragility fracture, was suspected to underlie the multiple, low-intensity fractures and therefore discontinued. At this point, type 2 diabetes was considered as another predisposing factor.
During the year before the diagnosis, she suffered from a stress fracture of the left femur with significant dislocation , which was treated with total hip arthroplasty, as well as a stress fracture of the right femur that was treated with an intramedullary nail . Within the next months, she also suffered from stress fractures of the right distal femur, tibia and humerus.
A year before correct diagnosis of TIO, teriparatide, calcium carbonate (1000 mg daily) and cholecalciferol (20 µg daily) supplementations were initiated to enhance recovery of bone strength after pioglitazone treatment.
The patient was referred to the University Hospital Endocrine Unit. At this time point, the patient had not been able to walk for two years, was bedridden and had lost 30 kg of weight (from 106 to 78kg), and she needed constant pain medication (oxycodone 50 mg, gabapentin 1800 mg and paracetamol 3 grams daily). Biochemical tests revealed hypophosphatemia, combined with high serum FGF23-concentration (C-terminal, EIA-method, MVZ Labor Dr. Limbach & Kollegen, Heidelberg, Germany), inappropriately normal 24-hour urinary phosphate secretion, and increased serum alkaline phosphatase concentration . Alphacalcidol (0.25 µg twice daily) and phosphate supplementation (Phosphate Sandoz 500 mg twice daily, reduced dose due to diarrhea) were started. Calcium carbonate 1000 mg and cholecalciferol 20 µg daily were continued and teriparatide was discontinued. A bone biopsy from the iliac crest demonstrated osteomalacia. Genetic testing for hypophosphatemia [mutations in the DMP-1, ENPP1, FGF23, PHEX and SLC34A3 genes ] was negative. Computed tomography (CT) of the thorax and abdomen revealed no tumors. An additional, complete physical examination revealed a palpable mass in the right mandible. Ultrasound and CT confirmed a tumor with invasive growth in the right mandible . Cytologic analysis of a fine needle aspiration taken from the tumor demonstrated myoepithelial-like cells.
After the diagnosis was confirmed, the tumor of the right mandible was operated. Histopathological examination of formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded slides demonstrated a 2.6 cm phosphaturic mesenchymal tumor with multinucleated, osteoclast-like cells , with minimum tumor free resection margins of 0.5 mm. The Ki-67 proliferation index in hot spots was 10-15%. Immunohistochemical studies showed positive vimentin staining but negative CD34, EMA, and CKPAN stainings, compatible with a phosphaturic mesenchymal tumor and the diagnosis of TIO . The histologic samples were re-evaluated by an expert pathologist in the National Institutes of Health, USA.
Postoperatively, the patient needed prolonged treatment of 10 days in the intensive care unit. Both intravenous and p.o. phosphate supplementations were warranted to correct for severe hypophosphatemia . After surgery, the concentration of serum ionized calcium remained in the normal range, 1.16-1.25 mmol/l (reference range 1.15-1.30 mmol/l). Administration of calcium carbonate 1000 mg and cholecalciferol 20 µg daily was continued. Due to muscle weakness, the patient was dependent on mechanical ventilation for four days. Thereafter, she needed continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) through a tracheostomy. During that time, to maintain sufficient blood pressure levels, norepinephrine infusion had to be maintained for one week after surgery. She was on enteral nutrition during the postoperative days 1-11 (1500 kcal daily from third postoperative day). On the third postoperative day, the patient presented with respiratory alkalosis for six hours after fiberoptic bronchoscopy, with a pH of 7.52-7.60 and low/normal pCO2 (3.6-4.9 kPa), and elevated pO2 (13.2-59.8 kPa), base excess (BE) (2.5-5.7 mmol/l) and bicarbonate (HCO3) concentrations (27-30 mmol/l) (reference ranges 7.35-7.45, 4.5-6.0 kPa, 9.3-12.3 kPa, -2.5-2.5 mmol/l and 22-24 mmol/l, respectively). From the fourth postoperative day onwards, arterial pH remained within normal range. The patient was decanylated one week postoperatively . She received subcutaneous short-acting insulin (4-12 units daily) for hyperglycaemia.
Phosphate supplementations were administered for eight weeks. The patient received oxandrolone for one week because of extreme weakness and lack of spontaneous respiratory activity in order to improve muscle function and the recovery of lean body mass . Skeletal and limb pains relieved soon, and muscle weakness alleviated within the succeeding months. The patient was able to take a few steps after four months of rehabilitation.
After two years of rehabilitation, the patient was able to walk 100 meters with a walker and shorter distances without any help. She has not suffered from any further fractures or bone pains. After surgery, serum phosphate concentration has remained normal. Serum FGF23 concentrations decreased immediately after the operation and have remained slightly increased . Due to the vertebral fractures, DXA of the spine was unreliable.