In December 2000, a 49 year-old woman underwent left mastectomy for a stage IIA invasive ductal breast carcinoma with low proliferative activity (Ki 67 < 5%), negative hormone receptors and HER2 overexpressed (score 3+ at immunochemistry). In her medical history there were no cardiovascular comorbidities and she had no family history of cardiovascular disease.
From February to July 2001 she received an adjuvant chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide 600 mg/sqm, methotrexate 40 mg/sqm and 5-fluorouracyl 600 mg/sqm days 1,8. Subsequent follow-up was negative until September 2005 when a local left axillary relapse was resected. Histological and biological features of the relapse did not change. Surgical resection was followed, from January to February 2006, by radiation therapy on the left chest wall (5000 cGy with fractioned dose of 200 cGy/day). In November 2010, a PET-CT scan was performed to test for progressive increase in serum biomarkers. It showed multiple secondary localizations: lymph-nodal metastases (left axillary, mediastinic, iliac and lombo-aortic), liver metastases (third segment), and bone lesions (left seventh rib and left femur acetabulum). Liver biopsy confirmed hormone receptors negativity and HER2 overexpression (score 3+). The patient was absolutely asymptomatic (ECOG 0). A screening echocardiogram (January 2011) found no pathological findings and a normal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF 64%). At that point, first line chemotherapy with weekly paclitaxel (80 mg/sqm) associated with weekly trastuzumab (loading dose of 4 mg/kg followed by maintenance dose of 2 mg/Kg) was initiated and paclitaxel was withdrawn at the second administration because of hypersensitivity reaction and replaced with docetaxel (100 mg/sqm every three weeks). A supportive therapy with bisphophonates (zoledronic acid 4 mg i.v. every 28 days) was also administered for bone metastases. In March 2011, after three months of treatment (fourteen administrations of weekly trastuzumab), the patient referred asthenia, tachycardia, increasing dyspnea for mild efforts and palpitations. Within few days clinical conditions rapidly worsened and the patient was admitted to the emergency room for cardiogenic shock (heart rate 150 beats per minute, blood pressure 70/50 mmHg, severe oliguria, pulmonary congestion, NYHA 4, AHA D). An angio-CT scan excluded a pulmonary thromboembolism and the patient was admitted to a cardiac intensive care unit where an echocardiogram revealed a severe global biventricular dilatation and dysfunction (LVEF about 15%). Despite a maximal supportive therapy with inotropic agents and diuretics, shock persisted. Therefore an intraortic balloon pump was implanted with a very slow but progressive hemodynamic improvement and a resumption of diuresis. In absence of previous clinical experiences or data from the literature describing of similar serious clinical presentation using trastuzumab alone (without current or previous history of anthracyclines exposure), a myocardium biopsy was performed finding inflammatory areas of uncertain etiology but not compatible with a myocarditis. After approximately two months of hospitalization the patient was progressively weaned by inotropic agents and infusional diuretic therapy, and a heart failure pharmacological treatment was orally introduced (bisoprolol 2,5 mg, enalapril 2,5 mg, ivabradine 15 mg, canreonate 50 mg, furosemide 100 mg). After four months and with a slow pharmacological up-titration, we observed a progressive clinical improvement and an increase and stabilization of biventricular function (LVEF 45% on September 2011). In May 2012, a PET-CT scan showed lymph-nodal, liver and skeletal disease progression, at which point a second line chemotherapy with vinorelbine (25 mg/sqm, days 1,8) was initiated. In July 2012, after two cycles of chemotherapy, a further tumor assessment documented visceral disease progression. Therefore, with awareness of the high risk due to recent severe cardiogenic shock and after discussion with the patient and her family, we decided to resume trastuzumab therapy along with cardiac therapy. Weekly trastuzumab (2 mg/kg) was resumed with a clinical and echocardiographic cardiac monitoring. Soon thereafter, radiological evaluations (PET-CT scan and total body CT scan) showed a partial response of visceral disease. Trastuzumab and vinorelbine therapy was continued until June 2013 when, considering the positive response and the appearance of grade 2 neuropathy, vinorelbine was interrupted and trastuzumab was continued every 21 days (6 mg/Kg) until April 2014 with no further signs or symptoms of heart failure. External beam radiotherapy on left ileo-pubic branch (March 2012, 30 Gy) and on the second cervical vertebra (January 2013, 2000 cGy for 5 fractions) were performed for palliative purpose. Zoledronic acid every 28 days was continued during the whole period. Serial echocardiograms performed during trastuzumab treatment did not reveal LVEF drop maintaining in the range of 50–55%.
In January 2014 the patient presented diplopia, left eye squint, postural instability and leg weakness. A CT scan and MRI (February 2014) revealed the presence of four cerebral and cerebellar lesions (right cerebellar tonsil, left frontal and parietal lobe, quadrigeminal plate). The patient underwent stereotactic gamma-knife radiosurgery on February 2014 followed by whole brain irradiation for suspected leptomeningeal involvement (3000 cGy for 12 fractions). In April 2014 trastuzumab was interrupted and a new line of chemotherapy with capecitabine 3000 mg/day (1–14 every 21 days) associated with tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) lapatinib 250 mg 4 tb/day was started. Subsequent radiological assessment (August 2015) documented a complete remission of lymph-nodal and liver neoplastic disease and radiologic stability of bone metastases.
In November 2014 the patient was hospitalized for acute renal failure secondary to dehydration, fainting and recurrent vomiting. After discharge, she complained of severe asthenia, anorexia and weight loss. Consequently, chemotherapy with capecitabine was suspended and lapatinib was continued as monotherapy for about a year during which she never reported cough, dyspnea, chest pain and other symptoms suggestive of heart failure (NYHA II, AHA C). In November 2015, echocardiographic examination showed no relevant changes compared to the previous ones. We found an interesting pattern of LVEF trend along with trastuzumab treatment – discontinuation – and resumption .
Over the following three months, the patient experienced a rapid deterioration of general clinical conditions, with progressive and definitive bedrest and altered conscience, suggesting a meningeal disease progression. In January 2016, the last ultrasound examination showed a progressive liver disease. The patient died on February 24, 2016 from neoplastic disease progression.