A 18-year-old male presented to orthopedics clinic with complaint of lower back pain without any lower limb pain from past 6 months which was spontaneous in onset after trivial fall, increased with activity, and relieved by rest and analgesics, no diurnal and postural variation was observed. On examination, the patient was having muscular spasm of paravertebral muscle with reduced range of motion at lumbar spine noted. We did not observe any kind of neurological involvement in the patient. Chances of thecal sac compression are rare in these patients unless any concomitant disc disease. He had no visual deformity in spine, and no obvious swelling.
We evaluated the patient further with radiological imaging and blood investigations. On digital X-ray of lumbosacral spine which showed irregularity in superior end plate of L3 vertebrae with decreased lordosis in lumbar region. MRI of lumbosacral spine showed anterior wedging in L3 vertebral body, erosion of superior end plate of L3 vertebra, narrow disk space of L3–L4, and schomrl nodes in L3 vertebrae .
Blood parameters CBC, ESR, and CRP were within normal limits which exclude any infective or inflammatory etiology. On basis of all above findings, it was suggestive of atypical Scheuermann disease (type IIa) which involves only one vertebra. This disease is divided into two types:
Typical Scheuermann disease (type I): It involves three or more than three thoracic vertebrae which causes kyphotic deformity in dorsal spine. Adolescents have more chances of this type Atypical Scheuermann disease (type Iia): It involves one or two vertebrae of dorsolumbar or lumbar segment, disk space narrowing, and anterior schmorl nodes. It is seen less commonly Acute traumatic intraosseous disk herniation (type Iib): It consists history of acute vertical compression injury resulting in severe back pain and evidence of end plate fracture (anterior schmorl nodes).
The patient was explained about the disease and treated conservatively with anti-inflammatory medication and physical therapy. Indications for surgery include progression of deformity, cosmesis, severe pain and rarely, cardiopulmonary or neurological compromise.