A 27-year-old male patient, underwent renal transplantation when he was 15-year old due to renal hypoplasia, but, was ultimately introduced hemodialysis. Following AVF construction, he experienced the steal syndrome, resulting in amputation of his left third digit and multiple AVF reconstruction. His left forearm AVF was malfunction due to severe PAD: quantity of blood flow was 70–110 ml/min because of complete obliteration of the proximal radial artery. Angiography demonstrated that obstruction of the proximal radial artery and regurgitation from the palmar arch to the AVF. This AVF condition barely enabled to perform daily hemodialysis with low efficiency with Kt/V < 1.0 (Daugirdas equation) . Exertional symptoms, tingling, and frigid digits were noted mainly due to decreased blood flow to the hand. The left second digits SPP was 17 mmHg. In order to restore digital circulation and AVF, distal dual bypass was planned under general anesthesia. First, in order to secure arterial inflow, brachial arterial stricture was excised and anastomosed end-to-end*. Following arterioplasty, however, the AVF flow measured by the doppler US, was still too weak to maintain hemodialysis. Thus, subsequently, the patient was given 5 000 units of intravenous heparin totally and monitored by ACT testing: 150–200. Regarding proximal anastomosis of the first distal bypass, the left brachial artery (distal to the * anastomosis) and reversed GSV graft were anastomosed with interrupted 7-0 prolene suture. In terms of the distal side, the posterior wall was sutured by parachute anastomosis technique, and the anterior wall anastomosis with interrupted 8-0 prolene was performed. Next, because it is true that AVF in the distal forearm is generally recommended, to repair forearm AVF, the second distal bypass was performed. The proximal portion was created at the proximal radial artery, downstream from the first distal bypass in order to prevent secondary steal syndrome. The left radial artery and reversed GSV graft were anastomosed with interrupted 7-0 prolene suture. Regarding the distal end side, the GSV graft and cephalic vein were sutured by the parachute anastomosis technique with 7-0 prolene. Finally, regurgitation from the palmar arch was ligated. The first distal bypass graft blood flow was 36 ml/min, measured by VeriQ (Medistim, Oslo, Norway). Angiography demonstrated satisfied simultaneous palmar arch and AVF circulation . The left second digits SPP improved to 90 mmHg following reflow. Kt/V improved to1.53 (Daugirdas equation) with well-maintained AVF. The both graft patency was confirmed without any endovascular intervention at 12-month following distal bypass.