A 47-year-old man (body weight 62.1 kg and height 166.8 cm) was reported in our hospital with a past medical history of tongue cancer that was operable. The preoperative spirometry test, electrocardiography, and transthoracic echocardiogram were normal. He is a non-smoker with no history of cerebrovascular disease. In his thirties, he had undergone resection of the mandibular area with plate reconstruction for treatment of tongue cancer; however, the site became infected and the plate was removed 8 months before presentation. The patient returned for reoperation involving a free abdominal muscle flap with vascular anastomosis and partial mandibular resection with tracheostomy. After surgery, the patient was in the ICU for deep sedation and ventilator management for 48 h, until the vascular anastomosis stabilized. Initially, the iASV ventilator mode was selected to change only the percentage minute volume (%MV) automatically. On the postoperative day 3, the patient’s oxygenation worsened, and purulent sputum increased; fiberoptic suctioning of sputum was performed once along with sputum culturing. Although no significant organism was detected with sputum Gram staining, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Pseudomonas otitidis were detected in the sputum culture test. We therefore arrived at a diagnosis of VAP and changed the patient’s antibiotic from ampicillin/sulbactam 1.5 g per 6 h to meropenem 0.5 g per 8 h. At the time of entering the ICU, his PaO2/FiO2 ratio was 462, which indicated a good oxygenation capacity; this decreased to 171.5 at the time of VAP diagnosis. At the same time, the other patient entered the ICU with a severe respiratory emergency. We continued the iASV mode as we judged that the respiratory condition could be improved. PEEP and FiO2 were selected as additional automatic settings in iASV, %MV was automatically set, and the delta P (ΔP) approximating the driving pressure did not exceed 10 cm H2O. .
Arterial blood gas (PaO2, PaCO2, and pH) was measured every 6 h to confirm that his respiratory condition was within the expected range.
Once the patient’s oxygenation capacity started improving, the INTELLiVENT®-ASV started to show a decline in FiO2, first until it reached 0.3, and then reduced PEEP from 14 to 5 cm H2O based on the lung protective ventilation strategy. Two days after changing the antibiotics to treat VAP, his WBC, CRP, and the sputum secretion from the lungs decreased, indicating resolution of VAP. Therefore, mechanical ventilation was successfully withdrawn. During this time, the ΔP obtained by subtracting PEEP from the inspiratory plateau pressure was kept below 10 cm H2O .
We used dexmedetomidine (0.2γ to 0.5γ) and propofol (1 mg/kg/h to 3 mg/kg/h) for sedation during his admission in ICU. We continued the same sedation dosage after VAP diagnosis, and after stopping ventilator usage, the propofol administration was also stopped. Dexmedetomidine was continued after extubation at night for the purpose of sleeping.
Two days after stopping ventilator usage, the patient’s respiratory condition was stable and he was transferred to the general ward.