A 25-year-old female health-care worker from central India, known SCD on folic acid and hydroxyurea, was admitted to our hospital 1 year back with complaints of fever and pain in the abdomen. She was diagnosed as a case of dengue, for which she was admitted under a physician. During the hospital course, her blood parameters revealed thrombocytopenia and blood culture showed growth of Klebsiella (all sickle cell patients are susceptible to capsulated organisms such as pneumococcus, Klebsiella, hemophilus due to functional asplenia, the patient did not receive any steroids during her hospitalization for dengue). She was then managed with a transfusion of platelets and blood products and was started on IV antibiotics injection Ceftriaxone + Tazobactam 8 hourly for 3 days, following which she showed improvement and was shifted to, oral doses of Cefixime 200 mg + Dicloxacillin 500 mg that were given for a week and was discharged.
Following an asymptomatic period of 2 weeks, the patient presented with pain over the bilateral forearm and legs. On examination, there was local warmth and bony tenderness at the right forearm, no local discharging sinus, and no clinical evidence of a subcutaneous collection.
On evaluation, the plain radiological features were suggestive of periosteal changes and lytic lesions-osteomyelitis, although, the uniqueness of presentation of her symptoms was “Multifocal Bilaterally symmetrical involvement.” Laboratory evaluations were remarkable for leukocytosis with a white blood cell count of 18.4 × 103 (6.0–17.5) and C-reactive protein of 35 mg/dL.
Differential diagnosis of the presenting condition was:
Chronic multifocal recurrent osteomyelitis (CMRO) Multifocal pyogenic osteomyelitis Vaso-occlusive crisis leading to multiple bone infarcts.
Further to confirm our diagnosis, the incisional bone biopsy by corticotomy and debridement of the lesion from the most symptomatic right forearm region (right ulna) was performed.
The culture of biopsy from right ulna showed the growth of Klebsiella sp. and was only sensitive to Co-trimoxazole.
The patient was started on co-trimoxazole, and she tolerated well and had a significant clinical improvement in the form of subsidence of pain, normalization of the blood counts along with the acute phase reactants. The antibiotic treatment was continued for 6 weeks, the patient was observed closely post-hospitalization, continued to recover well, and completed her antibiotic course without any issues. She has not had any more recurrences of osteomyelitis or other serious infections till 1-year follow-up ( and ).