A 31-year-old male patient attended the outpatient clinic of our hospital’s reproductive medicine center with a complaint of “three years without pregnancy despite not using contraception”.
Three years without pregnancy.
In 2014, the patient’s wife had undergone an induced abortion, and the patient had undergone a high ligation of his left varicocele in 2018; however, sperm quality did not appear to have improved upon re-examination after the surgery.
The patient has no history of hypertension or diabetes. Her parents were non-consanguineous and had no family history of hereditary diseases.
In terms of appearance, the patient’s height was 165 cm, weight was 65 kg, and body mass index was 23.88 Kg/m2. Specialist examination showed that his pubic hair was distributed like an inverted triangle, his penis measured approximately 6 cm long when flaccid, the urethral opening showed no visible abnormalities, bilateral testicular volume was approximately 12 mL with a tough texture, the bilateral vas deferens and epididymis showed no observable abnormalities upon palpation, and no varicocele was found.
Through two routine semen analyses and rapid morphology staining (Diff-Quik method), the patient was diagnosed with secondary infertility and ASS. Given the patient’s informed consent, 5 mL of his peripheral blood was collected. Our study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Shenzhen Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital and was conducted with the patient’s informed consent.
After three to five days of abstinence, the patient masturbated to enable sperm extraction, which was liquified in a water bath at 37℃. Analyses were conducted twice according to the WHO laboratory manual (Fifth Edition). Eosin staining was conducted to detect sperm viability and sperm morphology was determined after staining the sperm smear using a rapid staining solution (Diff-Quik method), and 200 sperms were counted. Morphological defects were divided into four categories: normal, abnormal head-neck configuration, detached heads, and headless, and the percentage of each category was calculated.
Peripheral blood was collected and used for karyotype analysis through cell culture and Y chromosome microdeletion testing through PCR-capillary electrophoresis.
For exome sequencing, we fragmented 1-3 μg of genomic DNA, extracted from each sample, to an average size of 180 bp with a Bioruptorsonicator (Diagenode). Paired-end sequencing libraries then were prepared using a DNA sampleprep reagent set 1 (NEBNext). Library preparation included end repair, adapter ligation and PCRenrichment, and was carried out as recommendedby Illumina protocols.
The amplified DNA was captured use GenCap Deafness capture kit (MyGenostics GenCap Enrichment technologies). The DNA probes were designed to tile along the exon regions and the known non-exon pathogenic region of human genes. The capture experiment was conducted according to manufacturer’s protocol. The PCR product was purified using SPRI beads (Beckman Coulter) according to manufacturer’s protocol. The enrichment libraries were sequenced on Illumina HiSeq X ten sequencer for paired read 150 bp.
After sequencing, the rawdata were saved as a FASTQ format, then followed the bioinformatics analysis,the data would be transformed to VCF format, variants were further annotated by ANNOVA Rand associated with multiple databases, such as,1000 genome, ESP6500, dbSNP , EXAC, Inhouse (MyGenostics), HGMD, and predicted by SIFT, PolyPhen-2, MutationTaster, GERP++.
five steps using to select the potential pathogenic mutations in downstream analysis: (1) Mutation reads should be more than 5, mutation ration should be no less than 30%; (2) Removing the mutation, the frequency of which showed more than 5% in 1000 g, ESP6500 and Inhouse database; (3) If the mutations existed in InNormal database (MyGenostics), then dropped; (4) Removing the synonymous; and (5) After (1),(2),(3), if the mutations were synonymous and they were reported in HGMD, left them. When finished above jobs, the mutations which were left should be the pathogenic mutations.
When performed under conditions of low sperm activity, neither method revealed morphologically normal sperm. High percentages of sperm with abnormal head-neck connections, detached heads, and headless sperm were observed, indicating complete teratozoospermia with oligoasthenozoospermia . Eosin staining showed that there were no normal sperms in the semen; instead, some were intact (with head and tail at an angle), most had headless, and very few had sperm heads without tails .
Peripheral blood karyotype analysis (G banding): 46, XY; Y chromosome microdeletion: no deletion observed.
We analyzed exons and adjacent splicing regions of genes associated with male infertility, with a focus on known pathogenic genes related to severe oligozoospermia and the patient’s clinical background. We found two heterozygous variants of the PMFBP1 gene : PMFBP1c.414+1G>T (p.?) and PMFBP1c.393del (p.C132Afs*3). The heterozygous splicing variant c.414+1G>T (p.?) of gene PMFBP1 was in intron 4 (the PMFBP1 gene contains 20 introns) and was likely to interfere with the mRNA splicing signal. This was a classical splicing variant, which may lead to loss of amino acids but might not destroy the reading frame. The heterozygous frameshift variant c.393del (p.C132Afs*3) of the PMFBP1 gene caused the replacement of cysteine by alanine at position 132, followed by a frameshift and a premature stop codon, resulting in the early termination of protein coding. The detected frameshift mutation may lead to > 10% amino acid loss, resulting in the occurrence of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, which may be a non-functional mutation. According to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics Guidelines, these variants are probable pathogenic variants .