A 31-year-old Chinese woman was hospitalized because of premature contractions at 27 + 6 wk of gestation.
The patient had conceived spontaneously, her blood pressure during pregnancy was normal but her serum glucose was found high at 24 wk of gestation. She had been controlling her blood sugar by injecting insulin subcutaneously, along with diet and exercise. She came to our hospital because of the frequent contraction at 27 + 6 wk of gestation.
The patient (gravida 4, para 2) had no history of coronary heart disease, hypertension, hepatitis or tuberculosis, or food and drug allergies.
The patient had no history of drug abuse, smoking, or drinking. There was no family history of genetic disease or cancer.
Body temperature 36.7 °C, pulse rate 86 bpm, blood pressure 121/78 mmHg, respiratory rate 18 per minute, indoor oxygen saturation 99%. Fetal heart rate was 147 bpm.
Laboratory examinations revealed a white blood cell count of 6.34 × 109/1 (70.1% neutrophils), and an elevated C-reactive protein level of 29.3 mg/L. Liver and kidney function, electrolytes, creatinine, and cholestatic liver enzymes were all within normal limits. Extensive serological tests such as Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, rubella, and Coxsackie proved to be negative. Tests for hepatitis B, chlamydial antigens and human immunodeficiency virus were negative, as well as the bacterial culture of skin, blood, urine, and genital lesions.
Ultrasound: The heart, liver, and kidneys showed no obvious abnormalities.
Fetal ultrasound: Ultrasound examination at 30 wk of gestation showed a single live fetus of 29 wk and the amniotic fluid was normal.
Continuous ritodrine (for 5 wk until her skin issues appeared) and indomethacin rectally (6 times) were used to suppress premature labor whereas dexamethasone (twice, 2 d every time) was given to reduce the severity of respiratory distress syndrome and offspring mortality. The patient began to complain of itching and abdominal rash at 32 + 3 wk of gestation, which spread fast to her back and all extremities . After 3 d, a fine maculopapular rash resembling erythema multiforme cover the whole body but over the face, neck, and chest. Her skin condition was diagnosed as allergic dermatitis; therefore, calamine lotion and mometasone furoate cream were topically applied when she was 32 + 6 wk pregnant. She started taking prednisone (20 mg/d) and was advised to terminate the pregnancy if contractions could not be suppressed when she was 33 + 1 wk pregnant. At 33 + 3 wk of pregnancy, erythema and bullous rashes had spread throughout the body and was particularly prominent on the upper limbs, the dorsum of the hands, back, and breech. As the lesions became confluent, hydrocortisone (200 mg/d i.v.) was used. Since starting with the rash, indomethacin and dexamethasone had been no longer used. Due to increased uterine contraction and the patient's refusal to terminate the pregnancy, intravenous ritodrine to prevent preterm delivery was not stopped and the dose of ritodrine had been increased despite the skin rash. At 34 wk of pregnancy, she had been on treatment for 10 d but her condition was progressing; her skin rash on the upper extremities turned dark and gray with small blisters, and the skin of the patient’s elbows became broken, blisters enlarged, and the whole body rashes were accompanied by blisters ; several white spots were seen on the tip of the tongue, and there was obvious pain when eating. After a multidisciplinary team discussion, involving a dermatologist, intensivist, pharmacist, obstetrician, nutritionist, and pediatrician, we considered these phenomena likely to be a severe drug eruption. Intravenous methylprednisolone (60 mg) and immunoglobulin were administered immediately. After a comprehensive analysis of the history of medication, clinical symptoms, and auxiliary inspection, we suspected TEN induced by the ritodrine (Symptoms and treatment of the patient during different periods is listed in Table ).