In 2010, a 57-year-old Caucasian male with a history of hypertension and familial hypercholesterinaemia presented to our outpatient clinic with newly developed tearing left-sided chest pain radiating to the back unrelated to exercise. He was cycling regularly without compromise. His medication included Ramipril, Ezetimibe, and Rosuvastatin. Family history: the patient’s mother suffered from an unspecified heart condition since age 40, the father died of a stroke at an older age. His daughter and two granddaughters have no known cardiac condition. The physical examination was unremarkable, the blood pressure 130/80 mmHg. The resting electrocardiogram (ECG) showed slight T-wave inversions in V5 (, left). Troponin I was at 0.1 ng/mL (reference <0.032 ng/mL). A bicycle exercise ECG was terminated early due to ascending ST-segment-depressions and marked hypertension (237/100 mmHg). Transthoracic echocardiography showed a normal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF >60%). Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) with dobutamine stress showed no signs of ischaemia with an LVEF of 67%. The apical wall thickness was 8 mm with a ratio of 1.1 (, top row). In 2013, the patient was referred again for anterolateral T-wave inversions (, middle), at this point symptom free. The blood pressure was 140/80 mmHg. Echocardiography suggested slight concentric hypertrophy. A second dobutamine stress-CMR showed no signs of ischaemia. The apical wall thickness had grown to 11 mm, meeting the criteria for relative but not absolute apical hypertrophy (, middle row). Subsequent exercise ECGs in 2016 and early 2018 showed the known ST-depressions and exercise-induced hypertension. At the end of 2018, the patient presented again with atypical chest pain and exertional dyspnoea New York Heart Association II (fast cycling, 3–4 flights of stairs). Blood pressure was 166/101 mmHg. The resting ECG showed global T-wave inversions (, right). High-sensitive Troponin I was slightly elevated at 4.5 ng/mL (reference <1.9 ng/mL) without a relevant kinetic. Echocardiography showed diastolic dysfunction (E/A 1.5, E/E′ medial 22.0, lateral 15.1, LAVi 35 mL/m2) and marked apical hypertrophy (16 mm, ratio 1.8, ). Coronary artery disease was excluded by coronary angiography. The left ventricular end-diastolic pressure was elevated at 22 mmHg. A third CMR in early 2019 confirmed the apical hypertrophy (, bottom row). Late enhancement imaging and parametric CMR showed diffuse fibrosis of the apical septum in 2019. Regional and global longitudinal and circumferential endocardial feature-tracking strain values showed progressive impairment of the longitudinal strain in the apical segments with pathological values at the last exam compared to published reference values., A diagnosis of apical HCM was made. Holter monitoring showed no cardiac arrhythmias, 24 h ambulatory blood pressure monitoring showed arterial hypertension (mean 146/90 mmHg, dipper). Verapamil and Chlortalidon were prescribed. Cardiac consultation for the patient’s daughter and granddaughters was recommended.