Patient, 29 years old, housewife, residing in Bamako, admitted to the department on 20 March 2023 for altered consciousness and fever. Her symptomatology would be of progressive onset, evolving for about fourteen days, marked by fever, headaches and vomiting, and then by a functional impairment of the right limbs. She had been treated for severe malaria confirmed by injection of artesunate in a private health facility for 6 days. She had given birth around 14 February 2023 after following prenatal consultations correctly. Her child was healthy. She had no known medical or surgical history, or use of immunosuppressive drugs. Physical examination revealed a fever of 38.8°C, a SOFA score of 6 (3 for the Glasgow score of 9/15 and 3 for a daily diuresis of 490 ml), a stiff neck, a pyramidal syndrome (hemiplegia and right-sided areflexia, left hemiplegia with a motor strength of 4/5 in the upper limb and 3/5 in the lower limb), and vaginal fingers stained with profuse discharge. The cranio-cerebral CT scan revealed several hypodensities enhanced by the contrast agent. One of these foci occupied almost the entire left hemisphere, with a mass effect on the homonymous ventricle and a deviation of the brain stem to the right, the other focus was right ventricular. The examination of the CSF showed a cloudy liquid, a mixed leukocytopaenia of 1080/mm3, hypoglycaemia of 0.5 g/l and hyperproteinaemia of 1.2 g/l. The CSF and vaginal swabs were positive for E. coli strains resistant to penicillin (amoxicillin, amoxicillin clavulanate), carboxypenicillin (ticarcillin), aminoglycoside (gentamycin), cephalosporins (cefotaxime, cefixime, cefotaxime, cefepime), quinolones (ciprofloxacin, norfloxacin), tetracycline, phenicols (chloramphenicol) and cotrimoxazole. They were sensitive to meropenem, amikacin, ceftazidine, colistine and cefepime. Creatinine clearance (CKD-EPI formula) was 61.35 ml/min with creatinemia of 110 µmol/l. The blood count showed moderate neutropenia of 1400/ml and moderate anaemia (haemoglobin of 9.1 g/dl), microcytic (VGM of 79 fl), hypochromic (CCMH of 30 g/dl). Two HIV serologies were negative. The diagnosis of genital sepsis with suppurative meningitis and acute renal failure was retained.

The patient was then given meropenem 1 g intravenously every eight hours for 21 days. She also received a hydro-electro-caloric intake of 3 litres per day, genital washing with chlorhexidine twice daily for five days, and physiotherapy from the 10th day of meropenem treatment. The patient's condition was favourable, with apyrexia and consciousness recovering on the 3rd and 6th day of meropenem treatment, respectively; the motor strength of the limbs was assessed as 2/5 on the right and 5/5 on the left upper limb, and 4/5 on the left lower limb on the 12th day of physiotherapy; renal function was good on the 10th day of meropenem treatment. Exeat was granted on 14 April 2023, with physiotherapy sessions in outpatient care and an appointment ten days later. At this appointment, the motor strength of the limbs was assessed as 5/5 on the left and 3/5 on the right.
