A 56-year-old Caucasian male presented with a diagnosis of recurrent heart failure. Previously, he was given a diagnosis of palindromic rheumatism based on a four-year history of lower extremity migratory joint pain and swelling that failed to respond to NSAIDs and hydroxychloroquine. During this time, he also developed unintentional weight loss, fatigue and cognitive impairment. Past medical history was significant for a renal cell carcinoma, treated with a left nephrectomy 4 years prior to presentation. The patient had a 45-pack year smoking history. He had not travelled abroad except for New Zealand and Hawaii 25 years ago.

The patient had been previously evaluated over 4 years by numerous services including rheumatology, hematology, cardiology and dermatology with an extensive work-up, including blood cultures that were negative on repeat occasions. Eleven months prior to current presentation, the patient developed recurrent acute congestive heart failure exacerbation, requiring multiple admissions with treatment involving diuretics and chest tubes, providing limited short-term symptomatic relief.

On this presentation, the patient had symptoms consistent with an exacerbation of congestive heart failure. The patient stated he had lost approximately 40 pounds over 6 months. He denied any GI symptoms, fevers, chills or night sweats. Physical examination revealed the patient as pale, afebrile and hemodynamically stable. He was noted to be cachectic with a weight of fifty-one kilograms (BMI: 17.8). Pitting edema of both lower extremities to the proximal shin with hyperpigmentation was noted. As observed on the initial CT scan, there was diffuse lymphadenopathy and right epitrochlear lymphadenopathy in particular was noted. Jugular venous distension was noted to 8 cm above the sternal angle with a positive Kussmaul’s sign on inspiration. The patient had a 3/6 systolic ejection murder without a pericardial knock. There was no oculomasticatory myorhythmia or supranuculear vertical gaze palsy observed.

Transthoracic echocardiogram imaging was reviewed from 2014 to the 2016. In 2014, subtle tethering of the mitral valve was noted with thickening and cord calcification. The posterior leaflet had reduced excursion and the mitral valve apparatus was apically displaced. There was the observation of subtle diastolic doming over the anterior mitral leaflet. Progressive echocardiogram findings in 2016 showed the anterior mitral valve to be thickened with reduced excursion, the posterior leaflet to be fixed and cords with shortening. Overall, this was in keeping with pseudoprolapse. Over the aortic valve, there was systolic doming of the right coronary cusp and calcification from the commissural aspect of the aortic valve with sparing of the base. Notably, there was the presence septal shuttering in early diastole with early inspiratory septal bounce/shift, indicative of abnormal heart and lung interaction. Overall, this was suggestive of early constrictive physiology.

A repeat transthoracic echocardiogram on admission showed numerous interval changes including; a reduction in left ventricle systolic function (ejection fraction of 48%), severe mitral regurgitation, moderate tricuspid regurgitation, moderate aortic regurgitation and worsening pulmonary hypertension (RSVP 78 mmHg). Calcific aortic valve changes were noted that were felt to be post-inflammatory as opposed to degenerative changes. The mitral valve had an unusual appearance suggestive of prior valvulitis, in particular rheumatic in nature. The pericardium was thickened with features of exaggerated heart and lung interactions, consistent with constrictive physiology. Based on these findings, pericardial stripping and valvular surgery were proposed.

Perioperative findings consisted of thick pericardium and densely adherent to the surrounding anatomy. The mitral valve was grossly abnormal with fibrosis, in keeping with a rheumatic type process and was subsequently replaced with a bioprosthetic valve. The tricuspid valve had thickened leaflets with slightly thickened papillary muscle and was repaired with a ring annuloplasty. The thickened aortic valve was addressed with primary repair.

The above constellation of symptoms, in the context with prior work-up as unremarkable, lent to a strong clinical suspicion of an atypical presentation of Whipple’s disease. Two days post-op, duodenal biopsies were obtained, and surprisingly were not consistent with Whipple’s disease. On the request of the clinician, the cardiac valves and pericardium pathology specimens were examined for PAS staining and PCR. The cardiac specimens demonstrated numerous foamy macrophages filled with PAS positive material compatible with Whipple’s disease. Tropheryma whipplei was identified by direct 16S rDNA PCR on the mitral valve with > 99% sequence match. The pathological changes were consistent with active endocarditis, myocarditis, and pericarditis, caused by T. whipplei. The patient started treatment with IV Penicillin G for 14 days and subsequently maintained regimen of oral sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim for long-term treatment. Six months following diagnosis, the patient has had no complications and is clinically improving.