A 34-year-old Korean male with no underlying diseases was rescued from a fire in his home. When the firefighters arrived, he was lying in his bed unconscious and pulseless. Ventricular fibrillation was observed on an automated external defibrillator monitor, and 2 minutes of chest compression with 150 J shock was applied. Recovery of spontaneous circulation ensued just after defibrillation, and the patient was transferred to the emergency department (ED). Upon arrival, erythema with vesicles was found in his face, neck, chest wall, both axillary areas, and the back. In addition, he had a low estimated Glasgow Coma Scale score (3 points) and weak respiration, so intubation and mechanical ventilation support were applied. The initial blood pressure was 88/46 mmHg. Laboratory tests showed leukocytosis, elevated hepatic enzymes (aspartate transaminase 310 U/L, alanine transaminase 184 U/L) and relatively normal levels of C-reactive protein (0.07 mg/dL) and procalcitonin (0.07 ng/dL). On the other hand, the level of serum interleukin 6 (IL-6) was markedly increased to 1328 pg/mL. The initial arterial blood gas (ABG) showed hypoxemia with a low partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2 37 mmHg) as well as metabolic acidosis with a serum lactate level of 12.6 mmol/L. The percentage of serum COHb was 59%, indicating severe CO poisoning. An initial chest X-ray showed diffuse bilateral infiltration, and chest computed tomography (CT) revealed diffuse ground-glass attenuation with an anterior–posterior density gradient by dense consolidation in dependent areas, which suggests an early state of ARDS . Therapeutic hypothermia was applied for prevention of hypoxic brain damage. Shock requiring infusion of norepinephrine exceeding the rate of 0.5 μg/kg/minute despite adequate fluid resuscitation was observed after sedation along with therapeutic hypothermia. Even with 100% of fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) and maximal positive end expiratory pressure, hypoxemia (PaO2 61 mmHg) as well as hypercapnia (partial pressure of carbon dioxide 58 mmHg) progressed. Prone position ventilation and application of inhaled nitric oxide were considered, but were not implemented due to concern for rapid progression of shock. Therefore, we decided to conduct veno-veno extracorporeal membranous oxygenator (V-V ECMO) via both right and left femoral venous cannulation. Despite V-V ECMO application, hypoxemia and shock progressed. Thus, direct hemoperfusion with polymyxin B-immobilized fiber (PMX-DHP) was indicated and conducted immediately to prevent further development of cytokine storm. PMX-DHP (TORAYMYXINTM PMX-20R, TorayMedical, Tokyo, Japan) was applied with continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) via a nontunneled, double-lumen catheter inserted in left jugular vein, with a starting blood flow rate of 150 mL/minute for 24 hours. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) with ECMO and PMX-DHP. In the ICU on post-burn day 1, flexible bronchoscopy was done to assess degree of inhalation injury and to toilet the airway. Bronchoscopy revealed severe edema and congestion in the bronchial wall with carbon soot deposition. With V-V ECMO maintenance and 24 hours of PMX-DHP, serum COHb percentage and IL-6 level normalized, and dramatic improvement on chest X-ray was seen within 96 hours. On the seventh and eighth ICU days, the patient was weaned from V-V ECMO and the ventilator, respectively. On the 11th ICU day, the patient was moved to the general ward with a plan for systematic rehabilitation including respiratory rehabilitation. Upon transfer, the patient was alert without cognitive dysfunction, and electroencephalogram along with diffusion magnetic resonance imaging showed no definitive signs of hypoxic brain damage. However, both sensory impairment and motor weakness were observed in the right lower extremity with an abnormal result on electromyography suggesting right lumbar plexopathy. The patient was discharged from hospital with the plan of further rehabilitation through the outpatient clinic in the rehabilitation medicine department of hospital in other city.