The 5-year-old vaccinated male intact mongrel breed was referred to Hassanzadeh Specialized Pet-hospital with a huge mass on the mandibular bone. The owner declared the mass appeared over 5 months. The clinical presentation started with drooling, problems in chewing, opened mouth caused by mass distention, malocclusion in the right mandible, and face changes. The right mandibular canine and first premolar tooth were not observed, the second premolar tooth was dislocated and the maxillary canine on the same side was oriented rostrally. There were no signs of pain and the mass was firm and bony consistency. Also, there was a smaller mass on the right mandible with lower invasion and lack of changes in dental occlusion . The differential diagnosis of the mentioned case predicts old malunion fractures, and bone tumors such as osteosarcoma, osteoma, osteoblastoma, ossifying fibroma, and osteomyelitis or exostoses. Other jaw soft tissue masses such as epulis, squamous cell carcinoma, and ameloblastoma have rejected the cause of the consistency and bone structure of the mass.
The skull radiographs were performed in dorsoventral and lateral projection which showed the intense and well-demarcated edge with a short transitional zone between normal and abnormal bone. There was a smooth rounded radiopaque appearance rostral of bilateral mandibles. The right mass size measured 8 × 4 cm and prevent normal chewing. The left mass has no remarkable changes in radiology in comparison to the left mass. The periosteal reaction and invasion of the surrounding soft tissue were not seen. Thoracic radiographs did not indicate pulmonary metastasis .
The blood sample was collected and the leukogram showed mild neutrophilia and monocytosis which would be because of chronic inflammation. The biochemistry profile was normal and did not have a significant change . Cytological assessment was performed by fine needle aspiration cytology from the core of the lesion. The microscopic evaluation showed oval to spindle shape cells with poorly malignancy criteria. A moderate number of fatty cells, degenerated neutrophils, bacteria, macrophages, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts. Septic inflammation was evident and suspected of mesenchymal tumor .
Due to the chewing problem, mandibulectomy is considered the best treatment option for this patient. Therefore, the patient was sedated with Ketamine (5 mg/kg of body weight)-Diazepam (0.2 mg/kg of body weight), intravenously, and maintained by Isoflurane inhalation, respectively. It is positioned in the ventral recumbency and the mandibular mass is excised by unilateral mandibular ostectomy. The approach was according to the dissection of the Genioglossus, a superficial portion of the Masseter muscle, and the rostral portion of the Mylohyoideus muscle and Digastricus. Mandible was removed after the mandibular alveolar artery, vein, and inferior alveolar nerve ligation . The antibiotic therapy (Cefazolin 25 mg/kg b.w., q8, 5 days and Clindamycin 11 mg/kg b.w. q24, 3 days) and analgesics (Morphine 0.2 mg/kg b.w.) were administrated.
The mass was sent to the Histopathology Laboratory and the gross examination admitted a cream-tan tissue, measuring 10 × 5 cm2. The microscopic description revealed the admixture of mature lamellar and woven bone patterns, with Haversian-like canals. Cortical-type bone architecture is more frequent than trabecular bone architecture. Osteoblasts rimming bone are inconspicuous and small. Osteocytes in the matrix are small, not atypical, and randomly distributed. Intertrabecular marrow spaces are filled with moderately cellular and loose fibrous stroma. The final diagnosis was osteoma .