A 51-year-old unemployed, married Japanese woman was admitted to our hospital to determine the aetiology of pericardial effusion. At 8 years of age, she had complained of pain in the extremities induced by fever and exercise. At 15 years of age, she had been diagnosed with FD on the basis of reduced α-galactosidase A activity (15.4 nmol/mg protein/h; reference range, 31–47 nmol/mg protein/h) and the presence of inclusion bodies in the peroneal nerve. Subsequently, a 3 bp deletion (GAG) at position c.1072 of the α-galactosidase A gene was identified as the mutation site. Her father died of anaphylactic shock due to injection when he was aged 28 years, and her mother’s α-galactosidase A activity was 37.3 nmol/mg protein/h at diagnosis. No relatives had the same diagnosis or any medical history that could be suspected as FD (, pedigree chart). She was not followed up between the ages of 15 and 42 years. At 42 years of age, she complained of palpitations and chest discomfort. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed cardiac involvement with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. At 44 years of age, she was started on 0.2 mg/kg agalsidase alfa therapy administered every 2 weeks without additional drugs. However, LV concentric hypertrophy progressed and plasma brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels continued to increase over a period of 7 years.
At 51 years of age, she experienced shortness of breath at rest and during sleep, accompanied by a weight gain of 3 kg in 2 months. She received 20 mg/day of furosemide orally once-a-day for a month at an outpatient clinic. However, we discontinued its administration before the admission day because it did not affect the severity of pericardial effusion despite the 3-kg reduction in body weight as shown below. She had been receiving ERT regularly until the time of admission. Her blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory rate were 128/70 mmHg, 60 beats/min, and 14 breaths/min, respectively. Her heart sounds were normal and systolic murmurs were audible at the 5th left sternal border. Chest X-ray revealed an increased cardiothoracic ratio compared with that 1 year prior . Twelve-lead electrocardiogram showed T-wave inversions in leads I, II, aVL, aVF, and V3–6 and a high voltage in the precordial leads . Protein (1+) was detected in urine, and blood test results showed increased levels of cardiac troponin-T (0.24 ng/mL; cut-off, 0.1 ng/mL) and BNP (66.1 pg/mL; cut-off, 18.4 pg/mL). Her C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 0.06 mg/dL (cut-off, 0.14 mg/dL).
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed 65% LV ejection fraction without abnormal regional wall motion. Additionally, previously unrecognized pericardial effusion was noted . Cardiac cine magnetic resonance imaging revealed diffuse LV hypertrophy with circumferential pericardial effusion and increased signal intensity on non-enhanced T2-weighted imaging and late gadolinium enhancement . These findings suggested potential myocardial damage with oedema/inflammation and fibrosis in the anterior and lateral walls. A cardiac catheterization study revealed the presence of a 27 mmHg pressure gradient at the mid-LV cavity; however, other intracardiac pressures, i.e. pulmonary artery wedge pressure, pulmonary artery pressure, right ventricular pressure, and right atrial pressure and cardiac output values were within normal ranges. Endomyocardial biopsy specimens demonstrated vacuolated myocytes mixed with normal myocytes , cytoplasmic granular inclusions , laminated inclusion bodies , infiltration of macrophages , T lymphocytes , and interstitial fibrosis .
summarizes the changes in the plasma levels of lyso-Gb3, tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-18, and high-sensitivity (hs)-CRP proportional to the changes in LV mass over the 7-year period of agalsidase alfa therapy. The lyso-Gb3 level, which initially decreased from 19 to 13 nmol/L [reference range, 0.37 ± 0.11 nmol/L (mean ± standard deviation, SD)] over the first 2 years, increased thereafter in proportion with increasing LV mass [reference range, 93 ± 16 g/m2 (mean ± SD)] . The levels of TNF-α (reference range, 0.75–1.66 pg/mL), IL-6 (cut-off, 4 pg/mL), and hs-CRP (cut-off, 1500 ng/mL) remained within the normal range . The IL-18 levels [reference range, 126 ± 44.5 pg/mL (mean ± SD)] increased despite ERT . Echocardiography-guided pericardiocentesis was performed to drain 700 mL of pericardial fluid to relieve her symptoms and obtain the sample. Pericardial fluid analysis conducted at 7 years and 3 months since ERT revealed the presence of exudate. Cytological examination was negative for malignant cells, and bacterial cultures were negative for infection. However, lyso-Gb3 (14 nmol/L), IL-18 (135 pg/mL), TNF-α (1.19 pg/mL), and hs-CRP (343 ng/mL) were detected in the pericardial fluid. The level of IL-6 was higher (885 pg/mL) in the pericardial fluid than in plasma (2.3 pg/mL; ).
She started receiving 1.25 mg of bisoprolol once-a-day from the day of discharge. The pericardial fluid persists to date, as observed at every 6-month examination; however, anti-inflammatory drugs were not administered because the patient was asymptomatic and her hs-CRP level was within the normal range. The pericardial effusion disappeared spontaneously 1.5 years after pericardiocentesis. She continues to receive ERT to date.