A 74-year-old male patient with chronic kidney disease stage III, essential hypertension, coronary artery disease with 30% stenosis of the RCA, atrial fibrillation on chronic anticoagulation, rhythm control with amiodarone, rate control with diltiazem, and implantable defibrillator, who had a history of self-resolved upper respiratory infection a week prior to admission, when he started experiencing shortness of breath (SOB).

Shortness of breath was evident during exertion and at rest, presenting with orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. His symptoms were accompanied by intermittent chest discomfort and pressure lasting around 15 minutes, worse when laying supine, attenuated by sitting up, non-radiating, and not accompanied by diaphoresis, and self-resolving. He did not take any medications to alleviate discomfort. He mentioned experiencing chills, diaphoresis, nasal congestion, sore throat, arthralgia, unexpected weight loss, and occasional dizziness and imbalance while walking. The day before admission, he could walk his dog for 1 block; on admission day, he could not walk due to persistent SOB. He denied having any fever, cough, hemoptysis, palpitations, edema, muscle, or joint discomfort.

On physical examination his vital signs demonstrated heart rate 74 beats per minute, blood pressure 159/69 mmHg, respiratory rate 20, O2 sat above 94% on room air.

He was in respiratory distress and his cardiovascular assessment revealed distant heart sounds, absence of JVD, abdominal tenderness in the right upper quadrant and epigastric area, as well as malleolar pitting edema.

Electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus rhythm, 70 bpm, prolonged PR, low voltage in precordial leads, and prolonged QTc.

Findings such as muffled heart sounds, low voltage ECG, and cardiomegaly lead to the decision of performing POCUS at bedside. It demonstrated a large pericardial effusion.

Chest x-ray demonstrated cardiomegaly, with no evidence of infiltrates or vascular cephalization.

2D-echocardiogram STAT was performed, and cardiology was consulted due to high suspicion of tamponade after POCUS, despite the patient’s adequate vital signs.

He was admitted due to dyspnea secondary to pericardial effusion, ruling out cardiac tamponade and transaminitis of unclear source. A couple of hours after admission, the patient became hemodynamically unstable secondary to cardiogenic shock.

Emergent pericardiocentesis was performed in the ICU by cardiologist with removal of 800 mL of dark purple bloody pericardial fluid. Pericardial window was performed, draining the remaining pericardial effusion (700 mL of bloody, nonclotting fluid); the pericardium and epicardium were extremely inflamed. No isolated source of bleeding; however, some areas of oozing.

Initial 2D-echo demonstrated right atrial invagination and 0.39% inspiratory to expiratory respiratory variation in mitral inflow velocities, consistent with tamponade.

Pathology report of pericardial tissue—benign fibrovascular adipose tissue with reactive fibro-cellular changes, patchy chronic-acute inflammation, and focal fat necrosis. No evidence of malignancy.