A 36-year-old white male patient suffering from headache and abdominal pain presented at our emergency department. Initial ECG showed a sinus rhythm (40/min.) with a single T-wave inversion in lead V2, and an incomplete right bundle branch block. Thrombocytes were decreased with 71.000/μl (normal range 150.000–450.000/μl), creatinine was elevated (2.0 mg/dl) with a maximum increase to 3.0 mg/dl (normal range 0.6–1.1 mg/dl) and massive proteinuria. C-reactive protein was also elevated: 8.6 mg/dl (normal < 0.5 mg/dl). Puumala virus IgG ELISA turned out to be positive, and specific antibodies (IgG and IgM) could be detected in the serum, and confirmed by immunoassay, also see Additional file . The patient was admitted to the nephrology department for supportive therapy.
Six days later, the patient reported chest pain and dyspnea. High sensitivity troponin I rose up to 0.32 μg/l (normal range below 0.04 μg/l) with an increase of the creatinkinase to 319 U/l (normal max. 190 U/l), no dynamic ECG changes could be observed. The patient was admitted to the chest pain unit. Echocardiography revealed a normal left ventricular function (65%) without regional wall motion abnormalities, no pericardial effusion or valve abnormalities. Since creatinine has normalized in the meantime, coronary artery disease was ruled out by coronary CT angiography.
CMR for work-up of suspected myocarditis was performed using a 1.5 T Magnetom Aera (Siemens Health Care, Germany). Cine-SSFPs revealed normal LV-EF (60%) with no wall motion abnormalities. A modified Look-Locker inversion recovery product sequence (MOLLI, MyoMaps) was used for T1-mapping and performed in a single mid-ventricular short-axis (SAX) slice at mid-diastole, prior and after application of contrast agent according to current recommendations . T2-mapping was performed in the corresponding mid-ventricular SAX before administration of contrast agent using an ECG-triggered T2-prepared single-shot steady-state free precession (SSFP) product sequence with multiple T2 preparation times . Normal values: native T1 < 1000 ms, T2 < 50 ms. Analyses were made by cvi42 software (Circle, Canada). Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) images were acquired after contrast administration (Gadobutrol 0.15 mmol/kg) using segmented inversion-recovery fast low angle shot (IR-FLASH).
Native T1-mapping demonstrated markedly elevated T1 values with preponderance in the inferoseptal wall (1068 ± 73 ms in the entire slice vs. 1122 ± 31 ms in the inferoseptal wall), also see Figs. and . Furthermore, T2-mapping revealed increased values (entire slice 52 ± 6 ms, inferoseptal wall 55 ± 6 ms), suggesting myocardial edema representing active myocardial inflammation by hantavirus infection. In contrast, the LGE image, potentially indicating irreversible myocardial damage if positive, in the corresponding slice was negative . Despite negative LGE, this patient was considered having hantavirus-induced myocarditis due to: 1) clinical symptoms, 2) increased cardiac biomarkers, 3) exclusion of CAD and 4) conspicuous native T1- and T2-mapping values detected by CMR.
In the next few weeks, the patient’s state of health rapidly improved and symptoms of chest pain and dyspnea disappeared. Five months later, the patient was followed up by the same CMR protocol: Substantial decrease of native T1 values (957 ± 58 ms in the entire slice vs. 971 ± 36 ms in the inferoseptal wall) and T2 values (entire slice 44 ± 5 ms, inferoseptal wall 45 ± 3 ms) in the mid-ventricular slice position could be observed, again LGE-negative, suggesting myocardial healing .