A 68 year-old male patient was referred to our surgical department from another hospital's medical department with a presenting clinical picture of sudden right upper quadrant abdominal pain, nausea and dark urine. With an initial diagnosis of obstructive jaundice possibly due to choledocholithiasis the patient was admitted to our department for further investigation. The patient's past medical history included upper gastrointestinal bleeding and chronic pulmonary obstructive disease.
Tumor markers (CEA, CA19-9, a-FP) were normal, while a mild elevation of the cholestatic enzymes (ALP = 138 IU/L, γ-GT = 95 IU/L) were demonstrated with return to normal of bilirubin and transaminases.
Abdominal ultrasound, computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated dilatation of the left intrahepatic bile ducts without the presence of any space-occupying lesion. Triplex ultrasonography of the liver confirmed the patency of portal and hepatic veins and of the hepatic artery.
Endoscopic retrograde and magnetic resonance cholangio-pancreatographies showed anomalous dilatation of the left intrahepatic bile ducts with a concomitant milder dilatation of the pancreatic duct, as well as mucus discharge from the papilla of Vater during endoscopy.
Colonoscopy was performed to rule out primary bowel neoplasm and revealed the presence of large bowel polyps. Snare polypectomies were performed and the histological analysis demonstrated the presence of tubulous and tubulovillous adenomas of the colon with mild to moderate degree of epithelial dysplasia.
Total bone scan with Tc99 m MDP, thoracic computed tomography and brain magnetic resonance imaging were negative for secondary deposits.
With a diagnosis of a cholangiocarcinoma a left hepatectomy with inflow occlusion (Pringle's maneuver) and selective hepatic vascular exclusion and cholecystectomy were carried out. The histology report describes the presence of foci of papillary adenomas with a fibrovascular core connecting each of them with the ductal wall, the cuboidal or columnar cells lining the bile duct epithelium and the presence of excessive intraductal mucus, as well as foci of a moderately to poorly differentiated carcinoma, with sporadic necrotic areas and invasion of the fibrously thickened intrahepatic bile ducts .
The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the 9th postoperative day. Despite an uncomplicated 2 year follow-up period, the patient rapidly deteriorated and died from multiple pulmonary metastatic deposits.