Mrs A, a 25-year-old woman, came to our hospital because of repeated hair pulling and binge eating behavior voluntarily. Her medical history was collected via a detailed inquiry. More than 10 years ago, the patient was sexually discriminated against by her family and had a bad relationship with her parents. She gradually became unhappy, self-abased and nervous, and began to pull out her hair repeatedly and uncontrollably, which was more obvious when she was in a bad mood. After about 2 years of systematic CBT and pharmacotherapy, she still had no improvement. Nearly a year ago, the condition worsened; she was upset, unhappy and was crying often. Additionally, the hair pulling phenomenon worsened, and she even used nail clippers to pull out the hair follicles on her head, and she had to resort to constantly wearing a wig to cover up the local hair loss. Furthermore, patients encountering increased pressure will exhibit intermittent binge eating attacks: she will eat much more food than usual in a short time, felt unable to control eating. When this began, she will eat much faster than normal, and until she felt uncomfortably full and got a feeling of guilty after eating, about two to three times a week, but no emetic, diuresis or diarrhea behavior and resulted in a significant increase in weight gain. The patient had an obvious impairment in social function and had changed jobs several times in the last year. Mrs A had been misdiagnosed with "obsessive–compulsive disorder", "depression" or "anxiety disorder" and had been mono- or co-treated with sertraline (200 mg/day × 8 weeks), fluvoxamine (150 mg/day × 12 weeks), bupropion (300 mg/day × 6 weeks) and risperidone (1 mg × 8 weeks) in the last 2 years, but all of them did not work. The patient was given fluvoxamine (150 mg/day) and bupropion (300 mg/day) before admission.
On admission, wearing a wig, Mrs A had normal vital signs, but was obese (BMI: 28.23 kg/m2). The hair loss was obvious in the temporal and occipital regions, and the local hair follicles in the scalp were red and swollen with oozed blood (see attached Fig. , the local hair defect). Mental state examinations: clear consciousness, normal orientation and cooperation, no delusions or hallucinations, no somatization symptom, she always felt depressed and anxious because she could not control her impulse of pulling hair and binge eating, she had a low self-evaluation but had no suicide attempt, she could not perform well in work and changed her job often. Laboratory tests, ECG, EEG and brain MRI scans showed no obvious abnormalities. The psychological tests revealed: Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale(Y-BOCS) showed 18 points, Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAMA) showed 22 points, Hamilton's Depression Scale-17 (HAMD-17) showed 18 points, Eating Disorder Inventory (EDI) showed 245 points, these results indicate the patient had obvious obsessive–compulsive, depressive and anxiety symptoms, and also indicate she had eating disorder.
After admission on the basis of the recent treatment (fluvoxamine 150 mg/day and bupropion 300 mg/day), the patient was given a combined treatment with NAC, started at 600 mg/day and titrated gradually to 1200 mg/day (D4) and 1800 mg/day (D9). During this period, the patient's anxiety and depression were significantly improved, the hair plucking behavior was significantly reduced and her binge eating was also rapidly alleviated (no recurrence except on the day of admission). Subsequently, the patient was discharged from the hospital on day 11.
A follow-up of 2 weeks after discharge showed that the patient's mood was stable, her anxiety was alleviated, hair plucking behavior was rarely observed, her hair was thicker than before and inflammation was significantly improved. A follow-up of 4 weeks after discharge showed an improvement of her obsessive symptoms, no episodes of binge eating and her normal occupation of teaching had resumed. A follow-up of 14 weeks after discharge (16 weeks after treatment) showed no plucking behavior, no episodes of binge eating, slimmer than ever (BMI: 26.95 kg/m2), and she was in good working and living conditions. Maintenance dose was fluvoxamine 100 mg/day, bupropion 300 mg/day, NAC 1200 mg/day. (drug dosages and scale evaluations used during treatment are shown in Table , and changes in local hair defects are shown in Figs. , and ).