A 40-year-old man with a history of MLS in the right thigh was treated with wide excision at our hospital . At the time of diagnosis, he had no distant metastasis. Histological findings of the resected specimen revealed a round cell component of 10% and a negative margin . Adjuvant chemotherapy with four cycles of doxorubicin (70 mg/m2, every 3 weeks) was administered.
Two years after the surgery for the primary tumor, follow-up chest computed tomography (CT) showed a low-density area in the left ventricle. The patient was then asymptomatic. Contrast-enhanced CT showed a mass, measuring 4 cm × 2 cm in the left ventricle . Transthoracic echocardiography also identified the mass in the left ventricle, which was suggestive of a neoplasm . Clinical images revealed no evidence of local recurrence or distant metastasis other than the cardiac mass at that time. Given the risk of valve obstruction, he was immediately admitted to our hospital for cardiovascular surgery. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the left ventricular tumor showed a lower-signal intensity than that of skeletal muscle on T1-weighted images, higher-signal intensity on T2-weighted images, and slight enhancement with a contrast agent . Considering the clinical course, the mass was regarded as a metastasis of MLS. He underwent surgical excision of the lesion in the left ventricle. Intraoperatively, we found a reddish-white tumor arising from the papillary muscle without invasion of the interventricular septum. Histopathological examination of the specimen showed a mixture of oval non-lipogenic cells and small signet ring lipoblasts in a prominent myxoid stroma, which was consistent with the findings of the primary tumor in the thigh. However, the proportion of round cell component in the ventricular specimen was increased compared with that in the specimen of the primary tumor . A negative margin was histologically confirmed in the ventricular specimen.
Six months later, he complained of back pain and developed metastatic disease in the sixth thoracic vertebra. Conventional radiotherapy was administered to the spine lesion, which was delivered as 50 Gy in 25 fractions.
Fifteen months after the cardiac metastasectomy, he presented slight dyspnea on effort. Contrast-enhanced CT showed a tumor in the right atrium involving the atrium septum . Our cardiovascular surgeons decided that the lesion was not amenable to complete excision with an adequate margin. The patient was treated with surgical excision of the tumor with R2 margin (macroscopically evident margin positivity) . The histological findings of the specimen indicated MLS with hypercellular lesions with a round cell component of about 30%, which represented progression compared to that of the left ventricular specimen at the first cardiac metastasectomy . Radiotherapy of 50 Gy in 25 fractions was performed for the residual disease of the right atrium and atrial septum postoperatively. His ejection fraction evaluated with echocardiography after the second cardiac metastasectomy remained 40%, and he could perform his daily activities without difficulty. There was no recurrence in the heart after the second cardiac metastasectomy, although multiple metastases occurred in the abdominal cavity, lungs, and muscles. Despite palliative chemotherapy with trabectedin and eribulin, he finally died of the disease 2 years after the second cardiac metastasectomy.