The patient was a 67-year-old man with no significant medical history. He presented to the Nanjing Brain Hospital for the first time on July 4, 2016 with new onset frequent attacks of left limb convulsions without loss of consciousness nor incontinence for 6 days. The brain MRI from another hospital on June 30, 2016 showed abnormal signals in the left cingulate gyrus. During the hospitalization, the patient presented with frequent attacks (ten or more ictal attacks a day) of the left limb convulsions. Duration of attacks ranged from dozens of seconds to several minutes. There was no abnormality during the interval of the seizures. In the interictal period, the patient had no fever or headache, no mental or behavioral abnormalities, no dysphagia, no weakness of limbs, or other complications of nervous system.
Routine laboratory studies including blood and urine routine tests, coagulation tests, liver and renal function, blood sugar, glycosylated hemoglobin, antinuclear antibody, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, phospholipase A2, thyroid function, HIV and syphilis, were all unremarkable. Anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) antibody was negative. Serum carbohydrate antigen 72–4 was 17.56 IU / ml (normal < 6.00 IU / ml), more than normal. Lumbar puncture revealed the CSF pressure of 100 mmH2O. Examination of the CSF showed white blood cells of 4/μl, protein levels of 0.45 g/L (normal 0.2 ~ 0.4 g / L). The concentrations of glucose and chlorine in the CSF were normal. Anti-NMDAR antibodies were detected in CSF and serum using a commercial kit (Euroimmune, Germany) by indirect immunofluorescence testing (IIFT) according to the manufacturer’s instructions for twice. Anti-NMDAR titers were 1:10(++) in CSF and 1:32(++) in serum. Anti-AMPA1, AMPA2, LG1, ASPR2 and GABAB receptor antibodies in CSF and serum were negative. Tests for paraneoplastic antibodies (Hu, Yo, Ri, Ma2, CV2, Amphiphysin, ANNA-3, Tr, PCA-2, GAD) in CSF were all negative. Chest CT did not reveal any lesions concerning for malignancy. Video-EEG showed slight abnormality (all visible more low amplitude fast wave guide, especially the front head). Brain MRI scan and enhanced scan showed long T1 and long T2 abnormal signal on the bilateral frontal parietal, proximal midline, diffusion weighted imaging (DWI): high signal intensity, patchy eccentric mild enhancement . MRS showed N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) peak decreased and no increase in choline compounds (Cho) peak. Therefore, lesions were considered the possibility of non-neoplastic lesions.
With a presumed diagnosis of anti-NMDAR encephalitis, the patient was treated with intravenous dexamethasone 10 mg/d × 11d → methylprednisolone 200 mg/d × 3d → methylprednisolone 80 mg/d × 3d → gamma globulin (20 g/d × 5d), oral prednisolone acetate tablets (40 mg qd) and antiepileptic (oxcarbazepine 300 mg bid). The epileptic seizures were slightly alleviated after treatment. The main manifestation was the twitching with spasms of the left upper and lower extremities, each lasting several seconds to more than ten seconds, attacking several times a day, without alteration of consciousness. Then the patient was discharged home.
Two months later, the patient presented to the hospital for a second time. He had suffered from frequent attacks of the left limb. Physical examination showed no abnormalities in the nervous system. Results from routine biochemical and cytological examination of the cerebrospinal fluid were normal. Anti-NMDAR titers were 1:32(+++) in CSF and 1:32(++) in serum. The brain MRI showed bilateral frontal parietal lesions enlarged slightly and the enhancement became more obvious than before . The patient was treated for a second time with intravenous injection of methylprednisolone (80 mg/d × 15d) → oral prednisolone acetate tablets (40 mg qd), immunoglobulins (25 g/d × 5d), oral azathioprine (50 mg qd), oral antiepileptic (oxcarbazepine 600 mg bid, Debakin 250 mg qm, 500 mg qn) treatment. The epileptic seizures were slightly alleviated after the treatment, 2~3 times a day, the twitching with spasms of the left limb typically lasts a few seconds, without loss of consciousness. Then the patient was discharged home.
Four months later, the patient presented at the hospital for a third time. He complained of weakness after frequent partial seizures in his right limb. Muscle Strength Grading Scale of the right lower extremity was 4/5 and physical examination of the remaining nervous system showed no significant abnormalities. The diagnosis was simple partial status epilepticus and Todd’s Paralysis. Epilepsy was controlled on diazepam injection therapy and the muscle strength of the right lower extremity returned to normal. The brain MRI reexamination indicated that the frontal parietal lesions enlarged and one new lesion appeared in the left basal ganglia with some mild mass effect, significantly enhanced . Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) showed partial ablation of white matter fibro tracts in the bilateral frontal parietal lobe and the left basal ganglia lesion, reduction of FA and the surrounding fibro tracts slightly compressed . Arterial spin labeling (ASL) MR imaging showed that bilateral frontoparietal and left basal ganglia lesions had abnormally high perfusion . Surgical biopsy of the right parietal lesion was performed under general anesthesia on November 21, 2016. The lesions were pale red, slightly tough, abundant blood supply and without clear border. The size of the removed lesion was about 1.5 × 1.5 × 1.0 cm. The astrocytoma (WHO II-III) was confirmed on histopathologic findings. Patients transferred to the oncology department for further radiotherapy and chemotherapy. One month later, the patient died.