Our case was a 65-year-old elderly woman with an ongoing scene of jaundice and abdominal pain which was settled with medical therapy. The transabdominal ultrasound was indicative of the presence of stone inside the dilated common bile duct (CBD) and she was alluded to an elective outpatient ERCP owing to choledocholithiasis. The assessment was average; in addition, aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and bilirubin were seen to be inside the ordinary range. Nonetheless, alkaline phosphatase was elevated (659 IU/dl). Her vital sign was stable, oxygen therapy with nasal cannula was established and oxygen saturation was 98%.The patient underwent general anesthesia with midazolam, fentanyl, and ketamin at the proneposition.
The side view endoscope was inserted slowly and easily into the duodenum, and a papilla with a normal appearance was seen next to a small diverticulum anfistolotomy was performed using a kindle knife following technically unsuccessful cannulation of CBD with a standard sphincterotome. Meanwhile, pulse oximetry dropped to 80% and the procedure was interrupted. The patient was released from pronepositin and auxiliary oxygen was applied with bag mask ventilation; nonetheless,the pulse oxymetry did not exceed 82% and there was no obvious reduction in lung sounds at that moment. Also, the patient developed abdominal distension. Therefore, duodenum perforation was suspected and abdominal radiography was performed which disclosed a large area of mottled air in the retroperitoneal area (around the kidney) . The physicians made the patient NPO and Iv administration of metronidazole and ceftriaxone was started. Subsequently, facial, cervical, and thoracic subcutaneous emphysema occurred. Oxygen therapy continued with the reservoir bag mask, pulseoxymetry dropped to 75% and bilateral lung sounds decreased. Abdominal computed tomography indicated the evidence of duodenal rupture, including retroperitoneal air, intra-abdominal free fluid, bilateral pneumothorax, Pneumomediastinum and subcutaneous emphysema (-).
Bilateral chest tube was inserted instantly and the patient created indications of peritonitis. Laprotomy and repair of a lease (2 cm) situated in the posterolateral mass of the second segment of duodenum (Stapfer type 1 perforation) was performed. At long last, the patient was moved to the ICU, and after 4 days she was moved from the emergency unit to the ordinary ward. She bit by bit improved and was released from the clinic 8 days after the procedure.