A 74-year-old woman was referred for CABG treatment. She had a history of diabetes mellitus and dyslipidemia and previously underwent percutaneous stenting of the mid right coronary artery and the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD). Preoperative coronary angiography revealed 90% in-stent stenosis of the proximal LAD and 75% stenosis of the diagonal branch . In addition, she had three instances of in-stent stenosis at the LAD. Whenever restenosis was diagnosed, the implementation of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was repeated. Taking this history into consideration, we decided to perform a left ITA (LITA)-LAD bypass and a right ITA (RITA) diagonal branch bypass. The ITAs were mobilized as skeletonized grafts. We routinely used nicorandil (4 mg/h) and diltiazem (4 mg/h) during CABG operation for the prevention of vasospasm.
At first, we performed RITA diagonal bypass. Subsequently, we performed anastomosis of LITA-LAD bypass. After CABG, the patient had stable circulation (BP 126/54 mmHg, HR 62 bpm) without changes in ST segment as monitored by electrocardiogram. When we examined blood flow of the RITA diagonal bypass, transit time flow measurement revealed reasonable blood flow (flow rate 20 mL/min, pulsative index 3.4, diastolic flow of 82%). On the other hand, the LITA graft showed comparatively poorer blood flow (flow rate 15 mL/min, pulsative index 2.1, diastolic flow 74%) than the RITA graft. Flow competition between the RITA and LITA was unlikely to occur considering the location of the stenotic lesion. In addition, taking into the consideration the perfused region of the LAD and the severe stenosis in the stent, the graft blood flow was too low and technical anastomotic stenosis was suspected. We re-anastomosed the LITA-LAD bypass. However, even after re-anastomosis of LITA-LAD bypass, transit time flow measurement revealed worsening of graft flow compared to before (LITA-LAD: flow rate 7 mL/min, pulsatile index 4.8, diastolic flow 68%; RITA diagonal: flow rate 11 mL/min, pulsatile index 5.6, diastolic flow 76%). We immediately closed the wound and moved the patient to a hybrid operating room to examine the causes of this progressively low graft flow.
We performed coronary angiography and detected vasospasms in the native coronary arteries without ST elevation, as seen on the electrocardiogram. We performed intracoronary injections of verapamil (5 mg) and isosorbide dinitrate (6 mg) through the ITA graft, but no improvement was observed. We subsequently injected fasudil (20 mg) through the LITA and observed that coronary flow through the LITA graft improved (thrombolysis in myocardial infarction risk score of 3) . The intracoronary fasudil injection did not cause systemic hypotension, as demonstrated by the postinjection measurement of 86/56 mmHg compared with the preinjection measurement of 93/52 mmHg. We subsequently applied intra-aortic balloon pumping to secure coronary blood flow.
On postoperative day 1, coronary angiography revealed a patent bypass graft and sufficient coronary runoff . Electrocardiogram showed no ischemic changes. Peak postoperative CK, CK-MB, and troponin T were 582 U/L (41–153 U/L), 7.6 IU/L (4–18 IU/L), and 0.307 ng/mL (0–0.014 ng/mL), respectively. The patient experienced an uneventful clinical course without vasospasm recurrence and was discharged on postoperative day 11.