A 62-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of mental abnormality and hypomnesia for 3 months. The main mental symptoms were gibberish, irrational talk, impaired mental attention, without apparent hallucinations and delusions. The patient did not present with fluctuating consciousness, lack of consciousness, or loss of consciousness. The family of the patient reported that she had a history of fever before she experienced the mental symptoms. Her highest body temperature was 38.6 °C. Her axillary temperature became normal after she received antibiotic therapy for 4 days. However, she gradually developed symptoms of mental abnormality. She also intermittently complained of abdominal pain, vomiting, constipation, and urinary incontinence for 1 month. She did not experience other discomforts, such as headaches, dizziness, and convulsion. She visited a local hospital in October 2018, and the routine blood test showed that the white blood cell counts were normal, and the percentage of lymphocytes was high. The blood potassium was 1.91 mmol/l (normal 3.5-5.3 mmol/l), and the prolactin level was 90.55 μg/l (normal 2.74–26.72 μg/l). The free thyroxine was slightly high, the thyroglobulin antibody was 12.32 IU/ml (normal 0–115 IU/ml), and the thyroid peroxidase antibody was 10.42 IU/ml (normal 0–34 IU/ml). The testing results of antinuclear antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-Jo-1 antibody, anti-dsDNA antibody, anti-Scl-70 antibody, anti-SSA antibody, and anti-SSB antibody were yielded negative, and the tests for hepatitis, HIV, and syphilis virus were also negative. The local hospital suspected intracranial infection, endocrine disease, and electrolyte disorders and gave her symptomatic treatment. Nevertheless, her symptoms showed no noticeable improvement. It was difficult to diagnose the disease, so the patient was admitted to our hospital. The patient had a history of diabetes, hypertension, erosive gastritis, and cataract surgery, but she had no family history of neurological diseases.
The physical examination revealed that her body temperature was 36.8 °C, and there was tenderness below the xiphoid. The neurological examination showed impaired mental attention and reaction capacity, slow speech, normal manifestations of the brain nerve, normal muscle strength, and muscle tone, negative meningeal irritation sign and pathological reflex, normal tendon reflex. The patient could not cooperate with the sensory system examination. The mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score was only 6/30.
Encephalitis was initially suspected, and lumbar puncture was performed. The CSF examination showed that the CSF pressure was 110 mmH2O, and the white blood cell count was normal, but she had an increased total protein level of 0.57 g/l (normal 0.15–0.45 g/l) and a glucose level of 5.10 mmol/l (normal 2.2–3.9 mmol/l). The coxsackie B virus, enterovirus, and cytomegalovirus test levels were normal. Bacterial culture and Cryptococcus neoformans tests were negative. A contrast-enhanced MRI of the brain was normal. The diagnosis of encephalitis was excluded in general. However, leukoencephalopathy was evident on the T2 fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images. A high-signal intensity in the white matter of the cerebral hemisphere, especially at the subcortex of the frontotemporal and corona radiata, was found on the T2 FLAIR images . The MRI imaging of the left basal ganglia and bilateral corona radiata showed lacunar infarction. Magnetic resonance angiography indicated that the blood vessels were normal. The DWI results revealed a symmetrically distributed strip-shaped high-intensity signal of the corticomedullary junction in the bilateral frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes .
Skin biopsy samples were obtained at 10 cm above the patient’s ankle. A light microscope was used to examine the samples, which showed hyperkeratosis of the epidermis. A few lymphocytes and tissue cells infiltrated through the superficial vessels of the dermis . Electron microscopy showed round-shaped intranuclear inclusions in the nucleus of the fibrocytes. The intranuclear inclusions had clear borders and were composed of fibrous substances without a membrane structure .
The fasting blood glucose was 9.48 mmol/l, and glycosylated hemoglobin was 6.6%. The routine urine test showed normal results. The patient presented with mental abnormality for 3 months. We did not consider the diagnoses of hypoglycemia, diabetic ketoacidosis, or hyperosmolar hyperglycemic syndrome. Furthermore, the patient did not present with depression, anxiety, consciousness disorders, hallucinations, and neurasthenia, which were common mental symptoms in patients with diabetes. The results of the electrolyte showed hypokalemia (2.6 mmol/L), hyponatremia (127.3 mmol/L), and hypochloremia (86.5 mmol/L). The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and cortisol hormone tests showed normal results. The MRI of the hypophysis showed no abnormal areas. The electroencephalography showed low-and moderate-amplitude desynchronized-mixed waves when she fell asleep.
Brain protection and symptomatic therapy were given when the patient was hospitalized, and the symptoms were relieved. However, she still complained of recurrent vomiting and urinary incontinence. The patient was alive, and the condition of the patient did not worsen or improve for 6 months after she was discharged.