A previously healthy six-year-old girl was admitted with fever, dyspnea, abdominal pain, and pain in the right arm and shoulder. Four days before admission she had fallen from a tree while playing. Shortly after admission she was transferred to the ICU because she acutely developed signs of shock, anemia and progressive abdominal pain. Splenic rupture was suspected and confirmed by ultrasound showing sub-capsular spleen hematoma and free intra-abdominal fluid. During the ICU stay she developed an abscess on the right shoulder, for which antibiotic treatment was started. The culture of the aspirate, taken before start of antibiotics, from this abscess was positive for Staphylococcus aureus. After 1 month she was transferred to our center under the suspicion of pericarditis, because of persistent fever and cardiomegaly on the chest X-ray. Echocardiography revealed pericardial effusion, located mostly behind the left ventricular (LV) posterior wall (Additional file ), with a to and fro blood flow through a fistula between the left ventricular lumen and a cavity in the pericardial space, and echogenic densities suggestive for fibrin strands and clots (see Fig. ). Cardiac function was good with mild mitral valve regurgitation. Findings were suggestive for advanced purulent bacterial pericarditis complicated by covered left ventricular perforation (pseudo-aneurysm).
High doses of intravenous cefotaxime and flucloxacillin, already started in the referring hospital, were continued. She developed arthritis of the left knee and right elbow which were both aspirated but with negative cultures. Two weeks after admission her clinical condition did not improve with persistent leukocytosis and high C-reactive protein levels. A pericardial abscess with ongoing bacteremia was suspected and surgical intervention was scheduled.
A median sternotomy was performed, leaving the pleural space closed. The patient was placed on extracorporeal circulation using standard bicaval cannulation. The operation was performed on a beating heart. On opening of the pericardium multiple small abscesses and adhesions were identified and removed, as were thick vegetations on the left ventricular posterior wall. The fistula in the LV myocardium connecting the LV lumen with an abscess on the posterior-lateral wall of the LV was found and closed with prolene sutures with felt (see Fig. ). The pericardial space was irrigated multiple times with a solution of sodium-chloride and iodine. Cultures of the abscesses were negative. Post-operatively she had a quick recovery without fever episodes. She was discharged from the hospital in good condition 2 weeks after surgery. Antibiotics were continued for almost 4 months because of persistent osteomyelitis of the right upper arm and a septic arthritis of the right elbow. Echocardiograms during follow-up revealed no abnormalities.