A 73-year-old male patient without any comorbidities presented with breathlessness for the last 12 h along with bipedal pitting edema and scrotal edema for the last 1 month with no features suggesting orthopnea or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. There was no history of any medication intake, prolonged steroid abuse, altered bowel habits, recent surgery, or prolonged immobilization. Physical examination revealed tachypnea (respiratory rate—44/min), tachycardia (heart rate—140 beats/min), mild pallor, hypotension (BP 70/40 mmHg) with SpO2 80% in room air and 96% with 8 liters of O2/min via face mask. Peripheral extremities were cold and clammy. Bilateral pitting pedal edema, and scrotal edema along with leukonychia were present. Jugular venous pressure was not raised. Cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, and lymphoreticular system examinations were within normal limits. For shock, vasopressor (noradrenaline) support and intravenous fluid resuscitation were carried on. The patient survived the episode of shock. 12-lead electrocardiogram showing sinus tachycardia and negative cardiac biomarkers ruled out acute coronary syndrome. Chest X-ray was performed which was normal. 8 a.m. serum cortisol was found to be normal (11.2 mcg/dl). On evaluation, the patient was found to have iron deficiency anemia (transferrin saturation 10%) with normal vitamin B12 levels. Fasting blood glucose was 93 mg/dl with a Glycated hemoglobin (HbA1C) of 5.4. Serology for Human Immunodeficiency virus (HIV)- 1,2; Hepatitis C virus (HCV); and Hepatitis B virus (HBV) was non-reactive. The Mantoux test was negative. Hypoproteinemia (4.4 mg/dl) along with hypoalbuminemia (2.4 mg/dl) was evident with normal renal function test. Markers of inflammation were elevated [erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)-64, Ferritin-732 mcg/L, C-reactive protein (CRP)-12.6 mg/dl]. 24 h of urinary protein was 119 mg/24-h urine. No dyslipidemia was present. Ultrasonography of the whole abdomen revealed no evidence of chronic liver disease or any kidney disease. 2D echocardiography revealed an ejection fraction of 60% with right ventricular free wall hypokinesia without any pericardial effusion. Raising the suspicion of pulmonary thromboembolism, computed tomography of pulmonary angiography was performed where pulmonary thromboembolism was noted in bilateral lower lobe pulmonary arterial branches and right-sided upper lobe pulmonary arterial branches with dilated pulmonary trunk and both main pulmonary artery (MPA) [MPA 29 mm, right-22 mm, left-18 mm]. During the hospital stay, the patient was gradually developing asymmetrical right leg swelling for which an ultrasonography color doppler of bilateral lower limbs was performed where a long segment thrombus was noted extending from the popliteal vein to complete involvement of the external iliac vein. Antiphospholipid syndrome was ruled out. Protein, C, S, antithrombin III, and Serum homocysteine were within normal limits. Factor V mutation was not detected. Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria (PNH) profile was negative. No Monoclonal protein band was detected on serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP). A computed tomography scan of the neck, thorax, and abdomen revealed no evidence of internal solid organ malignancy. Anticoagulation was started with low molecular weight Heparin (LMWH) and Warfarin and INR were monitored. To unveil the etiology of iron deficiency anemia and hypoproteinemia, stool examination, and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy were planned which revealed erythematous duodenal mucosa. D2 biopsy was taken which revealed chronic inflammatory cell infiltration in lamina propria consisting of eosinophils, plasma cells, and lymphocytes along with the presence of a parasite within the lumen of duodenal crypts morphologically resembling Strongyloides stercoralis. The stool was positive for occult blood and Strongyloides stercoralis larva was seen on wet moun. Bronchoscopy was done where the larval stage of the parasite was seen. Ivermectin (200 μg/kg orally) was started with Albendazole (400 mg orally two times a day). On continuation of the treatment with anticoagulant and anthelmintic, target INR was achieved (INR 2.2). The patient’s general well-being and appetite were improved within 2 days of therapy.