A 66-year-old male presented with pain and edema of the right leg for 2 d.
Pain and edema of the right leg for 2 d prior to hospital admission, no fever, chest pain, or dyspnea.
Multiple soft tissue injuries caused by falls 12 d before admission.
The patient had no remarkable personal or family history.
Swelling of the right lower extremity with palpable pitting edema, normal skin temperature, and a good arterial pulse within this extremity.
At the time of admission, the patient had a D-dimer level of 2789 ng/mL (NG, 0-500 ng/mL).
At the time of admission, color Doppler ultrasonography revealed right iliac-femoral vein thrombosis with decreased distal blood flow velocity. In order to accurately assess the anatomy of the retroperitoneal venous system in this patient, contrast-enhanced computed tomography was conducted after the thrombolysis procedure, which revealed that the right common iliac vein was located behind the left common iliac artery and was clearly compressed and stenotic. Many collateral vessels had formed in the pelvic cavity, and the left iliac vein was significantly wider than that on the right side. Abnormal left-sided IVC drainage was the result of the union of the two common iliac veins at the level of the 4th lumbar vertebra. It ascended vertically to the left side of the abdominal aorta where it connected with the left and right renal vein at the levels of the 2nd and 3rd lumbar vertebrae, respectively. The right renal vein additionally crossed posteriorly to the abdominal aorta. The left-sided IVC continued to ascend and intersected with the hemiazygos vein at the level of the 2nd lumbar vertebra, after which it crossed posteriorly to the left diaphragm crura and entered the thorax. It then ascended through the posterior mediastinum to the left of the four inferior thoracic vertebrae, crossing posteriorly to the thoracic aorta and the azygos vein at the level of 8th thoracic vertebra, arching over the root of the right lung and joining the right superior vena cava at the level of the 5th thoracic vertebra. There was no retrohepatic IVC or right IVC in this patient, and the hepatic vein drained directly into the right atrium . No other anatomic anomalies were detected in this patient, and echocardiographic findings were normal.