In this case, a 30–35 year old African American male, with a past medical history of Graves Disease diagnosed in 2020 on methimazole and no past psychiatric history, presented to the emergency department (ED) with altered mental status (AMS). The patient could not provide history at the time of arrival due to AMS and disorganized behavior, so most history was initially provided by the patient’s mother. Per mother, the patient’s behavior over the prior two months was uncharacteristic, including posting threatening messages on social media, purchasing firearms, being incarcerated for stealing work property, and delusions such as believing he was a villain destined to kill superheroes. In addition, the patient had homicidal ideation towards family members, leading his mother to no longer feel safe in his presence. The mother reported a history of abnormal behavior a month before the patient’s diagnosis of Graves’ Disease in 2020 in which the patient was paranoid, anorexic, and had insomnia. At that time, the patient was stabilized with methimazole and had complied with his medication until two months before this admission.
When the patient arrived at the ED, the patient was agitated, uncooperative, and combative, requiring restraints and sedation by a combination of Haloperidol (Haldol) 10 mg/ Midazolam (Versed) 2 mg intramuscular. Initially, the ED believed the patient’s symptoms were due to a brief psychotic episode or drug-related psychosis, so the patient was transferred to the psychiatric emergency unit. The urine drug screen was positive for cannabinoids with a false positive for benzodiazepines from the required sedation of Haldol 10 mg/Versed 2 mg IM. The patient denied any other history of illicit substance use and no previous, documented records of stimulant use disorder were identified. Overnight, the patient had persistent tachycardia of > 110 heart rate, so a thyroid panel was initiated, which resulted in Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH) < 0.0005 and free T4 (fT4) > 7.770, evidence for a thyrotoxicosis induced psychosis. Other labs included a complete blood count and a complete metabolic panel, which were benign.
The patient was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) to treat his thyrotoxicosis. While in the ICU, the patient reported paranoia, and persecutory delusions causing distress due to concerns that he was the subject of the medical staff’s discussions in the hallway. Nursing reported that the patient was concerned that the medical staff had malicious intentions, so psychiatry started the patient on Olanzapine 10 mg twice a day (BID). Endocrine was consulted and initiated Propranolol 60 mg three times a day (TID) and Methimazole 30 mg BID and noted thyromegaly and peripheral tremors on physical exam. During the two days in the ICU, the patient’s thyroid levels improved with decreased paranoia and combativeness, and he was transferred to the hospital’s internal medicine floor for continued monitoring. The endocrine team recommended a thyroidectomy due to his recent history of noncompliance and the high mortality risk of thyrotoxicosis. Once the patient had a normal fT4 level of 2.27ng/dL, otolaryngology performed a total thyroidectomy, and the patient was transferred back to the inpatient hospital floor for continued monitoring. With no evidence of psychosis and overall improvement in behavior on postoperative day (POD) 1, Olanzapine 10 mg BID was decreased to once nightly.
On POD 6, the patient’s paranoia towards hospital staff returned even with reassuring labs of parathyroid hormones (PTH) 41.3pg/ml and calcium 8.9mmol/L, good adherence to Levothyroxine (Synthroid) 137 mcg daily, and a benign physical exam. The patient was then transferred to the inpatient psychiatric unit and diagnosed with a psychotic disorder due to hyperthyroidism, with delusional disorder. The patient continued Synthroid 137 mcg/daily in the psychiatric unit and restarted Olanzapine 10 mg BID. Olanzapine 10 mg BID was down-titrated to 10 mg nightly for better patient compliance with a simplified regimen and to avoid oversedation from higher doses of an antipsychotic. After day two on the psychiatric floor, the patient’s psychosis symptoms abated on the antipsychotic. Upon questioning, the patient had no recollection of the past two months, including most of his hospital stay. Ultimately, the patient showed greater insight into his illness and understood the need for strong medical compliance and outpatient follow-up. The patient was discharged on Synthroid 137 mcg daily and Olanzapine 10 mg daily. Post hospitalization, the patient was lost to follow up.