A 49-year-old woman with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma was admitted to the hospital because of fever for several hours. The patient had been treated for lymphoma since 3 months ago. Five days before admission, the patient was treated with the third cycle of CHOP plus rituximab (R-CHOP). She had no history of travel or contact with animals including cows or their products. Physical examination revealed high fever of 39.8°C. The patient had a subclavian cuffed-CVC(Hickman catheter) on the right side with no evidence of the inflammation at the exit site. Laboratory data and chest radiograph were within normal limits. Three sets of blood samples for cultures were drawn through CVC lines (2 sets) and a peripheral vein (1 set), respectively. The patient was treated empirically with vancomycin (1 g every 12 h intravenously). On the second hospital day, all 3 sets of blood cultures grew gram-positive, acid-fast bacilli. The cultures from the CVC became positive more than 2 hours earlier than that from a peripheral vein. Non-pigmented and pinpoint-shaped colonies were observed on blood or chocolate agar plate after 3 days of incubation at 37°C. It did not grow well on McConkey agar plate. As it grows, the color of the colonies becomes pale-yellow. Vancomycin was replaced by imipenem/cilastatin (500 mg every 6 h intravenously) and amikacin (375 mg every 12 h intravenously). On the sixth hospital day, the CVC was removed because of persistent fever. After removal of CVC, the patient became afebrile and the repeated blood cultures became negative. In vitro susceptibility test was performed by broth microdilution test as described by the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards (NCCLS) guidelines . The result of in vitro susceptibility test was shown in Table . The isolates were susceptible to most antimicrobial agents tested except vancomycin. The patient was further treated with oral ciprofloxacin (500 mg every 12 hours) and doxycycline (100 mg every 12 hours) for 4 weeks. She had been doing well with no evidence of recurrence for the next 3 months.