A 70-year-old man was referred to our department for an asymptomatic thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm. He had recently undergone percutaneous coronary procedure due to an ischemic cardiac event (myocardial infarction) and for this reason he was in treatment with a dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT).
The patient, a former smoker with arterial hypertension under single medical therapy, had been previously treated for an infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm with open surgical repair approximately 15 years before. A computed tomography angiography (CTA) scan performed for other causes, revealed a type III TAAA with a maximum diameter of 55X65 mm . The patient was asymptomatic for abdominal pain, but complained of buttock and thigh claudication, even in the absence of defects in the pelvic perfusion. Symptoms were further evaluated with spinal magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) that showed a severe lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS) . The patient was deemed to be at high risk for open surgery due to concomitant chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and low ejection fraction 40%) and a staged endovascular aortic repair was then planned, consisting of TEVAR followed by a second step to be performed 4 weeks later with a fenestrated custom-made endovascular repair of the visceral and infrarenal aorta.
Considering that subclavian and hypogastric arteries were patent and the intended length of the tract of thoracic aorta to be covered was less than 20 cm, the procedure was estimated at intermediate risk of SCI for the previous infrarenal aortic repair. Additionally, considering the need for continuing with the DAPT for the recent cardiac procedure, in agreement with the anesthesiologist, it was decided not to place a preoperative CSF drainage.
The procedure was performed with the deployment of a thoracic endoprosthesis (Cook Medical Inc., Bloomington, ZTEG-2PT-40-30-165-PF), as planned. The intervention was performed under general anesthesia, with a duration of 110 min. At the end of procedure, the patient was transferred to Intensive care Unit for postoperative monitoring, without any sign of clinical complications (Hb > 10 g/dl, mean arterial pressure (MAP) > 90, oxygen saturation > 97%). After 24 h from the procedure, incomplete paraplegia with absence of deep tendon reflex was detected. Therefore, it was decided to immediately insert a spinal catheter for CSF drainage.
CSF drainage was carried on for 7 days and the patient showed a partial recovery of the sensibility deficit (tactile dolorific hypoesthesia). The patient was transferred to the Spinal Unit, where a satisfactory recovery of the movements of the right leg was noted, whereas plegia of the left leg was still present. The patient was finally discharge in postoperative day 15th to a dedicated neurological rehabilitation center.
The second staged intervention was than delayed and, 1 week before the date of planned intervention, the patient came to the emergency department for hemoptysis and chest pain. An urgent CTA showed sudden increase of the thoracoabdominal aneurysm (78X63 mm) with contained sac rupture. The patient underwent urgent endovascular exclusion of the TAAA with the 4-branched custom made endoprosthesis: another thoracic stent-graft (Cook Medical Inc., Bloomington, ZTA-PT-36-32-161) was deployed to extend previous TEVAR. All the side branches were stented with Fluency (Bard Incorporated, Karlsruhe, Germany) and reinforced with a self-expandable stent (SMART, Cordis Endovascular, Warren, NJ). Distal abdominal stent grafting with both iliac artery extensions was performed landing distally inside the previous surgical graft.
Final digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed complete exclusion of the TAAA and good patency of the visceral vessels. Postoperative course was uneventful. No changes in neurological status occurred. The patient was discharged in the 6th postoperative day. The CTA performed 12 months after the procedure demonstrated the continued exclusion of TAAA and the patency of visceral and renal vessels .