An asymptomatic 40-year-old woman presented with gastric wall thickening detected by screening with an upper gastrointestinal series and underwent contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT), which also revealed an anterior mediastinal mass. She had been diagnosed with asymptomatic SjS at the age of 35, which was overlooked during the initial work-up. She had no medication or smoking history. She had a family history of breast cancer in her mother’s side and rheumatoid arthritis in her father’s side. The laboratory data showed nothing but hypergammaglobulinemia (IgG, 2750 mg/dL; IgA, 625 mg/dL; IgM, 241 mg/dL), and the serum soluble interleukin-2 receptor level was also within the normal limits (362 U/mL). A chest radiograph revealed no abnormalities. An abdominal CT revealed a localized wall thickness measuring 22 mm with enhancement in the middle part of the gastric body on the greater curvature. A well-circumscribed mass with a heterogenous concentration measuring 49 × 22 mm in the anterior mediastinum without any distant metastases and multiple cysts in both lungs were also demonstrated. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a multilocular mediastinal mass without invasion to the surrounding parenchyma . 18Fluoro-2-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) was not performed before the surgery. Suspecting the gastric wall thickness suggested a gastrointestinal stromal tumor or MALT lymphoma, we performed an endoscopic incisional biopsy. The pathological findings showed lymphocytic infiltration without any atypical cells or a light chain restriction between the kappa and lambda chains on immunostaining, consistent with inflammatory changes. We successfully performed a total thymectomy, due to suspecting an anterior mediastinal mass as a thymoma, by a bilateral approach via video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery with carbon dioxide insufflation in a supine position. There were no adhesions around the mass, and it was removed from the surrounding organs without any surgical difficulty . We also performed a wedge resection of the right upper lobe of the lung as a surgical biopsy to rule out lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM). The operation time was 187 min with 2 g of total blood loss. The cut surface of the mediastinal tumor exhibited a grayish-white solid mass with multiple cysts. Histopathologically, there was an infiltration of numerous lymphoid cells with lymphoid follicles. Small- to medium-sized atypical lymphoid cells were observed, and some of them exhibited plasmacytoid differentiation . Cytokeratin immunostaining revealed a lymphoepithelial lesion, consistent with infiltration of lymphoid cells into the epithelium. These cells were positive for CD20 and negative for CD3, CD5, and CD10. A light chain restriction positive for kappa and negative for lambda chains was demonstrated. From these findings, we diagnosed the mediastinal mass as a MALT lymphoma. A lung cyst was found to be an emphysematous bulla without any specific histological findings suggesting LAM. The postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged home on postoperative day 2. FDG-PET revealed no abnormal FDG uptakes in any organs 1 month later, and she is currently disease-free at 9 months after surgery.