In February 2017, a 56-year old woman was transferred from a peripheral hospital to the department of Urology (University of Bonn) due to left sided flank pain and elevated serum infection parameters. An abdominal computed tomography scan showed an obstruction of the renal pelvis caused by an amorphous mass .
The patient had neither relevant urologic medical history nor hematuria but she reported intermittent shivering since one week. The physical examination showed severe left sided flank pain on palpation. Extensive laboratory examination revealed leucocytosis (22.53 G/l), elevated C-reactive protein (253 mg/dl) and creatinin (1.4 mg/dl) as well as significant leucocyturia. A calculated antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone and tobramycin was initiated and a double-J-stent was inserted into the left ureter. The urine culture of the admission day did not reveal bacterial growth.
Due to missing clinical recovery with persistent fever and elevated serum infection parameters, the antibiotic treatment was changed to meropenem after four days.
Eventually, repeated urine culture and blood cultures revealed fungaemia with Candida glabrata. Therefore, intravenous antifungal therapy with caspofungin was started. Due to an allergic reaction with exanthema the therapy was shifted to amphotericin B. Blood tests ruled out HIV infection and Diabetes and there was no evidence for other immune deficiencies.
Cerebral and thoracoabdominal computed tomography scan excluded an extrarenal focus of infection and echocardiography did not show any intracardial fungal vegetations. Although the patient did not suffer from any visual impairment we initiated ophthalmoscopic examination as recommended in literature in case of fungaemia . Funduscopy revealed fungal parapapillary chorioretinal infiltrates . Under the antimycotic treatment, the inflammatory parameters were regressive and the patient’s clinical condition improved significantly. Ureterorenoscopic examination revealed a tough yellowish-gray mass in the renal pelvis.
Due to insufficient ureterorenoscopic removal of the mass, it was decided to perform percutaneous “nephrolitholapaxy”. Thus the material could be extracted completely . Microbiological and histological work-up revealed fungal bezoar colonized with Candida glabrata. Seven days after intervention urine culture control proved the absence of fungal colonization.
Finally, after 22 days of amphotericin B therapy, ophthalmologic re-examination showed a complete regression of the chorioretinal candida infiltrates and the patient was discharged in good general condition with normalized infection parameters.
After a follow up of two months the patient felt well and urine culture was sterile.