A five-day-old full-term female baby delivered by cesarean section cried immediately at birth. The mother had no comorbid conditions and described her pregnancy as normal. During the pregnancy, the mother had an X-ray of her leg, but she was unaware of her pregnancy at the time. There is no family history of congenital anomalies, and the baby is born to parents that are unrelated. The baby was born with a trunk-like appendage that was arising from the superomedial canthus of the left eye, 26 mm × 12 mm in size, with a small tract with Cerebrospinal fluid discharge. The left nasal cavity was hypoplastic with left anophthalmia. No cleft palate, cleft lip, or choanal atresia was noted. .
A two-dimensional Echocardiography (2D echo) revealed complex cyanotic congenital heart disease, including double outlet Right Ventricle with a large ventricular septal defect of 8 mm, malposed great vessels, mild valvular right ventricular outflow tract obstruction (RVOTO) with a pressure gradient of 26 mmHg, small Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) with a left to right shunt and confluent branched pulmonary arteries. Two ostium Secundum atrial septal defects (ASD) were noted of 4 mm and 25 mm with a normal biventricular structure and function. On Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, mild hydrocephalus, bilateral colpocephaly (larger than normal occipital horns due to undeveloped white matter in the posterior cerebrum) with bilateral periventricular white matter hypodensities and corpus callosum agenesis were noted. Computed tomography (CT) imaging with a 3D reconstruction of the face revealed minor bony defects of the left nasal bone, frontal process of the maxilla, and absent nasal turbinates.Bilateral maxillary and ethmoid sinuses were underdeveloped, to a greater degree on the child's left side. CT imaging of the thorax and abdomen revealed a hemivertebra involving the T10 vertebral body causing focal scoliosis with right-sided convexity.
Our patient’s parents deferred treatment and chose to wait till the child grows older.