A 78-year-old asymptomatic male patient underwent evaluation for prostate cancer. CT revealed a 56 × 77 mm mass at the posterior mediastinum ; subsequently, he was diagnosed with AVA. Apart from prostate cancer, his medical history was unremarkable. He did not have history of liver disfunction nor trauma.. In addition, the physical examination results and laboratory data were normal. When we had extensive discussion with the general thoracic surgeons, there was concern that there could be a strong adhesion to the surrounding tissues.The orifice of the azygos vein was larger than in previous cases reported as well. The chest surgeons suggested that it would be safer to perform the surgery under the cardiopulmonary bypass by cardiac surgeons considering the risk of major bleeding. We anticipated from the preoperative images that resection of the AVA would be difficult. Therefore, we planned to occlude the AVA inflow with coil embolization, and to surgically close the outflow from inside of the superior vena cava (SVC), thus excluding the aneurysm from the SVC. Any compression of the adjacent structures, thrombus formation, or pulmonary embolism were not evident. First, we performed the coil embolization of the caudal AVA inflow and the second, third, and fourth intercostal veins via the right internal jugular vein approach . Next, through a reversed L-shaped sternotomy (right fourth intercostal space) , a cardiopulmonary bypass was established by right femoral artery cannulation and venous drainage from the right atrium and both brachiocephalic veins. Intraoperative findings revealed no adhesion of the AVA to the lung and SVC ; therefore, we considered AVA resection. The orifice of the azygos vein was 20 × 50 mm on the posterior wall of the SVC . Subsequently, AVA was depressurized, allowing the aneurysm excision by a stapler. We excised the AVA with a stapler device (Powered ECHELON FLEX® 7; Ethicon, Tokyo, Japan) and closed the orifice. The cardiopulmonary bypass time was 64 min, operative time was 394 min, and bleeding volume was 105 ml. Histopathologic examination confirmed the preoperative diagnosis; it showed few inflammatory cell infiltration around vasa vasorum, intimal thickening and hypertrophy of the medial smooth muscle cell. The subsequent surgical and clinical courses were uneventful, and the patient was discharged in stable condition 8 days later. Postoperative CT showed no abnormalities, with the aneurysm having disappeared.