A 57-year-old gentleman with a history of active smoking, insulin dependent diabetes mellito (IDDM), hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and chronic coronary artery disease (CAD), presented complaining of severe ED. He underwent percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) in 2010 with implantation of three DES on left anterior descending artery, OM1, and right coronary artery. He was asymptomatic for chest pain, and echocardiography demonstrated normal cardiac function. He had normal external genitalia and secondary sexual characteristics. Sexual hormones analyses were in the reference range (total testosterone 7.34 ng/dL; free testosterone 17 pg/mL; sex hormone binding globulin 54 nmol/L; DHEA-S 394 g/dL). Ultrasound evaluation revealed normal prostate. Patient was taking 1 tablet of Bisoprolol 1.25 mg in the morning. He showed no response to increasing doses of different oral PDE5i drugs as well as no response to intra-cavernosal injections to prostaglandin E1 (IC-PDE1) over a 1-year period. Libido was normal. Dynamic Doppler Ultrasound with IC injection of PDE1 (Caverject® 10 mcg and after 10 min additional 10 mcg) showed a peak systolic velocity (PSV) of 12 cm/s on the left cavernosal artery and a PSV of 6 cm/s on the right cavernosal artery suggestive of a bilateral severe vasculogenic ED (normal response after Caverject > 25 cm/s). International Index of Erectile Dysfunction-5 questionnaire (IIEF) score was 3 points (normal 26–30; severe ED 6–10; moderate ED 11–16; mild ED 17–25). Selective angiography showed significant and diffuse atherosclerotic disease of the right mid and distal internal pudendal artery (IPA) associated with absence opacification of distal vascularization of the cavernous bodies and critical stenosis of the left internal iliac artery (IIA) ( and ). By utilization of a 6 Fr. left internal mammary guiding catheter (Cordis, Milan, Italy), the left IIA was engaged, and a 0.014' BMW wire (Abbott, Milan, Italy) was utilized to cross the stenosis. After non-compliant 5 mm × 40 mm balloon pre-dilatation at 10 atm (Sequent Neo NC, B.Braun), a self-expandable 6 mm × 18 mm bare-metal stent (Vascuflex® – B.Braun,) was precisely placed at the ostium of the vessel with no residual stenosis . Then, the IPA was engaged, and stenosis crossed by a Sion Blu 0.014' wire (Asahi Intecc Co. Japan) followed by semi-compliant balloon 2.0 mm × 20 mm (Sequent Neo, B. Braun) inflation at 10 atm in the proximal, mid, and distal segments and subsequently by sirolimus-eluting balloon 2.5 mm × 30 mm inflation (Magic Touch ED, Concept Medical) at proximal and middle segments followed by 2.0 mm × 20 mm sirolimus balloon inflation at the distal segment for 2 min at 8 atm, respectively. After waiting for 10 min to rule out elastic recoil, a 2 × 18 drug-eluting stent (DES; Supraflex Cruz, SMT) was implanted in the mid-segment of the IPA due to >30% residual stenosis with an optimal final acute result at control angiography . Femoral access was closed by a 6 Fr Angioseal VIP closure device (Terumo Europe).
One hundred and twenty millilitre volume of peripheral blood was utilized to concentrate 12 mL of autologous mononuclear cells by point-of-care device (Hematrate® Blood Filtration System, Cook Regentec), designed to obtain an autologous concentration of mononuclear cells (MNCs) utilizing whole-blood selective filtration . Mononuclear cells were immediately injected into the cavernous bodies under echo-guidance . This procedure was repeated at 35 and 70 days after the index procedure, following the same protocol used for critical limb ischaemia non-option patients.
The patient's hospital course was without complications. He was discharged with aspirin 100 mg lifelong, clopidogrel 75 mg for 1 year (choice related to the presence of multiple risk factors, previous coronary revascularization and multiple stents placement in the pudendal arteries usually considered a low flow district), rosuvastatin 20 mg, and fenofibrate 200 mg, Tadalafil 5 mg/daily, and vitamin E supplementation. After 3-months from the procedure, the patient reported an excellent response to PDE5i. At 6-month, the patient underwent Dynamic Doppler ultrasound with 10 mcg of IC-PDE1, which showed peak systolic velocity of 27 cm/s on the left and 32 cm/s on the right cavernosal arteries. IEF-5 score was 16 (delta IEF 13), suggestive of an excellent mid-term result. No complication was observed at the site of MNCs injection at the time of out-patient visit. At 1-year follow-up, the patient reported stable improvement in sexual function with an IEF-5 score of 18. He underwent control angiography demonstrating complete stent patency of the left IIA and excellent result on the right IPA with a marked increase in vascularization of the distal IPA and common penile artery ( and —arrows).