A 63-year-old woman found a mass in the superior lateral quadrant of the left breast, with no obvious discomfort, and she paid no attention to it.
During the next 2 years, the left breast mass gradually increased in size and was painful. She developed discomfort in the left upper limb and visited a local hospital many times (without an examination report). Surgical treatment was suggested, but the patient refused.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
The patient has a history of good health, and there is no similar patient in the family members.
Physical examination showed that the skin in the outer upper quadrant of the left mammary gland was obviously sunken, and a hard mass about 5 cm × 6 cm, with an unclear boundary, irregular shape, and poor activity was found on palpation. No obvious enlarged lymph nodes were found in the axilla.
No abnormalities were found in the patient's laboratory examinations.
Ultrasound showed a solid hypoechoic mass approximately 3.5 cm × 5.3 cm × 4.5 cm in size at the margin of the gland at 12-3 o'clock in the superior lateral quadrant of the left breast, and several hypoechoic lymph nodes of different sizes were detected in the left axilla. The largest lymph node was about 0.6 cm × 0.6 cm, and the lymphatic hilum structure had disappeared. No abnormalities were found in the right breast. Therefore, chest computed tomography (CT) scanning was performed, and the left breast mass was diagnosed as breast cancer, with no abnormalities in the lungs. Other results, including abdominal ultrasound, bone scan, and laboratory examinations, showed no abnormalities. There was no family history in genetic disorders.
The patient underwent core needle biopsy of the left breast mass under ultrasound guidance, and the histopathological diagnosis was apocrine carcinoma. Immunohistochemical analysis showed negative expression of ER and progesterone receptor (PR), but positive expression of HER2 and AR (approximately 60%); gross cystic disease fluid protein 15 (GCDFP-15) was also positive .