Our patient was a 20-year-old woman with a history of a sacral mass diagnosed by CT-guided needle biopsy 7 years before as benign fibrohistiocytoma. A repeat biopsy of her lesion through an open approach revealed myofibroblastic sarcoma. Consideration was given for reduction of tumor burden and lumbopelvic reconstruction to facilitate long-term progression-free survival and to improve quality of life, respectively.
The extension of tumor into both sacroiliac joints prohibited sparing S1; thus, a two-staged total sacrectomy was planned, as previously described. Briefly, the first stage of the procedure included a midline laparotomy, mobilization of the visceral and neural structures, and ligation of the internal iliac vessels. A colostomy was performed, and a right vertical rectus abdominus myocutaneous flap based on the inferior epigastric vessels was mobilized, wrapped in a bowel bag, and placed in the pelvis. The second stage was performed the next day, and it included L5 and S1 laminectomies, bilateral osteotomies and disarticulation of the sacrum from the ilium at the sacroiliac joints, ligation of the thecal sac inferior to the takeoff of the L5 nerve roots, complete L5–S1 discectomy, and transection of the S1–S5 nerve roots. The entire sacrum, along with the tumor, was removed piecemeal. This was followed by lumbopelvic reconstruction with spinal instrumentation and bone graft.
The patient underwent a long inpatient postoperative course. She responded well to intensive physical rehabilitation. Her postoperative course was complicated by the development of a small superficial soft tissue Staphylococcus epidermidis abscess in the operative bed treated with percutaneous drainage and a full course of intravenous and oral antibiotics. The patient also developed a small ischial decubitus ulcer, remote from the surgical incision, treated with local wound care. At 3 months after surgery, the patient was able to ambulate with the assistance of a walker. She had normal strength in her left leg, except for plantarflexion (S1). Her right leg was more impaired, with normal proximal strength but significant weakness in hip extension (L4 and L5), dorsiflexion (L4), extensor hallucis longus (L5), and plantarflexion (S1), suggesting sciatic nerve injury. She was discharged home and was pain-free off narcotics.
At 5 years after surgery, the patient remains pain-free. She was able to ambulate independently with a right ankle-foot orthosis. There was no evidence of locally progressive or metastatic disease on follow-up imaging. Postoperative imaging showed settling and a stable fibrous pseudoarthrosis .
The patient’s first pregnancy was unbeknownst to us during a period of follow-up loss after sacrectomy. However, she gave birth to a healthy 5-lb, 2-oz baby girl through a cesarean delivery at 37 weeks’ gestation by a community obstetrician. There were no birth complications. The baby, now 3½ years old, is meeting developmental milestones.
The Baylor Maternal-Fetal Medicine Service at Texas Children’s Pavilion for Women followed her second pregnancy closely. Frequent visits every 2 to 3 weeks were scheduled to monitor maternal status (e.g., weight gain and blood pressure). The pregnancy was carefully documented with monthly fetal ultrasound and MRI . At each outpatient visit, catheterization was performed to send urine culture, and the patient was on Keflex suppression throughout the pregnancy. Routine prenatal labs were obtained, and routine vaccines were administered. A repeat elective cesarean was performed at 37 weeks of gestation. Great care was taken to identify the right inferior epigastric vessels, the pedicle of the rectus abdominis musculocutaneous flap used for closure of the sacral defect . Plastic surgery was available at the time of delivery, but the right rectus abdominis muscle flap was not seen and was assumed to be posterior to the uterus. A healthy baby girl was delivered . The birth weight was recorded as 6 lb and 9 oz. Apgar scores of 8 and 9 were assigned at 1 and 5 min, respectively.
Table summarizes the patient history in timeline format.
Prior to the patient’s second pregnancy, we collected standardized and validated indices data to quantitate Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) outcomes through the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) and MOS Short Form 36 (SF-36).
Our patient’s ODI score was 30 %, representing mild disability.
SF-36 Physical Component Summary for our patient was calculated as 28.6 (national average, 53.5), and SF-36 Mental Component Summary was 52.9 (national average, 46.19). Our patient’s scores compared favorably in the domains of social functioning and mental health but were below the population norms across the remaining scales of physical functioning.