A 62-year-old non-Asian Spanish man was admitted to the emergency room for abdominal pain of epigastric origin, which evolved over the next 3 days to diffuse pain with constipation, but with no fever or vomiting. He had a 32-pack-year smoking history and had completed disulfiram treatment for alcohol cessation 10 years previously. He had residual pain in lower limbs after lumbar disc herniation surgery 15 years previously, for which he was taking naproxen, and had a medical history of a mild factor XII deficiency. He had no other relevant medical, surgical, or family history. On physical examination, palpation showed he had a contracted abdomen, with lividity and signs of peritonism but with no signs of deep vein thrombosis in the lower limbs. Blood pressure was 112/88 mmHg, heart rate 122 beats per minute, and temperature 35.8 ℃. There were no other findings on physical and neurological examination. A thoracoabdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed “findings suggestive of intestinal perforation (probably in the upper hemiabdomen), without being able to clearly identify the point of perforation.” Laboratory parameters in the emergency room showed glucose 123 mg/dL, urea 238 mg/dL, creatinine 4.29 mg/dL (previously, normal), total bilirubin 1.45 mg/dL (conjugated 0.91 mg/dL), and amylase 111 mg/dL. Sodium and potassium were in normal range, and the hemogram was also normal. Intravenous fluid resuscitation and empiric antimicrobial therapy with piperacillin–tazobactam 3.375 g/8 hours intravenous for 10 days, fluconazole 400 mg/24 hours for 6 days, and vancomycin 1 g/12 hours for 4 days were started. The patient underwent urgent surgical intervention, which revealed generalized peritonitis, perforation at the pylorus, necrosis of the greater omentum, and an abundance of free fluid in all abdominal quadrants (surgical intervention consisted of pyloric suture and resection of the greater omentum). The pathology report revealed “pyloric wall with signs of perforation and epiplon with adiponecrosis, microabscesses and exudative-fibrinoid serositis.” In the immediate postoperative period, the patient had a low level of consciousness and saturation of up to 80%, with acute lung edema observed on the CT scan (“extensive bilateral pulmonary consolidations associated with bilateral pleural effusion and evidence of anasarca due to probable fluid overload/decompensated heart failure”). The patient was intubated to achieve oxygen saturation > 98% with an FiO2 of 0.4. The patient was sedated and on analgesic, responding to painful stimuli. Hemodynamically, he was mostly stable with a need for norepinephrine at 0.3 mg/kg/minute and tension readings of 123/73 and 90 beats per minute. However, liver function progressively worsened, reaching total bilirubin levels of 4.15 mg/dL. Likewise, the patient was in acute renal failure AKIN III, with diuresis dependent on furosemide at 30 mg/hour, creatinine levels > 4 mg/dL, and urea > 290 mg/dL. The patient presented poor postoperative course, with progressively higher fluid outflow through abdominal drains and abdominal sepsis, as revealed by symptoms and microbiology (Klebsiella pneumoniae was isolated in blood culture; Enterococcus faecalis and Escherichia coli in the drains; E. coli and Streptococcus anginosus in the surgical wound), which raised suspicion of perforation of the previous surgical suture. As intraabdominal pressure increased progressively, the patient underwent a second surgical intervention at 9 days after the first surgery, which revealed a biliopurulent contamination in the peritoneal cavity caused by a previous dehiscence from a pyloric suture line. Therefore, based on intraoperative findings, duodenal exclusion was performed by gastric antrectomy followed by retrocolic Roux-en-Y (end-to-side) gastrojejunostomy and jejunojejunal distal (side-to-side) anastomosis. Cholecystectomy was then followed by external drainage of the common bile duct by placement of a T-tube, to prevent cholecystitis. Splenectomy was performed because of intraoperative bleeding.
The patient remained intubated and sedated, maintaining good saturation. He also had hemodynamic stability without vasoactive amines. However, total bilirubin levels continued to rise (from 4.15 to 6.8 mg/dl), and the patient continued to exhibit anuria, with urea 291 mg/dl, creatinine 4.02 mg/dl; pH 7.35, HCO3- 26.5 mmol/L, pCO2 47 mmHg, and normal anion gap (AG). The patient began treatment with an infusion of caspofungin for 13 days at 50 mg/24 hours, meropenem for 21 days at 1 g/8 hours, and again with vancomycin for 6 days. As the patient again presented very poor postoperative evolution, with fecal contamination of the abdominal drainage, a third surgery was performed 4 days after the second one, in which the patient underwent partial colectomy (due to the intraoperative ischemic appearance of the colon) and resuture of the pyloric repair. Pathological anatomy showed gastric and duodenal dehiscence, with an ischemic appearance of the transverse colon and perforations, foci of hemorrhagic necrosis (both mucosal and submucosal), secondary gangrenous inflammation, and multiple intestinal ulcerations related to calcified phlebosclerosis of the submucosal vessels. After the third intervention, the patient was in stable but serious condition. Hemodynamically, the patient was stable, with some hypertensive peaks (160/70 mmHg). Bilirubin levels improved, down to 2.19 mg/dl; however, the patient continued to have poor kidney function that required hemodialysis sessions at 6 days after the third surgery. Due to the improvement in respiratory function, extubation was carried out but failed due to weakness in the musculature. For this reason, a tracheostomy was performed at 29 days after admission. Teicoplanin was delivered at 3 days after the third surgery, at 400 mg/12 hours for 6 days by isolation in surgical wound exudate of Enterococcus gallinarum. An infusion of ertapenem and ampicillin at 1 g/24 hours and 1 g/6 hours, respectively, was started at 16 days after the third surgery but was suspended because of a skin rash. Linezolid infusion (600 mg/12 hours) was also started at 20 days after the last intervention in order to treat for Gram-positive bacteria. In the last days of life, the patient showed increased overall deterioration, with disconnection to his environment, oscillation between normothermia and hypothermia, and systolic blood pressure < 70 mmHg, which forced hemodialysis to be suspended. Furthermore, despite hemodialysis, creatinine peaks continued at 8.11 mg/dl, and urea at 190 mg/dl. After receiving palliative care, the patient died, 35 days after admission. No autopsy was requested.