A 62-year-old previously healthy Sri Lankan native male from Gampaha, in the Western Province of Sri Lanka presented with high fever associated with chills and rigors for 17 days. He also complained of malaise, myalgia and arthralgia for the same duration but denied any urinary, respiratory or abdominal symptoms. Until he presented to us, he had obtained treatment froma local hospital for the illness with no clinical improvement. He had received co-amoxyclav, clarythromicin and paracetamol for 4 days. He had not been consuming any medication prior to the illness and had not received any drug that would result in extrapyramidal features. Around the 5th day of the clinical illness he had developed intermittent resting tremor in his right arm and leg. By the time he presented to us he had stiffness and very frequent intermittent resting tremor (Additional file : Video). This resulted in difficulty to carry out normal work with the right hand. He also found it difficult to walk due to unusual stiffness and heaviness of the right leg. Furthermore, he found it difficult to smile with others and felt very distressed. He denied similar previous episodes. There was no associated hearing impairment, seizures, or altered level of consciousness. There were no symptoms to suggest involvement of cerebellar system or autonomic nervous system. There was no family history of movement disorders. He had been working in his garden 7 days prior to the onset of fever and rest of the past medical history was unremarkable. Examination revealed intermittent high amplitude low frequency resting tremor in his right hand (Additional file : Video) and a mask like face where he found difficult to smile or show his teeth . He also had increased muscle tone limited to the right side with normal tendon reflexes.The rest of the central nervous system was unremarkable. His blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg in both supine and standing positions, pulse rate 88 beats per minute and there were no cardiac murmurs. The respiratory system revealed few basal crackles and the abdominal examination was unremarkable except for a superficial crater like lesion suggestive of an eschar. He did not have lymphadenopathy or a rash.
His full blood count was 13.4 × 109/L (Neutrophils 43 %, Lymphocytes 56 %), Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 80 mm/1st h and had a normal urine analysis, liver and renal function tests. The CT scan of the brain and the Electroencephalogram were normal. We did not perform a lumbar puncture or an Magnetic resonance image scan of the brain. He was positive for Immunofluoresence Assay (IFA)-IgM and IgG for O. tsutsugamushi on the 17th day of illness and the IFA-IgG titre using Orientia Karp antigen was 1:1024 which rose up to 1:16,384 after 2 weeks confirming scrub typhus. His fever settled with oral doxycycline and azithromycin within 48 h and demonstrated some improvement in his Parkinsonism features prior to discharge from hospital in 4 days. He vistied for review 2 weeks after discharge and by this time he showed complete improvement and was happy with a smiling face .