A 60 years old Caucasian woman was admitted to the Emergency Department of our Hospital because of ascites and abdominalgia. Twenty years earlier she was diagnosed with breast cancer, subjected to mastectomy and then treated with several chemotherapy lines, including the inhibitor of vascular endothelial growth factor A Bevacizumab, hormonal therapy and local radiotherapy. About 5 months before the admission, she developed seizures and sudden cognitive impairment, with loss of contact: a MRI revealed cranial and cerebral metastasis. An antiepileptic drug Levetiracetam was started as well panencephalic radiotherapy was given for five days. Chemotherapy was also administered with resolution of symptoms and regression of metastasis. One month before the hospitalization, she developed lower limb deep vein thrombosis, so she started fondaparinux as anticoagulation therapy. The patient continued its oncological follow-up schedule of a stage IV breast cancer, with multiple liver, pleural, pulmonary and bone metastasis, treated with Palbociclib, anti-CDK4 and 6 antagonist and Fulvestrant, an estrogen receptor antagonist. At two follow-up visits during the 4 weeks prior to admission to the Emergency Department because of low circulating serum magnesium levels, magnesium and potassium salts supplementation was reported and then suspended due to the appearance of abdominal pain. She was sent to the Emergency department by the oncologist because of abdominalgia associated to nausea and vomiting. She has been treated with a proton pump inhibitor for at least 6 months because of heartburn, regurgitation, and symptoms related to gastroesophageal reflux disease. An abdominal ultrasound highlighted abundant ascites. She was vigilant and collaborating, without alteration on neurological exam. Her vital parameters were normal, and laboratory tests showed mild anemia (Hemoglobin 10.6 g/dl, hematocrit 32%), no renal (creatinine 0.4 mg/dL) or hepatic (GOT 21 U/L; GPT 13 U/L; total bilirubin 0.4 mg/dL, albumin 3.2 g/dL) impairment and a moderate increase in C reactive protein (63 mg/L; normal values < 5 mg/L). Plasma sodium (135 mEq/L), potassium (3.9 mEq/L), chloride (98 mEq/L), calcium (8.2 mg/dL) and phosphate (4.0 mg/dL) concentration were normal, whereas magnesium levels were at the lower limit (1.8 mg/dL). Within the normal range was also pH and bicarbonate. Coagulation was normal, except for a significant increase of d-dimer. On physical examination, she had ascites and abdominalgia without breathing impairment. She felt nausea and vomit; symptomatic therapy with metoclopramide was given and a parenteral nutrition infusion with Olimel N4 (1500 ml/day, Glucose 112,5 g, Lipids 45 g, Amino-acids 38 g, Nitrogen 6 g; sodium 21 mEq/L, potassium 16 mEq/L, Mg 2.2 mEq/L, osmolarity 760 mOsm/L) was started. She was treated parenterally with loop of Henle diuretic therapy, furosemide associated with potassium sparing diuretic canrenoate, associated to water restriction. An abundant diuretic response and the reduction of ascites was observed in the 48 hours following, with a significant weight loss and an almost complete resolution of the abdominalgia. No changes in blood pressure or heart rate were measured. She suddenly presented confused and disoriented. She was not able to attempt a simple order and she complained headache. Her blood pressure was still normal and the neurological exam did not show any focal or lateral abnormality. Ammonium blood levels were normal (37 uM/L, normal values between 10-50). An urgent cerebral tomography was performed, showing a diffuse cerebral edema (,ABC). Patient neurological condition rapidly got worse, till vigil coma, with loss of interaction ability, while her vital parameters (blood pressure, heart rate and peripheral oxygen saturation) remained normal. Treatment with intravenous desametasone (8 mg twice a day) and mannitol (mannitol 18%, 100 ml four times per day followed by 50 ml four times per day), associated with magnesium sulphate (40 mEq in saline solution 250 ml per day in 6-hour infusion period) was immediately started and continued for three days. A cerebral MRI was urgently performed showing diffuse increase in signal alteration of the periventricular, deep and sub-cortical white matter in parieto-occipital region of the two sides, as from leukoencephalopathy, also in relation to post-radiotherapy modifications. venous thrombosis of the distal segment of the transverse sinus and of part of the left sigmoid sinus .
She continued subcutaneous Fondaparinux at anticoagulating dose (7,5 mg/die) while Palbociclib and Fulvestrant were discontinued. Anti-edema (desametasone and mannitol) treatment as well magnesium sulphate infusion were continued. Her clinical condition rapidly improved with resolution of the acute episode.
A brain MRI was performed after 10 days, showing less but still persistent bilateral parieto-temporal-occipital vasogenic edema, partial resolution of the cerebral vein thrombosis, but evidencing the presence of few micro-haemorrhages in left temporal and parietal site .
Patient neurological status completely recovered and after 2 weeks, she was discharged with the diagnosis of PRES.
At a MRI brain scan, performed the following month, a reduction of the vasogenic edema but a persistent even if reduced left transverse sinus thrombosis . After a month, she was admitted to the hospital because of severe respiratory distress due to pneumonia and after three days she passed away.