The patient was a 67-year-old Middle-Eastern man who came to the emergency ward with progressive bilateral lower extremity muscle weakness and myalgia. The patient had no drug history and no significant past medical history or history of contact with toxins. Fifteen days prior to the onset of muscle weakness, the patient had presented with fever, rhinorrhea, and mild shortness of breath, and with a positive nasal swab PCR test, had a diagnosis of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pneumonia, for which he was treated as an outpatient, with desirable recovery after 15 days. However, following the resolution of COVID-19 symptoms, the patient started to develop myalgia and bilateral lower extremity proximal weakness. Due to augmentation of his lower extremity weakness and development of upper extremity proximal weakness, he was admitted to the hospital for further evaluation. In the physical examination, proximal muscle weakness was noted in the upper and lower extremities (power grade 4/5 and 3/5, respectively), with normal tone and deep tendon reflexes. The patient had no skin lesions or rashes. The patient also reported no muscle tenderness in our examination. The rest of the examination was normal.
The initial laboratory tests detected elevated muscle enzymes including creatine phosphokinase (CPK): 12,000 (normal: 38–174 U/L); lactate dehydrogenase (LDH): 757 (normal: 130–240 U/L)]; and aldolase: 11 (normal: 8.5 U/L). Procalcitonin was in the normal range. Also, 25-hydroxy vitamin D test levels were normal, at 40 ng/mL. Other laboratory data included a white blood count (WBC) of 8.83 × 103 µl), hemoglobin of 14.2 g/dL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 9 mm/hour (normal: < 20 mm/hour), C-reactive protein of < 2 mg/L (normal: ≤ 6 mg/L), creatinine of 1 mg/dL, blood urea of 32 mg/dL, sodium (Na) 140 mEq/L, potassium (K) 4.4 mEq/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 25 IU/L (normal: 15–40 IU/L), alanine transaminase (ALT) 26 IU/L (normal: ≤ 41 IU/L), and alkaline phosphatase 121 IU/L (normal 120–450 IU/L). Bilateral thigh magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) axial and coronal view (T1 and T2; Short Tau Inversion Recovery) showed diffuse edema within all muscle compartments of the thigh with notable intra- and perimuscular edema, suggestive of myositis. .
Electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction velocity (NCV) findings were suggestive of irritable myopathy in several proximal muscles, including rectus femoris, iliopsoas, and deltoid. Additionally, in a left deltoid muscle biopsy, muscle necrosis was reported in the absence of inflammation, in favor of necrotizing autoimmune myositis . In cryopreserved biopsy from deltoid muscle, variation in fiber size was evident, with presence of some pale necrotic fibers with evidence of myophagocytosis associated with some regenerating fibers. Inflammation was absent. On trichrome stain, no apparent fibrosis was seen. Based on the overall histomorphology and clinical and laboratory findings, the diagnosis of immune-mediated necrotizing myopathy was established. .
Among all myositis-related autoantibodies such as anti-3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR), anti-signal recognition particle (SRP), anti-Jo-1, and anti-NXP2, only anti-NXP2 autoantibodies were positive, which prompted us to search for underlying malignant processes. The patient underwent a malignancy workup by abdomen and pelvis ultrasound, chest CT scan, endoscopy and colonoscopy, prostate-specific antigen (PSA), and ear, nose, and throat (ENT) examination, which were all unremarkable. Based on the positive results of NXP2 and to rule out malignancy, a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET) scan was performed, which demonstrated a 35 × 28 mm left thyroidal lobe nodule . A thyroid biopsy confirmed its unmalignant nature and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels were also normal. Cardiac echocardiography, electrocardiography, and lung spirometry were also normal. Chest high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) also showed bilateral multifocal patchy ground-glass opacities with dominant peripheral distribution, which were attributable to previous COVID-19 pneumonia. .
Since myositis could emerge in the context of some connective tissue disorders, testing for some other laboratory markers, including antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-smooth muscle antibodies (ASMA), perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA), cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (C-ANCA), anticyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP), rheumatoid factor (RF), anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-ds DNA), complement component 3 (C3), complement component 4 (C4), and anti-Ro were done, which were all in the normal range. Thus, a diagnosis of necrotizing autoimmune myositis, possibly complicating COVID-19, was made after ruling out other causes for NAM by appropriate tests.
For treatment, prednisolone 1 mg/kg orally was administered. CPK levels started to fall after the initiation of steroids and were 107 IU/mL at the time of discharge. Resolution of ground-glass opacity of the lungs was observed after three months from his discharge. The prednisolone dose was decreased gradually to 10 mg, 1 year after diagnosis, and azathioprine was continued with an initial dose of 150 mg/day, which was decreased to 100 mg/day. The patient’s muscle force was resolved to normal after 1 year of follow-up. After confirming no inflammation, we reduced the prednisolone dose to an eventual 5 mg daily, along with 50 mg/day azathioprine. The patient is still relatively well after 15 months follow-up with improved laboratory examinations and muscle power in all extremities. The latest laboratory data were as follows: CPK: 115 U/L; LDH: 478 U/L; WBC: 9.02 × 103/µl); hemoglobin: 13.9 g/dL; AST: 25 IU/L; ALT: 23 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase (ALK): 134 IU/L; K: 4.1 mEq/L; ESR: 5 mm/hr; CRP < 2; vitamin D: 30 ng/mL; creatinine: 1.19 mg/dL; blood urea: 42 mg/dL; and Na: 139 mEq/L.