A 34-year-old G4P3 Caucasian woman was followed up antenatally because of a stillbirth in her previous pregnancy. She had had mild pre-eclampsia in her first pregnancy and a Caesarean section was carried out after unsuccessful induction of labor. Her second pregnancy and delivery were uneventful. The reason for the stillbirth in her third pregnancy was found to be an umbilical cord knot.
In the pregnancy reported here, our patient had polymorphic eruption of pregnancy (PEP) from 26 weeks' gestation and had three separate courses of oral steroids. Anti-D-antibodies were also found to be increased but in quantitative analyses their concentration, however, remained low. She was hospitalized once for a short period in late pregnancy because of an abnormal fetal heart rate recording.
At 36 weeks' gestation, a hypoechoic, 3.6 × 4.2 cm rounded mass was noted within the placenta on ultrasound examination . An ultrasound scan with umbilical artery Doppler measurement after 28 weeks' gestation was normal and it is likely that the leiomyoma had gone unnoticed probably because no special attention had been paid to the placenta on that occasion. Another explanation could be that the leiomyoma grew very rapidly in the third trimester of pregnancy and it was too small to draw appropriate attention in earlier scans.
She had induction of labor due to worsening of PEP at 38 weeks' gestation. A viable male infant weighing 3330 g was delivered with Apgar scores of 9 at one minute and 9 at five minutes. The placenta was removed without difficulty.
A round-shaped nodule was noted on the maternal surface of the otherwise normal placenta. The size of the nodule was 4 × 4 × 3 cm. It had a pale cut surface without hemorrhage, necrosis or calcification .
Histologically, the nodule was composed of bundles of smooth muscle cells. Nuclei were round or oval shaped and there were no atypical features or mitotic activity . No attached myometrium was identified.
Immunohistochemistry was positive for the smooth muscle actin antigen (Neomarkers, 1:500). Factor VIII related antigen (Dako, 1:750) and CD34 (Becton-Dickinson 1:20) marked only the endothelial cells, whereas cytokeratin of low molecular weight (Becton-Dickinson, 1:20), placental alkaline phosphatase (Dako 1:20) and desmin (Biogenex, 1:50) were negative. The method used for labeling was streptavidin-biotin. The tumor cells were positive for progesterone receptors but negative for estrogen receptors which is typical for leiomyomas during pregnancy .
Chromosomes of the tumor were studied from paraffin sections by the fluorescence in situ hybridization technique with X- and Y-chromosome-specific probes and the tumor was found to carry XX chromosomes.