A four-month-old previously well Sri Lankan male infant from an urban area presented with high grade fever of 102-103 °F of 2 days duration. He had conjunctival redness, bilateral pedal oedema, a scaly rash in the cheeks, and a sand-paper like papular erythematous rash on the trunk and bilateral upper and lower limbs. Both liver and spleen were palpable 2 cm below the costal margin. There was no redness in the tongue and no cervical lymphadenopathy. Other system examinations were normal, except for high blood pressure measured by both manual and electronic methods, which was above the 99th percentile.
The initial full blood count showed a total white cell count (WBC) of 18,000/uL with a neutrophil leukocytosis of 53%, a platelet count of 552,000/uL and a haemoglobin of 12 g/dL. C-reactive protein (CRP) was 130 mg/dL and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 10 mm in the 1st hour. Serum sodium was 134 mmol/L and potassium 5.4 mmol/L. Renal and liver function tests were normal. Covid-19 rapid antigen and PCR tests were negative.
He was empirically initiated on intravenous cefotaxime and flucloxacillin based on the local sensitivity patterns, suspecting either a streptococcal or staphylococcal septicaemia. However, blood culture was sterile and high fever spikes continued despite continuous antibiotics. Ultrasound scan abdomen on day four was normal and 2D echocardiogram did not show any coronary artery dilatations. Atypical Kawasaki disease was suspected and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 2 g/kg was administered on day six, followed by aspirin 80 mg/kg/day in four divided doses. As the response was poor, investigations were repeated. CRP and ESR had risen to 143 mg/dL and 130 mm/1st hour respectively. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed polymorphs 10/mm3, lymphocytes 43/mm3, red cells 23/mm3 and protein 136 mg/dL. Antibiotics were escalated to intravenous meropenam and vancomycin. CSF culture showed no growth.
Fever spikes continued on day ten and the child developed periungual desquamation in fingers and toes. 2D echocardiogram was repeated which showed dilated coronary arteries (left main coronary artery 5.3 mm, left anterior descending artery 6.5 mm, right coronary artery 5 mm) and a thin pericardial effusion suggestive of KD. A second dose of IVIG 2 g/kg was given and Aspirin dose increased to 100 mg/kg/day. Intravenous Methylprednisolone 30 mg/kg pulse therapy was given for 3 days followed by oral prednisolone. Fever settled for 72 hours, only to recur again. Repeat 2D echocardiogram on day fifteen showed progressive worsening of the coronary dilatation (LMCA 5.7 mm, LAD 9 mm, RCA 6 mm). Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST elevations in inferior leads which were persistent on serial ECGs. Cardiac Troponin I levels and Creatine-kinase levels were normal. Clopidogrel and warfarin were added while Aspirin was continued. Oral prazosin and furosemide were added to control the hypertension. His serum electrolytes, renal functions and ultrasound abdomen and kidney-ureter-bladder and renal artery doppler were normal. Extensive investigations in view of aetiology for hypertension such as renal angiogram, urinary and plasma metanephrines, renin-aldosterone levels were not performed as the preliminary investigations were normal and due to limitation of resources in the local setting. His 2D-Echocardiogram did not reveal left ventricular hypertrophy and ophthalmic assessment did not reveal hypertensive retinopathy which confirmed the acute onset of hypertension with the current illness.
On day sixteen he developed a vesiculo-papular rash involving face, trunk and distal upper and lower limbs including the periungual regions and the perineum . It progressively evolved into bullous lesions. Biopsy of the rash revealed parakeratosis and neutrophils in the epidermis with broad papillae suggestive of guttate psoriasis . It did not show small or medium vessel vasculitis.
Intravenous infliximab 5 mg/kg was administered on the 28th day of illness after screening for and excluding tuberculosis, followed by two more doses on the 2nd and 6th week after the initial dose. Fever responded to infliximab within 24 hours and the skin lesions showed gradual improvement. He developed a small joint arthritis involving proximal and middle inter-phalangeal joints of hands and feet on day 40 which showed a diurnal worsening . Oral Methotrexate was added. Repeat 2D echocardiogram on day 60 showed a reduction in the coronary artery diameters, finally indicating a therapeutic response (LMCA 5.3 mm, LAD 6.9 mm, RCA 5 mm). The infant was discharged on day 61 of illness on aspirin, warfarin and prazosin. Oral prednisolone, clopidogrel and methotrexate were gradually tailed off after discharge. Oral prednisolone 2 mg/kg dose was given for 6 weeks followed by gradual taper over a period of 3 months.
On follow up, his arthritis and skin rash resolved completely. The hypertension which was present from the beginning of illness settled completely four and a half months from disease onset, enabling discontinuation of anti-hypertensive medications.