A 2630 g female newborn was delivered at term by a cesarean section due to deceleration after an uncomplicated pregnancy to a 36-year-old mother. Since the age of three months she was hospitalized several times with intermittent wheezing, inspiratory stridor, epigastrical retractions, dyspnea and cough. Each time, she was diagnosed either with bronchiolitis or wheezy bronchitis and treated with bronchodilators, inhaled corticosteroids and antibiotics. However the symptoms recurred frequently, therefore further diagnostic approaches were initiated including chest-radiography, allergy tests (specific IgE) and otorhinolaryngeal examination, which revealed no abnormalities. At the age of two years the girl was admitted to our hospital because of an acute exacerbation of her pulmonary situation. She presented in reduced physical condition with respiratory distress at rest, wheezing and dry cough. Inhalation therapy with beta agonists showed no success, there were no signs of a severe viral or bacterial infection. Based on her medical history of several episodes with recurrent, therapy-refractory wheezing without signs of an infection and her acute condition of severe respiratory distress we decided to extend the diagnostic approach and underwent flexible bronchoscopy under general anesthesia. The larynx appeared with a mild malacia, the branching of the right upper lobe bronchus (RUL) was atypical in the anterior aspect of the carina followed by tracheal stenosis. The main bronchi could not be entered with a two millimeter bronchoscope . Therefore and to identify the exact anatomical situation a CT scan of the lung was performed with a three-dimensional reconstruction of the tracheo-bronchial system, which demonstrated a voluminous right upper lobe bronchus branching of the trachea at the level of the aortic arch, followed distally by a tracheal stenosis to the left . At a lower vertebral level than that of the normal carina (T5-6), the trachea was divided into two bronchi (bifurcatio tracheae), of which one proceeded to the left side of the lung (left main bronchus, LMB) and one adjacently with the pulmonary artery to the right (bridging bronchus, BB). This bridging bronchus upcoming from the left supplied the right lower and middle lobe. Whereas the right lower lobe was normally configured, the right middle lobe appeared hypoplastic. Parts of the ventral upper lobe were hyperinflated. Despite the small diameter of the left main bronchus, the left lung was normally ventilated. CT scan provided no indication of an associated vascular malformation e.g. a left sling pulmonary artery (SLPA). To exclude further anatomical variations of the cardiovascular, renal or gastrointestinal system echocardiography and abdominal ultrasound were performed and demonstrated no anomalies.
Treatment with epinephrine inhalation and leucotriene receptor antagonist was initiated for several weeks and the patient was followed by our outpatient clinics every three months. Early intervention with physiotherapy, early use of mucolytic therapy and antibiotics were recommended during infections. During her three-years follow up period the girl has shown several croup-like attacks, but did well without further intervention or therapy.