A 19-year-old female was evaluated at the Department of Adult Psychiatry Outpatient Clinic with complaints of lack of enjoyment of pleasurable activities, sleep disturbances, suicidal thoughts, and self-induced injury at times of high stress via superficial cutting behaviors on her forearms. These symptoms were in association with ongoing family conflict with her mother and her sister with whom she lived.
At the psychiatric evaluation, she expressed that her self-esteem was strongly affected by her turbulent family relationships, and she seemed extremely unhappy. She reported superficial cutting behaviors at least 2 times a week, usually in an impulsive fashion. Laboratory evaluations including hemogram, liver function tests, total protein, vitamin B12, folic acid, T3, T4, and TSH were within normal limits. Baseline psychiatric evaluation with the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) revealed scores of 21 (moderate depression) . According to clinical evaluation as well as DSM-V criteria, the patient was diagnosed with major depressive disorder and borderline personality disorder, and she was started on citalopram 20 mg by mouth per day . Cognitive behavioral therapy focusing on negative cognitions was also initiated. Partial response to treatment was observed at the 12th week with reduction of BDI-II score to 12 (mild mood disturbance).
While she was under follow-up at the Department of Adult Psychiatry Outpatient Clinic, she admitted to a prior ingestion of a portion of a small bottle (less than 30 milliliters per her description of the product packaging) of a commercially available chemical skin exfoliator containing TCAA. This consumption was impulsive per her description and occurred after an argument with her mother. While such products available over the counter can typically range from 8% to 30% TCAA ingredient which determines strength, she did not recall what percentage of TCAA was in the product . She had purchased the TCAA peel to brighten and even out her skin tone by reducing the appearance of hyperpigmentation (acne marks and freckles). She believed the product to also contain antidepressant TCA, since the product was marketed per her report as a “TCA peel,” which is often done in the industry. She knew that TCA antidepressants can be extremely damaging or even fatal in overdose which was her intent. TCA effects in overdose are well documented in the literature . Her symptoms after ingestion were burning pain on her lips and in her mouth, which frightened her somewhat, preventing her from consuming more of the product. She also complained at the time of mild abdominal discomfort followed by an episode of vomiting. Fortunately no other symptoms were reported and all of the symptoms resolved within a few hours. She was asymptomatic at the time of reporting this event to the outpatient clinic.