The recipient of the blood transfusion was a 16-year-old Sri Lankan boy who has beta thalassaemia major with a co-morbidity of blood transfusion-induced cardiomyopathy. Thalassaemia is the commonest monogenic disease in Sri Lanka . The patient, who is from the Polonnaruwa district in the North Central Province of Sri Lanka gave no history of travel overseas. He had been splenectomized in 2010 and receives monthly blood transfusions. His last transfusion had been on the 21st of April 2021. He developed fever and headache 13 days following the transfusion on 4th May for which he sought treatment from a General Practitioner two days later. He was treated for a viral fever with anti-pyretics and malaria was not suspected nor tested for at this stage of the illness. As the fever did not respond to treatment he was admitted to the General Hospital, Polonnaruwa on the 9th of May 2021 for further investigation and treatment, 18 days after the blood transfusion. As a part of the routine fever surveillance activities carried out in hospitals by the Public Health Field Officer (PHFO) for the AMC, the patient was tested for malaria soon after admission, and was reported positive for P. falciparum by microscopy (parasite density of 51,315/μl with asexual parasites and gametocytes). The diagnosis was also confirmed by polymerase chain reaction testing.
The day after admission, when the malaria diagnosis was confirmed the patient was febrile (37.8 °C), had a blood pressure of 90/60 Hgmm and a normal heart rate. Laboratory investigations revealed a haemoglobin (Hb) of 5.4 mg/dl, WBC count of 31,300/μl and a platelet count of 378,000/mm3. The patient was treated with artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT), artemether-lumefantrine, the first-line treatment for P. falciparum malaria in Sri Lanka, for 3 days at the standard recommended dosage under supervision, based on national malaria treatment guidelines . Routine investigations on liver and other functions were performed.
The patient’s clinical condition deteriorated over the first 3 days of treatment. The peripheral blood parasitaemia declined very slowly from a starting density of 51,015 parasites/μl on admission. After 72 h of commencement of anti-malarial treatment the parasitaemia was 7147 parasites/μl, blood pressure remained below normal at 90/50 mmHg, haemoglobin (Hb) level fell to 7.6 mg/dl and the WBC count was 47,430/mm3. He still had irregular spikes of fever. The liver enzymes increased (AST from 86.5 U/L to 250.8 U/L and to 458.9 U/L; and ALT from 62 U/L to 174.3 U/L and 314.9 U/L) over 3 days. Serum C-Reactive Protein was elevated above 100 mg/L. The patient was managed with intravenous inotropes (noradrenalin) because of the poor response of blood pressure to fluid therapy. With parasites persisting in peripheral blood on completion of the ACT course at 72 h, and deterioration of the patient’s clinical condition, further anti-malarial treatment options were considered. The second-line anti-malarial medicine in Sri Lanka, dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DHAPPQ) could not be used in this patient because it is contraindicated in cardiomyopathies which the patient suffered from. Treatment with the next option, intravenous artesunate 2.4 mg/kg was, therefore, commenced immediately (i.e. 72 h after starting anti-malarials) and given for a further 3 days while the patient was managed in the Coronary Care Unit of the hospital. Following the last dose of IV artesunate, he was started on a 3-day course of oral artemether-lumefantrine as the recommended practice after parenteral artesunate. By day seven of commencement of treatment, asexual malaria parasites were no longer seen in blood smears, but gametocytes (sexual stages) were present at a density of 270/μl. The patient had improved clinically by then and had a stable blood pressure after withdrawal of inotropes, and liver function test had returned to normal levels (AST- 48.7 U/L and ALT- 25.5 U/L). The gametocyte count decreased gradually to 152 parasites/µl on completion of oral ACT on day 9. A stat dose of primaquine (0.75 mg/ kg−3 tablets) was given on day 10 for its anti-gametocyte activity. The patient was completely cleared of parasites including gametocytes by day 15. Following the transfusion of three units of blood the patient was discharged from hospital on day seventeen (post transfusion Hb was 9.8 mg/dl (27th April 2021). Data on beta thalassaemia patient diagnosed with malaria is provided in Additional file : Table S1.
Upon diagnosis of malaria in the recipient, information on the blood donor of the last transfusion given to the recipient on the 21st of April 2021 was traced, based on the records maintained by the National Blood Transfusion Service. The donor was a member of the armed forces who had returned to Sri Lanka on the 9th of December 2020 after spending 16 months in South Sudan on a United Nations peacekeeping mission. He was also traced in the AMC database as a person who was being kept under surveillance. While in South Sudan he had taken mefloquine and doxycycline as antimalarial prophylaxis, but reportedly, not on a regular basis. As per guidelines of the AMC, and through the close collaboration that exists with the armed forces, their members arriving from malaria endemic countries are screened for malaria by microscopy and Rapid Diagnostic Tests (RDT) at the airport, or, due to the current COVID-19 pandemic, at COVID quarantine centers where they are kept for 14 days. The first malaria screening of the group of 51 armed forces personnel of whom the blood donor was one, was performed at the airport on the 9th of December 2020 and he and the rest of the group were reported as negative for malaria by microscopy and RDT. He was asymptomatic on arrival and gave no history of malaria while in South Sudan. He had donated blood four months after his return, on the 9th of April 2021 and this blood donation was used on the beta thalassaemia patient. Prior to transfusion the blood product was screened for malaria by microscopy as a routine procedure but was reported as negative. However, when the stored blood smear was examined retrospectively after the incident of transfusion-malaria, it showed P. falciparum parasites (asexual parasites—112 parasites/μl, gametocytes—32 parasites/μl). On testing the asymptomatic donor for malaria on 10th May 2021, soon after the recipient was diagnosed, he was found to be positive for malaria by microscopy at a very low density of 32 parasites/ μl with ring and gametocyte stages of P. falciparum. On admission his Hb was 15.2 g/dl. He was admitted to the same hospital ward as the blood recipient a day later, and was treated with an oral ACT artemether-lumefantrine and a single dose of primaquine . His blood parasitaemia was completely cleared on day 3 of treatment and was discharged from hospital on the 4th day.
Reactive parasitological and entomological surveillance activities commenced the same day as the diagnosis of malaria was made in the blood recipient and donor respectively in accordance with AMC’s prevention of re-establishment strategy. Primary and secondary case surveillance was carried out covering all residents of houses within a radius of 1 km of residencies of both the recipient and the donor . A total of two hundred persons were screened by microscopy and were found negative for malaria. The blood donor had 51 travel contacts in the armed forces group which had returned with him from South Sudan who were screened by microscopy, and they all reported negative for malaria.
Entomological surveillance was conducted within a radius of 1 km of the residence of the blood recipient. With the reporting of larvae of Anopheles culicifacies, the primary vector of malaria in Sri Lanka, larval source management, space spraying and distribution of long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs) were carried out. Entomological surveillance was also carried out around all sites where, the blood donor had stayed night over the past 14 days from blood donation up to diagnosis, and larvae of primary vector was found in two locations. The same vector control methods mentioned above were applied at these sites as well.