A 38-year-old female patient with a 12-year history of Relapsing-Remitting Multiple Sclerosis (RRMS) was evaluated. There was no personal or familial history of other autoimmune disorders. MS was diagnosed in March 2011 based on the interpretation of brain and spinal cord MRI results. The patient originally rejected pharmacological treatment. However, after a disease flare-up in May 2014, she got intravenous corticosteroid treatment. Subsequently, treatment with interferon beta-1a was initiated. Due to ongoing disease activity and progression, interferon therapy was escalated to Fingolimod after two years. Fingolimod therapy was initiated in 2016 and was well-tolerated. The patient has remained relapse-free and clinically stable with an Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score of 2. In 2019 NTZ was introduced in anticipation of a planned pregnancy, which, however, did not occur. She remained on treatment until February 2023, when she discontinued medication in terms of the emergence of painful cutaneous lesions. Over a 3-year period, the patient received injections at a frequency of every 55 days. No adverse reactions were reported during or following infusions. The patient denied using any new medications or herbal agents. Throughout this period, the patient remained clinically and radiologically stable with no evidence of disease exacerbation.

The initial presentation occurred in November 2022 with the development of erythematous plaques on both upper extremities. This onset occurred subsequent to the administration of the 15th dose of Natalizumab. The excruciating lesions that are accompanied by myalgia, fever, and periodic exacerbation. Insect injuries and pathergy were excluded due to the patient’s history, the characteristics of the lesions, and their duration. The patient’s condition showed a gradual deterioration. Laboratory evaluation revealed elevated levels of Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), indicative of an inflammatory process. A diagnosis of cellulitis was established at an external medical center, and the patient received intravenous antibiotic therapy without achieving clinical improvement.

The patient presented to our clinic only after painful skin lesions had progressed to necrotic ulcers. As an initial step in the evaluation, brain and cervical spine MRI examinations were performed to exclude a new disease relapse. She referred to a dermatologist for consultation and further investigation. Additional test for anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), anti-phospholipid antibody, cytoplasmic ant neutrophil antibodies (c-ANCA), perinuclear autoantibodies(p-ANCA), Anti-cardiolipin antibodies(ACA), lupus anticoagulant antibody, C3, C4 and CH50 were within normal limit and viral hepatitis serology was negative. Skin biopsies were obtained. Negative results were obtained when microorganisms, such as bacteria, fungi, and acid-fast bacilli, were stained. A diagnosis of PG was made on the basis of the clinical presentation and histopathological findings. Topical Pipecuroniums and Mupirocin were also prescribed, in addition to oral Prednisolone 50 mg daily with a subsequent three-month cessation. Although oral prednisolone therapy resulted in a significant diminution of pain, complete ulcer healing was not achieved. Consequently, the dermatologist recommended intra lesion corticosteroid injections to optimize treatment outcomes.