A 25 year old male patient presented to our tertiary care eye hospital with a complaint of decreasing visual acuity in the right eye of 4 months duration. He had been treated earlier with topical anti-glaucoma agents and steroids given orally, topically and as posterior subtenon injection. His previous clinical record showed anterior chamber activity, severe vitritis and an intraocular pressure of 40 mmHg. Intraocular growth had been suspected on a previous B-scan ultrasonography. Vitreous tap of the right eye performed before the patient came to our clinic had shown atypical cells on cytological examination, suggestive of retinoblastoma (Rb).
On ocular examination he had no perception of light in the right eye (PL –) and 6/6 vision in the left eye. There was rubeosis iridis, ectropion uveae, a fixed pupil and neovascular glaucoma in the right eye. By that time he had also developed a pseudohypopyon in the right eye resembling a masquerade syndrome (Figure ). Vitritis and vitreous condensations were noticed. The view of the right fundus was not clear. Examination of the left eye did not show any abnormality in the anterior and posterior segments.
B-scan ultrasonography of the right eye showed a hyper echoic endophytic mass with no calcification. CT scan of the orbits and brain showed intraocular mass in the right eye without any calcification. The patient had normal blood counts and liver function tests. Enucleation of the right eye was carried out. Histopathological examination revealed poorly differentiated Rb (Figure ), showing combined endophytic and exophytic growth patterns and retinal detachment. Tumour size was 1.5 × 1.2 cm. Vitreous, choroid and optic disc were involved. Optic nerve was involved up to the resection margin (pT4). Regional lymph nodes were not assessed (pNX). Tumour was poorly differentiated (histological grade pG3) with necrosis greater than 50%. Apoptosis and calcification were also seen on histopathology.
Chemotherapy and radiotherapy were planned and pre-chemotherapy systemic laboratory workup was advised. However, the patient did not comply and was lost to follow up. He reported again after one month with swelling in the enucleated socket. Patient was again counselled about the disease and management with chemotherapy and radiotherapy was advised. Injection Carboplatin 975 mg (on day 1), injection Etoposide 260 mg (on day 1and 2) and injection Vincristine 2 mg (on day 1) were given 4 weekly. After 6 cycles of chemotherapy and radiotherapy of 50 Gy in 25 fractions (12 MeV) to the right orbit, the patient developed sudden weakness of lower limbs with inability to sit or stand. Bone scan was performed using Technetium (99mTc) medronic acid but whole body imaging did not show any evidence of secondaries. DEXA scan of the lumbar spine and left hip showed osteopenia and increased risk of fractures. Contrast enhanced CT scan of the orbits and brain showed a metastatic brain deposit as an enhancing soft tissue mass in the supra-sellar region. Whole brain Co 60 radiotherapy in a dose of 20 Gy in 5 fractions was done. He was then discharged from the oncology unit with an advice to continue supportive care as he was unfit for any further oncology related therapeutic intervention. The patient expired almost 16 months after the onset of symptoms.