A 68-year-old man underwent right lower lobectomy for invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (pT2aN1M0 Stage IIB) in June 2016 by an open thoracotomy approach. Postoperative follow-up computed tomography (CT) examinations revealed a pure-solid pulmonary nodule in the right upper lobe of his lung , which was found to be slightly enlarged on a follow-up CT evaluation . In July 2019, a partial pulmonary resection of the right upper lobe was performed. During the surgery, a severe adhesion between the lung and the chest wall was noted, and dissection of the adhesion caused bleeding from the 6th intercostal artery . Hemostasis was achieved using soft coagulation . Dissection of the adhesion was performed only to the extent necessary to perform the partial resection. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 5 days after surgery.
The first postoperative outpatient visit was 18 days after surgery, and blood test and chest X-ray showed no abnormal findings. However, the patient later experienced hemoptysis at the toilet of a convenience store adjacent to the hospital. He was rushed to the hospital by medical staff who were assembled by a stat call. His vital scores were unstable; blood pressure (BP) was 117/98 mmHg, heart rate (HR) was 125 bpm, respiratory rate (RR) was 30 beats/min, and SpO2 was 70% (room air). A second chest X-ray on the same day showed decreased permeability in the right middle lung field . Contrast-enhanced CT scan of the chest showed a hematoma with a maximum diameter of 11 cm in the right thoracic cavity, a small amount of free air, and leakage of contrast medium into the hematoma from 6th intercostal artery . A 3D-reconstruction of the chest CT revealed a pseudoaneurysm of the intercostal artery .
The patient was immediately admitted to the Radiology Department for emergency angiography. Because his systolic BP was 58 mmHg on admittance, a rapid transfusion of four units of red cell concentrate (RCC) was administered during the preparation for angiography. The angiography through the right femoral artery revealed extravasation from the 6th intercostal artery . Therefore, the 6th intercostal artery was embolized using an embolization agent (NBCA:lipiodol = 1:3) to stop the bleeding.
After the emergency angiography, the patient’s general condition recovered. However, a CT examination performed 2 days later found free air within the hematoma. Because pulmonary fistula was suspected, a chest drain tube (24Fr.) was inserted into the intrathoracic cavity. The air leak disappeared on day 17 after angiography and the patient was discharged on day 22.