A 22-year-old Caucasian female was seen in the neurosurgical outpatient clinic. The family history was irrelevant. Her medical history revealed a congenital anal atresia and an ectopic anus. At the age of 3 years, the latter was corrected with an anterior sagittal anorectoplasty (ASARP) procedure. Furthermore, she had suffered from grade III vesico-ureteral reflux. X-ray imaging of the lumbar spine confirmed a partial sacral agenesis, sickle-shaped sacrum . After surgery, constipation resolved without fecal incontinence. She was followed-up by the pediatric surgeon. Otherwise, she was in healthy condition and is currently employed as a registered nurse.
During the second part of 2010, she experienced transient defecation difficulties. For that reason, the pediatric surgical team performed an MRI without contrast of the pelvic region. This showed the formerly known changes as expected from the ASARP procedure and the partial sacral agenesis. Coincidentally an anterior presacral mass of unknown origin, suggestive of a meningocele, as well as a bicornuate uterus was diagnosed . Neurological examination did not reveal any deficits, explicitly there were neither pyramidal tract nor posterior column signs. The history of anorectal malformations, partial sacral agenesis and the presacral meningocele should prompt to the diagnosis of Currarino’s triad. This syndrome can be accompanied by a tethered cord, and a presacral mass of another origin, such as a teratoma. Therefore, we decided to perform a contrast-enhanced MRI of the lumbosacral spine, to rule out any of the above. It confirmed the presacral mass to be a meningocele. Furthermore, a moderate tethered cord was observed with the medullary conus at level L3–4, as well as a small syrinx. The radiologic findings and the absence of symptoms showed no need for surgical intervention. We decided to pursue a conservative approach and follow her in the outpatient clinic. If complaints or neurological symptoms should occur, depending on the incident pathology, transdural ligation of the meningocele or untethering of the spinal cord could be considered. Genetic counseling was initiated.