The patient, a 39-year-old man with frequent urination, urgency and pain in the bladder area while holding back the urine for 1 month was in good health before. There was no abnormality in the urine routine. The examination of the prostatic fluid showed elevated white blood cells and decreased lecithin bodies. Prostatitis was initially diagnosed. After two weeks of treatment with cephalosporin and M receptor blocker, the symptoms of frequent urination and urgency were partially improved. Review the prostatic fluid indicated that the white blood cells were normal, and the lecithin bodies increased by 20% compared to 2 weeks ago, but the pain in the bladder area was not significantly relieved when the urine was held. Further examination of the urinary system color Doppler ultrasound suggest that the bladder had occupying space. An approximately 2.0 cm solid lesion in the left upper part of the pelvic cavity was seen by ultrasound . The admission-related examination, including blood, coagulation, liver function and kidney function tests as well as electrocardiogram and chest X-ray, showed no obvious abnormalities. CT suggested that a 2.0 × 1.9 cm mass was located in the left front wall of the bladder and was protruding outward with clear boundaries . There was no obvious abnormality of the bladder mucosa on cystoscopy. Nuclear heterogeneous cells were not detected in the urinary exfoliative cytology.
With the results of the imaging examination, a benign tumour was considered. Based on the tumour being convex to the outside of the bladder, a laparoscopic partial cystectomy through the extraperitoneal space was performed . After general anaesthesia, the patient was placed in the supine position with the buttocks raised by 10 cm. We selected a 3 cm midline incision under the umbilicus as the observation hole, cutting the skin, subcutaneous tissue and the anterior and posterior sheaths of the rectus abdominis layer by layer. Placing the balloon under the posterior rectus abdominis, the extraperitoneal space was expanded . We separated the adipose tissue on the anterior wall of the bladder. A mass, 2.0 × 2.0 cm in size with a smooth surface, was seen on the left anterior wall of the bladder and protruded outside of the bladder. Using an ultrasonic knife, the tumour was completely removed from the bladder with 0.5 cm normal bladder tissue margins . The bladder wall was sutured by using 1–0 absorbable barbed suture through continuous full-thickness . A total of 200 ml of normal saline was injected into the bladder through the catheter, and there was no fluid extravasation in the incision of the bladder wall, which confirmed that the suture was reliable. The operation lasted 65 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was approximately 20 ml. Pathological examination described that the bladder mass had a size of 2 × 2 × 1.6 cm, with a surface covering of bladder mucosa and an envelope with clear boundaries, while the cut surface was greyish white. A schwannoma with oedema and bleeding was considered by pathological diagnosis. We used Envision staining to detect the expression of biomarkers. Immunohistochemical staining showed: S100(+), Desmin(−), SMA(−), CD34(−), Ki67 (about 8%+) . The patient used a semi-liquid diet and walked after getting out of bed on the 1st day after surgery, without obvious gastrointestinal symptoms such as abdominal distension. The pelvic drainage tube was removed on the 4th day after surgery, and the catheter was removed on the 7th day after surgery. There was no recurrence after 2 years follow-up by cystoscopy and CT.