A 30 year-old man was referred to our trauma center with impaired wound healing and infection after multiple surgeries for bilateral intra-articular calcaneal fractures. Six months ago, he had jumped from a fire protection staircase at a height of about 2.5 m on a concrete surface while doing parkour sports. Initial fracture treatment consisted of bilateral open reduction and interlocking plate fixation via extensile lateral approaches. In the subsequent course, a deep infection developed on both sides necessitating multiple revisions with complete hardware removal, serial debridements and lavage until 4 months postoperatively. As part of this procedure, resorbable bone cement had been implanted. Because wound drainage and infection persisted, the patient had been offered bilateral partial calcanectomy. He therefore presented to our Foot & Ankle Center for a second opinion.
For initial examination at our center, 6 months after the initial injury, the patient appeared in a wheelchair. The scars of the extensive lateral approaches over both heels displayed a fistula formation of almost 2 cm in the wound angles on both sides . With continuous effusion that was more pronounced on the right side than on the left side. Bone could be probed from the fistula on both sides. The peripheral blood circulation was intact. A hypesthesia was noted on the lateral aspect of both feet distal to the scar area and interpreted as sural nerve affection. The total range of motion of both feet displayed 30 degrees of plantarflexion and no dorsiflexion in the sagittal plane. Hindfoot motion was severely restricted with no eversion and inversion of 15° bilaterally. The subtalar joint appeared stiff on both sides. Lab results upon presentation included a leukocyte count of 6.87 GPt/L s and a C reactive protein (CRP) level of 30 mg/L. CT scans on admission revealed a heled calcaneal fracture with minimal residual step-off in the subtalar joint on both sides and a central osseous defect in both calcanei. On the right side, amorphous hydroxyapatite bone cement was in place that seemed encapsulated by a fibrous membrane (see ).
The patient was admitted to our hospital and after a detailed discussion of all possible treatment options.
An extended reconstructive therapy after infected ORIF of calcaneus fractures was established: we decided for a radical irrigation and debridement of all necrotic and infected bone and soft tissues, removal of the bone cement and insertion of a polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) cement spacer with gentamycin (Palacos-G, Heraeus Inc., Hanau, Germany) and with vacuum assisted closure (3 M™ V.A.C., Germany) dressing to eradicate infection. There were in total seven debridements accomplished. Intraoperative swabs revealed multibacterial infection with Staphylococcus epidermidis, Staphylococcus saprophyticus, Staphylococcus equorum, Enterococcus. avium and Enterococcus. faecalis. The wound debridement’s were repeated until negative swabs were obtained.
Additionally, an intravenous antibiotic first with Vancomycin for 10 days and then, matching the antibiogram, Amoxicillin was administered for 6 weeks intravenously. Following complete resection of all necrotic tissue, a bone defect remained measuring 20 × 19 × 14 mm on the right side and 57 × 25 × 14 mm on the left side . Furthermore, a full thickness soft tissue defect in the lateral hindfoot region 140 × 50 mm on the left and 150 × 70 mm right resulted, necessitating flap coverage .
Following negative cultures from multiple bone biopsies, reconstruction of the bone and soft tissue defect was performed 8 weeks following admission and first debridement. The osseous defects were filled with resorbable bone cement containing gentamicin sulfate (Cerament G, Bonesupport Inc., Lund, Sweden).
An abductor digiti minimi flap was raised on both feet to cover the soft tissue defects. The incision was carried out from the distal insertion of the abductor digitus quintus muscle at proximal phalanx of the fifth toe to the lateral aspect of the calcaneus at the transition from the glabrous to the hairy skin of the heel. The abductor digiti minimi muscle and tendon were identified and gently separated from the flexor digiti minimi muscle, technique also described in Wie Mardini, Flaps and Reconstructive Surgery (2nd Edition, pg. 818–823, 2009). The tendon was detached from the proximal phalanx of the fifth toe and held with a PDS suture for atraumatic handling. Dissection from the fifth metatarsal bone was continued proximally until the first perforators were reached. The wound edges were mobilized towards the lateral calcaneal wall. After mobilizing the muscle flap, it was pivoted around the perforators into the defect zone on the lateral calcaneus . Finally, the abductor digiti minimi muscle flap was covered with meshed split thickness skin graft from the thigh and sealed with a V. A. C. dressing that was removed after 4 days.
The patient was kept nonweight-bearing for 4 weeks and on partial weight-bearing for another 8 weeks in hindfoot-offloading Donjoy boots using two crutches. He returned to full weight-bearing after three months after prolonged clear drainage with particles of the bone substitute (“white washout”) for 10 weeks, the soft tissues healed on both sides.
The patient was seen for a follow-up examination 9 months after defect filling and flap coverage. He was ambulating freely without crutches in sports shoes with insoles. He did not report pain when walking on even ground. The soft tissues had healed uneventfully without residual drainage on both feet . Range of motion was 45 degrees of dorsiflexion/plantarflexion in the sagittal plane and 20 degrees of eversion/inversion in the frontal plane. Except for the pre-existing hypesthesia, there were no neurovascular deficits. Standing radiographs including hindfoot alignment views revealed correct position of the hind foot and no signs of arthritis at the ankle, subtalar and calcaneocuboid joints. There was slight loss of heel height bilaterally. The bone cement was for the most part resorbed and replaced by cancellous bone.