A 55-year-old male applied to our clinic with a sudden pain in his right shoulder, 2 years after a reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA) in another hospital due to rotator cuff arthropathy. He was a gardener and returned to his work after 2 months of the operation. His range of motion (ROM) was improved and had no pain in his daily activities after several months. However, almost 2 years from the initial surgery, he suddenly felt extreme pain in his shoulder when he tried to operate a vacuum cleaner. He applied to our clinic after trying painkillers for 3 weeks. A sharp pain in the shoulder, restrained ROM, and a loosening-like feeling were his major complaints at his admission with a normal neurovascular examination and without any comorbidities. Plain radiographs of his shoulder were taken and a RTSA with a broken humeral stem was determined . Further evaluation was done with a computed tomography of the right shoulder to evaluate any occult fracture around the shoulder girdle and bony fracture was excluded from the study.
A one-stage operation was planned for revision. We used the previous incision line for the deltopectoral approach. After reaching the glenohumeral joint, the prosthesis was found to be dislocated and broken at the humeral tray of proximal stem. The model itself was a modular stem and due to the suspicion of infection, samples were taken from the surrounding synovium and joint fluid. Metallosis and debris tissue were debrided. The humeral stem and the glenoid hemisphere were removed with its cement and a cemented long humeral stem (SMR, Lima LTO, Udine, Italy) was placed . The glenohumeral joint was then reduced and the layers were anatomically closed. No post-operative complications were spotted. The synovial culture which had been taken for the suspicion of an infection was reported sterile. A frozen section analysis revealed active chronic synovitis, fibrosis, and giant cell reaction of foreign bodies. Shoulder physiotherapy with ROM and strengthening exercises were applied to the patient for 3-month postoperatively. No complication has occurred during his 3-year follow-up after surgery and the patient has nearly full ROM with only 20° of loss in abduction and has neither pain nor complaints. The patient was satisfied with result of the treatment and gained full function of his right shoulder.