A 40-year old male presented to hospital with pleuritic chest pain with radiation to the back 3 days after his first dose of the Pfizer-BioNtech mRNA COVID-19 vaccination. The patient had neither past medical history nor any regular medications. He lived with his wife and was employed as a school teacher.
The patient’s initial ECG demonstrated sinus rhythm with PR- and ST-segment changes consistent with acute pericarditis . Initial blood tests revealed a normal high sensitivity troponin level of 4 ng/L (upper limit of normal value of 20 ng/L), C-reactive protein of 2.4 mg/L, and a normal D-dimer level. Viral polymerase chain reaction performed on a nasopharyngeal swab was negative for common respiratory viruses including COVID-19. An echocardiogram demonstrated no pericardial effusion and preserved left and right ventricular functions. The patient underwent CT aortography given the radiation to the back, which was normal. The patient was admitted to the hospital for analgaesia with fentanyl and oxycodone due to the severity of the pain before down-titrating to ibuprofen 400 mg three times a day for one week. Given an improvement in pain and stable vital parameters, the patient was discharged from the hospital after 5 days of admission with the plan for follow-up with his general practitioner.
Within 24 h, the patient represented with chest pain. Repeat ECGs taken in the emergency department demonstrated mild ST-segment elevation in the inferior leads. In light of this, the patient proceeded to emergency invasive coronary angiography that demonstrated angiographically smooth coronary arteries. The patient’s repeat blood tests demonstrated a normal troponin level and C-reactive protein. A repeat bedside transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated no pericardial effusion and a normal left ventricular ejection fraction. The patient was treated for acute pericarditis with colchicine 500 μg twice daily and high dose ibuprofen at 800 mg three times daily. He was discharged after 3 days with decreasing pain.
Over the next 2 months, the patient had three admissions with recurrent chest pain despite good compliance with medications. During these admissions, he had a peak C-reactive protein of 208 mg/L and a transient mild raise in troponin of 42 ng/L. The patient had two further transthoracic echocardiograms, one of which demonstrated early features of constrictive pericarditis manifested by a trace pericardial effusion, interdependence of the ventricular septum, and annulus reversus assessed by tissue Doppler imaging. Subsequent to this, the patient was commenced on immunotherapy and discharged on prednisolone 50 mg daily, trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole 160–800 mg three times weekly, pantoprazole 40 mg daily, colchicine 500 μg three times daily, and ibuprofen 600 mg three times a day.
One week later, the patient represented with recurrent chest pain as well as significant weight gain, mood disturbance, and insomnia related to glucocorticoids. Repeat TTE demonstrated no features of constriction. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging with LGE demonstrated extensive pericardial enhancement with no myocardial fibrosis ( and ) and no features of constrictive physiology. During admission, azathioprine 25 mg was added to his medical regime prior to discharge after a 10-day admission.
The patient represented 10 days later with chest pain and a C-reactive protein level of 103 mg/L despite good compliance to medical therapy. After multi-disciplinary discussion, anakinra 100 mg daily was commenced. The patient was also reviewed by the psychiatry team with a diagnosis of adjustment disorder in the setting of multiple hospital presentations. The patient was discharged after a 5-day admission with significant improvement on prednisolone 20 mg daily, anakinra 100 mg daily, trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole 800 mg/160 mg daily, colchicine 500 μg twice daily, naproxen 1 g daily, pantoprazole 40 mg daily, and a fentanyl transdermal patch.
The patient represented with chest pain and dyspnoea after 2 months of only occasional mild chest pain and one presentation to the emergency department that did not require admission. Given the recurrence of pain, despite successful biochemical response, a repeat CMR with gadolinium was performed. Compared to the initial CMR, there was some improvement, however, there was persistence of diffuse pericardial enhancement with mild pericardial thickening ( and ). There were concerns regarding central sensitization that was treated with a continuous ketamine infusion over 5 days under the guidance of a pain specialist. This therapy provided temporary relief of pain, however, there was recurrence of pleuritic chest pain after cessation of the ketamine infusion despite substantial medical therapy.
Given the case complexity and the persistence of debilitating chest pain despite maximal medical therapy, a heart team decision to proceed with pericardiectomy was reached. This involved a sternotomy that revealed a moderately thickened pericardium with soft adhesions between the pericardium and epicardium over the anterolateral, inferior, and diaphragmatic surfaces . The parietal pericardium and inflammatory tissue attached to the visceral pericardium were subsequently resected prior to two drain tubes being inserted and the chest closed with sternotomy wires. Subsequent tissue histology demonstrated areas of focal fibrosis without features of malignancy. Acid-fast bacillus (AFB) staining was negative.
The patient was discharged Day 7 post-pericardiectomy with mild sternal pain but resolution of his pericardial pain. He was discharged on anakinra 100 m daily, azathioprine 175 mg daily, colchicine 500 μg, gabapentin 600 mg three times daily, indomethacin 50 mg three times daily, tapentadol 100 mg twice daily, and paracetamol 1000 mg four times a day.
The patient has now been managed in the community for 4 months since the previous admission with complete resolution of chest pain. He has begun down-titration of immunosuppression. Exercise capacity is now unlimited, and there is no current analgaesia requirement.
The patient described this experience as immensely frustrating with a clear impact on his mental health, and loss of independence as well as inability to remain employed. This was compounded by the temporary benefit and then relapse of attempted therapies. Relief of symptoms has resulted in a slow and steady improvement in his mental health .