A 40 year old Malay male was seen at the emergency department with 1 week history of left hypochondriac pain with concurrent abdominal distention. He also complained of loss of appetite and feeling lethargic for 1 month duration. He had no fever, nausea, vomiting, changes in bowel habits or any history of bleeding diathesis. There was no history of trauma. Neither there were any significant past medical history nor family history of malignancy. He was an active smoker for 20 years but denied any alcohol consumption or substance abuse.
On clinical examination, he was afebrile, with an elevated heart rate of 110 beats per minute and a blood pressure measurement of 121/79 mmHg. Patient appeared pale. Abdominal examination revealed enlarged, non-tender liver and spleen. There was no ascites or peripheral lymphadenopathy. Cardiovascular and respiratory examinations were otherwise unremarkable.
Haematological investigation revealed a low haemoglobin level at 6.4 g/dl. The patient had a white cell count (WCC) of 33.3 × 10^3 /uL and a platelet count of 568 × 10^3/uL. Differential WCC showed a predominant neutrophil count of 79.9%, lymphocyte count 8.9%, monocytes 9.6%, eosinophils 0.8%, basophils 0.8%, absolute neutrophil count of 25.63 × 10^3 /uL and absolute lymphocyte count of 2.95 × 10^3 /uL. There was an increase in lactate dehydrogenase levels (LDH) from 534 to 666 u/L. Peripheral blood film revealed leucocytosis with neutrophilia with no evidence of blast cells or atypical lymphocytes. Patient was reluctant to undergo a bone marrow aspiration and trephine biopsy. Abdominal ultrasonography demonstrated a large splenic collection. A contrast enhanced computerized tomography of the abdomen further revealed a large heterogenous splenic collection measuring 18 cm × 15 cm × 16.9 cm which was suggestive of a splenic haematoma [Fig. , and ]. There were no intra abdominal or pelvic lymph nodes enlargement. Based on computed tomography findings, a preliminary diagnosis of spontaneous splenic rupture was made. A surgical consult was obtained and an explorative laparotomy was performed on the patient. Intra operative findings showed a ruptured spleen with extensive adhesions to the omentum. No intra peritoneal lymph nodes enlargement were found. Splenectomy was then performed and subsequently, the patient was transferred to intensive care unit for close observation.
From a histological perspective, the gross appearance of the obtained specimen revealed an enlarged spleen with irregular outer surfaces. A cut section of the spleen showed a firm, cream coloured layer occupying almost entire spleen with large area of necrosis with splenic infarcts. There as minimal amount of normal looking parenchyma tissues at the peripheral aspect of the specimen. Further histological examination revealed a diffuse infiltration of malignant lymphoid cells, which exhibited irregular nuclear membrane with vesicular nuclear chromatin and prominent nucleoli. The adjacent splenic parenchyma showed a congested and expanded red pulp with infiltration by atypical lymphoid cells [Fig. ].
The histological report confirmed the presence of diffuse large B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) via immunohistochemical testing. Immunohistochemical staining showed the cells to be positive to CD20 (diffuse), BCL-2, BCL-6 (> 30%), and MUM-1 (> 30%) and negative to CD3, CD10, Cyclin-D1, Tdt, CD30 and ALK. Ki67 proliferative index was > 80%. In accordance with the WHO classification of Lymphoid Neoplasm [, ], these findings were consistent with the diagnosis of a diffuse large B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, non-germinal center B-cell (non-GCB) type. Further molecular studies to assess MYC / BCL-2 / BCL-6 translocation or rearrangement was not done as the fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis was not available in our local laboratory settings. Thirteen days later, the patient was discharged with prophylactic meningococcal, pneumococcal and influenza vaccinations. He was referred to the haemato-oncologist outpatient clinic at a tertiary care centre for post - operative chemotherapy. Unfortunately, the patient did not turn up for subsequent follow ups, rendering it difficult to further document any information with regards to treatment response in this report.