A 59-year-old Pakistani woman with a past medical history of hypertension and a significant family history of cancer in first-degree relatives (breast, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer) was referred to the cardiothoracic surgery clinic. This was due to an incidental finding of a nodular density on her chest X-ray as part of a preoperative workup for a total left knee replacement due to osteoarthritis. However, there were no previous chest images for comparison. Aside from a minor complaint of blood-tinged sputum in the morning, there were no complaints or symptoms. She was vitally stable and saturating well on room air. Her general physical, cardiovascular, respiratory, abdominal, and central nervous system examinations were unremarkable.
Radiological imaging (CXR) showed a nodular density in the right lower zone of the right lung measuring approximately 2.5 cm × 2 cm. A subsequently conducted high definition [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scan revealed a lobulated soft-tissue lesion measuring 23 mm × 23 mm (with internal cavitation) along the medial aspect of the anterior segment of the lower lobe of the right lung . The lesion had a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 2.7. No evidence of hypermetabolic nodal, pulmonary, hepatic, splenic, adrenal, or bony metastasis was observed.
A CT-guided core biopsy of the lesion was performed. Histopathological evaluation revealed a core of a spindle cell lesion with smaller cores of native unremarkable lung parenchyma. Significant cytological atypia or increased mitotic activity was not seen. Immunohistochemical staining revealed the cells to be S100 focal positive, SOX-10 negative, ASMA negative, Melan A negative, HMB-45 negative, STAT6 negative, and CD34 patchy positive. A diagnosis of a benign spindle cell lesion, likely of neural origin, was made. An elective surgical resection was planned for a month later.
After standard preoperative optimization and preparation, a posterolateral thoracotomy with right lower lobectomy was performed under general anesthesia. The pleural cavity was entered through the fifth intercostal space. Enlarged station 9R and 10R lymph nodes and a mass in the lower lobe of the right lung were visualized, while no masses were observed in the middle or upper lobes. There were no pleural nodules or pleural effusion. The inferior pulmonary ligament was divided, and the inferior pulmonary vein was identified and divided between ties. The oblique fissure was incomplete, and was used to separate the upper, middle, and lower lobes of the lung through cautery. The pulmonary artery was identified at the confluence of the oblique and horizontal fissures, and the superior segmental and basilar branches were visualized. The superior segmental branch and the pulmonary artery distal to the take-off of the middle lobe branch were both divided between ties. The bronchus intermedius was dissected and the middle lobe bronchus was identified. The bronchus distal to the middle lobe take-off was dissected, and a TA-30 stapler was used to divide the superior segmental bronchus and the bronchus distal to the middle lobe take-off. The mass was then resected, and hemostasis was secured. The surgical wound was closed in layers after the placement of an extrapleural catheter and chest tubes, and the patient was shifted to the in-patient facility. The patient remained vitally and hemodynamically stable and was discharged 3 days after the operation. The patient was confirmed to be in her usual state of health upon 6-month and 1-year follow-up, with no late complications or recurrences.
Histopathological examination of the resected lobe showed lung parenchyma infiltrated by an encapsulated neoplastic lesion composed of well-differentiated Schwann cells. The neoplastic cells showed a biphasic pattern with compact areas of spindle cells having moderate eosinophilic cytoplasm and normal chromatic elongated nuclei. Areas of occasional palisading (Verocay bodies) were also seen . These morphological findings, combined with immunohistochemical staining results concurrent with those mentioned earlier, were consistent with the diagnosis of an intrapulmonary schwannoma.