A 35-year-old, well-built, right-hand dominant gentleman, a temple priest by profession and a known epileptic with a frequency of seizures of once every year, being treated with regular oral phenytoin, presented with pain and deformity in both shoulders since the previous day. He had an episode of generalized seizures the previous day and sustained a fall during the episode. He reported that his left arm got stuck between a wall and a cupboard during the fall while his right arm was free during the fall. However, the patient could not recollect clear details due to seizures. He was otherwise asymptomatic before the incident. There was no history of external injury or other associated injuries or history suggestive of instability.
On examination, both shoulders were swollen with bruising on the medial aspect of both arms. Both shoulders were tender and the arms were held in a neutral position. All attempted movements of the shoulders were painful. There was no distal neurological or vascular deficit in the upper limbs. There was no generalized ligament laxity on clinical examination.
Anteroposterior and scapular Y-view radiographs of the right shoulder revealed an anteroinferior dislocation of the shoulder with a displaced fracture of the greater tuberosity and a large Hill–Sachs lesion.
Similar views of the left shoulder revealed a light bulb sign , suggesting posterior dislocation of the shoulder, along with a displaced fracture of the greater tuberosity.
Closed reduction of both shoulders was performed with gentle traction under general anesthesia. The greater tuberosities were persistently displaced after the reduction. A lateral transdeltoid approach (deltoid splitting) was used to approach the fracture and transosseous suture fixation of the greater tuberosities with No. 2 Ethibond sutures was done by the technique suggested by Dimakopoulos et al. .
At 2 weeks post-fixation, both shoulders remained congruently reduced. While the right greater tuberosity fracture remained stable, the tuberosity fracture in the left shoulder had displaced . Resuturing was done under anesthesia and the fixation was reinforced with 4 mm cannulated cancellous screws . The greater tuberosity fracture had split into two fragments. Fixation was assessed under fluoroscopy and was found to be stable with movements of the shoulder. The patient was advised arm sling for both shoulders for 6 weeks, with an additional small abduction pillow on the left. Internal rotation was delayed for 4 weeks on the left shoulder. Pendulum exercises were started from 2 weeks postoperatively followed by active assisted and active exercises at 4 and 6 weeks, respectively. The patient recovered well. Fractures united at 8 weeks on the right shoulder and at 12 weeks on the left, and at last follow-up at 12 months, the greater tuberosity fractures had healed well and the glenohumeral joints were in situ . He had achieved full shoulder function by 16 weeks after first surgery .