A 79-year-old Caucasian man presented to the emergency room with shortness of breath, bilateral leg oedema and fatigue. His medical history was notable for arterial hypertension and degenerative valve disease, with indication of aortic valve replacement which he refused. He did not use alcohol, tobacco or illicit drugs. There was no history of recent infection, or any invasive procedure in the last year. Besides taking antihypertensive drugs, he was not on any medications. He had not been consulted by a physician in the last 3 years.

On physical examination, he was afebrile, with bilateral lower extremity oedema, there was arrhythmia with a heart rate of 70/min, blood pressure was 180/80 mm Hg; there was a grade 5/6 systolic murmur at the aortic area, and a grade 4/6 holosystolic murmur at the mitral area. Respiratory examination revealed dullness to conventional percussion, decreased tactile fremitus and decreased breath sounds at the bilateral lung bases with crackles. The remainder of the exam was unremarkable.


Investigations

Standard 12-lead ECG showed atrial fibrillation with heart rate between 60–70 beats/min and left ventricular hypertrophy signs with secondary repolarisation changes.

The chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with interstitial densities and pulmonary venous congestion. Large bilateral pleural effusions were noted.

The chemistry panel showed an N-terminal pro b-type natriuretic peptide level of 2000 pg/mL, increased creatinine with an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 30 mL/min/1.73 m2, high blood glucose, hyperuricaemia and hyponatraemia. The C reactive protein level was 9 g/dL (normal <5 g/dL), erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 30 mm/hour and the fibrinogen level was 300 mg/dL (normal <500 mg/dL). There was mild normochromic normocytic anaemia (haemoglobin=99 g/L) and leucocyte count was 9710/mm3 with 64% neutrophils, 7% eosinophils, 20% lymphocytes and 9% monocytes. The urinalysis was normal, with negative urine culture. Pharyngeal exudate was positive for Candida spp. and negative for Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes. Further blood tests were in the normal range.

Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed mild left ventricle hypertrophy. Systolic function was normal with an ejection fraction estimated at about 60%. The right ventricle was mildly enlarged with normal longitudinal function. Both atria showed marked enlargement. The aortic valve was tricuspid with severe stenosis (aortic valve area 0.4 cm2) and moderate regurgitation. The mitral valve showed a mobile hyperechogenic formation with the maximum diameter of 12 mm seen in the left atrium which strongly indicated endocarditis. Doppler examination showed severe mitral regurgitation due to perforation of the mitral anterior leaflet and also moderate tricuspid regurgitation. The inferior vena cava was dilated, and the pulmonary systolic pressure was estimated at about 50 mm Hg.

Transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed the presence of vegetation.

Sonography of the abdominal organs was normal.

Before antibiotic treatment was started, four blood cultures where taken from separate venous sites, at 30 min intervals. Each sample was placed into a pair of blood culture bottles that cultivate aerobic and anaerobic bacteria separately.

Three out of four blood culture grew Gram-positive cocci in clusters. The organism grew on trypticase soy agar and was catalase-positive, oxidase-negative and coagulase-negative. It was identified as coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, and subsequently as S. warneri by the Vitek 2 GP card (BioMérieux). After 72 hours of treatment three other blood cultures were taken randomly and came out negative.


Treatment

Empirical antibiotic treatment with vancomycin 30 mg/kg/day intravenous in three doses and gentamicin 3 mg/kg/day intravenous was started. Afterwards, following the discussion with the infectious disease physician and the microbiologist, we concluded that the isolation of S. warneri was not contamination, and we established the diagnosis of S. warneri endocarditis, based on two major diagnosis criteria—echocardiography and positive blood cultures. The antibiogram revealed resistance to penicillin, tetracycline, erythromycin, clindamycin, clarithromycin, doxycycline, fosfomycin, rifampicin and susceptibility to fusidic acid, ciprofloxacin, daptomycin, gentamicin, vancomycin, levofloxacin, linezolid, moxifloxacin, norfloxacin, ofloxacin, oxacillin, pefloxacin, minocyclin and trimethoprime/sulfamethoxazole. We decided to continue treatment with oxacillin 12 g/day intravenous in four doses according to current guidelines. The patient also received medication for heart failure and was anticoagulated with acenocoumarol for his atrial fibrillation. He was consulted by a psychologist and received sleep pills, for insomnia.


Outcome and follow-up

The patient’s clinical condition improved slowly, with gradual remission of congestion, and decrease of non-specific inflammation markers, and also there was an improvement in kidney function (with a decrease of creatinine from 2.0 to 1.4 mg/dL). He was discharged after 1 month with a good clinical condition. The patient was informed again about the firm indication for mitral and aortic valve replacement, but he refused again the intervention.

One month after discharge the patient had the same aspect of the TTE, with severe mitral regurgitation but with well-tolerated heart failure (New York Heart Association class II). The chemistry panel showed mild normochromic normocytic anaemia (haemoglobin 112 g/L), and a creatinine level of 1.6 mg/dL.

After 3 months he was again hospitalised for decompensated heart failure (pleural effusion and fatigue). All of the five blood cultures taken this time were negative. The symptoms improved after 6 days of intravenous diuretics and the patient was discharged with the same recommendations.

He is still refusing the valve surgery.