A 60-year old female was admitted to our hospital with a low-grade fever and purulent secretion from the incision at the right lower abdomen. She had suffered from the symptoms for about 1 year and underwent an antibiotic therapy in the local hospital but showed little effect. Six years ago, the patient came to our hospital with the right low extremity intermittent claudication and rest pain and then received a conventional aortofemoral dacron graft bypass because the pre-operation computed tomographic angiography (CTA) showed obstruction of the right external iliac artery. She recovered well after the surgery and was discharged without claudication. It is noteworthy that 6 months after the operation, she was involved in an accident which triggered a rectal hematoma and recovered under conservative treatment.

The laboratory tests showed elevated peripheral white blood cell count (9.74 × 109/L), neutrophil (7.2 × 109/L), C-reactive protein (over 200 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (24 mm/hour) and procalcitonin (2.71 ng/mL). The purulent secretion was positive for Escherichia coli. Colonoscopy revealed a rectal fistula the same place where the rectal hematoma was spotted 5 years ago due to the accident, and an air test and a methylene blue test confirmed a sinus between the rectum and the abdominal wall. A CTA examination showed the right iliac prosthesis was occlusive with perivascular infection and a sinus formation in right anterior lower abdomen. Therefore, we suspect a rectal fistula induced AVGI. After peri-operative preparation, the patient was treated with graft excision and debridement, but without artery reconstruction. Intraoperative, a peri-graft intestinal adhesion was evident and segments of intestinal wall participate in a composition of the sinus formation. The infected vascular graft was found and removed. About 2 months after the operation, the patient’s value of C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and procalcitonin dropped to normal ranges. She recovered well with no signs of right extremity lower ischemia and continued to receive postoperative anti-infective treatment.