A 21-year-old male with no past medical history presented to a rural ED with severe headache and decreased level of consciousness. He was brought by his friend, who stated the patient complained of a headache that began two hours prior to arrival while he was working at a local grocery store. En route, he acutely developed slurred speech and became unresponsive in the vehicle. There was no history of trauma, fevers, or illicit drug use.
The patient’s initial heart rate was 137 beats per minute (bpm), blood pressure 159/85 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), and respiratory rate 17 breaths per minute, with a room-air oxygenation saturation of 100%. The patient was not following commands, but he opened his eyes to pain, and moved all extremities. He did not respond to verbal stimuli. His Glasgow Coma Scale was calculated to be eight. Corneal, gag, and cough reflexes were intact. Pupils were 3 millimeters and reactive bilaterally. Fundoscopic exam was not performed.
The patient was intubated on arrival for airway protection. Laboratory tests were unremarkable other than a lactic acidosis of 4.8 millimoles/liter (mmol/L) (reference range: 0.0–2.2 mmol/L), increasing to 7.8 mmol/L three hours later. Non-contrasted computed tomography (CT) of the head was obtained and recognized as hydrocephalus by the EP. No neurosurgical service was available at the ED, so the transfer process was initiated. The EP called the transfer centers of six hospitals with neurosurgical services across multiple states, none of which could accept the transfer.
After CT, the patient developed decorticate posturing and was administered a bolus of 250 milliliters (mL) of 3% hypertonic saline, the head of his bed was raised to 30 degrees, propofol infusion was increased, and fentanyl infusion was added. The patient’s heart rate increased to 167 bpm, and blood pressure increased to 232/143 mm Hg with the right pupil dilated and unresponsive. A one gram per kilogram bolus of 20% mannitol and additional bolus 250 mL of 3% saline were administered.
After multiple failed attempts at transfer, the EP called the unpublished number of the attending EP workstation at the institution where he had trained, and that institution eventually received the patient and requested assistance. Typically, transfers to the accepting facility are routed through a transfer call center, which contacts the attending physician for the specialty service, who discusses the case with the transferring physician and arranges further care. If the required higher level of service is unavailable, the transfer call center prevents the transfer without input from accepting services. In this case, the transferring EP was unable to communicate directly with the attending neurosurgeon because the neurological intensive care unit (ICU) was full, and the transfer call center followed established protocol and refused the transfer.
The receiving EP and the attending neurosurgeon discussed the time-sensitive, life-threatening nature of the case and the difficulties in transfer. The neurosurgeon accepted the patient to the ED and began treatment there. A neurosurgery resident and a neurologic ICU nurse were made available to treat the patient in the ED while preparations were made to find a neurologic ICU bed. The patient was flown by helicopter to the accepting facility.
Emergent bedside bilateral external ventricular drains (EVD) were placed on arrival to the accepting ED. Magnetic resonance imaging of the head revealed a colloid cyst obstructing the bilateral foramen of Monro, resulting in hydrocephalus . The cyst was resected via craniotomy. The patient was discharged with profound neurological disability after a prolonged inpatient stay to an inpatient rehabilitation facility. Five months after discharge, he followed commands, verbally responded to binary questions, fed himself, and stood with physical therapy assistance.