A 69 year old Caucasian female with a past history of ocular melanoma was found to have an incidental 1.6 × 1.6 × 0.7 cm hypodense lesion in the head of the pancreas, on surveillance computed tomographic (CT) scanning of the abdomen . In addition, there was a single enlarged porta hepatis lymph node measuring 2.8 × 1 cm. The patient was asymptomatic and without any prior episodes of pancreatitis.
Additional imaging studies were performed to characterize the lesion. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated the 1.7 × 1.3 cm lobulated lesion with effacement of the distal CBD . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) confirmed the 1.5 × 1.4 cm hypoechoic lesion suggestive of a cyst, which did not show communication with the pancreatic duct. EUS further demonstrated thickened cyst wall with mural nodule and presence of luminal debris . The mural nodule measured 0.8 × 0.7 cm. Vascularity of the nodule on EUS was not assessed. Fine needle aspiration of the cyst revealed turbid, viscous fluid, however the pathology evaluation was inconclusive. Post-EUS, the patient developed right upper quadrant abdominal pain, with post-prandial worsening, and was associated with dark colored urine and acholic stools. Due to concern for extrinsic compression on the CBD, the patient underwent ERCP, which identified a 7 mm single area of stenosis in the CBD that was relieved with placement of a plastic stent. Following stent placement, her blood work and symptoms normalized. She underwent repeat EUS with FNA of mural nodule. The FNA cytologic evaluation revealed atypical cells. Clinically, the cyst was considered to be an intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm or mucinous cystic neoplasm. Considering the worrisome features of lymphadenopathy on imaging studies and atypical cells on FNA cytology of mural nodule, a decision was made to resect the lesion. Pancreas protocol CT scan performed prior to surgery showed a vague hypodense area in the pancreatic head, likely collapse of the cyst following aspiration, and a decompressed biliary tree. Pancreatic duct was not dilated, however, there was distal pancreas atrophy. A pylorus preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed.
Gross evaluation of the pancreas revealed a 1.6 × 1.1 × 1 cm uniloculated cystic lesion in the head of the pancreas. The cyst did not show communication with the main pancreatic duct. The cystic lesion was completely excised and all margins were negative. The entire lesion was submitted for histological evaluation. Microscopic evaluation showed a unilocular cyst lined by gastric type mucinous epithelium . No papillary projection or configuration was seen. Immunohistochemical stains showed the cyst wall lining to be diffusely positive for MUC5AC, and focally positive for MUC 6. The mucinous lining was negative for MUC1 and MUC2 . The histological features were consistent with a simple mucinous cyst. No dysplasia or carcinoma was seen. There was focal thickening in the cyst wall with intraluminal nodular lesion characterized by amorphous eosinophilic congophilic material consistent with amyloid, surrounded by foreign body type giant cell reaction and chronic inflammation composed of lymphocytes and polyclonal plasma cells . Upon further evaluation of congo red stain, the amyloid deposits showed characteristic apple green birefringence on polarizing microscopy, and red fluorescence on fluorescent microscopy using Texas Red filter . This focus correlated with the mural nodule seen on EUS. Laser microdissection (LMD)-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectroscopy (LC–MS) confirmed the amyloid to be lactoferrin type. In addition, an immunostain for lactoferrin was positive in the amyloid deposits . The background pancreas showed mild chronic pancreatitis. No amyloid deposition was noted in the islets of Langerhans, interstitium or blood vessels of pancreas.
Her post-operative course was uneventful apart from a mild wound seroma requiring only local wound care. She has since been seen multiple times in clinic following surgery and has recovered well.