A 29-year-old primigravida Caucasian female with a past medical history significant for short stature, tobacco use, and poorly controlled pregestational type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) presented to clinic for routine antenatal care. She was first diagnosed with diabetes mellitus at age 22 and managed with metformin prior to pregnancy with a history of poor glycemic control. She was transitioned to glyburide 5 mg twice daily by her obstetrician and subsequently increased to 10 mg twice daily secondary to continued elevated blood glucose levels (fasting ranged from 78 to 113 mg/dl and 2-hour post prandial ranged from 97 to 332 mg/dl). At 13 and 3/7 weeks of pregnancy, the patient was admitted for tighter blood glucose management, initiation of insulin, and a dietician consult to achieve improved control of glucose levels. A baseline hemoglobin A1c was obtained on admission and noted to be high at 8%. Previous maternal hemoglobin A1c levels were not reported. Antenatal fetal ultrasound at 22 weeks was notable for severe sacral agenesis, bilateral renal pelvis dilatation, single umbilical artery, and findings suggestive of pulmonary hypoplasia. The patient was referred to a tertiary care fetal and neonatal medicine center in the USA for further evaluation, and fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was recommended for confirmatory testing. Fetal MRI at 29 weeks gestation showed absence of the lower two-thirds of the spine with corresponding spinal cord abnormality compatible with type 1 caudal regression syndrome with noted horseshoe kidneys . No fetal cardiac anomaly was detected. Fetal anomalies were likely secondary to poorly controlled diabetes during early pregnancy. There was no significant family history.
The mother was counseled extensively by maternal fetal medicine and neonatology that the infant’s prognosis was extremely guarded given the severe spinal cord anomaly and possible pulmonary hypoplasia with substantial risk of intrauterine fetal demise (IUFD), perinatal death, or paraplegia/quadriplegia in a surviving infant. The mother was offered additional confirmatory genetic testing, which she declined. After extensive counseling and discussion of options, which included termination of pregnancy, early induction of labor for provision of comfort care, or continuation of pregnancy to term, the mother opted to continue the pregnancy. She chose to pursue a plan for induction of labor at term (~ 39 weeks) with goal of respiratory resuscitation of the infant and admission to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) for stabilization if the infant was viable. She was followed closely throughout the remainder of her pregnancy by maternal–fetal medicine (MFM) and the fetal neonatal medicine center. She continued to return for regular obstetric care for the next 10 weeks with close attention to fetal growth and glucose control. On return obstetric follow up at 37 weeks gestation, the patient’s glucose log showed improved glycemic control with fasting glucose levels < 90 mg/dL and 2-hour postprandial values typically < 120 mg/dL. She was seen by her obstetrician at 39 and 0/7 weeks, at which time there was normal fetal movement and offered induction of labor. She chose to schedule an induction of labor at 39 and 3/7 weeks. Unfortunately, when she presented to labor and delivery for her scheduled induction, antenatal ultrasound showed low amniotic fluid index (AFI) and absent fetal heart tones consistent with intrauterine fetal demise. Labor was medically induced with subsequent vaginal delivery of a stillborn male. Evaluation of the newborn demonstrated normal facies and upper extremities, with normal chest to 2 cm below nipple line and bony spine palpable to approximately the lower two-thirds. No further bony spine was palpable. Feet and legs were present but very small, as was the abdomen, and a left club foot deformity was noted. The baby was small for gestational age with a birth weight of 2070 g, which is less than the first percentile with a Z score of − 3.3 according to the Fenton growth chart. Postnatal cytogenetics confirmed a normal male 46 XY karyotype.
The family declined autopsy, so a minimally invasive autopsy was performed. Postmortem MRI confirmed findings of severe caudal agenesis and abrupt cord termination . Several skeletal abnormalities were visualized on the corresponding CT autopsy . The infant was in a frog-like position with flexion and abduction at the hips and flexion at the knees. Bilateral iliac wings were hypoplastic and closely approximated at midline secondary to sacral agenesis. Other deformities included a single umbilical artery, horseshoe kidneys , a left talipes equinovarus deformity, and eight bilateral thoracic ribs .