A 75-year-old Japanese male was transferred from another hospital after presenting with hemorrhagic shock due to hematochezia. He had been transported by ambulance to the previous hospital after complaining of discomfort and bloody stool on the previous day. He had undergone distal pancreatectomy and right lower lobectomy for pancreatic cancer and lung cancer, respectively, 5 years prior and total pancreatectomy due to residual pancreatic cancer eight months prior. The reconstruction procedure consisted of hepaticojejunostomy, Braun’s anastomosis, and gastrojejunostomy. In addition, a stent had been inserted for stenosis of the hepaticojejunostomy 1 month prior. The patient’s medical history also included atrial fibrillation, and he was taking insulin and apixaban. On arrival, he appeared to be pale and his extremities were cold. His vital signs were as follows: respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min; pulse rate, 105 beats/min (bpm); blood pressure, 77/54 mmHg; temperature, 34.9 °C. Arterial blood gas analysis detected severe lactic acidosis (lactate concentration: 9.9 mmol/L) and anemia (hemoglobin level: 3.1 g/dL). The laboratory data showed a white blood cell count of 5850/μL, C-reactive protein level of 0.08 mg/dL, procalcitonin level of 0.097 ng/mL, and serum glucose level of 389 mg/dL. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen did not detect any active bleeding. His melena had already ceased. Fluid resuscitation and massive transfusions resolved his hemorrhagic shock. Crystalloids were administered 800 mL over an hour. Blood products were initiated 30 min after the patient’s arrival. The patient required 16 units of red blood cell concentrate, 14 units of fresh frozen plasma and 20 units of platelets within 12 h of his arrival for hemostatic resuscitation. A classification of hemorrhage of the patient was considered as class IV based on the American College of Surgeons. Urgent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was a poor study because of food residue and failed to identify the source of the patient’s bleeding. Thus, he was admitted to the emergency intensive care unit for careful observation. The patient’s acute physiology and chronic health evaluation (APACHE II) score on the day of admission was 24, and the Charlson comorbidity index was three.
Since fresh bleeding was detected in the terminal ileum during capsule endoscopy the next day, colonoscopy was performed without bowel cleaning. But the exam produced poor findings due to blood clot. Therefore, transanal double balloon enteroscopy was scheduled for further investigation 4 days after the patient’s admission. The patient took 5 h to ingest 2 L of PEG plus an additional liter of PEG for bowel preparation. This was the first time he had consumed PEG. 1 h after consuming the 3 L of PEG, he complained of a feverish chill and his heart rate and temperature increased to over 130 bpm and 39 °C, respectively. The transanal double balloon enteroscopy exam was performed uneventfully and did not reveal the source of the patient’s bleeding.
After the examination, he appeared to be agitated and distressed and exhibited hypotension, high fever, and an elevated lactate level, which indicated septic shock. He did not have any other complaints. His abdomen was soft, flat, and non-tender. Empirical antibiotic therapy with meropenem was administered, and two sets of blood cultures were obtained at the same time. Fluid resuscitation and a noradrenaline infusion were initiated due to septic shock, followed by intubation and mechanical ventilation. Table shows the patient’s laboratory data at the time that he suffered septic shock. Repeated lab tests revealed a significantly elevated procalcitonin level. Liver function tests produced normal results during the course, so we excluded biliary stent infection. Figure shows the patient’s clinical course during the first 15 h after he ingested PEG, the hypotensive phase of his condition, and the resuscitation period. Ongoing intensive care led to a gradual improvement in the patient’s condition and he was successfully extubated on day 4 (the day when the PEG preparation was administered was defined as day 0, at which APACHE II score was 34). An examination of his blood cultures detected C. braakii and we replaced the meropenem with ceftazidime based on the results of sensitivity tests. Later, the identity of the pathogen was confirmed by biochemical analysis and partial sequencing of 16S rRNA. Urinalysis produced normal results. Cultures of the patient’s urine and sputum at the onset of septic shock were negative. The tip cultures of central venous catheter which had been placed in a femoral vein on admission were found to be negative. Stool culture was obtained 1 week after presenting septic shock, which was also negative. Antibiotics were administered for a total of 10 days. The patient was discharged from the emergency intensive care unit on day 8. Figure shows the patient’s clinical course over the 8 days after he first suffered septic shock.
Melena occurred intermittently. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy subsequently identified marginal ulceration of the gastrojejunal anastomosis, which was successfully treated with coagulation hemostasis. The patient was discharged on day 33.