A 55-year-old Caucasian female with stage IV pancreatic cancer and without other significant medical history presented to the interventional pain clinic with increasing sacral, lower extremity, and pelvic pain. The patient was unable to ambulate secondary to pain and deconditioning. Magnetic resonance imaging without contrast and computed tomography (CT) with contrast just prior to her clinic visit showed a large pancreatic mass with liver infiltration, multiple pelvic and sacral metastatic lesions, and a significant collection of intra-abdominal fluid. Of note, the lumbar and sacral epidural space showed no abnormalities or lesions. Her oncology team determined she was no longer a candidate for any further treatment and recommended palliative measures only. Her prognosis was poor with a life expectancy of a few weeks. Her pain control regimen included fentanyl patch 200 mcg every 72 hours, hydrocodone/acetaminophen 10/325 mg every 6 hours as needed, duloxetine 60 mg daily, and gabapentin 300 mg three times a day; however, she continued to have uncontrolled pain with significant decrease in her quality of life.
Due to the patient’s poor prognosis and short life expectancy, an implantable intrathecal pain pump was not pursued. It was decided that a tunneled multiorifice epidural catheter with an external infusion pump would be the best treatment option for her pain. The epidural catheter was placed at the L5-S1 level using standard fluoroscopic technique. A paramedian approach with the Tuohy bevel directed cephalad was used to advance the catheter to the L3–4 vertebral level. Then 2 mL of injected contrast showed spread along the right L5 and S1 nerve roots. There was no contralateral spread seen and therefore the decision was made to inject a test dose of 6 mL of bupivacaine 0.25%. After waiting for 10 minutes, the patient was assessed and she had marked anesthesia and decreased pain on her right side, but normal pain on the left. To get full relief of her symptoms, it was decided to place a second tunneled epidural catheter using the same technique as the previous catheter placement along the left side of the epidural space at the same L5-S1 level in order to achieve bilateral analgesia. Then 2 mL of contrast was again injected through this catheter after placement, and it showed spread only along the left L5 and S1 nerve roots . To achieve contrast spread bilaterally, injection through both epidural catheters was required. The placement of two epidural catheters was therefore performed in order to avoid the anticipated poor bilateral spread of infused local anesthetic and subsequent inadequate pain relief. The patient tolerated the procedure well and was placed on dual patient controlled epidural analgesia (PCEA) pumps with each pump delivering a basal dose of 3 mL of bupivacaine 0.2% per hour with a demand dose of 3 mL every 30 minutes. She received excellent pain control and her reported numeric pain score for her lower extremity and sacral pain went from a 10 to a 3. She was discharged to hospice and placed under the care of the palliative physician. On phone call follow-up, it was reported that she had no adverse effects associated with the epidural infusion and continued to have numeric pain scores in the 3 to 6 range. While in hospice she was continued on the same basal epidural infusion and with approximately five demand doses per day. The patient remained on the same topical and oral pain medication regimen, which included transdermal fentanyl and oral hydrocodone/acetaminophen. Unfortunately after 4 weeks, the patient passed away in her sleep with her husband at her bedside. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s next of kin (husband) to publish this case report and any accompanying images.