A 40-year-old Sri Lankan female presented with exertional breathlessness (NYHA II) and weight loss for 4 weeks duration. There was no cough, hemoptysis, evening pyrexia or night sweats and no history of limb claudication. Her past history was negative for connective tissue disorders, vasculitis or tuberculosis. The family history was unremarkable. General examination did not reveal any abnormal physical signs. She had collapsing pulse and blood pressure of 110/40 mmHg in both arms. Early diastolic murmur was heard in both left and right sternal edge. The lung bases were clear and rest of the systemic examination was normal.
Chest x-ray showed smooth dilatation of the ascending aorta and walls of it are not parallel to each other. Transthoracic and transeseophageal echocardiogram showed ascending aortic aneurysm (maximum diameter of 54 mm) with severe aortic regurgitation. Cardiac chamber dimensions were within normal limits and left ventricular ejection fraction was normal. Computed tomographic (CT) aortography confirmed the dilatation of aortic root and ascending aorta without dissection or leaking. Acute phase reactants were slightly elevated (erythrocyte sedimentation rate 50 mm 1st hour, C-reactive protein 18 mg/dL). Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test (VDRL) was non-reactive. Antinuclear antibody was negative.
Cardiology team proceeded their further evaluation with pre-operative coronary angiogram which showed normal epicardial coronary arteries. Aortic valve and root replacement was recommended by the cardiologist. Cardiothoracic surgical team carried out the aortic valve replacement (AVR) with 19 mm bileaflet St Jude Medical mechanical valve and aortic root replacement with 30 mm Albo graft. Surgeon noted evidence of aortitis with external inflammatory adhesions during the surgery. Post-operative period was uneventful. Warfarin therapy was started while closely monitoring the INR and it was kept between 2 and 3. Histological examination of aortic wall revealed granulomatous aortitis with caseous necrosis even though it did not show acid fast bacilli (AFB) on Ziehl–Neelsen staining (ZNS).
The final diagnosis of ascending aortic aneurysm with severe aortic regurgitation due to tuberculous aortitis was made on the basis of clinical, imaging and histological findings. She was treated with category one antituberculous therapy (ATT) consisting of 3 fixed dose combination tablets per day each containing rifampicin 150 mg, isoniazid 75 mg, pyrazinamide 400 mg and ethambutol 275 mg (RHZE). Frequent dose adjustment of warfarin was required during ATT. Continuation phase of ATT was extended for up to 10 months with rifampicin and isoniazid as in the case of disseminated tuberculosis. She made a good clinical recovery with improvement of her symptoms and follow up image showed functioning aortic prosthesis while maintaining INR in therapeutic range.