A 59-year-old man presented to the emergency department with acute diffuse lower limb pain of recent onset with no history of trauma. His medical history included obesity, hypertension, type 2 diabetes, myocardial infarction, stroke, obesity, and long-term smoking. His treatment included bisoprolol 5 mg daily, furosemide 20 mg daily, metformin 1000 mg twice daily, sitagliptin 50 mg daily, atorvastatin 20 mg at night, and aspirin 75 mg daily. No relevant family history was noted. He had been smoking 10 cigarettes/day for 15 years. No allergies or history of alcohol abuse or illicit drug use. On clinical examination, the heart rate was 89 beats per minute, blood pressure 161/79 mmHg, temperature 36.9 C, and oxygen saturation 99%. The lower left limb was cold, peripheral pulses were not palpable with no edema. Cardiopulmonary and abdominal examinations were normal.  The blood work showed a hemoglobin of 18 g/dL, leukocytosis (15 700/mm3), and C-reactive protein of 6 mg/L. Liver, thyroid, renal, and coagulation tests were normal. A lower limb angioscopy was performed that confirmed an occlusion of the left common femoral artery extending to the superficial femoral artery, as well as an occlusion of the left popliteal artery to the tripod. A right tibio-fibular trunk occlusion and moderate mixed atheromatous changes in the infrarenal aorta and iliac arteries were also described. The patient was then hospitalized and a thrombectomy of the left femoral artery was performed to revascularize the left lower limb. As part of the etiologic study, a cardiac ultrasound was performed that showed no abnormality and subsequently a thoracic angiotomography that described the presence of a floating thrombus in the distal third of the aortic arch downstream of the supra-aortic trunks. In the face of these findings, a positron emission tomography (PET) scan was performed to look for occult neoplastic disease, but this investigation did not show the presence of significant hypermetabolism in the segments examined.
