A 39-year-old Indonesian male presented to the digestive clinic department with a 7-day history of jaundice. Jaundice was associated with epigastric discomfort, nausea, loss of appetite, and skin itch. He had a history of benign brain tumors and underwent craniotomies three times, at ages 16, 17, and 24. The type of brain tumor and specific procedure are not well known by the patient. Six months before the onset of jaundice, he was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus and began taking oral diabetic medications. The family history was remarkable; it was revealed that two of the four siblings of the patient have similar conditions. Both of his siblings underwent brain tumor resection, total pancreatectomy, and nephrectomy for Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL)-associated tumors. Vital signs were within normal range, and physical examination revealed jaundice on the skin and sclera, epigastric pain, and a palpable lump in the epigastric region and both of his flanks.
Laboratory workup revealed elevated bilirubin levels, with serum total bilirubin of 6.54 mg/dL and conjugated bilirubin of 5.24 mg/dL. The contrast-enhanced MRI of abdomen with MRCP revealed dilatation of biliary tree consisting of right and left intrahepatic bile duct, common hepatic duct, cystic duct, and common bile duct without the presence of stone with suspicion partial obstruction by multiple cysts in the pancreas with diameters ranging from ±0.5–5 cm with ring enhancement, multiple cyst lesion with ring enhancement in both kidney and gallbladder hydrops with cholecystitis . PET/CT scan showed an ametabolic hypodense lesion in the left side of the cerebellum, multiple hypodense nodules or cysts with multiple calcifications covering the entire pancreas, a solid hypermetabolic nodule in the left adrenal gland with suspicious pheochromocytomas, and an ametabolic hypodense multiple lesion in both kidneys. All radiologic findings correspond to von-Hippel-Lindau disease .
Total pancreatoduodenectomy was decided after considering the lesion in the entire pancreas, which contains solid and cystic nodules, also the presence of endocrine pancreatic insufficiency. Following an evaluation of his fundamental condition and the exclusion of any contraindications, surgery was scheduled.
Intraoperatively, it was discovered that the cysts were seen in the entire pancreas with dilatation of biliary tree . Therefore, total pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed and followed by reconstruction with end-to-side choledochojejunostomy, side-to-side gastrojejunostomy, and subhepatic drainage was placed .
The histopathological findings showed multiple serous cystic neoplasms with calcification. Immunohistochemically, the report further confirmed multicystic pancreatic hamartoma with neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia and the lesion still showed an islet of Langerhans structure. Diagnosis is supported by diffuse positive in Cytokeratin 19 (CK19) and CK7 in cystic lesions, negative CEA, positive synaptophysin and chromogranin in nodular lesions, and positive Ki67% (0.2 %) which exclude adenocarcinoma or neuroendocrine tumor findings .
The management of the patient is optimally performed by an interprofessional healthcare team. Glycemic control after total pancreatectomy is handled and monitored by an endocrinologist. The insulin regimen prescribed for the patient was as follows: 10 IU of basal insulin taken in the evening, 8 IU and 10 IU of rapid-acting insulin given bolus during breakfast and dinner, respectively. The treatment for exocrine insufficiency was enzyme-substitution drug, which contains amylase, protease, deoxycholic acid, dimethylpolysiloxane, vitamin B1, vitamin B2, vitamin B6, niacinamide, and calcium pantothenate. In addition, with radiologic findings of multiple cyst lesions in both kidneys and a solid nodule in the left adrenal gland with suspicion of pheochromocytoma, close monitoring by a urologic surgeon was advised.
After three months of follow-up, the patient's main complaints were unstable blood glucose levels with variations of about 60 up to 400 mg/dL and an average of 200 mg/dL checked by a home-use blood glucose meter. Moreover, the patient report having at least three loose bowel movements each day and oftentimes fatty stool (steatorrhea) after overindulging in a high-fat diet. At six months follow-up, the blood glucose was controlled within the range 80-200 mg/dL and could take a normal low-fat diet without steatorrhea.