The patient was a 66-year-old Chinese man with a past medical history significant for AF, not on anticoagulation per the patient’s preference, and coronary artery disease (CAD) status post-percutaneous coronary intervention to left anterior descending artery about 1 year ago, currently on aspirin, clopidogrel, and rosuvastatin. He initially presented with 2 days of chest tightness, and acute coronary syndrome was ruled out. He then suddenly developed intermittent and sharp left-sided abdominal pain. Systemic review was negative for fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or hematuria. He lives in a rural town working as a farmer, and is a current smoker with about 30 pack year smoking history. He denies any alcohol abuse or illicit drug use, and has no known drug allergies. Family history is non-contributory. Current home medications include aspirin (100 mg), clopidogrel (75 mg), rosuvastatin (10 mg), furosemide (20 mg), spironolactone (20 mg), and isosorbide mononitrate (10 mg). No known drug allergies were documented.
On admission, his vitals were normal, with blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg, heart rate of 68 beats/minute, and oral temperature of 36.3 °C. On examination, his heart rate was irregularly irregular without heart murmurs, jugular venous pressure (JVP) was normal, with no pitting edema in lower extremities. Lungs were clear on auscultation. His abdominal examination was notable for mild tenderness to palpation over the left quadrant without rebound or guarding. Bowel sounds were normal. The rest of the examination was unremarkable.
Routine laboratory tests showed normal complete blood count, liver function tests, amylase, lipase, and thyroid function tests. Creatinine was normal at 56 μmol/L (normal range, 40–130 μmol/L) with mildly elevated blood urea nitrogen (7.29 mmol/L [normal range, 2.3–7.1 mmol/L]). Urinalysis was negative for proteinuria, infection, and hematuria. Fecal occult blood test was negative. Both lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and alpha-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase (α-HBDH) were elevated (283 U/l [normal range, 135–225 U/l] and 239 U/l [normal range, 76–195 U/l], respectively). Bedside abdominal and renal vascular Doppler ultrasound were normal. Due to persistent abdominal pain of unclear etiology, a contrast-enhanced CT scan was then performed, revealing renal infarction of the left kidney . Coronary (data not shown) and aortic angiograms were negative for coronary stenosis and aortic dissection. Given the CT findings and unresolved abdominal pain, a renal angiogram was performed and showed distal occlusion of both superior and inferior segments of the left renal artery . Next, attention was paid to the left renal artery. Two guide wires were introduced into the left renal superior and inferior segments , and the Pt wire was then passed through the distal end of the occluded superior artery. A 5 × 4 mm thrombus was aspirated by a suction catheter and locally inflated using a Maverick 1.5 × 15 mm balloon, and 0.1 mg nitroglycerin and 1 mg diltiazem were injected through the microcatheter . Blood flow restoration to both superior and inferior segments of the renal artery and vessel potencies were confirmed by angiography after the aforementioned interventions , which is more clearly observed in the amplification of the images for renal angiograms after the surgery compared with before the surgery . Abdominal symptoms resolved 6 hours after the operation. LDH (230 U/L) and α-HBDH (216 U/L) decreased and eventually normalized by postoperative day 5. He was continued on all home medications and started on warfarin post-procedure with an international normalized ratio (INR) goal of 2–3. The patient was discharged on triple therapy with aspirin (100 mg), clopidogrel (75 mg), and warfarin (3.125 mg) for 1 month, followed by clopidogrel and warfarin for a further 6 months. At 6 months follow-up, the patient was symptom-free and renal function remained normal (creatinine 74 μmol/L [normal range, 57–111 μmol/L]). Repeat angiography was not performed at follow-up to avoid additional radiation exposure given low suspicion for persistent or recurrent renal infarction.