After experiencing constipation and abdominal distension for three days, a 55-year-old man was brought to the emergency department for treatment. The patient had a fever following an upper respiratory illness 9 days before admission. He had neither a history of anticholinergic prescription use nor recent abdominal surgery. His vital signs upon arrival were as follows: His temperature was 37.8°C, his pulse rate was 92 beats per minute, his respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute, and his blood pressure was recorded at 151/99 mmHg upon arrival. He had a swollen, non-tender, tympanitic belly and no audible bowel sounds during auscultation. Hepatosplenomegaly or peritoneal irritation signs were absent in the patient. Urinary retention was not noticed. Abdominal ultrasound revealed diffuse abdominal gas distention and a dilated small intestine. On auscultation, active peristalsis was absent.

Three days after abdominal distension, the patient developed ascending weakness in both upper and lower extremities. A neurological evaluation revealed sensory deficiencies (reduced sensation to touch and reduced sensitivity to pain, while vibration and joint position sense was intact) and decreased muscle strength (3/5 both upper and lower extremities based on the MRC scale). The patients’ s deep tendon reflexes were absent in both upper and lower extremities. Plantar reflexes were muted bilaterally. His initial bowel distension was not considered a neurological manifestation; however, the development of symmetrical quadriparesis caught the neurologist’s attention.

Routine biochemical studies, including serum potassium level (4 mEq/L) and other blood tests, showed no abnormal findings. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain, cervical, and thoracic spinal cord did not reveal any underlying brain or spinal pathology. Abdominal CT with contrast showed markedly delayed bowel without mechanical obstruction, which suggested paralytic ileus, and no contrast passed through the duodenum during a 6-hour small bowel series examination. Over the next few days of total parenteral feeding and prokinetic use (metoclopramide 10 mg IV TID), the patient showed persistent severe ileus. A nerve conduction study (done 4 days of symptom onset) demonstrated demyelinating sensorimotor polyneuropathy. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed a normal white blood cell count (2 WBC/μL), high protein (819.9 mg/L; reference: 150–450 mg/L), and a glucose level of 55 mg/dl. This showed albumin-cytological dissociation. Based on the clinical presentation, neurophysiologic findings, and CSF findings, we diagnosed him with Guillain-Barre syndrome. Immediate treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 0.4 g/kg daily for 5 days was initiated. Five days after the onset of motor weakness, the patient’s condition rapidly progressed to involve bilateral facial paralysis (facial diplegia) and dysphagia. In the next few days, the patient developed respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation due to diaphragmatic weakness. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. After 2 months of intubation in the intensive care unit, the patient passed away due to septicemia. In this case, the patient presented with paralytic ileus as a type of dysautonomia; however, it was not recognized as GBS dysautonomia. The later emergence of motor weakness and sensory disturbances prompted the consideration of GBS.