31-year-old female patient (C.) referred to the rehabilitation center after suffering an ischemic stroke with hemorrhagic transformation, the result of an aneurysm in the right middle cerebral artery. She was admitted to the institution with a month of evolution of the brain damage and was referred to the occupational therapy service.

The Functional Independence Measure (FIM) was administered during the initial evaluation to assess the level of assistance required in basic activities of daily living (ADL). The patient was fed by nasogastric tube, required maximum assistance in minor grooming and communication. She also received full assistance in dressing, bathing, using the toilet, transfers, functional mobility and continence.

From the observation of occupational performance, alterations in motor skills related to obtaining and holding objects, the position of the body in relation to space and objects and maintaining execution were detected. An important apraxic component of movement was observed, which impacted the functional use of objects in daily tasks, so the Tulia Apraxia Test (AST) was administered, which rated the performance as severe apraxia. C. retained the processing skills related to the ability to keep up with an activity and the temporal organization of the same; not so the skills related to the organization of space and objects. As for the social interaction skills, she managed to look at the interlocutor and respond to their questions, although she was not able to initiate or end a conversation, produce language, keep up with the interaction or verbally support it. According to the evaluation of the speech therapy service, the patient had global aphasia.

C. participated in an interdisciplinary treatment (TO, kinesiology, phonoaudiology, music therapy, cognitive rehabilitation) and intensive (5 hours daily of therapy, specifically 1 hour of TO) in an inpatient setting.

In line with the reported baseline level, the objectives were defined together with the patient: (1) That the patient can increase her collaboration in basic ADLs, gradually decreasing the assistance required. (2) That the patient can incorporate her right upper limb (MSD) in functional activities. (3) That the patient can participate in instrumental ADLs with supervision.

C. was admitted to the rehabilitation center for 5 months. The intervention from OT during the first month of admission focused on training in strategies to increase participation in basic ADLs, indicating the family the corresponding level of assistance. Due to the subluxation presented, she entered an 8-week protocol in which the use of rigid shoulder bandage and functional electrical stimulation in the shoulder musculature is combined, which is carried out together with kinesiology.

Intervention during the second month focused on increasing motor and processing skills to continue training in basic ADL. Thickened handles were made for cutlery, which helped to hold them, and the bathroom environment was modified to facilitate the reach of the toiletries. We also worked together with a speech therapist to train the patient in accessing an augmentative alternative communication (AAC) application on her cell phone and the functional use of it.

During the third month, sensory-motor reeducation of the MSD was performed to favor its incorporation into the ADLs. The protocol of movement therapy induced by restriction of the healthy limb was performed for 14 consecutive days. The Motor Activity Log (MAL) evaluation was administered in order to have an objective assessment of the use of the affected upper limb in daily activities before and after the protocol.

During the fourth month, the treatment focused on increasing C.'s processing skills during instrumental ADL participation. Temporal, spatial and object organization were worked on in activities such as food preparation and handling of desk tools, and the spontaneous incorporation of the MSD in these activities.

In the final evaluation, the patient was able to increase her level of independence in all basic ADLs, requiring more time in the activities of minor grooming, bathing, dressing, use of the toilet and social interaction. In terms of communication, C. was able to understand abstract ideas and complex conversations with minimal difficulty and was able to express herself orally, relying on the use of the CAA application. In addition, she incorporated the MSD spontaneously in basic and instrumental ADLs with a slight decrease in the efficiency of movement. Finally, she was able to participate in instrumental ADLs such as household chores, shopping, and preparing food with supervision. When comparing the evaluations administered at admission and discharge, an improvement in performance in all skills was observed.
