A 52-year-old female developed mandibular sensory paresthesia and pain after 3 mo of lurasidone administration, without orofacial dyskinesia, hands tremor, limbs rigidity, bradykinesia, axial dystonia, retrocollis, torticollis, or blepharospasm.
A 52-year-old female had been diagnosed with schizophrenia since April 2001, and was treated with various antipsychotics, including risperidone 1 mg/d, amisulpride 200 mg/d, quetiapine 200 mg/d, ziprasidone 40 mg/d, and clozapine 125 mg/d, with a duration of a few months, respectively. The most long duration of main regimen was olanzapine 10-25 mg daily (June 2013-March 2021), which was fully effective, but was discontinued due to the adverse side effect of weight gain. Consequently, the main regimen was shifted to lurasidone, initiate dose 40 mg/d then up titration to 120 mg/d since March 2021. However, she developed mandibular sensory paresthesia and pain after 3 mo of lurasidone administration, without orofacial dyskinesia, hands tremor, limbs rigidity, bradykinesia, axial dystonia, retrocollis, torticollis, or blepharospasm.
A 52-year-old female with no history of medical disease, movement disorders or sensory paresthesia had been diagnosed with schizophrenia since April 2001.
The patient had no developmental delay, and had elementary school education level with poor academic performance. She had introverted personality as premorbid personality and poor interpersonal relationship. She could keep her occupational function as a cleaner since young adult until now. She got married at her 20’s and divorced at her 32’ while she was diagnosed of schizophrenia. The patient denied psychiatric family history.
We also consulted a dentist to rule out oral infection or other lesions. Both the aforementioned laboratory tests and dental consultation showed negative findings. Due to the defining features, TSS was suspected. Severity was evaluated on the basis of an Extrapyramidal Symptom Rating Scale (ESRS) score of 18 points before we changed antipsychotics to quetiapine monotherapy.
A series of laboratory tests including complete blood count, liver function, renal function, diabetes mellitus lipid profile, copper, ceruloplasmin, thyroid function, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, immunoglobulin (Ig)A, IgG, anti-2 glycoprotein 1Ab, anticardiolipin Ab IgG, anticardiolipin Ab IgM. Anti-ENA, a venereal disease research laboratory test, HBs antigen, hepatitis C virus antibody, cryoglobulin identification, a homocysteine test and brain computed tomography (CT), were performed to rule out a secondary organic etiology. We also consulted a dentist to rule out oral infection or other lesion. The aforementioned laboratory tests and dental consultation both showed negative findings.
The brain CT image and report are demonstrated in Figure . Technique of examination: Axial brain CT with 5 mm section from vertex to skull base without contrast enhancement; normal ventricular size; normal appearance of cerebral fissures, cisterns & sulci; no evidence of intracranial hemorrhage; no midline deviation; no abnormal parenchymal attenuation change; no definite bony fracture; well pneumatization of bilateral mastoid cells; unremarkable of paranasal sinus; symmetrical and smooth contours of nasopharynx; and left frontal scalp swelling. There is no evidence of intracranial hemorrhage.