A 60-year-old female patient, known case of type-2 diabetes mellitus, began to experience pain and irritation in the left eye after undergoing a left penetrating keratoplasty.
On examination, the left lid was edematous, and the corneal graft showed edema with buried sutures. An infiltrate of 2 x 1.5 mm and an epithelial defect was observed temporally.
The visual acuity was limited to finger counting close to the face. Direct microscopy of a corneal scraping revealed septate hyphae, and fungal culture grew A. nidulans.
The patient was prescribed natamycin 5% and voriconazole eye drop 1% along with oral voriconazole 200 mg for 14 days. However, due to minimal resolution of infection,
loose sutures were sent to the microbiology lab for a culture that again grew A. nidulans. The infection resolved after two months with an extended voriconazole treatment,
and there have been no recurrences to date.
A 65-year-old male farmer presented with diminution of vision and opacity in both eyes. He gave a history of redness and opacity in the right eye three years back and in the
left eye one month back. The patient had been diagnosed with right anterior staphyloma and corneal melt in the left eye in a private hospital when he referred to our center.
There was no history of ocular trauma, but a watery discharge and congestion were observed in both eyes. The visual acuity was limited to the perception of light in both eyes.
The left eye examination revealed a 3x3 mm central corneal thinning. The case was diagnosed with left infective keratitis with corneal thinning and melts.
The patient was empirically started on vancomycin 5%, tobramycin 1.3%, natamycin 5% eye drops, and oral ciprofloxacin for 14 days. On day 10 of presentation,
the ulcer in the left eye had a 2.5 x 2.5 mm perforation, for which penetrating keratoplasty (PK) was performed, and an intraoperatively excised cornea was
sent for microbiological workup. The direct microscopy did not demonstrate any bacterial and fungal etiology. Therefore, the patient was discharged with
an empirical coverage of vancomycin 5%, natamycin 5%, tobramycin 1.3% eye drops, and oral ciprofloxacin for 7 days and a plan for weekly follow up visits.
The fungal culture grew A. nidulans after 3 days. However, an oral antifungal could not be started as the patient did not visit the center again and was lost to follow-up.
A 59-year-old male presented with sudden onset of vision diminution, pain, and redness in the left eye after undergoing cataract surgery five days earlier.
The visual acuity for distant vision in the left eye was hand movement close to the face. Ophthalmic examination showed conjunctival congestion and the presence of AC cells,
exudates, and flare in the anterior chamber. A diagnosis of acute post-cataract surgery endophthalmitis was made. Subsequently, an Endophthalmitis Pars Plana Vitrectomy (PPV)
with intravitreal antibiotic instillation was performed. Vitreous biopsy was sent for microbiological workup, and the patient was discharged with
an empirical coverage of vancomycin 5%, tobramycin eye drops 1.3% and oral ciprofloxacin for one week. Fungal culture grew A. nidulans.
However, the patient did not refer for his first follow-up, and an antifungal could not be prescribed. The patient visited the center 18 days later due to the
deterioration of his condition, and the examination revealed a membrane on the left pupil along with a nasally located fungal ball.
The patient was operated for PPV with intraocular lens and bag explants, vitreous lavage, and intravitreal voriconazole (100μg /0.1ml) instillation along
with natamycin eye-drops 5%, and oral voriconazole 200 mg for one month.
The patient’s symptoms did not mitigate with the given treatment, and a diagnosis of recurrent endophthalmitis was made.
The PPV was repeated with intraocular lens and bag explants, accompanied with intravitreal amphotericin B (10μg /0.1ml) and vancomycin (1mg /0.1ml) instillation.
The patient could not visit the center for follow-up due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On teleconsultation, the patient reported left eye discharge, for which he was advised to follow up physically.
Samples from all three cases were received in the ocular microbiology section. The samples included a corneal scraping and loose
sutures (from case no. 1); cornea excised in PK procedure (from case no. 2); and two vitreous biopsies (from case no. 3).
All samples were processed for gram stain, potassium hydroxide (KOH) wet mount, and culture. Sheep Blood agar (5%) and Sabouraud Dextrose Agar (SDA)
(HiMedia, Mumbai, India) were incubated at 37°C for 18 to 24 h and at 25°C for a minimum of 14 days. Primary microscopy of cases no. 1 and 3 showed thin
branching septate hyphae with few pus cells . Bacterial cultures were sterile in
all three cases and SDA grew filamentous fungus between days 3 and 5. The isolation of fungi was considered significant if at least one
of the following criteria was met: a) observation of fungal elements in primary microscopy and fungal growth in fungal culture medium (b)
confluent fungal growth on the sample inoculation site . The fungal growth from all samples was initially white cottony and later appeared glabrous. It matured with tan and smoky green alternative rings
on the obverse and dark brown pigment on the reverse . Lactophenol cotton blue staining showed septate
hyaline hyphae with short to medium length brown-tinged conidiophores. These conidiophores produced biseriate, flask-shaped vesicles covered by metulae
and phialides on the upper part bearing round, smooth, green conidia in chains .
After 10-14 days, large round cleistothecia were observed encompassing asci producing red-brown lenticular ascospores .
The cleistothecia were surrounded by numerous large, spherical, thick, double-walled hyaline ‘Hulle Cells’ .
The morphological characteristics of the isolates were confirmed through slide cultures of all the isolates.
The E-strip method (HiMedia, Mumbai, India) was employed to determine the antifungal susceptibility pattern of all the isolates . Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) was determined for amphotericin B, posaconazole, itraconazole, and voriconazole using E-test strip.
All MIC values were recorded 24 and 48 h after the application of strips. The MIC was defined as the lowest concentration preventing
any discernible growth. presents the results of the antifungal susceptibility test of the three isolates.
Clinical breakpoints (CBP) were not determined by the Clinical and Laboratory Standard Institute (CLSI) for Aspergillus species.
Therefore, the results of antifungal susceptibility testing of amphotericin B, posaconazole, itraconazole, and voriconazole were interpreted following
the ‘modes’ (most frequent MIC) documented for Aspergillus spp. in the M38 document by CLSI .