A 10-mm pedunculated polyp in the gallbladder neck was detected on a follow-up abdominal ultrasound in a 60-year-old man with chronic hepatitis and hepatitis B without medication. A benign tumor or low-grade malignancy was suspected, and he initially did not wish to undergo surgical resection. Six months later, an abdominal ultrasound showed an increase in the polyp to 12 mm at the neck of the gallbladder with point-like perfusion, focal thickening of the gallbladder wall, and a gallbladder stone at the fundus . Enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a polypoid lesion at the neck of the gallbladder, a distended gallbladder with a thickened and enhanced wall, and a gallbladder stone at the fundus. He was asymptomatic, and laboratory examinations revealed that the patient had a normal liver function and coagulation with hepatitis B virus DNA level of 3.2 log IU/ml; positive and negative serologic markers for hepatitis B envelope antibody and envelope antigen, respectively, and the tumor marker levels were within normal ranges [carcinoembryonic antigen, CEA (1.8 U/ml; normal range < 5.0 U/ml) and CA19-9 (9.9 U/ml; normal range < 37 U/ml)]. Although the patient was diagnosed with a benign gallbladder polyp, malignancy could not be completely excluded. Therefore, a laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed. Intraoperatively, only a slight thickening of the gallbladder wall was detected. Macroscopically, there was a pedunculated yellowish polyp (14 × 11 × 15 mm) at the neck of the gallbladder. The gallbladder wall was thickened, and the Rokitansky-Aschoff sinus (RAS) was clustered at the wall .
Histopathological examination revealed solid or trabecular nests of tumor cells in the polypoid lesion. These tumor cells were uniformly monotonous with a small round nucleus and multivacuolated clear cytoplasm , and the cytoplasm was negative for periodic acid-Schiff reaction. Necrosis and mitosis were not observed. The surface of the polyp was composed of a biliary epithelium without atypia. The neoplastic lesion was restricted to the lamina propria, and neither vascular nor lymphatic invasion was present (ENETS: T1N0M0; AJCC: T1aN0M0). Chronic cholecystitis with RAS was observed in the surrounding gallbladder tissue. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and CD56, indicating neuroendocrine differentiation . The expression of Ki-67 showed a labeling index of < 2%. Hence, the tumor was diagnosed as clear cell NET G1 of the gallbladder. No additional treatment was administered because R0 resection was performed using cholecystectomy, and there was no evidence of invasion or metastasis to other organs. Although clear cell NET may appear as a part of VHL disease, the patient had no clinical findings and family history of VHL. The patient is doing well without any signs of recurrence until the one-and-a-half-year follow-up period.