An 82-year-old frail gentleman presented to our center with a nine-day history of abdominal distension, constipation, localized periumbilical pain, intermittent, nonradiating, and multiple episodes of nonprojectile, nonbilious vomiting containing food particles. He denied fever, jaundice, hematochezia/melena, urine or urine discolored, or trauma to the abdomen before the onset of the symptom. The medical history was significant for hypertension since 15 years, cholelithiasis diagnosed eight years ago, and recently diagnosed bronchiectasis, managed with low flow oxygen therapy.
On examination, his vital parameters were within normal limits, abdomen distended, nontender with exaggerated bowel sounds. Initial investigations showed normal hematologic and biochemical parameters. Abdominal ultrasound revealed a contracted gallbladder with distended bowel loops. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis revealed dilated small intestine loops with hyperdense intramural calculi with air in the biliary tree, suggestive of gallstone ileus with cholecystoduodenal fistula .
Initial management consisted of fluid resuscitation, insertion of a nasogastric tube, analgesia, and nil by mouth. A Foley catheter was inserted and strict urine output charts were maintained. An exploratory laparotomy with a lower midline incision was performed and an enterolithotomy was performed within 24 h under spinal anesthesia, given the chest morbidity . Peroperatively, a single 4.5 × 2 cm gallstone was impacted in the terminal ileum, 10 cm proximal to the ileocaecal junction. The ileum at the impaction site was healthy while dilated proximally. Incidentally, a Meckel's diverticulum, 60 cm proximal to the ileocaecal junction with a wide base was also detected. A longitudinal enterotomy proximal to stone impaction allowed milking of the stone out proximally. The enterotomy was repaired transversely. The impacted gallstone causing ileus is shown in . The cholecystoduodenal fistula was left undisturbed due to the significant risk of duodenal injury. Postoperative recovery was uneventful and the patient was discharged home on postoperative day six. The patient remained asymptomatic and disease-free for 16 months of follow-up.