A 17-year-old neutered male European Shorthair cat was presented owing to an
inability to jump, weakness and respiratory stridor. All these signs had started a
few months previously. The cat was kept strictly indoors, had no history of trauma
and the owner did not report any other clinical signs or pre-existing disease. The
physical examination revealed a plantigrade stance, pelvic limb muscle atrophy that
was more severe on the right, broad facial features and inspiratory stridor.
Neurological examination showed the cat had a reluctance to move, lameness of the
hindlimbs and paraparesis with plantigradism. Postural reactions and flexor reflexes
were reduced in both pelvic limbs. Neurological signs were more severe on the right
pelvic limb. A lesion affecting the sciatic nerves, more severe on the right side,
was suspected because the cat was not ataxic, and the other nerves originating from
L4–S3 spinal cord (femoral nerve, pelvic nerve, pudendal nerve, etc) were apparently
not affected. A lesion affecting the nerve roots of the sciatic nerve at the level
of the cauda equina could not be excluded, but was considered less likely because of
the marked asymmetry of the clinical signs and the absence of evidence of
involvement of the pelvic and pudendal nerve and coccigeal nerves. Degenerative
(lumbosacral stenosis, disc herniation), neoplastic (lymphoma, paraneoplastic
polyneuropathy) or metabolic (lumbosacral stenosis associated with acromegaly,
diabetic polyneuropathy) conditions were included as differential diagnoses.
Routine laboratory examination, including a complete blood count, serum biochemistry
and complete urinalysis, was unremarkable. Serum glucose concentration was
5.4 mmol/l (reference interval [RI] 4.1–6.4 mmol/l) and serum fructosamine
concentration was 211 µmol/l (RI 220–350 µmol/l). Serum total thyroxine
concentration was also normal (32 nmol/l; RI 10–60 nmol/l). Serum IGF-1
concentration, measured with a validated commercially available chemiluminescence
assay (Immulite; IDEXX Laboratories), was higher than the assay detection limit (1000 ng/ml). Basal GH
concentration was not measured. Abdominal ultrasound evaluation revealed visceral
organs of normal size (liver, spleen, pancreas, kidneys and adrenal glands). An
echocardiography was performed, which showed no evidence of cardiac hypertrophy.
A CT scan of the lumbosacral spine and the head was performed with a single slice
helical scanner (Siemens Somatom Emotion). The cat was placed in sternal recumbency
under general anaesthesia and a scan of the lumbosacral spine was obtained with a
2 mm slice thickness. Subsequently, the head was scanned with 1 mm slice thickness,
pre- and post-contrast (Iomeprol with an iodine concentration of 300 mg/ml, dosage
of 600 mg iodine/kg EV [Iomeron 300; Bracco]). In the precontrast CT examination,
the right cranial articular process of S1 was hypertrophic, with severe impingement
on the right L7–S1 foramen . The left L7–S1 foramen was also mildly stenotic due to mild bony
hypertrophy of the left caudal articular process of L7 . Ventral spondylosis between L6 and
L7 without involvement of the L6–L7 foramina was also detected. Post-contrast CT
examination showed an enlarged pituitary gland (4 mm in height, 4.5 mm in width,
4 mm in length) with a mild suprasellar extension . Hypertrophic ethmoidal turbinates
and left fluid-filled tympanic bulla indicating otitis media were other
findings.
In order to better characterise the peripheral neuropathy, electrodiagnostic tests
were performed. Electromyography showed mild spontaneous pathological activity of
the appendicular muscles innervated by the right sciatic nerve. Motor nerve
conduction studies (MNCS) and sensory nerve conduction studies (SNCS) of both
sciatic tibial nerves and of the right ulnar nerve were within normal limits.
Minimum F waves latencies and F ratio were severely increased in the right tibial
nerve. Onset latency of cord dorsum potential obtained by stimulating the tibial
nerve was increased in both pelvic limbs, and more severely in the right one.
Electrodiagnostic findings were indicative of a lesion of the proximal portion of
both sciatic nerves or their roots, which was more severe on the right side .
The final diagnosis was acromegaly and entrapment neuropathy of the sciatic nerve as
a consequence of lumbosacral/foraminal stenosis due to bone hypertrophy. Medical
treatment for acromegaly using cabergoline was suggested, but the owner declined it.
Surgical treatment of the foraminal stenosis was discussed, but a medical approach
was preferred owing to the age of the cat. As a result, treatment was aimed to
control and prevent neuropathic pain (gabapentin 10 mg/kg q12h) and re-checks were
arranged every 3 months to evaluate neurological condition and glycaemic control.
The clinical condition slightly improved in the first weeks of treatment. Sixteen
months after the first presentation, the cat was still euglycaemic and neurological
signs were stable. Serum IGF-1 concentration was re-evaluated at the time and was
still over the detection limit of the assay.