An 80-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our hospital with a 12-year history of an endocrine inactive steady sellar mass lesion (13 mm in diameter; Figure ). Our patient had been previously asymptomatic with no pituitary hormone deficiency or visual impairments. Moreover, our patient had a medical history of good health with only minor health issues that included hypertension and osteoporosis. However, prior to hospital admission, she had recently experienced two severe headache attacks; the last episode was accompanied by nausea, vomiting and blurred vision. Hyponatremia (120 mEq/L) with low serum osmolality (247 mOsm/L) and highly elevated urine osmolality (695 mOsm/L) were detected. An endocrinological investigation revealed hypocortisolism with no other hormone disturbances. Fundoscopy showed no pathological findings. However, further ophthalmologic examination with Goldman perimetry confirmed a bitemporal hemianopsia accentuated on her right side. Her neurological examination results were otherwise normal. After substitution therapy with hydrocortisone, our patient rapidly improved and her headaches subsided.
Findings from a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan were suggestive of an acute hemorrhage of the sellar process, consistent with pituitary apoplexy . Except for an age-consistent vascular leukoencephalopathy, the diagnostic imaging showed no further pathological findings. Our tentative diagnosis at this point was a pituitary adenoma with pituitary apoplexy.
Due to these clinical and radiological findings, the decision was made to surgically remove the tumor. A gross total extirpation using a transnasal, transsphenoidal approach to the pituitary mass was successfully performed. Intraoperatively, the tumor appeared yellowish-brown, was relatively firm and was located within a sellar hematoma cavity, which was evacuated.
Postoperatively, our patient's visual field deficits improved markedly on clinical examination and Goldman perimetry confirmed a partial recovery of her bitemporal visual field deficits. Endocrinological studies showed panhypopituitarism with partial and transient diabetes insipidus. Our patient received substitution therapy with hydrocortisone, levothyroxine and transient therapy with desmopressin. Overall, our patient remained in good health with a satisfactory level of performance. A repeat MRI scan taken 16 months after surgery showed good chiasmatic decompression with no residual tumor mass .
The resected tumor was examined with light microscopy, which revealed a small, well circumscribed, non-adenomatous tumor surrounded by slightly compressed remnants of adenohypophyseal parenchyma . The tumor was richly vascularized with an observable reticular mesh of thin-walled capillaries interspersed with large epithelioid-looking cells . Pale eosinophilic cytoplasm showed xanthomatous or vacuolar change . Immunohistochemistry confirmed the expression of the endothelial-associated markers CD31 and CD34 in the intratumoral capillaries, although not in the stromal cells themselves. Conversely, the stromal cells were diffusely immunoreactive for vimentin, with a minority of cells also coexpressing S100 protein and epithelial membrane antigen . No inflammatory infiltrate was detected except for the occasional mast cell . Staining for cytokeratins tested negative, as did the Langerhans-cell-associated marker CD1a. Less than 1% of lesional cell nuclei were labeled with the cell proliferation-associated antigen Ki-67.
Given the above findings, we identified the tumor as an intrapituitary example of capillary hemangioblastoma (World Health Organization grade I). Since our patient displayed no clinical stigmata of VHL disease, genetic testing was not performed.