A 60-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our department due to suspected cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma on the left thigh. She reported an 8-week history of a non-traumatic ulcer that initially resembled a bruise, but gradually developed into a painful, non-healing ulcer. The patient had a poor performance status and a past medical history of smoking, peripheral vascular disease (PVD), and rectal squamous cell carcinoma that had been treated with chemoradiotherapy 5 years earlier. There was no other known history of immunocompromise.

On examination, the patient was febrile (37.9°C) and tachycardic (109 bpm). A necrotic ulcer with a purple undermined border was present on the left inner thigh that was surrounded by warm and tender induration. No crepitus or discharge was present.

Blood tests revealed raised inflammatory markers (white cell count [WCC] of 23.8 × 109/L and C-reactive protein of 282 mg/L). Autoimmune screen was unremarkable. Microscopy, culture, and sensitivity from a wound swab only identified contaminants. Ultrasonography was performed which excluded the presence of an underlying fluid collection. Given the lack of remarkable imaging and the slow advance of the condition, the possibility of necrotising fasciitis was excluded. The patient was therefore treated with co-amoxiclav and metronidazole for presumed pyoderma gangrenosum with superimposed cellulitis.

Three days later, the patient was found to have spreading induration and increasing pain despite improving inflammatory markers (WBC of 10.9 × 109/L and C-reactive protein of 134 mg/L) and was admitted to hospital with presumed worsening cellulitis. She was escalated to intravenous antibiotics. A skin biopsy was performed that revealed ulceration to the subcutis, neovascularisation with proliferation of vascular channels and spindle cells. There was no evidence of neutrophilia, atypia or mitotic activity to suggest pyoderma gangrenosum or malignancy. Immunohistochemistry studies found positivity to the vascular marker CD31 and were negative to HHV-8. A diagnosis of RAE was thus made based on the clinical and histological findings, and the patient was urgently referred to the vascular team for consideration of surgical correction of PVD. Unfortunately, following their assessment, and due to her poor performance status, the patient was not found to be fit to undergo surgical treatment. Instead, antibiotics were continued with improving inflammatory markers and lessening pain. Wound dressings and topical timolol were also initiated. Unexpectedly, and despite ongoing antibiotic therapy, the patient’s condition deteriorated suddenly, leading to her demise within 3 weeks of her initial presentation to our department due to irretrievable PVD.