A 69-year-old healthy male patient, on his first emergency department (ED) visit, presented with persistent hiccups, fever up to 38.4 °C, and mild left upper quadrant abdominal pain for 4 days. Except during sleep, his hiccup frequency was approximately several times per minute. The patient quit smoking 30 years ago after 10 years of one pack per day. He did not have URI symptoms such as cough, rhinorrhea, or sore throat. On physical examination, his vital signs included a temperature of 38.4 °C, a pulse of 107 beats/min, blood pressure of 130/73 mm Hg, respiratory rate of 18 breaths/minute, and an oxygen saturation of 95% measured by pulse oximetry while breathing ambient air. Except for mild tenderness in the left upper abdomen, the patient exhibited good oral hygiene, normal breath sounds, and all other physical examinations were normal. Fever workup revealed leukocytosis (15.34 K/µL) and minimal left pleural effusion on chest X-ray . The patient was discharged in a stable condition.
His hiccups persisted, and his abdominal pain progressed despite the use of analgesics. Additionally, newly developed dyspnea was noted. The patient presented to our ED 2 days after the initial visit, exhibiting vital signs: a temperature of 38.3 °C, a pulse rate of 135 beats per minute, blood pressure at 145/77 mm Hg, a respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute, and an oxygen saturation of 94%, measured through pulse oximetry while breathing ambient air. In the physical examination, the most significant difference compared to his initial visit was a noticeable decrease in breath sounds on the left side. Laboratory data revealed leukocytosis (white blood cell count 21.39 K/µL) and lactic acidosis. Chest radiography showed complete whitening of the left lung field. Computed tomography scans showed a collapsed left lower lung with massive left pleural effusion. Empyema was suspected.
Thoracentesis with chest tube placement was performed, and pleural fluid analysis revealed elevated levels of total nucleated cells (349/µL), total protein (4.6 g/dL), and lactate dehydrogenase (1044 U/L). Empirical ceftriaxone was administered owing to the diagnosis of empyema. The persistent hiccups and mild abdominal pain significantly improved. However, the efficacy of chest tube drainage was limited. Therefore, we changed the antibiotic from ceftriaxone to piperacillin-tazobactam. Left video-assisted thoracoscopic surgical decortication was performed.
After surgery, the patient was afebrile, and the infection profile improved with piperacillin-tazobactam. His hiccups improved and the frequency decreased to several times per day. Pleural effusion culture yielded Streptococcus intermedius 9 days after thoracocentesis. No bacterial growth was observed in his blood cultures by matrix assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) after 7 days. Antibiotic use was shifted to the oral form of amoxicillin-clavulanate after 14 days of intravenous antibiotic treatment. The patient was then discharged and returned to the clinic for follow-up. No significant symptoms suggestive of pulmonary infection recurrence were noted the following 6 months after discharge.