A 75-year-old woman was admitted in ICU after a cardiac arrest with return of spontaneous circulation, caused by tension pneumothorax. Now-flow and low-flow were 1 minute and 17 minutes, respectively. She was admitted 1 hour after the event, without sedation. Lungs were mechanically ventilated, the pleural drain was in place, pulse oximetry was 100% /FiO2 0.5, arterial pressure and heart rate were 160/70 mmHg and 110bpm, respectively, with norepinephrine at an infusion rate of 1mg/h, and temperature and glycaemia were 36.5°C and 8 mmol/L, respectively. There was no any sign of pneumothorax. Fever was actively treated without inducing hypothermia.
She was unconscious (Glasgow Coma Scale: 3/15), with a conserved bilateral photomotor reflexes. She had intermittent bilateral ocular revulsion and bilateral shoulders tremor. Propofol was initiated by a bolus followed by a continuous infusion and the movements of the eyes and shoulders ceased immediately. One hour later a 13 channels EEG ( in supplementary figures) diagnosed a NCSE as a pattern of generalized periodic spike-waves evolving in generalized rhythmic spike-waves at 1 Hz with high amplitude (> 200 µV), without response to stimulation. Midazolam was initiated by a bolus followed by a continuous infusion which permitted to achieve a burst suppression pattern ( in supplementary figures). A 4-channel sensor connected to BIS VISTA® monitor was placed, in order to monitor the two processed parameters and showed an isoelectric signal ( in supplementary figures).
On day 2 Clobazam and levetiracetam were added to ensure a bridging between IV and oral antiepileptic drugs. Conventional EEG recording showed a pattern of burst suppression and raw EEG from BIS monitor showed an isoelectric signal.
On day 3, the 4-channel sensor was replaced by a 2-channel sensor which was connected to patient's bedside monitoring. Propofol and midazolam were both decreased progressively. Few hours later (, , and ), while there were no any abnormal movements, raw EEG of BIS monitor connected to a Philips BIS module [panel A] and secondarily to a BIS VISTA module [panel B] showed a pattern of high voltage with irregular morphology, alternating with isoelectric signal, evoking spikes (white arrows), spike-waves (red arrows), and polyspikes (white star). BIS and SR values did not show significant variations.
Although it was not planned at that moment to request a conventional EEG recording, given the high suspicion of NCSE recurrence, the neurophysiology team was urgently contacted and the NCSE recurrence was confirmed and treated. The conventional EEG showed continuous generalized rhythmic spikes and spike-waves, sharply countered, of medium amplitude at 1-1.5 Hz ( in supplementary figures). Unfortunately the patient died on the fifth day.