A 61-year-old lady with a history of rheumatoid arthritis since 1986 was referred to the orthopaedic surgical clinic by her treating rheumatologist. She had a total shoulder replacement implanted 11 years previously at a different hospital trust and did not have any delayed healing or episodes of infection post-operatively. On attendance at the orthopaedic clinic, she reported a 1 month history of pain and swelling in the shoulder, which had progressed to an intermittently discharging sinus over the posterior aspect of her shoulder. She had not recently undergone any dental intervention or other surgical procedures, and had otherwise been systemically well throughout this period. X-rays revealed elevation of the humeral head consistent with rotator cuff failure. The replacement head had also migrated medially due to failure of the supporting glenoid bone and there was osteolysis around the humeral implant (.).
The patient had been on immunosuppressive medications, which included anti-TNF medication and methotrexate for rheumatoid arthritis for the previous 5 years, and was not taking antibiotics at the time of presentation to the clinic. Initial superficial wound swabs were taken for culture at this clinic attendance, all of which revealed no growth at this stage.
Initially, the patient did not wish to undergo revision surgery and instead wished to consider management with suppressant antibiotic therapy, but after further consideration, she decided to proceed with a revision procedure. A two-stage procedure was planned that initially comprised implant removal, debridement, temporary spacer insertion and empirical intravenous antibiotic therapy post-operatively, followed by reimplantation of a custom-made prosthesis at a later second stage. At the first-stage operation, the implant was removed, the sinus was excised, and an extensive debridement and washout was performed. A large loculated collection and copious infected tissue were noted. Seven deep tissue samples were obtained with sterile instruments and sent to the microbiology laboratory for culture and sensitivity testing in a sterile container. An antibiotic-loaded cement spacer (model H48G, Synicem Shoulder Spacer, Lima Orthopaedics UK Ltd, Letchworth Garden City, UK) loaded with 1.50 g of gentamicin was inserted to maintain tissue tension and joint alignment. The patient was started empirically on IV flucloxacillin 2 g QDS following surgery since Gram-positive organisms are the commonest pathogens in prosthetic joint infections, while awaiting results from the intra-operative samples.
Tissue samples were homogenized using a vortex machine with the addition of saline broth and were plated on the blood, cystine–lactose–electrolyte-deficient (CLED) and chocolate agar. Further, fastidious anaerobe broth (FAB) was also inoculated for each sample and was read each day for a total of 5 days of incubation. was isolated from two out of seven tissue samples at 48 h from the blood plate and subsequently identified using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) technology. One out of the two positive tissue samples, with further FAB, isolated a similar pathogen. Ciprofloxacin, amoxicillin and ceftriaxone etests were set up, and the organism was detected to be sensitive to all as per European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) guidelines. Antibiotics at this stage were rationalized as per microbiology advice and the patient was commenced on intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g once a day for 14 days, followed by a further 28 days of oral ciprofloxacin 500 mg BD (equivalent to twice a day) to complete a total 6-week course. A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed in view of the risk of endocarditis, and this was negative.
The second-stage procedure for implantation of the definitive prosthesis (custom-made Lima shoulder, Lima Orthopaedics UK Ltd, Letchworth Garden City, UK) was performed 10 months following the first stage (with two delays due to anaesthetic concerns and the presence of pressure ulcers). At the second-stage procedure, there was no evidence of an active infective process and implantation of the new custom-made prosthesis was undertaken. Three deep tissue samples were obtained using sterile instruments and sent to the microbiology laboratory for culture and sensitivity testing. Samples were processed in a similar manner as previously stated with additional broth incubation for 5 days. The patient was commenced empirically on intravenous vancomycin, dosed as per the local vancomycin calculator, and co-amoxiclav 1.2 g TDS (three times a day), as per the local hospital guidelines for revision surgery post-operatively. No pathogens were isolated from any deep tissue specimens following a final read at 5 days. The patient was subsequently discussed in the Bone Infection MDT (Multi-Disciplinary Team) meeting and it was advised that the antibiotics be rationalized to oral ciprofloxacin 500 mg BD to complete the 6-week post-operative period because the patient was immune suppressed and had a high risk of relapse.
The patient completed the course of antibiotics and recovered post-operatively with no further complications from the shoulder perspective. She continued to make progress, and her range of motion at the shoulder joint improved slowly. However, her post-operative physiotherapy was limited to over-the-phone sessions during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) crisis and 7 months post-surgery the patient fell, sustaining a closed, right tibial shaft fracture that was successfully managed non-operatively in serial casts, although this further limited her shoulder rehabilitation. Twelve months post-operatively, her radiographs were satisfactory and she had regained function to a level beyond her pre-operative range. Her inflammatory markers were CRP 36.6, ESR 59 (consistent with her rheumatoid clinical picture), and WCC 6.8; and her clinical shoulder scores were 36 for the Oxford shoulder score, with a Constant score of 43.
At 14 months post-second stage surgery, the patient was admitted with sepsis, with the likely focus originating from a right foot ulcer that had led to osteomyelitis. Superficial ulcer swabs from the right foot isolated (MSSA). The patient declined any further ongoing treatment and elected to return home with her family for palliative care.