A 10-year-old white girl presented to our emergency room in January 2015 with a 1-month history of headache and morning vomiting. On examination, she appeared slightly pale, with body temperature of 36.5 °C, heart rate of 90 beats per minute, blood pressure of 106/62 mmHg, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 100% in ambient air. Her neurological status was normal. Laboratory test results are shown in Table . A chest X-ray was within limits. An urgent non-enhanced brain computed tomography (CT) scan showed a focal lesion in the left frontal subcortical region with prominent surrounding edema and mass effect . She was therefore admitted to our hospital. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated ring enhancement on post-contrast T1-weighted (T1W) sequences; fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences confirmed extensive vasogenic edema . She lived with her parents and siblings in Southern Italy. Before the onset of the current illness, at 5 years of age she had undergone surgical excision of a pleomorphic adenoma of the parotid gland. No evidence of a pre-existing congenital airway malformation was referred. She was not sexually active, and she did not smoke cigarettes, drink alcohol, or use illicit drugs. Her father, a heavy tobacco smoker, was a merchant. Her mother, a housewife, reported three miscarriages. Her maternal grandfather had died from colon cancer at 40 years. Her paternal aunt was affected by , and a second-degree cousin presented ovarian immature teratoma. After multidisciplinary discussion, neuronavigation and left frontal craniotomy with tumor resection with direct cortical and subcortical stimulation was done under general anesthesia. She received preoperative steroid medication which was tapered post-surgery. MRI scanning within 72 hours after surgery documented total resection .
Microscopy on tissue sections showed malignant neoplasms with extensive necrosis, composed of atypical columnar and cuboidal cells, which had vesicular nucleolated nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm. Tumor cells covered papillary structures with fibrovascular cores or formed small glands and micropapillae lacking stroma. The surrounding brain parenchyma showed evidence of reactive gliosis and lymphohistiocytic infiltrate . On immunohistochemical examination, neoplastic cells were positive for cytokeratin 7, thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) , cytokeratin AE1/AE3, and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), whereas all other markers tested were negative: cytokeratin 20, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), thyroglobulin, vimentin, cluster of differentiation (CD) 10, WT1, calretinin, inhibin, CD117, CD30, S100 protein, melan-A, actin, chromogranin, synaptophysin, and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). INI1 expression was retained. Thus, a diagnosis of metastatic lung adenocarcinoma was proposed. A chest CT scan showed a parenchymal nodular lesion in the lower lateral basal segment of the right lobe, measuring 32 mm × 18 mm × 17 mm, thought to be the primary lung cancer with mediastinal nodal metastasis. Tumor spread was confirmed by positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showing a primary lung tumor and with high fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake: maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 8.5 and 8, respectively .
At fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis, no rearrangements of anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), c-ros oncogene 1, receptor tyrosine kinase (ROS1), and rearranged during transfection (RET) genes were found. ROS1 gene was found deleted in 57% of neoplastic cells. Next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis was applied to genomic deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. Both the “Cancer Hotspot Panel” (50 genes) and the “Comprehensive Cancer Panel” (444 genes) through the Personal Genome Machine with Ion Torrent™ technology (Life Technologies, Applied Biosystems) were applied. NGS analyses with Comprehensive Cancer Panel highlighted the presence of multiple non-targetable mutations in fms-related tyrosine kinase 4 (FLT4), ubiquitin-protein ligase E3 component N-recognin 5 (UBR5), ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM), and TATA-box binding protein associated factor 1 (TAF1). Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation status was negative.
One month after admission our patient started chemotherapy treatment for NSCLC with cisplatin and vinorelbine for six cycles over a 5-month period. Two months later, an MRI 3 months after diagnosis revealed cerebral recurrence; therefore, she underwent a second surgical resection, followed by radiosurgery (CyberKnife). A brain MRI and PET/CT scan after completion of her last dose of chemotherapy showed absence of cerebral metastasis and partial regression of the lesion of the lower lobe of her right lung (RLL); thus, between 7 and 8 months after admission she received adjuvant thoracic radiation therapy. Unfortunately, 1 month later surveillance imaging revealed lung tumor progression and multiple brain metastases. She subsequently started whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT) and three cycles of docetaxel. One year after admission a rapid lung tumor progression was documented. One month later she developed headache and vomiting due to increased cerebral edema and growth of brain metastases. Therefore, she started corticotherapy and third-line pemetrexed treatment (five cycles), but 5 months later a PET/CT scan revealed further worsening of intracranial lesions and skeletal metastases. She underwent radiosurgery by CyberKnife technique on brain metastases and the following month she received nivolumab at 3 mg/kg intravenously every 2 weeks compassionately. Due to worsening of clinical conditions, a month later PET/CT was performed, revealing disseminated (skeletal, pulmonary, cerebral, lymphonodal) disease. She continued nivolumab, receiving a total of five cycles without adverse events. Given the ongoing clinical and imaging deterioration, palliative treatment was initiated and she died of respiratory failure 23 months after diagnosis of metastatic lung adenocarcinoma . Autopsy was declined by parents.