A female infant, 2 months of age, previously healthy, was admitted to the pediatric emergency department. The mother reported weight loss, colic, alternating hunger cries with lethargy, mild diarrhea and worsening vomiting, with onset 5 days ago. She also reported previous symptoms of nasal congestion, sporadic cough, conjunctivitis, small skin vesicles on the chest and absence of fever. The nasopharyngeal reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test result for SARS-CoV-2 was positive. The mother had become infected with SARS-CoV-2 10 days before the infant. On physical examination, the infant was very irritable, alternating with lethargy, with a face of abdominal colic pain associated with multiple feeding interruptions, moderate dehydration and hypothermia (<36°C). The weight was 4.8kg; the skin had a lattice appearance, with prolonged capillary filling and decreased urine flow. The pulse was 125 beats/minute, respiratory rate 54 breaths/minute, and pulse oximetry oxygen saturation was 97% in room air. The patient was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) after volume resuscitation.

The patient was a full term newborn with no pre-existing illness or antibiotic use, who was fed breast milk and infant formula supplement from the second week of life.

Data from biochemistry, urine, faeces, coagulation function tests and infection biomarkers, performed after confirmation of SARS-CoV-2 infection at admission and follow-up. Serology for SARS-CoV-2 was positive for IgM (2.11AU/mL, with normal range <0.90) and negative for IgG. PCR for SARS-CoV-2 PCR remained positive in faeces for more than 27 days, despite the respiratory tract examination already being negative. Additional viral panel tests, urine and faeces culture were negative, and only the nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT or PCR) was positive for C. difficile .

Multislice helical computed tomography (CT) of the chest, echocardiography and abdominal ultrasound were normal.

During 4 days of admission to the NICU, the patient persisted with abdominal cramps and required additional amounts of intravenous fluids due to poor acceptance of breast milk and infant formula. The proton pump inhibitor initially prescribed was discontinued. No antiviral, glucocorticoid or antimicrobial was prescribed to the patient.
