A 21-year-old male patient was admitted with 1 month history of intermittent high grade fever. He also complained of weight loss, loss of appetite, generalized body weakness and hair loss. He was not on any long term drug treatment. On clinical examination, he appeared unwell, was febrile at 38.5ºC with mild pallor.
He also had a painful oral ulcer with bilateral cervical and right axillary nontender lymphadenopathy but there was no hepatosplenomegaly or bone tenderness. Other system examinations were unremarkable. Laboratory evaluation revealed normochromic normocytic anaemia (hemoglobin 9.9g/dl, RBC 3.9×1012/L), leucopenia (white cell count 2.06×109/L) and thrombocytopenia (platelet 75×109/L). Aspartate transaminase was 64.2 U/L, alanine transaminase 86.7 U/L, GGT 244.4 U/L (normal range 15–55 U/L) and lactate dehydrogenase was 757U/L (230-460 U/L). Alkaline phosphatase, serum albumin and bilirubin levels were normal. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 55mm in 1st hour and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 3.8mg/L (<6).
Serum ferritin increased at 1174.36ng/mL (20–159 ng/mL). Coagulation profile was normal. Urea, creatinine and urinalysis were normal. Infection screen for Epstein-Barr, cytomegalovirus, hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV viruses was negative. Toxoplasma gondii IgG antibody was positive with negative IgM. Blood and urine cultures were negative. Malarial parasites were not detected. Mantoux test was negative. The autoimmune profile revealed increased levels of double stranded (ds)-DNA antibody 133.3 IU/L (>46.1 IU/L is positive), C3 level was 46.1 mg/dL (normal range 90-180 mg/dL). Anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) was positive. Chest x-ray, electrocardiogram, echocardiogram and abdominal ultrasound were normal. Cervical lymph node biopsy revealed chronic reactive lymphadenopathy without neoplastic lymphoid cell proliferation. There was a reactive bone marrow. The diagnosis of SLE was made according to the American Collage of Rheumatology (ACR) diagnostic criteria, as he fulfilled four criteria including hematological involvement, oral ulcer, positive ANA and ds-DNA antibody. He was started on oral prednisolone 1mg/kg daily treatment. He made a dramatic clinical and biochemical improvement within one week and was discharged. He was reviewed at medical clinic regularly and corticosteroids were tailed off gradually. Currently, three months after the diagnosis, he is being managed with low-dose prednisolone, hydroxychloroquine and osteoporosis prophylaxis.