An 83-year-old man noticed a left submandibular mass and visited our Department of Oral Surgery. He had no B symptoms. His family history was unremarkable, although he had a history of renal insufficiency. A physical examination revealed an elastic hard tumor (diameter: 4 cm) that was well-demarcated and had not adhered to the surrounding tissue. The covering skin was normal, and the patient reported not experiencing spontaneous pain or tenderness. Laboratory testing revealed slight anemia (red blood cell count: 385 × 104/μL, hemoglobin levels: 11.7 g/dL) and leukopenia (white blood cell count: 3,900/μL), although his serum lactate dehydrogenase levels were not elevated (207 IU/L). Levels of soluble interleukin-2 receptor were markedly elevated (2,730 IU/mL), although we did not detect elevated titers of antibodies to human T-cell leukemia virus-1 or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Computed tomography and diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging revealed a left submandibular tumorous lesion and multiple swollen lymph nodes (the left cervical and inguinal nodes) . Magnetic resonance imaging also revealed multiple high-intensity areas in the vertebrae, bilateral ribs, and ilia, although there were no abnormalities in the mediastinum or abdomen. We obtained a biopsy specimen from the submandibular lesion, which supported our initial pathological diagnosis of anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL), although a hematopathological consultant helped us make a final diagnosis of EBV-positive DLBCL. The patient underwent 2 courses of chemotherapy using the THP-COP regimen and achieved partial remission, although the tumor was ultimately resistant to the following therapies: molecular-targeted therapy using brentuximab vedotin, THP-COP (4’-O-tetrahydropyranyl adriamycin, cyclophosphamide, Oncovin®, prednisolone), and EPOCH (etoposide, prednisolone, Oncovin®, cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin). The patient was alive with progressive disease at the 9-month follow-up.
Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining revealed that the lymph node architecture was effaced and diffusely occupied by infiltrative large lymphoid cells. Many foci of necrosis were visible, and the lesion was comprised of centroblast-like cells (a large vesicular nucleus and several conspicuous nucleoli), immunoblast-like cells (prominent central nucleoli), and plasmacytic cells . There were scattered large multinuclear cells with prominent nucleoli, including large cells that were similar to Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg cells (HRS-like cells) .
The initial IHC revealed that the tumor cells were positive for CD30 and MUM-1, but negative for CD3, CD4, CD5, CD8, CD10, CD19, CD20, CD23, CD38, CD45, CD45RO, CD56, CD79a, CD138, Pax-5, immunoglobulin light chains (κ and λ), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), Bcl-2, and Bcl-6 . These results could not define cell lineage and histological type of the tumor. Additional IHC revealed that the tumor cells were positive for B-cell-specific transcription factors (Oct-2 and BOB.1), which confirmed B-cell derivation of the tumor cells . In situ hybridization revealed clear positive signals for EBV-encoded small RNAs in the nuclei of the tumor cells . The tumor cells were negative for LANA-1 (a product of human herpesvirus-8), and the Ki-67 labeling index was very high (approximately 80%).
We performed gene rearrangement testing using the BIOMED-2 multiplex polymerase chain reaction-based method, which revealed clonal rearrangement of the immunoglobulin heavy chain and light chain genes. No clonal rearrangement was detected in the T-cell receptor genes.