A 49-year-old female patient complained of fever and headache for 32 day was hospitalized in the Department of Infectious Diseases of Guangzhou Panyu Central Hospital, Guangdong, China, on October 29th, 2020. She had lived for one and a half years in Los Angeles, USA and just returned to China 2 days before. While living in the United States, she traveled around Los Angeles and trimmed plants for several times in the garden.
The symptoms included a sudden onset of fever (39 °C), severe headache, and rash on her face and back while she was in Los Angeles on September 27th. The patient went to local hospitals several times, but computed tomography (CT) showed no abnormities on her head. She received symptomatic treatments, but had not fully recovered.
When admitted to our hospital, the patient was with headaches, fevers, vomiting, and maculopapular rashes (1.5 cm × 1.5 cm) on the face and back. Her white blood cell count (WBC), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP) were slightly higher than the normal range, but her electrolytes was slightly lower. CT examinations revealed small nodules in the posterior apex of her left upper lobe and lateral segment of middle lobe of right lung, but no abnormalities in head.
The empiric combinatory therapy (ceftriaxone sodium 2 g daily and acyclovir 0.5 g q8h) for both viral and bacterial meningitis was given. A lumbar puncture was performed on day 34. The CSF opening pressure was greater than 400 mmH2O. CSF analysis demonstrated positive pandy test and negative cryptococcal antigen, gene Xpert MTB/RIF assay, and culture result . Drug dehydration and other symptomatic treatments were added. But there was no relief of the symptoms.
A lumbar puncture was repeated on the 39th day . Autoimmune encephalitis spectrum results were positive of the anti-MOG-IgG antibodies for the serum and the CSF (1:32 and 1:3.2, respectively). To further identify the pathogen, PACEseq mNGS (Hugobiotech, Beijing, China) of CSF and blood was performed on a Nextseq 550 platform (Illumina, California, USA). A total of 308 unique sequence reads were finally aligned to the C. posadasii genome in CSF, which showed a dominant abundance of 2.32% in all microbial species after excluding the human reads from the total gene pool . The blood mNGS showed negative of the pathogen. A targeted PCR of C. posadasii and Sanger sequencing were subsequently applied, which finally confirmed the mNGS detection of CSF . In addition, the tissue biopsy of the patient’s back rash indicated HE Stain, PAS stain (+), and hexamine silver stain (+) , which were also in line with coccidioidomycosis. Considering the abnormal signals in the bilateral parieto-occipital lobes and the meninges by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), the patient was finally diagnosed with C. posadasii infected meningitis.
The treatment was adjusted with fluconazole (800 mg intravenously daily) and ceftriaxone (4 g q24h). Other symptomatic treatments were also performed, such as mannitol (125 ml intravenously q8h) to reduce intracranial hypertension. The detailed treatments were shown in Fig. .
The patient gradually recovered over the next 7 days. The body temperature returned to normal, and the headache and dizziness relieved. Repeated lumbar puncture revealed the pressure at 200 mmH2O . The patient's vital signs were stable. The patient was then transmitted to Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University for antifungal treatment with altericin B combined fluconazole. One month later, the patient’s symptoms improved and was finally discharged. She was required oral fluconazole. On February 2021, reexamine of the patient found high blood fat with intrajugular venous thrombosis and head sinus. The patient was given levarabban, oral anticoagulant therapy, fluvastatin, and oral calcium supplements. After 3-month follow-up, her headache aggravated with a increase intracranial pressure. The patient then received dehydration treatments.