A 72-year-old White man with an 8-year history of CLL previously treated with four cycles of fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, rituximab in 2012, and ibrutinib since 2014, presented to the oncology clinic with 2 weeks of low-grade fever and chills, night sweats, fatigue, dysphagia, and new-onset rapidly increasing cervical lymphadenopathy. The interval workup revealed worsening of lymphocytosis (61% at presentation vs. 40.2% at 6 months before the presentation) and thrombocytopenia (42 vs. 92 K/mm3). A positron emission tomography scan showed bulky confluent hypermetabolic adenopathy throughout all bilateral neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis portions. The patient was subsequently admitted to the hospital with suspected CLL progression and possible transformation to a more aggressive type. Lymph node biopsy revealed that high-grade diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) had transformed from CLL (Richter syndrome; Fig. ). The patient was started on DA-R-EPOCH chemotherapy. However, the patient's course was complicated by tumor lysis syndrome, acute kidney injury, and neutropenic fever with Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteremia. Therapy with broad-spectrum antibacterials and antifungals and with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) was initiated.
Despite an improvement in cervical lymphadenopathy, on day 9 of hospitalization, the patient developed severe airway obstruction and immediately underwent emergency intubation for airway protection, following which he was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the neck demonstrated significant neck soft-tissue edema, for which he received high doses of hydrocortisone, but with no improvement. On day 10, the patient remained unresponsive after sedation was weaned off, and he subsequently developed two episodes of generalized seizures. Computed tomography of the head showed no acute abnormalities. An electroencephalogram did not demonstrate any signs of focal or generalized seizure activity. Brain MRI revealed edema in the cortical gray and subcortical white matter of the bilateral occipital and inferior temporal lobes, consistent with posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome . The patient experienced recurrent seizure episodes refractory to lorazepam, levetiracetam, valproate, but responsive to midazolam and propofol. Of note, additional blood cultures became positive for Klebsiella oxytoca; thus, tigecycline was added to the antibiotic regimen. However, considering the overall grim prognosis, the decision was made, in conjunction with the family, not to escalate care. Unfortunately, the patient's condition deteriorated further, resulting in cardiac arrest. We concluded that the nature of PRES, in this case, was multifactorial and related to the recently initiated combination chemotherapy, with acute kidney injury and sepsis being essential additional risk factors.