A 23-year-old female presented to the emergency department with a 1-day history of fits. It was described as a generalized tonic-clonic seizure with loss of consciousness for about 30 minutes. There was no aura or focal neurological deficit. She reported having headache, vertigo, disturbed sleep, and reduced appetite. The patient had a history of similar seizures that progressively worsened over the last 1 month. The patient was taking sodium valproate for the last 6 months but the seizures were uncontrolled despite of strict medication compliance. In addition, she also had generalized body weakness, intermittent twitching and tightness in the hands for the past 7 years. She did not have a history of seizures, head trauma, central nervous system infection, stroke, hypertension, diabetes, thyroid disease, or autoimmune disease. Family history was not significant for seizures disorder.
Her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure was 120/70 mm Hg; pulse rate was 74 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, and body temperature of 37.3°C. Neurological examination revealed clear consciousness with no cognitive impairment or cranial nerve dysfunction. Her systemic and general physical examinations were unremarkable except for a positive Chvostek sign.
Initially workup was done for the metabolic causes of seizures and the laboratory evaluation revealed hypocalcemia as shown in
Computed tomographic (CT) scan of the brain was ordered that diffuse brain parenchymal calcification involving globus pallidus, putamen, caudate, internal capsule, thalamus, dentate nucleus, and subcortical white matter in scattered areas of fronto parietal regions as shown in .
Based on the patient laboratory investigation and radiological finding a differential diagnosis of fahr’s disease and fahr’s syndrome were made. Initially the patient received injection calcium gluconate 20 mL of calcium gluconate 10% diluted in 50 mL of dextrose infused over 10 minutes by intravenous route, injection midazolam and an injection diavalproex sodium 500 mg. Patient was admitted to the medical unit and further workup for hypocalcemia was initiated that revealed hypoparathyroidism as shown in the .
Due to the absence of secondary causes that is, congenital defects, thyroid surgery, neck radiation in the patient history, negative anti-nuclear antibodies a diagnosis of Fahr’s syndrome secondary to primary hypoparathyroidism was made. The patient was placed on oral sodium valproate 500 mg twice daily, calcium citrate 600 mg twice daily, vitamin D3 50 000 once weekly for 6 weeks. At sixth week follow up, the patient remained symptomatic having 2 episodes of seizure in the last 15 days despite of strict compliance to anti-seizures and calcium supplements. Her calcium remained low (5.2 mg/dL). She was prescribed oral prednisolone 2 mg/kg for 4 weeks along with the anti-seizures and calcium and vitamin D supplement. After 1 month of starting the steroid therapy her calcium level raised to 7.2 mg/dL, she remained asymptomatic and her steroid therapy was tapered.