A 70-year-old man was diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma (clinical T4N0M0) involving a right upper lobe mass of 4.0 cm in diameter and a metastatic nodule in the middle lobe. He underwent right upper and middle bilobectomy and systematic lymph node dissection through a posterolateral thoracotomy. On the second postoperative day, 1750 mL of white turbid fluid was drained through the chest tube and the effusion was diagnosed as chylothorax. During the first 24 h following implementation of a fat-free dietary regimen, the color of the discharge became transparent, but another 630 mL of discharge was observed. Although the amount of discharge reduced gradually, it was persistent. Chemical pleurodesis was performed on the sixth postoperative day for which 5 KE of OK-432 (Picibanil; Chugai Pharmaceutical, Tokyo, Japan) and 300 mg of minocycline were administered into the thoracic cavity. The discharge began to progressively diminish. Three days thereafter, the amount of discharge had decreased to 150 mL/day, and on the ninth postoperative day, the chest tube was removed. On the 14th postoperative day, the patient complained of dyspnea and dysphagia, and an upper mediastinal mass was detected on chest radiogram . Chest computed tomography revealed a large mediastinal fluid collection 6 cm in diameter surrounded by a thick capsule that was compressing the trachea and esophagus . The mass was suspected to be a mediastinal chyloma. Since the patient’s symptoms were gradually progressing, we performed surgery on the 15th postoperative day. Thirty minutes before the surgery, ice cream was given to the patient to help confirm the leakage point in the thoracic duct. Thoracoscopy revealed a small amount of chylous effusion in the thoracic cavity and an elastic mass in the upper mediastinum. When the thick capsule was incised, chyle began to spill out . Once the chyle had drained completely, we confirmed the point of leakage and repaired it using a Z-suture with 4–0 Prolene (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ) . The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was free of any symptoms. He remained asymptomatic 12 months after discharge from the hospital.