A 31-year old male patient admitted to the Tropical and Parasitic Disease Department of Poznań University of Medical Sciences, Poland, because of the presence of a tumor-like lesion within the liver. The patient had been living in a small village surrounded by forests in which a big foxes population has been detected.
Prior to the admission the patient had suffered from influenza like syndromes, pain in the right subcostal region and suddenly joidance.
He was admitted to the local Surgery Department with suspicion of biliary tract pathology. CT scan gave the evidence of irregular mass with disseminated calcifications. He was diagnosed undifferentiated hepatitis with cholestasis.
Because of atypical radiology results suspicion of Echinococus infection was done. ELISA serology test was positive (2.9 Units; positive above 1.0). The patient was moved to the Tropical and Parasitic Clinic in Poznań for further investigations.
On admission day the physical examination was unremarkable. Blood tests showed elevated levels of bilirubine (2 mg%), alkaline phosphatase (172-248 U/l) gamma glutamylo trans peptidase- GGTP (135-262 U/l).
USG of the abdominal cavity revealed presence of a huge calcified lesion in the VII-th liver segment with the diameter of 12.3 × 2.8 cm and in the II-nd liver segment a solid hyperechogenic focus with calcifications inside as well as disseminated calcifications in the interhepatic biliary tracts neighborhood. MRI showed the liver enlargement, with irregular tissue. In the VII, VI and V segments polycyclic fluid lesion and disseminated inside the right lobe smaller fluid foci as well as biliary tract widening .
According to the picturesque data suspicion of alvecococcosis was done.
ELISA test (Echinococcus IgG) was positive – 50 NTU (positive above 11NTU) and confirmed with positive Western-blot which revealed presence of specific for Echinococcus multilocularis IgG (7,16,18, 26–28 kDa). ELISA EM2-plus (anty-E.multilocularis) was also high positive (> 3.0ABS). The patient was finally diagnosed the liver alveococcosis with P2M0N0 stage.
When the diagnosis was established the albendazol therapy (2x400mg/day) was initiated together with ursodeoksycholic acid (2x250mg/day) in order to lowered bilirubine level and protect from apoptosis healthy liver tissue . The patient was qualified to the surgery treatment and was moved to the General and Transplant Surgery Department, Poznan University of Medical Sciences. MELD score of the patient was 10 (creatinine 1.13 mg/dl; bilirubin 1,12 mg/dl, INR 1,15, not dialysed).
The right hepatectomy was performed. Access to the liver was achieved by bilateral subcostal incision and then mobilizing the liver from its ligamentous attachments, including the coronary ligament, and left and right triangular ligaments, then anatomic resection of the fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth liver segments was performed. Right portal vein, right hepatic artery and right hepatic duct was ligated and cutted. In addition, visible cysts were removed from the left lobe of the liver in nonanatomical resection and suspicious calcified lesions in hepatoduodenal ligament were also removed . Postoperative course complicated by lymphorrhea, conservative treatment was initiated, obtaining improvement. In ultrasound on the 8th postoperative day, spleen enlargement occurs (141x55mm).
The histopathology examination of the all 3 speciments revealed presence of chronic inflammatory changes with thick wall calcified granulomas and accelular homogeny infiltrates with necrosis cavities.
Additionally, the biological material after surgery was used for molecular genotyping of Echinococcus sp. For this reason, the DNA was extracted from the removed liver tissue with lesions, using the commercially available kit (NucleoSpin Tissue, Macherey Nagel, Dueren, Germany). Next, the isolated DNA was used as a template in the PCR with Echinococcus sp. 12S rRNA-specific primers (EM-H15 and EM-H17), according to Stieger et al. (2007) . Moreover, as a control of DNA quality and presence of PCR inhibitors, we used isolated genetic material to amplify human GAPDH, according to Xiang et al. (2012) . Finally, the PCR product was sequenced and the obtained sequences were aligned using BioEdit software.
Based on the PCR reactions with Echinococcus-specific primers, we confirmed that the patient was infected with Echinococcus sp. . Further sequence analysis revealed the complete similarity with Echinococcus multilocularis 12S rRNA , suggesting that the clinical outcome and after surgery complications were not correlated with parasite genotype and potential more pathogenic Echinococcus multilocularis strain.
After the operation albendazol treeatmet was continued. With no other major or minor complication patient with normal level of bilirubin, alanine transaminase and aspartate transaminase was discharge on 17th postoperative day.
The patient’s follow –up, performed 10 months after the operation gave the evidence of thrombocytopenia (80G/l), leucopenia (3.1G/l) and syderopenic anemia. MR of the abdomen cavity showed presence of numerous hypodensic partially calcified lesions within the remaining liver segments. Moreover critical portal vein constriction (the diameter 3-4 mm), collateral venous circulation in the liver hil were detected. The examination revealed also splenomegaly as a result of the portal hypertension . Performed endoscopy of upper gastrointestinal tract revealed presence of first degree varices oesophagi as well as gastritis and duodenitis.
Recently, patient had control MRI (06.03.2020) and there are no active outbreaks of alveococosis in the liver parenchyma, compared to previous studies, the image is stable. Collateral vessels are visible in the liver cavity. The spleen is enlarged, by a maximum length of about 16 cm (before operation spleen length was 14 cm). Patient is clinically asymptomatic. But he still requires regular, every 6 months follow-up in the Tropical and Parasitic Clinic.