An 11-year-old skeletally immature girl presented to us 2 years back with pain and swelling over the right forearm without any restriction of moments and other constitutional symptoms. The patient had a similar problem 4 years back , for which she underwent surgery elsewhere and she completely recovered. Available biopsy reports suggested a non-ossifying fibroma. On examination, the patient had a tender bony thickening of radius extending to about 2cm underneath the previous surgical scar which was a 5cm anterolateral longitudinal surgical scar in the region of the middle third and distal third junction of forearm. The patient had no neurovascular deficit.
X-ray radiography showed a 1cm diameter multiloculated lesion involving the complete diameter of bone with sclerotic rim in the distal diaphysis of radius, with no periosteal reaction and cortical breach . Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging showed a well-defined expansile lytic, trabeculated lesion with multiple internal septations region ( and ). Since the previous biopsy report from a reputed institute suggested non-ossifying fibroma 4 years back, we did not go for further studies like bone scan. As the lesion was painful and the child had difficulty in carrying heavy objects, we decided to intervene. Based on the previous biopsy report and imaging features, we decided to perform direct intralesional excision (curettage) of the lesion. Radius was exposed through the previous surgical scar (Henry’s approach) without tourniquet control. During exposure, we found gross adhesions around radial artery due to the previous exposure. Radial artery was accidentally cut, repair was not attempted and hence ligated. Under image intensifier guidance, the lesion was identified and bone window was made. Tumor tissue was thoroughly curetted and the defect was filled with artificial bone substitute (STIMULAN calcium sulfate beads).
Tumor tissue was sent for biopsy. Above elbow, POP slab was applied for 6 weeks. Histopathology showed tissue with spindle cells arranged in fascicles and bundles in a storiform pattern along with osteoclast such as giant cells and no evidence of cytological atypia/atypical mitosis/necrosis suggestive of non-ossifying fibroma . The patient was put on the above elbow POP slab for 2 weeks and converted to POP cast for the next 4 weeks. At 6 weeks, POP was removed and an active range of motion exercises of wrist started. The patient was advised not to involve in sports activities for nearly 6months until bony union was seen radiologically. The patient was serially followed up. Post-operative radiograph showed some residual tumor involving the dorsal cortex which was noted even at 1-year follow-up X-ray .The patient was followed up for 3 years. Tumor was completely regressed and was not seen on X-ray . She had a full range of movement with no functional deformity (-).