We present the case of an 84 years old male presenting with dyspnea (NYHA III) and fatigue, hypotension (88/50 mmHg), tachycardia (97 bpm), and fever (38.4 °Celsius) to our emergency department fulfilling 2 of 4 criteria for SIRS . Clinical examination was significant for discrete bibasal pulmonary rales and a 2/6 systolic murmur, in agreement with a preexisting, moderate mitral valve insufficiency. Initial laboratory findings showed substantially elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) (84 mg/l) and serum creatinine (159 μmol/l).
Recent medical history was significant for ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) 15 days prior to the current presentation with successful percutaneous coronary intervention and implantation of two drug eluting stents in the proximal right coronary artery. Other relevant comorbidities included pre-existing coronary artery disease, arterial hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. His current medication included aspirin, ticagrelor, nebivolol, olmesartan, rosuvastatin and pantoprazol, with ticagrelor initiated 15 days ago. He had no history of allergies.
Empirical antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone was initiated in the emergency department due to suspected severe sepsis after blood and urine culture sampling. Extensive infectious disease work-up including blood cultures, a respiratory panel for the comprehensive detection of respiratory disease-causing viruses and bacteria, HIV testing, and imaging studies (CT-scan of the chest, abdominal ultrasound, transthoracic and transoesophageal echocardiography) did not reveal an infectious cause of SIRS.
Symptoms (dyspnea and fatigue), signs (fever), and laboratory signs (CRP) of SIRS persisted despite 6 days of intravenous antibiotic treatment . Further, Dressler-Syndrome was considered as a differential diagnosis. However, lack of a pericardial rub, leukocytosis, pericardial effusion, or clinical and laboratory response to preemptive treatment with ibuprofen rendered it very unlikely.
After broad, unrevealing diagnostic work-up ticagrelor was suspected as the causative agent of persistent SIRS due to recent initiation and no other change in drug treatment. Accordingly, ticagrelor was discontinued at day seven and replaced by clopidogrel. No other drug was changed during the hospital stay. This was followed by a rapid improvement in symptoms as well as clinical and laboratory signs of SIRS. In clinical follow-up 2 weeks and 1 year after discharge the patient remained asymptomatic and well.