A 79-year-old Black female patient was referred for percutaneous LAAO. Past medical history was significant for mitral regurgitation, tricuspid regurgitation, and persistent atrial fibrillation complicated by recurrent significant gastrointestinal haemorrhage on anticoagulation secondary to diverticulosis. Five months prior to referral, she underwent surgical mitral and tricuspid valve repair, as well as LAA ligation with 35 mm AtriClip due to elevated stroke risk (CHA2DS2-VASc score 5) with intolerance to oral anticoagulation. Initial pre-procedural clinical examination revealed a haemodynamically stable, well-appearing female with regular heart rate and irregular rhythm. Pre-operative laboratory assessment revealed normal kidney function (serum creatinine 0.81 mg/dL) and mild anaemia (haemoglobin 10.8 g/dL, reference 12.0–15.0 g/dL). Intra-operative transoesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) demonstrated closure of the LAA. However, 40-day post-operative TEE and cardiac computed tomography (CT) imaging demonstrated a significant persistent communication between the left atrium and LAA with no evidence of LAA thrombus ( and ). After comprehensive review of the TEE and CT scan images, we felt that a LAAO device could be used to achieve adequate occlusion of the residual LAA pouch. For LAAO device implantation, trans-septal atrial imaging was performed using fluoroscopic and TEE guidance, with a mid-septal puncture chosen using intracardiac ultrasound guidance. Intra-procedural TEE was used for sizing of the LAA, and based on these measurements, a 27 mm LAAO device (WATCHMAN™) was selected and deployed, with all the P.A.S.S. (Position, Anchor, Size, and Seal) criteria satisfied . Only 1.4 mm PDL was present. She continued on apixaban 5 mg twice daily and aspirin 81 mg daily post-operatively. Follow-up TEE at 6 weeks demonstrated a trivial PDL measuring 1.9 mm along posterior aspect, with no thrombus seen. At that point, the decision was made to continue aspirin 81 mg daily and clopidogrel 75 mg daily, with discontinuation of apixaban. The patient has not experienced any further episodes of major bleeding, and we are tentatively planning to stop clopidogrel at 6 months post-operatively, with continuation of aspirin 81 mg daily indefinitely thereafter.