A 40-year-old female presenting with mild hepatic dysfunction was referred to our hospital. She did not smoke but had a drinking habit. At age 28 years, she had presented with elevated platelet counts (> 100 × 104/μL); ET had been diagnosed based on bone marrow biopsy results. She was prescribed aspirin (100 mg/day) and anagrelide (2.5 mg/day). She had also been prescribed ebastine for itching a while ago.
On admission to our hospital, laboratory examination revealed slightly elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels (82 IU/L), although the patient’s ALT level had improved from that recorded previously. Her platelet count was slightly elevated (62.4 × 104/μL). Prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time were normal. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a cecal tumor. Colonoscopy revealed advanced cecal cancer . Computed tomography (CT) indicated cecal wall thickening .
The patient recovered from liver dysfunction without treatment. She stopped taking oral aspirin 1 week prior to surgery but continued anagrelide until the day before surgery. To prevent thrombosis, she wore elastic stockings; furthermore, intermittent pneumatic compression was performed during surgery. Laparoscopic-assisted ileocecal resection was performed. We used a soft coagulation system to achieve complete hemostasis. The operative duration was 202 min; blood loss was 34 mL.
From the first postoperative day, the patient started walking, drinking water, and resumed oral anagrelide intake. She resumed oral aspirin intake on the fifth postoperative day. Her perioperative platelet count was controlled to approximately 40–60 × 104/μL . Prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time also did not show abnormal values during the perioperative period. The postoperative course was uneventful and she was discharged on the seventh postoperative day.
The tumor pathological stage was T3N1M0 (Stage IIIB). The patient received intravenous oxaliplatin plus oral capecitabine (CapeOX) as postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy (oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2, capecitabine 1000 mg/m2). However, after one course, she again experienced liver dysfunction (aspartate aminotransferase [AST] level, 388 IU/L; ALT level, 531 IU/L); because of anagrelide, her platelet count decreased to 17.8 × 104/μL. Therefore, we asked her to discontinue anagrelide and aspirin that day onwards; 5 days later, her platelet count recovered to 50 × 104/μL. Subsequently, she resumed taking anagrelide and aspirin; however, she refused to resume any adjuvant chemotherapy after this incident. Her liver function normalized gradually in 4 months. There were no clinical signs of thrombosis, and there was no appearance of a new thrombus on contrast-enhanced CT 6 months after the operation. One-year post operation, she is well without tumor recurrence or new metastasis.