A 73-year-old male patient presented with a firm, subcutaneous nodule in the right upper eyelid . The lesion was present for 10 years, slowly growing and painless. The mass was round, relatively hard and moved freely under the skin, without pain on palpation or mobilization. The overlying skin showed no inflammatory signs or abnormal pigmentation. There was no restriction in ocular movements, and the remaining ophthalmological examinations were unremarkable.
The patient underwent an orbital CT scan that revealed an extra-conical mass, adjacent to the lateral rectus insertion, with no distortion of the globe or invasion of the bone or muscular structures. The mass had a heterogeneous density, and two cysts were present in its superoanterior portion .
An excisional biopsy was performed over the upper eyelid dermis, through a 15 mm horizontal incision in the lateral third of the eyelid crease. The tumor was well circumscribed with no adhesions and was easily dissected and removed in its entirety . The lacrimal gland was found to be independent of the mass, with a normal appearance. The incision was closed with a 6.0 polypropylene suture. The postoperative appearance can be observed in .
On gross pathologic examination, the nodule was well-defined with dimensions 20 mm × 15 mm × 12 mm. A smooth and tan cutting surface was found, with tiny cavitated areas containing a pasty whitish material. The entire specimen was submitted to histologic examination. The tumor was totally encapsulated and presented a biphasic pattern, consisting of a chondromyxoid stroma and an epithelial component . The epithelium was arranged in nests, cords, and tubes, or glandular branching structures layered by a double epithelium in which the inner epithelial layer exhibited apocrine features, such as decapitation [Figure and ]. There was no significant atypia. Numerous cysts were present in the tumor, lined by metaplastic stratified squamous epithelium and containing keratinized epithelial plugs in the lumen . No areas of necrosis, interstitial hemorrhage or appreciable mitotic activity were found. No satellite nodules were identified. Immunohistochemistry revealed a variable expression of the inner epithelial cells to pancytokeratins AE1/AE3 and to carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) [Figure and ]. The outer epithelial cells and stromal component expressed vimentin and S100 protein [Figure and ]. There was no evidence of lacrimal gland parenchyma or signs of malignant changes. These findings defined the tumor as a palpebral pleomorphic adenoma and were consistent with apocrine differentiation.
The systemic work-up was negative for metastasis; thus the patient was kept under vigilance with periodic observations. In 2 years of follow-up, he has remained asymptomatic without the signs of local recurrence.