A 25-year-old female with a history of substance abuse (smoking and daily cannabis use) and a 2017 arthroscopy of the right knee for pigmented villonodular synovitis presents to the emergency department. She presents for medical evaluation due to a severe acute pain syndrome localized to the right knee, which partially resolves with the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. On physical examination, the right knee is enlarged with evidence of free fluid in the joint and limited range of motion. As part of the evaluation, a magnetic resonance imaging of the knee is performed, which reveals extensive diffuse oedema in the subcutaneous cellular tissue, with involvement of the popliteal fossa muscle groups. Multiple multilobulated cystic images are observed with dimensions of approximately 34 mm, as well as hypointense nodules in the supra and infrapatellar bursae with dimensions of 29 mm. Edema is observed in the lateral portion of the outer femoral condyle that encompasses the anterior and posterior regions, as well as edema in the inner tibial plate, the medial region of the patella and signs of lateralization of the patella, suggestive of dislocation. With the suspicion of a recurrence of pigmented villonodular synovitis of the knee, the patient is scheduled for surgery, which consists of an open medial and lateral resection of the affected knee, preserving the neurovascular structures of the popliteal fossa. During surgery, severe synovial infiltration with hypertrophy and hyperpigmentation of a soft tumor that affects both the intraarticular and periarticular space, compromising approximately 190 degrees of the popliteal artery, is observed. Extensive synovectomy is performed and irrigation with 200 cm3 of solution is performed. Macroscopically, a membranous lesion of reddish brown appearance, with a medium consistency and dimensions of 10 × 8 cm is described and a sample is sent for histopathological analysis. The patient recovers in the postoperative period without complications. The histological analysis confirms the presence of villonodular synovial tissue-derived villous structures associated with a dense stromal tissue with inflammatory cells, giant cells and abundant histiocytes. This confirms the diagnosis of recurrent pigmented villonodular synovitis with extension to the soft tissue, without the presence of a sarcomatoid component. The patient is discharged with a pain management regimen, with no reported complications.
