A 68-year-old woman was referred to our Nephrology Department for kidney failure and a monoclonal gammopathy. Her medical history included dyslipidemia and hypothyroidism, taking statins and levothyroxine. There was no drug abuse or nephrotoxic medications. She was clinically well and did not complain of any symptoms. Physical examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory findings included a creatinine elevation to 246 μmol/L with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 17 mL/min and urea of 5.1 mmol/L. Reports from previous years showed a normal kidney function. Calcium adjusted for albumin was 2.22 mmol/L, with a total protein level of 80 g/L. Phosphate, calcidiol, and parathyroid hormone levels were normal. Lipid and hepatic profiles showed no significant alterations. Creatine kinase, thyroid hormone levels, and complete blood count were normal. Immunofixation electrophoresis confirmed a serum monoclonal IgM-lambda of 2.0 g/L. There was no evidence of albuminuria or proteinuria, with negative urine immunofixation, and no microhematuria.
Abdominal ultrasound showed symmetrical kidneys, with normal corticomedullary differentiation.
Laboratory tests were repeated, showing a progressive increase in serum creatinine up to 347 μmol/L (eGFR 11 mL/min) and in the serum monoclonal IgM-lambda to 7.9 g/L . Other parameters showed no significant change over time.
Bone marrow aspiration immunophenotyping showed 4.86% B-lymphocytes with lambda light chain predominance, and Congo red stain was negative. The kidney biopsy showed a total of 16 glomeruli, one of them globally sclerosed. There was no tubulointerstitial scarring or inflammation. No alterations were observed in the cortical blood vessels . Immunofluorescence was negative as well as Congo red stain. Electron microscopy was not performed.
To clarify the inconsistent results of an elevated creatinine with no other signs of kidney disease, we measured the glomerular filtration rate with chromium-51 labeled ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (51Cr-EDTA), which showed a value of 77 mL/min/1.73 m2.
These results prompted the idea that the elevated serum creatinine levels could be spurious and related to an interference with the paraprotein during the measurement method at the laboratory. The rise in the creatinine level over time was concordant with an increase in the monoclonal component, while normal urea levels were maintained. Our laboratory uses an enzymatic method to measure creatinine. The only available method in our laboratory to verify if the interference is due to the IgM paraprotein is to perform a dilution of the serum sample, thereby diluting the presence of the interfering element (IgM molecules) as well. The IgM concentration was 8,730 mg/L. A 1:4 dilution of the patient’s serum sample was carried out by mixing 100 μL of physiological saline with 300 μL of serum, and the creatinine concentration was measured. The obtained result was 27 μmol/L, which, when multiplied by the dilution factor, would yield a result of 108 μmol/L serum creatinine. The serum index measured in the sample was a hemolysis index of 4 μmol/L, an icteric index of 17 μmol/L, and a lipemic index of 21. None of these serum indices interfere with the measurement of serum creatinine concentration. We confirmed these results with a cystatin C measurement, with a value of 1.01 mg/dL (eGFR 70 mL/min). Our patient was finally diagnosed with a falsely elevated serum creatinine associated with an IgM paraprotein.