An 82-year-old Caucasian man arrived at the emergency department of our hospital complaining of painless, total, macroscopic hematuria starting 24 hours ago. His medical history includes some lower urinary tract symptoms, starting six years ago, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and an episode of stroke five years ago. Clinical examinations were normal, and digital rectal examination (DRE) was negative for pathologic findings. The estimated prostate volume was 70 ml. The laboratory findings were normal, and total serum PSA was 3.7 ng/ml.
At the abdominal ultrasound, the prostate volume was calculated as 65 ml, and the residual volume was 45 ml. During cystoscopy, the bladder mucosa had a normal macroscopic appearance and an enlarged prostatic middle lobe with small areas of hemorrhage was noted.
The patient left the hospital with finasteride, 5 mg 1 × 1, and tamsulosin, 0.4 mg 1 × 1. Three months later, the serum PSA was 2.9 ng/ml.
Five months later, the patient returned to the emergency department for urinary retention. An 18F Foley catheter was inserted, and 15 days later, the patient had a transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP). During the operation, we found a diffuse redness of the whole prostate, especially at the area of the prostatic urethra proximal to the verumontanum. The redness involved the bladder neck, the area of the triangle, and the left lateral bladder wall. The same area was characterized by diffuse edema. The prostatic lateral and middle lobes were removed and cold-cup biopsies were taken from the edematous area of the bladder neck and lateral wall. The histologic examination showed ductal prostatic adenocarcinoma . The CT scan of upper and lower abdomen and thorax and the bone scan were negative for metastasis.
The patient was treated with triptorelin, 3.75 mg once/month and bicalutamide, 50 mg 1 × 1. The serum PSA at three, six, and 12 months after TURP was 0.1 ng/ml. The patient remains asymptomatic, and he entered a six-month follow-up protocol.