An 80-year-old Caucasian female with a past medical history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia presented with exertional midsternal chest pain that was predominantly pressure-like, 5/10 in intensity, and short-lasting. There was no associated shortness of breath, sweating, or palpitations. On the same night, she had an episode of lightheadedness associated with shortness of breath as she tried to get up from bed. This lightheadedness was not associated with fever, chills, malaise, myalgia, night sweats, loss of consciousness, or dizziness. She had no history of intravenous drug use, prior/recent dental procedures, prosthetic valves, rheumatic heart disease, or immunocompromised states. Vital signs included a temperature of 98.7 F, heart rate of 38 beats per minute, blood pressure of 122/58 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. Orthostatic vitals were normal. Cardiac examination revealed bradycardia, normal S1 and S2, and no audible murmurs. The remainder of the examination was unremarkable except for trace bilateral lower extremity edema.
Initial laboratory workup, including complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, and thyroid panel, was significant for mild leukocytosis of 11,300 cells per mm3 (normal reference range: 3900–11,000 cells per mm3). Cardiac biomarkers showed normal troponin and elevated brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) pro of 13,443 pg/mL (normal reference range: less than 125 pg/mL). Chest x-ray (CXR) showed no acute cardiopulmonary process. Electrocardiogram (EKG) showed sinus rhythm with 2:1 atrioventricular block on admission , but telemetry showed intermittent complete heart block. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) images were suboptimal due to poor windows and motion artifacts. However, it revealed normal left ventricular (LV) systolic function with mild concentric LV hypertrophy and an ejection fraction of 70%. There were no apparent valvular abnormalities .
On the day of admission, clonidine and atenolol (home antihypertensives) were discontinued due to suspicion of medication-induced conduction abnormality. Despite this, telemetry showed persistent high-degree heart block with a heart rate in the 40 s. The rest of her vitals remained stable. Hence, she was scheduled for a permanent pacemaker implantation for a presumptive diagnosis of senile high-degree heart block. On day 3 of admission, before the scheduled procedure, she became acutely hypoxic to 85%, requiring a non-rebreather mask to maintain adequate oxygen saturation. CXR revealed pulmonary vascular congestion, which was appropriately treated with diuretics following which she improved to saturate well on 4 L of oxygen via nasal cannula. However, she also spiked a single elevated temperature of 103F. Blood cultures grew gram-positive cocci in clusters in 4/4 bottles. Empirical intravenous vancomycin was started. On day 4, she developed new onset slurred speech, right-sided hemiparesis, and altered mental status. Physical examination revealed no signs or sequelae of systemic embolization, and her skin was warm and well-perfused. Computed tomography of the brain revealed hypodense regions in the left lentiform nucleus and anterior caudate nucleus representing acute/subacute stroke, likely secondary to emboli. In view of her altered mental status and inability to protect her airway, she was intubated. She became hypotensive, requiring pressor support secondary to septic shock. EKG showed regularized atrial fibrillation, suggestive of a complete heart block with atrial fibrillation . Therefore, a temporary transvenous pacing lead was inserted. Blood cultures were speciated as methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus, and antibiotics were switched to intravenous cefazolin.
On day 5, TEE revealed normal LV systolic function but found multiple echodensities, including a 0.76 cm × 0.50 cm vegetation seen on the PMVL and a 1.9 cm × 1.3 cm polypoidal structure on the atrial side of the AMVL . In addition, there was a heterogenous extension of the echodensity from the aortic root, along the aorto-mitral cushion and into the IVS, which was significantly thickened, indicating IVSA . Mild mitral regurgitation and mild aortic regurgitation were noted along with a small pericardial effusion. Due to high mortality risk, she was not deemed to be a surgical candidate. Given her prohibitive surgical risk and poor prognosis, the family decided to change her goals of care to comfort measures only. Unfortunately, the patient died on day 6.