A 66-year-old Maori man presented to our hospital with a history of an enlarged left testicle of 10 weeks’ duration. His clinical examination revealed nontender swelling of the left testicle. His alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (BHCG) levels were within normal limits. His lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) concentration was mildly elevated at 267 U/L (normal range 120–250 U/L). Ultrasonography of his testes demonstrated an enlarged left testicle measuring 7 × 5.5 × 4.3 cm with an estimated volume of 87 ml. A large, heterogeneous mass involved the entire testicle with increased vascularity . The patient’s right testicle measured 3.7 × 2.5 × 1.8 cm with an estimated volume of 8.8 ml. He underwent left orchiectomy. The macroscopic specimen consisted of well-circumscribed nodular lesions of varying sizes, with the largest measuring 45 × 15 mm and containing solid and gelatinous components . Sections of the specimen showed tumor composed of sheets of small, blue, round cells divided into nodules by fibrous septae . Immunostaining showed the tumor to be cytokeratin 20 (CK20)-positive with a typical paranuclear dotlike staining pattern . The stain showed a positive result for CD56, a neuroendocrine marker , as were CD117 and CK (paranuclear dots). The result was negative for CK7, placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP), CD30, CD20, AFP, S100, SOX10, prostate-specific antigen (PSA), chromogranin, and thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1). The Ki-67 level was >50 %. This immunostaining pattern raised the possibility of metastatic MCC.
The patient presented ﻿again to our hospital 3 months later this time with a right testicular mass. Tumor markers, including LDH, AFP, and BHCG, were within normal limits. Ultrasonographic imaging demonstrated a new lesion in the right testis measuring 3 × 2.6 × 2.3 cm. He underwent a right orchiectomy, and sections of the specimen showed diffuse infiltration of small, blue, round cells. Immunostains were positive for CD117, CD56, synaptophysin, CK20 (dotlike), and cytokeratin AE1/AE3 (dotlike). The tumor cells were negative for inhibin, PLAP, PSA, S100, CD30, CD45, CD3, CD20, TTF-1, and napsin A. The Ki-67 level was 80 %. This pattern was consistent with a poorly differentiated neuroendocrine tumor in keeping with metastatic MCC. Detailed histology reports can be found in Additional files and . A primary site was not identified, and a staging computed tomographic scan did not show evidence of other metastases. The patient received six cycles of adjuvant carboplatin and etoposide chemotherapy. He remained disease-free 18 months following completion of chemotherapy.