A 46-year-old man presented with generalized seizures. He was on venlafaxine therapy for depression and anxiety disorder. He had taken venlafaxine for sex weeks. He started on 75 mg/day which was increased to 150 mg/day after two weeks. He was told to continue the medication in that dose. Blood pressure was monitored and he was all the time normotensive. There was no history of seizures, hypertension or other diseases. He had no other medications. The seizures were followed by nausea, vomiting, severe headache, visual disturbances and confusion. He also experienced severe shortness of breath and began to cough up frothy pink sputum. On presentation in the emergency department, he was sleepy, had a pulse of 135 beats/min, a blood pressure of 231/133 mm Hg, and a respiratory rate of 35-38. His chest X-ray indicated pulmonary oedema. He was treated for acute congestive heart failure due to severe hypertension. The hypertension was treated with labetalol and enalaprilat intravenously. Venlafaxine therapy was stopped. Complete blood picture, and blood biochemistry were normal. On day 2 of admittance he experienced further seizures. Treatment with phenytoin and levetiracetam intravenously proved to be effective and the seizures stopped. An electroencephalogram showed diffuse slowing indicating an encephalopathy. Cerebrospinal examination was normal. Echocardiography was normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, pre and post gadolinium, carried out on day 2, displayed an increased T2 signal in the cortex on both the T2 and FLAIR images throughout the frontal and temporal lobes and in the cerebellum consistent with hypertensive encephalopathy/PRES . No contrast enhancement was seen and diffusion weighted imaging showed no signs of ischemia. The mental status changes improved after treatment. Oral anticonvulsive and antihypertensive treatment continued. Other secondary causes of hypertension were excluded. The patient gradually improved and he became seizure free and the blood pressure successively became normal. Physical examination showed no signs of heart disease. Repeated chest X-ray was normal. The patient was discharged to his home on day 12. A MRI after six weeks displayed marked regression of the abnormalities . The patient was seen again after three months. The prescribed antiepileptic drug was discontinued as well as antihypertensive treatment. His blood pressure had been normal and he had not had any seizures. He denied any cardiac symptoms. He had not experienced any new symptoms at follow-up after one year. He is recurrently evaluated by psychiatrist. He now uses a different medicine for his depression and anxiety disorder.