A 40-year old Asian male patient reported to the general surgical outpatient department at Mayo Hospital, Lahore in October 2011 with the history of a rapidly enlarging painless lump in his right scrotum for the past two months. There were no comorbid conditions. He was married with three children; all of them were alive and healthy. His previous medical and surgical history was unremarkable.
On physical examination, a non-tender lump measuring 4.0 × 3.5 cm, firm-to-hard in consistency, was present as a right testicular swelling. It was associated with slight skin puckering. Examination of the other, that is, the left testis was unremarkable. There was no generalized lymphadenopathy on general physical examination. The liver and spleen were of normal size. Sonographic examination of the scrotum revealed a well-defined, hypoechoic space-occupying lesion in the cranial and lateral aspect of the right testis. Findings on sonographic and computerized tomography (CT) examinations of the abdomen were normal. Differential diagnosis for this sonographic appearance was seminoma and orchitis. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was within normal range and the Montoux test for Mycobacterium tuberculosis was negative. His complete blood counts at the time of presentation were within normal limits. On discussion with the patient, he was informed that benign pathology such as isolated tuberculous orchitis was a possibility and informed consent was taken.
Testicular biopsy was performed under general anesthesia and the specimen was sent in formalin to the Histopathology Laboratory, Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi. The histopathological examination revealed markedly necrotic tissue with foci of the lesion. Histologic examination of the specimens revealed a diffuse proliferation of malignant round cells within the interstitium of the testicular parenchyma. The cells were present in the form of sheets with scant cytoplasm and slight variation in size and shape of medium-to-large nuclei, which frequently showed irregular foldings and granular chromatin. Mitotic activity was also observed with mitoses seen at a rate of 16/10 high power fields. Intervening scattered vessels were also present. These cells infiltrated around the seminiferous and epididymal tubules and presented in a discohesive pattern .
Immunohistochemical stains were applied and neoplastic cells showed positivity with T-cell markers CD3 and CD 43 . CD 56 was also positive . Pan B (CD20), CD 4, CD 8, CD 5 and the epithelial marker cytokeratin were negative. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) detection was done through immunohistochemistry by using EBV-latent membrane protein (LMP), which was also negative. The study was not experimental and no identifiable material was used in the manuscript, so this study did not require ethical approval.