Patient background
Our patient was a 73-year-old male diagnosed with localized prostatic cancer on a background of long-standing metabolic syndrome, osteoarthritis, peptic ulcer disease and two previous cerebrovascular accidents (CVA). His regular medications were aspirin, telmisartan, rosuvastatin, esomeprazole, empagliflozin and metformin. He had no known allergies. He was an ex-smoker and drank one bottle of wine a night.

Prostate cancer diagnosis
The patient was referred to urology with an elevated PSA of 15.4 ng/ml, which was an increase from 8.13 ng/ml performed the year prior. Multiparametric MRI (mpMRI) demonstrated no lesion and a transperineal prostate biopsy (TPB) revealed Gleason 9 (G4+5), grade group 5 prostate cancer of the right posterior lobe. A staging PSMA PET scan confirmed high local prostate avidity and no metastasis. The final histopathology demonstrated a pT3a stage cancer with clear surgical margins.

RALP and discharge
RALP was performed under general anesthetic in the 27-degrees trendelenburg position with a zero-degree telescope. A 24F rectal tube and 18F indwelling catheter (IDC) were inserted during the procedure. Hasson port was passed supraumbilically and insufflated to 10 mmHg with the remaining ports inserted under vision. The sigmoid colon was minimally released laterally to drop the bowel away from the working peritoneal space. There were no adhesions observed and the sigmoid was normal in appearance and attachment. The space of retzius was accessed and a routine prostatectomy was performed. Bladder neck was spared, bilateral nerve sparing was not performed, dorsal venous complex was cut and oversewn. Prior to vesicourethral anastomosis a negative rectal leak test with 60ml air was performed via a syringe, with insufflated air then removed and the rectal tube left open at the end till removal at case completion. The anastomosis was watertight with a negative 180 ml leak test. Total operative time was 160 minutes and estimated blood loss measured at 250 ml. The patient was discharged after two days and postoperative care included analgesia on demand, laxatives for three-days and enoxaparin venous thromboembolism (VTE) prophylaxis.

ED presentation
19-days following RALP the patient presented to the emergency department (ED) with a three-day history of obstipation and reduced oral intake. He also presented with a two-day history of nausea, one episode of vomiting and back pain relieved by lying supine. He denied any abdominal pain, urinary symptoms, fevers or chills. He also denied any recent opioid use and was using paracetamol when required following RALP.

On examination his vitals were normal. His abdomen appeared very distended, however non-tender to light and deep palpation. There was no guarding or peritonism. Bowel sounds were hyperactive on auscultation. Digital rectal examination revealed an empty rectum with no blood or fecal matter.

Sigmoid volvulus diagnosis & management
The patient was admitted, and an abdominal & pelvis contrast-enhanced CT was performed revealing volvulus of the sigmoid colon. Flexible sigmoidoscopy confirmed a sigmoid volvulus 30 cm of insertion of the scope. There was no masses or blood, and the mucosa appeared normal and healthy. The patient underwent sigmoid detorsion and the colon was decompressed with insertion of a rectal tube. There were no procedural complications during the flexible sigmoidoscope. Postoperatively, he was commenced on regular metoclopramide, cetirizine, analgesia and osmotic laxatives. Postoperative stay was complicated by euglycemic ketoacidosis thus, seven days later the patient was discharged.

Two months after discharge, the patient presented again to ED with a similar three-day history of obstipation, progressive abdominal distension, reduced oral intake for two days, and dull generalized abdominal pain worse centrally. On examination his abdomen was very distended again, bowel loops were palpable and there was mild generalized tenderness with no guarding or rigidity.

Abdominal & pelvis contrast-enhanced CT revealed another sigmoid volvulus, thus the decision was made to perform flexible sigmoidoscopy, detorsion and decompression of the volvulus and insertion of the rectal tube again. One month following his second episode of sigmoid volvulus, an elective anterior resection of the sigmoid colon was performed to prevent recurrence of symptoms following his urological procedure. No operative comment was made about abnormal clinical findings such as a narrow mesentery or large redundant sigmoid colon.