A 45-year-old patient (G3P0030) desired pregnancy and sought fertility treatment in an academic reproductive endocrinology and infertility center. Her medical history included hypertension, prediabetes, thyroid dysfunction and overweight habitus (body mass index of 29 kg/m2). Her medications included methyldopa, metformin and levothyroxine. Her past surgeries included laparoscopic proximal transection of the left fallopian tube for left hydrosalpinx with concurrent loop electrode excisional procedure (LEEP) for cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) II at age 41. Pathology was negative for dysplasia and malignancy. She had previously undergone three hysteroscopies with endometrial polypectomies.
Her obstetrical history included failed fertility treatments and recurrent pregnancy loss. Her first pregnancy, conceived naturally five years earlier, ended in spontaneous abortion at 6 weeks of gestation. She underwent three cycles of IVF and had one fresh day 5 transfer of three embryos that did not result in pregnancy. She then had three separate programmed frozen embryo transfer cycles using autologous oocytes. In two cycles, two embryos were transferred, resulting in biochemical pregnancies. In the third cycle, three embryos were transferred, resulting in a negative pregnancy test. She later underwent two frozen embryo transfer cycles of donor ovum-derived embryos. She had one embryo transferred, resulting in a negative pregnancy test, and another single embryo transfer the following cycle, ending in a first-trimester spontaneous abortion. Workup for recurrent pregnancy loss was unremarkable. She had a normal female karyotype, negative antiphospholipid antibody testing and negative anti-thyroglobulin and anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies. Her partner had a normal male karyotype.
Next, she underwent a programmed transfer of one donor ovum-derived day 5 frozen euploid embryo. Nine days later, she underwent initial beta-hCG testing, which reported a level of 53 mIU/mL. Two days later, beta-hCG had increased to 155 mIU/mL. She reported minimal vaginal spotting at that time. Four days later, at 4 weeks and 6 days of gestation, she paged the on-call physician to report abdominal cramping along with brown spotting. Pain resolved later that day but vaginal spotting continued. The following day, at 5 weeks and 0 days of gestation, her beta-hCG level continued to rise, to 2176 mIU/mL.
Her first transvaginal ultrasound was the following day, at a gestational age of 5 weeks and 1 day . Transvaginal ultrasound imaging showed a gestational sac measuring 8.1 mm in the lower uterine segment versus the upper cervix. The sac was located 2.2 cm from the external cervical os. A yolk sac and fetal pole were not visualized. Beta-hCG was noted to be 3217 mIU/mL on this day. Transvaginal ultrasound was repeated the following day, given concern for CEP . The gestational sac was in the upper cervix, measuring 8.3 mm. Again, no yolk sac or fetal pole was seen. Her beta-hCG level increased to 4607 mIU/mL on this day. Intramuscular methotrexate was then recommended for likely CEP. The patient refused methotrexate at that time as the pregnancy was highly desired, and the patient was discharged with strict return precautions.
Later that day, the patient reported heavier vaginal bleeding at home with passage of large clots. On arrival at the emergency room, she reported soaking through two pads every 30 minutes. She was then amenable to methotrexate treatment given heavy vaginal bleeding and she was given a single-dose intramuscular methotrexate protocol (50 mg/m2). She was admitted for hemodynamic monitoring and observation.
Overnight, she had approximately 400–500 cc of vaginal bleeding. Her vital signs remained stable throughout admission. Her hemoglobin level decreased from 12.0 g/dL at baseline prior to admission to 8.9 g/dL on the morning of hospital day 2 (HD), then to 8.5 g/dL on the evening of HD 2. By HD 3, vaginal bleeding was minimal and pain had resolved. Her hemoglobin level stabilized at 8.3 g/dL on the day of discharge. She was discharged with oral iron supplementation and plan for serial beta-hCG testing, with activity restrictions and strict return precautions.
Between days 4 and 7 of methotrexate treatment, the beta-hCG decreased by 38.2% . By day 7, she reported minimal spotting and no pain. Beta-hCG continued to downtrend weekly thereafter . She did not require any additional methotrexate doses or procedures to facilitate resolution of the pregnancy.
Three months after the final beta-hCG measurement, she had a follow-up saline sonohysterogram that showed a normal endometrial cavity.