A 65-year-old, right-handed Caucasian woman was transferred from a local hospital to our neurological intensive care unit (NICU) after a witnessed generalized tonic-clonic seizure. She had hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder, a history of heavy cigarette smoking and a long-standing but well-controlled bipolar disorder. Three weeks before the seizure, biopsy of a right hilar mass via mediastinoscopy confirmed the diagnosis of SCLC. Treatment for the cancer had not been initiated. Shortly after the biopsy, her family found her to be intermittently confused. Over the following two days, she developed fever, dizziness, vomiting, poor appetite and progressive shortness of breath. Confusion worsened to the point that she could no longer recognize her family and became non-interactive. She remained lethargic and confused despite treatment with ceftriaxone and azithromycin for right lower lobe pneumonia. Investigations and results at the local hospital included: (1) CSF analysis showed 28 white blood cells with 99% lymphocytes, glucose 122 g/L, protein 36 g/L, no organisms on Gram stain and no growth from bacterial culture; (2) MRI of the brain showed T2 and FLAIR hyperintensities in both mesial temporal regions without contrast enhancement, diffusion or susceptibility changes; (3) EEG demonstrated background slowing with focal sharp and slow discharges in the right mid-temporal and right posterior temporal region. Empiric treatment with intravenous acyclovir was initiated while HSV polymerase chain reaction (PCR) study from CSF was sent for analysis. On her seventh day at the local hospital, she was observed having a generalized tonic-clonic seizure for which she received intravenous fosphenytoin. She was intubated and transferred to our NICU.
On examination, she was unresponsive to verbal or noxious stimuli. Her pupils were restricted from previous cataract procedures. There was no gaze preference. Corneal, vestibular-ocular and gag reflexes were intact. Her tone was normal. She made no purposeful withdrawal on the left side. A Babinski maneuver elicited a plantar response from both feet.
She had a second, brief, witnessed generalized tonic-clonic seizure with left gaze deviation and left head turning. An EEG demonstrated electrographic seizures consisting of bilateral independent periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges (bi-PLEDs) in both temporal lobes with right-sided predominance . Intravenous lorazepam was given and phenytoin was reloaded. Levetiracetam and topiramate were subsequently added in increasing doses (up to maximum dosages) to treat persistent electrographic seizures. Repeat CSF analysis again demonstrated mild pleocytosis with lymphocytic predominance (23 white blood cells with 94% lymphocytes) but was otherwise normal. CSF cytology did not show any malignant cells. Empiric treatment with acyclovir for HSV encephalitis continued until a second negative CSF HSV PCR returned. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), varicella zoster virus (VZV) and human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) were all negative. Repeat MRI of the brain showed T2-FLAIR hyperintensities in both mesial temporal lobes without restricted diffusion or post-gadolinium enhancement . Chest X-ray showed post-obstructive pneumonia in the right lower lobe with collapse of the right middle and upper lobes due to compressive atelectasis from the lung cancer . Computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest demonstrated mediastinal and hilar lymphadenopathy and pleural effusion in addition to a loculated right lower lobe . Her lung cancer was not amenable to resection. She continued to receive broad-spectrum antibiotics for pneumonia, and chemotherapy for SCLC with carboplatin and etoposide was commenced.
Serum contained markedly elevated anti-N-type voltage-gated calcium channel (VGCC) antibody titer of 0.42 nmol/L (normal value < 0.03) and mildly elevated anti-P/Q-type VGCC antibody titer of 0.04 nmol/L (normal value < 0.02). No other paraneoplastic antibody (including binding, ganglionic and striational acetycholine [Ach] receptor antibodies, Purjinke cell antibodies type 1 [PCA-1 or anti-Yo], PCA-2, PCA-Tr [anti-Tr, immune response marker for Hodgkin's lymphoma], anti-neuronal nuclear antibodies type 1 [ANNA-1 or aniti-Hu], ANNA-2 [anti-Ri], ANNA-3, anti-Ma1, anti-Ta, collapsin response-mediator protein-5 [CRMP-5 or CV2], amphiphysin, anti-glial/neuronal nuclear antibody, Type 1 AGNA-1) was detected. Voltage-gated potassium channel (VGKC), N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) and glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) antibodies were not sent. Our patient received IVIG (0.4 mg/kg daily for five days) and 1 g of Solu-medrol (methylprednisolone) daily for three days, followed by tapering doses of prednisone over four weeks. Long-term monitoring (LTM) EEG showed gradual resolution of epileptiform activities only after initiation of immune therapy, despite being on multiple anti-epileptic drugs.
Two months after the onset of her neurological illness, she was following commands and had become conversant but she still displayed cognitive impairment and still suffered episodes of delirium. Our patient had multiple subsequent hospitalizations for aspiration pneumonia and seizures that were refractory to anti-epileptic drug adjustments and only responsive to IVIG and steroids on a monthly basis. MRI six months later showed resolution of T2-FLAIR hyperintensities . However, she continued to have severe short-term memory deficits. She died eight months after the initial presentation due to progressive lung cancer.