A female aged two years and 11 months was brought to the ED by ambulance for a generalized tonic-clonic first-time seizure. The patient had otherwise been in her usual state of health with no recent febrile illnesses. Her mother noted that the patient had an acute episode of unresponsiveness with a blank stare and called 9–1–1. Upon emergency medical services arrival, the child developed generalized tonic-clonic seizure activity. She received a weight-based dose of 1.7 milligrams (mg) of midazolam en route to the hospital, which resolved the movements. Upon arrival to the hospital, the child was no longer actively seizing and appeared to be sleepy, consistent with a postictal state. The estimated total seizure length was approximately two minutes. The patient had no notable past medical history. Family history was notable for Graves disease in the patient’s mother.
Vital signs on arrival were as follows: temperature 37.9° Celsius measured rectally; heart rate 188 beats per minute; respiratory rate 27 breaths per minute; and blood pressure 125/62 millimeters of mercury. Her height was 103 centimeters, 99th percentile, and her weight was 16 kilograms, 87th percentile. Her physical exam was notable for exophthalmos and small goiter but was otherwise unremarkable, including a non-focal neurological examination. Of note, her tachycardia and widened pulse pressure persisted after resolution of her seizure and postictal period.
Her electrocardiogram was notable for left ventricular hypertrophy and sinus tachycardia but had no evidence of ischemia or abnormal intervals. Her laboratory evaluation was notable for a normal fingerstick blood glucose, elevated alkaline phosphatase with mild transaminitis, mild microcytic anemia, undetectably low thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and unmeasurably high free thyroxine.
The pediatric endocrinologist was consulted who, based on the patient’s weight, recommended starting atenolol 12.5 mg, methimazole 7.5 mg, and 1 milliliter (mL) potassium iodide-iodine (Lugol’s saturated solution of potassium iodide {SSKI}) solution (to be given one hour after atenolol and methimazole). After treatment was initiated, the patient’s heart rate improved to the 160s, and she was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU). While in the PICU, further levels were obtained and were notable for unmeasurably high free triiodothyronine (T3), unmeasurably high total T3, and elevated thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins (328% baseline). While in the PICU, the patient was continued on atenolol, methimazole, Lugol’s solution, and hydrocortisone 50 mg every eight hours. She was in the PICU for approximately 24 hours and then transferred to the medical ward.
The patient remained in the hospital for one week and was discharged home with methimazole, propranolol, and SSKI. She was followed in endocrinology clinic multiple times over the next few months. The SSKI was eventually stopped, and propranolol was changed to atenolol. She had trouble with compliance with medications as the formulations available for atenolol are not child friendly. She was referred to another hospital system for a total thyroidectomy given inability to tolerate swallowing pills. She has not had recurrent seizure activity since initiating thyroid treatment.