A 29-year-old African-American male with a past medical history of advanced AIDS and non-compliance with medications was presented with acute onset of chest pain. The pain was associated with shortness of breath. Physical activity worsened the intensity of the pain. He denied any nausea, vomiting or diaphoresis. Physical examination was unremarkable. Laboratory work up on admission showed a troponin T level of 5.0 ng/ml (upper limit of normal = 0.10 ng/ml), white blood cell (WBC) count of 2.0 K/uL and eosinophil count 1.52 K/uL (upper limit of normal = 0.4 k/uL), hemoglobin level of 9 g/dL and platelets count of 250,000/μL and absolute CD4 count of 12/mm3. Renal, liver and clotting profiles were all normal. The electrocardiogram (EKG) initially showed T wave inversions in the anterior leads, which were not present on prior EKGs. The troponin T level rose to a peak of 35.8 ng/ml and a repeat EKG revealed changes consistent with inferior wall myocardial ischemia. The 2D echocardiogram revealed decreased ejection fraction estimated at 30–35% with no wall motion abnormalities. Workup for hypercoagulable state including anticardiolipin antibodies, protein C, protein S, factor V Leiden and homocysteine levels tests were all negative.
Of interest, throughout the year prior to admission, the percentage of eosinophil was noted to be persistently and abnormally high. In that same period, the patient was leukopenic with WBC count ranging between 0.8 K/ul and 3 K/ul. In addition, Immunoglobulin E level was found to be elevated at 9330 IU/ml (normal <100 IU/ml). Fluorescence in situ Hybridization (FISH) peripheral blood analysis was negative for FIP1L1-PDGFRB translocation. Bone marrow biopsy showed slightly hypercellular tri-lineage hematopoiesis with no evidence of any pathological/clonal hematologic disorder. The anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibodies (ANCA), anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), rheumatoid factor, myeloperoxidase antibody, proteinase 3 antibody, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptides (CCP) were negative. Serologic studies for infection, hepatitis, toxoplasmosis, autoimmune, and paraneoplastic disease were negative. Stool analysis and blood films were negative for parasites.
On the basis of his elevated troponins and echocardiographic findings, he was initially managed for non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) with aspirin, statin, clopidogrel, beta blockers and heparin. Angiography showed that our patient had a mild non-obstructive disease. A cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) was done [Figures and ] and it showed a pattern typical of eosinophilic endomyocarditis. He was started on daily methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg intravenously. On steroid treatment, the eosinophilic count decreased dramatically and his clinical state ameliorated rapidly. A repeat echocardiogram on day 10 revealed an increase in ejection fraction and systolic function confirming the therapeutic benefit of the steroid therapy.