A 49-year-old man presented with exertional dyspnea. Physical examination revealed a loud S1 and a diastolic murmur in the apical region. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed severe rheumatic MS with mild MR, as well as mild functional tricuspid regurgitation and a pulmonary pressure of 55 mmHg. Then, the patient underwent a three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography to assess the mitral apparatus more accurately and exclude the presence of left atrial appendage thrombus . His Wilkins score was 8. This is a borderline score to take BMV. However, the patient prefers to take the percutaneous intervention rather than thoracotomy. Thus, BMV was performed via the antegrade approach under local anesthesia and X-ray fluoroscopy guidance. After transseptal puncture, a 24-mm balloon was used to achieve a single dilatation of 22 mm, after which the mean transmitral pressure gradient decreased from 19 to 11 mmHg. Intraoperative transthoracic echocardiography performed immediately afterwards revealed a significant increase in mitral regurgitation. However, the subvalvular structure could not be observed clearly because the patient was in a supine position. His vital signs remained stable with no definite symptoms, and he refused mitral valve replacement. He was discharged 4 days later after undergoing BMV. Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography follow-up performed one month later revealed severe MR caused by a freely mobile part of the mitral papillary muscle . The left ventricular cavity and the two groups of papillary muscle were then imaged using three-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography, which showed avulsion of the posterior papillary muscle (PMA) from the left ventricular trabecular muscle. No residual papillary muscle attachment to the left ventricular wall was observed, confirming avulsion of the posterior papillary rather than its rupture . In addition, the left ventricular end-diastolic dimension increased from 45 to 53 mm. The estimated systolic pulmonary pressure increased from 55 mmHg to 81 mmHg. Therefore, the patient underwent mechanical mitral valve replacement and tricuspid annuloplasty. After surgery, the patient recovered without symptoms. At 1-month and three-month follow ups, the patient was asymptomatic, and transthoracic echocardiography showed that the left ventricular volume and pulmonary systolic pressure were significantly lower than before surgery.