An 80-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital on Jan.5, 2022 with multiple medical conditions for several years. He has been diagnosed with chronic renal insufficiency (elevated serum creatinine) ten years ago and renal anemia seven years ago. He was intermittently treated with human erythropoietin. Two weeks before transferring to our hospital, the patient was administered continuous renal replacement therapy because serum creatinine rising to a level of 400 µmol/L and oliguria. His past medical history included hypertension, coronary heart disease, plasmacytoma, fungal pneumonia, bacterial pneumonia, hepatic insufficiency, and hyperhomocysteinemia. The patient presented asthenia, anuria, without fever and had no cough or sputum. He also had petechiae on the forearm and a 5×5 cm ecchymosis on the chest. Auscultation detected bilateral coarse breathing. He had a CRP plasma level of 59.7mg/L, a procalcitonin level of 0.931ng/mL, and a serum creatinine level of 467μmol/L. His erythrocyte and platelet counts were 1.87×1012/L and 42×109/L, respectively. His hemoglobin level was 68g/L, and his white blood cell count was normal. A chest CT scan revealed a dense opacity in the middle of the right lung, lung nodules, mild interstitial changes, and pleural effusion.
Before transferring to our hospital, the patient’s blood culture was negative for Aspergillus spp. or Mucorales and positive for Candida, while the exact type of Candida had not been identified at that time, an intravenous infusion of 800mg fluconazole on the first day, followed by 400mg per day for several days, as an treatment strategy for this condition in another hospital. Because this was ineffective, he was treated empirically with piperacillin sodium tazobactam sodium at 2.25g three times a day in our hospital. His treatment history for plasmacytoma was unknown because of hospitalization in another hospital before. Leucogen was used to treat for his hypocytosis, Other treatment strategies included platelet transfusion, hemodialysis, antihypertensive therapy, acid inhibitory, liver protection therapy and treatment of anemia.
The patient’s condition did not improve during the treatment course. His inflammatory blood markers of CRP and procalcitonin remained high , indicating a persistent infection. Although the patient had a normal body temperature when he was admitted to our hospital, it increased to 38.2°C on the fourth day, and fluctuated somewhat up and down, reaching 39°C only once briefly. Unfortunately, the patient died nine days after admission to our hospital .