A 21-year-old African-American male basketball player presented after a positive COVID-19 PCR test 1 month earlier for an RTP assessment. His COVID-19 symptoms included diarrhoea, cough, shortness of breath, and nasal congestion for 9 days. No intervention or hospitalization was needed, and he felt he was fully recovered and was asymptomatic. His vital signs and physical examination were normal. His cardiac exam was within normal limits, including no abnormal heart sounds, regular pulse and rhythm, and equal strong peripheral pulses. His respiratory exam showed no abnormal breath sounds with equal inspiratory effort. His resting electrocardiography (ECG) is shown in . He had no significant past family history of cardiomyopathies or sudden cardiac arrest before the age of 50 years. He denied any persistent dyspnoea, chest pain, palpitations, lightheadedness, dizziness, near syncope, or syncope. At that time, as per published guidance, an echocardiogram revealed normal left ventricular (LV) size and function (normal wall motion, diastolic function, and LV ejection fraction = 58%) (see , ). Troponin was undetectable. As the player was currently without symptoms, he returned to activity with a ramp-up of exercise.
He returned to exercise as per the recommendations and noted symptoms of shortness of breath and chest tightness, which began within a week of return to basketball practice. This prompted a halt in exercise and additional testing. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging revealed normal size and function with an ejection fraction of 55% with mild apical lateral hypokinesis and subepicardial late gadolinium enhancement involving the apical lateral segment. No active oedema was present. This finding was consistent with myocardial fibrosis/scar related to myocarditis . He was held from exercise as per the ACC/AHA recommendations for return to sport. After 2 months, he was symptom-free; we decided to proceed with a stress test that was positive for inferolateral repolarization abnormalities at rest and positive for a significant burden of premature ventricular complexes (PVCs) (right bundle superior axis) likely originating from the LV inferolateral at the base and non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) with exercise during the recovery phase . He was again held from the activity for an additional 3 months. A repeat CMR and echocardiography showed the resolution of scar/fibrosis and the prior mild apical lateral hypokinesis . A repeat stress test found rare, isolated PVCs (right bundle superior axis) initially at rest that did not escalate with exercise and the absence of non-sustained VT at peak heart rate. Moreover, the patient had a normal exercise tolerance, normal hazard ratio, and blood pressure response without sustained arrhythmias.
Moreover, on follow-up ECG at 3 and 6 months, the PVC morphology remained unchanged. At this point, he began a slow RTP by ramping up his activities. Of note, the patient did not receive any medical therapy for myocarditis throughout the observation period, as his cardiac function was preserved. After 1 month of exercise, he wore an ambulatory monitor for 1 week, inclusive of a graded return to an exercise regimen, which did not demonstrate any significant arrhythmias with exercise.