A 1-month-old infant (sex, female; height, 51.2 cm; body weight, 3.1 kg; body surface area, 0.21 m2) was hospitalized due to IAA/VSD/PDA/PH .
Cardiovascular CT revealed a ventricular septal defect of 13 mm and the continuity of the aortic arch at the distal end of the left subclavian artery was interrupted, where the descending aorta was connected to the left pulmonary artery via an arterial catheter with an internal diameter of about 5 mm. Meantime, the ratio of pulmonary to systemic blood pressure measured by cardiac ultrasound was 0.95, which met the diagnostic criteria of congenital heart disease combined with severe pulmonary hypertension.
After completing relevant examinations, aortic arch interruption correction, ventricular septal defect repair, ductus arteriosus cut-off, and suture were performed and the operation was successful. Due to obvious myocardial oedema in the infant, sternal closure was delayed. The left atrial and right ventricular pressure monitoring tubes, both of which were connected through a triplet, were inserted into right pulmonary vein and pulmonary artery, respectively, and the triplet was in closed condition ( and ). When the infant returned to intensive care unit, ventilator-assisted breathing was received, and the non-invasive cardiac monitoring system (Most-Care system) was used to closely monitor the vital signs. Meanwhile, the left atrial and right ventricular pressure measuring tubes were separately connected to the monitor through the pressure measuring kits to dynamically monitor the changes of the left atrial and right ventricular pressure . According to the infant’s condition, selective pumping of vasoactive drugs such as dopamine, dobutamine, milrinone, epinephrine, and other vasoactive drugs were given to improve coronary perfusion and cardiac function.
On the night of the surgery, pulmonary hypertensive crisis was triggered by endotracheal intubation with sputum aspiration. Pulmonary artery pressure soared from 18–22/13–15 mmHg to 80/53 mmHg, systemic circulation pressure plunged from 78–83/44–49 mmHg to 40/22 mmHg, blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) decreased from 98% to 84%, and heart rate dropped from 150–158 b.p.m. to 51 b.p.m. simultaneously . Emergency bedside thoracotomy was given, by which it is found that the right atrium and right ventricle were significantly enlarged with distress, and the triplet was turned on urgently to make the left atrial and right ventricular pressure monitoring tubes connected. Meantime, pure oxygen and nitric oxide (20 ppm) were inhaled by breathing bag, and fentanyl, midazolam, rocuronium bromide, and other drugs were given to enhance sedation and muscle relaxation therapy. The systemic blood pressure increased instantly to 68–72/44–50 mmHg, right cardiac distress relieved immediately, and the heart rate soon increased to 83–110 b.p.m. Three minutes later, the SpO2 increased to 89%, and the pulmonary artery pressure decreased to 19–22/15–17 mmHg. The triplet was turned off, and ventilator was given to assist breathing subsequently, and then the SpO2 increased to 95–99%, blood pressure to 83–88/50–53 mmHg, and heart rate to 155–161 b.p.m. . After 20 min of observation, the infant’s vital signs were stable and there was no recurrence of pulmonary hypertensive crisis, so the infant was given delayed sternal closure again.
Thirty-six hours after surgery, bedside sternal closure was performed, the left atrial and right ventricular pressure monitoring tubes were removed smoothly, and the infant was discharged 9 days later. One year after surgery, transthoracic echocardiography showed the infant recovered well .