A 68-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with dyspea and general fatigue in July 2018. He was diagnosed with acute decompensated heart failure due to ischemic cardiomyopathy. The patient had a history of severe coronary heart disease and chronic kidney disease (CKD Stage II-III). During his last hospitalization in 2017, Coronary angiography showed severe triple vessel coronary artery disease, he refuse revascularization therapy. Holter revealed paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia and frequent ventricular premature beats, so he received implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) treatment. Aspirin, atorvastatin, furosemide, spirolactone, perindopril and metoprolol were taken regularly at home. On the current admission, his blood pressure and heart rate were 135/82mmHg and 75beats/min respectively. A S3 and systolic murmur were identified alone with inspiratory moist rales in the bilateral lung fields with slight edema of both lower limbs. The first laboratory values were as follows: white blood cells, 8.060/uL; hemoglobin, 14.6 g/dL; serum creatinine, 160 umol/L (estimated glomerular filtration rate 38 ml/min/1.73 m2);blood urea nitrogen 12.0 mol/L, serum sodium, 137mmol/L; serum potassium, 3.84 mmol/L; amino-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), 25,000 pg/mL; cardiac troponin 0.11 ng/mL. Electrocardiogram revealed a sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 75 beats per minutes, ventricular premature beats, non-specific ST-T changes.

Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly, left small pleural effusion and pulmonary congestion. Echocardiography demonstrated a sever left ventricular enlargement with decreased systolic function (left ventricular end-diastolic diameter, 65 mm; left ventricular ejection fraction, 28%), diffuse ventricular wall motion decrease, severe mitral regurgitation and moderate tricuspid regurgitation. The estimated pulmonary arterial pressure was 52 mmHg. The patient was diagnosed with acute decompensated heart failure caused by volume overload. In the initial treatment, intravenous loop diuretics and nesiritide were administrated as well as traditionally prescribed drugs. Because the patient was critically ill with heart failure and he was insensitive to intravenous diuretics, the patient's clinical symptoms did not improve significantly and his urine volume did not increase either. Therefore, diuretic resistance could be considered. In order to improve fluid retention and relieve his dyspnea, low-dose TLV (7.5 mg qd) was performed on day 3. The administration of TLV dramatically relieved dyspnea and increased urinary output. Cardiac rehabilitation was started gradually. Unfortunately after 3 days treatment of TLV, we observed that he became delirious and his limbs shook uncontrollably. High serum sodium 173 mmol/L was noted compared to the results of the first examination (137 mmol/L). Severe hypernatremia was diagnosed. Because no other medications were changed, we did not strictly require patient to control the fluid intake, and no other medication could cause elevation of serum sodium, we suspected a high sensitivity to the side effect of TLV. Hence, we stopped the use of TLV and encouraged patient to drink plenty of water, gastric tube was inserted orally to increase the intake of fresh water. After intensive rescue, serum sodium was restored to normal (135 mol/L) on day 10. The clinical data was as follows: white blood cells, 4, 010/uL; hemoglobin, 14.2 g/dL; serum creatinine, 104 umol/L (estimated glomerular filtration rate 62 ml/min/1.73 m2); blood urea nitrogen 10.7 mmol/L, serum sodium, 135 mmol/L; serum potassium, 4.01 mmol/L; amino-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), 3280 pg/mL; Although the patient's laboratory results and clinical symptoms improved, he still needed intravenous diuretics to maintain liquid output. But he remained insensitive to them. Later, when the patient refused continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT), we tried again to use a lower dose of TLV (3.75 mg qd) to improve diuretic resistance. 2 days later, Serum sodium rose again (162 mmol/L). We had confirmed that hypernatremia was caused by TLV. After the suspension of TLV, his serum sodium decreased to 138 mmol/L gradually, psychiatric symptom recovered. In order to maintain the patient's urine volume, We had to give the patient a larger dose of intravenous loop diuresis and nesiritide . During this period, the patient's overall condition was stable. He was discharged on the 21st day after admission. After hospital discharge, patient eventually died of cardiac arrest due to critically ill heart failure.