A 56-year-old gentleman (65 kg, 160 cm, BMI 25.4 kg/sq.m and ASA-IV E) presented to our emergency department with a two-day history of right lower abdominal pain, fever, and vomiting. His medical history was significant for long-standing type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM), hypertension, dyslipidemia, and dilated cardiomyopathy. Examination revealed tenderness in the right iliac fossa and bilateral fine basal crepitation. CT abdomen revealed acute gangrenous appendicitis, and an urgent open appendectomy was scheduled.
We assessed him preoperatively and consulted with a cardiologist. He was admitted to the Emergency Department, and our focus was on the patient’s cardiorespiratory system and ability to tolerate a general anesthetic procedure.
On examination, he was stable enough to verbalize his medical history. He also had a history of hospital admission for decompensated heart failure in 2019. At that time, transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a dilated left ventricle (LV), severely reduced systolic LV function (EF 18%), severe global hypokinesis of LV, and Grade 3 diastolic dysfunction. The patient was treated with anti-heart failure medications and discharged home a week later. He was prescribed aspirin, bisoprolol, ramipril, dapagliflozin, rosuvastatin, isosorbide dinitrate, and insulin.
In this visit, he had poorly controlled DM (HbA1C 13%). Laboratory tests revealed an NT pro-BNP level of 1122 pg/mL, troponin T level of 28 ng/l, CRP level of 158 mg/l, WBC 16000/mcl. TTE revealed a moderately dilated left ventricle, severely reduced LV systolic function, biplane LVEF of approximately 25%, severe global hypokinesis of the LV, and Grade 3 diastolic dysfunction. His medications on admission included bisoprolol, rosuvastatin, and insulin.
The patient had a revised cardiac risk index (RCRI) of 4, with 15% risk of major adverse cardiac events (MACE) and high risk for both general anesthesia and neuraxial blockade.
He was admitted to the SICU for preoperative optimization, arterial and central venous line insertion, Pulse index Continuous Cardiac Output (PiCCO)-guided fluid resuscitation, and antibiotic prophylaxis.
Owing to the patient’s high risk, we held a multidisciplinary team meeting. The team decided that the patient would undergo an open appendectomy with QLB combined with monitored anesthesia care (MAC). As the patient had gangrenous appendicitis, there was a further risk of deterioration.
The patient was counselled regarding the urgent need for surgery, perioperative risk of cardiac complications, and specific anesthesia management, and written consent for anesthesia was obtained. He was brought to the operating room, and standard monitors were applied, along with an invasive arterial line monitor and supplemental oxygen administered via face mask at 5L/min. Inotropes (dobutamine and adrenaline infusions) were prepared in case he developed hemodynamic instability.
In the left lateral decubitus position, 2 mg of midazolam and 50 µg of fentanyl were administered intravenously as anxiolytics. An ultrasound probe (curvilinear low-frequency) was placed in a transverse orientation at the midaxillary line at the L2-L4 level to visualize the three expected abdominal layers (transversus abdominis, external oblique, and internal oblique). The probe was then moved posteriorly until quadratus lumborum muscle (QLM) was confirmed. Under aseptic techniques and ultrasound guidance, the needle was inserted and advanced into the anterior aspect of the QLM. Proper positioning of the needle tip was confirmed by hydrodissection, and 20 mL of 0.33% levobupivacaine was injected into the fascia between the right QL muscle and psoas muscles .
Surgery was performed 15 min after the block, with supplemental local infiltration and intravenous fentanyl at titrated doses of up to 50 µg. Intraoperative sedation was achieved with 2 mg of midazolam intravenously at titrated doses of up to 4 mg. A minimal dose of noradrenaline 0.03–0.05mcg/kg/min infusion was continued to maintain normal hemodynamics. An additional dose of intravenous fentanyl (50 µg) was administered to blunt the effects of deep peritoneal stimulation. The patient maintained the airway and vital signs around baseline throughout the procedure.
The patient was transferred to the SICU for hemodynamic monitoring and organ support. The numerical rating of pain score was 0/10 at rest and 2/10 with movement at 24 h and reached a maximum of 4/10 with movement at 48 h postoperatively. His pain was managed with paracetamol, and he was discharged on the fourth day postoperatively. A summary of the clinical care pathways for our patient is shown in .