A 48-year-old man was referred to our emergency room with a 10-day history of progressive dyspnea, non-productive cough and fever. He had previously visited his primary physician, who prescribed a 7-day treatment with an antibiotic. The patient had a 34-pack-year history of cigarette smoking, did not take any regular medications and had not recently visited any tropical country. Physical examination revealed hyperthermia (38.0°C), with blood pressure and pulse within normal ranges. He was slightly polypneic (28 cycles per minute) but had no other sign of respiratory difficulty. Respiratory sounds were diminished on both pulmonary bases and no adventitial sounds were heard. No rash or lymphadenopathy was noted and the remainder of his physical examination was normal. Room air arterial blood gas (ABG) was unremarkable and laboratory findings showed slight normocytic normochromic anemia (hemoglobin (Hb) 12.3 g/dL, hematocrit (Hct) 36.1%), leukocytosis (20,920/mm3), relative neutrophilia (75.5%), thrombocytosis (499,000/mm3) and elevated C-reactive protein (155.9 mg/L). Ionogram and renal function were normal. Chest X-ray revealed a mild reduction in lung volume and a mild and diffuse coarse reticular pattern on both lungs. The patient was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia, and, following admission to the Medicine ward, was started on empiric antibiotic therapy with levofloxacin.
During the first days after admission, persistent fever and high levels of inflammatory markers were noted. Given the patient's condition, an investigative diagnostic procedure was initiated. Blood cultures, HIV and hepatitis testing were negative. Coagulation, hepatic function and urine sediment were unremarkable. Bronchofibroscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage were negative for malignant cells, and virologic, bacterial, and mycological examinations and polymerase chain reaction were negative for mycobacterial DNA. Transthoracic echocardiography showed no evidence of any valvular vegetation, and a blood smear was not compatible with any myelodysplastic syndrome. Thoracoabdominal-pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan revealed several lymph nodes in all mediastinal compartments but no hilar adenomegalies. Multiple cysts and nodules, with mid to upper zone predominance, and interstitial thickening were observed in the lungs . The dimensions of the liver were enlarged, with several irregular hypoattenuating lesions and infracentimetric lymph nodes in the hepatic hilum . As a result, an ultrasound-guided liver biopsy was performed. Histologic and immunohistochemical examination (i.e. positivity for S-100 protein and CD1a antigens) established a diagnosis of LCH.
A course of steroids (prednisolone, 1.0 mg/kg/day) was initiated, and the patient was encouraged to discontinue smoking immediately, which clearly improved the clinical course of the disease. Six months later, he remains asymptomatic, with low levels of inflammatory markers, although his lung and liver radiological patterns remain unchanged.