An 81-year-old man presented to the emergency department complaining of epigastric pain and tarry stool passage that lasted for 3 d.
Of 3 d prior to admission, the patient developed epigastric pain and tarry stool passage. Because of progressive symptoms, he was brought to the emergency department of our hospital.
Prior to this incident, he was admitted to the hospital three times in 6 mo due to acute cardiopulmonary distress. The first admission was for lung fibrosis exacerbated by pneumonia, pleural effusion, and congestive heart failure, with an ejection fraction of 25%; the second admission occurred 2 mo later for pulmonary edema; and the third admission occurred in the following month as a result of coronary artery disease (CAD) accompanied by cardiogenic shock and acute pulmonary congestion. His CAD was treated using percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty with the initiation of antiplatelet therapy.
No remarkable history.
The patient presented with slight hypotension without tachycardia or fever (blood pressure, 92/60 mmHg; pulse rate, 62 bpm; body temperature, 36.9 °C). The patient appeared mild confused with limited activity due to general weakness. Mild abdominal distension with poor appetite was complained, but no dizziness, shortness of breath, chest tightness, abdominal pain or decreased urine amount was noticed. Further physical examination revealed a soft abdomen without obvious point tenderness, muscle guarding or rebounding pain. He was not pale nor icteric.
Laboratory tests indicated leukocytosis with left shift (white blood cell count, 10600/μL; segment, 73.3%), direct bilirubinemia (direct bilirubin, 0.7 mg/dL; total bilirubin, 1.6 mg/dL) and elevated liver enzyme levels (alanine aminotransferase, 648 IU/L; aspartate aminotransferase, 130 IU/L); anemia, thrombocytopenia, renal insufficiency, and electrolyte imbalance were not detected. Virology tests also confirmed the absence of hepatitis B or C viral infection.
The patient was then admitted to a gastroenterology ward owing to suspicion of cholecystitis and upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Abdominal ultrasound revealed the presence of gallbladder sludge. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast was performed the next afternoon; the scan revealed an enhancing pseudoaneurysm of the cystic artery with high-density material in the gallbladder and common bile duct (CBD) and mild dilatation of the bilateral intrahepatic duct (IHD) and CBD .