In December 2013, a 58-year-old man with a history of type-2 diabetes mellitus (DM2), systemic arterial hypertension (SAH) and dyslipidemia was referred to our centre, the Hospital de Clínicas de Sao Paulo, a large academic and public centre located in Sao Paulo, Brazil, from the primary care service to investigate uncontrolled blood pressure and blood glucose. At initial clinical examination, he presented facial phletora, hirsutism, violaceous striae and centripetal obesity, and a CS clinical diagnosis was suspected. Initial examinations identified hypercortisolism and elevation of ACTH . The ACTH increment in the corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) stimulation test was 14%, suggesting an ectopic ACTH-producing tumour. To confirm this hypothesis, the patient underwent an inferior petrosal sinus sampling with CRH stimulation. The central/peripheral ACTH gradient was less than 2 at 0, 3, 5 and 10 min after desmopressin injection, confirming the ectopic ACTH producing. Magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the abdomen showed an expansive lesion in the tail of the pancreas measuring 5.0 cm in the largest diameter, multiple small nodules in hepatic segment III and increased volume of both adrenals . In January 2014, he was referred to our institution, the Instituto do Cancer do Estado de Sao Paulo, where he underwent an R0 body-caudal pancreatectomy, splenectomy and removal of the segment III of the liver, which was compatible with PNET, infiltrating the liver tissue. The final diagnosis was of a well-differentiated PNET, with positive immunohistochemistry staining of synaptophysin and chromogranin A, three mitosis/10 high-power fields and Ki67 index of 6%. There was adequate clinical control of DM2 and SAH after resection. In July 2014, a Gallium-68-DOTATATE PET-CT was performed and did not show any measurable metastatic disease. However, in November 2014, he presented hyperglycaemia and high blood pressure again, associated with elevation of both serum cortisol and ACTH, which were resultant from hepatic recurrence with a new lesion of 1.2 cm in segment VI of the liver. Because the patient was quite sick to undergo new hepatic resection due to uncontrolled CS and also because of the short interval from last metastasectomy, new surgical resection was contraindicated. Octreotide LAR 20 mg IM once every 28 days was started but was unsuccessful in controlling symptoms. Subsequent hepatic embolisation did not improve his condition either. Due to uncontrolled CS in February 2015, bilateral adrenalectomy was performed and the CS finally resolved. The pathology report revealed a metastatic neuroendocrine tumour in the left adrenal, with immunohistochemistry staining positive for synaptophysin, chromogranin A positive and ACTH, negative staining for CD56, CDX2 and TTF1 negative and ki67 index of 30%.
After symptom control, the patient was lost to follow up, returning six months with recurrent hyperglycaemia and skin hyperpigmentation; at that time, the elevation of plasma ACTH was identified. A new MRI of the abdomen showed a progression of hepatic metastases. Octreotide LAR was tried again, but there was disease progression after two doses. In October 2015, he received the combination of oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2 given on day one and capecitabine 1000 mg/m2 (CapOx) orally for 14 days, in a 21-days cycle. At this time, he presented diffuse exuberant hyperpigmented lesions of the skin, mainly in interphalangeal joints and tongue . After two cycles, there was significant improvement in cutaneous hyperpigmentation and the patient was restaged with new CT scans that showed stable disease. Despite good tolerance, the patient requested to stop chemotherapy and he went on chemoholiday. In March 2016, after three months without treatment, the hyperpigmented lesions of the skin worsened and imaging tests evidenced new progression of liver disease. Re-exposure to CapOx was indicated. He received three more cycles, when in in April/2016, CT scans demonstrated partial response in liver lesions. The patient chose to pause the chemotherapy once again. At the last image evaluation, in June 2017, the tumour has remained stabilised and three has been no further worsening of skin hyperpigmentation.