A 53-year-old Japanese man affected by NF-1 presented with a three-week history of jaundice, upper abdominal discomfort, dysphagia and loss of appetite . His mother had a history of neurofibromatosis. Upon physical examination, a smooth mass, with its largest dimension measuring 20 cm, was palpated in his right upper abdomen. On admission, laboratory findings revealed leukocytosis, with a white blood cell count of 12,200/mm3; aspartate aminotransferase, 75 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 75 U/L; alkaline phosphates 1913 U/L; γ-glutamyl transferase, 960 U/L; total protein, 7.4 g/dL; and total bilirubin, 4.4 mg/dL. His C-reactive protein level was 9.3 mg/mL (normal range, 0.5 mg/mL to 0.8 mg/mL). His serum level of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was extremely high at 3050 ng/mL (cutoff, 2.5 ng/mL), and his α-fetoprotein (AFP) level was 812 ng/mL (cutoff, 10 ng/mL). The carbohydrate antigen (CA) 72-4 was also high at 180 U/mL (cutoff, 8.0 U/mL); CA 19-9 was normal at 16 U/mL (cutoff, 37 U/mL). An upper GI barium study showed a 5.0 cm filling defect on his cardia that extended to his lower esophagus. An abdominal computerized tomography (CT) scan showed multiple liver lesions and ascites, but no lymph node enlargement was identified . Gastroendoscopic examination revealed a tumor with a 6 cm diameter on the esophagogastric junction, which was spreading to his esophagus . Multiple biopsies showed moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma of the stomach at stage IV . An immunohistochemical study showed that CEA-positive and AFP-negative cells were present in the tumor . Our patient was administered palliative chemotherapy and treated with TS-1 (tegafur, gimeracil, oteracil potassium). Our patient died due to liver failure a month after initial admission. A pathological review of necropsy specimens of his liver lesions showed moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma . An immunohistochemical study showed that CEA-positive and AFP-negative cells were present in the metastatic liver tumor resembling the gastric lesion .