We present the case of 32-year-old female patient who presented to the urologist with fever lasting for the previous two months, usually 37°C to 38°C, with occasional temperature leaps to 40°. Laboratory blood tests showed leukocytosis with cell counts up to 19,000. The patient did not complain of lumbar pain. Urinalysis showed leukocyturia, erythrocyturia, and slight positivity for protein. The patient was treated with a combination of amoxicillin, clavulonic acid, and cefuroxime. Abdominal ultrasound and multiphase CT depicted a large, expansive, heterogenous mass in the lower pole of the left kidney measuring 92 × 59 × 76 mm. CT scans showed a renal neoplastic mass with increased peripheral inhibition and poor central inhibition, possibly due to central necrosis. The tumor was unsharply demarcated from the surrounding parenchyma and pelvic system . Regional lymphadenopathy was present, but there were no signs of propagation in the main renal vein or perinephric fat tissue, and there were no signs of liver or bone metastasis. Chest CT showed no signs of lungs metastasis or mediastinal lymphadenopathy. In order to determine the final histopathological diagnosis, histopathological and immunohistochemical analyses were performed, complemented by reverse transcryptase-polymerase change reaction (RT-PCR). Gross examination of the slitted specimen showed a sharply circumscribed tumor measuring 9 × 6 × 6 cm and replacing a large part of the kidney. The renal tumor displayed infiltrated parenchyma but no expansion into the pelvic system and ureter or signs of spreading into the main renal vein. Gross appearance of the tumor was white-yellow with large necrotic areas. The microscopic analysis of perinephric fat tissue, regional lymph nodes, and the left adrenal gland revealed no signs of metastasis. Microscopic analysis showed that the tumor was composed of solid nests and stripes of tumor cells with small oval and round nuclei, and some of the nuclei contained small nucleoli . The tumor cell cytoplasm was scanty and pink with coarser appearance of chromatin. Mitotic figures were also found. Immunohistochemical analysis included MIC2 gene product/CD 99 , neuron-specific enolase (NSE) , CD3, CD 20, chromogranin, synaptophysin, vimentin, and neurofilament. Immunohistochemical staining revealed positive expression of CD99 and NSE in all tumor cells. The tumor cells did not stain with CD3, CD 20, chromogranin, synaptophysin, vimentin, or neurofilament. RT-PCR analysis for EWS-FLI1 fusion proteins was positive for type II 191 pb and negative for type I 125 pb. Diagnosis of rPNET set on the basis of characteristic morphological characteristics and results of immunohistochemical analysis was confirmed by RT-PCR. After nephrectomy, the patient received 14 cycles of a VAC/IE regiment adjuvant chemotherapy comprised of vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, and etoposide. Our patient was disease-free for nine years and eight months. Blood and urine laboratory test values were in the normal range.
The study was approved by the institutional ethical committee and conducted according to the principles of the declaration of Helsinki of the world medical association. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest. The authors did not receive any grants for writing this article.