The patient was a 53-year-old woman with no relevant medical history. She experienced discomfort and pain in the anal region, and a colonoscopy detected a tumor in the colon. On the basis of imaging and endometrial sampling cytology with conventional biopsy findings, she was diagnosed with International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage IVB endometrial cancer (endometrioid adenocarcinoma Grade 1) with colon metastasis and lymphadenopathy in the bilateral obturator lymph nodes and sacrum. She received neoadjuvant chemotherapy (four cycles of paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 and carboplatin area under curve 6). Two months later, Hartmann surgery was performed to prevent the tumor from occluding the colon. Pathological evaluation of the tumor specimen confirmed endometrial cancer, surgical stage IVB. MSI testing revealed the tumor was MSI-H.
After the surgery, computed tomography (CT) showed an enlarged recurrent tumor in the colon, with peritoneal dissemination and multiple metastases in the paraaortic lymph nodes. Hence, she was started on a combination of lenvatinib (20 mg, administered orally once daily) and pembrolizumab (200 mg, administered intravenously as a 30-minute infusion every 3 weeks). On day 11 after the LEAP therapy, she received 4 units of red blood cells due to a fall in her hemoglobin level to 7.3 g/dL. She was discharged on day 12. On day 15, she developed a gait disorder and tremors. Hypothyroidism (thyroid stimulating hormone [TSH] level: 5.350 ng/mL, free thyroxine 4 [FT4] level: 0.99 pg/mL, free thyroxine 3 [FT3] level: 2.08 pg/mL) was also detected on the same day on consultation with endocrinologists.
On day 18, she was referred to the emergency room for an altered sensorium. On arrival, her Glasgow Coma Scale score was E3V4M6. Her blood pressure showed a continued increase . There was no electrolyte imbalance or renal or liver failure . An emergency CT scan found no brain metastasis or intracranial hemorrhage . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a slightly high signal intensity in the left occipital lobe, with no apparent cerebral infarction . LEAP therapy was discontinued. Although there were no visual complaints or findings given the location of the MRI abnormalities and electroencephalogram was normal, her consciousness level gradually worsened, resulting in convulsions, which were suppressed by an intravenous injection of diazepam (5 mg). She was started on levetiracetam (200 mg) to prevent convulsions. For further investigation, additional blood tests and multiple lumbar taps were performed. While serum vitamin B1, TSH, FT4, and FT3 levels were normal, a slight increase was seen in the anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody levels . The blood glucose level was 110 mg/dL. Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid found cells (5/µL), protein (154 mg/dL), and glucose (50 mg/dL) , suggesting that meningitis was unlikely. The disturbance in consciousness gradually improved with time, indicating the low probability of Hashimoto encephalopathy.
Previous clinical trials have revealed that the incidence of adverse effects of lenvatinib and pembrolizumab on the central nervous system was 0.4% and less than 0.1% , respectively, and could have caused PRES and encephalitis, respectively. The absence of markers of inflammation in the cerebrospinal fluid and a high signal intensity in the left occipital lobe on MRI suggested PRES, rather than encephalitis. Therefore, it was concluded that these symptoms were caused by lenvatinib, not pembrolizumab. She was resumed on treatment with pembrolizumab. Although no long-term sequalae of PRES were observed, unfortunately, CT showed multiple lymph node metastases after four cycles of pembrolizumab monotherapy, indicative of further disease progression. Pembrolizumab was discontinued, and she is now enrolled in another clinical trial in Japan.