A 46-year-old male with end-stage renal disease of unknown cause had been on hemodialysis for 3 years when he underwent cadaveric renal transplantation 15 months ago. Except for 3 years of hypertension, there was no other remarkable medical history. The kidneys of donor after brain death were procured by an operation group. However, during harvesting of the donor’s kidneys, a branch of right renal artery to renal superior polar was inadvertently cut off. The artery branch with a diameter 0.3 mm arised from the bifurcation of abdominal aorta and renal artery. Subsequently the severed renal artery branch was anastomosed in situ with 7–0 prolene during the repair of the kidney. Although the lengh of the renal artery branch became little shorter, the major trunk of renal artery was not excessively stretched. The cold and warm ischemia time of the kidney were 5 min and 6 h respectively. The right kidney of donor was transplanted in the right iliac fossa. The donor renal artery with a Carrel patch of donor aorta was anastomosed end-to-side to the recipient right external iliac artery with 6–0 prolene, and renal vein was anastomosed end-to-side to the recipient right external iliac vein with 5–0 prolene, and the graft ureter was anastomosed to the urinary bladder of the recipient with a double J stent. Basiliximab was used as immunity induction on the day of surgery and the fourth day after transplantation. His immunosuppression regimen consisted of tacrolimus, mycophenolate sodium, and prednisolone. His immediate postoperative course was unremarkable. His blood pressure was controlled to 140–156/90–105 mmHg with nicardipine spironolactone, and furosemide y. The 24-h urine volume was between 1937 and 4100 ml, and his renal function. Significantly improved, reaching a creatinine of 151 μmol/L on 11st day posttransplantation. However, from the 12nd day after transplantation his blood pressure began to gradually increase to 170–174/103-109 mmHg.There was no positive presentation on clinical examination and ultrasonograph, and the level of creatinine and urine volume were also stable. So the nicardipine was increased. To our surprise, it was still difficult to control his blood pressure even though three antihypertensive medications (sustained-release nifedipine 60 mg twice daily, urapidil 30 mg twice daily, arotinolol 10 mg twice daily) were administrated. His blood pressure reached to 190/120 mmHg on 20th day after transplantation. There was a decrease in 24-h urine volume with 1620-1725 ml, and mild impairment of renal function with a creatinine of 194 μmol/L. A bruit became audible over the site of the transplanted kidney. Color Doppler ultrasonography indicated a decreased RI in intrarenal arteries and increased blood flow of the transplant renal artery, with RI of 0.45, the peak systolic velocity(PSV) of 305 cm/s and the velocity gradient between stenotic and prestenotic segment of more than 3:1, therefore, a vascular complication of TRAS was suspected. Diagnostic arteriography was performed through a retrograde contralateral femoral artery puncture on 22nd day after transplantation, and it showed a 90% stenosis of transplant renal artery, and the TRAS occurred in the distal site of the anastomosis instead of the anastomosis . We considered that the reconstructional renal artery branch stretched the trunk of renal artery, which resulted in the stenosis distal to the suture line. Two days later, after sufficient preparation renal artery angioplasty was undertaken through a retrograde ipsilateral femoral artery approach. As the stenosis might be high elastic due to the stretch, percutaneous transluminal stent implantation was performed. Because the artery branch situated on the stenosis, bare stent (6 × 14 mm, Express Vascular SD) had to be chosen to avoid effecting the flow of the artery branch. After the bare stent was successfully deployed, a second angiographic evaluation verified the effectiveness of the intervention was obvious. After the interventional treatment, the renal function and urine volume recovered, and his blood pressure was stably controlled to 121/80 mmHg with only two antihypertension (nifedipine and arotinolol). He was discharged on 28 day after transplantation with a creatinine of 108 μmol/L. Changes in clinical parameters over the 1-month treatment period is shown in Table . The patient’s renal function remains stable at clinical follow-up of 15 months.