A 30 year old woman was diagnosed with end stage renal disease which was suspected to be a complication of previous malarial illness. Haemodialysis was initiated in 2000 and a deceased donor kidney transplant was performed in 2005. Immunosuppression was by cyclosporin, azathioprine and prednisone, without induction therapy. The post-transplant course was stable with good renal function. The patient developed diabetes mellitus in 2010 and was placed on insulin. Parathyroidectomy was performed in 2011 for hyperparathyroidism. She was treated in hospital once in 2012 for a urinary tract infection.
Renal function deteriorated over a period of 6 months in 2014, serum creatinine increasing from a baseline of less than 100 to more than 300 μmol/l. This prompted the performance of a transplant biopsy. Chronic allograft nephropathy was diagnosed and immunosuppression changed to tacrolimus (target serum trough level 5-7 ng/ml), mycophenolate mofetil (1 g twice daily) and prednisone (10 mg/day). Renal function remained stable until rapid deterioration occurred early in 2015 due to suspected non-adherence to immune suppressants during a foreign visit. Three steroid pulses (methylprednisolone 250 mg daily) were administered, and a repeat transplant biopsy was performed. The histological appearance was essentially unchanged. Renal function improved somewhat with serum creatine decreasing from an initial value of 640 μmol/l to 395 μmol/l, and then stabilising at a new baseline of about 380 μmol/l after one further dose of methylprednisone 500 mg. Subsequently viral infection due to cytomegalo-, and BK-virus occurred at different times. The virus infections were diagnosed by quantitative serum PCR for CMV and by urine PCR for BK virus. CMV infection, which presented as a febrile illness, was treated because of a sustained viral load of 250–671 copies/ml. Treatment was by induction with intravenous gancyclovir and maintenance with oral valgancyclovir. The BK viral load in the urine was 269,000 copies/ml. Immunosupression was progressively reduced to a tacrolimus target trough level of 5 ng/ml, mycophenolate mofetil 500 mg twice daily and prednisone 5 mg daily and viral disease remained quiescent. Late in 2014 and during 2015 the patient developed recurrent episodes of severe bacterial urinary tract infection which were accompanied by SIRS response. She was admitted to hospital on five occasions with intervals of one to 2 months. The infections responded each time to empiric (usually amoxicillin/clavulanic acid) and/or directed (on occasion switched to a carbapenem) antibiotic therapy for 10–14 days. Initially Klebsiella pneumoniae was cultured from urine and blood, but on the last 3 occasions Escherichia coli (E. coli) was cultured, each time with similar antibiotic sensitivity. Ultrasound of the transplant, vesicocystourography and cystoscopy were non-contributory to the causation of recurrent infection apart from grade 2 reflux into the transplant ureter. Various prophylactic antibacterials were prescribed without success. On each occasion of admission for sepsis the graft was tender and it was decided to perform an FDG-PET/CT scan. This revealed a metabolically active lesion in the upper pole of the transplanted kidney, suggestive of an abscess . Attempted aspiration of the lesion did not yield pus after several passes, and was followed by a core needle biopsy. The biopsy yielded poor non-diagnostic tissue, but a positive culture of an E. coli with the same antibiotic sensitivity spectrum as that cultivated from urine and blood. The biopsy was repeated and this time yielded diagnosable material. Routine histological sections were stained with haematoxylin and eosin and revealed renal tissue with a prominent infiltrate of cryptococcus round yeast bodies. The fungal elements were organised into groups in a myxoid and inflammatory background in most of the tissue. Alcian blue staining demonstrated a thick mucinous fungal capsule. The microscopy confirmed the presence of chronic allograft nephropathy. There were areas of prominent interstitial fibrosis with atrophic tubuli and occasional sclerotic glomeruli. There were no specific features of BK virus nephropathy present. The biopsies had not been specifically cultured for fungal pathogens as the finding was unexpected. At the time of discarding the plates at 48 h, there had been no fungal growth.
On the basis of the radiological and histological appearances, a diagnosis of cryptococcoma of the transplanted kidney was made. Investigation for systemic cryptococcosis was commenced. An uncontrasted brain and lung CT scan was normal. Cerebrospinal fluid examination yielded the following: glucose 3.6 mmol/l, protein 0.29 g/l and adenosine deaminase 1.5 u/l. There were no cells present. India ink staining and cryptococcus latex antigen test (CLAT) of the fluid were negative. Bacterial and fungal culture were negative. The lungs were examined clinically, and radiographically by plain X-ray and CT scan. They were found to be normal. The serum cryptococcus latex antigen test (s-CLAT) was negative. Multiple subsequent blood and urine specimens were negative for fungal culture.
The patient was treated with fluconazole 400 mg daily with the intention of continuing for 6 to 12 months. During this time the patient remained chronically ill with nausea, anorexia and loss of weight, as well as the recurrent urinary tract infections. On follow-up FDG-PET/CT scan after 2 months the cryptococcoma showed a significant increase in size and intensity . A gastroscopy was performed for the upper gastro-intestinal symptoms. A mucosal mass was seen, biopsy of which revealed Kaposi sarcoma.
Throughout her protracted illness the patient remained unwilling to accept any reduction of the immunosuppression for fear of losing the kidney. Eventually, in light of poor renal function and life-threatening infections, she acceded to reduction and cessation of immunosuppressants, and was started on haemodialysis. Treatment for the cryptococcosis was escalated by adding 200 mg of fluconazole after each dialysis session. The lesion in the kidney which had become detectable on ultrasound was apparently unchanged. The patient died soon after initiation of dialysis during admission to hospital for an episode of severe sepsis.