A 62-year-old female with MFS was presented to the hospital for an emergency after being diagnosed with cerebral thromboembolism due to atrial fibrillation (AF). Apart from the acute endovascular thrombectomy, the patient was treated for congestive heart failure associated with aortic valve regurgitation with tachycardic AF. Echocardiography revealed severe regurgitation with reduced left ventricular ejection function (32%) and massive left ventricular diastolic dimension (88 mm). Aortic valve was tricuspid, and the eccentric regurgitation jet revealed prolapse of right coronary cusp. The aortic root was moderately dilated (42 mm). After 2 months of treatment, the patient was referred to our hospital for the surgical treatment of aortic valve regurgitation. The patient was free from the sequela of brain stroke, but complained of general fatigue consistent with a New York Heart Association class III condition with weakened leg muscle strength due to disuse syndrome. N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) level at admission was 3964 pg/mL. Sinus rhythm had been maintained after initiating oral amiodarone. The diameter of the aortic root in this patient was below the size required for indicating surgical treatment for MFS . In addition, the dimension and systolic function of the left ventricle suggested the progression of ventricular remodeling. Therefore, aortic valve replacement was selected primarily for the prevention of heart failure. In contrast, there were various options for the management of AF in the present case. Left atrial appendage closure was thought to be an appropriate treatment option to prevent recurrence of cerebral thromboembolism because AF had been effectively controlled by antiarrhythmics and the patient would receive coumadin following mechanical valve implantation. Thus, combined surgery involving aortic valve replacement and left atrial appendage (LAA) closure was planned in order to achieve early rehabilitation and return to daily life. Her chest XP revealed severe scoliosis . Spirometry showed normal lung function. A computed tomography was performed to determine the optimal intercostal space to access both the aortic valve and LAA . Three-dimensional reconstruction imaging showed that right lower hemisternotomy in a reverse “L” fashion was the optimal approach for clamping and incising the aorta with the ectopic origin of the right coronary artery arising from anteromedial surface of ascending aorta .
The patient was intubated using a double-lumen tube and laterally positioned at approximately 30 degrees right-side up. A skin incision was made from the second intercostal space down to the xiphoid process, after which the chest was opened via right lower hemisternotomy. The surgical field was secured using a Kent retractor (Takasago medical Inc., Tokyo, Japan) and sternal retractor with the costal arch folded back. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established with femoral arterial and cavoatrial cannulation. The ascending aorta was cross-clamped using flexible aortic clamp . Cardiac arrest was obtained using bidirectional cardioplegia. An oblique aortotomy was created 10 mm medial to the ostium of the right coronary artery. The aortic valve cusp was then resected, and a 25-mm mechanical valve was implanted in the intra-annular position. After closing the aortotomy, the 40-mm AtriClip (Atricure Inc, Westchester, OH, USA) was applied to the stump of the LAA before releasing the aortic cross-clamp. The patient was carefully weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass, which required an intraaortic balloon pump for the treatment of perioperative low-output syndrome due to reduced left ventricular function. The extracorporeal circulation time and aortic cross-clamp time were 165 and 87 min, respectively. The total operative time was 303 min. Transfusion of 4 units of red blood cells and 6 units of fresh frozen plasma was required during the surgery.
The patient was extubated on postoperative day 2, and the intraaortic balloon pump was removed 2 days after the extubation. Further, she was then transferred to the rehabilitation center for the management of her disuse syndrome on postoperative day 21; thereafter, she has been living independently without any cardiac and cerebrovascular event.