A 36-month-old female patient presented initially to the pediatric clinic with a history of delayed, acute projectile emesis and diarrhea, without signs of anaphylaxis following ingestion of gumbo soup beginning at 14-months of age. The patient was born by spontaneous vaginal delivery, exhibiting no complications during gestation or birth. She had no confounding infections, medication, or other food ingestions prior to her first presumed FPIES reaction. The family denied history of any atopic co-morbidities – including any IgE food allergies. Importantly, she previously tolerated gumbo over several months prior to her initial reaction and subsequent ingestion trials produced the same gastrointestinal symptoms consistent with FPIES.
Gumbo, which translates to “okra” in numerous West African dialects, is a thick, okra-based stew containing spices and various seafood ingredients . The patient began consuming small amounts (e.g. ranging from”a taste” to ¼–1/2 cup) of a family recipe of gumbo consisting of okra and tuna at about 2-months of age as was the cultural practice for families from their native West African nation. She consumed her family’s gumbo soup regularly within her diet for a year until she experienced recurrent, projectile emesis and diarrhea 2–3 h after an isolated consumption of ½ a cup of gumbo. She would have over five episodes of projectile emesis, about every 10 min over the course of 2 h, and non-bloody, non-mucoid diarrhea that lasted for about 2 h. No cutaneous or respiratory symptoms were observed to indicate IgE-mediated hypersensitivity. After the resolution of her symptoms, the patient was lethargic, but she responded well to oral hydration with apple juice and tolerated intake of foods high in carbohydrates such as spaghetti and crackers. Emergency room care was not utilized. Within the same month, the family gave the child okra and tuna ingredients from the gumbo soup to consume separately. The patient exhibited no symptoms after consuming the tuna, but did experience recurrent, projectile emesis and diarrhea 1 h after ingesting the okra. The family then bought a fresh batch of okra to determine whether the okra in their possession was problematic, but after consumption, the new okra triggered identical symptoms of emesis and diarrhea for the patient for her 3rd and final reaction. Figure illustrates her clinical course timeline pertinent to the FPIES history.
Based on her history, she was clinically diagnosed with FPIES and advised to avoid okra and all okra-based foods. The family strictly heeded this suggestion and no further incidences of reactions occurred. At the family’s discretion, okra in gumbo soup was slowly reintroduced at 3 years of age, in serving sizes starting at about ¼ cup on a daily basis with good tolerance and the patient has since been asymptomatic since. No other changes in her medical history were noted and she now has no need for any food avoidance measures.