A 70-year-old man, without any particular pathological history, referred by family physician, to emergency with a 48h evolving abdominal pain, important abdominal distension, nausea, vomiting, and a last bowel movement reported 2 days ago. On examination, his vital signs were: temperature: 37.3 °C, pulse rate: 110/minute, respiratory rate: 24/minute and blood pressure: 110/60 mmHg. The abdominal examination revealed an abdominal sensibility at the right illiac fossa, a distension of the abdomen and an empty rectal ampula on rectal examination. The biological checkup showed hyperleukocytosis at 15700/mm3, hemoglobin at 11g/dl, platelets count at 159,000/mm3 and C-reactive protein at 180 mg/liter, the hepatic and renal check-ups were normal. An abdominal X-ray revealed the presence of hydro-aeric levels at the ileum segments without pneumoperitoneum. The abdomino-pelvic CT-scan objectified a distension of the terminal ileum measured at 30mm, upstream of a transitional level in which seats a rectangular and plane foreign body (, ). Considering these findings, the patient was diagnosed with intestinal perforation caused by a foreign body. After optimization of his general condition with a Naso-Gastric tube suction and intravenous fluids resuscitation, a decision was taken to proceed with an emergency laparotomy, under general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation. Performed by a 5th year and a 4th year surgical resident. Preoperative prophylactic antibiotics were administered. The exploration revealed a sharp foreign body (fish bone) measuring 3 cm/2cm at the 15 proximal centimeters of the terminal ileum, which penetrated through the wall of the ileum. The foreign body was removed and we noticed that it is a fish bone (, ). The margins of the perforation were excised and primary closure was performed. The patient recovered well and was discharged on the 6th postoperative day. On interrogation, the patient acknowledged that he incidentally swallowed the fish bone 5 days ago. The postoperative course was uneventful: improvement of the general condition of the patient.