A 68-year-old woman was brought to our hospital with repeated right upper abdominal pain lasting for 3 month and aggravation for 9 h. From February 2019 to May 2019, the patient experienced multiple episodes of dull epigastric pain and discomfort, which was often aggravated in the morning with paroxysmal colic. The patient had visited many hospitals without symptom control, but had improved after orally taking omeprazole and anti-inflammatory agents. She did not have black stools or similar symptoms before the symptoms appeared 3 months earlier.
Physical examination showed obvious tenderness in the lower right epigastric region of the xiphoid process, and there was no rebound pain or muscle tension. Blood examination only indicated slightly elevated levels of C-reactive protein, while other tests including routine blood tests were normal. Chest X-ray and B-ultrasound indicated no obvious abnormalities, as shown in Fig. . Gastroscopy revealed obvious hyperemia and edema in the anterior wall of the duodenal bulb, with superficial white pus coating on the surface, and semicircular swelling of the mucous membrane into the cavity, as shown in Fig. .
A duodenal bulbous bulge with bulbous inflammation (possibly due to external pressure on the gall bladder abscess) and/or duodenal bulb ulcer were first considered to be responsible for the discomfort. Cefazoxime sodium was intravenously administered at 2 g and Q12h. Omeprazole was orally administered at 40 mg and Q12h. However, the effect of the anti-ulcer therapy was unremarkable as the symptoms were not significantly relieved and epigastric pain was still present. Additionally, the paroxysmal spasmolysis could not be controlled by intramuscular injection of anisodamine.
Computed tomography (CT) was further performed, and the results suggested the gallbladder was slightly larger, the gastric cavity filling was poor, and the gastric antrum was thickened. After careful examination of the film, we found a streaky high-density shadow (approximately 3 cm in length) on the posterior wall of the gastric antrum extending outside the wall, as shown in Fig. . The possibility of FBs accompanied by perforation was then considered. Further abdominal X-ray also showed a dense shadow in the duodenal bulb with a length of about 2.7 cm, as shown in Fig. . Endoscopic ultrasonography showed that the anterior wall of the duodenal bulb obviously protruded into the cavity. A superficial ulcer was observed on the anterior wall and white moss was observed on the uplift. Hyperechoic space with a cross-section of approximately 0.1 × 0.1 cm was found in the deep submucosal layer of the local stomach, accompanied by an acoustic shadow in the rear as shown in Fig. , which led to the consideration of fishbone as the FB. Further questioning of the patient confirmed that she had a history of eating fish soup before she developed abdominal pain.
Abdominal CT examination suggested abscessus and thus, the possibility of perforation was not excluded. It is more difficult to find lesions under laparoscopy and endoscopic treatment is associated with higher risks when perforation is suspected, thus the patient was recommended for exploratory laparotomy. However, the patient and her family refused open surgery and requested endoscopic investigation. However, certain difficulties and complications may arise with endoscopic treatment: 1) the FB stump may not be visible under the endoscope; 2) injury to the adjacent liver and pancreas can occur; 3) after removing the FB, the closed perforation cannot be treated under the endoscope; 4) massive upper gastrointestinal bleeding or perforation can occur during or after surgery. If any of the above conditions occurs, emergency surgery is required. During the operation, we attempted to find the end of the fishbone on the bulges of the ball using FB forceps (MTN-4GF-23, Nanjing minimally invasive), as the tail end could be seen faintly in the abscess. FB forceps were used to clamp the proximal end and a fishbone-like FB with a length of 5.5 cm was pulled out. The ulcer slightly oozed blood and two thrombins were sprayed to stop the bleeding. Fasting as well as acid inhibition and anti-infection medication were prescribed for the patient after surgery.
After treatment, the patient’s abdominal pain disappeared. Endoscopy was performed 1 week later and showed that the ulcer healed well. The patient was discharged and subsequent follow-ups revealed no further abdominal discomfort.