A 17-year-old Vietnamese female presented to the emergency department with chest pain, several weeks of fatigue, decreased appetite, a dry cough, and unintentional weight loss over 2 months. Her vital signs were normal and the physical exam was without virilization or cushingoid features. Physical exam was notable for clubbing and right flank tenderness. Initial laboratories obtained showed a normocytic anemia and normal electrolytes. CT-angiography of the chest revealed a 9.2 × 8 × 7.4 cm large heterogeneous hypervascular mass in the right lower lung, a similar-appearing 7.1 × 5.4 × 6.9 cm heterogeneous mass in the left adrenal gland, and a 3.4 cm hypodense mass in the right adrenal gland (shown in , ). CT abdomen and pelvis also showed a 1 cm lesion abutting the dorsal pancreas and a right adnexal enhancing mass.
Further laboratory testing showed normal tumor markers: CA 19-9, AFP, beta-Hcg, CA 125, and CEA. Dopamine, epinephrine and norepinephrine levels were normal. Urine metanephrine to creatinine ratio, free metanephrines, and normetanephrines were normal. HVA and VMA were done for neuroblastoma screening and were in normal ranges. Testing for Echinococcus, tuberculosis, and Coccidioides was negative. Endocrine workup was normal with 17-hydroxyprogesterone at 81 ng/dL, aldosterone 2.0 ng/dL, renin 1.5 ng/mL/h, DHEAS 37 μg/dL, testosterone 14 ng/dL, progesterone less than 10 ng/dL, ACTH 29 pg/mL, and AM cortisol 18.2 μg/dL (shown in ). She underwent interventional radiology-guided biopsy of the left adrenal mass and was discharged.
She was readmitted for chemotherapy after preliminary pathology from the adrenal mass returned ALK positive. Ancillary staining of the mass showed it was positive for ALK-1, WT1, and D240 , and it was sent to Mayo laboratory for consultation. MRI brain showed abnormal clival signal consistent with metastatic disease but no evidence of metastasis. MRI spine did show evidence of spinal metastasis. PET scan showed diffuse bony lesions. Due to evidence of metastasis and acute onset of hypoglossal nerve deficit, she received a 2-day course of palliative radiation therapy (8 Gy) to clival region and C4–C7. She was started on crizotinib, an ALK/ROS1 inhibitor, in December 2021. During her hospital stay, she endorsed persistent cough, headaches and also developed blurry vision after starting crizotinib, possibly a side effect of the medication. During this hospitalization, the final pathology from Mayo laboratory was received and was confirmed as a malignant ALK-positive neoplasm harboring DCTN1-ALK fusion transcript, likely representing ALK-positive histiocytosis. Immunohistochemistry performed showed CD163-positive cells, as well as scattered WT-1 positivity. Next-generation sequencing demonstrated the DCTN1-ALK fusion transcript . Follow-up CT abdomen and pelvis obtained 1 week after starting crizotinib showed a decrease in the size of lung and adrenal masses (shown in , ), with lung mass now 7.9 × 7.5 cm (previously 8.2 × 8), left adrenal mass now 7.6 × 5.6 (previously 8.2 × 6.2), and right adrenal mass 1.1 × 1.0 cm (previously 3 × 2 cm). She was discharged on crizotinib 400 mg BID.
ALK-positive histiocytosis was originally reported in infants but more recently has been reported in older children and young adults, particularly of Asian origin. Most of these cases have been reported to have a KIF5B-ALK fusion mutation; however, there are a few reports of DCTN1-ALK fusion that was seen in our patient. DCTN1-ALK fusion mutations have also been rarely reported in non-small cell lung cancer, inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, spindle cell variant of epithelioid cell histiocytoma, and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia. Tumors with ALK fusions have been shown to respond to ALK-inhibitor therapy.
She was seen a week later in oncology clinic, and the final pathology report showed the rare diagnosis of metastatic DCTN1-ALK fusion-positive histiocytosis. After 3 weeks on crizotinib, her hypoglossal nerve deficit resolved and headaches and cough had significantly improved. Follow-up PET scan 2 months later showed resolution of lesion in left occipital condyle and decreased avidity of the other bony lesions. The right lung mass and left adrenal mass had further decreased in size, and the right adrenal lesion was no longer seen. She continued on the same dose of crizotinib with good response. She had significant improvement in extracranial lesions on crizotinib, but May 2022 scans showed a small CNS lesion despite improved intracranial disease, suggesting sanctuary site disease on crizotinib. She was switched to lorlatinib, which has documented superior CNS penetration. Follow-up MRI brain 2 months later showed resolution of the left frontal lobe lesion. The most recent scan done in August 2022 demonstrated continued improvement while on lorlatinib, with right lower lobe mass and left adrenal mass continuing to decrease in size.