An 82-year-old white man with a medical history of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation for which coumarins were prescribed presented with an episode of macroscopic hematuria. A physical rectal examination revealed a diffusely indurated prostate and computed tomography (CT) showed normal aspect of his kidneys and bladder as well as an enlarged prostate. Laboratory analysis showed a white blood cell count within normal limits (6.69×109/L) and a slight increase in prostate-specific antigen from 4 to 9.4 ng/ml. A transrectal US of his prostate revealed a hypoechoic and hypervascular subcapsular area in the peripheral zone of his prostate with a differential diagnosis including diffuse carcinoma or granulomatous inflammation. An uneventful US-guided transrectal biopsy was performed on an out-patient basis, 7 days after anticoagulation therapy was ceased. Pathologic analysis of the biopsy specimen revealed a diffuse carcinoma of the peripheral zone of his prostate. Three days later, a massive rectal hemorrhage occurred, associated with hemodynamic shock (blood pressure 50/30 mmHg, heart rate 100 beats per minute). A good hemodynamic response was obtained after appropriate therapeutic management. A clinical examination revealed a nodular rectal area in the prostate bed without a large hematoma. Endoscopy revealed two active arterial bleeders in his lower rectum but endoscopic clipping failed. He was referred to the angiography suite for emergency interventional treatment. Selective angiography of his inferior mesenteric artery did not reveal any bleeding. Selective catheterization of the anterior division of his right internal iliac artery revealed a prostatic artery with an inferior and superior branch. With a microcatheter (Progreat 2.7, Terumo Europe, Leuven, Belgium), selective catheterization of his internal pudendal artery revealed an arteriovenous fistula (AVF) in the left prostatic body, fed from collaterals originating from his right inferior prostatic artery . No contrast extravasation was noted. Embolization with calibrated microparticles (Embosphere® 300–500 μ, Merit Medical, South Jordan, Utah, USA) was performed, followed by placement of three 4×4 mm microcoils (Target®, Boston Scientific Inc Natick, MA, USA) at the origin of the anastomosis with his left inferior prostatic artery . Control angiography following embolization showed complete occlusion of the treated artery without residual opacification of the AVF. Selective angiography of his left internal iliac artery showed a patent internal pudendal artery with normal opacification of his dorsal penile artery and without opacification of an AVF . He was discharged the next day without clinical signs of postembolization syndrome or lower urinary tract symptoms.