An 11-year-old girl showed proteinuria on a school urinalysis screening. She was taken to a hospital for investigation of upper eyelid edema. She was born at 26 weeks of gestation, with a birth weight of 526 g (standard deviation [SD], -2.7) and birth height of 30 cm (SD, -1.3), and she started growth hormone treatment at the age of 4 years and 5 months for her short stature. There was no medical or family history of kidney disease. She had no infection in the last few months, and her vital signs were normal. Her height was 137 cm, and her weight was 37 kg, which was 7 kg heavier than usual. Physical examination showed that she had marked generalized edema. She had no cutaneous purpura, abdominal pain, or joint pain, suggesting that she did not have IgA vasculitis. Urinalysis and urine chemistry results were as follows: urinary protein, 2165 mg/dL; urinary protein-creatinine ratio, 22 g/gCr; urinary red blood cell count, > 100 /high power field; and urinary β2-microglobulin, 8579 μg/L. The findings of laboratory examinations were as follows: normal complete blood cell count; serum total protein, 3.7 g/dL; serum albumin, 1.3 g/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 20 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 14 IU/L; lactate dehydrogenase, 159 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 383 IU/L; total bile acid, 1.1 μmol/L; ammonia, 33 μg/dL; total cholesterol, 666 mg/dL; triglyceride, 268 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen, 12.9 mg/dL; serum creatinine, 0.54 mg/dL; sodium, 135 mEq/L; potassium, 4.5 mEq/L; chloride, 107 mEq/L; calcium, 7.4 mg/dL; and C-reactive protein, 0.02 mg/dL. Immunological examination revealed serum IgG of 122 mg/dL, serum IgA of 82 mg/dL, C3c of 67 mg/dL (normal range: 73–138 mg/dL), C4 of 14.1 mg/dL (normal range: 11–31 mg/dL), CH50 of 28 U/mL, and antistreptolysin O of 44 IU/mL. Antinuclear, myeloperoxidase, and proteinase 3 antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. Screening for infectious diseases were negative for parvovirus B19 IgM and mycoplasma antibodies. Her physical and laboratory findings suggested no autoimmune diseases or infections. Hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C antibody test results were also negative. Liver disease-related IgA nephropathy was ruled out because ultrasonography and computed tomography revealed ascites in the absence of portosystemic shunt and cryoglobulinemic glomerulonephritis was ruled out because blood tests were negative for cryoglobulin. Based on these results, nephrotic nephritis with hypocomplementemia was suspected, and a renal biopsy was thus performed.
Light microscopic studies showed mesangial cell proliferation and increased mesangial matrix with lobulation in almost all glomeruli. Endocapillary proliferation in the glomeruli and a few neutrophil infiltrations in the capillaries of the glomeruli were observed . Additionally, periodic acid-methenamine-silver staining showed some double contours of the glomerular basement membrane ; these are all characteristic findings of MPGN. The size of the glomeruli was within the normal range, and there were 2.6 glomeruli per square millimeter. The glomerular density of 13 minimal change nephrotic syndrome patients (mean 11.8 ± 3.6 years) with normal birth weight was 3.6 ± 1.1 / per square millimeter , indicating that the glomerular density of this patient was within the normal range or slightly lower. Immunofluorescent studies showed that deposits of IgA and C3 were dominantly detected in the mesangial regions, and were also slightly detected along the capillary walls. In addition, IgA deposits were stronger than those of C3 . IgA subclass staining revealed stronger staining for IgA2 stains than for IgA1 stains . Electron microscopic studies showed electron-dense deposits in the subendothelial, subepithelial, and paramesangial regions. Mesangial cell interposition was observed . The subepithelial deposits were not hump-like and podocytes were slightly sparse. No disease-specific glomerular deposit structures such as renal amyloidosis or monoclonal immunoglobulin deposition disease were observed on EM . Based on these aforementioned findings, we diagnosed this girl with IgA-dominant MPGN. Hypoalbuminemia was treated by intravenous infusion of albumin, and furosemide was also administered. After the biopsy, the patient was treated with three courses of methylprednisolone pulse therapy (MPT; one course; 30 mg/kg of methylprednisolone for three consecutive days), followed by oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) and mizoribine (MZR). Lisinopril was used to treat hypertension and proteinuria. Although hypocomplementemia improved after the three courses of MPT, nephrotic-range proteinuria and hypoalbuminemia remained; therefore, two courses of MPT were additionally administered, and the immunosuppressant was changed from MZR to cyclosporine (CsA). The dose of CsA was initially started at 2 mg/kg/day. The CsA blood level target for single-point concentration 2 h post-dose was set at 600–700 ng/mL for approximately 2 months, after which the dosage was adjusted to 450–550 ng/mL. Subsequently, the urinary protein-creatinine ratio decreased from 4 to 0.8 g/gCr, and serum albumin tended to increase. She was discharged on the 155th day of hospitalization. The dose of prednisolone was changed every other day and gradually decreased. Decreased urinary protein was detected 13 months after the treatment . A second renal biopsy was performed 22 months after the start of treatment, and improvement in glomerular lesions was found . Cyclosporine nephropathy was not observed. On the second biopsy, positive deposits of IgA were detected mainly in the mesangial regions and also slightly along the capillary walls. Deposits of C3 and IgA1 were not detected, but very slight deposits of IgA2 were present in the mesangial regions and along the capillary walls. . No deterioration of kidney function was observed after almost 2 years of treatment. The levels of C3 improved after three courses of methylprednisolone pulse therapy, and has remained normal since then. Posterior subcapsular cataract was considered as an adverse effect of steroids because no deterioration in visual acuity was observed during the follow-up period.