A 70-year-old Japanese man, who had undergone esophagectomy with gastric conduit reconstruction via the antesternal route for spontaneous esophageal rupture 28 years previously, was hospitalized due to redness of the precordial skin, which had persisted for 1 month . Gastric juice was discharged from the gastric conduit through the skin fistula. He had taken low-dose aspirin due to a past history of left carotid artery obstruction and stenosis of the right carotid artery but had not taken proton pump inhibitors (PPIs). Laboratory studies showed mild inflammatory findings (WBC 9200/ul, C-reactive protein 5.7 mg/dl). No evidence of Helicobacter pylori infection was seen.
Computed tomography (CT) revealed a fistula between the thickened gastric conduit and skin . He was diagnosed with a gastric conduit ulcer that penetrated through to the chest wall and was managed conservatively with fasting, the administration of a PPI and antibiotics, and continuous compression of the gastric conduit over the skin with a cotton ball. Upper gastrointestinal fiberscopy on day 14 revealed the ulcer was located at the anterior wall of the middle gastric conduit . An esophageal biopsy revealed no evidence of malignancy.
The fistula healed with conservative management. Although the fistula relapsed twice on the 37th and 58th days, respectively, it healed with conservative management.
On the 174th day from the onset, discharge was recognized again. A fistula of 1.5 cm in diameter was observed on the operation scar of the precordium at the nipple line, from which the gastric mucosa was seen. The skin around the fistula was reddish . On the 196th day, when the infection was completely controlled, resection of the refractory cutaneous fistula was performed with the transfer of a pectoralis major muscle pedicle flap and a split-thickness skin graft.
First, a skin incision of 3 cm × 2 cm in size was made on the fistula. The area around the fistula was debrided and the gastric conduit was partially resected together with the fistula. The wall defect was closed with interrupted layer-to-layer anastomosis (3-0 PDS®). Then, the tissue defect resulting from the resection was filled with a right pectoralis major muscle pedicle flap with the 2nd to 4th penetrating branches of the internal thoracic artery as a vascular pedicle. Finally, the muscle pedicle flap was covered with a split-thickness skin graft harvested from the left thigh .
The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course and was discharged on the 36th post-operative day. He has been free from relapse for 2 years .