On October 9, 2022, a 32-year-old male farmer sought treatment in the outpatient department with complaints of “abdominal pain and fever.” The patient had developed a persistent, intensifying burning sensation in the upper abdomen three days earlier, which was progressively worse, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, fever, fatigue, cough, sputum production, dizziness, headache, and shortness of breath. His temperature had risen to 38.5 °C without any apparent cause.
The patient had a medical history of binge eating and alcohol abuse, diabetes mellitus, and chronic pancreatitis for many years. Most notably, in 2020, the patient developed septic shock as a result of a B. pseudomallei infection. Then, in 2021, he suffered a recurrence of septic shock, this time due to severe pneumonia and suppurative knee arthritis. Following treatment, he was discharged once his condition improved.
The patient's temperature was 38.3 °C, pulse 132 beats/min, respiratory rate 20 breaths/min, blood pressure 110/92 mmHg, and weight 40kg. His symptoms acutely appeared, with notable abdominal distension and abdominal tenderness (3+), along with rebound tenderness (3+), especially severe in the upper left abdomen. Laboratory examination showed hemodiastase 972U/L, urinary amylase 1420 U/L, blood glucose 13.36 mol/L, CRP 178.1 mg/L, and procalcitonin 5.44 mg/L.
Ultrasound imaging highlighted the pancreatic head as having diffuse, calcified, and echogenic characteristics (A). Further CT examination showed a clearer picture, showing swelling of the pancreas with flocculent exudate in the surrounding area, suggesting the exacerbation of chronic pancreatitis (B). Additionally, the scan revealed bilateral infectious lesions in the lungs and pleural effusions on both sides (C).
By the third day of the patient's hospitalization, B. pseudomallei was detected in blood, sputum, and pancreatic drainage samples (A). Identification of the pathogen was perfomed by MALDI-TOF MS (RUO database) and confirmed through whole genome sequencing. The genome assemblies of B. pseudomallei strain (T165) in this study are available in the figshare (DOI:10.6084/m9.figshare.23902500). After 1 day of cultured on blood agar plates at 37 °C, the colonies were small in size, with a smooth, milk-like and slightly viscous texture. After an additional two days for cultivation, these colonies gradually became pale white, round and opaque (B). Broth microdilution method was employed for antimicrobial susceptibility testing. The isolate was susceptible to amoxicillin-clavulanate, ceftazidime, imipenem, doxycycline and co-trimoxazole, except for intermediate sensitivity to chloramphenicol.
Acute attack of chronic pancreatitis and pulmonary infection was diagnosed on the first day of admission, and the patient was initially treated with intravenous ampicillin-sulbactam (2 g/dose, twice daily) combined with metronidazole (0.5 g/dose, twice daily) to control infection, along with protamine insulin to manage blood glucose levels. Despite these interventions, the patient's condition took a turn for the worse, with continuous thrombocytopenia, chills, intensified fever, and his shortness of breath progressed, ultimately resulting in shock. In response to the patient's deteriorating state, on the second day of admission, he was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for further treatment, where pancreatic intubation was performed for pus-drainage, and a ventilator was placed for assisted breathing. Continuous renal replacement therapy was initiated at the bedside, which aids in clearing inflammatory mediators from the bloodstream. Additionally, the patient received other symptomatic treatments to address his symptoms and stabilize his condition. For infection control, the patient was started on intravenous meropenem (2 g/dose, every 8 hours) for a two-week period. Following the antimicrobial susceptibility results, ceftazidime (1 g/dose, every 6 hours) was subsequently used for an additional three weeks as part of a de-escalation strategy leading up to discharge. The patient also received platelet transfusions. After 38 days in the hospital, the patient felt well with no discomfort. He was discharged in stable condition, with all symptoms resolved and a complete absence of flocculent exudate around the pancreas, as confirmed by CT (D), and the inflammatory foci in the lungs had marked absorption (E). Post-discharge, the patient continued to take oral co-trimoxazole tablets (0.96g/dose, twice daily) for six months to maintain infection control, and insulin to control blood sugar. Six months after discharge, the patient was regularly followed up with, and he had made a full recovery.