A one-year-and-10-month-old Taiwanese girl was admitted to our hospital because of acute gastroenteritis with severe vomiting and diarrhea for two days.
The index patient was referred to our genetic clinic because of unusually severe hypokalemia. She had been recently admitted to our hospital because of acute gastroenteritis with severe vomiting and diarrhea for 2 d. On admission, we noted generalized weakness. Laboratory investigations showed severe hypokalemia (1.9 mmol/L) . The patient was treated with intravenous potassium supplementation (potassium chloride, 0.15 mEq/kg of body weight per hour) under the diagnosis of hypokalemia related to acute gastroenteritis. The patient’s symptoms gradually improved after treatment. Therefore, the patient was discharged, and post-discharge follow-up was suggested.
Based on the birth history, the girl was previously healthy and denied any systemic diseases.
During a consultation held at our hospital, the patient’s mother said that her 7-year-old daughter was also diagnosed with hypokalemia at another hospital, but no further investigations were performed. In addition, her 17-year-old daughter had been experiencing muscle cramps and muscle pain associated with a severe reduction in daily activities for several years.
No history of salt-craving, tetany, motor developmental delay, arthralgia, or arthritis was observed. Her growth parameters and blood pressure were also within the normal range.
During outpatient follow-up, recurrent severe hypokalemia (2.6 mmol/L) was observed. Subsequent laboratory investigations, including blood analysis, showed metabolic alkalosis with hypokalemia (2.9 mmol/L) and borderline hypomagnesemia (1.9 mg/dL). Normal thyroid, adrenal function, plasma renin, and aldosterone levels were noted. Urinalysis revealed renal potassium wasting (urine potassium 39 mmol/L, urine potassium-creatinine ratio 15.6 mmol/mmol, transtubular potassium gradient (TTKG) 8.9), increased level of urine chloride (64 mmol/day), and hypocalciuria (0.4 mg/dL, urine calcium to creatinine ratio 0.01). Based on the above laboratory findings, a renal tubular disorder was highly suspected. Further, family history revealed that the hypokalemia might have been due to genetic processes.
Laboratory investigations showed that potassium levels were as follows: eldest daughter, 1.9 mmol/L; second eldest daughter, 4.1 mmol/L; third eldest daughter, 2.1 mmol/L; and index patient, 2.4 mmol/L. In addition, the potassium levels of the mother and father were 4.5 mmol/L and 4.2 mmol/L, respectively. To date, some autosomal recessive tubular disorders presenting with hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and hypocalciuria have been established in the family.
Venous blood samples were obtained from the three affected individuals with severe hypokalemia and their parents after detailed informed consent. Blood samples were sent to the DNA diagnostics laboratory (SOFIVA GENOMICS). According to their established protocols, the laboratory performed an exon-wide sequencing analysis of the gene SLC12A3. Genetic analysis of the gene SLC12A3 in the three affected individuals with severe hypokalemia revealed compound heterozygous mutations of the gene SLC12A3: c.179C>T in exon1 and c.965-1_976delinsACCGAAAATTTT in exon8, respectively. These two mutations are known to be associated with GS . Both parents were heterozygous carriers of GS-associated mutations found in their daughters. The mother was the carrier of c.179C>T, and the father was the carrier of c.965-1_976delinsACCGAAAATTTT (see Figure ).