An 81-year-old woman, who had a history of resection of a benign eccrine spiradenoma from the parietal scalp 12 years earlier, presented with a large swelling on the same region that had been growing over the preceding 5 years without any neurological deficit. Radiological examinations demonstrated that the lesion was a single, large cystic mass invading bilateral parietal bones and attached to but not occluding the superior sagittal sinus (SSS) . Whole-body positron emission tomography revealed no lymph node or distant metastases.
The lesion was excised along with surrounding scalp and bone, and detached from the SSS. The dura mater covering the SSS was electrocoagulated. Reconstruction of the removed skull and scalp was then performed using titanium mesh and a pedicled skin flap from the occipital region which was replaced by a skin graft from the femoral area . Histopathological examination revealed the features of low-grade eccrine SC. Two distinct cell types were observed, comprising eosinophilic cuticular cells surrounded by poroid cells with a high nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio forming palisading or solid nests, accompanied by glandular lumens and ducts. Overall cytoplasmic atypia, some mitotic figures and partial loss of the two-cell structures were also observed . Cytokeratin 7 was broadly expressed, and Ki-67 labeling index was approximately 30% . Close follow-up was continued considering the risk of recurrence.
Thirty-three months after the first surgery, solid tumor was seen to have recurred in the SSS and a second resection was performed . The tumor was totally excised, again preserving the SSS, adjacent dura and pedicled scalp flap . Histopathological diagnosis was similar to the previous lesion, other than the loss of the large cyst formation. No adjuvant therapy was administered, in consideration of the lack of evidence of efficacy, the age of the patient, and a recent history of ischemic brainstem infarction prior to the second surgery.
Twelve months after the second surgery, a heterogeneous contrast-enhancing mass was observed in the epidural region with extracranial extension pushing against the titanium mesh. The SSS was compressed but not occluded, and the scalp skin was about to rupture . No metastatic lesion was evident on whole-body examination.
The third operation was performed with resection of the skin flap, titanium mesh, and surrounding bone edge. The tumor invading the SSS could not be resected due to marked bleeding. An artificial bone flap made from polyethylene was used for the cranioplasty instead of metallic material, which would reduce the scattered radiation dose to the surrounding tissue. Scalp reconstruction was performed with a new pedicled skin flap from the left temporal region . The histopathological diagnosis was compatible with the first lesion. Two months after the third surgery, the patient received 6 MV X-ray EBRT using simultaneous integrated boost (SIB) volumetric-modulated arc therapy (VMAT) with the prescribed dose of 50 Gy in 25 fractions to the planning target volume margin (residual gross tumor invading the SSS + 5 mm, tumor cavity + 3 mm) as well as SIB with 57.5 Gy to the residual gross tumor margin. The median dose to the gross tumor volume was 60.4 Gy. The residual tumor rapidly shrank and had vanished by 3 months after completion of the EBRT .
Twenty months after the third surgery, the patient developed left hemiparesis and a recurrent tumor was observed with intracerebral extension arising from the SSS forming a cystic lesion . The patient concurrently developed rectal carcinoma with lower gastrointestinal bleeding. Palliative endoscopic partial resection of the cystic lesion was performed, followed by stereotactic radiotherapy using CyberKnife® (Accuray Incorporated, Sunnyvale, CA) with 42.2 Gy in 10 fractions to the margin of the residual cyst wall and the tumor involving the SSS . Histopathological examination demonstrated that the features of low-grade SC had been sustained .
The patient was transferred to another hospital and died 7 months after the last treatment, 7 years after the first surgery, with no apparent swelling of the scalp.