A 66-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital with a 7-year history of gallbladder stones, detected during a physical examination, leading to a proposed laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Preoperative abdominal ultrasonography revealed multiple gallstones and cysts in the left lobe of the liver. Plain computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen revealed low-density lesions in the left hepatic lobe, prompting the recommendation for an enhanced abdominal CT examination.
The patient had no prior history of surgery but had a history of multiple chronic conditions, including hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and atrial fibrillation. The patient consistently adhered to the medication regimen and reported satisfactory management.
The patient denied any family history of tumors.
The patient was alert and in good condition. No abnormal symptoms such as jaundice, nausea, vomiting, or acid reflux were noted. An abdominal examination revealed no tenderness, rebound tenderness, or muscle tension. No abnormal masses were palpable, and the Murphy's sign was negative.
Total bilirubin, 20.6 μmol/L (reference range: 0-23 μmol/L); direct bilirubin, 7 μmol/L (reference range: 0-4 μmol/L); indirect bilirubin, 13.6 μmol/L (reference range: 0-17 μmol/L); alanine transaminase (ALT), 13 U/L (reference range: 9-50 U/L); aspartate transaminase (AST), 19 U/L (reference range: 15-40 U/L); carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 5.46 ng/mL (reference range: 0-5 ng/mL); alpha fetoprotein, 2.61 ng/mL (reference range: 0-20 ng/mL); carbohydrate antigen 199 (CA199), 29.88 U/mL (reference range: 0-37 U/mL). The rest of the laboratory results were normal. Pathological examination of the lesion revealed an IPNB with severe epithelial dysplasia or high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia .
Abdominal enhanced CT arterial phase , abdominal enhanced CT venous phase , and an initial diagnosis of a cystic, solid lesion in the left lobe of the liver with dilatation of the distal intrahepatic bile ducts were made; cholangiocarpal cystadenoma was ruled out, and magnetic resonance (MR) enhancement examination was recommended. Subsequently, abdominal MR imaging (MRI) + MR cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) (enhanced) examination confirmed the presence of cystic and solid lesions in the left hepatic lobe, along with dilation of the left intrahepatic bile duct, indicative of IPNB.