A 43-year-old woman, 156 cm in height and 69 kg in weight, who was employed as a cashier in a bakery, was admitted to the department of pain medicine for pain in both of her legs.
The pain had persisted for 3 d, with substantial movement restriction. The patient denied any history of trauma or vaccine injection. She had initially undergone an ultrasound examination of her lower limbs, which had ruled out arteriovenous thrombosis. Despite receiving therapy comprising non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and rest, under the assumption that her pain was caused by muscle strain, the pain and swelling increased and the patient developed a fever and chills.
The patient had no history of diabetes.
The patient did not report having experienced any injury or trauma, and had no recent history of infection, foreign travel, or immunosuppression.
We admitted the patient to investigate the etiology of her fever and pain. Upon physical examination her temperature was 39.1°C, pulse rate was 90 beats/min, and blood pressure was 100/65 mmHg. Her visual analog scale score was 8 cm. No wounds or breaks in the skin were noted on her lower extremities. She had tenderness in both her thighs and left knee joint, as well as in her bilateral gluteus media and small gluteus muscles. Both of the patient’s thighs were swollen and had a sensation of warmth, although no erythema, ecchymosis, or fluctuance were noted in these areas. Respiratory, neurological, and cardiovascular examination results were all normal.
A hematological examination conducted upon the patient’s admission to hospital revealed leukocytosis [white blood cell (WBC) = 19.67 × 109/L] and neutrophilia (neutrophils = 17.92 × 109/L; 91.1%). Her hemoglobin concentration was 83 g/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration was 192 mg/L (normal value: < 7 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 96 mm/h (normal value: < 20 mm/h), and her creatine kinase concentration was 306 IU/L (normal value = 24–170 IU/L). Routine urine and stool cultures, liver and kidney function, electrolyte levels, and myocardial enzyme profile were all within the normal range. Tests for autoantibodies associated with rheumatic diseases were negative.
Plain radiographs revealed no bony abnormalities of the knee joint. A lower limb venous ultrasonography excluded phlebothrombosis. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis revealed no abnormalities. As we suspected that the patient might have pyomyositis, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, which revealed widespread infiltrative edema within the vastus lateralis muscle, indicative of myositis with a possible abscess. We observed no signs or symptoms of knee joint effusion, osteomyelitis, or infiltration.
After obtaining blood cultures, we started the patient on empirical antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone. She remained febrile during her first 3 d of hospitalization, and after 4 d of antibiotic treatment her temperature decreased to normal levels. Blood cultures taken upon presentation revealed no growth after 3 d. Subsequent laboratory tests revealed improvements in leukocyte (11.31 × 109/L) and neutrophil (9.06 × 109/L) concentrations.
Because we suspected that the patient might have pyomyositis and as 7 d of antibiotic treatment alone did not significantly relieve the swelling or pain in her legs, a repeat MRI of the thighs and hip joint was performed with enhanced contrast. This revealed multiple pockets of pus in the vastus lateralis and gluteal muscles . We performed needle aspiration of these abscesses with ultrasound guidance and local anesthesia, draining about 40 mL (30 mL from the left leg and 10 mL from the right) of purulent material. The purulent content was sent for culturing. The patient’s condition improved after aspiration. Physical examination revealed a reduction in muscle tenderness and localized indurations. A follow-up ultrasound done 3 d after aspiration revealed the accumulation of residual fluid measuring 1.5 cm × 1.2 cm. The patient declined a second round of aspiration. Staphylococcus aureus was observed in the aspiration culture.