A 6-month-old female (body height 65 cm, body weight 6.6 kg) with tetralogy of Fallot, pulmonary artery atresia, and major aortopulmonary collateral artery (MAPCA) underwent palliative reconstruction of the right ventricular outflow tract and unifocalization of the MAPCA. Anesthesia was induced with sevoflurane, and the trachea was intubated with an uncuffed 3.0-mm tube. After induction, anesthesia was maintained with fentanyl, midazolam, and rocuronium. A total dose of 100 mcg/kg fentanyl and 1.5 mg/kg midazolam was administered during the operation. The operation was uneventful until separation from cardiopulmonary bypass, when her oxygen saturation could not be maintained due to the presumably high resistance of the pulmonary artery. Thus, she was transferred to the ICU with the sternum open, supported by venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). She was weaned off ECMO on the third day of admission (day 3) to the ICU. However, she required prolonged mechanical ventilation for the following reasons. First, venoarterial ECMO support was reinitiated on day 6 because an attempt of delayed sternal closure led to severe desaturation due to pulmonary hypertensive crisis. Second, percutaneous balloon dilatation of the left pulmonary artery stenosis performed on day 13 was complicated by severe bleeding from the trachea. Furthermore, on day 28, she experienced non-obstructive mesenteric ischemia and underwent exploratory laparotomy, resulting in marked abdominal distention and generalized edema.
She was finally weaned off ECMO support on day 36. The patient was sedated with dexmedetomidine, midazolam, fentanyl, and chlorpromazine hydrochloride during treatment in the ICU, but the drug doses were gradually decreased, resulting in minimum use of sedatives on day 52 (fentanyl 0.2 mcg/kg/h, midazolam 0.03 mg/kg/h, and dexmedetomidine 0.2 mcg/kg/h). On day 52, she met the extubation criteria with a rapid shallow breathing index of 6.5 and improved dynamic Crs at 0.65 mL/cmH2O/kg with no clinical signs of high airway resistance. Thus, her trachea was extubated on day 52. After extubation, ventilation and oxygenation were not problematic with high flow nasal cannula support for several hours with no clinical signs of upper airway stenosis. However, she became restless with sternal retraction several hours after extubation, suggesting increased respiratory effort. The arterial blood gas analysis showed elevated pCO2 (53 mmHg), and she was reintubated 20 h after extubation.
After reintubation, Edi monitoring was initiated to assess diaphragm function. Measurements were carried out using a 12 Fr Neurally Adjusted Ventilatory Assist (NAVA) catheter attached to a SERVO-i ventilator (Maquet Critical Care, Solna, Sweden). The catheter position was adjusted with the Edi catheter position tool equipped in the NAVA software and confirmed by daily chest X-rays. Mechanical ventilation was managed by the Synchronized Intermittent Mandatory Ventilation (SIMV) mode with pressure support (PS) and positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) properly applied to ensure respiratory muscle unloading. Her typical Edi values during SIMV were in the range of 10–20 mcV. Daily SBTs from 15 min to 30 min (PS 5 cmH2O, PEEP 5 cmH2O) were performed from day 53. The maximal Edi and NVE values were recorded during the SBTs . In summary, the Edi during the SBTs was higher than 70 mcV just after the reintubation, indicating a strong inspiratory effort to deliver normal tidal volume; the Edi decreased gradually day by day while the tidal volume showed nearly constant values, leading to improvement of NVE. On day 58, her Edi values during the SBTs were 10–20 mcV, comparable to those during SIMV, and her trachea was extubated. After extubation, the patient received high-flow nasal cannula support and did not experience reintubation owing to respiratory collapse. She was discharged from the hospital without oxygen support on day 158.