History of Presentation
A 53-year-old man with a history of multiple previous percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) treatments had an angina on effort with Canadian Cardiovascular Society class II. Coronary angiography (CAG) revealed 90% stenosis in the stent implanted 4 years before, and he was admitted for revascularization.

Past Medical History
Four years before, the patient underwent catheter ablation for symptomatic paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. At the same time, he was also aware of angina on effort, and CAG performed during the ablation procedure showed 90% stenosis with severe calcification in the proximal segment of the left anterior descending artery (LAD). He then underwent PCI. Despite extensive preparation with rotational atherectomy of 1.25-mm burr and predilatation by 2.5-mm cutting balloon, a 2.75- × 20-mm drug-eluting stent was insufficiently expanded even after postdilatation with a 2.75-mm noncompliant balloon. Two years before, the patient complained of angina symptoms and CAG showed in-stent restenosis (ISR) of 90% stenosis. We performed revascularization, but high-pressure dilation of 12 atm with a 2.75-mm cutting balloon and 25 atm with a 3.0-mm noncompliant balloon did not provide sufficient dilation eventually.

Differential Diagnosis
Other causes of chest pain were ruled out. Chest radiography did not show any signs of heart failure or respiratory disease. Despite a history of catheter ablation for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, he had been in sinus rhythm and there was no evidence of tachycardia event. His chest pain was similar to the symptoms which he felt at previous PCIs.

Investigations
The 12-lead electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm and no significant ST-segment changes, and transthoracic echocardiogram showed no significant asynergy and preserved left ventricular systolic function with an ejection fraction of 74%. Moreover, myocardial perfusion single photon emission computed tomography implied anterior ischemia and CAG showed 90% ISR with severe calcification in the proximal LAD.

Management
Via a right distal radial artery approach with a 6-F Judkins Left 4.0 guide catheter (Mach 1; Boston Scientific) a guidewire (SION blue; Asahi Intecc) was crossed into the distal LAD successfully. Supported with a guide extension catheter (GUIDEPLUS, NIPRO), optical coherence tomography (OCT) (Dragonfly OPTIS, Abbott Vascular) examination was performed and we found circumferential thick calcification outside of the stent. Even though 3.0-mm scoring balloon inflation with up to 24 atm, the lesion proved resistant to expansion. Then, we exchanged to 7-F SPB 3.5 guide catheter (Hyperion, Asahi Intecc) to enforce the backup power and 1.75-mm burr rotational atherectomy was performed. Even after rotational atherectomy, high-pressure dilatation with a 3.0-mm scoring balloon up to 24 atm again did not provide adequate stent expansion. Therefore, we decided on a strategy of treatment by intravascular lithotripsy (IVL). A lithotripsy balloon 3.0 × 12 mm (Shockwave Medical) was positioned across the underexpanded segment of the stent. The balloon was inflated to 4 atm and 10 shockwave pulses were delivered at a rate of 1 pulse per second, following which the balloon was inflated further to 6 atm for 5 to 10 seconds, which was repeated multiple times, and then excellent dilation was seen at the second 10 pulses. Additional 40 pulses were delivered eventually, and the stent appeared to have expanded fully on repeat angiography and OCT observation. Finally, the lesion was dilated with a 3.0-mm drug-coated balloon (SeQuent Please NEO, NIPRO) up to 6 atm. We confirmed sufficient stent and lumen expansion on angiogram and OCT with the final lumen area of 7.08 mm2 at underexpanded stent segment. Therefore, we finished the PCI procedure without any complications, and the patient was discharged 2 days after PCI.

Follow-Up
During the outpatient clinic follow-up, there were no clinical events and the patient did not complain of angina symptoms. Seven months later, follow-up CAG accompanied with OCT and coronary angioscopy (CAS) imaging were conducted. On CAG, there was no stent restenosis with patent stent. OCT revealed homogeneous neointimal coverage of stent struts with sustained acute lumen gain and no evidence of stent recoil or ISR. Notably, post-PCI fractured thick calcium outside the stent at the index PCI had disappeared. In addition, CAS showed the stable white color neointima and a few stent struts with dull light reflection