A 16-year-old boy was admitted to the local health center for evaluation of dyspnea, cough, chest pain and a body temperature of 39°C. He was normotensive with a heart rate of 115 beats per minute and a respiratory rate of 25 breaths per minute. The complete blood count revealed elevated white blood cells (15.130/μl) and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 105 mm. Serum electrolytes, hepatic and renal function tests were normal.
He reported that the symptoms had occurred after attending a party for teenagers, during which he had consumed a large quantity of alcohol and had an episode of vomiting. He also reported that he had practiced a fire-eating performance during the party using liquid paraffin, without knowledge of inhaling any of it. A chest radiograph showed infiltration in the right middle lobe which was diagnosed as aspiration pneumonia, and he was treated at the local health center with a combination of antibiotics (a macrolide and a second-generation cephalosporin). After 5 days of treatment, because of clinical deterioration, he was referred to a pulmonary clinic.
Spirometry revealed severe restriction of lung function (a forced vital capacity 68% of the normal value). Arterial blood gas measurements were within normal ranges: pH = 7.38, pCO2 = 36.3 mmHg, pO2 = 98.5 mmHg and sO2 = 97.4%. A chest computed tomography scan was performed, which showed consolidation with an air bronchogram in the right middle lobe, and areas of atelectasis and ground glass opacities in the middle and lower right lobes .
Bronchoscopy presented inflamed, hyperemic mucosa, especially on the right side. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid was hemorrhagic and revealed cytoplasmic vacuolation of the macrophages, lipid-laden alveolar macrophages detected by lipid staining and oil-red-O stain, and neutrophilia (23%; Figure ). Owing to the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid findings and the history of fire-eating, the patient was diagnosed with hydrocarbon pneumonitis and was treated with systemic steroids (intravenous prednisolone 25 mg × 2) and intravenous antibiotics. Steroids were prescribed for 21 days: 6 days during the patient's hospitalization followed by tapering doses over the next 15 days. There was significant clinical and radiologic resolution 6 days after treatment was initiated .