The patient, an 11-year-old female, has been suffering of short stature for 6 years before being admitted to the hospital. The girl was the fifth child born to a nonconsanguineous couple. She was born naturally at full term, with a low birth weight and height, and was breastfed. After the age of 5, the patient’s height is lower than that of children of the same age. After admission to our hospital, Blood tests showed the decreased levels of phosphorus to 0.80 mmol/L (normal range: 0.96–1.62 mmol/L), 1,25-(OH)2-D to 11.39 pg/ml (normal range: 20–100 pg/ml), tubular reabsorption of phosphate (TRP) to 83.7% (normal range: 84 to 96%) and increased levels of alkaline phosphatase to 1427.40 U/L (normal range: 45–125 U/L). The other electrolytes, thyroid hormone, 24-hour urine calcium levels and ratio of maximum rate of renal tubular reabsorption of phosphate to glomerular filtration rate (TMP/GFR) were unremarkable. The patient’s siblings and parents blood phosphorus results revealed that one of the patient’s sisters had low blood phosphorus, and bowed legs were the only clinical manifestation. Here are the patient’s laboratory test results along with their corresponding normal reference ranges.
Table Phosphate clearance test results: after consuming 300 ml of distilled water on an empty stomach, the following measurements were taken 2 hours later; TRP: tubular reabsorption of phosphate; TMP/GFR: ratio of maximum rate of renal tubular reabsorption of phosphate to glomerular filtration rate.
Hand X-ray showed left distal ulnar radius consistent with rickets in active phase , radiographs of growth plates demonstrate metaphyseal widening, cupping, lucency and flaring, possible old fracture of the distal radius on the left side, and bone age comparable to the girl’s standard of 9 years; renal scan suggested a strong echogenic cluster of about 6 mm in the right renal pelvis and calyces ; the chest radiograph showed reduced bone density in the bones within the scan area ; previous bone X-rays of both hands suggested that the hands and wrist joints were dysplastic and rickets was considered; radiographs of both lower limbs suggested that rickets was present in both lower limbs with bowed legs. Pure tone audiometry: the average hearing threshold at speech frequencies of 20 dB in both ears. The conductance map shows a binaural (type A) curve, no otoacoustic emissions elicited in either ear. Auditory brainstem: binaural hearing thresholds of 25dBnHL, suggestive of normal hearing.
A case is reported in this paper. The proband’s parents are not consanguineous. With the informed consent of the patients and family members, whole exome sequencing analysis was performed and showed that the proband harbored the c.1402C > T; p.R468W in theSLC34A3gene , this variant has been described by Bergwitz et al. 2006 . Sanger sequencing was performed to verify this variant in other family members. The proband’s mother and father carry a heterozygous variant of the gene, and the proband’s sister had a homozygous variant. The proband also harbored a c.3917C > T (p.A1306V) homozygous variant in theLRP5gene . The proband’s mother and father carried a heterozygous variant in the gene, but the proband’s sister was normal.
Therefore, combined with the clinical manifestations of the patient, the genetic testing results and family analysis can be used to diagnose hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria. The relevant manifestations of the patient and her relatives are as follows .