On July 24, 2022, a 4-year-old pregnant Simmental beef cow (approximately 600 kg, 268 days gestation) stopped eating and had not drunk water for 8 days. The cow was not producing any feces despite being given 1 kg of sodium sulfate and 8 l of vegetable oil twice.
Primary symptoms
The affected cow had an increased abdominal circumference , was dehydrated (as evident by the recession of the eyes in the orbits and skin tent duration >2 seconds), and transabdominal palpation revealed a large accumulation of fluid in the rumen. The cow had a body temperature of 39.4°C, respiration rate of 42 breaths/minute, and heart rate of 74 beats/minute. The left 1–3 ribs had high-pitched “pinging” based on auscult ation and percussion. The right abomasum area was enlarged , which was hard and clearly defined on palpation. On rectal examination, the intestine was found to be empty, the intestinal wall was dry, and a small amount of black sticky feces was attached to the rectum . The fetus was confirmed to be alive by the rectal touch of the uterus.
Laboratory examination
Blood routine examination showed an elevated white blood cell count of 18.4 × 109/l (reference range: 4.9–12.0 × 109/l) and neutrophil count of 9.6 × 109/l (reference range: 1.8–6.3 × 109/l). There were also marked increases in the number of red blood cells (10.8 × 1012/l; reference range: 5.1–7.6 × 1012/l), hemoglobin content (154 g/l; reference range: 85–122 g/l), and hematocrit (0.75 l/l; reference range: 0.22–0.33 l/l).
Biochemical results showed reduced potassium ions (3.2 mmol/l; reference range: 3.9–5.8 mmol/l), chloride ions (88 mmol/l; reference range: 95–110 mmol/l), and calcium ions (2.0 mmol/l; reference range: 2.43–3.10 mmol/l), with elevated creatinine (384.46 μmol/l; reference range: 88–175 μmol/l), urea nitrogen (28.2 mmol/l; reference range: 2.0–9.6 mmol/l), total bilirubin (19.23 μmol/l; reference range: 0.17–8.55 μmol/l), and γ-glutamyltransferase (29.7 U/l; reference range: 6.1–17.4 U/l).
X-ray examination revealed a metallic foreign body in the reticulum . The rumen fluid pH was approximately 8.5. Based on the above results, the cow was diagnosed with TR and AI. Based on previous reports , the diagnosis of TR can be confirmed by foreign body tests and X-ray examination. However, the differential diagnoses include forestomach atony (FA), rumen obstruction (RO), omasal obstruction (OO), left displaced abomasum (LDA), abomasal torsion (AT), and intestinal obstruction (IO) .
Treatment plan
Both TR and AI were treated surgically. To save the fetus, a cesarean section was performed on the cow before the two operations were carried out. Medication was administered 3 hours before surgery to correct the dehydration, electrolyte disturbances (hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, and hypochloremia), and acid-base disturbances (metabolic alkalosis). describes the specific treatment plan in the present case.
Antibiotics and anti-inflammatory agents were administered in the following preoperative injections: (i) 500 ml Ringer’s solution, 5 mg vitamin C, and 50 ml of 10% potassium chloride; (ii) 100 ml of 10% glucose and 500 ml of 10% calcium gluconate; and (iii) 500 ml of 5% glucose and 5 g ampicillin, each as a one-time intravenous injection; and (iv) 0.3 g meloxicam as a one-time intramuscular injection.
Before surgery, the accumulated fluid in the rumen was extracted by inserting a gastric tube via the oral cavity, further relieving the abdominal pressure. After local-infiltration anesthesia with a 0.5% procaine solution, an incision was made in the middle of the paralumbar fossa in the lef t flank to open the abdominal cavity. Intraperitoneal exploration rev ealed that the wall of the reticulum had adhered to the diaphragm, although no inflammatory purulent exudate from the abdomen. The omasum was found to be approximately 0.5 times larger than normal and located in a more ventral position than normal. The volume of the abomasum was approximately 5–7 times normal and was very firm on palpation. The bowel was empty and the fetu s was active. The cesarean section was then performed. Part of the uterus was pulled out at the incision, the uterus was cut open, and the fetus was removed. The uterus was then sutured. Subsequently, the rumen was cut open and the wire attached to the wall of the reticulum was removed. The rumen was then sutured.
The abomasum was cut open to eva cuate its contents. Xylazine hydrochloride (60 mg) w as injected intramuscularly to sedate the cow while lying down on the left side. After administering local-infilt ration anesthesia using a 0.5% procaine solution around the right lower abdominal wall in the abomasum region, the surgical incision was sele cted at the location where the AI was the hardest and made contact with the body surface. The feed material was removed a nd the abomasum was sutured. It is worth noting that we apply a slightly different approach for suturing the rumen, abomasum, and uterus from the traditional method. In particular, continuous spiral sutures were made on the mucosa of the uterus, and on the mucosa and submucosa of the rumen and abomasum with thinner polyglycolic acid (PGA) sutures (USP: 2–0), followed by continuous spiral sutures throughout the layer with thicker PGA sutures (USP: 0). Finally, cushing sutures were made with the same thicker PGA suture.
Postoperative treatment was provided for 5 days, including (i) 2 l Ringer’s solution, 5 g vitamin C, and 50 ml 10% potassium chloride; (ii) 1 l 10% glucose and 300 ml 10% calcium gluconate; (iii) 500 ml 10% concentrated sodium chloride; (iv) 500 ml 5% glucose and 5 g ampicillin; (v) 500 ml normal saline and 600 mg ranitidine, each as a single intravenous injection once per day; (vi) 20 mg neostigmine methylsulfate as a single subcutaneous injection twice a day; (vii) 20 ml compound vitamin B as a single intramuscular injection twice a day; and (viii) 100 IU of oxytocin as a single intramuscular injection once a day.
On the seco nd day after the surgery, the cow began to ruminate, had an appetite, was in good spirits, and passed a large amount of black mucous feces. The cow fed on 3 kg hay and 2 kg concentrate. On the third and fourth days after surgery, feed intake increased, with 7 kg hay and approximately 5 kg concentrate consumed. On the fifth day, the fetal coat was completely excreted, but the feed intake decreased, the number of ruminations was reduced, the rumen peristalsis was weakened, and only a small amount of feces was excreted. On the sixth day after surgery, the cow began to drink a substantial amount of water, the abdominal circumference increased, rumination stopped, only a small amount of hay was eaten, and no excrement was observed. With rumen effusion, the high-pitched “pinging” could be heard by auscultation of the left side of ribs 1–3 with percussion, and palpation of the genuine stomach area was slightly hard. Therefore, we suspected that the abomasum had become obstructed again.
Routine blood examination showed an elevated white blood cell count of 14.5 × 109 and neutrophil count of 7.2 × 109/l, whereas no obvious abnormalities were found in biochemical parameters. On the eighth and ninth days after the operation, Zeng Ye Cheng Qi Tang (a traditional Chinese medicine powder consisting of 300 g rhubarb, 600 g mirabilite, 60 g Magnolia officinalis, 80 g Fructus aurantii immaturus, 120 g Scrophularia ningpoensis, 120 g Ophiopogon japonicus, 120 g Rehmannia glutinosa, 150 g areca nut, 60 g Aucklandia, and 200 g Raphanus seed) was administered, which is often used to treat ruminal impaction and IO, along with 1 l of vegetable oil. The abomasum area was massaged at the same time as the administration of the formulation (1 hour each time, three times/day). Furthermore, a subcutaneous injection of 10 mg neostigmine was administered four times/day. The cow was fed hay only (2 kg a day) and concentrate feed was stopped. As of the 11th day, the ruminant returned to normal, feed intake gradually increased, the rumen and abomasum peristaltic sound was enhanced as detected by auscultation, and normal defecation was observed. The amount of hay fed daily was gradually increased (but not more than 10 kg). After continued observation for 5 days, all indices of the diseased cow returned to normal . After 120 days, the cow made a full recovery and became pregnant again. The calf born by cesarean section is in good health .
The animal study was reviewed and approved by the College of Animal Science and Technology, Chongqing Three Gorges Vocational College. Written informed consent was obtained from the owners for the participation of their animals in this study.