A 67-year-old male presented with abdominal pain and blood-tinged stool of 1-month's duration. His past medical history revealed hypertension well controlled by medication for 8 years and that he had been a smoker for 20 pack years. His family history was noncontributory. Physical examination revealed a protuberant abdomen with a huge tender intra-abdominal mass. Laboratory findings including blood analysis, serum electrolytes, and hepatic and renal functions were within normal limits, as was the serum alkaline phosphatase.
On colonoscopy, a solid mass measuring 5 cm was detected protruding from the colon wall . The mass was covered with blood clots and necrotic debris. Colonoscopic biopsy confirmed a sarcoma of an undetermined type. Computed tomography demonstrated a 15 × 9.7 cm heterogeneously enhancing mass, with mottled calcification and a cystic portion, occupying the left upper quadrant of the abdominal cavity . For curative resection of the tumor, en bloc mass excision with segmental colon resection and splenectomy was performed. During the operation, the surgeon described the tumor as being located in the mesentery and involving the stomach, greater omentum, pancreas, and transverse colon. The resected tumor measured 18.5 × 13 × 9.5 cm. It was located in the mesentery and perforated the abutting colon wall. The external surface of the mass was smooth. The cut surface consisted of a gray-white to tan-yellow solid area with a gritty sensation and a large multicystic area . The cystic portion contained clotted blood with thin septae and was focally necrotic.
Sections taken from the cystic structure showed large blood-filled spaces separated by thin septae and smaller cystic spaces within the solid area. The septal walls consisted of numerous large, bizarre rounded to spindled cells with multilobed hyperchromatic nuclei, and coarse granular chromatin . Sections from the firm, calcified portion revealed a poorly differentiated sarcomatous tumor showing a solid growth pattern with large anaplastic cells and spindle cells . Giant cells with multiple bizarre nuclei or osteoclast-like giant cells were scattered throughout the tumor and were associated with the areas of hemorrhage. The osteoid was laid down in a fine ramifying lacework, and was partly calcified . Transition areas between neoplastic osteoid and cartilage were noted . More than 20 mitoses per ten high-power fields were observed, and these included highly atypical forms. Necrosis was evident.
For immunohistochemical studies, paraffin-embedded tissue was stained using the avidin-biotin peroxidase complex method. The neoplastic cells were positive for vimentin, alpha smooth muscle actin, osteonectin, CD99, and S100 in the chondroblastic portion, but negative for cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen, desmin, myogenin, CD34, and c-kit. The final histologic diagnosis was a mesenteric extraskeletal osteosarcoma with telangiectatic features.
After the uneventful surgery, the patient underwent the first cycle of chemotherapy consisting of intravenous ifosfamide (1800 mg/m2) and adriamycin (25 mg/m2). However, he developed a recurrent peritoneal mass measuring 11 × 9.5 cm and multiple lung and liver metastases 3 months postoperatively. He died 4 months later.