A 71-year-old man with no history of episodes suggesting mental illness was brought to us after a suicide attempt. Forty days earlier, he had undergone cataract surgery, and during the operation, the artificial lens fell inside the lens, resulting in a decrease in visual function compared with before the illness. Thereafter, he tended to have insomnia due to stress caused by the difficulty he faced in returning to his work and hobbies. He gradually developed depression, along with anxiety related to physical ailments such as discomfort in his right eye, back pain, and complaints of right knee pain. The depressive mood continued to worsen, and the patient complained that "I'm finished" and "I want to die"; he then ingested an herbicide (glyphosate) and was rushed to the emergency room. After gastric lavage, there was no physical abnormality, but as the patient's suicidal thoughts continued, the need for psychiatric treatment was recognized, and he was admitted to the psychiatric department the next day.
The patient had been experiencing insomnia, depressed mood, weight loss of 5 kg in 1 month due to loss of appetite, poor concentration, low energy, feelings of worthlessness, loss of interest, and hopelessness for more than 2 weeks, triggered by the loss of vision caused by the surgery, which had made it difficult for him to lead his daily life without getting help from his family. Therefore, we diagnosed the patient with major depressive disorder and started him on mirtazapine (15 mg/day). On the seventh day, mirtazapine was discontinued due to suspected mirtazapine-induced delirium. Although his anxiety and agitation improved slightly, the patient scored 23/30 points on the Hasegawa Dementia Scale-Revised (HDS-R), with some disorientation and short-term memory impairment. The patient did not remember his suicide attempt or cataract surgery and had both anterograde and retrograde amnesia; on that basis, we suspected some organic cause. EEG showed some slow waves at 6-7 Hz on the 12th day . MRI showed bilateral swelling of the medial temporal lobes and hippocampi and high signal on T2-weighted imaging; diffusion-weighted imaging showed high signal predominantly in the right insular cortex, and T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (T2-FLAIR) also showed high signal predominantly in the right insular cortex . In addition to the insular cortex, T2-FLAIR also showed a high signal in the hippocampus . On the 13th day, involuntary movements of the left face, tongue biting, and weakness of the right side of the body were observed with no impairment of consciousness; these movements were judged to be a simple partial seizure. On the same day, the patient was placed in the ICU for general management. There were no abnormal findings on a CT scan of the head. The patient was given 1000 mg of levetiracetam. On the following day, he was free of convulsions and hemiplegia and was able to communicate well; therefore, he returned to the psychiatric ward that day. On the 14th day, the patient returned to the psychiatric ward. An electroencephalogram (EEG) showed spikes in the right frontal lobe (F4), suggesting epilepsy originating in this region, and levetiracetam 1000 mg was continued. A lumbar puncture performed on the same day showed no increase in cerebrospinal fluid cell count, and cultures were negative, suggesting encephalopathy rather than infectious or autoimmune encephalitis. Gradually, in addition to the original disorientation, the patient became agitated, had difficulty maintaining attention, and was unable to receive rest instructions. For this reason, we considered him to be in a state of delirium and started physical restraint on the same day. At night, the patient became emotionally unstable, shouting, "I'm going to the office," yelling, and suddenly bursting into tears. In addition, from the 15th to the 16th day, 11 bouts of involuntary movements occurred on the left side of the face, lasting a few minutes each. The dose of levetiracetam was increased to 2000 mg/day on the 16th day, and simple partial epileptic seizures did not occur from then on. Risperidone (0.5 mg/day) was added before bedtime on the 17th day, and although there were some fluctuations in affect and disorientation after that, the patient was able to sleep at night and received rest instructions on the 19th day. Risperidone was discontinued. Gradually, the patient recovered from his cognitive impairments, including disorientation, and the HDS-R on the 26th day showed a score of 23/30, with improvement only in the recall item. An EEG on the 27th day showed no slow waves or spikes, and an MRI scan on the 28th day showed a slight improvement in the high signal and swelling of the hippocampus and insular cortex on T2-weighted, T2-FLAIR, and diffusion-weighted imaging; on this basis, the patient was discharged on the 33rd day.