A 37-year-old woman (Body-Mass Index: 23.62 kg/m2) was attending the Ingenes Institute in México City for secondary infertility.
The patient has been trying to get pregnant for 24 mo with negative results, using only natural methods to conceive. We proposed an in vitro fertilization (IVF) protocol, complimented with pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD).
Three years prior to her attending Ingenes, she had one previous pregnancy, which was resolved by a cesarean section after placental detachment. Afterward, she presented abnormal uterine bleeding with bloody or brown vaginal discharge, severe pelvic pain, dyspareunia, and urinary discomfort eight months after the cesarean.
She had no other medical complications and was not taking any medications. No causes of male infertility were found in her partner.
The patient underwent a standard course of controlled ovarian stimulation (Depot GnRH agonist, Cetrotide 0.25 mg daily dose, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). In the immediate days after controlled ovarian stimulation started (9 d), we observed the formation of hydrometra. The patient was given a single dose of Triptorelin (0.2 mg; Gospeptyl daily Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Saint-Prex, Switzerland). Stimulation was prolonged until the diameter of leading follicles was > 18 mm (18-22 mm). Then, recombinant human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) (Choragon 1000 IU, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Saint-Prex, Switzerland) was administered, and oocytes were retrieved after 36 h with ultrasound guidance. All 14-18 mm follicles were aspirated, and 20 ova were collected. It was decided to proceed to fertilization and culture. The ova were fertilized by intracytoplasmic sperm injection, and six embryos developed (2AB, 2BB, and 2BC Inner cell mass/Trophoblast quality). With the embryos that reached day 5, a trophectoderm biopsy was collected for PGD, and then the embryos were frozen. After PGD, four euploid embryos were considered for implantation; however, it was decided to postpone implantation for one month to allow for endometrial preparation.
The endometrial preparation was carried out with the application of an in situ agonist prior to the Luteal phase (Triptorelin 3.75 mg, Gonspeptyl daily, Ferring) and transdermal application of 17-β-estradiol (Evorel 50). On day 10 of endometrial preparation, the formation of hydrometra was again evident, so it was decided to cancel the endometrial preparation cycle and perform an endometrial cavity evaluation-closing of any ostia by hysteroscopy with the suspicion of a possible hydrosalpinx. The proximal closing of tubal ostia was performed without any complications, finding a normal cavity. A second endometrial preparation was performed with the same protocol. On day 10 of the endometrial preparation, the formation of hydrometra was again evident, so we decided to cancel the cycle, and treat the patient with progestin (Utrogestan, 100 mg every 12 h, 5 d, SEID, Barcelona, Spain). A new endometrial preparation with estradiol valerate (Primogyn, Bayer Health) was tried using 6 mg/d as the maximum dose, and on the 13th d of preparation, the hydrometra formation was again evident.
None.
A transvaginal ultrasound was performed, and in addition to hydrometra, the presence of an isthmocele was located at the anterior wall of the uterine isthmus. Its base was 6.6 mm and height was 6.1 mm, indicating the presence of a second-degree isthmocele . Re-evaluation of a previous hysteroscopy video was performed, where a thorough evaluation of the defect area was not performed, probably due to the absence of characteristic symptoms.