A 54-year-old man with a body mass index of 43.7 kg/m2 (weight, 124.8 kg; height, 169.0 cm) had a medical history of high blood pressure, bronchial asthma, sleep apnea syndrome, and surgery for a right bronchial gangliocytic paraganglioma. He had previously undergone esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) at another hospital for screening examination, without any symptoms and abdominal findings. EGD revealed a tumor in the duodenal bulb; therefore, he was admitted to our hospital for close examination.
EGD revealed two smooth elevated lesions with a diameter of 10 mm in the anterior wall of the duodenal bulb . A biopsy of the tumors in the anterior wall indicated the presence of neuroendocrine cells. The tumors were diagnosed as duodenal neuroendocrine tumors (NET). Abdominal plain computed tomography (CT) revealed no lesions, apparent enlarged lymph nodes, or distant metastasis. Endoscopic ultrasonography showed that the lesions were hypoechoic masses primarily comprising the third layer having an unclear border with the fourth layer. Because this finding suggested that the tumors had invaded the muscle layer, we decided that surgical resection was necessary. Therefore, laparoscopic distal gastrectomy with lymph node dissection and Roux en-Y reconstruction was performed. The extent of lymph node dissection was D1+ with No.12a lymph node because the tumors were located in the duodenum bulb. Intraoperative findings revealed that the tumors were not exposed to the serosal surface. The surgery was performed in the same way as usual for gastric cancer. The duodenum was transected using linear stapling device, and the stump was reinforced with serosal muscle suturing. A curative resection was performed without intraoperative complications. On the basis of pathological findings and immunostaining, the diagnosis was NET, which was classified as NET G1 according to World Health Organization (WHO) classification 2010 .
From the physical findings and laboratory test results, the postoperative course up to postoperative day (POD) 3 was uneventful. The drain amylase level at POD1 was as low as 157 U/L; he started eating on POD3. He had a fever on POD5; hence, the meal was stopped, and a course of antibiotics was started. However, the fever was not improved, so CT was performed on POD8. Abdominal plain CT showed fluid collection in the anterior cavity of the pancreatic head . Consequently, CT-guided drainage of the collected fluid was performed. The contrast radiography through the drainage tube showed that there was no fistula between the fluid and gastrointestinal tract and no obvious anastomotic leakage. The amylase level of the drainage fluid was high at 4667 U/L, which suggested that the peripancreatic fluid collection was caused by pancreatic fistula and poor drainage. The drainage was continued, and the fluid cavity tended to shrink.
On POD28, he passed a large amount of blood stool. His vital signs were stable. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT showed a small amount of fluid collection on the anterior side of the pancreatic head but no apparent extravasation findings. Although the CT imaging showed no evidence of abdominal bleeding or pseudoaneurysm, bleeding from a pseudoaneurysm was suspected because of the clinical findings; therefore, an emergency angiography was performed. We performed angiography of the celiac artery, splenic artery, and gastroduodenal artery as well as their branches that perfused the pancreas and the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery branching from the superior mesenteric artery; however, no apparent pseudoaneurysm or extravasation was found. Therefore, no action other than observation was performed .
EGD showed no bleeding from the gastrojejunal anastomosis site, jejunojejunostomy, and duodenal blind end. Colonoscopy also revealed no bleeding foci. We could not detect the source of bleeding, and there was no blood stool subsequently. The meal was restarted on POD34. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT on POD36 showed no hemorrhage or pseudoaneurysm, and the abscess had disappeared. Therefore, on the same day, we removed the drainage tube. He was discharged on POD50.
A plain CT 6 months after the surgery showed no abnormal findings and no pseudoaneurysm. Approximately 1 year after the initial surgery (POD350), he passed a bloody stool and was admitted to a local hospital after experiencing hemorrhagic shock. Laboratory tests revealed severe anemia with a hemoglobin level of 4.5 g/dL; therefore, blood transfusion was performed. Because colorectal bleeding was suspected, a colonoscopy was also performed; however, the bleeding source was not detected. A few days later, he again experienced a bloody stool and subsequently underwent EGD. An ulcer with pulsating exposed blood vessels near the duodenal blind end was observed. He was diagnosed as having a hemorrhage from a delayed pseudoaneurysm associated with surgery and was transferred to our hospital.
Although his vital signs were stable, laboratory tests showed a hemoglobin level of 7.1 g/dL. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT revealed a pseudoaneurysm arising from the proximal gastroduodenal artery (GDA), extending into the duodenal wall . Emergency angiography was performed, which revealed a pseudoaneurysm that had developed from the proximal GDA, as demonstrated in the CT findings . Transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) was successfully performed with the isolation and packing technique. First, the proper hepatic artery distal to the pseudoaneurysm was embolized by using coils. Second, the pseudoaneurysm and posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery branching from the pseudoaneurysm were embolized with N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate. Finally, the common hepatic artery proximal to the pseudoaneurysm was also embolized by using coils . Laboratory tests performed 1 day after TAE showed no evidence of liver failure. No clinical signs of rebleeding were observed during the course, and he was discharged on the seventh day after TAE. Subsequently, abdominal contrast-enhanced CT was performed twice approximately 3 and 9 months after TAE, and there were no findings, such as pseudoaneurysm recurrence, and no symptoms suggesting rebleeding.