A 69-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to intensive care unit because of a persistent comatose state (Glasgow Coma Scale scored at 6) following a generalized tonic-clonic seizure requiring intubation. His high blood pressure (>190/110 mm Hg) required intravenous infusion of nicardipine. Brain CT scan and MRI (with DWI, FLAIR, T2, and T2*) showed no abnormalities. He had a past medial history of oral cancer treated in 2007 with surgery and radiotherapy. He had a comorbid condition of obesity and dyslipidemia. Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed transient left bundle branch block which normalized a few hours later. Troponin and BNP were elevated to 35 ng/mL (n < 0.05) and 600 pg/mL (n < 100), respectively. Cardiac ultrasound showed large apical akinesia with altered left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). Angiography showed no occlusive lesion or stenosis, and left ventriculogram showed regional wall motion abnormalities involving the mid and apical segments, characteristic of takotsubo cardiomyopathy .
After 3 days, the patient's consciousness improved. However, he continued to have persistent left-sided hemiparesis predominantly in the upper limb. Electroencephalogram showed slight slowing of cerebral activity in the right hemisphere without paroxysmal activity. The CSF analysis was normal (biochemistry, bacteriology, virology, pathology). A second brain MRI was performed on day 3 and displayed bilateral, cortical, and subcortical vasogenic edema with a right posterior predominance, suggesting the diagnosis of PRES. A cerebral angiography performed on day 12 showed no abnormalities and in particular no stenosis that could have been in favor of a reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome.
Troponin, BNP, LVEF, and cardiac kinetics normalized a few days later as would be expected in transient apical ballooning syndrome. A brain MRI obtained 15 days after admission showed complete resolution of the vasogenic edema confirming the diagnosis of PRES. The patient recovered fully within 3 months.
In the history there was no record of a stressful physical or emotional event preceding the onset of the patient's symptoms. Biological samples and abdomen/pelvic CT scan found no evidence of thyroid dysfunction or pheochromocytoma.