A 47-year-old Caucasian male with a 10-year history of Crohn's disease presented with a 5-day history of fever, night sweats, rash over both legs and headache. The headache was localised at the left temporal area and associated with nausea, lethargy, general malaise, fever, night sweats and rigors but not photophobia. There was no history of previous upper respiratory tract infection. The medical history of the patient did not indicate anything relevant except Crohn's disease which was diagnosed in 1998. This was treated with a partial colectomy in 1999 and a total colectomy in 2006. He did not take any regular medication and reported no drug allergies.
On initial physical examination upon hospital admission, the patient was afebrile (tympanic temperature 36.5°C). His skin revealed lesions that were purple-red, non-pruritic, tender nodules measuring 1-2 cm in diameter. They were asymmetrically distributed over both shins and inner knee areas resembling eryhthema nodosum . Neurological examination was unremarkable. He had no neck stiffness.
Laboratory examination revealed a white cell count of 11.5 × 109/L with neutrophilic leukocytosis (79%). CRP was raised (234 mg/l). Both kidney and liver functions were normal.
The next morning, the headache worsened and the patient began experiencing neck stiffness. On examination, the patient had a fever with temperature of 39.4°C. Mild neck stiffness was elicited. He did not have focal neurology. Further nodules had appeared on his shins.
A computed tomography (CT) head scan was normal. We proceeded to a lumbar puncture. This showed clear fluid, an opening pressure of 36 cm H2O, no xanthochromia, total cells 366, polymorphs 294, lymphocytes 72, red blood cells <1, cerebrospinal fluid culture negative (also negative for acid-fast bacilli) and meningococcal polymerase chain reaction negative. Since these results initially suggested bacterial meningitis, 2 g of intravenous ceftriaxone twice daily was started. In addition, the patient received ibuprofen 400 mg three times daily and paracetemol 1 g four times daily for analgesia.
On the third day of admission, further similar lesions appeared on both upper arms. Punch biopsies were taken from these lesions. Histology on the specimens revealed severe papillary edema. The dermis contained an infiltrate of neutrophils and nuclear dust was also present. These findings supported the clinical diagnosis of acute neutrophilic dermatosis (Sweet's disease.) On days 4-6 of admission, his symptoms started to improve. He was still having headaches and spiking temperatures of up to 38.9°C in the evenings but the skin lesions were settling with decreased tenderness and redness. By the seventh day, the patient was apyrexial, his headache had settled, and his CRP had fallen from 234 to 33. He was discharged from the hospital.