This is a case of a 68-year-old male smoker (50 pack-year history). The occupation of the patient is a farmer. No family history of cancers or lung cancer. He was admitted to hospital due to cough, sputum and dyspnea. He had a 4-year history of COPD and a 3-year history of well-controlled chronic gastritis. He had no other medical conditions such as high blood pressure, diabetes, obesity or autoimmune disease and denied drinking alcohol. Physical examination revealed a barrel-chest.Wet rales and wheezing could be heard in the right upper lung. Laboratory data showed WBC 11.90/109/L (reference, 4–10/109/L), Neu 8.75/109/L (reference, 2.5–7.5/109/L), Lym 0.94/109/L (reference, 1.5–3.3/109/L), CRP 149.77 mg/L (reference, ≤ 10 mg/L). Blood gas analysis PO2 77.10 mmHg (reference, 80-100 mmHg). Chest computerized tomographic (CT) scan revealed signs of emphysema, irregular mass-like consolidation with cavity shadows in the right upper lobe, and thickening of local interlobular septa . Bronchoscopy and alveolar lavage showed no abnormality. Combined with clinical manifestations, laboratory examination and imaging data, he was diagnosed as community acquired pneumonia (CAP). He was treated with intravenous ceftizoxime (1 g/Q12h/9d) for anti-infection, intravenous methylprednisolone (40 mg/qd/5d), atomized salbutamol for antispasmosis, relief of bronchoscpasm, cough and expectorant treatment, and was discharged with improvement. Pulmonary function testing showed a decreased FEV1/FVC ratio (53.47), an FEV1 of 1.08 L (45% normal), and reduced diffusing capacity of 23%. After discharge, he was treated with LABA/LAMA and recovered well. He did not return to the hospital for follow-up.
About 7 months after discharge, the patient returned to the hospital for cough and dyspnea. Physical examination of the left upper lung breathing sound was low. Laboratory data showed a cytokeratin 19 fragment of 2.42 ng/ml (reference, < 3.3 ng/ml) and neuron-specific enolase 85.87 ng/ml (reference, 0–16.3 ng/ml). Contrast-enhanced chest CT showed resolution of the right upper lung lesion and residual scarring . Irregular mass in the bronchial opening area of the upper lobe of the left lung and fusion with enlarged lymph nodes in the left hilum and adjacent mediastinum: Central lung cancer of the left lung with left pulmonary obstructive inflammation, lymph node metastasis in the mediastinum and left hilum, and arteriovenous invasion of the left upper lung were considered to be highly possible . At the same time, we compared the images of the first hospitalization at the same layers .
Positron emission tomography/CT did not detect an increase in standard uptake value except the lung. Fibrobronchoscopy revealed infiltrating growth of new organisms in the bronchial mucosa of the left upper lobe of the lung covered with white membrane-like neoplasm . We compared images of the same site at the first admission . Biopsy diagnosed SCLC . This patient PD-L1 Tumor Proportion Score was 52%. The diagnosis was ES-SCLC.
The patient intravenously received cisplatin (75 mg/m2) and etoposide (80 mg/m2 on days 1–3) and durvalumab (humanized monoclonal PD-L1 inhibitor, 1500 mg) every 3 weeks for four cycles. 2 months after treatment, the patient achieved partial remission (PR) in imaging assessment , and the patient refused prophylactic cranial irradiation and chest radiotherapy. Durvalumab (1500 mg) was administered once every four weeks, and the disease progressed after four times of maintenance treatment . The patient refused chemotherapy again, immunotherapy and radiotherapy, anlotinib and analgesic drugs orally only, and went home to hospice care. He succumbed to his disease approximately 9 months after his diagnosis.