A 35-year-old male presented to their GP for treatment of hot flushes on finasteride (5-alpha reductase inhibitor) for hair loss, which he had recently stopped. The finasteride was stopped because of these side effects and a subsequent baseline prostate-specific antigen (PSA) showed a raised reading of 12.5ng/mL, which prompted referral to a urologist.
Negative urine culture excluded urinary tract infection, and repeat PSA 6 weeks later demonstrated a rise to 14.6ng/mL. Digital rectal exam revealed a small, benign-feeling prostate which was non-tender. There was no family history of prostate cancer, and the patient did not have any physical or sexual activity prior to the PSA tests.
Multiparametric MRI found a PIRADS 4 lesion in the anterior zone of the prostate (see ). PSMA PET identified focal and markedly increased tracer uptake in the anterior zone of the prostate concordant with the MRI lesion (see ). The SUVmax on the PSMA PET scan was 23.5, consistent with a site of active tumor. There was no evidence of lymphadenopathy or metastatic disease. Targeted trans-perineal prostate biopsies found Gleason 4+5=9 (Grade Group 5) acinar adenocarcinoma in 8 of 8 biopsy cores involving 80% of the total material sampled. No cribriform architecture was identified but there were features suspicious of extra prostatic extension on the biopsy. Sperm banking was completed and a robotic-assisted radical prostatectomy was performed with a novel RoboSling vascularized continence sling, an aggressive bilateral nerve spare and a bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection, without complication. Pathology demonstrated Gleason 4+5=9 adenocarcinoma with focal cribriform architecture, 0.6mm of extracapsular extension at the apex anteriorly, and clear margins, stage pT3a N0 M0 (see ).
At 12-month follow-up, the patient had an undetectable PSA, complete continence with 0 daily pad use, and reported erections rigid enough for penetration with acupuncture and daily Tadalafil (phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor) for penile rehabilitation. The patient’s father has since been diagnosed with Gleason 6 prostate cancer at the age of 67, screening having been prompted by the patient’s diagnosis. On further history from relatives, his maternal grandmother had a history of breast cancer at age 89. Genetic testing, including BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2 and TP53, was performed in the context of the high grade disease at a young age and did not identify a heritable cause. Please see for a treatment timeline schematic.