In this case report, prepared in adherence to the SCARE 2023 guidelines for surgical case reporting. A 35-year-old female presented to our urology clinic on [02-27-2023] with a 2-week history of left lumbar pain. Computed tomography urography (CTU) performed on [02-28-2023] identified Y-shaped double renal pelvis malformations in the left kidney. Preoperative renal function was normal (creatinine: 0.60 mg/dL). Urine analysis indicated elevated white blood cells and red blood cells in the urine, and no obvious abnormalities were found in the other test results. Urinary CTU suggested double renal pelvis malformations of the left kidney, the ureters fused at the lower edge of L3, multiple upper ureteral calculi on the left side with dilation of the upper renal pelvis. The upper calculus was slightly smaller, with a long diameter of about 25 mm and an average CT value of 850 hu. The lower calculus was larger and strip-shaped, with a long diameter of about 38 mm and an average CT value of 1101 hu.

The patient was placed in the right lateral position for surgical treatment. The surgical method selected was retroperitoneal laparoscopic ureterolithotomy. During the operation, it was observed that there was a double ureteral malformation in the upper left segment, in a Y shape, with severe adhesion to the surrounding tissues. After carefully separating the ureter, an incision was made at the calculus site of the upper ureter, and the incision was extended by about 3 cm. The calculus at the lower part was removed. The texture was slightly hard and was about 4 cm in length and elongated. The ureter was examined again up to the near renal hilum. No calculi were seen under laparoscopy. Considering that the calculus had moved upward to the upper left renal pelvis, a flexible ureteroscope was inserted from the first incision. With the assistance of laparoscopy, the flexible ureteroscope was placed along the ureteral incision into the renal pelvis. A calculus was seen in the left renal pelvis, about 3 cm in size. An attempt to insert a stone-catching basket to remove the calculus failed. Then, percutaneous nephrolithotomy under direct laparoscopy was changed, and a Fr18 channel was established. A ureteroscope was inserted, and the calculus could be seen. Then, a holmium laser was inserted to crush and remove the calculus. The angle of the ureteroscope was adjusted, and the junction of the left renal pelvis and ureter was found. An integrated double J stent was inserted. Under direct laparoscopy, it was seen that the double J stent passed through the ureteral incision. The operation time was approximately 3 h, and the intraoperative blood loss was about 50 mL. Postoperative review CT examination showed no obvious calculus shadow. The double J stent in the body was removed 1.5 months later. After half a year, the review of urinary CTU was normal.