Our patient was a little girl one month old who came at our service from neonatology. This girl was the third child of healthy Albanian parents, without history of consanguinity. During the pregnancy the mother had presented oligohygramnios. The baby had a birth weight 2500g. She was born at term but she was small for gestational age. APGARE score was 8/10. She was discharged at day three but she was admitted in neonatology at age of 20 days because of jaundice, weight loss, feeding problems, failure to thrive and contractures of lower limbs . At age of one month she was transferred at our service of gastrohepatology because of cholestasis. In this moment the girl weight was 2350 g. We decided to feed her by nasogastric tube. The first results of blood analyses had shown cholestasis ( direct bilirubine=5,2 U/L; total bilirubine =8,9U/L; ALT=85U/l;AST=66U/L; GGT=30U/L). Abdominal echography has shown important ascites . We had performed a blood transfusion because of severe anemia. In consultation with our neurologist and geneticist the contractures of lower limbs are interpreted as talipes calcaneovalgus . The recent urinary analyses had shown glucosuria ,urinary ph was basic, aminoaciduria. We found also hyperchloremia and low bicarbonate. This combination of arthrogryposis , cholestasis and renal dysfunction make us to think about ARC syndrome. At the same time we have excluded the most part of pathologies that presents cholestasis like cystic fibrosis,TORCH, a1 antitripsine deficiency, endocrinopathy, Allagille syndrome,some metabolic disorders. Cranial computed tomography was unremarkable. We didn’t perform a liver biopsy because of an abnormal prothrombine time. Approximately one month later the girl presented a severe ichtyosis and recurrent febrile episodes despite antibiotic therapy. We have expected that this child will present diarrhea but she presented a severe form of constipation. We treated her with several enema but constipation has persisted .Other part of treatment were ursofalk, vitamine A,D,E,K , sodium bicarbonate and antibiotics. Unfortunately she died at age of three months of septicemia. Permission for autopsy was refused. Three weeks later we had a response of molecular biology that was sent abroad which confirms VPS33B mutation