A 69-year-old female had received antihypertensive drugs (azilsartan [20 mg/day] and amlodipine [10 mg/day]) for over 15 years. The patient previously had non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (stage IV) and underwent repeated courses of chemotherapy for each relapse between the ages of 35–49 years, resulting in complete remission (chemotherapy drug/cumulative dose [mg/m2]: doxorubicin [DOX]/218; pirarubicin/830; mitoxantrone/33; cyclophosphamide/23,758; vincristine/72; etoposide/333; and carboplatin/85; and rituximab/1,358; the equivalent DOX dose to assess ATC cardiotoxicity was 691 mg/m2). Furthermore, the patient received endoscopic submucosal dissection for early-stage rectal cancer and a right hemicolectomy for colon cancer at the age of 65 years.

The patient subsequently presented with exertional dyspnea and abdominal distention and was hospitalized for acute HF in August X, 1.5 months after symptom onset (this admission date was considered the reference date). Upon admission, the patient was in clinical scenario 2, with chest X-ray (CXR) findings of a pleural effusion, cardiac enlargement, and moderate pulmonary congestion (CXR2). An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus tachycardia (E2). A systolic murmur was heard, suggesting aortic stenosis (AS). Initial oxygen and intravenous diuretic therapies relieved the HF symptoms. Azilsartan was titrated to 40 mg/day, and azosemide (30 mg/day) and carvedilol (5 mg/day) were added early in the treatment course. A two-dimensional echocardiogram (2DE) revealed left ventricular (LV) and left atrial (LA) enlargement, reduced left ventricular wall motion (LVWM) with an 18% left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), and an elevated tricuspid regurgitant maximum pressure gradient (TRmaxPG) of 41 mmHg. All three calcified aortic valve leaflets had restricted openings, with a 30-mmHg aortic valve pressure gradient (AVPG) (#1 in Table 1). Dobutamine Stress 2DE ruled out severe AS. Computed tomography (CT) revealed an aortic valve calcium score of 1,189 Agatston units (AU). Coronary angiography (CAG) demonstrated no significant stenosis. Cardiac catheterization revealed increased pulmonary artery wedge pressure, increased LV end-diastolic pressure, pulmonary hypertension (PH), decreased cardiac output index, and low AVPG. Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels declined from 1,183 pg/mL at admission to 710 pg/mL at discharge. In January X + 1, five months after reference date and four months post-discharge, weight gain was observed, and the BNP level increased to 2,986 pg/mL, indicating WHF. Azosemide was titrated to 45 mg/day, slow-release nifedipine at 20 mg/day was added to control blood pressure below 120 mmHg, and carvedilol was titrated to 7.5 mg/day. The patient remained stable at New York Heart Association (NYHA) class 2, with BNP levels of 1,100–1,900 pg/mL over the following year.

In March X + 2, one year and seven months after the reference date, the patient was suspected of having WHF with possible progression toward severe AS. This suspicion was based on an ECG in February X + 2 (one year and six months after the reference date) demonstrating LV strain (E4) and a CXR in March X + 2 (one year and seven months after the reference date) demonstrating cardiac enlargement (CXR4). Azilsartan was substituted with empagliflozin at 10 mg/day and sacubitril/valsartan at 200 mg/day (titrated to 400 mg/day over four weeks). Approximately three months later (one year and 11 months after the reference date), the patient rapidly experienced WHF symptoms, including dyspnea and abdominal distention, classified as NYHA class III. The symptom progression coincided with physical exertion, as the patient’s partner had undergone surgery and required care. Ivabradine was added to achieve heart rate control between 50–60 bpm, and a diuretic was used as needed to achieve target morning weight maintenance. Cardiac status subsequently improved to NYHA class II moderate limitation of physical activity (NYHA class IIm). The 2DE in October (two years and two months after the reference date) revealed a slight decrease in LV systolic dimension, slight LVEF improvement to 29%, and AS progression. Therefore, spironolactone at 25 mg/day was started as quadruple therapy. BNP levels decreased to 2,902 pg/mL in early February X + 3 (two years and six months after the reference date). Vericiguat was started in late February after receiving quadruple therapy and ivabradine treatment, without a 2DE evaluation. HF symptoms improved with weight loss owing to increased urine output, and the BNP level decreased below 650 pg/dL. The 2DE in March X + 3 (two years and seven months after the reference date) revealed the same LVEF and AVPG as in October X + 2 (two years and two months after the reference date), in addition to decreasing LV dimensions and a normalized TRmaxPG. Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia with hypotension frequently occurred, and the patient was readmitted in June (two years and 10 months after the reference date) for an electrophysiological study and right heart catheterization (RHC). RHC revealed mild PH, and right ventricular myocardial biopsies demonstrated drug-induced myocardial damage: the cardiomyocyte diameter was mildly enlarged, with noticeable anisokaryosis of the cardiomyocyte nuclei, some cardiomyocytes exhibited giant nuclei, and cytoplasmic vacuolar degeneration was observed. Mallory staining revealed fibrosis unrelated to the vascular structure between the cardiomyocytes, with the replacement of the myocardium by fibrous tissue. The 2DE in June (two years and 10 months after the reference date) revealed normalized LV diameter, a moderate reduction in LA enlargement, improved LVWM (52% LVEF), and a normalized TRmaxPG; however, the AVPG increased to 77 mmHg, with a Vmax of 4.4 m/s and aortic valve orifice area of 0.55 cm2, which was diagnosed as severe AS. The restricted openings of all calcified aortic valve leaflets were unchanged; however, all leaflets appeared slightly thickened and brightened. CT revealed that the aortic valve calcium score increased to 2,468 AU. Amlodipine was discontinued, and sacubitril/valsartan was tapered to mid-dose owing to persistent hypotensive symptoms. Spironolactone was discontinued due to hyperkalemia. The patient was stable at NYHA class II with a slight limitation of physical activity (NYHA class IIs) on sacubitril/valsartan at 200 mg/day, empagliflozin at 10 mg/day, carvedilol at 7.5 mg/day, azosemide at 30 mg/day, ivabradine at 15 mg/day, and vericiguat at 10 mg/day. An aortic valve replacement (AVR) for severe AS was successfully performed in September (three years and one month after the reference date), with good subsequent clinical outcomes.