A 69-year-old Japanese man presented to our institution with decreased vision in his right eye. He had a medical history of stage 4, poorly differentiated, esophageal cancer that had been diagnosed previously via endoscopic biopsy. Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) revealed multifocal increases in fluorodeoxyglucose uptake into the esophagus, lung, liver, lumbar vertebrae, and mediastinal lymph nodes. The patient was treated with three cycles of fluorouracil (5-FU) and cisplatin (CDDP) chemotherapy as well as 30 sessions of radiation therapy (60 Gy) over approximately 6 weeks, three months prior to presentation.
Visual acuity was 20/200 in the right eye (OD) and 20/600 in the left eye (OS). The patient reported previously having a macular hole in the left eye but received no surgical intervention. Anterior segment examination was normal except for 2+ nuclear cataracts in both eyes (OU). No anterior segment inflammation was present in either eye. A dilated fundus examination revealed a veil-like vitreous opacity with white retinal lesions in the macula and periphery OD, consistent with a vasculitis or possible ARN . Although the view was limited due to the thick vitreous opacity, no obvious masses were detected in the retina or choroid. Fundus examination of the left eye was normal, except for evidence of the old macular hole with hard exudates along the superior temporal arcade . Given the patient’s history of metastatic esophageal cancer, differential diagnoses included acute retinal necrosis (ARN), chronic uveitis, and neoplastic disease. Due to the poor view and uncertainty regarding diagnosis, surgical intervention was scheduled two days later.
A combined cataract extraction and 25 gauge pars plana vitrectomy was performed. Phacoemulsification was followed by intraocular lens implantation. Next the vitreous opacity was removed and submitted for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing and cytologic analyses. A peripheral tractional retinal detachment was also detected during the surgery. Therefore, a silicone oil tamponade was selected. In consideration of the possible ARN diagnosis, the patient was started on systemic antiviral (250 mg/day intravenous acyclovir for 3 days), anti-inflammatory (20 mg/day oral prednisolone for 3 days), and anti-coagulant (100 mg/day biaspirin for 3 days) therapies immediately following surgery with cooperation with the internal medicine department.
PCR testing from vitreous sample was negative for toxoplasma, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, bacteria, and fungi. However, the vitreous sample did contain scattered, undifferentiated malignant cells . Further immunohistochemical examination was not performed due to the small sample size. Vitreous specimen findings matched those of the primary esophageal tumor biopsy . Given the presence of a central nervous system metastasis, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head was performed. No evidence of further central nervous system malignancies was found. However repeat PET–CT revealed widespread systemic metastases.
Ultra-wide view fundus imaging revealed multifocal white intraretinal lesions in the macula and periphery two months after surgery . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) through these white opacities displayed hyper-reflective inner retinal lesions with no choroidal involvement, suggestive of retinal metastasis . Visual acuity was 20/200 OD and the retina remained attached under the silicone oil. No further intervention was provided by our department due to the poor prognosis. The patient was maintained on palliative care and passed away three month later due to multiple organ failure, secondary to his malignancy.