A 29-year-old woman with a history of out of hospital cardiac arrest with underlying ventricular fibrillation 4 months after delivery of her first child was referred to our centre to evaluate the risk of a second pregnancy. After her first pregnancy, the differential diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy vs. peripartum cardiomyopathy or primary electrical disease was made and an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) was implanted as secondary prevention. Extensive investigations, including echocardiography and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed no abnormalities apart from mild mitral prolapse and mild left ventricular dysfunction.
When she presented in our centre for counselling, she happened to be already 2 weeks pregnant. She had no complaints, no recent history of (pre)syncope’s. Clinical examination showed a lean woman (height 169 cm, weight 59 kg), with normal blood pressure 112/76 mmHg and an oxygen saturation of 98%. On auscultation, an apical mild systolic murmur was present with no signs of heart failure. The 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated sinus rhythm with right bundle-branch block and ventricular extra systoles (PVC) . Exercise-ECG illustrated regular PVCs, no ST-segment changes, and moderate exercise capacity (81% of predicted maximal workload). Echocardiography showed a myxomatous mitral valve with some prolapse and mild to moderate regurgitation with normal left and right ventricular dimensions and function.
Intensive follow-up both at the Department of Gynecology and Cardiology was arranged and the case was repeatedly discussed at the multidisciplinary pregnancy heart team in the presence of cardiologists, gynaecologists, and anaesthesiologists. The maternal risk for cardiac events was categorized as WHO class III and planned delivery with assisted vaginal delivery at our expert centre for pregnancy and cardiac disease was recommended. Medical treatment with metoprolol 100 mg/day was initiated. Prenatal foetal evaluation, genetic screening, and intensive follow-up of foetal growth under treatment with beta-blockers were provided. Pregnancy and delivery were uneventful. A healthy boy, birth weight 3040 g, was born after induction of labour at 39 weeks of pregnancy. She remained in the hospital for rhythm observation for 3 days. No cardiac events occurred in the peripartum period and on transthoracic echo her ventricular function remained good.
However, 4 weeks later, she experienced a sudden syncope at home, while taking a shower. ICD interrogation revealed primary ventricular fibrillation, induced by a premature ventricular beat, terminated with a successful ICD shock. The morphology of the inducing beat could not be determined, since the recording of the intracardiac EGM starts after detection . A reversible cause like deterioration of left ventricular function or electrolyte imbalance was not found. Echocardiography revealed no new abnormalities. Medical treatment with metoprolol 100 mg/day was continued.
She mentioned having PVCs as an adolescent. Reviewing her ECGs showed the presence of regular right bundle-branch block ventricular extra systoles and a right superior axis, i.e. with an origin in the inferolateral basal left ventricle (i.e. close to the posterior mitral annulus) . A frame-by-frame echocardiographic analysis allowed the diagnosis of a MAD with detachment of the root of the annulus from the posterolateral ventricular myocardium during systole .
Re-evaluation of the cardiac MRI made after her first cardiac arrest confirmed the presence of MAD inferolateral in late systole and detected no signs of fibrosis.
demonstrates an xPlane segmental analysis of the mitral valve and its annulus performed from the parasternal long-axis window with a lateral sweep at mitral annular level, orthogonal short-axis views are recorded on the secondary image. The xPlane image analysis of the mitral annulus illustrated clearly the presence of MAD at the posterior annulus and a normal anterior mitral annulus, explaining why the diagnosis of MAD can be missed when the cutting plane is incorrect .