A 43-year-old Chinese Han woman with a history of GD was referred to our department for recurrent cough, expectoration for 2 months, and hemoptysis accompanied by fever for 1 week. Physical examination of the neck showed a slightly enlarged and homogenous thyroid gland, and a bilateral lung examination by auscultation was unremarkable. Her medical history was significant only for GD, which had developed 5 years previously and was treated with PTU. She had no history of other cardiovascular or cerebrovascular risk factors; allergic diseases including asthma, allergic rhinitis, or urticarial; and psychosocial disorders and no family history of autoimmune diseases. PTU was initially started at 300 mg/day and decreased to 100 mg/day once the euthyroid status was obtained.
In the fourth year of treatment, the patient started nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) treatment for arthralgia. In the fifth year of treatment, she developed recurrent cough and expectoration accompanied by malaise and asthenia but denied any experience of a rash, weight loss, or myalgia. After 2 months of ineffective treatment with antibiotics, the patient developed hemoptysis and fever, with a peak temperature of 37.9°C. Chest CT showed diffuse alveolar infiltrates, and pneumonia was considered. Moxifloxacin was then added to treat the bacterial infection. Two weeks later, however, the patient still had fever, cough, and hemoptysis. Repeat CT scan showed much more severe lesions with diffuse, bilateral, predominantly lower lobe nodular infiltrates and ground-glass opacity . A diffuse segmental hemorrhage was noted on bronchoscopy with a needlepoint hemorrhage and partial fusion in the submembrane along the left main bronchus spreading to the opening of the left upper lobe .
Examination of the bronchial lavage fluid revealed 98% macrophages with iron staining positive for siderophages, and negative culture findings. Laboratory examinations revealed normal free triiodothyronine (2.18 pg/mL, normal range [NR] = 2 - 4.4), free thyroxine (0.98 ng/dL, NR = 0.93 - 1.7), and thyroid stimulating hormone (1.05 uIU/mL, NR = 0.27 - 4.2); low thyroglobulin (0.5 ng/mL, NR = 1.4 - 7.8); significantly elevated thyroglobulin antibody (> 4000 IU/mL, NR = 0 - 115) and antithyroid peroxidase antibody (256.4 IU/mL, NR = 0 - 34); gradually increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR; 80 - 112 mm/h, NR = 0 - 20); and slightly increased C-reactive protein (CRP; 39 mg/L, NR = 0 - 8). Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays were positive for MPO-ANCA and proteinase 3 (PR3)-ANCA, while immunofluorescent assays were positive for p-ANCA and c-ANCA. The complete blood cell count indicated slight anemia, with a decrease in hemoglobin (HGB) from 123 g/L to 89 g/L (NR = 113 - 151). Coagulation study revealed a slightly elevated D-dimer (1.11 mg/L, NR < 0.55).
Liver and kidney functions were normal. Antinuclear antibody, anti-extractable nuclear antigen, and anti-double-stranded DNA were not detected. Pulmonary function test items were normal. Abdominal ultrasonography and cerebral magnetic resonance imaging were unremarkable. Thyroid ultrasonography disclosed a diffusely enlarged thyroid gland with hypervascularity indicative of GD. Based on these findings, this patient was diagnosed with PTU-induced ANCA-positive pulmonary vasculitis with DAH. The PTU was discontinued promptly, and an intravenous injection of methylprednisolone (80 mg/day) was initiated. Three days later, the steroid dose was changed to 40 mg/day. One week later, the therapy was changed to oral prednisolone, which was then tapered over next 12 weeks. There was significant improvement in respiratory symptoms and fever 1 week after the start of prednisolone treatment and PTU withdrawal. Within days, antithyroid antibody titers and ESR decreased markedly.
Approximately 1 month after our observation, the serum was tested negative for ANCA, and ESR and HGB level were normal. In addition, chest CT indicated restoration of the lungs; it showed rapid improvement in the pulmonary pathology with an almost complete recovery in the parenchyma that was subsequently confirmed with bronchoscopy . After 6 months of follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic at 3 months of follow-up with a negative ANCA. Whole blood and thyroid function tests revealed normal ESR, CRP, and D-dimer levels. The steroid dose was tapered. At the 6-month follow-up, steroids were discontinued, and the ANCA remained negative. The patient’s condition remains stable.