A 38-year-old Chinese female who visited the hospital for physical examination due to discomfort in the area of her right kidney, and a solid mass in the right kidney was found for 4 months. The patient had microinvasive adenocarcinoma of the left lung 4 years prior, without obvious abnormalities in the right lung and other lobes of the left lung. The patient did not smoke and had no family history of major diseases. No obvious abnormality was found by laboratory examination. Ultrasound examination showed an isoechoic area at the lower pole of the right kidney, with a size of 1.6 × 1.3 cm, a clear boundary, and an uneven echo; it was slightly convex locally, and the blood flow signal could be seen . Enhanced CT of the lower abdomen revealed a solid space occupying the right kidney, and CCRCC was considered . Based on imaging findings, robot-assisted laparoscopic nephron-sparing partial nephrectomy was performed. Grossly, the tumour was a well-circumscribed lesion measuring 2.0 cm × 1.0 cm × 0.7 cm under the renal capsule, with a greyish yellow and greyish red colour. The tumour was submitted for histologic examination. Histologically, the tumour consisted of three different structures: a CCRCC-like region, a haemangioblastoma-like region, and a focal leiomyomatous stroma component . The CCRCC-like region accounted for approximately 60%, and the tumour cells were arranged in acinar or glandular tubular shapes, with homogeneous pink staining in a few acinar cavities but without papillary architecture. The cell cytoplasm was transparent or slightly eosinophilic, and the boundary was vivid . Most of the nuclei were located at the base, and some were irregular in shape. Nucleoli could be seen in some cells (WHO/ISUP grades 1 to 2, Fig. C). Among the cancer cells, we also observed oval or polygonal cells with a flaky distribution and obvious capillary network. The tumour cells varied in size and had a pale or eosinophilic cytoplasm that sometimes contained sharply delineated fine vacuoles and hyaline globules. The stroma was leiomyomatous, mainly located around the tumour; some areas were loose and edematous and devoid of cells, with a rich mesh of capillaries . The tumour cell nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli showed light-moderate nuclear atypia and pleomorphism. Neither mitotic figures nor necrosis was present . Focal haemorrhage, haemosiderin deposition, and psammoma bodies were observed. Some areas showed prominent delicate vascularity, such as a haemangioblastoma, which transitioned with the CCRCC-like area .
Immunohistochemical results showed that the CCRCC-like region was diffusely strongly positive for AE1/AE3, vimentin, CAIX , PAX8 , PAX2, CK7 , and CAM5.2, partly positive for HNF1α, and negative for CD10, α-inhibin, NSE, S-100, CD34, and TFE3. The haemangioblastoma-like region was diffusely positive for vimentin and CAIX; partly positive for PAX8, PAX2, α-inhibin , and S-100; mostly positive for NSE; and slightly positive for HNF1α. CD34 staining highlighted the complex capillary network . The Ki67 index was approximately 1–2% in these two areas. SMA was strongly positive in the leiomyomatous stroma . The whole-exon sequencing (WES) results of the tumour sample showed missense single-nucleotide variations (SNVs) in TSC2 (NM_000548: exon 4:c.T311C:p. L104P) and SETD2 (NM_014159:exon 3:c.C721G:p.P241A). The patient recovered well and was discharged after surgery. She has not received other treatments after the operation. She was in good condition and had no evidence of recurrence or metastasis at the 18-month follow-up after the operation.