A 9-year-old female patient arrived at the emergency room because of a 36-h history of intermittent right lower abdominal pain, anorexia, vomit, and quantified high-grade fever. She had no pathological personal or family history of interest. On examination, the right iliac fossa was tender to palpation and no frank peritoneal signs were observed. Initial laboratory evaluation showed leukocytosis, neutrophilia, and an elevated C-reactive protein. Ultrasonography of the abdomen was inconclusive. A heterogeneous lesion of 40 × 37 mm within the colon, no appendix and some swollen mesenteric nodes of at least 10 mm were reported. A complementary abdominal CT scan revealed findings suggestive of ileocolic intussusception with an invagination area of approximately 6.6 × 4.9 cm. After surgical consult, the patient underwent an exploratory laparoscopy that required laparotomy conversion. A well-defined, 5 cm mass at ileo cecal valve and multiple hard pericecal lymph nodes were observed. Preserved permeability between the ileum and colon, complete integrity of the cecum wall and lack of vermiform appendix were also reported. The possibility of an auto-digested appendix and a cecal tumor were discussed. At this time, surgeons decided to resect retrocecal and pericecal lymph nodes and send these samples to pathology before any further intervention. The patient was admitted to the inpatient floor where antibiotic therapy based on ampicillin sulbactam, and metronidazole was initiated. The oncologist department was consulted and complementary laboratory exams including liver and renal function tests, uric acid, electrolytes, lactic dehydrogenase, and quantiferon-TB tests were ordered. Only lactic dehydrogenase was altered. A chest x-ray ruled out mediastinal masses. No alarming findings were reported. However, the patient presented gastric distension, abdominal pain and fever by the second hospitalization day. The content inside the suprapubic JP drain changed from a serohematic aspect to a dense cloudy fluid. A culture and cytochemical analysis of peritoneal fluid was performed without significant results. CBC showed mild leukocytosis and neutrophilia. Reactive C-protein remained elevated. Two blood cultures and an urinalysis were negative. Due to the uncertainty of the etiology of her clinical picture, infectology decided to change antibiotic therapy to piperacillin/tazobactam and amikacin. An abdominal x-ray showed air fluid levels in the small bowel and a colonic distention projected at mesogastrium. Gastroenterology suggested initiating bowel rest and placing a central line for parenteral nutrition.
After five more days, elevated inflammatory markers, abdominal distension and pain, and the unusual JP drain aspect persisted. A new ultrasound confirmed that the mass and surrounding area had the same aspect as days before. The histopathological description of paracecal-retrocecal lymph nodes and the sample of mesenteric omentum obtained during the first intervention failed to detect neoplastic cells. Macroscopically, three encapsulated lymph nodes from 0.8 to 2 cm were received. Their physiological architecture was preserved; secondary lymphoid follicles with hyperplastic germinal centers containing macrophages with cellular debris were reported. The interfollicular population was polymorphic and contained frequent large cells with prominent immunoblast-like nucleoli. Other areas showed sinusoidal histiocytosis with eosinophils and neutrophils. There was fibrosis with a predominantly neutrophilic mixed inflammatory infiltrate that spread to neighboring adipose tissue in the periphery of the nodes. The immunohistochemical study confirmed the presence of follicular dendritic cells and B lymphocytes in the germinal centers (CD23 + + +/+ + + and CD20 + + +/+ + + respectively), T lymphocytes in the mantle zone (CD3 + + +/+ ++), macrophages in germinal centers and sinusoidal area (CD68 +/+ ++). Frequent CD30 + + +/+ + + immunoblasts and actin + + +/+ + + myofibroblasts within areas of fibrosis were also observed. EBV study using EBER in situ hybridization was negative. Ziehl Neelsen and PAS did not show any pathogen. The 22 × 0.6 cm omentum sample showed fibrous thickening of the septa and the presence of a mainly lymphocytic infiltrate. Fibrino-leukocytic material was also seen in the serosa. Pathologists concluded the possibility of an unspecified acute versus chronic epiploitis, lymphadenitis and serositis. Nevertheless, due to her unfavorable clinical evolution and the elevated inflammatory markers, a second surgical intervention was decided. The patient underwent an omentectomy and resection of approximately 40 cm of terminal ileum, cecum and ascending colon. Pericolonic lymph nodes were resected as well. A sample of a collection observed near the cecum was taken for culture and cytochemical studies before aspiration and drainage. After surgery, the patient remained hemodynamically stable, without abdominal pain or distention. A nasogastric tube was placed and parenteral nutrition continued. The peritoneal fluid analysis was negative. Improvement in inflammatory markers lead to amikacin discontinuation. And by the fifth postoperative day, JP drain, and nasogastric tube were removed. Later, a regular diet was successfully initiated, and the patient was finally discharged.
The histopathological final report described an 8 cm ileal segment, and a 14 cm ascending colon including the cecum with a diameter that ranged from 1 to 3 cm. The external surface was covered by a pinkish-gray serosa with fibrinopurulent material over the ileocecal area. A completely subserous dilated appendix was identified within the cecum wall. It contained a white-yellowish purulent material at the tip . A well-defined nodular lesion of approximately 1.5 cm was also identified . The mucosa of the cecum was pink while ileal mucosa had a granular appearance. Nine nodules, which measured between 0.3 and 3 cm, were isolated from the surrounding area. The 12 × 4.5 cm omentum sample had no palpable nodes. A second omentum sample showed multiple whitish irregular fragments of bland tissue that measured between 0.8 and 1.5 cm. Microscopically, the histological findings of the fourteen isolated lymph nodes were compatible with follicular hyperplasia. The subserosal cecal appendix showed transmural necrosis and perforation causing leakage of purulent material and an acute inflammatory reaction of the surrounding adipose tissue which extended up to the cecal and ileal serosa. All layers of the appendix were independent and unrelated to the cecum wall . The distal portion of the appendix showed the proliferation of cellular nests that were composed of round uniform nuclei with a “salt and pepper” appearance . No mitotic activity was evidenced. It seemed to infiltrate the muscular layer of the appendix and reach a diameter of 1.5 cm. No lymphovascular or perineural invasion was observed. Disease free margins were reported. Ileum dissection showed Peyer’s patches hyperplasia with wide germinal centers. Tumoral cells’ immunochemical studies showed a Ki67 proliferative index of 2%, a positive (+ + +/+ + +) cytoplasmic granular pan-cytokeratin, a positive (+ + +/+ + +) cytoplasmic chromogranin and a negative synaptophysin reaction . Pathologists concluded the presence of an incidental well differentiated neuroendocrine tumor grade I pT1 pN0 at the tip of the appendix in the middle of a clinical picture caused by an acute necrotizing appendicitis of a complete subserosal appendix. Due to the stage, no further intervention was required. She fully recovered in subsequent controls. Nevertheless, correct management of short bowel syndrome will become a key feature for the preservation of her future quality of life.