A 19-year-old male presented to the emergency department of a regional hospital with severe epigastric pain 12 hours after sustaining blunt trauma to the abdomen during an alleged assault. He was noted to be haemodynamically stable, and physical examination revealed epigastric tenderness and guarding. His white cell count (WCC) was 22.6 × 109/L (normal range 4–9 × 109/L) and his C-reactive protein (CRP) was 343 mg/L (normal range <3 mg/L). His amylase was also elevated at 378IU/L (normal range 25–125IU/L). His haemoglobin was within normal limits. An urgent computed tomogram (CT) was performed. This demonstrated complete transection of the pancreatic body with pancreatic haematoma formation . This was consistent with a grade III injury according to the American Association for Surgery of Trauma (AAST) classification. No other injuries were identified and there was no evidence of active haemorrhage or bile leak.
The patient was promptly transferred to our centre where an on call hepatobiliary service was available. As the patient was haemodynamically stable with no evidence of active bleeding or bile leakage on his CT, he was treated conservatively. He was kept nil by mouth, placed on intravenous antibiotics and total parenteral nutrition was commenced via a peripherally inserted central catheter. Octreotide was also administered to reduce pancreatic secretion. He remained haemodynamically stable and gradually improved both clinically and biochemically. A pancreas protocol CT scan was performed on his fifth day in hospital, which showed stable appearances compared to the scan performed on his admission. The haematoma had remained stable, and once again there was no evidence of active bleeding or bile leak. Oral fluids were reintroduced at this point and intravenous antibiotics were stopped.
A further CT scan was performed on day 14 which showed stable appearance of the laceration with maturation of the previously identified haematoma with adjacent pseudocyst formation . At this point, the patient was completely asymptomatic, tolerating full diet, and both his WCC and CRP had normalised. He was discharged shortly after this and reviewed in outpatients 14 days following discharge with a further repeat CT scan. Once again, he remained asymptomatic and CT findings revealed minimal interval change. A magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatogram (MRCP) was subsequently carried out, confirming complete loss of pancreatic duct integrity. The duct was found to be dilated to 4.2 mm distal to the point of transection with associated hypo enhancement of the parenchyma suggestive of fibrosis. Despite this, the patient remains clinically well and is asymptomatic as of six months since discharge from the hospital. He continues to be monitored in the outpatient setting.