A 64-year-old Caucasian man had severe regurgitation of the tricuspid aortic valve due to an aneurysm of the ascending aorta, which involved the sinus of Valsalva. Composite valve-graft conduit replacement of the aortic root was performed 4 years ago. The patient suffered a transient ischemic attack with a thrombotic occlusion of a branch of the left middle cerebral artery 18 months postoperatively, most likely due to subtherapeutic oral anticoagulation (international normalized ratio [INR] 1.8). Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) did not show vegetations on the mechanical aortic valve and the concentration of C-reactive protein was 1 mg/L (normal value <5). Aspirin was then added to the vitamin K antagonist phenprocoumon, and the patient successfully self-monitored his INR values with a target range of 2.0–3.0. He did not use skin disinfectants, and he had no acne.
A wasp sting to his upper lip was managed conservatively one month prior to hospitalization, and subdued sounds of his mechanical aortic valve were noticed by the patient. No dental procedures were performed in the six months prior to the sting. He became febrile up to 38 °C, had night sweats and felt ill. Upon admission, the patient was in good general condition. His body temperature was 37.3 °C; his blood pressure was 137/94 mmHg; and his pulse rate was 79 bpm. There was a 1/6 systolic murmur and a metallic hue to the second heart sound. There were no peripheral emboli in the skin. The spleen was not enlarged. Laboratory results showed an elevated concentration of C-reactive protein (73 mg/L, Fig. ) and a normal leukocyte count (7.3×109/L [normal values 4.0–9.8]). The kidney function (creatinine 90 μmol/L [62–110]) and the liver function tests (aspartate transaminase [AST] 29 U/L [<38]) were normal. The INR value was 2.4, consistent with therapeutic anticoagulation with phenprocoumon. The lactic dehydrogenase was slightly elevated (655 U/L [<248]). An infective endocarditis was suspected clinically, and TEE was performed. Vegetations on the mechanical bileaflet aortic valve were seen , but there was no perivalvular abscess formation. Ten blood cultures (BactecTM 9050, Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) were inoculated with 10 ml blood samples, five cultured under aerobic and five under anaerobic conditions. All blood cultures were obtained before starting the antibiotic therapy. Initially, no bacterial growth was observed. Broad range polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using 16S rDNA primers failed to identify bacteria in blood samples. One anaerobic blood-culture showed growth of a Gram-positive rod after 6 days, which was sent to the reference laboratory for further testing. The identification of P. acnes was performed according to standard procedures with conventional tests. The Gram-positive rods were catalase positive, showed a positive CAMP reaction, reduced nitrate and produced indole, but were lipase and lecithinase negative. Utilizing gas-liquid chromatography, the production of propionic acid from the glucose broth was detected. In four of 5 anaerobic blood cultures bacteria grew within 12 days, and biochemical analysis again identified P. acnes; all aerobic blood cultures remained sterile. Furthermore, the antibody response to this bacterium was quantified . According to the modified Duke criteria, a definitive diagnosis of infective endocarditis was confirmed . The initial antibiotic treatment included vancomycin and gentamicin i.v. plus rifampicin p.o. After the identification of the P. acnes, vancomycin was stopped and ceftriaxone was started. The intravenous therapy was stopped after four weeks, and levofloxacine plus rifampicin were prescribed for an additional four weeks of oral antibiotic therapy. No bacteria grew in the blood cultures following the completion of the antibiotic therapy. A follow-up TEE showed no vegetations on the mechanical aortic valve, and the patient continues to be well. He consistently uses skin disinfectants prior to obtaining a blood specimen for his INR measurements.
Sera drawn at different time points were tested for antibodies against P. acnes by the Ouchterlony assay in the following 2½ years. For the antigen preparation of the P. acnes strain (ATCC 6916, Manassas, VA) colonies of 20 sheep blood agar plates were suspended in a tube with 10 ml of phosphate buffered saline (pH 7.2) and sonicated in a cup horn sonifier (60 W, Branson Sonic Power Co., Danbury, CT) 8 times for one minute. The tube was centrifuged at 2000xg for 10 min following overnight storage at 4 °C. Aliquots of the supernatant, each containing100 μL, were stored at −80 °C. The patient’s sera were tested against this antigen with the Ouchterlony test . The highest dilution of the serum that still precipitated the P. acnes antigen in the Ouchterlony test system (ID Plates Cleargel, IMMY, Norman, OK) represented the titer of this serum. The titers decreased during the following 2½ years indicating the clearing of the bacteria without relapse .