A 52-year-old overweight white woman with hypertension and a 3-years history of chronic kidney disease stage II K-DOQI was referred to our Nephrology department for worsening renal function and resistant hypertension.
Laboratory analysis showed a mild asymptomatic anemia, serum creatinine 1.9 mg/dl, with non-selective nephrotic proteinuria, Bence-Jones proteinuria, and extremely elevated serum kappa free light chains (FLC). Total calcemia was persistently normal and no bone lesions or full-blown nephrotic syndrome were present. Although coagulation profile was persistently not evaluable, probably due to the interfering monoclonal protein, bleeding time was in the normal range .
A bone marrow biopsy revealed a complete metaplasia of clonal plasma cells with > 90% of clonal plasma cells and cytogenetic analysis (FISH) confirmed the diagnosis of micromolecular kappa MM with high-risk chromosomal abnormalities, R-ISS 3. All clonal plasma cells carried translocation t(14;16) on IGH/MAF gene. Complete immunoparesis was also noticed, while CRAB criteria were not reported.
Patient showed increased NT-proBNP and high-sensitivity troponin (hs-cTnT) suggesting cardiac involvement. ECG showed tachycardia, first degree AV block and right axial deviation with right conduction delay. Unexpectedly, Congo-red stain on abdominal fat was negative for amyloid deposition. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed a 4.4 × 2.8 cm right atrial mass projecting through the tricuspid valve orifice, and a second 1.5 cm mass located at the right ventricle (RV) apex. Function and motility of both ventricles were preserved, and no sign of left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy was present (interventricular septum 10 mm, LV posterior wall 8 mm). No significant valvular regurgitations were identified.
A computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram showed RV thrombi, a large thrombus involving the pulmonary trunk and its two main right and left branches, as well as the segmental basal branches of the left lung. A partial thrombosis was described in the inferior vena cava from its intrahepatic tract to the origin of the renal veins (extended for about 7,5 cm) . Complete thrombosis of the left renal vein was also detected. Remarkably, the patient reported only mild asthenia, normal blood pressure, no dyspnea, and 99% oxygen saturation in room air. Since she was hemodynamically stable, unfractionated heparin was promptly started but, according to the thrombosis extension and the high risk of embolization, the patient was referred to cardiac surgery.
Through a midline-sternotomy approach, a bilateral pulmonary thrombus was removed en-bloc with attached casts of the lobar branches across an incision in the pulmonary artery.
Both masses from the right chambers were removed through the right atrium , while the thrombus into the inferior vena cava was too firmly attached to the vessel wall to be extracted. Cardiopulmonary bypass was terminated without inotropic supports. After surgery, patient restarted anticoagulation therapy with unfractionated heparin, subsequently substituted by warfarin.
Meantime, a kidney biopsy was performed and light microscopy showed a moderately increased glomerular mesangial matrix without endo or extracapillary proliferation. No morphological lesions such as mesangial nodules or nodular glomerulosclerosis were recognized and none of the glomeruli were sclerotic. There was a grade 1 interstitial fibrosis (IF < 25%) with small areas of lymphocytic infiltrate. Also, rare inflammatory hyaline casts were found in the tubules in the absence of concurrent cast-nephropathy. Vascular compartment was practically normal according to patient’s age . Congo red staining was once again negative. Immunofluorescence (IF) on fresh frozen unfixed tissue was not contributory, with only weak (± or 1 +) staining for C3 and kappa FLC . Differently, IF on fixed tissue demonstrated an intense (3 +) linear staining for kappa FLC along the glomerular and tubular basement membranes, while IgG, lambda, and C3 staining were negative . Electron microscopy showed segmentary “ground pepper-like” deposits in the subendothelial space and the glomerular basement membranes (GBM). Similar deposits were observed along the tubular basement membrane (TBM). Extensive podocyte foot process effacement was seen with no sub-epithelial or mesangial electron-dense deposits . The final diagnosis was “kappa light chain deposition disease (LCDD)”.
The patient fully recovered from surgery. A new TTE showed preserved function of both ventricles (EF 58%, TAPSE 20 mm, RV-RA gradient 25 mmHg) or major valvular disease. No new intracardiac masses were detected (video, Additional file 1).
A 3-months follow-up CT showed the persistence of only a partially calcified thrombus in the right pulmonary artery’s distal branches, warfarin was continued.
After 4 cycles of VTD protocol (Bortezomib, Thalidomide, Dexamethasone), the patient presented a very-good partial hematologic remission. Afterwards, she received autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, with a stable complete hematologic remission and a progressive improvement of proteinuria and renal function .