A 69-year-old woman was diagnosed with suspected GBC and peritoneal carcinomatosis and was referred to our hospital. She had no remarkable medical history, but hepatitis C virus antibody was incidentally detected on a laboratory test and a suspected GBC lesion was found in a subsequent imaging examination. The levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9) were 1.8 ng/mL and 144.5 U/mL, respectively. Contrast-enhanced CT showed 20-mm thickening of the fundus of the gallbladder and multiple nodules of approximately 100-mm maximum diameter in the peritoneal cavity . Contrast-enhanced MRI indicated similar findings to those in CT, and diffusion impairment at the primary tumor was apparent in diffusion-weighted imaging . The gallbladder tumor and the other nodules had high maximum standardized uptake values on PET-CT. The value for the primary tumor was 6.5.
Gemcitabine (GEM) plus cisplatin (CDDP) combination therapy (GC therapy) was started under a diagnosis of unresectable GBC with peritoneal carcinomatosis. After 12 courses of therapy over 9 months, the CEA and CA19-9 levels were similar to their initial values, after each had elevated once . The CA19-9 level remained high, but stable, and the primary tumor had enlarged slightly . However, the peritoneal nodules had disappeared in some areas and had not increased in number, and no new lesions, including distant metastasis, were visible on CT . Thus, we decided that complete resection was possible macroscopically.
Extended cholecystectomy with partial liver resection with surgical margins of approximately 1.5 cm from the primary tumor, resection of the extrahepatic bile duct with regional lymph node dissection, and total omentectomy were performed. The primary tumor at the fundus of the gallbladder had a macroscopic appearance of the nodular-infiltrating type . Multiple cancerous nodules were found in the omentum , but disseminated nodules in the peritoneum and liver metastasis were not apparent. Carcinoma cells were detected in intraoperative peritoneal lavage cytology, but ascites was not noted. The final stage was ypT3N0M1 (PER), ypStage IVB in the TNM clinical classification .
The primary GBC was biliary-type adenocarcinoma with squamous differentiation . Lymphatic invasion was seen , but lymph node metastasis was not detected. Degenerative features such as atrophic changes of tumor cells and prominent fibrosis and calcification of the surrounding stroma were partly present . The disseminated omentum nodules had similar degenerative features to those of the primary tumor . Overall, these findings suggested that preoperative chemotherapy had been effective.
On postoperative day 14, GC therapy was switched to GEM and S-1 therapy (GS therapy). We made this decision because of the apparent gradual weakening of the effect of GC therapy, based on the lack of shrinkage of the primary tumor; the small decline in the CA19-9 level; and the limited effect in histopathological findings. After 8 courses of GS therapy over 5 months, the regimen was changed to S-1 monotherapy because of the patient’s tolerance for GS therapy. This treatment has continued to date (i.e., 31 months from the initial diagnosis) without any apparent recurrence for 19 months postoperatively.