A 60-year-old woman complained of blurred vision in her left eye for one week. On presentation, the best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.6 in the right eye, and hand motion in the left eye. Slit lamp examination revealed normal anterior segment in both eyes. Direct ophthalmoscopy revealed slight macular epiretinal membrane in the right eye, and grey submacular membrane surrounded by subretinal hemorrhage in the left eye . The axial length of the right eye was 30.61 mm, and that of the left eye was 30.43 mm by IOL Master measurement. Fundus fluorescein angiography revealed early-staged submacular hyperfluorescence lesion , followed by strong fluorescein leakage and enlargement of hyperfluorescence in the later phases . Indocyanine green angiography demonstrated early-staged clustered hyperfluorescence spots , which showed evident leakage and enlargement in the later phases , confirming an active CNV in the left eye. Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) revealed type 2 CNV surrounded by serous neurosensory macuar detachment and intraretinal cysts above CNV in the left eye . Her past medical history was not remarkable. CNV secondary to degenerative myopia in the left eye was then diagnosed and uneventful intravitreal conbercept (2.5 mg/0.05 ml) injection was performed soon after the informed consent was signed.
Three weeks after the injection, the patient came back with a complaint of central scotoma in the left eye. BCVA was counting fingers, funduscopic examination revealed a full thickness MH and surrounded retinal detachment , SD-OCT comfirmed a full thickness MH accompanied by macular detachment and intraretinal cysts in the left eye . Vitrectomy, internal limiting membrane peeling assisted by indocyanine green staining, and silicone oil tamponade were successfully performed in the left eye. Postoperative SD-OCT at one week’s follow-up revealed a reattached macular retina yet still open MH in the left eye. At three months’ follow-up, BCVA in the left eye was 0.05, MH still kept open depite successful macular reattachment and Fuchs spot formation which was characterized by a hyperreflective subretinal spot in SD-OCT.