A boy aged 5 years and 4 months, with a height of 101.2 cm and weight of 15.1 kg, was scheduled for circumcision under general anesthesia to treat true phimosis. He had a history of chronic granulomatosis and had undergone allogenic bone marrow transplantation when 4 years old. Over the course of treatment, he had general anesthesia five times using propofol and remifentanil and experienced no postoperative nausea. He also had no family history of PONV. The preoperative examination was otherwise unremarkable, aside from chronically slightly elevated AST (46 IU/L).
The patient was admitted to the operating room without premedication. Slow induction with sevoflurane and nitrous oxide was performed, and after intravenous access was established, intubation was performed using a supraglottic device. Anesthesia was maintained with oxygen, air, 0.9–1.1% of sevoflurane, and 0.4–0.5 mcg/kg/min of remifentanil during surgery. Sacral epidural anesthesia with 1ml/kg of 0.2% ropivacaine and 15mg/kg of intravenous acetaminophen was administered for postoperative analgesia. The operation time was 1 h and 2 min, and the anesthesia time was 1 h and 43 min.
The patient complained of nausea in the PACU and was administered 0.1mg/kg of ondansetron. After the nausea resolved, he was transferred to the general ward.
The patient was able to drink water at 1 h and 2 h after transfer to the ward, but intravenous infusion was continued because he did not feel well enough to eat dinner. He vomited after breakfast the following day and complained of continued nausea. Discharge to home was postponed, and 0.1mg/kg ondansetron was re-administered—23 h had elapsed since the first dose in the PACU. Thirty minutes after re-administration, he became drowsy and showed only a slight response to stimulation, scoring 5 on the Ramsay sedation scale. Since vital signs were stable with no respiratory depression or need for oxygen, follow-up was continued in the ward with a pulse oximeter.
Three hours after re-administration, the patient recovered to a score of 3 on the Ramsay sedation scale. He could have water without nausea or vomiting. He was discharged later on the same day at the strong request of his guardian. Because the drowsiness improved spontaneously, no additional testing was performed. After discharge from the hospital, he was able to have meals as usual, and drowsiness was not observed.