Our patient is a nonsmoker, 73-year-old male who came to our attention after presenting to a medical outpatient clinic with the chief complaint of right shoulder pain with a 2-week duration. The patient describes his pain as excruciating in nature, mostly occurring at night and awakening him from sleep. He experienced two episodes of the same complaint lasting about 3–5 days in the last 6 months, both with spontaneous resolution. Nowadays, the patient is seeking medical attention due to the persistence of the pain without any improvement. He mentioned that he is consuming large and frequent meals of red meats and some kinds of seafood such as tuna. Past medical history is positive for controlled hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and mild chronic kidney disease. The patient reported no personal and/or family history of cancer, any acute, repeat, or discontinued medications, any allergies, autoinflammatory diseases, any genetic or psychosocial issues, and a significant past surgical history for coronary artery bypass graft. He denies any history of trauma in general or specifically to the shoulder. Upon admission, the physical assessment was unremarkable except for right shoulder pain and tenderness with movement in the absence of redness, swelling, and hotness. Laboratory evaluation revealed C-reactive protein of 111 mg/l (normal range 0–10 mg/l), erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 122 mm/h (normal range 0–15 mm/h), blood urea nitrogen of 32 mg/dl (normal range 8–23 mg/dl), creatinine of 1.4 mg/dl (normal range 0.7–1.2 mg/dl), uric acid of 15 mg/dl (normal range 3.7–7.1 mg/dl), and a normal white blood cell count. Radiological imaging of the right shoulder was normal. An arthrocentesis was performed, and analysis of the aspirated synovial fluid revealed the presence of yellow needle-shaped monosodium urate crystals under a light microscope along with a white blood cell count of 2500 cell/μl. A diagnosis of gout with right shoulder involvement was established. The patient was prescribed prednisolone 40 mg/day for 10 days, allopurinol 300 mg/day, and colchicine 0.5 mg/day. The patient was followed up for 6 months with significant improvement. The patient also had a good tolerance for pharmacological agents without any reported complications or adverse events.