A 57-year-old male with a history of diabetes presented to the ophthalmology clinic with chief complaints of sudden painless diminution of vision, metamorphopsia, and color vision deficits in the left eye (OS) for one month. At that time, his vision was 20/20 in the right eye (OD) and 20/40 in OS, and intraocular pressure (IOP) was 13 mmHg OU. Ophthalmic examination revealed a left relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD), blurred optic nerve margin, creamy chorioretinal infiltration around the optic disc, and mild macular edema, with no evidence of diabetic retinopathy. Examination of the right eye was non-revealing. The patient denied any history of drug abuse, smoking, or recent travels, and other than type 2 diabetes mellitus with glycated hemoglobin of 7.2%, his past medical history was not contributory.

All laboratory tests including complete blood count (CBC), C-reactive protein (CRP), anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), rheumatoid factor (RF), angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), viral hepatitis titers, lysozyme, Histoplasma antibody, Syphilis, HLA-B27, HIV, Bartonella serology, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), QuantiFERON, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) were normal except for an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 28 mm/hr. CXR was normal; however, calcified mediastinal lymph nodes were detected on a chest CT with contrast, and their endobronchial ultrasound biopsy results were normal for histology and culture. MRI of the brain and orbit with Gadolinium enhancement displayed soft tissue abnormality with enhancement in the left orbital apex with involvement of the extraocular muscles, anterior aspect of Meckel’s cave, and lateral cavernous sinus. It also showed dural-based lesions along the greater wing of the right sphenoid and inferior frontal convexity with underlying cortical erosion and enhancement of the calvarium and subtle leptomeningeal enhancement along the ventral surface of the pons.

Additionally, lumbar puncture showed normal opening pressure (11 cm H2O), and CSF analysis demonstrated a white blood cell (WBC) count of 45 cells/µL (88% lymphocyte), protein of 174 mg/dL, and glucose of 59 mg/dL. Complement fixation (CF) test for Coccidioides immitis was positive (titer of 1:2); however, the culture was negative. Flow cytometry excluded lymphoma. According to these findings and the patient’s previously vague history of flu-like symptoms, headaches, intermittent nausea/vomiting, and neck pain (2–3 months before), a tentative diagnosis of Coccidioidomycosis meningitis was made. Fluconazole (800 mg) once daily was commenced. However, due to its adverse effects of intractable nausea and vomiting, it was later switched to posaconazole 100 mg three times daily.

Three months later, the patient stated a mild improvement in his vision, which was in line with the change in his BCVA (20/25 OS). He also tested negative for Coccidioides immitis antibodies in CSF and blood. A repeat orbital and head MRI scan also displayed stable enhancement of the left orbit cavernous sinus, both optic nerves and meninges.

Although the follow-up testing was negative, the patient was maintained on a lower dose of posaconazole (100 mg twice daily) according to the expert advice of three Infectious Disease specialists who believed Coccidioides immitis meningitis was the most probable diagnosis for the patient based on the existing evidence.

Five months later, the patient presented with acute onset of anterior uveitis (3+ anterior chamber cells) in OD. In addition to increasing the posaconazole to the previous dosage (300 mg), he underwent an extraocular orbital muscle biopsy for further investigation. The biopsy revealed non-caseating granulomatous inflammation with negative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) results for Coccidioides immitis. To manage possible concurrent inflammatory etiology, his rheumatologist then attempted a trial of 60 mg of oral prednisone daily. New treatment improved his fundoscopic findings, including regression of the previously noted creamy choroidal infiltrate and resolution of optic nerve edema and subretinal fluid. However, his vision and visual field remain unchanged.

Seven months later, a neuro-ophthalmologist noted significant active left optic disc edema, which had worsened due to poor compliance with his corticosteroid therapy. According to a diagnosis of presumed sarcoidosis flare-up, the patient was restarted on 20 mg prednisone daily and was referred to the Uveitis Clinic for further management.

At that time, his vision was 20/40 OD and 20/60 OS, and IOP was 9 and 10 mmHg OD and OS, respectively. Ophthalmic examination revealed disc swelling with a blurred optic nerve margin, peripapillary chorioretinal atrophy, and 1+ cell in anterior vitreous OS and unremarkable findings OD. Although the spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) image was normal OD, preserved foveal contour with intraretinal edema and ellipsoid zone disruption in the macular region were detected in OS. Moreover, SD-OCT of the left eye optic nerve showed elevated disc and subretinal fluid at the temporal side. Wide-angle fundus fluorescein angiography (FA) at the late phase showed moderate optic disc hyperfluorescence and window defect on the lesion with chorioretinal atrophy OS. A follow-up MRI displayed stable soft tissue abnormalities. As the constellations of findings were consistent with the diagnosis of NS, prednisone 20 mg was restarted for the patient, leading to the resolution of his ocular symptoms in OS. At the time, chest CT showed nonspecific solid and ground glass pulmonary nodules. Positron emission tomography (PET) CT demonstrated multiple fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) avid lymph nodes above and below the diaphragm, consistent with a diagnosis of sarcoidosis. Multiple follow-up CSF testing showed no evidence of coccidioidomycosis, which made it unlikely for the patient to have active coccidioidomycosis meningitis, further supporting NS as our primary diagnosis. At that point, according to the highly probable diagnosis of NS, the Infectious Disease specialist discontinued posaconazole.

Two months later, his vision was 20/30 and 20/60 in OD and OS, respectively. Fundus photo showed milder optic disc edema and SD-OCT manifested improvement, such as decreased size and echogenicity of intraretinal fluid OS. Likewise, FA showed improvement in the optic disc inflammation as reduced hyperfluorescence. Subsequently, prednisone was tapered to 10 mg daily, and methotrexate at 20 mg weekly was initiated with folic acid supplementation. Follow-up MRI showed improvement in soft tissue thickening and enhancement within the intraconal soft tissues near the orbital apex as well as the peripheral enhancement of the proximal intraorbital segment of the optic nerve sheath complex. However, three months later, methotrexate was replaced with monthly infliximab infusion (7.5 mg/kg for 4 months) to manage the worsening of his neurologic symptoms, such as severe headaches as well as ocular inflammation OU (+1 anterior chamber flare and cells). In the meanwhile, the patient underwent bilateral cataract surgery as well. During the most recent visit, the patient indicated an improvement in blurriness, light sensitivity, and eye pain OU, which was in line with the resolution of ocular inflammation (no anterior chamber flare and cells) and BCVA of 20/20 and 20/30 in OD and OS, respectively.