The patient was a 75-year-old woman who presented with severe bilateral leg edema and epigastralgia. There was no past history of chronic hepatitis or blood transfusion. Admission laboratory tests revealed an elevated serum aspartate aminotransferase level (48 U/L), mildly decreased serum albumin (3.6 g/dL), mildly decreased serum (74%), mildly elevated D-dimer (12.9 μg/mL), and mildly elevated fibrin degradation product (12.6 μg/mL). The tumor marker AFP was slightly elevated to 585 ng/mL. The Child-Pugh classification was A, and the indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min was 12%. CT scans showed a huge tumor, 21 cm in diameter, in the right liver and TT, 37 mm in diameter, in the right atrium . The TT was pedunculated, swung like a pendulum with the heartbeat, and reached the tricuspid valve on a transesophageal ultrasound video . The symptomatic patient had a risk of sudden death due to TT in the right atrium. Therefore, we explained the high surgical mortality rate to the patient and her family, and they decided to proceed with surgery.
At first, a partial sternotomy was made, and cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) via the aorta, superior vena cava, and right femoral vein and electrical ventricular fibrillation were performed after intravenous injection of 25,000 units of heparin sodium. Although the TT in the right atrium was very soft and fragile, thrombectomy from the right atrium and inferior vena cava (IVC) was successful . After the removal of TT, the IVC was clamped with a tourniquet above the diaphragm and the right atrium was sutured with 5–0 Prolene. After DC defibrillation was carried out, CPB was stopped, the tourniquet on the IVC was released, and 100 mg protamine was administered for the neutralization of heparin. The open heart surgery time was 23 min, and the CPB time was 42 min. Next, a reverse T incision was made, and right hepatectomy by anterior approach and IVC tumor thrombectomy were performed. After ligation of the anterior and posterior Glissonean pedicles, the liver parenchyma was transected under the Pringle maneuver and IVC clamping below the liver. After the IVC and right hepatic vein were confirmed by anterior approach, the IVC was opened and a residual TT in the IVC was removed under total hepatic vascular exclusion (THVE) . Finally, the huge tumor was removed with the diaphragm without pulmonary embolism. The total operation time was 9 h, and the total blood loss was 8200 mL. The tumor was of the massive type macroscopically , and cancer cells showed moderately to poorly differentiated HCC with invasion to the portal vein, hepatic vein, and diaphragm. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged 14 days after surgery. She is still alive 14 months after surgery with recurrence in the lung.