A thirty seven year old female presented with a history of progressive distension of the abdomen with pedal edema and yellow discolouration of the eyes of two weeks duration. On examination she was found to be icteric with an enlarged, firm liver and gross ascites. Liver function tests revealed a conjugated hyperbilirubinemia with mildly deranged transaminases and alkaline phosphatase. Ultrasonography (USG) with Colour Doppler showed an enlarged liver with a hypertrophied caudate lobe, a 1.1 cm portal vein with hepatopetal flow, an occluded right hepatic vein with middle and left hepatic veins patent only in their proximal parts and a patent but narrowed inferior vena cava, compressed by the caudate lobe, together with free fluid in the abdomen. Splenic and superior mesenteric veins were normal. Liver biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of Budd Chiari syndrome. Prothrombotic workup did not reveal any obvious cause for the Budd Chiari syndrome.
Transjugular venogram showed 90% narrowing of the IVC with a 14 mmHg gradient across the narrowing and non-visualization of the hepatic veins beyond their origins. The hepatic veins could not be cannulated, suggestive of complete occlusion at the ostia. . An 18 × 63 mm WALL STENT was placed across the narrowed segment in the IVC followed by balloon dilatation using a 16 mm balloon .
Percutaneous transhepatic venogram through the left hepatic vein under USG guidance showed the left hepatic vein was patent only in its proximal portion, the distal 2–3 cms being completely occluded and draining through multiple collaterals. IVC stent was in situ . The right hepatic vein was completely occluded. The middle hepatic vein also showed long-segment total occlusion (> 3 cm).
Recanalisation of the left hepatic vein was attempted, but failed owing to the long and fibrous nature of the occlusion. The patient then underwent a side-to-side portocaval shunt using the right external iliac vein as H-graft. Postoperative recovery was uneventful and she was anticoagulated during that time. Six weeks after surgery, she was re-admitted with pedal edema and ascites. Doppler evaluation showed patchy flow through the shunt. Venogram through a transjugular approach revealed patent IVC stent. There was narrowing of the portosystemic graft with a gradient of more than 15 mmHg near its IVC end .
Considering the acute angulation of the portocaval shunt with the IVC, a transfemoral venous approach for venoplasty and stenting was thought to be more appropriate. Following predilatation of the graft with a 5 mm angioplasty balloon , an 8 mm × 30 mm self-expanding nitinol stent was placed in the graft covering its portal and caval ends. Post dilatation was carried out by a 8 mm balloon. Post stenting portal venogram showed good flow through the graft into the IVC .
The portocaval gradient dropped to < 5 mmHg post stenting. Subsequently she was anticoagulated with warfarin. The patient has been on regular follow up since then and is asymptomatic for five years.