A 74-year-old male was admitted to the emergency department with a 3-day history of progressive painful proptosis of the left eye. His medical history included hypertension and hyperlipidemia with no history of trauma. Clinical examination revealed a left proptotic orbit with chemosis and scleral injection . Visual acuity of the left eye was 20/150. The right eye was unremarkable; the patient had no fever nor other infectious signs.
Computed tomography (CT) scan showed an ovoid mass in the lateral intraconal space with surrounding infiltration and increased vascularity. CT angiogram revealed a well-circumscribed heterogeneously enhancing mass within the inferior intraconal space of the left orbit (measuring 1.8 × 1.7 cm round) with periorbital soft-tissue swelling, suggesting inflammation . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) angiogram confirmed the findings of past studies: orbital cellulitis was apparent, the left inferior ophthalmic vein was prominent as compared to the right, and there was a partly thrombosed venous varix of the inferior ophthalmic vein . Imaging did not show any evidence of arteriovenous fistula.
At this point, potential considerations included orbital cavernous malformation, metastatic tumor causing venous outflow stenosis, arteriovenous malformation, dural arteriovenous fistula, and thrombosed venous varix due to orbital cellulitis.
A neurosurgical consult was requested by the ophthalmology team. To further delineate the nature of the lesion, a diagnostic cerebral angiogram was performed, which revealed an intraconal venous varix . Consideration was made for transvenous embolization or direct orbital puncture and embolization along with surgical removal. A mutual decision of conservative treatment without intervention was reached, with aggressive interventions reserved if the patient declined further. Intravenous methylprednisolone for 5 days was initiated, as well as a maintained course of oral corticosteroids, doxycycline, and levofloxacin thereafter.
The patient was seen in the clinic 2 weeks after discharge. His symptoms had significantly improved, and he denied any eye redness, diplopia, or pain. On examination, there was no chemosis or scleral injection, but there was a significantly improved mild, painless proptosis . A 2-week follow-up CT scan of the orbit with contrast demonstrated a stable soft-tissue intraconal mass in the left orbit with peripheral venous phase enhancement in addition to central enhancement, consistent with the previously diagnosed thrombosed orbital venous varix of the inferior ophthalmic vein . At this time, the patient had completed his oral antibiotic course and was tapering his prednisone course. A 1-year orbital MRI was conducted and showed a slight increase in the enhancing intraconal mass in the left orbit . The patient had no symptoms. Since the mass size had not significantly increase and the patient’s condition was stable, no additional imaging or clinical follow-up was required per standard of care.