We present the case of a male Caucasian infant, aged 9 months and 3 weeks, who is brought to the emergency room having 40 °C fever, vomiting associated with breast feeding, restlessness, symptoms with an onset in the last 12 h, and associated with the mother’s referral as for the protuberant fontanelle. At the time of admission, the infant was febrile 38.8 °C, pale, with perioral cyanosis, with a normal lung assessment, relative bradycardia - heart rate (HR) of 88 beats per minute (bpm), with asymmetric deep tendon reflexes more diminished on the right side, right Babinski reflex present, right hemibody motor deficit, bulging of the anterior fontanelle, and Glasgow Coma Scale of 8. He was born naturally, normal birth weight, with food diversification started at the age of 6 months, and still breast fed at the moment. The only condition in the infant’s history is a gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), diagnosed at the age of 2 months, for which the patient received a treatment with esomeprazole 0.5 mg/kg/qd (5 mg/qd) for the last 4 months. The GERD improved after food diversification was introduced, but some inconstant vomiting is still present. Laboratory investigations revealed the following alterations: leukopenia – white blood cells 2.6 × 109/L, 88.2% (2.293 × 109/L) neutrophils, hemoglobin 9.9 g/L, hematocrit 28.8%, mean corpuscular volume 70.6 fL, platelets 133 × 109/L, blood protein 5.74 g/dl, blood glucose 102 mg/dl, C-reactive protein 215 mg/L (references value 0–10 mg/L), and procalcitonin 10 ng/ml (references value < 0.5 ng/ml).
A chest radiography was performed and revealed an emphasized bilateral infrahilar and hilar interstitial drawing.
A cranial computerized tomograpohy (CT) scan was performed and revealed the following aspect: a diffuse cerebral edema with a wide left parietal hypodense area.
A cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was also performed and the findings were the following: a diffused swelling aspect of the cortical areas (hyposignal T1/T2 and hyperintensity on FLAIR sequences) with the disappearance of cortical sulci, and with the blurring of the cortical gray and white matter border in the left paramedian areas of the frontal, parietal, and occipital lobe. Hypersignal T2 and hyperintensity on FLAIR sequences in the fronto-parietal sulcus (bilateral) with a haematic component in magnetic susceptibility sequences. Ectasia of the small cortical cerebral veins, without cerebral lacuna images at the level of high flow cortical veins or venous sinuses. Small images with restricted diffusion spread across the bilateral supratentorial brain parenchyma. The administration of gadolinium-based contrast agent highlighted small diffused areas in the right frontal lobe white matter right, in the left frontal and parietal lobe, underlying areas of edema and at the level of the meninges, predominantly in the frontal and parietal lobes. See Figs. and .
3D Time of flight angiography TOF sequences revealed no abnormalities in the cerebral arterial circulation. The conclusion of the MRI was: the described aspect corresponds to a meningoencephalitis. See Fig. .
A transfontanelar puncture was performed, and revealed a purulent cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), a CSF on examination with 310 WBCs/mm3 (reference values 0 to 10), a glucose of 5 mg/dL (reference values 40 to 70 mg/dL), a protein of 28.35 g/L (reference values 0.15 to 0.2 g/L), and with a latex agglutination test positive for group B Streptococcus (GBS). Gram stained smear shows a high number of leukocytes, rare red blood cells, and numerous Gram positive cocci arranged in pairs or short chains that were confirmed on growth medium as Streptococcus agalactiae. The antibiogram of the bacterial isolates determined by disc diffusion method revealed the sensitivity to ampicillin, linezolid, vancomycin, teicoplanin, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, ciprofloxacin, and the resistance to tetracycline and clindamycin. The treatment was initialized with cerebral depletion therapy (such as administration of intravenous solutions like mannitol), ampicillin 200 mg/kg/day, ceftriaxone 90 mg/kg/day, and vancomycin 60 mg/kg/day. After receiving the susceptibility tests result for the isolated strain, ampicillin, and vancomycin were administered. Also, dexamethasone, and antiseizure drugs were associated to the treatment. The bacteriological examination of mother’s genital secretions, breast milk, and peri-areolar skin were negative. The bacteriological examination of infant’s gastric secretion, was unfortunately performed after initiation of the treatment and was negative. His response to the therapy was slowly favorable, the survival being associated with motor (right hemiplegia), language deficits, and episodic irritability (Additional file : Flow diagram).