A 56-year-old male with no previous history of depression and sleep disorder experienced nightmare and abnormal dreams after consumption of 750 mg extended release metformin. He described his dream as bizarre which awakened him at night with negative feelings. The nightmare only lasted for a night, but the dreams every night thereafter seemed abnormal. He reported that the dreams did not affect his quality of sleep except for the first night. He had been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) 5 years ago and managed to control his blood glucose level by dietary modification. He concurrently took atorvastatin and candesartan for his hypertension and dyslipidemia. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) and Hamilton Psychiatric Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D17) showed very good sleep quality and negative results for depressive symptoms. He stated that he was happy with his life and working environment. Physical examination showed that the patient was overweight but other examinations were otherwise unremarkable. Liver enzymes, blood creatinine and urea were within normal limits. His A1C hemoglobin level was 7.6%.
In attempt to evaluate the causality of the nightmare and abnormal dreams, the patient agreed to temporarily discontinue and rechallenge atorvastatin, candesartan, and metformin, respectively. Every single drug was consumed for four consecutive days and then was changed to another drug. On the night when metformin was reintroduced, the abnormal dreams ensued. Although it did not affect his overall sleep quality and daily life, his abnormally vivid dreams continued for 4 following nights as the metformin was rechallenged.
After the extensive potential benefits of metformin were explained, the patient agreed to continue taking metformin 750 mg per day for the first week and metformin was uptitrated to 1500 mg per day in a 3-month follow-up plan. Three months after the initial visit, he reported that he still experienced abnormal dreams every night with no interference of daily activities. He noticed that the symptoms temporarily worsen when the dose was increased and felt better if he consumed metformin in the morning. He also occasionally experienced a mild metallic taste and bloating. His A1C hemoglobin level on the follow-up visit was 6.5%. The patient still reported the same abnormal dreams every night even after 6 months of using metformin. Both his global PSQI score and HAM-D17 were 0, and A1C hemoglobin level was 6.7% on the last visit.