Our patient was a 37-year-old, obese, previously healthy white woman. She was a smoker with no family history of ischemic heart disease. Her recent history involved 3 weeks of respiratory tract infection treated with antibiotics and bronchodilators.
She was admitted to our hospital after experiencing a witnessed out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Bystander CPR was immediately performed for 7 minutes, followed by advanced CPR that included tracheal intubation and mechanical chest compressions provided by the physician-led ambulance team. Her electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed ventricular fibrillation, and she underwent external defibrillation with return of spontaneous circulation. Upon hospital admission, the patient’s blood pressure (BP) was 94/45 mmHg and her heart rate was 110 beats per minute. Her ECG initially showed atrial fibrillation with spontaneous conversion to sinus rhythm and no signs of ST-segment elevations or Q-wave development. Computed tomography (CT) scans of her head and chest were reported normal.
Coronary angiography revealed a proximal thrombotic occlusion of the left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery. Successful recanalization of the LAD coronary artery after catheter-based thrombus aspiration, and balloon dilation followed by stent implantation, was verified with normalized anterograde flow (Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction grade flow score 3), and an eptifibatide infusion was instituted.
Immediately after the patient’s arrival in the intensive cardiac care unit (ICCU), a drop in her BP to 60/30 mmHg and a hemoglobin concentration of 4.5 g/dl were noticed. Transfusion was started, the patient’s abdomen was distended, and bedside abdominal ultrasound (US) examination revealed free intraperitoneal fluid. Abdominal CT performed after initial stabilization revealed liver injury with active extravasation from the cranial surface of the right lobe and a massive hemoperitoneum.
At that point, the patient was coagulopathic with a body temperature of 33.5 °C. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed a pH of 7.15 and a lactate concentration of 7.4 mmol/L. Angiography and selective transcatheter arterial embolization were successfully performed in combination with evacuation of 4.5 L of intraperitoneal blood through a 16-French pigtail catheter inserted into the right flank under US guidance .
After completion of these procedures, the patient was transfused with a total of 9 U of packed red blood cells, 8 U of plasma, and 2 U of platelets (pooled from five donors each) and was hemodynamically stable. She was weaned off mechanical ventilation 2 days later and thereafter made an uneventful recovery. She was discharged to a local hospital on day 13 without neurological disability.