The case we present begins at 5 years of age in a boy who 'eats and sleeps a lot', initially attributed to a sedentary lifestyle. However, at 7 years of age he suffers two episodes of generalized tonic-clonic seizures with altered natremia, which raise the alarm. His first admission concludes a hypothalamic-pituitary axis dysfunction, with no significant findings in the complementary tests. In addition, his behavior, defiant and aggressive for his age, draws attention. After a polysomnography with multiple latency tests at the discharge of his first admission, he is diagnosed with narcolepsy type 1 (without cataplexy, but with low levels of hypocretin-1: 58.2 pg/mL). Thus, the hypersomnolence they attributed to being a 'sleepy boy' is now justified, although the rest of the symptoms of narcolepsy (cataplexy, sleep paralysis and hallucinations) were never present. During the following four years, symptoms and signs of a significant hypothalamic dysfunction are added, including altered thermoregulation (cold skin), hyperprolactinemia, hypothyroidism, stagnation of height and weight gain of 18 kilos in one year, which guide the definitive diagnosis of ROHHAD. The imaging studies with magnetic resonance ruled out structural lesions, as well as neural tumors, with the performance of a 123I-MIBG scintigraphy. Successive polysomnographies showed a deterioration of his quality of sleep, at the expense of hypoventilation during sleep, which could be documented by transcutaneous capnography, which showed a partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) > 50 mmHg during 72% of sleep and a mean pCO2 of 52.1 mmHg, with significant O2 desaturation in the absence of data of sleep apnoea. For all this, the patient received a multitude of treatments (topiramate, risperidone, levotiroxina, bi-level positive airway pressure at night and strict control of caloric and hydric intake). In addition, immunoglobulins, corticosteroids, rituximab, cyclophosphamide and etanercept were used. Nothing was effective to reverse, or at least stop, the progress of the disease, which in the last admissions associated significant malnutrition (obesity), dehydration, episodes of uncontrollable agitation with self and hetero aggressiveness, which required the use of parenteral nutrition and sedation. Finally, he died at 11 years of age, after six years from the onset of symptoms and four from the diagnosis of ROHHAD.
