We report the case of a 58-year-old woman diagnosed with multiple simultaneous colon cancer using the Pillcam Colon 2. The patient referred to our service for dyspnea, fatigue and chest pain with a progressive onset. From patient history, we should mention type II diabetes mellitus, atrial fibrillation and cardiac ischemic disease and family history of colon cancer (father). She received a low dose of aspirin (Aspenter 75mg). The patient denied melena or changes of bowel habits.
On examination, the patient was noted to be pale, tachycardic (pulse = 104 bpm), orthopneic, with pulmonary rales, tender liver and periferal pitting edema; gynecologic evaluation was normal. Blood tests showed severe hypochromic-microcytic anemia (hemoglobin = 7,61g/dl; MCV=66,2fl; MCH=19,8pg), thrombocytosis (PLT= 500.000/mmc) with low level of serum Fe (19 microg/dl) and high Fe-binding capacity (495 mg/dl). Renal function tests revealed a minimally elevated BUN (51mg/dl). Other biochemical markers found some inflammatory activity (ESR = 50mm/h, CRP +), while tumoral markers were non-reactive. Upper endoscopy revealed an erosive pangastritis (probably due to aspirin ingestion) with no evidence of bleeding. This is why we decided to perform a colonoscopy, but because of the associated co-morbidities, the patient could not tolerate the examination. We used the Pillcam colon 2 system to investigate the entire digestive tract. The patient underwent a special preparation regimen with 6L of PEG (2L one day before capsule ingestion, 2L in the same day before ingestion and 2L after ingestion). This revealed one tumoral mass in the caecum and a second tumor in the transverse colon . After blood transfusions (2 MER units) and improvement of cardiac function, the patient was transferred in a surgery unit and two days later, she underwent surgery. Because the preoperative CT scan found no metastatic lesions and lymph nodes, there was no need for chemotherapy. The follow-up at 3 and 6 months after surgery identified no early complications or tumor recurrence.