A 50-year-old woman with a history of fatigue, worsening exertional dyspnoea, and
weight increase (8 kg) in the last 3 months was referred to our
Cardiovascular Department by her general practitioner. Clinical examination detected
hypotension (90/60 mmHg), an holosystolic murmur best heard at the cardiac
apex, bilateral pulmonary rales, lower extremity oedema, and macroglossia. Her past
medical history was unremarkable except for bilateral carpal tunnel (CT) surgery
some years before. She denied suffering from arterial hypertension, and an
electrocardiogram (ECG) obtained 1 year earlier was reported normal (not
available).
The patient is a previously asymptomatic young adult without comorbidities,
presenting with severe new-onset HF. The differential diagnosis includes
cardiomyopathies, hypertensive, ischaemic, and valvular heart diseases. Macroglossia
and CT syndrome suggest an infiltrative disease, while the heart murmur endorses the
possibility of a severe valve disease precipitating acute HF. The absence of any
cardiovascular risk factor makes the diagnosis of ischaemic heart disease
unlikely.
The ECG showed sinus rhythm with normal QRS voltages and Q-waves in anterior and
inferior leads not consistent with the degree of left ventricle (LV)
hypertrophy (max 17 mm) and normal wall motion evident at echocardiography
.
In addition, grade III diastolic dysfunction, reduced LV global longitudinal strain
(GLS –14%) with an ‘apical sparing’ pattern, thickened
mitral valve leaflets, right ventricle hypertrophy and dilated inferior vena cava
were found (Video 1). Laboratory tests revealed high brain natriuretic peptide
(BNP) levels (618 pg/L, normal reference value <100 pg/L) and
persistent mild increase in troponin T (0.34 ng/mL, normal reference value
<0.25 ng/mL). An invasive angiography excluded coronary artery
disease. Clinical and instrumental findings rose the suspicion of CA, and the
Gillmore’s algorithm was followed: serum λ free light chains (FLCs) returned
pathologically increased (108 mg/dL, delta FLCs 93 mg/dL) and Perugini
grade 1 myocardial uptake was found at diphosphonate scintigraphy . The diagnosis of
AL-CA was confirmed through detection and typing of amyloid fibrils at Congo red
staining and electron microscopy of abdominal fat specimen. A concomitant diagnosis
of a smouldering micromolecular λ-type myeloma was made on the basis of
22% clonal plasma cell in the bone marrow biopsy (BMB) without signs of
end-organ (classic ‘calcium elevation, renal insufficiency, anemia, and bone
abnormalities’ criteria) damage .
The advanced heart involvement (Mayo cardiac stage III) and the micromolecular myeloma
contraindicated ASCT as up-front therapy. Therefore, low-dose cytoreductive therapy
with cyclophosphamide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone (CyBorD) was started, halving
the standard dose of the proteasome inhibitor and monitoring troponin serum
concentrations and fluid status on a daily basis. Up-titration of diuretic dose up
to 200 mg/die of furosemide was necessary due to frequent readmissions for
decompensated HF with haemodynamic deterioration. No other HF medications were
started. Low cardiac index (2.5 l/min/m2) at right heart
catheterization and severely reduced maximal oxygen consumption during exercise
(VO2) peak (15.4 ml/kg/min, 50% predicted value) with
impaired ventilatory efficiency at cardiopulmonary exercise test (CPET) were
documented. After one CyBorD cycle, therapeutic strategies were collegially
discussed in a multidisciplinary team, considering three main variables: young age,
severe cardiac involvement with ominous prognosis, and absence of significant
extra-cardiac involvement, which was systematically investigated. The patient was
judged a good candidate for HTx followed by ASCT. Thus, she entered on the HTx
waiting list within 2 months from HF diagnosis. She experienced two syncopal
episodes without clear prodromal symptoms and received an implantable cardioverter
defibrillator for the prevention of arrhythmic death as bridge to HTx.
Despite fragile conditions, she succeeded in having a full course of chemotherapy
with unexpected progressive reduction in serum values of BNP and FLCs. After 1 year
of CyBorD therapy (6 cycles), serum FLCs normalized without residual hematological
disease at BMB. At cardiological evaluation, the patient was in New York Heart
Failure (NYHA) I functional class with normal BNP value (70 pg/L), lower diuretic
dose (125 mg/die), recovered LV systolic function (GLS −20%)
,
increased exercise capacity (VO2 peak of 20.8 ml/kg/min,
76% predicted value), and normalization of ventilation and carbon dioxide
production slope at CPET . Due to significantly improved
cardiac performance and the complete hematological response, CyBorD therapy was
discontinued, and the patient was withdrawn from HTx waiting list and the planned
ASCT. She underwent apheresis and cryopreservation of hematopoietic stem cells in
case of future need of ASCT. At device interrogations, no record of ventricular
arrhythmic events or ICD discharge was found. She remained stable in NYHA I
functional class after >3 years from HF onset under regular cardiological and
hematological follow-up.