A 68-year-old man presented with acute-onset cognitive and memory disturbance 10 days before admission. He experienced disorientation and had a score of 12 points on the mini-mental state examination (MMSE). He had no headache, nausea, or visual disturbance, including a visual field defect. Endocrinological examinations revealed hyponatremia (119 mEq/L), serum hypo-osmolality (242 mOsm/L), urinal hyper-osmolality (475 mOsm/L), presence of serum antidiuretic hormone (1.6 pg/mL), continued renal excretion of sodium (93.6 meq/L), normal adrenocortical function, absence of clinical evidence of volume depletion, absence of other causes of hyponatremia, and correction of hyponatremia with fluid restriction, which met the criteria of SIADH. Computed tomography (CT) indicated a high-density mass located in the third ventricle that caused left unilateral hydrocephalus due to obstruction of the foramen Monroe . Intraventricular hemorrhage was not apparent. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the tumor showed high intensity in both T1-weighted images (T1WIs) and T2-weighted images (T2WIs), low intensity in susceptibility-weighted images (SWIs), and a low intensity peripheral rim in T2WIs, suggesting subacute intralesional hemorrhage. The mass was not enhanced with gadolinium. Cerebral angiography revealed no mass stains.
The mass was removed via a basal interhemispheric translamina terminalis approach . An old hematoma was suctioned after incision of the capsule. The mass adhered tightly to the left hypothalamus, which was supposed to the origin and was well circumscribed from the surroundings. We carefully separated the mass from the left hypothalamus and completely excised the mass. Histopathological examination indicated that the specimen was composed of variant vessels, hematomas, and hemosiderin according to hematoxylin-eosin staining . Elastica van Gieson staining showed thin blood vessel walls containing endothelium as well as a collagenous adventitia. CD34-immunoreactivity was identified in the endothelial-like cells. The histopathological diagnosis was CCM.
Hyponatremia and serum hypo-osmolality improved (Na: 137 meq/L, serum osmolarity: 279 mOsm/L) without fluid restriction 7 days postoperatively. Diabetes insipidus did not appear. Postoperative T1WIs showed that the mass was completely excised and that the left unilateral hydrocephalus improved . However, disorientation and memory disturbance did not recover after the operation, and he was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation of higher brain function. His MMSE score improved to 21 points, and he could perform indoor activities of daily living, however, he could not resume work at 1 year after the operation.