During the course of a respiratory infection, a 26-year old male exhibited gait imbalance, numbness and “pins and needles” the lower-limbs. Based on the patient´s description, the sensory symptoms were present in whole lower legs from the hips and proximal thigh distally (i.e. approximately in the distribution from L3 to S1). The patient suffered from cough and fever for 2 days prior the onset of neurological symptoms. His C-reactive protein (CRP) was 160 mg/L (normal range 0-5 mg/L). The chest X-ray, abdominal ultrasound and echocardiography were normal. The paranasal sinuses radiography revealed a mild gas-fluid level in the left maxillary sinus. Starting from the 4th day of the respiratory symptoms (2 day after the onset of neurological symptoms), the patient was treated with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid for seven days, first five days intravenously 1000 mg/200 mg every eight hours in the department of internal medicine of a small local hospital and two last days per orally 875 mg/125 mg twice a day with the good effect on respiratory functions and fever, but without any impact in neurological symptoms and signs. The neurological symptoms were, however, not dominant from the patient’s perspective and the patient was not examined by any neurologist at the beginning of the symptoms. The residual neurological symptoms (numbness in the lower legs and difficulties running and tandem-walking) remained stable for another three years. Since the level of disability was considered mild, the patient was still not referred to a neurologist. The patient’s family history was unremarkable, patient’s mother suffers from high blood pressure and type 2 diabetes mellitus, his father has high blood pressure. No neurological or autoimmune diseases appeared in the family. The patient suffered from mononucleosis at the age of ten and mumps at the age of 17, otherwise is the patient’s medical history unremarkable.
By the time the patient had reached the age of 29, a subacute progression (two weeks) of imbalance had resulted in severe walking problems and he was admitted to the neurological department of the secondary hospital. Neurological examination revealed perianogenital hypesthesia with sphincter dysfunction (urinary retention¨and incomplete empting) and severe positive and negative sensory symptoms in the lower limbs, including L3-S2 hypoesthesia, impaired joint position sense and loss of vibration sense, and severe lower limbs and gait ataxia. Deep-tendon reflexes and the plantar reflex were absent. The patient was unable to walk correctly in tandem gait, or to run due to ataxia, he was unable to walk unsupported for more than few meters and did not exhibit any muscle weakness. His EDSS was 6.0. The clinical findings in the cranial nerves and upper extremities were completely normal and his cognitive status was intact.
An MRI (1.5 T) scan of the brain and cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine performed ten days after symptoms onset proved normal . In the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), there were no indications of neuro-infection, no oligoclonal bands appeared in CSF or in the serum. CSF protein was elevated to 2.24 g/L (normal range 0.15-0.45 g/L). Initial nerve conduction studies and needle electromyography (NCS/EMG) examinations were normal.
Based on the clinical presentation, relapsing-remitting course, elevated CSF protein levels and normal brain and spine MRI, a diagnosis of inflammatory polyneuropathy considered and the patient was therefore treated with high-dose steroids (3 g of methylprednisolone), resulting in a significant reduction of complaints with residual symptoms. Thus, the chronic treatment with prednisone (20 mg/day) commenced, and the patient was referred to a tertiary neuromuscular center.
In this center, a follow-up NCS examination confirmed the absence of demyelinating changes in all the peripheral nerves examined in both upper and lower limbs. The spinal MRI did not show any abnormality of the lumbar or sacral nerve roots (i.e. no thickening or a tube-shaped enlargement). The diagnosis of inflammatory neuropathy including chronic immune sensory polyradiculopathy (CISP) was therefore considered improbable and further investigation undertaken [, ]. Visual, brainstem auditory and motor-evoked potentials were normal. Somatosensory-evoked potentials established a central lesion of the spinal somatosensory pathway to the lower extremities (with no abnormality in the upper extremities) .
A range of laboratory tests was performed to investigate the following antibodies: the paraneoplastic (anti-Hu, anti-Ri, anti-Yo, anti-CV2, anti-Amphiphysin, anti-Ma1, anti-Ma2), the infectious (including syphilis and HIV) and the autoimmune (including anti-nuclear antibodies, antibodies against extractable nuclear antigens, anti-double- and single-stranded DNA; anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anticardiolipin antibodies, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies and anti-aquaporin-4 (AQP4)), all proved negative. The blood levels of creatine kinase, myoglobin, vitamin B12, B9, Cu, thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyroxine and carbohydrate-deficient transferrin were normal. Eventually, anti-MOG antibodies were detected by immunofluorescence Euroimmun fixed cell-based assay (titer 1:80).
A diagnosis of MRI-negative MOGAD myelitis was established and, in response to persisting neurological symptoms, the patient was retreated with high-dose steroids (3 g of methylprednisolone), to no significant effect. Long-term treatment with 100 mg azathioprine was started (a reduced dose in the light of lower thiopurine methyltransferase activity). The previous treatment with 20 mg prednisone was progressively discontinued over the course of six months . The medication is well tolerated; the patient had no complaints related specifically to the drug. The course of the disease was relapsing. There were no signs of relapse-independent progression.
Currently, the patient has been relapse-free and clinically stable for almost three years. MRIs of the brain and the spinal cord six months later remained normal. Anti-MOG seropositivity was repeatedly proven during remission by visual observation on a fluorescence microscope immunofluorescence Euroimmun fixed cell-based assay (titer 1:80 to 1:40). The patient’s optical coherence tomography remained normal.
At the age of 31, the patient currently exhibits mild negative sensory symptoms in the distal parts of the lower limbs, areflexia of the lower limbs, impaired sense of vibration and joint position, and moderate gait and lower limb ataxia. Tandem walking and running are not possible. His expanded disability status scale stands at 3.5 (cerebellar and sensitive 3, other functional systems normal). Patient´s cognitive functions are within normal range.