A 28-year-old Togolese woman of Ewe ethnic origin working part-time in a prison setting with no previous history of disease was admitted in August 2017 for left hemibody sensory problems with ataxia. These problems were observed while the patient was hospitalized for a few days in the hepato-gastroenterology (HGE) department. She had been referred to the HGE department for vomiting, abdominal pain and persistent hiccups lasting for about a month, which were thought to be due to gastritis with multiple ulcers based on a digestive endoscopy. Prior to admission to the HGE department, she initially received anti-ulcer and antiemetic drugs, but the outcome was marked by persistent vomiting and the appearance of episodes of prolonged loss of consciousness. Before the appearance of digestive problems, the patient presented with headaches and auditory and visual hallucinations due work-related stress. The examination also confirmed the existence of evening fever, weight loss without cough and secondary amenorrhea unrelated to pregnancy.
On day 1 of neurological problems, an examination confirmed the persistence of digestive symptoms, apyrexia, the existence of a headache, left hemibody ataxia with nystagmus when looking to the left, pronounced left osteotendinous reflexes, and left hemibody hypoesthesia up to the base of the neck. Encephalic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a hypersignal lesion in the bulbar more lateralized on the left in the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence not enhanced after a gadolinium injection . The infectious assessment showed a normal pulmonary X-ray, a negative human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serology, negative plasmodium tests but the presence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (using GeneXpert) with normal cytochemistry and a sedimentation rate (SR) of 120 mm in the 1st hour. The pregnancy test was negative. On day 3 of the neurological problems, digestive problems subsided, and even though the results of the examinations were not yet compiled, the patient presented three episodes of cardiopulmonary arrest with a fever of 39 °C without an infectious contact point. She successfully benefitted from orotracheal intubation with broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment and intravenous corticosteroids in the intensive care unit. In the presence of the digestive symptomatology with a bulbar lesion, we alluded to an APS within the framework of an NMOSD, and a sample for the anti-AQP4 antibody tests was sent to Paris, France. Upon leaving the intensive care unit after 72 h, anti-tuberculosis treatment was established. The outcome was favorable with apyrexia, a modification in the nystagmus and an improvement in the ataxia. Subsequently, the result of the anti-AQP4 antibody test was positive (indirect immunofluorescence on transfected cells, anti-AQP4 Euroimmun reagent, CERBA file No. 17 T0483884 of 01/09/2017). In September, 2 months from the onset of digestive problems, with Lhermitte’s sign and hand and foot contracture access without vesico-sphincter problems were established. At the neurological examination, the osteotendinous reflexes were pronounced. Cervical medullary MRI showed an additional intramedullary hypersignal lesion in the T2 sequence at the C2 level without contrast enhancement after a gadolinium injection . In addition to the symptomatic treatment of spasticity, a second course of intravenous corticosteroids was administered, and anti-tuberculosis treatment was continued. The outcome was favorable, and the patient resumed her usual activities as of February 2018, which was 8 months after the first onset. After 8 months of anti-tuberculosis treatment, the patient was started immunosuppressive therapy (azathioprine 50 mg twice daily) to limit the risk of recurrence of NMOSD.