A 6-year-old boy, weighing 18.5 kg, white Kosova-Albanian ethnicity, presented with right groin pain, swelling and redness. Two days before admission the patient was injured during a football game in the right lower abdomen and the next day he complained of pain in the right inguinal area.
Abdominal pain was permanent and increasing. The child was anorexic, but had no complaints of vomiting and diarrhea or disuria. On admission the patient was sub febrile (38°Celsius) with a painful non-reducible mass in the right inguinal region with signs of cellulitis in this area. There was a marked tenderness on palpation of the right lower abdomen and right hemiscrotum was moderately swollen and painful in palpation.
Plain abdominal x-ray showed no fluid-air levels, but a metallic foreign body (pin) under right superior pubic bone was apparent [Fig ]. White blood cells were elevated. Surgical exploration was performed under general anesthesia. Inguinal canal is opened through transverse lower abdominal skin crease. Through swollen cremaster muscle and hernia sac we palpated a sharp metallic foreign body. Sharp side came from appendix lumen, two thirds of pin being in its apex. Dividing cremaster muscle we opened swollen hernia sac and we found the inflamed vermiform appendix perforated by a domestic pin [Fig. ]. The base of the appendix and coecum were in the internal ring closing it, thus blocking the fluid from the hernia sac returning to the abdominal cavity. Serous-purulent exudate in hernia sac was aspirated.
Appendectomy and high ligation of hernia sac was performed. The wound was primary closed, without drainage. Antibiotics (ceftriaxon 500 mg and gentamicin 40 mg) twice a day for two days intravenously were administered. For postoperative analgesia paracetamol suppositories are given. Patient had uneventful postoperative course, and no complications in three years follow up.
From parents we learned that the boy three weeks before the operation unintentionally ingested a few pins while drinking cola from the glass in a family ceremony.
His mother has removed the pins from his mouth, and since he didn't have any complaints, he wasn't examined regarding foreign bodies in gastro-intestinal tract.