A 56-year-old female patient was initially admitted to a secondary care centre. Her medical history included arterial hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus and breast cancer undergone full remission following treatment more than 15 years ago. The patient had just returned from a pilgrimage when she noticed a subacute sensorimotor deficit in her left hand. Initially physicians suspected a stroke, but the brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no signs of acute or subacute ischemia or inflammation. She was admitted for further diagnostic evaluation. The next day she complained of blurred vision with no reported loss of visual acuity at that time. Over the next 3 days there was a marked clinical deterioration: The patient developed a vesiculopapular rash with secondary clustered crustation on her neck, ear and décolletage and became increasingly agitated and confused. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed a mild pleocytosis of 10 [0–4] /μl. Empirical antiviral treatment with aciclovir was started on suspicion of herpes zoster encephalitis. However, subsequent polymerase chain reaction testing of the CSF was negative for varicella-zoster, herpes simplex and other neurotropic viruses. A follow-up cerebral MRI revealed a right parahippocampal T2 lesion that was not evident on the initial MRI . In addition, there were T2 hyperintense lesions in both optic nerves, which were consistent with optic neuritis . At this point the patient was referred to our tertiary care facility.
Here the patient was diagnosed with blindness in the right eye, severe reduction of visual acuity in the left eye (<0.1) and a marked ataxic tetraparesis. The rash, misdiagnosed as herpes zoster, turned out to be self-induced excoriation caused by the patient’s own fingers in an attempt to relieve a perceived severe burning and itching over the skin, which we attributed to a central pain syndrome, probably the cause of the agitation.
MRI of the spinal cord revealed spinal cord T2 hyperintense lesion locations and extension compatible with transverse myelitis (,). A follow-up spinal tap was negative for oligoclonal bands. Chest/lung computed tomography scan revealed no evidence of pulmonary sarcoidosis. Initial testing for anti-AQP4 and anti-MOG antibodies was performed 12 days after clinical onset and prior to immunotherapy. Sera were analysed by cell-based indirect immunofluorescence at EUROIMMUN (Lübeck, Germany); staining at serum dilutions ≥1:10 was considered positive. Assays were negative at that time and at follow-up . In contrast to AQP4-Ab-positive NMOSD, the diagnostic criteria for seronegative NMOSD are far more complex and require the presence of ≥2 core criteria, at least one of which must be ON, LETM or area postrema syndrome. Additional MR criteria must also be met. In our case, the patient had two core clinical features (bilateral ON and LETM) with brain MRI showing extensive (>1/2 optic nerve length) T2 hyperintense lesions of both optic nerves, a white matter lesion not suggestive of MS and acute myelitis involving more than 3 contiguous segments. In addition, differential diagnoses were ruled out as far as possible by repeated serological and CSF analysis. Thus, we diagnosed seronegative NMOSD according to the 2015 revised criteria of the International Panel for NMO Diagnosis . We started treatment with high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone at 1 g per day for 5 consecutive days. Due to lack of improvement, 7 sessions of plasma exchange were performed every other day with concomitant oral prednisolone therapy (60 mg/d) and prolonged tapering. The concomitant medications at that time were pantoprazole, L-thyroxine, liraglutide, basal insulin, naloxegol, pregabalin and mirtazapine.
Given the recently approved therapies for AQP4-positive NMOSD and the fulminant onset of the disease, we decided to start INE as an off-label use. Administration of 300 mg on days 1 and 15 was well tolerated with no immediate or subacute adverse events. Prior to discharge to a rehabilitation clinic, the patient could recognise the basic shapes of most everyday objects with her left eye and was able to stand with much assistance.
At a follow-up visit 3 months later, the patient reported being able to walk up to 500 m with a walker. The right eye remained blind, colour vision had returned to the left eye, but she was still unable to read a newspaper. A brain MRI showed a new inflammatory T2 lesion in the left frontal white matter, possibly representing paraclinical disease activity before the immunotherapy could take full effect. Prednisolone was reduced from 20 mg to 5 mg/d. When we administered the second cycle of INE at the six-month follow-up, there were no new cerebral lesions and the inflammatory cervical myelopathy decreased in volume . Walking was unrestricted; unfortunately, the visual impairment remained unchanged. Clinical stability was maintained after 12 months of treatment. A synopsis of the clinical course is shown in .