A 6-month-old male infant was referred with different types of skin lesions, persistent blistering, and frequent spontaneous flushing since birth. The child did not have any physical or psychomotor disturbances. No significant family or antenatal history data existed. Intermittent courses with oral H1 blockers and topical antibiotics and corticosteroids had been administered without improvement.
On admission, vital signs and chest and abdomen examinations were unremarkable, while hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy were absent. A variety of skin lesions (reddish-brown, partially with peau d’orange appearance, macules, papules, plaques, and nodules), sized 4–65 mm, were distributed on the neck, trunk, buttocks, and extremities. Tense bullae, erosions, and crusts were revealed to overlay plaque surfaces . Darier’s sign was demonstrated . Oral mucosa was not affected. Within the first 2 days, we observed several flushing episodes, unprovoked by any triggering factors.
Laboratory findings did not disclose hematologic, biochemical, or liver function abnormalities. Serum tryptase level (STL) was 11.8 ng/ml (reference range <11.4 ng/ml). A biopsy taken from an elevated plaque with vesiculation revealed melanin in the basal/suprabasal layer, subepidermal bulla, dense mast cell infiltration, and some eosinophils in the dermis . Immunohistochemical staining for CD117 antibody was positive . Toluidine blue and Giemsa stainings showed metachromatic granules in the cytoplasm of the infiltrating cells . The pediatric consultation did not reveal systemic symptoms.
The patient was initially treated with methylprednisolone 0.6 mg/kg once daily (o.d.) intramuscularly (3 days), oral levocetirizine 1.25 mg o.d, 2% topical fusidic acid, and 0.1% betamethasone valerate cream. Subsequently, the dose of methylprednisolone was tapered, given orally (0.5 mg/kg o.d [4 days], 0.5 mg/kg every other day [2 weeks], 0.5 mg/kg twice a week [2 weeks]) and stopped. After 10 days, levocetirizine was replaced with ketotifen 0.05 mg/kg twice daily for eight more weeks and the cream was replaced with 1% hydrocortisone cream for a month. The child was closely followed up during the treatment. His symptoms improved remarkably. There were no adverse effects of the therapy. Over the following 3 years, the clinical manifestations were successfully managed with intermittent ketotifen and topical hydrocortisone treatments. Parents were counseled on the avoidance of triggering factors for mediator release. At the last follow-up (3.5 years of age), only a few pale-brownish macules were seen with no blistering or isolated flushing episodes. The STL declined to 7.2 ng/ml. For 3 years the patient did not show any symptoms consistent with systemic mastocytosis.
All procedures followed were in accordance with the ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation (institutional and national) and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1964, as revised in 2013. Informed consent was obtained from the parent for the child being included in the study and for the publication of the patient photographs.