A 25-year-old male with no pertinent past medical history presented to the ED by ambulance with obvious right wrist deformity following a high-speed motor vehicle collision as a restrained driver. The patient had braced his outstretched hand against the steering wheel during vehicular impact, resulting in traumatic injury to the wrist. His vital signs on arrival were within normal limits, but he was in significant distress, rating his pain as a 10/10. Physical examination revealed a grossly deformed right wrist with dorsal swelling and severe tenderness to palpation, but no evidence of neurovascular compromise. Radiographs of his right wrist revealed a transverse fracture of the distal radius with dorsal angulation of the distal fragment (Colles fracture), as well as an ulnar styloid fracture.
Despite receiving opioid and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory analgesia, the patient still reported intractable, severe pain with intolerance of radial manipulation. To avoid procedural sedation, an ultrasound-guided CCBPB was performed to augment patient analgesia and facilitate reduction (–, ).
Informed consent for CCBPB performance was obtained, and the patient was placed on a cardiac monitor with intravenous access established. The patient was positioned supine with the right arm abducted 90 degrees to stretch the pectoralis muscles and bring the costoclavicular brachial plexus more superficial toward the skin surface. The patient was prepped and draped in the standard manner, and sterility was maintained for the duration of the procedure. A high-frequency linear ultrasound probe was oriented transversely just inferior to the midpoint of the right clavicle in the infraclavicular fossa. The probe beam was angled slightly cephalad to visualize the costoclavicular space posterior to the clavicle. The costoclavicular brachial plexus cords were identified just lateral to the axillary artery and between the subclavius and serratus anterior (upper slips) muscles. An in-plane, lateral-to-medial approach was used to guide a 22-gauge, 50-millimeter echogenic block needle between the lateral and posterior cords. Twenty milliliters of 0.5% ropivacaine were injected perineurally around the brachial plexus cords. The procedure was performed without complications.
Fifteen minutes post-block performance, the patient had dense sensorimotor blockade of the right upper extremity and reported his pain at 0/10. Despite aggressive manipulation, the patient reported no pain, and successful reduction of the distal radius fracture was achieved. A sugar-tong forearm splint was applied, and the patient was discharged from the ED with outpatient orthopedic surgery follow-up. On telephone inquiry the next day, the patient reported no numbness, tingling, or residual sensorimotor deficit.