A 34-year-old nulligravida with a remote history of follicular cyst treated by ovarian cystectomy presented with acute abdominal pain associated with emesis. She was hemodynamically stable, but her abdominal exam was remarkable for rebound tenderness. Complete blood count revealed hemoglobin of 5.4 mg/dL (hematocrit of 18.7%) and an undetectable platelet count. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis revealed moderate-volume hemoperitoneum and contrast blush surrounding the left ovary , which was consistent with low volume active blood loss from the left ovary.
Five weeks prior to presentation, the patient experienced prolonged gingival bleeding after a dental appointment. Two weeks following this, she began to experience spontaneous bruising, epistaxis with minimal trauma or sneezing, and cravings for ice chips. This was followed by uncharacteristically long and heavy menses, during which the patient soaked 1 pad every 1-2 hours. She began to feel fatigue and shortness of breath with minimal activity. The day prior to admission, she began to feel abdominal bloating and the following day she described waxing and waning, moderate to severe abdominal pain.
She was admitted to the intensive care unit out of concern for possible spontaneous intracranial hemorrhage (ICH). She was transfused two units of platelets and two units of packed red cells; her platelet count rose only to 13 × 109/L and several hours later fell to 11 × 109/L . After review of her peripheral blood smear, hematology began empiric treatment for immune thrombocytopenia with IV immunoglobulin and IV methylprednisolone. The patient's platelet counts began to spontaneously improve without additional transfusion, consistent with a consumptive thrombocytopenia; at discharge, platelets were 162 × 109/L. The patient's hemoglobin recovered appropriately after platelet count recovered, presumably because the spontaneous bleeding from the left ovary ceased.
A battery of hematologic, infectious, and rheumatologic testing revealed an antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer of 1:640, a negative double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), positive anti-Smith antibodies, positive anti-SSA antibodies, and positive anti-RNP antibodies. The patient met criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and her thrombocytopenia was attributed to this. Interestingly, the patient's direct Coomb's test was positive, which is unusual for ITP. The patient had normal bilirubin and liver function tests, but it was thought that she had an early synchronous autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA), which can be associated with thrombocytopenia and can develop in the early years of diagnosis . The patient's response to steroids and normalization of hemoglobin levels with normalization of platelet function illustrates that her AIHA was mild and responsive to steroids alone. The patient was discharged in stable condition on 1 mg/kg oral prednisone and plaquenil.
One week after discharge, the patient was without active bleeding and ecchymoses were fading. However, she was found to have a platelet count of 28 × 109/L, and was treated for steroid-refractory ITP with rituximab 375 mg/m2 weekly for four weeks. She was placed on oral imuran in hopes of better controlling the underlying SLE. The patient responded well to these interventions, with subsequent platelet recovery to normal levels. She was vaccinated for pneumococcus and meningococcus, and a discussion was held regarding H. influenzae vaccination in anticipation of possible splenectomy later in life.