A 35-year-old man of South Asian origin with a strong family history of ischaemic heart disease and history of smoking (15 pack-years) presented in another city with anterior wall myocardial infarction and was thrombolyzed with streptokinase. He did not have any other relevant personal medical history. Patient had low socioeconomic status and avoided leaving his work and travelling to another city for treatment. Four weeks later he presented to our hospital with persistent angina. On examination, patient was clinically stable and had a blood pressure of 155/90 mmHg with a heart rate of 97 beats per minute. His general physical and systemic examinations were unremarkable. Electrocardiogram showed Q waves in Leads V1–V6. Transthoracic echo revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 35% with hypokinetic anteroseptal and anterior, basal-to-apical segments but preserved wall thickness and normally functioning valves. His troponins were normal. Low-density lipoprotein was 165 mg/dL and HbA1c was 5.5%.
Coronary angiography showed multivessel coronary artery disease with critical disease in circumflex (LCx) and dominant right coronary artery (RCA). There was subtotal occlusion in mid LAD followed by diffuse disease in distal course needing endarterectomy/patch-plasty. Heart Team meeting decided for CABG with saphenous venous graft (SVG) to obtuse marginal (OM), SVG to RCA, and LIMA to LAD with hybrid DCB to distal LAD as an experimental treatment after patients consent. Endarterectomy/patch-plasty was planned as a bail out strategy. Hospital ethical board approval was obtained for this experimental treatment.
CABG was carried out through mid-line sternotomy as conventional on pump CABG with cardioplegia in our hybrid operation theatre with fluoroscopic facility. Cardioplegia dosage was repeated after every 60 min. Pedicled LIMA was harvested using electrocautery with the help of LIMA retractor. Meanwhile long saphenous veins were harvested from right and left legs. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established using aortic and two-stage venous cannula. Reverse SVG was anastomosed to distal RCA and OM using 7/0 Prolene suture with good distal run off. At the planned site for LIMA implantation, a 6 mm arteriotomy was made in the LAD and a reverse SVG was anastomosed to it temporarily with 7/0 Prolene suture using 6 stitches, while the proximal end of SVG was secured to 6 Fr radial sheath. This sheath remained in the SVG and was not advanced into the native LAD. This sheath SVG combination was then used for contrast injections and for taking wire and balloons into distal LAD . In order to prevent the contrast from crystallizing out in the coronaries, as the heart was not beating, the contrast was flushed continuously using saline and cardioplegia. These were directly given into the SVG sheath combination via the cardioplegia pump. Gentle contrast injections were taken through the SVG sheath and then segment of LAD, distal to arteriotomy site, to be treated with angioplasty was marked by placing two metal clips on top of the heart surface. Road map was taken and BMW (Abbott vascular) 0.014 workhorse coronary wire was introduced into LAD through SVG sheath and parked in distal LAD. Mid-to-distal LAD disease was predilated between the 2 metal clips with 1.5 and 2 mm semi-compliant, Sprinter (Medtronic) balloons . Repeat contrast injection showed well-expanded LAD with no residual stenosis or significant dissection. Final treatment was done with 2 mm polymer-free paclitaxel DCB, Sequent Please Neo (B. Braun), extending 5 mm on both sides of predilated LAD segment . Excellent angiographic result was obtained with no residual stenosis . SVG radial sheath combination was then removed and LIMA was implanted on the proposed insertion site using 8/0 Prolene suture.
Anticoagulation during procedure was done with unfractionated heparin at a dose of 300 units/kg and then activated clotting time (ACT) maintained as per CABG protocol throughout the procedure. Patient was given 75 mg of Aspirin via N/G on induction of general anaesthesia.
After completing CABG, a final coronary angiogram was done through right femoral access. LIMA injection was done to confirm patency of LAD distal to LIMA insertion, that showed excellent results and CABG completed . After CABG protamine was administered as 1.5 mg/kg aiming to achieve an ACT of 150–160 before shifting the patient to intensive care unit. In the ITC, patient was loaded with 75 mg of Aspirin and 300 mg Clopidogrel after 04 h of surgery after ensuring that chest tube drainage was less than 0.5 mL/kg/h for consecutive 3 h. Unfractionated Heparin was started as 1000 units/h after 04 h to maintain an ACT between 150 and 200 for 12 h followed by injection Clexane 0.5 mg/kg/day for 5 days. Twenty-four hours after CABG, patient was started on maintenance dose of 75 mg Clopidogrel, 75 mg Aspirin, and 40 mg Rosuvastatin daily.
Patient had an uneventful post-procedure recovery and remained asymptomatic during OPD visits. At 6-month follow-up, patient was asymptomatic with stable cardiovascular status. Transthoracic Echo revealed an LVEF of 45% with slightly hypokinetic anteroseptal and anterior, basal segments but preserved wall thickness and normally functioning valves. CT coronary angiography at 6 months revealed a patent LIMA to LAD with no significant stenosis in mid-to-distal LAD .