A fourty-year-old man with DEB diagnosed at the age of eight was admitted to the department of gastroenterology because of the dysphagia for two previous months. The diagnosis of DEB was established due to the presence of single blisters on the whole body since the sixth month of life. His sister was also diagnosed with DEB and had similar symptoms of the disease. To our knowledge, the presented patient and his sister are the oldest diagnosed with EB living in Poland. At the age of four the patient started experiencing heartburn occasionally. Five years later dysphagia appeared for the first time. It was an episodal and periodical ailment. He reported a deterioration of dysphagia at the age of nineteen; he mostly consumed liquids and soft consistency meals during that time. Nonetheless, the patient admitted that this esophageal discomfort still was not a constant one and there were time intervals without this ailment. In the past there were also episodes of mild esophageal bleeding. The only one endoscopic esophageal dilatation in this patient took place in 1997; a stenosis was located then approximately 18 cm from incisors. The performed procedure ameliorated swallowing difficulty. A barium swallow test obtained one year after the endoscopic dilatation of the esophagus also revealed esophageal constriction on the same level. In 2014 the patient was diagnosed because of hematochezia and pain in hypogastrium. Tissue samples obtained in colonoscopy revealed the presence of nonspecific inflammatory infiltration in the ascending colon and terminal part of the ileum. Interestingly, 3 years ago he complained of hemoptysis and there was a suspicion of bleeding to pulmonary alveoli in the course of DEB. However, a CT scan did not confirm bleeding. On admission to our department the patient was complaining of painful swallowing of solids. Two months earlier he was diagnosed in the cardiology unit because of the chest pain and elevated level of troponin I. An electrocardiogram did not show any abnormalities. The patient refused to undergo coronarography and no more cardiological diagnostic procedures were performed Additional file . On admission to our unit he did not complain of the chest pain. On physical examination he appeared comfortable, afebrile with pulse 90 beats per minute, blood pressure 125/90 mmHg, respiratory rate 19 per minute and the body mass index (BMI) was 24.7 kg/m2. The patient presented blisters, skin reddening and crust formation on the upper and lower limbs. There were also contractures and disabled movement in his hand joints together with a loss of a finger and toenails . The apex of the tongue and left palatine arch were covered by superficial ulcerations. During his hospital stay, performed laboratory tests did not reveal any abnormalities. A CT scan of the chest and abdomen showed a thickening of the esophageal wall at maximum to 7 mm on the level from the fourth cervical vertebra to the fourth thoracic vertebra . A probe of gastroscopy under sedation with benzodiazepine failed due to an esophageal stenosis. An attempt of examination with paediatric endoscope was also unsuccessful. A barium swallow test revealed a narrowing of upper esophageal lumen to 7 mm along the length of 4 cm together with two diverticula on the right side not emptying of contrast. During swallowing other two diverticula appeared which were emptying of contrast . A barium swallow test also showed a noticeable weakening of the esophageal mucous membrane. After the performed investigation the patient was qualified to endoscopic dilatation of esophageal stenosis and endoscopic management of diverticula. However, he did not agree to undergo this procedure during current hospital stay. In our unit the patient was treated with proton pump inhibitor (PPI) and prokinetic drugs administered intravenously, which caused an amelioration of esophageal discomfort. He was discharged in a good general condition with a recommendation of a diet based on soft consistency meals, oral PPI and prokinetic drugs administration and the next follow-up in a month.