A healthy 20-year-old Japanese man was trapped beneath a 3-ton steel frame while working on a crane. He was rescued by his coworkers and exhibited constant bleeding from the right side of his lower abdomen when the ambulance arrived. He was transferred to our emergency department with the wound compressed. On arrival, his vital signs were: respiratory rate 22/minute, blood pressure 97/65 mmHg, and pulse rate 140/minute. His Glasgow Coma Scale score was E4 V5 M6. On physical examination, there was instability of his hip and constant bleeding from the wound on the right side of his lower abdomen. Endotracheal intubation and fluid resuscitation were performed. Computed tomography (CT) of his body showed: splenic injury; sacrum fracture; separation of the sacroiliac joint; and fracture of the right pubis, ischium, and acetabulum. Vancomycin and meropenem were started to prevent infection. He was immediately taken to our angiography room for transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) for pelvic hemorrhage. Angiography showed extravasation from the bilateral internal iliac arteries, which were embolized. His bilateral external iliac arteries showed thrombosis. A SAM® Pelvic Sling™ (SAM Medical, Wilsonville, OR, USA) was applied to his pelvis. Since complete hemostasis was not achieved after TAE, a vascular surgeon was consulted. Based on the view from the expanded wound on the right side of his lower abdomen, his right external artery was ligated in the emergency room and hemostasis was achieved. Gauze was packed with the wound sutured. Subsequent CT showed ischemia of his right lower limb. Despite the amount of time that had passed since the accident and the possibility of increased risk, due to his young age and the strong desire of his family to save his limbs, revascularization surgery was performed in the operating room. After crossover graft of the axillary-femoral artery, another hemorrhage was confirmed in his retroperitoneum, which was thought to be due to the external iliac artery injury. An additional crossover graft of the axillary-femoral vein was performed. Cystostomy and external fixation of the pelvic fracture were performed. On day 2, additional debridement of the right side of his lower abdomen was performed. Packed gauze was removed and a drainage tube was inserted. Contrast CT showed ischemia of his left lower limb and right anterior tibial artery. On day 3, he was referred to our plastic surgery department for blisters on his bilateral thighs and scrotum, which were thought to be a complication of TAE of his bilateral internal iliac arteries. At a conference meeting with the intensive care unit team and orthopedic surgery team, we concluded that amputation of his bilateral lower limbs was inevitable, since we prioritized saving life over limb. On day 8, a right above-knee amputation was performed. The decision to amputate above the knee was made because there was a possibility that the soft tissue could be covered with the intact skin of his thigh. There was also a risk of massive hemorrhage due to the pelvic fracture if we performed hip disarticulation. On day 13, left hip disarticulation and colostomy were performed. On day 17, bilateral ureterostomy was performed. On day 21, he underwent another debridement. We confirmed necrosis in his bilateral gluteal muscles and part of his quadriceps muscle, which were debrided . Because it was difficult to control the hemorrhage, we had to stop debridement, even though necrotic muscle was still visible. We left the wound open because of the extensive soft tissue damage . Repeated debridement was necessary because of the ongoing infection; we performed debridement a total of six times . Part of his ilium and acetabulum was left and the posterior ilium was fully exposed after the extensive debridement. On day 112, left anterolateral thigh flap was rotated posteriorly and fixed with a suture anchor with successful coverage of the exposed pelvis. Negative-pressure wound therapy (NPWT) was applied for the formation of healthy granulation tissue . On day 168, a full-thickness skin graft, which was harvested from his head, back, and abdomen, was applied to the rest of the ulcer. On day 230, complete epithelialization was achieved . Rehabilitation was started along with the use of prosthetics . He has made progress to the point where he can get on and off a wheelchair and move around independently. Currently, he lives at home with his parents. The reconstructed pelvis allows for good prosthetic fitting.