An unrelated natural couple brought an 11-month-old female with delayed development to the outpatient department for genetic counselling . There were no obvious abnormalities detected during the foetal period for this patient. After birth, the baby was found to have jaundice (lasting for 1 month), difficulties falling asleep and a small head circumference. At the age of 7 months, physical examination showed muscular hypertonia, hands often clenched, and global growth regression. The electroencephalogram showed bounded linearity. Cranial MRI showed that the volume of the bilateral cerebellar hemispheres was significantly decreased, especially in the lower part of cerebellar hemisphere, the cerebellar sulcus was widened and deepened, and the occipital cistern was widened (suspected cerebellar hemisphere dysplasia). Additionally, the signal of the bilateral globus pallidus changed slightly, the sulci of the bilateral cerebral hemispheres was slightly widened and deepened, the bilateral frontotemporal extracerebral space was slightly widened, and the bilateral lateral ventricles were slightly widened. At 11 months of age, the head circumference was 40 cm (< − 3 SD) (reference value: 41.9–47.3 cm) . The clinical diagnosis was primary microcephaly. There was no genetic history in the family, and the parents were not close relatives . We initially diagnosed the patient with intellectual developmental and microcephaly with pontine and cerebellar hypoplasia (MICPCH) based on the specific clinical characteristics. There were no phenotypic abnormalities observed in the parents of the patient.
We extracted DNA from the patient’s peripheral blood sample and performed WES. The results showed that the CASK gene had a heterozygous missense variant, specifically CASK: NM_003688.3: exon 7: c.638T>G: p.L213R. .
According to the bioinformatics analysis, this variant was not previous reported and was not found in most databases, including the ExAC browser, 1000 Genomes Project, and In-house Chinese-Control. The latest gnomAD database indicates that the frequency of this variant is 0.000005520 . In addition, this variant site is highly conserved in many species according to mutation taster . PhastCons and PhyloP were used to evaluate the scores of amino acid sequence conservation. The scores indicated that this variant site is highly conserved . Moreover, this mutation was predicted to be deleterious by the following bioinformatic tools: SIFT , PolyPhen-2 , and M-CAP . The above results indicate that this variant site is pathogenic and well conserved.
To further confirm the negative effect of this variant on CASK expression, wild-type and mutant plasmids were constructed and transfected into HEK-293T cells. We determined the mRNA and protein expression of both the wild type and the mutant and found that there was no significant difference in mRNA expression between the wild type and the mutant. However, compared with the wild type, the protein expression of the mutant was downregulated.
Finally, we predicted the structural pattern of the protein after the amino acid arginine (R) was substituted for leucine (L) by PSIPRED [–]. Importantly, the mutant protein showed decreased protein stability, which is represented by the increased Gibbs free energy (ΔΔGpred = 1.857). The results of the protein structure prediction showed that the nuclear charge of the protein increased (ΔCharge = 1) and the stability of the protein decreased (ΔΔGpred = 1.857) after the variant. Moreover, a random coil in the secondary structure is changed to a β-sheet, which also affects its spatial structure . Therefore, the decreased protein stability and the changed protein structure might contribute to the downregulation of CASK protein expression, further causing the loss of protein function.