Our work is a single case report and has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria .
A healthy 59-year-old woman on long-term therapy with Hydroxyurea 500 mg daily for essential thrombocytosis, presented with a painless slow-growing lesion of the jaw that had persisted and increased in size for six months, the appearance of the lesion is correlated to the administration of the hydroxyurea treatment. There was no history of local trauma, radiotherapy, HPV infections, or family history of malignancy. She was referred to our department's consultation for specialized care. No other personal or family history was raised during the patient interrogation. Clinical examination revealed a large nodular lesion with irregular borders of the right cheek, infiltrated into underlying tissue, the lesion extending to the free border of the right lower eyelid with dimensions 4 × 4 cm, without sensory disturbances or diplopia (.). In the nose, black horn-shaped hyperkeratosis lesion in the nasal pyramid (.).
There were no palpable neck lymph nodes on the left side.
A biopsy of surgical material was performed, showing a well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma.
The definitive diagnosis of malignancy was made; metastatic investigations were performed, including chest radiography, abdominal echography, PET scan. The results of these exams were normal.
The computed tomography (CT) was performed and found free lymph node.
On the biological level, the patient presented anemia at 7.4 g / dl for which she was transfused; a thrombocytosis at 548.000, the rest of the assessment was without particularities.
Based on the positive medical history and clinical examination, the patient was diagnosed clinically with hydroxyurea-induced squamous cell carcinoma, the hydroxyurea was ceased and the hematological therapy was switched to busulfan. The surgery was indicated and performed by the chief professor of our department who has 15 years of operative experience. The surgical procedure had the aim of the restoration of the anatomic landmarks after a large excision of the tumor and reconstruction of full-thickness eyelid defect with a local flap under general anesthesia.
Duration of surgery: 60 min; estimation of blood loss: 150 ml; duration of hospital stay: 3 days.
The patient received amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 1 g twice daily and antalgics for 8 days.
Post-operative histopathology confirmed SCC proliferation; the different margins of excision were healthy.
The multidisciplinary team deciding on the treatment options included surgeons, oncologists, radiotherapists, ophthalmologist surgeons, radiologists. The decision was made to treat the patient with the surgical approach (surgical excision of the tumor) with 1.5 cm free margins and reconstruction; the authors used the superior pedicle nasolabial island flap; with postoperative radiotherapy (PORT) and postoperative chemotherapy (POCRT). Considering the patient's age, general history, the size of the tumor, the prognosis was average.
Postoperative periods were favorable; the scar was clean and non-inflammatory.
Routine follows up 3, 6, and 12 months showed no signs of recurrence.