A 4-month-old infant with a history of fever, vomiting, poor appetite and constipation for approximately 48 h, along with a previously reducible umbilical hernia, born at 34 weeks via cesarean section due to premature rupture of membranes in a twin pregnancy, was transferred to the emergency department of our institution.
On admission, hematochemical examination showed a white blood cell count of 19.7 × 103/ul, 55.9% neutrophils, a C-reactive protein of 13.77 mg/dl, and a procalcitonin level of 5.34 ng/ml. At physical examination, the patient presented abdominal distention, and an erythematic area around the umbilicus with a palpable reducible soft tissue mass within the umbilical defect. A complete abdominal ultrasound performed in the emergency department revealed diffuse and marked distention of the intestinal loops, the absence of intestinal effusion or invagination, and the presence of a reducible herniated loop at the umbilical site with no vascular abnormalities on doppler .
Within 2 days of admission, the patient became distressed and developed severe intestinal bloating, vomiting, irreducibility of the umbilical hernia, and skin discoloration and erythema at the umbilical site. A direct abdominal x-ray showed signs of hydro-gas stasis and multiple hydro-aerial levels that were relevant to the ileum when there was no free abdominal air . The patient underwent an urgent surgical procedure for hernia reduction, involving the isolation and release of the hernia sac from the ileal loop, which was firmly adhered to a fibrin plate. Upon opening the herniary sac, the presence of a gangrenous and perforated appendix within it was discovered. An appendectomy was therefore performed on double tobacco-pouch technique (, ), and the abdominal wall defect was sutured . The cecal appendix and the herniary sac were sent for histological examination, which revealed a picture of acute appendicitis with acute necrotizing-exudative serositis, approximately 5 cm in size, with perforation of the appendiceal wall. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the seventh postoperative day.