We present a 62-year-old ethnic Indonesian woman previously diagnosed as having thoracic spinal cord entrapment with paraplegic condition for 6 months and chronic renal failure on hemodialysis for 2 years. She felt pain in her back and had difficulty in getting up from the floor. She could not move her legs, their power was 0/5, and there was no movement of her toes. She had no improvement in the neurologic deficit for 6 months. No sign of spinal shock was found in a physical examination during a neurological examination at her first visit. All modalities of sensation below her belly button were lost including proprioception. Urinary retention had to be catheterized, but she had no urine production for 2 years (please see information on kidney failure below). Defecation had to be helped by digital exploration. Her muscles were hypertonic with exaggerated jerk reflex and clonus. There was no history of significant injury to her back.
A chest and thoracic X-ray was taken and the result was normal . T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging showed a regular hypointense lesion in intradural location behind the bodies of Th8 and Th9 vertebrae predominantly on the left side. The lesion compressed the cord to the left. On T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging the lesion was isointense relative to normal cord .
The special note that we took here was that our patient had not urinated for the last 2 years before the paraplegic condition due to thoracic spinal cord entrapment. She had had diabetes mellitus for more than 10 years that already affected her kidneys. Two years before the incident, she had already been diagnosed as having ESRD. There is no history of diabetes mellitus, renal dysfunction, or paraplegic condition in her family. Her creatinine (Cr) level at that time was 11 mg/dl. She had to undergo hemodialysis three times a week.
We performed our protocol of human umbilical cord MSCs (hUC-MSCs) implantation and injection to treat this patient. The protocol consists of six cycles of hUC-MSCs intrathecal implantation and intravenous injection with time interval of 3 months. One cycle consists of implantation of 16 million hUC-MSCs performed three times and intravenous injection of 16 million hUC-MSCs performed three times. After the second cycle of hUC-MSC protocol, improvement was seen in both legs, and she could do extensions of both of her knees. Her sensory level was increased from 0 to 2, but the clonus was still there. Surprisingly, we also found that she had urinated for the first time in the last 2 years after the first cycle of hUC-MSC protocol, and her Cr level decreased significantly from 11 mg/dl to 2 mg/dl after the second cycle of hUC-MSC protocol. Fortunately, no signs of allergy were found in this patient; as we know, allergic effect is one of the most terrifying effects of intravenous injection of MSC.