A 21-year-old male Japanese student, an active member of an equestrian club, sustained a right toe injury during an accident in a club-related activity. The injury resulted in the severance of his right toe above the interphalangeal joint . Following initial wound treatment, he was directed to the rehabilitation department 2 weeks post-injury. He had no remarkable medical or family history. The patient agreed to provide the case report and consented to its publication, including any accompanying images. The ethics committee of our institution waived the need for ethical review, as the patient provided written consent for the case report.
Initial assessments indicated pain localized to the injury site, primarily during walking. One month post-injury, the patient also reported pain in the right knee joint while engaging in riding or walking. The pain in the area of the hallux deficit hindered his ability to apply pressure on the thenars. Diagnostic tests, including walking cycle analysis, temporospatial gait parameters, foot pressure distribution, ground reaction force measurements, toe grip force, and one-leg standing tests, were conducted. The foot pressure during a comfortable walk were recorded using a Zebris plantar pressure platform (FDM; GmbH, Munich, Germany; number of sensors: 11,264; sampling rate: 100 Hz; sensor area: 149 cm × 54.2 cm) [–]. The center of pressure (COP) during a comfortable walking pace was captured using force plates (Kistler Japan Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) at a sampling rate of 1000 Hz with a low-pass filter set at 20 Hz . A diminished foot pressure was observed not just in the hallux but also in the metatarsal head of toes two to five on the injured side . The left-foot COP shifted toward the left toe in the late stance phase, while the right-foot COP transitioned toward the second toe, exhibiting greater spatial variability . Assessing the walking cycle using a Zebris plantar pressure platform , the load response and single-support durations were reduced, while the pre-swing phase was extended .
Vertical ground reaction force during the second peak of walking was diminished on the right side (right 599.8 N, left 660.3 N). The patient was unable to maintain a one-leg stand for 10 seconds on the right foot. Pain levels for the toe and knee were rated 5 out of 10 on a numerical rating scale (NRS).
On the basis of these findings, a rehabilitation protocol was designed to enhance medial foot loading and improve foot pressure during walking and standing . The regimen included balance and trunk strength training. Starting from the fifth week, the focus shifted to lower limb strength training. From the ninth week, dynamic joint stability exercises were introduced to enhance neuromuscular coordination for movement stabilization . After 3 months, foot pressure and COP movement during walking improved, as did pressure distribution across toes two to five and the metatarsal head, with negligible discrepancies between the left and right sides in both the vertical and anterior–posterior directions . The pressure was consistently distributed from the second toe of the right foot . Notable enhancements were also observed in the pre-leg phase . The second peak of the vertical component of the ground reaction force increased (right 647.5 N, left 639.5 N). One-leg standing on the right foot became stable for 10 seconds, even on a balance mat. NRS scores for the toe and knee pain reduced to 0, indicating a return to pre-injury levels of activity.