A 62-year-old man with SIT, intestinal malrotation, and type 2 diabetes underwent gastroduodenal endoscopy for investigation of epigastric discomfort. A 5-cm type 2 tumor was found at the cardia side of the EGJ . A biopsy confirmed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, and the patient was diagnosed with Siewert type II EGJ cancer with 2.5 cm of esophageal involvement. Computed tomography (CT) revealed SIT, intestinal malrotation, multiple spleens, and irregular thickening of the gastric wall. No swollen lymph nodes (LNs) or distant metastases were observed . The patient was diagnosed with EGJ cancer (T3N0M0 Stage IIA according to the 8th edition of the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC)-TNM classification). In addition, three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction of a CT angiogram showed that the common hepatic artery was absent, the proper hepatic artery was derived from the superior mesenteric artery through the gastroduodenal artery, and an accessory left hepatic artery (ALHA) arose from the left gastric artery (LGA) . We planned a robot-assisted transhiatal lower esophagectomy and proximal gastrectomy with D2 LN dissection, including lower mediastinal lymphadenectomy.
The patient was placed in a spinal position and the port placement mirrored our conventional settings . The patient’s position was changed in a reverse Trendelenburg position with 15 degrees before the da Vinci Xi Surgical System (Intuitive Surgical, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) rolled in. The first and second arms were placed on the right side of the abdomen for Cadiere forceps and Maryland bipolar forceps, respectively. The fourth arm was placed on the left side of the abdomen for fenestrated bipolar forceps. The assistant port was also placed on the left side of the abdomen. Robotic bipolar vessel-sealing tools were attached to the second arm or fourth arm depending on the surgical site.
After laparoscopic inspections, the lesser omentum was opened and suprapancreatic LN dissection was started. The two left gastric veins draining into the splenic vein (SPV) were clipped and cut . The LGA branched an ALHA and was itself divided into three branches. The branches of the LGA were clipped and cut, preserving the root itself . Station 11p and 11d LNs were dissected, tracing the splenic artery behind the SPV. Next, the greater omentum was dissected from the middle part toward the lower pole of the spleen, and station 4sa LNs were dissected. The rest of the suprapancreatic LN dissection was then completed toward the crus of the diaphragm. On the right side of the patient, the left gastroepiploic vessels and the short gastric vessels were divided by a sealing device attached to the second arm or fourth arm depending on the working angle. Transhiatal lower mediastinal lymphadenectomy was then performed (station 110 LNs) . We decided to secure a safety margin of at least 2 cm from the tumor. It was 4 cm from the angle of His based on preoperative esophagogastric fluoroscopy, where was transected with an EndoWrist Stapler (Intuitive Surgical, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) . The stomach was transected at the upper one-third level. The resected specimen was extracted through an umbilical incision.
After checking the margin of softy on the back table, esophagogastrostomy was performed according to the side overlap with fundoplication by Yamashita (SOFY) method as follows . The central apex and left edges of the remnant stomach stump were fixated by suture to the crus of the diaphragm. The esophagus was pulled caudally, and the most proximal dorsal side of the esophagus was fixated by suture to the apex of the remnant stomach stump to prevent the esophagus from being pulled into the mediastinum. Small incisions for a stapler were made in the center of the anterior gastric wall and left side of the esophageal stump, respectively. A 45-mm EndoWrist Stapler was inserted into both holes. The esophagus was then rotated 45 degrees clockwise and stapled to suture the left wall of the esophagus to the stomach. The entry hole was closed using 3–0 absorbable barbed sutures. The esophagus was rotated back 45 degrees, and the posterior wall was placed parallel to the stomach wall. The right side of the esophagus was fixated by suture, completing the valvuloplasty .
The surgical time was 296 min, and the amount of blood loss was small. Histopathological diagnosis revealed a Siewert type II tumor measuring 50 × 37 mm in diameter and moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with subserosal invasion . Three metastatic LNs were present around the cardia. The final stage was pT3N2 pStage IIIB according to the 8th edition of the UICC-TNM classification. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged 11 days after surgery.