A 12-year-old girl child presented with complaints of swelling around the nape of the neck associated with pain. The swelling, as reported by the parents, progressively increased in size over the period of 1 year. Pain was constant and dull aching in nature. Plain radiograph showed an expansile lytic lesion arising from the posterior elements of C2 vertebra . Accordingly, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was advised that showed multiple loculated lesions in the posterior elements of C2 that extended anteriorly to the body as well. There were fluid–fluid levels seen in most of the loculi. There was no extension into the spinal canal . Computed tomography (CT) scan reported expansile giant soap-bubble lesion with distorted trabeculae and thinning of cortices . Radiological appearances were consistent with ABC of C2 vertebrae. Subsequently, embolization of the feeder vessels to the lesion was done . Within 3 h of the procedure, navigated percutaneous biopsy was done under GA to prevent the patient movements during procedure. Tissue was sent for histopathology. Then, diluted contrast was injected into the lesion to confirm if there was any spinal canal leak. After ruling out any leak, methylprednisolone (120 mg) mixed with calcitonin (200 IU) was infiltrated into the lesion in different directions using navigation guided Jamshidi needle. Procedure was uneventful, and the child was sent home within 24 h. Histopathology showed numerous osteoclastic giant cells arranged non-spatially in spindle cell stroma with dissimilar nuclei. Blood-filled spaces rimmed by osteoclasts were seen. The appearance was suggestive of ABC . The patient was followed up in 2 months, and a repeat CT was done that showed few scattered calcifications along the trabeculae. She was further subjected to another session of selective feeder embolization followed by percutaneous intralesional injection of methylprednisolone and calcitonin in a similar fashion.
In view of COVID pandemic, patient’s parents were on telephonic contact who reported gradual reduction in pain and decrease in swelling size. She was followed up at the end of 18 months. Clinically, the pain had subsided with evident decrease in the size of the swelling. Repeat CT was done that showed dense ossification of the lesion, including the body of the vertebrae with significant shrinkage in fluid-filled cavities. There was reduction in the size of the lesion and spinal canal remained uninvolved .