A 70-year-old man presented to the Emergency Department (ED) with 4 days of increasing shortness of breath and fatigue, having a positive SARS-CoV-2 screening test 15 days before. His past medical history included arterial hypertension, rheumatoid arthritis and prostate cancer under radiotherapy and hormone therapy.
At ED, he denied fever, chills, chest and abdominal pain, nausea, or vomiting. He had no fever, but was breathless, tachypneic, and severely hypoxemic with a peripheral oxygen saturation of 64% under room air, improving to 98% on 15L of oxygen/minute via a nonrebreather mask. Chest examination revealed bilateral crackles and wheezing. Arterial blood gas analysis showed a respiratory alkalosis and hypoxemia (arterial oxygen partial pressure - PaO2/fractional inspired oxygen - FiO2 ratio 170). Laboratory tests showed an elevated C-reactive protein (43.73 mg/dL) and D-dimer (35 200 ng/mL) and acute kidney injury AKIN 2. The chest X-ray revealed bilateral reticulonodular infiltrates and linear opacities with a predominantly peripheral distribution. COVID-19 pneumonia was diagnosed. He was admitted to the general ward and dexamethasone was promptly started maintaining oxygen via non-rebreather mask, therapeutic-dose anticoagulation, and diuretic therapy. In the first 48h he developed severe respiratory failure and was transferred to the ICU, requiring IMV, after a failed trial of NIV with progressive ascent parameters until Continuous positive airway pressure 12 cmH2O and FiO2 90%, for about 24 hours.
The patient remained deeply sedated on pressure-controlled mode ventilation. Due severe respiratory failure, neuromuscular blocking agents were applied during the first 72h, and then by short intermittent infusion or bolus as needed basis to reduce patient-ventilator asynchrony and to access respiratory mechanics. Recruitment manoeuvres were applied once by stepwise approach reaching a peak inspiratory pressure of 35 cmH2O and respecting 15 cmH2O of driving pressure. Then the PEEP was set for the best compliance and low driving pressure. Oxygenation and pulmonary compliance improved without haemodynamic instability. Lung-protective ventilation was maintained with low tidal volume around 6 mL/Kg of predicted body weight, plateau pressure below 30 cmH2O, PEEP of 15 cmH2O and FiO2 of 55%. Dynamic lung compliance was 30 mL/cmH2O and PaO2/FiO2 ratio stayed above 150, with no need of prone positioning. On 5th day of IMV, cervical, thoracic and abdominal subcutaneous emphysema were noted on physical exam and pneumomediastinum was suspected on chest X-ray. Abdominal distension and tympanic percussion were also observed, with tangential X-ray of abdomen showing free gas in abdominal cavity . A thoraco-abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan was performed and confirmed subcutaneous emphysema, moderate pneumomediastinum and a large pneumoperitoneum, without pneumothorax, tracheoesophageal rupture, or signs of visceral perforation . In the absence of bowel perforation and other clinical consequences, the multidisciplinary team (intensivists and general surgeons) decided to manage conservatively the SP. However, 12 hours later, the patient became unstable. Lung mechanics were changed (tidal volumes and lung compliance decreased, peak inspiratory and mean airway pressures increased), hypoxemia worsened and intra-abdominal pressure (IAP) increased without signs of pneumothorax. An abdominal compartment syndrome (IAP 25 mmHg and respiratory disfunction) developed, and emergency percutaneous needle abdominal decompression with a 14-G venous catheter was performed . The catheter was connected to an underwater seal drainage system , with clinical improvement allowing catheter removal after three days, with complete resolution and no relapse of the pneumoperitoneum. He did not present any features suggestive of gastrointestinal tract perforation (nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, or hemodynamic instability). Thereafter, abdominal examination remained normal, enteral feeding was fully tolerated and bowel function remained normal.
Due to prolonged mechanical ventilation, critical illness polyneuropathy and delirium, a percutaneous tracheostomy was performed on day 22 of IMV. The patient was discharged to the ward 48 days after ICU admission and left the hospital on day 129.