A 68-year-old male presented with entire body burns. He tried to commit suicide by burning himself on the riverbed, and covered his head with 10-liters of gasoline and set himself on fire. He had a history of insomnia and anxiety. He had no history of allergic responses and no smoking history. Vital signs on admission were as follows; Glasgow Coma Scale 15 points, body temperature 35.8°C, heart rate 98 bpm, blood pressure 170/85 mm Hg, respiratory rate 20 bpm, and oxygen saturation 100% with 10-liter mask. Erythema and bullae were observed on the auricular to mandible neck, thorax, abdomen, occiput, right upper arm, right dorsal hand, and left forearm. His anterior chest and posterior neck were covered with soot, and the skin in these areas had turned a grayish white . Soot was observed in the nasal and oral cavity, pharynx, and larynx, suggesting burn of the upper respiratory tract. Bronchoscopy showed soot adhesion, peripheral edema, and mucosal redness from the vocal cords to the period. Total burn surface area was 35%, which included 20% second-degree burns and 15% third-degree burns. The revised BAUX score was 120.
An overview of the hospital is shown in Figure . The burn-site was washed daily with warm water, treated with dimethyl isopropylazulene and gentamicin sulfate ointment and protected with moist wound care pads. At the time of admission, the guarantor's approval was not obtained, which prevented aggressive initial burn treatment such as debridement and skin grafting.
On day 8, he had a high fever of 38°C–40°C with a markedly increased inflammatory response, and the blood culture revealed methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Vancomycin and ampicillin/sulbactam were administered empirically against the burn-site infections. After the infections were under the control, the first split-thickness skin grafts (STSG) were performed on day 17 in the operating room. The skin grafts (0.01 inch graft) were harvested from the healthy skin on both thighs by using electric dermatome and meshed for expansion at the ratio of 1:3. After the first debridement and STSG on day 17, ampicillin/sulbactam was discontinued because of the appearance of erythema mainly on the lateral abdomen and suspected drug rash. Cefepime dihydrochloride hydrate was driven to start because acinetobacter baumannii was detected from a blood culture on day 20. Because the burn-site infections had been continuously manageable, the second STSG for the back area was performed on day 24. The skin was harvested from both lateral thighs and meshed at a ratio of 1:1.5.
From day 30, the redness on the trunk and extremities rapidly worsened, and some blistering was observed. We diagnosed as erythema multiforme because of drug eruption, then all antimicrobial agents were terminated. Because the erythema multiforme did not improve after the discontinuation of antimicrobial therapy, systemic administration of 40 mg/day prednisolone was initiated. However, on day 35, the erythema expanded and erosions and blisters formed on more than 30% of the body surface area. Nikolsky phenomenon and oral mucosal lesions were observed, especially on the back and extremities . Because erythema, blisters, and erosions were widely distributed and exceeded 10% of the body surface area with a fever above 38°C, we diagnosed the case as TEN and initiated steroid-pulse therapy (methylprednisolone 1,000 mg/day) for 3 days. This treatment was successful and the erosions and blisters gradually improved without any exacerbation of infection. On day 37, the erythema began to fade . On day 38, we switched the steroids therapy to oral prednisolone 60 mg/day. Prednisolone was tapered by 10 mg every week. No signs of infection was observed after discontinuation of antimicrobial therapy and steroid pulse therapy, and he discharged from ICU on day 41.
Thereafter, an additional debridement for the anterior thoracic region on day 59, STSG for anterior neck, shoulder, and thoracic (from lower abdomen skin) on day 73, and STSG for lateral neck (from posterior aspect of both thighs) on day 87 were performed under general anesthesia . After debridement and skin grafting for a total of five times, he was transferred to a general hospital on day 140. Lymphocyte stimulation test of the antibiotics used was performed to search for the cause of TEN, but it could not be identified.