An 18-day-old female was admitted to the paediatric intensive care unit because of a heart murmur and weak femoral pulses. The patient was in a good clinical condition with spontaneous breathing on room air and normal vital signs, except for a blood pressure gradient of 30 mmHg between the upper and the lower extremities. A transthoracic two-dimensional echocardiography was performed and confirmed the suspected diagnosis of aortic coarctation, with a systolic pressure gradient of 30 mmHg and a closed arterial duct . In addition, a total retrograde perfusion of the left circumflex coronary artery (LCX) was found, without visible ostial blood flow at the left aortic sinus (, online, Video S1). The left ventricle had a normal ejection fraction without regional wall abnormalities or mitral valve regurgitation. Because of uncertainty regarding the anatomy, a coronary angiography was performed, showing no left main coronary artery, but a single right coronary artery (RCA) arising from the aorta. The LCX was perfused retrogradely via collaterals of a normal right posterior descending artery and it reached the lateral wall of the ascending aorta, not flowing into it but into the right pulmonary artery (RPA) (, online, Video S2). Arising from the LCX, small branches of a rudimentary left anterior descending artery were seen. The pulmonary artery pressure was normal.
At 23 days of age, surgery was performed with resection of the aortic coarctation, end-to-end anastomosis, and reimplantation of the left coronary artery (LCA) into the posterior aortic sinus, using a button technique without stretching or torsion of the coronary artery (, online, Video S3). The RPA defect was closed with a xenopericardial patch. On post-operative Day 4, the patient exhibited recurrent episodes of supraventricular tachycardia, which were successfully treated with flecainide. After surgery, routine coronary angiography was performed, showing normal, antegrade flow into the LCA without stenosis . The girl recovered well from the operation and was discharged home soon with normal troponin values.