A 76-year-old man presented with a peripheral occlusive disease classified as Fontaine Stage IIB. He had a history of hypertension and dyslipidemia, and was a smoker. Preoperative contrast computed-enhanced tomography (CT) revealed a right SFA occlusion . We initiated antiplatelet therapy (100 mg/day aspirin and 75 mg/day clopidogrel). Angiography revealed a 16-cm chronic total occlusion of the right SFA. Endovascular treatment (EVT) was performed on the right SFA following intra-arterial injection of heparin (5000 units). A 6-French (Fr) guiding sheath was inserted via the left femoral artery. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) was used for passing through the true lumen. Thereafter, a 4-mm semi-compliant balloon was used for pre-dilatation and IVUS revealed no major dissections. A 25-cm Viabahn (diameter 5 mm) was implanted and a 5-mm non-compliant balloon was used for post-dilatation. On the final angiogram, no edge dissection was visible, and good flow was confirmed . The patient’s symptoms improved, and he was discharged after 4 days; however, he developed pain and local swelling of the right thigh 6 days after EVT. Venous thrombosis was excluded by ultrasound imaging. He had no fever, negative blood culture findings and negative procalcitonin levels (0.1 ng/ml; standard value is ≤0.5 ng/ml). However, blood analysis revealed elevated inflammatory marker levels: white blood cell (WBC) count was 12,000 cells/μl (standard values are 4500–7500 cells/μl) and C-reactive protein levels were 11.83 mg/dl (standard value is ≤1.0 mg/dl). MRI revealed extensive soft-tissue edema and a high perivascular T2 signal around the right SFA ; however, the stent-graft remained patent. This indicated possible perigraft inflammation. The clinical symptoms were severe and there was a risk of occlusion of the stent-graft. We initiated steroid therapy (prednisolone, 20 mg/day) 2 days after the symptoms started and decreased it as soon as possible. Clinical symptoms resolved within 7 days after initiating steroid therapy, and follow-up MRI revealed regression of soft-tissue edema . Therefore, the prednisolone was decreased to 10 mg/day and tapered by 5 mg per week until it was halted. Follow-up MRI demonstrated marked resolution of inflammation over 3 months .