A 40-year old woman was referred to our clinic in 2003 after detection of multiple lesions in both hepatic lobes during routine ultrasound examination. The patient did not report weight loss, night sweats or fever. She had no flush symptoms or diarrhea, only a slight postprandial discomfort in the right upper quadrant. Apart from a moderate hepatomegaly, physical examination was unremarkable. Routine laboratory findings were within normal limits without indication of liver disease or advanced malignancy. Likewise, chromogranin A, serotonin and 5-HIAA were within normal range. Sonographically the lesions were of high echogenicity with a hypoechoic halo. The largest lesion found in segment VI had a diameter of 6.8 cm. Multiple additional hepatic lesions were spread throughout both lobes with a size of approximately 1 cm. A CT-guided core biopsy was performed to establish histopathological diagnosis. Histological analysis of the biopsy material showed a G1 neuroendocrine neoplasm (NEN) with a low proliferation rate (Ki-67 < 1%) .
For tumor staging, abdominal imaging by MRI and a chest CT scan were performed which confirmed multiple bilobular hepatic lesions with no option for complete surgical removal. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) showed a positive receptor status of the hepatic lesions. Colonoscopy identified the primary tumor in the rectum: 5 cm from the anus a polyp with 1 cm diameter was found and endoscopically removed by snare biopsy. Microscopical analysis confirmed a G1 NEN with similar histological appearance as seen in the hepatic metastases . Due to the positive somatostatin (SMS) receptor status treatment with octreotide was started. 6 months later, however, a restaging revealed progression of the liver metastases. As there was no evidence of extrahepatic manifestation we decided to perform a transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) of the hepatic lesions. The patient received in total 7 TACE interventions without complications over a period of 2 years. Over a follow-up period of 7 years without further anti-cancer therapy up to the present, MRI revealed stable disease according to RECIST criteria.
In 2013, however, the patient presented to the general practitioner with hoarseness as well as tenderness on palpation and stabbing pain in the right lower jaw, the mandibular joint and the right part of the tounge. During the course of several weeks, additional symptoms like palsy of the tongue and dysarthria emerged and the patient was put on an empiric antibiotic treatment with a cephalosporine. With increasing numbness of the tongue and on the inner surface of the cheek, pain of the tongue, worsening dysarthria and dysphagia the patient presented to the emergency department of our hospital. A thorough neurological examination including cranial computed tomography, MRI with MR-angiography and a time of flight (TOF)-imaging as well as ENT examination was not instrumental to establish a diagnosis. However, a lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) puncture revealed a pleocytosis (19 cells/μl) as well as an intrathecal protein synthesis (IgG), both in accordance with an inflammatory process in the brain. Unremarkable CSF parameters included negative PCR’s for herpes simplex I and II virus, Epstein Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, varicella zoster and toxoplasma as well as negative bacterial cultures, cryptococcus antigen, and cytology examination for malignant cells. Transcranial magnetic stimulation showed an increased latency between the primary motor cortex and the left arm, whereas the right arm and both legs showed normal conduction. Serologic investigation of onconeural antibodies showed a highly positive titer for anti-Ri (1:2560, normal <80). The positive indirect immunofluorescence technique (IIFT) was validated with immunoblotting, which substantiated the isolated presence of the Ri-antibodies . As a result of this the diagnosis paraneoplastic brainstem encephalitis was established. An intravenous methylprednisolone therapy with 500 mg for 5 days led to rapid improvement of the patients neurological symptoms with concomitant decline of the anti-Ri titer from 1:2560 to 1:320. On follow-up 3 months after steroid therapy, the patient is currently completely asymptomatic. A regular methylprednisolone therapy for 5 days intravenously every 8 weeks is planned over a treatment period of at least 2 years. Since brainsteam encephalitis as paraneoplastic neurological syndrom have not been described in patients with metastatic rectum NEN before, other tumors were ruled out including a normal gynecological examination and a FDG-PET-CT without evidence for a lung tumor.