A 35-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with a 10-month history of headache, 6-month history of diplopia, 4-month history of hearing loss, and 1-month history of back pain. No fever, tumors, or exposure history of specific infections were noted. No significant family history of malignancy was found. Neurologic examination revealed normal cognitive performance, limb motor function, reflexes, sensory and cerebellar functions. Difficulty in bilateral eyeball abduction, diplopia, and mild bilateral facial paralysis were noted. There was hearing loss in both ears by gross hearing assessment. Signs of meningeal irritation, including Brudzinski and Kernig signs, were positive, and nuchal rigidity was present.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure was significantly elevated, with a slight increase in leukocytes that mostly comprised mononuclear cells and decreased glucose concentration. No pathogenic microorganisms were found by next-generation sequencing. Enhanced brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an abnormal signal on the ventral side of the pons and enhancement . Enhancement was also observed in the thickened dura of the upper cervical spinal cord . MRI of the thoracic and lumbar spinal cord showed thickening and enhanced spinal pia mater signals at the thoracic 1–12 and lumbar 1–2 levels.
Considering the possibility of meningeal carcinomatosis, an examination of CSF was conducted , in which small clusters of atypical nuclei were noted, which were suspected to be tumor cells. Further immunohistochemical special staining results were CK (-), CK7( +), ki-67(-), and AB/PAS ( +), suggesting that the origin of the tumor cells might be the epithelium. No tumors were found on systemic positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET–CT). No cutaneous melanocytic nevi were found in a careful examination of the patient’s skin. Histological examination of the subarachnoid meninx of the thoracic spinal canal in thoracic 6 level was performed. The specimen showed a cystic lesion covered by simple and pseudostratified, ciliated columnar epithelium, which was rich in mucin-producing cells highlighted by Alcian blue staining. Malignant characteristics were observed in some areas, including increased cellular density and pleomorphism with hyperchromatic nuclei. Immunostaining showed that the cells were positive for epithelial membrane antigen, cytokeratin, and carcinoembryonic antigen but negative for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), thyroid transcription factor (TTF)-1, and cancer antigen (CA)125. An increased proliferation labeling index (MIB-1, Ki-67) was observed in the areas of malignant transformation (about 20% of nuclei). A diagnosis of the neurenteric cyst with focal malignant features was considered. Malignant Rathke's cleft cyst was considered as a differential diagnosis; however, there was no granulomatous change or squamous metaplasia in the patient. Malignant endolymphatic sac tumor was also considered as a differential diagnosis; however, no petrous bone abnormalities were noted.
The patient refused radiation treatment and intrathecal or systematic chemotherapy and selected palliative treatment with ventricular abdominal drainage. After the ventricular abdominal drainage surgery, the headache was alleviated, but other symptoms still persisted. Until we submitted the case report, she was bedridden and in an extremely weakened state.