A 71-year-old woman presented with a 2-month history of dysphagia and chest pain after swallowing and came to our hospital with a complaint of worsening symptoms. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed a type-3 tumor at the middle intrathoracic esophagus (a), and a barium esophagography revealed an irregular stricture of the middle intrathoracic esophagus, measuring about 5 cm in length (b). Endoscopic biopsy specimens taken from the tumor histologically showed poorly differentiated squamous carcinoma, and an enhanced computed tomography (CT) work-up revealed thickening of the esophageal wall and swelling of a mediastinal lymph node without any distant organ metastases (a, b). She was diagnosed with an advanced ESCC with cT3N1M0, and underwent radical subtotal esophagectomy with three-field lymph node dissection.
The gross examination of the specimen showed that there was a type-3 tumor measuring 45 × 15 mm in consonance with an unstained area of iodine staining (a). Microscopic findings of the low-power field revealed invasion into the adventitia without exposure of the tumor (b), and those of high-power field also revealed poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with multiple lymph node metastases; these findings led to a diagnosis of pT3N1M0 (c). However, she had been sequentially administered adjuvant doublet chemotherapy using cisplatin and 5-FU, grade 4 hematological toxicity, and hepatobiliary disorders aborted it during the first course. She was then followed for 6 years without recurrence; however, chest X-ray and CT examinations at the 7-year follow-up revealed a 1.5-cm-diameter solitary pulmonary tumor at right middle lobe with (a, b). In addition, positron emission tomography CT (PET-CT) also showed abnormal uptake of this pulmonary tumor (c). Although we could not preoperatively perform CT-guided percutaneous lung biopsy due to the deep location of the tumor, any regional lymph nodes or distant metastases were undetected; therefore, we performed thoracoscopic partial resection of the right middle lobe.
Microscopic findings of low-power field revealed that there was a solid tumor with necrotizing compartments, and those of high-power field also revealed that tumor cells proliferate without having a basement membrane-like structure (a, b). From these findings, morphological features led to the diagnosis of poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. An immunohistochemical examination was performed to identify the origin of the tumor primary lung cancer or pulmonary metastasis from ESCC. The tumor cells of primary ESCC were positive for CK14, CK18, CK19, and CK5/6 (a–d). On the other hand, the tumor cells of the lung tumor were negative for CK14, napsin A, and synaptophysin (a–f). From these immunohistochemical features, the pulmonary tumor was not derived from both alveolar epithelium and neuroendocrine cells; thus, we finally made the diagnosis of super-late pulmonary recurrence of ESCC. This patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 10 without any complications, and no recurrence was noted for four years after pulmonary metastasectomy.