We report a case of a 58-year-old male with peripheral artery disease. Although he had a 10-year history of intermittent claudication, he had not visited a hospital for consultation previously. When he experienced a stroke and was admitted to our hospital, an MRI revealed left carotid stenosis, and stenting was performed. During admission, arteriosclerosis obliterans (ASO) was detected. The ankle brachial pressure index (ABI) was 0.61 in his right limb and 0.76 in his left limb. He also had a history of depression, alcoholism, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (FEV1.0 was 45.7%, FEV1.0 predicted was 54.8%), hypertension, and chronic renal failure.
After treatment for the stroke, he was referred to our heart and vascular team because of the ASO. An angiography through the left radial artery showed total occlusion of the right common iliac artery, 50% stenosis of the left common iliac artery, and 90% stenosis of the left extra iliac artery. Coronary angiography (CAG) was simultaneously performed because he had shortness of breath during exertion. The CAG showed three-vessel disease (#1, 100%; #5, 50%; #6, 90%; #11, 100%). The circumflex artery was perfused by the collaterals, but quite small, and right coronary artery, which was filled with collaterals, supplied the posterolateral area . Bilateral ITA demonstrated a good collateral pathway to both external iliac arteries.
Echocardiogram revealed that Left ventricular ejection fraction was 45% by modified Simpson method, the wall motion in the base and mid potion from the inferior to posterior lesion, and there was no significant valvular disease. Preoperative evaluation according to Euro score 2 and STS score were 1.226% and 2.09% respectively.
Our heart and vascular team concluded that CABG was recommended with bilateral ITA after a percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) because it was thought that keeping the access route for Intra-Aortic Balloon Pumping (IABP) was important and ITAs serve as good collaterals to both femoral arteries. In case of PTA failure of the right iliac artery occlusion, a concomitant procedure such as a femoro-femoral crossover bypass was planned for the CABG.
Although the PTA to the left common iliac artery and the left extra iliac artery with stenting was successfully performed, the PTA to the occlusive lesion of the right iliac artery was not successful. Therefore, CABG with a femoro-femoral crossover bypass was performed. The left ITA was harvested, followed by the right ITA, both with a skeletonized technique. The patient underwent off-pump CABG with the left ITA, which was anastomosed to the left anterior descending artery, and the right ITA, which was anastomosed to the proximal part of the posterior descending branch. Then, the femoro-femoral crossover bypass was performed with an 8-mm ringed polytetrafluoroethylene graft. Anastomosis to the left common femoral artery in endo-to-side fashion was followed by anastomosis to the right common femoral artery in endo-to-side fashion. During the operation, the blood pressure was stable with norepinephrine (range: 0–0.06 µg/kg/min) and monitoring of the cardiac output revealed a flow of 3.3–4.3 L/min (cardiac index was 1.6–2.1 L/min/m2). The interval between the clamping of the right ITA and starting perfusion to the right femoral artery was 3 h and 47 min.
After the operation, the patient’s condition was stable. Two hours after the operation, he was extubated in the intensive care unit, and no significant findings in his legs were noted. He underwent a routine postoperative blood test and showed an elevated creatine kinase level (2669 U/L), which peaked out at 7177 U/Lon postoperative day 1. Subsequently, it decreased gradually to the normal range for 10 days. Postoperative angiography showed that all ITA grafts and the femoro-femoral crossover bypass were patent. The intermittent claudication symptoms improved, and the ABI was 0.95 in the right side and 0.88 in the left side. He is followed as outpatients without symptom of angina 6 months after surgery.