A 31-year-old woman with complaints of mild dyspnoea on exertion over the last several years was referred to our institution for liver dysfunction and cirrhosis. She had a significant medical history of congenital atrial stand-still and atrial septal defect (ASD) at birth. She had undergone no interventions immediately after the birth and ASD patch closure and EP implantation at the age of 6 years. Her generator was exchanged at the ages of 17 and 23 years. Although the EP generator was extracted and replaced by a transvenous endocardial pacemaker (ventricular sensing and pacing) at the age of 30 years, EP leads had been abandoned after the transvenous endocardial pacemaker implantation. The patient had no relevant family history.
At initial presentation, her blood pressure was 131/80 mmHg, pulse rate was 60 beats per minute (b.p.m.), and her oxygen saturation was 98% at rest. Physical examination was normal, save for mild peripheral oedema. An electrocardiogram showed a ventricular pacing rhythm with a heart rate of 60 b.p.m. Blood investigations revealed thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 98 000/µL (reference range 158 000–348 000/µL); mild liver dysfunction; and an elevated B-type natriuretic peptide level of 41.9 pg/mL (reference range <18.4 pg/mL). Coagulation capacity was within the normal range. Antibody titres related to autoimmune disease, hepatitis viruses, and human immunodeficiency virus were negative. Tumour markers and interferon-gamma release assay results were negative. Chest radiography revealed bilateral enlargement of the pulmonary artery with cardiomegaly, EP leads with the loop placed on the anterior surface of the heart, and the endocardial pacemaker . Computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax showed calcified EP leads on the anterior surface of the heart; CT scan of the abdomen revealed surface nodularity of the liver suggesting cirrhosis and mild ascites, with no evidence of spontaneous portosystemic shunts other than the splenorenal shunt . Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated diffusely reduced left ventricular wall motion with an ejection fraction of 49%, bi-atrial enlargement, moderate mitral regurgitation due to left atrial enlargement, and dilatation of the inferior vena cava. There was no evidence of ventricular septal diastolic shudder, respiration-related ventricular septal shift, intracardiac shunt including residual ASD, or pericardial effusion. On pulsed-wave tissue Doppler imaging, the lateral and medial velocities of the mitral annulus in early diastole (e′) were 16.5 cm/s and 9.5 cm/s, respectively. The tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion was 10.9 mm and the tricuspid annular velocity in systole (s′) was 6.6 cm/s. Coronary angiography revealed no evidence of coronary stenosis. Right heart catheterization (RHC) showed a right atrial pressure of 14 mmHg, pulmonary artery pressure of 36/16 mmHg, mean pulmonary artery pressure of 24 mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 18 mmHg, cardiac index of 2.48 L/min/m2, pulmonary artery saturation of 78%, and waveforms similar to those of constrictive pericarditis (CP) . These results suggested that she had developed cardiac strangulation by the EP leads with haemodynamics similar to those of CP, leading to congestive hepatopathy with cirrhosis. Upon arriving at this diagnosis, complete EP lead removal and mitral valve repair were successfully performed .
After surgical removal, her dyspnoea on exertion was improved. Further, RHC 1 year after surgery showed a right atrial pressure of 6 mmHg, pulmonary artery pressure of 19/12 mmHg, mean pulmonary artery pressure of 15 mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 13 mmHg, cardiac index of 3.46 L/min/m2, and pulmonary artery saturation of 80%. The waveforms of RHC after surgery also changed compared with those before surgery . The medication administered immediately after surgery included a beta-blocker, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist, loop diuretic, and vitamin K antagonist. However, all medication has since been stopped because of pregnancy. The patient has shown no worsening of heart failure or other unanticipated events until the present time.