A 71-year-old female patient with thalassemia minor and hypertension was diagnosed in 1999 with early-stage right breast cancer. She underwent breast-conserving surgery and axillary dissection; pathology showed a small tumor, less than 2 cm, node-negative invasive ductal carcinoma. Hormone receptors (HRs) were positive but HER2 was negative. After the surgery, she received chemotherapy [cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil (CMF)] followed by radiotherapy and adjuvant tamoxifen for 5 years. She did well and was very adherent to clinical and mammographic follow-up until 2015, when she had an intractable cough. Imaging studies showed a left hilar lesion and multiple osteolytic bone metastases, including the left scapula, left shoulder, left iliac bone, and the fourth and seventh dorsal vertebrae. Fine needle aspiration from the left hilum, through endobronchial ultrasound, confirmed breast cancer metastasis. Similarly to the original tumor, hormone receptors were positive (ER 90%, PR 30%) and HER2 was negative. Therefore, she was started on endocrine therapy with fulvestrant, which kept her progression free for 2 years. She was then switched to exemestane and everolimus; however, this regimen was discontinued owing to grade II pneumonitis and prenephrotic range proteinuria. At that time, the patient was enrolled in a double-blind randomized clinical trial testing CDK4/6 inhibitors along with aromatase inhibitors. A few months later, the patient was taken off the study owing to disease progression, and was found to be on the placebo arm. Following the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of CDK4/6 inhibitors, she was started on ribociclib and letrozole, which she tolerated relatively well. Nonetheless, because of persistent neutropenia, the dose of ribociclib was reduced to 400 mg daily; on days 1–21 of a 28-day cycle.
Almost 20 weeks after starting ribociclib and letrozole, she noticed small, rounded, well-demarcated hypopigmented lesions over both hands with expanding patches reaching up to the mid forearms . Three weeks later, new similar lesions started to appear over her face and feet. The patient had no personal or family history of autoimmune diseases. The patient was seen at the dermatology clinic and was offered treatment with topical immunomodulators (calcineurin inhibitors), which she refused, and was kept on topical steroids with little improvement.