The subject of this case study was a 54-year-old male with medium build (body mass index: 21 kg/m2) who had been infected with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in January 2020 and diagnosed with critical COVID-19. To the best of our knowledge, the patient had enjoyed good health without any previous lung or cardiovascular conditions, except for a history of smoking for over 20 years. Symptomatic medical treatment, including antiviral treatment (umifenovir), was administered from January 29 to February 20. However, during hospitalization, the patient developed atypical pneumonia followed by ALI and severe hypoxaemia on February 12. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was initiated on February 22. The patient developed acute kidney injury requiring haemodialysis on April 1. On April 3, the patient tested negative in the SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid test and was diagnosed to be in the recovery stage of critical-type COVID-19. Following refractory hypoxaemia after 73 days, different slices of chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed severe pulmonary fibrosis , which was confirmed by pathological examination after lung transplantation. The patient was treated with umifenovir, convalescent plasma, alpha-interferon, corticoids, and other supporting therapy. However, there was no clinical improvement after 73 days on ECMO or active medical treatment, the patient suffered progressive dyspnoea, and progressive respiratory failure continued. In order to increase the patient’s life expectancy, double-lung transplantation was performed.
The patient underwent double-lung transplantation in late April 2020, following the ethical principles of international organ transplantation. The allocated lungs were harvested from the donor after brainstem death and donated through the China Organ Transplant Response System.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was discontinued 6 days after double-lung transplantation for the first time, but the patient suffered from hypoxaemia, respiratory acidosis, and circulation instability 7 days after double-lung transplantation. Hence, venous–venous ECMO was used again. In addition, biological tests showed D-dimer levels of 12.38 µg/mL, ultrasound indicated pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure, and minor levels of right pulmonary stenosis and embolism were found by CT angiography. Therefore, we administered intravenous heparin for anticoagulant therapy and inhaled nitric oxide to dilate the pulmonary arteries. The respiratory and circulation status improved during the following days. The patient was weaned from ECMO 12 days after double-lung transplantation, and tracheal intubation was removed 17 days after double-lung transplantation.
However, more than 3 months after double-lung transplantation, the patient complained of progressive dyspnoea again. Branch PAS was confirmed by pulmonary artery CT angiography, which revealed stenosis in the right lower pulmonary branch, including a minor level of pulmonary embolism. Electrocardiography (ECG) results showed sinus rhythm at 79–116 b.p.m. with right bundle branch block. Echocardiography revealed right ventricular enlargement, moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation, and an estimated right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) of 76 mmHg. Considering clinical presentation, ECG, echocardiography, and CT angiography findings, the patient was diagnosed with branch PAS. Later, Treprostinil injection was continuously administered for pulmonary vasodilation. However, biological tests showed that brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) levels were not improved. The patient underwent further right cardiac catheterization examination and pulmonary angiography under general anaesthesia and mechanical ventilation. Pulmonary angiography revealed the main pulmonary artery was at a pressure of 60/20 mmHg, severe stenosis was present in the right branch pulmonary artery with a pressure of 17/9 mmHg , and mild stenosis was present in the left branch pulmonary artery with a pressure of 50/20 mmHg.
The MPA1 catheter (Cordis, USA) was delivered to the distal end of the right pulmonary artery after right heart catheterization and exchanged for Amplatz Super Stiff Wire (BostonScientific Corporation, USA). A 14-Fr guiding sheath (Cook Medical, Bloomington, USA) was introduced into the right pulmonary artery so as to ensure the previously preloaded 25-mm long Pul-Stent™ (Med-Zenith Company, Beijing, China) could pass through the lesion smoothly. The stent was expanded step by step with a 12-mm Balloon-in-Balloon (Numed Company, USA) after accurate location was confirmed by angiography.
After the endovascular procedure, pulmonary angiography revealed the main pulmonary artery was at a pressure of 54/17 mmHg, the right branch stenotic lesion diameter improved and its estimated pressure was 45/17 mmHg , and the pressure gradient decreased from 43 to 9 mmHg. The percutaneous interventional procedure went smoothly, and the vital signs of the patient remained stable during catheterization. After treatment, echocardiography estimated the RVSP decreased from 76 to 34 mmHg. The patient’s BNP and NT-proBNP levels decreased distinctly . Additionally, the mean level of the postoperative oxygenation index was also significantly improved compared with the preoperative oxygenation index .