A 71-year-old female with a history of acid reflux presented to the emergency department following a syncopal episode, along with progressive diarrhea, weight loss, worsening jaundice, and fatigue. She had been undergoing outpatient evaluation for elevated liver enzymes over the past 2 years prior to admission. She was trialed on ursodiol and low-dose prednisone without much benefit prior to arrival.
In the emergency department, her vitals were remarkable for hypotension with a blood pressure of 72/53 mm Hg and a nadir HR of 62. Physical exam was significant for jaundice and cachexia. Blood work demonstrated leukocytosis 27.7 × 109/L (normal 3.4–9.6 × 109/L) with neutrophilic predominance. Hepatic function panel showed an aspartate transaminase level of 85 U/L (normal 8–43 U/L), alanine aminotransferase 85 U/L (normal 7–45 U/L), bilirubin 9.3 mg/dL (normal <1.2 mg/dL), and alkaline phosphatase of 2262 U/L (normal 35–104 U/L). Gamma-glutamyl transferase was elevated to 494 U/L (normal 5–36 U/L). C-reactive protein was 52 mg/L (normal <8 mg/L). TSH was elevated to 22.8 mL U/L (normal 0.3–4.2 mlU/L) with undetectable T3 and T4 levels. Review of a 6-month prior outside liver biopsy was consistent with periportal fibrosis with lymphocytic and scattered neutrophilic infiltrates in the portal tracts. No infiltrating histiocytes were noted in the biopsy.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for vasodilatory shock, requiring vasopressors and chronotropic agents along with antibiotics. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast illustrated diffusely heterogenous liver parenchymal enhancement without ductal dilatation, duodenitis, and diffuse colonic thickening concerning pancolitis (shown in a). CT chest was performed which showed centrilobular ground glass opacities bilaterally with mild pulmonary edema. Echocardiogram did not reveal any cardiac abnormality. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast revealed abnormal enhancement and thickening of the pituitary infundibulum and stalk most consistent with lymphocytic hypophysitis (shown in b).
Given the cholestatic nature of liver injury, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography was performed which showed multifocal nodular hepatic steatosis and hepatomegaly without any focal liver abnormality; in addition, multiple indeterminate bony lesions were read as non-specific focal sclerosis and cystic lesions. Autoantibody screening including anti-nuclear antibody, SS-A and SS-B antibodies, and anti-smooth muscle antibody were negative. IgG4 subclass levels were normal. A bone marrow biopsy showed 40% cellularity and reactive marrow changes without any blasts or infiltrate. Subcutaneous fat aspirate was negative for amyloid deposition on Congo red staining.
The patient was being optimized for a possible esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy once more stable. A repeat liver biopsy revealed histiocytes infiltrating the biliary tree with chronic biliary tract injury. Tissue stained positive for CD1a and S100, markers of Langerhans cells, and BRAFV600E-mutated protein, commonly found in various malignancies (shown in ). No evidence of IgG4 sclerosing cholangitis was observed. A diagnosis of secondary sclerosing cholangitis and cirrhosis secondary to multisystem LCH was confirmed.
Treatment was initiated with hydrocortisone and levothyroxine for panhypopituitarism. The patient was eventually started on dose reduced b-rapidly accelerator fibrosarcoma (BRAF) inhibitor, vemurafenib, after multidisciplinary discussion. The patient’s hospital course was also complicated by acute necrotizing pancreatitis, poorly controlled blood sugars, and new onset central diabetes insipidus that required treatment with desmopressin. Repeated hospitalizations in the following 3 months prompted her to opt for comfort care with palliative measures.