A 49-year-old Asian woman presented with severe abdominal distension and dyspnea. She suffered from the feeling of swelling abdomen, dull nature abdominal discomfort and pain, edema in both legs, and dyspnea from 3 weeks before her visit. She visited another hospital 2 days prior to her visit and was transferred to our emergency room owing to huge ovarian cystic mass occupying almost all of the abdominal cavity and large amount of left pleural effusion on computed tomography (CT) scan. On initial vital sign assessment, her blood pressure was stable and she had tachycardia but no fever. Her laboratory findings showed anemia (hemoglobin 8.3 g/dL), leukocytosis [white blood cells (WBC) 21.00 × 103/μL], C-reactive protein (CRP) elevation of 25.8 mg/dL with prolongation of prothrombin time (PT) (90.4 seconds), PT international normalized ratio (INR) , and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) (no coagulation), which could possibly imply disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Physical examination showed abdominal distension, severe tenderness, and rebound tenderness in the whole abdomen. Due to severe dyspnea and abdominal distension, chest arrow insertion at left lung and paracentesis were performed, draining approximately 850 mL and 2 L, respectively. While performing transfusion, we reexamined dynamic abdomen-pelvis CT scan and found 30-cm-sized multiseptated cystic mass and peritoneal thickening with large amount of ascites suggesting ovarian malignancy and peritoneal carcinomatosis . The patient’s preoperative cancer antigen 125 (CA125) level showed a significant increase with 674.3 U/mL, human epididymis protein 4 (HE4) was 286.4 pmol/L, and premenopausal/postmenopausal risk of ovarian malignancy algorithm (ROMA) index was 86.67%/92.83%. The other tumor markers such as carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) were within normal range. With all the results combined, rupture of a malignant ovarian tumor was suspected, and an emergent operation was planned.
On the initial operation findings, ruptured 30-cm-sized right ovarian multiseptated cystic mass showing diffuse adhesion to retroperitoneum, abdominal wall, and uterus was identified. Although frozen section biopsy from the right ovarian mass was revealed as a poorly differentiated carcinoma, debulking surgery including hysterectomy could not be performed owing to persistent oozing pattern bleeding from multiple sites, which was due to DIC. We performed bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and partial omentectomy. The pathologic diagnosis of the right ovary was high-grade stromal sarcoma with features of brisk mitosis (30–40/high-power field), focal necrosis, adenofibromatous component, endometriosis with mucinous metaplasia, and hypercellular stroma . The tumor consisted of monotonous uniform cells with endometrial stromal differentiation . Mitotic figures were frequent , and highly atypical neoplastic cells were noted . Metastasis to omentum was also identified. On immunohistochemistry, tumor cells were positive for CD10 , Cyclin D1, and FOXL 2 and positive focally for desmin and smooth muscle actin (SMA). They were negative for beta-catenin and inhibin A. After the surgery, endometrial biopsy was done for excluding metastasis from the endometrium, and the pathologic result was nonspecific. The patient underwent adjuvant chemotherapy with three courses of Adriamycin (75 mg/m2). On the follow-up CT scan that was performed 6 months after the chemotherapy, new 11-mm-sized probable seeding nodules in the right omentum and left paracolic gutter were seen. A 1.5-cm-sized partly solid nodule in the right upper lung field was also identified on the chest CT. As for the lung lesion, we had both primary and metastatic lesion in mind, and planned to perform the surgery separately.
We performed the secondary debulking operation including total hysterectomy, metastasectomy, omentectomy, peritonectomy, appendectomy, and HIPEC (paclitaxel 175 mg/m2). In the final pathologic report, it was confirmed that the uterine cervix, myometrium, and endometrium had no specific finding except atrophy, which excludes the possibility of endometrial origin malignancy. Peritoneum, omentum, and appendix specimens were confirmed as metastatic high-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma. Two months after the surgery, the patient underwent another right upper lung lobectomy operation, and the biopsy was revealed as adenocarcinoma, which means double primary malignancy. Currently, she has been alive for 28 months under a new chemotherapy regimen: paclitaxel (175 mg/m2) and ifosfamide (1.6 g/m2).