A 79-year-old man visited our institution because of an extensive IVC tumor and a small right renal tumor. He had had edema in bilateral lower extremities for 2 months and also felt abdominal distension from 3 weeks before. He underwent CT and blood test to investigate the cause of his symptoms at the hospital where his type 2 diabetes mellitus was being treated. CT showed an extensive intravenous tumor in the IVC causing hepatic ischemia and ascites and concurrently indicated small right renal tumor. He visited our department due to suspected IVC-TT associated with RCC. His blood test revealed abnormal values of Hb (11.1 g/dL), AST (191 U/L), ALT (446 U/L), and CRP (4.73 mg/dL), but other laboratory data were within normal range. Dynamic CT, abdominal MRI, and US were performed . Dynamic CT revealed a renal mass of 15 mm in size on the right lateral aspect in corticomedullary phase, suggesting RCC. The intravenous tumor was enhanced heterogeneously, expanding the lumen and extending from the right atrium to the L4 vertebral level and also into the bilateral renal veins with right-sided predominance. This intravenous tumor was suspected to have arisen from the smooth muscle of the IVC wall, such as leiomyosarcoma, rather than TT associated with RCC because the renal tumor was too small for extensive IVC thrombus and the direct invasion of the small renal tumor into the renal vein could not be detected by MRI and US. To confirm the histological diagnosis, we performed biopsies of both the intravenous and renal tumors. Eight days after the patient's first visit to our hospital, he simultaneously underwent an ultrasound-guided biopsy for the small renal tumor and a percutaneous transvenous biopsy for the intravenous tumor. The procedure of the percutaneous transvenous technique is summarized in Table and Fig. . Based on pathological findings and no finding of other metastatic lesions, the final diagnosis was clear cell RCC with IVC-TT .
The patient's general condition rapidly deteriorated from KPS 60 at his initial visit to 40 in just 3 weeks. Therefore, he and his family chose supportive care at their home, and declined surgery and systemic therapy such as immune checkpoint inhibitors.