A 60-year-old male patient presented with pain in the left knee with difficulty in walking since 3 months. The patient had road traffic accident 3 months back and sustained trauma to the left knee. The patient did not took any treatment for the same and came to hospital after 3 months of the injury.
On clinical examination, there was palpable gap of more than 5 cm between the fracture fragments, anterior surface of femur and condyles were palpated through fracture site and knee range of motion was between 30° and 90° of flexion, and terminal 30° extension lag was present. On radiological examination in form of X-ray radiograph and CT scan with 3D reconstruction fracture, morphology delineated and gap of 5 cm was noted (, ). The patient was operated in supine position and tourniquet was not used (to avoid interference with quadriceps release).
Midline 15 cm longitudinal incision was taken and medial and lateral flaps were raised. Fracture fragments were identified. Fracture ends were completed covered by the fibrotic tissue . Fracture ends were freshened, there was a gap of 5 cm between the fragments in full extension of knee. The insertion of the quadriceps tendon over proximal pole of patella was exposed and pie crusting was done on medial and lateral side, but still fragments were not approximated, so quadriceps release was done from the anterior surface of femur and V-Y plasty was done. Three longitudinal tunnels were made in proximal and distal fracture fragments and ethibond 5 was passed through it . This helped to reduce the fracture gap and was later tied along superior border. For the V-Y plasty, the length of the limbs of the V of size double the length of the defect was taken, approximately 10 cm. The V shaped cut is marked at junction of tendon and muscle and partial thickness cut were made. The ends of V are then pulled down along with patella and fracture ends were approximated. SS wire was used to hold the reduction of the fragments by encirclage wiring and anterior tension band wiring done. The Y limb so formed after pulling of the tendon was sutured, and then, part of V was sutured back with the medial and lateral native quadriceps muscle tendon. Retinaculum was repaired and wound closed in layers . Post-operative radiograph showed approximation of the fragment and reduction of articular surface .
Postoperatively, long rigid knee brace was given for 2 weeks and walking with partial weight-bearing started. After suture removal at 2 weeks, full weight-bearing initiated. At 3 weeks, knee range of motion started and continued till 8 weeks. At 3 months post-operative, the patient is able to do flexion up to 90° and no extension lag is present . There is bony union seen at 3 months follow-up.