A 50-year-old Mediterranean woman presented with 1-year history of involuntary movement of the toes of her right foot. Our patient was not known to have diabetes or hypertension. Initially, the patient started to have an odd but painless feeling in her foot; she described the feeling as something moving inside her foot. This had gradually progressed to visible movement of the toes of her right foot; she did not describe any aggravating or relieving factors to the movement. However, the severity of movement varied during the day. There was no history of lower limb trauma or psychological problems. There was no history of neuroleptics use or symptoms of thyroid disease [, ]. Our patient reported that she had a history of low back pain 15 years ago. She had been told that surgery was required for her lower back pain but she did not recall the reason for the surgery; unfortunately, her previous MRI scan was not available.
On clinical examination, our patient appeared healthy with no signs of anxiety or psychological problems. She had a normal gait with normal tandem gait and a negative Romberg’s sign. The movement did not affect her gait and she could walk on her toes and her heels . Her upper and lower limb power and reflexes were normal. There was normal coordination of the upper and lower limbs with no evidence of cerebellar signs, nystagmus or ophthalmoplegia. Her peripheral pulses were intact but there was mild swelling of her feet and legs due to mild varicose veins.
The movement was a continuous semirhythmic movement involving the right first, second, third and fourth toes. It was a constant, flexion/relaxation movement with a variable frequency between 0.5 and 1 Hz. There was no associated visible movement of her ankle or calf muscles. The patient was able to temporarily suppress the movement by powerful extension of her toes and dorsiflexion of her ankle.
Laboratory investigations did not show any remarkable abnormalities. Her vitamin B12 level was normal and she was already on vitamin D3 treatment. A nerve conduction study of her right lower limb showed no evidence of demyelination or axonal loss. There was no neurophysiological evidence of peroneal nerve compression at the fibular head or tarsal tunnel syndrome. F wave examination and electromyography (EMG) did not show any evidence of denervation.
A lumbar MRI scan demonstrated a mild disc protrusion between L4 and L5. There was a much smaller disc protrusion between L5 and S1. Both discs did not show spinal cord or nerve root compression on axial view. A Tarlov cyst was seen at the sacral area .