A 72-year-old female, fully edentulous, wearing a removable prosthesis, was referred to our clinic after three unsuccessful attempts at rehabilitation of the edentulous mandible, with complete dentures. The patient had a 16-month history of swallowing problems, a painful erosion lesion, burning sensations on the left floor of the mouth, and recurrent numbness in the lower-right inferior lip. The X-ray evaluation showed extreme resorption of the mandible, as seen in Fig. .
The patient was content with her maxillary denture, which was satisfactory from a technical point of view.
Her medical history revealed type 2 diabetes mellitus managed with medication, psychological depression, class II obesity, obstructive sleep apnea, class III (moderate) to IV (severe) heart failure according to NYHA (New York Heart Association) classification, controlled essential hypertension, and ischemic heart disease.
The preoperative CBCT confirmed resorption of the alveolar bone and partial resorption of the basal bone, a residual bone height between 5 and 8 mm corresponding to the interforaminal region, and the exposure of the inferior alveolar nerve (Class V-VI according to Cawood and Howell classification ), with no residual bone above the nerve in the lateral region (between the mental foramen and the second molar).
After presenting all the available options, including mental nerve transposition and extensive bone grafting, the accepted and less-invasive treatment was an overdenture supported by four splinted dental implants, without any bone grafting. The insertion of only two interforaminal implants was excluded due to the high risk of mandibular fracture. Therefore, in the third molar region, the inferior alveolar nerve by-pass technique was considered to be appropriate in this case. Prophylactic antibiotic therapy was initiated within one hour before surgery; the patient was administered with 2 g of a combination of amoxicillin and potassium clavulanate.
Mepivacaine HCl 3 % without vasoconstrictor (Scandonest 3 %, Septodont, Saint-Maur-des-Fossés, France) was locally infiltrated into the lingual and the labial aspect for each implant site. A full muco-periosteal flap was elevated to obtain direct visual access to the residual bone.
The osteotomies were performed at 300 rpm and 50Ncm under cold saline irrigation using a freehand technique. In the interforaminal region, two 3.5 mm x 7mm implants (AnyRidge®, MegaGen, Daegu, Korea) were placed with an insertion torque of 40Ncm (right) and 45 Ncm (left), respectively. In the third molar area, two 3.2 mm x 10 mm implants (Mini®, MegaGen, Daegu, Korea) were placed with an insertion torque of 35 Ncm. The implants were inserted in the residual buccal bone bypassing the inferior alveolar nerve, as shown in Fig. A and B.
The healing abutments were installed immediately: two conventional in the anterior region and two custom made; 12 mm in length healing in the posterior mandible. Simple interrupted sutures were used to close the incisions. 2 g of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium were administered for the following 4 days. Sensory condition in the lower lip and chin was evaluated 24 h after the surgery, and no neurosensory changes were present. Healing was uneventful and the sutures were removed 14 days after surgery. Restorative treatment was initiated at 22 weeks post-implant insertion and the patient received the final overdenture 22 days after the preliminary impression.
Due to the high level of mandibular atrophy, a special three-part customized impression tray was made as shown in Fig. A and B. The corresponding transfer abutments, AnyRidge®, for the two interforaminal implants, and Mini®, for the posterior implants, were inserted and functional impressions were taken with a polyether material (Impregum; 3 M ESPE, St. Paul, MN, USA), as shown in Fig. A. The three-part customised tray was made on a preliminary cast with implant analogues poured from a preliminary impression with the corresponding transfer abutments. Jaw relations were recorded with record bases and occlusal rims as shown in Figs. and A and C.
An Artex face bow (Amann Girrbach, Koblach, Austria) was used to transfer the horizontal relationship of the maxillary arch to the cranial base and data were employed to mount maxillary and mandibular casts in an Artex®CR (Amann Girrbach AG, Koblach, Austria) -Arcon articulator, following the manufacturer’s instructions. A try-in mandibular denture was manufactured and the required functional adjustments were performed, as shown in Fig. B. A removable bar-retained overdenture was planned. Four OT Equator® abutments (Rhein83, Bologna, Italy) were screwed onto the implants, two custom-made 11 mm abutments on the posterior implants and two 4 mm abutments in the interforaminal region.
A custom-designed bar secured with four castable Seeger Bar containers (Rhein83, Bologna, Italy), as shown in Fig. A and B was screwed over the OT Equator® abutments, with titanium locking screws and self-extracting Seeger rings (Rhein83, Bologna, Italy). The bar’s link framework was made with castable components: OT Bar gingival connectors. To anchor the over-structure, four single OT Equator® castable retentions (Rhein83, Bologna, Italy) were placed balanced distributed on the canine-premolar regions of the bar to ensure polygonal support for the denture. Both the bar and link frameworks were cast from Cr-Co alloy, together in the same duplicating mould to equalise the volumetric changes for both structures. After casting and postprocessing, the link framework was bonded to the final denture using a light-curing resin.
The bar was mounted on the four OT Equator® abutments by using the self-extracting elastic Seeger rings over the abutments, with the aim to obtain a passive structure and avoid stress distribution to the dental implants . Also, the space between the bar and the underlying mucosa was designed adequately for oral hygiene maintenance .
Due to the pattern of atrophy, the distal parts of the bar were not covered by the mandibular overdenture, as shown in Fig. A-D.
At the delivery of the denture, functional adjustments were performed, and soft retention Nylon inserts were used. Oral hygiene instructions, including the use of interproximal brushes and oral irrigators, were provided to the patient. The patient was extremely happy with the functional and aesthetic outcomes, as shown in Fig. A and B. The correct positioning of the bar was assessed with the aid of an orthopantomography, as shown in Fig. .
At one week post denture insertion follow-up, the patient had normal lower-lip sensitivity, improved masticatory ability, and normal deglutition.
The patient’s self-perception in relation to the impacts of oral conditions on physical, psychological, and social wellbeing was evaluated before treatment and one week post mandibular overdenture insertion using the Oral Health Impact Profile for Edentulous Patients (OHIP-EDENT) questionnaire, validated for the Romanian language (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01392456). Each of the 19 items were assessed on a Likert scale (4 = always, 3 = frequently, 2 = sometimes, 1 = seldom, and 0 = never) with a total range of 0–76, a higher score meaning poorer quality of life . Despite the good fit of the maxillary denture, the registered OHIP-EDENT total score was 69 prior to the treatment; however, it decreased to 19 with the final mandibular overdenture, showing a significant improvement in quality of life.
At the 14-month follow-up, the overdenture was evaluated and a CBCT taken, as shown in Fig. . The inferior alveolar nerve integrity and the stability of the bone tissue surrounding the dental implants were also assessed.