We present the case of a 59-year-old woman with a history of heavy smoking and hypertension, but no relevant cardiovascular history. Her condition started twenty days ago, characterised by chest pain, dyspnoea and fever. Based on the clinical presentation, acute community-acquired pneumonia was suspected and empirical antibiotic treatment was initiated. Although the fever and chest pain had subsided, dyspnoea persisted for another fifteen days, which led her to consult again at the nearest hospital, where an electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed poor progression of R in the precordial leads, ST elevation and negative T waves. The transthoracic echocardiogram showed a severely depressed ejection fraction with apical akinesia with associated apical thrombus. With these findings, an evolved acute myocardial infarction was diagnosed and a differential diagnosis between an aneurysm with apical thrombus and a pseudoaneurysm secondary to a cardiac rupture was raised. The patient was transferred to our hospital for further evaluation and possible intervention. On admission, she was haemodynamically stable and showed no signs of low output or heart failure. Blood tests were normal. The coronary angiography that revealed an occlusion in the mid-portion of the descending anterior aorta with TIMI 0 flow and no development of collateral circulation. The remaining coronary arteries showed no other significant lesions. Subsequently, for a better anatomical understanding, a cardiac magnetic resonance (MRI) and cardiac computed tomography (CT) were performed that demonstrated severe left ventricular dysfunction, subacute infarction in the territory of the descending anterior aorta and a rupture of the left ventricular free wall with an apical thrombus containing a thrombus, which exhibited partial fragmentation in the strictly apical region. Based on these findings, the possibility of surgical intervention was evaluated, but the chest X-ray revealed severe emphysema and pulmonary function tests showed severe obstructive ventilatory impairment. For this reason, an interdisciplinary discussion was held, exploring the options of surgical repair or heart transplantation. For surgical repair with a patch (Dor procedure), it was considered that the remaining cardiac volumes would be insufficient. On the other hand, it was considered risky and probably futile to perform a heart transplantation in a patient with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Therefore, in a joint decision with the patient, it was decided to opt only for medical treatment. Nine months after diagnosis, she remains asymptomatic.
