A 27-year-old male, victim of aggressive, blunt trauma with a 4-day history of symptoms was admitted to our surgery unit. The patient presented abdominal pain, was hypotensive (100/50 mmHg), perspiring, and drowsy. The abdominal examination revealed diffuse tenderness and rebound tenderness to palpation, 2 periumbilical ecchymoses of 2/2 cm, many others within the left deltoid area and on the lower limbs. Abdominal sonography revealed peritoneal fluid in all spaces with fibrin, chest X-rays unremarkable. Laboratory investigation showed hemoglobin and white blood cell count with normal values, creatinine 4.04 mg/dL, urea 209 mg/dL, mild acidosis, lactate 21 mmol/L, creatinine-kinase 1910 U/L, lactate-dehydrogenase 451 U/L, and ethanol 34 mg/dL. During laparotomy, we discovered 2 perforations on the ileum and general peritonitis with pus. We performed an enterectomy, about 20 cm of ileum, and an end-ileostomy with a mucous fistula on the distal ileum, saline lavage, four drainages, and a laparostomy. Following surgery, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) with septic shock and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS). We initiated empirical therapy with broad-spectrum antibiotics with ertapenem and vancomycin. The antibiogram from the peritoneal liquid revealed S. putrefaciens, S. cerevisiae, and Candida species susceptible to amikacin, gentamicin, ciprofloxacin, third-generation cephalosporins, and fluconazole. On the second day following surgery, we intervened again, and we discovered multiple intraperitoneal abscesses. We washed the patient once more, drained, and treated him surgically with a laparostomy. From the peritoneal liquid, Acinetobacter baumannii developed that were susceptible to colistin, and the same bacteria was discovered within the tracheal secretion. The patient remained on mechanical ventilation, inotropic support, and sedated. Fever (38.5 ºC), leukocytosis (22850/μL), high lactate (31.5), very high inflammatory markers (presepsin, procalcitonin, C-reactive protein), and higher inotropic support (from 10 to 25 μg/hour of norepinephrine) convinced us to repeat the intervention including both washing and laparostomy with negative pressure. Until the 11th day following surgery, the patient remained intubated, with inotropic support, had high fever (38 ºC), and very grave general status-MODS. He also had septic shock, with a positive antibiogram from the venous catheter for Klebsiella pneumoniae susceptible to sulfamethoxazole with trimethoprim, and for Staphylococcus hominis susceptible to vancomycin and levofloxacin. From the tracheal secretion, the bacteria found in the peritoneal liquid (A. baumannii) was sampled analogously. Every other day, we repeated the intervention to change the kit for intra-abdominal negative pressure. On the 12th day following surgery, the general status of the patient had improved. Thus, he no longer remained intubated, was hemodynamically stable, without inotropic support, with spontaneous respirations, and had a functional ileostomy. We changed 6 kits of negative abdominal pressure, the antibiogram from the peritoneal cavity was positive once again for Klebsiella and Acinetobacter with antibiotic therapy . During the last 3 interventions, we progressively closed the abdomen, and upon the 10th repeated intervention, we closed the entire abdomen, after which the patient was discharged from the ICU after 20 days where he had been administered many doses of antibiotherapy. The patient was discharged from the surgery unit on the 30th day after admission and had completely recovered.
After 6 months, the patient returned to close the ileostomy, and after another 8 months, he returned with a median postoperative hernia . Given both the large defect and due to the weight gained, we chose to resolve the hernia with an intraperitoneal mesh. This method was unsuccessful, and even the antibiogram was negative; the patient developed ulceration of the skin which was resolved surgically. We removed the mesh and performed a muscular-cutaneous flap . Written informed consent was obtained from the patient who participated in this case.