Our patient was a 48-year-old woman with a history of two previous cervical surgeries, the first one in 1987 and the second in 2003, with placement of titanium plates and screws at C4-C5 and C5-C6. She was seen at the clinic in 2005 with a 2-month history of fatigue, chills, headache, nausea, and asymmetric arthralgia. She also had episodes of malar rash after sun exposure and cutaneous fluctuating rash in the trunk. Physical examination revealed arthritis of the left shoulder and left ankle, livedo reticularis, and erythematous cutaneous rash in the thorax. No infection foci were detected. Laboratory studies revealed thrombocytosis 485,000 cells/mm3 (normal range 130,000–400,000 cells/mm3), elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) 75 mg/dl (normal range 0.1–1.0 mg/dl), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 40 mm/h (normal range 0–20 mm/h). Autoantibodies were negative, and complement levels were within normal range.
From 2005 to 2007, she had no treatment, and her symptoms had a fluctuating course. In 2007, fatigue, rash, and arthralgia appeared again, and she developed edema in her hands and feet. Rheumatology started prednisone and methotrexate without improvement. Six months later, dysphagia, halitosis, and “sputum” production of purulent aspect were added to the patient’s symptoms. She consulted an ear, nose, and throat specialist, who did not find any abnormality.
She continued with elevated CRP, ESR, and thrombocytosis. Labeled leukocyte single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) suggested spondylitis in the cervical spine (C4-C6) and revealed an inflammatory process in the nasopharynx, an increase in the prevertebral space of > 2 cm, and free air in this area . An esophagogram with hydrosoluble contrast revealed a posterior pharyngoesophageal diverticulum with a fistula to C6 . The patient’s x-rays of the lateral column after the cervical spine anterior fixation in 2003 showed preserved prevertebral space, and intersomatic C4-C5 box and plate were 5 mm anterior to the vertebral bodies, pressing the esophagus .
The patient was taken to surgery; screws and plates were removed from C4 to C6; surgical debridement was performed; and the fistula and diverticulum were removed with cricopharyngeal myotomy and esophageal repair. Esophagography with water-soluble contrast showed no leak after surgery, but the lumen of the esophagus at C4–C6 was increased in diameter with diminished compliance. Removed plates, screws, and tissue were cultured and grew Streptococcus milleri. The patient was treated with oral amoxicillin 1 g every 8 h and probenecid for 4 months, until a gammagram was negative. Her fatigue, arthralgia, rash, and livedo reticularis as well as dysphagia disappeared. Her acute-phase reactants normalized.