The patient was a 67-year-old woman who was admitted to the clinic in September 2019.
The patient was suffering lumbar pain for 7 years and aggravation with interspace claudication since the preceding February.
Twenty years previously, the patient had undergone partial thyroidectomy for thyroid nodules at a primary hospital. Post-operative examination of the resected specimen suggested a benign thyroid lesion.
The patient had no history of food or drug allergies, and genetic diseases.
Physical examination revealed mild limitation of lumbar flexion and extension activity, L4 paravertebral tenderness, no obvious abnormalities in sensation/movement, and normal blood circulation in both lower limbs. The results of the straight leg raising test, strength test, and bilateral Patrick's sign were negative. No abnormal nodules were touch in the bilateral thyroid glands, and cervical lymph nodes showed no enlargement bilaterally.
Color ultrasonography indicated solid nodules in the middle of the right lobe of the thyroid, thyroid imaging reporting and data system (TI-RADS) category 4A, and hypoechoic nodules in the bilateral lobes of the thyroid gland, TI-RADS category 3. Therefore, a nodular goiter was considered. No abnormal enlargement of the bilateral cervical lymph nodes was observed. Lumbar computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) results suggested metastatic or malignant tumors . Thyroid fine-needle aspiration demonstrated a large number of red blood cells (RBCs) with benign proliferative follicular epithelial cells. Thyroid needle biopsy results indicated a small number of thyroid follicles with nodular hyperplasia. Pathological examination of the L4 vertebral puncture biopsy indicated fibrinoid necrosis, broken bone, and thyroid tissue, which suggested metastatic thyroid cancer. Therefore, we sent the sample for pathological consultation at the Shantou University Medical College. Their examination indicated that bone marrow tissue, bone trabecula, and thyroid follicular tissue were observed in the puncture tissue of the L4 vertebral body. Considering the potential for ectopic thyroid tissue, we wanted to exclude FTC. Thyroid function was normal. However, MRI of the lumbar spine indicated malignancy, and whole-body positron emission tomography (PET)-CT was consistent with spinal tumors. No other metastases were found .