A 68-year-old man presented to the emergency department with progressive dyspnea and lower-limb edema leading to anasarca associated with neuropathic pain. The patient had no significant past medical history but reported undergoing outpatient evaluation in which a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and a pattern of left ventricular hypertrophy. His vital signs were within the normal limits but jugular engorgement, ascites, and lower limb edema up to the point of anasarca were observed. Physical examination notably revealed a rupture of the right biceps brachii tendon. Laboratory tests showed a hemoglobin level of 13.8 g/dL, creatinine 1.42 mg/ dL, blood urea nitrogen of 18 mg/dL, and N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) of 7461 pg/mL.

Chest X-ray reported cardiomegaly with aortic elongation. An electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm, right-axis deviation, low QRS voltage, first-degree atrioventricular block, pseudo-infarct pattern in precordial leads V1–V3, poor R progression, and alterations in high lateral repolarization.

The TTE indicated a non-dilated left ventricle with concentric hypertrophy as well as severely thickened walls with a speckled appearance, LVEF of 30%, and severely reduced longitudinal strain (−6.2%), demonstrating higher strain in apical segments than basal segments in a relative apical sparing. The left ventricular posterior wall measured 21.3 mm, interatrial septum thickness was 5.35 mm, and there was severe dilation of the left atrium, dilated right ventricle with decreased global contractility, moderate mitral regurgitation, and a small pericardial effusion. A coronary angiogram was done to rule out ischemic cardiomyopathy.

Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) revealed severe symmetric hypertrophy, significant dilation of the left atrium, marked thickening with involvement of papillary muscles, diffuse thickening of both ventricles, severe biventricular systolic dysfunction with an LVEF of 32% and right ventricular ejection fraction of 26%. A native T1 value of 1225 ms (normal value is less than 1000 ms) was obtained at the septum on mid-cavity short-axis map. Post-gadolinium enhancement displayed marked hypointensity of the blood pool, patchy up-take involving the entire myocardium, subendocardium, and epicardium, and the zebra sign. T1 mapping post-gadolinium revealed a severely increased extracellular volume of 72% (normal less than 30%), consistent with cardiac amyloidosis. Pyrophosphate scintigraphy indicated Perugini grade 3.

Hematologic tests were conducted to rule out light-chain amyloidosis, which is revealed by free Lambda light chains of 32.6 mg/L and Kappa light chains of 95.7 mg/L (with a ratio of 2.9). Serum and urine immunofixation found that these light chains were undetectable, protein electrophoresis showed no monoclonal peaks, and bone marrow flow cytometry indicated no plasma cell neoplasia. A subcutaneous adipose tissue biopsy was negative by Congo red staining for amyloid. A myocardial biopsy revealed myocytes with broad cytoplasm surrounded by clear pinkish amorphous material, which was focal positive for Congo red staining, showing as apple green in color. A genetic study was conducted, reporting a variant c.424G>A (p.Val142Ile) in heterozygosity in the exon of the TTR gene, confirming the presence of TTRv amyloidosis.