A 6-year-old boy presented with erythematous scaly lesions on the scalp and back. The clinical diagnosis of psoriasis was established and he started treatment with topical corticosteroid (methylprednisolone ointment). A partial clinical improvement of the lesions was noted, but residual plaques persisted. About one month later, purplish lesions appeared in the infrapopliteal region, in the gluteal area and in the upper limbs. He did not have fever, arthralgia and no gastrointestinal or genitourinary symptoms. A skin biopsy was performed in the affected area, which revealed a small vessel vasculitis affecting the papillary dermis. He continued the treatment with topical corticosteroid in the newly affected areas with good clinical response. A few days later, a urine analysis was performed that showed microscopic haematuria and nephrotic range proteinuria (urine creatinine protein (UCR) ratio of 4998 mg/g). These urinalysis abnormalities persisted for the following two months, although he always maintained normal blood pressure, without oedema or macroscopic urine abnormalities, and with normal serum albumin, creatinine and lipid profile. A complete investigation showed no abnormal findings, including measurement of circulating complement proteins (C3 and C4), immunoglobulins (IgA), ANA, anti-dsDNA and ENA antibodies, and serologic testing for hepatitis B, HIV, and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Ultrasound of the kidneys and bladder was normal. Almost three months after the first altered urine analysis, new macroscopic haematuria was observed, concomitant with abdominal pain and vomiting. Nefrotic range proteinuria (10 mg/m2/h) persisted. Histopathology of renal biopsy revealed mesangial proliferation and growing fibrocellular in 6/16 glomeruli with fibrinoid necrosis, and direct immunofluorescence showed predominantly mesangial IgA granulomatous deposits. These aspects were consistent with IgA nephropathy, class III of Haas. Three pulses of methylprednisolone of 30 mg/kg/day were administered, with decreasing macroscopic haematuria. The patient maintained oral prednisolone (60 mg/m2/day) for 4 weeks. During this treatment period, psoriatic lesions improved clinically, but nephrotic range proteinuria persisted. For this reason, cyclophosphamide (2 mg/kg/day) was initiated, concomitant with gradual withdrawal of prednisolone. Nine weeks later, the proteinuria decreased to a non-nephrotic range (RPCU < 2000 mg/g), but persisted above 1000 mg/g and, therefore, enalapril was introduced. He completed 12 weeks of cyclophosphamide. The proteinuria continued to decrease and became negative one month later. Renal function remained normal. The psoriatic lesions worsened with the gradual adjustment of prednisolone dose, despite cyclophosphamide. The use of topical corticosteroid (mometasone) and calcitriol ointment was initiated, but clinical improvement was insignificant. The patient then initiated phototherapy with a significant clinical improvement.
