A 52-year-old White man presented with intermittent constipation and back pain, with a history of a decrease in lymphocyte count (documented two months prior). The patient was a never smoker and had no family history of cancer or other cancer risk factors. Initial computed tomography scans revealed stage T4 prostatic adenocarcinoma with invasion into adjacent structures, metastasis to regional lymph nodes (stage N1), and metastases to the liver, bone, and a distant lymph node (stage M1) (, ). A retroperitoneal lymph node was biopsied to confirm histology. His prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level was 1291ng/mL.
The patient started the antiandrogen bicalutamide (oral) shortly after confirmed diagnosis and a gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist, leuprorelin (depot injection), was subsequently initiated to affect androgen deprivation. The patient received treatment until PSA values began to rise ≈15 weeks later and the patient discontinued bicalutamide. Docetaxel (intravenous infusion; 4 cycles) plus prednisone (oral; continuous dosing) was administered as standard of care; prednisone was continued for 1 week after the end of docetaxel treatment for symptom control. The patient ultimately discontinued docetaxel/prednisone due to radiographic disease progression and PSA progression and immediately started on abiraterone as an androgen receptor targeting therapy, which continued for 7 weeks until radiographic disease progression and PSA progression. The patient also received palliative radiation of the right femur and acetabula around the time abiraterone was initiated.
After discontinuing abiraterone, the patient was enrolled in the TRITON2 study based on results of local genomic testing of an archival tissue biopsy (retroperitoneal lymph node metastasis, 90% tumor purity) obtained at initial diagnosis. Local testing utilized the Oncomine™ Comprehensive Assay v3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA), which can detect single-nucleotide variants, copy-number variations, gene fusions, and insertions/deletions in 161 cancer-related genes. This local test indicated the presence of a BRCA1 T1399I (allelic fraction [AF], 19%) mutation , a novel variant of uncertain significance within a coiled-coil domain which bioinformatics analyses predicted to have a deleterious effect on the BRCA1-PALB2 interaction. A deleterious or probably damaging ATM G1663C mutation, a damaging TP53 P191del mutation, and an oncogenic, activating BRAF K601E mutation were also detected; no gene amplifications or gene fusions were detected. TRITON2 patients provided plasma samples for central genomic analysis prior to starting rucaparib. Analysis of the patient’s pre-rucaparib plasma sample was conducted using the FoundationOne Liquid CDx assay, which analyzes 324 cancer-related genes and identifies the same classes of BRCA alterations, including homozygous deletions. The FoundationOne Liquid CDx assay detected the same alterations as the Oncomine analysis of the archival tissue biopsy but also revealed the presence of a BRCA2 homozygous loss (whole gene, 26 of 26 exons) and several other alterations of unknown functional impact in a plasma sample with 28% tumor content .
The patient started at the recommended dose of rucaparib, 600 mg twice daily, but the dose was reduced to 500 mg twice daily due to nausea/fatigue, with the patient ultimately receiving rucaparib for 32 weeks . At enrollment into TRITON2, the patient had >21 bone-associated lesions and multiple liver lesions. Treatment with rucaparib resulted in a confirmed partial response per modified Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors, version 1.1 (51% decrease in liver metastasis target lesion diameters; ) lasting 13 weeks, ongoing as of the last radiographic assessment before subsequent anti-cancer therapy, resulting in a rPFS of 29 weeks, with no confirmed progression in bone. The patient also had a confirmed PSA response (maximum decrease, 95%; ) lasting 28 weeks from the first dose of rucaparib. The patient discontinued rucaparib treatment due to clinical disease progression after 32 weeks on study and subsequently received palliative radiotherapy due to painful bone lesions.
Following discontinuation from the rucaparib treatment, the patient received carboplatin and cabazitaxel for 2 cycles (intravenous infusion) until subsequent scans indicated progressive disease in nontarget liver lesions two months later. The patient discontinued carboplatin/cabazitaxel and did not receive any further anticancer therapies. The patient died ≈23 months after initial diagnosis due to progression of his disease.