A 69-year-old man visited our hospital with a complaint of acute onset abdominal pain 3 years previously. Laboratory investigation revealed that his serum amylase level was high, and computed tomography (CT) revealed fluid collection around the pancreas and a pseudocyst . He was diagnosed with acute pancreatitis without gallstones. He had no history of diabetes or any other medical conditions. The smoking history was 20 cigarettes/day for about 50 years, and the drinking history was about 500 ml of beer about 2 times a week. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed a pseudocyst without an intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) . The patient was discharged, and CT recorded 1 year after discharge revealed shrinkage of the pseudocyst with slightly dilated distal pancreas duct . He developed acute pancreatitis 1 year previously. Subsequently, acute pancreatitis recurred three times. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) revealed no stenosis or dilatation of the pancreatic duct at that time , and repeated pancreatic juice cytology showed no evidence of malignancy. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) was performed; however, no mass lesion was found in the distal pancreatic parenchyma. Acute pancreatitis recurred again this year, and CT revealed fluid retention around the tail of the pancreas and the splenic hilum, and a pseudoaneurysm of the splenic artery . Therefore, abdominal angiography and transcatheter arterial embolization was performed .
The possibility of pancreatic cancer could not be completely ruled out for causing repeated episodes of distally localized pancreatitis, and to treat secondary splenic artery aneurysm; therefore, surgical resection was planned after full-informed consent .
The tumor markers 2 months prior to surgery were within the normal range as follow; carcinoembryonic antigen 4.5 ng/mL, carbohydrate antigen 19–97 U/mL, and Duke pancreatic monoclonal antigen type 2 25 U/mL. Laparoscopy-assisted distal pancreatectomy was performed, with an operation time of 293 min, and a blood loss of 200 mL . The pancreas was resected on the left side of the portal vein. Preoperative examination revealed no findings suspicious of malignancy and considering the severe inflammatory changes due to repeated pancreatitis, D1 lymph node dissection was performed without rapid intraoperative pathology of pancreatic stump. A single tufted cyst 25 mm in size was found in the tail of the pancreas and a coil embolus was found in the dilated splenic artery; a part of the blood vessel wall was ruptured, and the coil embolus was exposed in the cyst . Pathological examination revealed a non-invasive cancer component in the specimen, i.e., carcinoma in situ . No lymph node metastasis was detected, and PanIN with carcinoma in situ was finally diagnosed.
The patient recovered satisfactorily and was discharged on postoperative day 10. The pancreatitis did not recur after surgery and there was no recurrence of pancreatic cancer; the patient still has regular follow-ups at our hospital.