A 54-year-old woman was referred to our center due to right ventricular enlargement which was incidentally detected on pre-operative echocardiography for ankle surgery at a local clinic. The patient was asymptomatic and in normal sinus rhythm. A transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a large secundum ASD with a diameter of 17 mm. A transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was performed and showed 20 × 23 mm secundum ASD with left to right shunt and right ventricle (RV), right atrium (RA) enlargement . The patient had a D-shaped small left ventricle (LV) with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 59%. Mitral valve leaflets were normal with no MR detected . Moderate tricuspid regurgitation (Grade II) due to dilated tricuspid valve annulus (46 mm) and mild pulmonary hypertension were observed. The rims to both sides of the superior vena cava and inferior vena cava were short, thus surgical repair of ASD under mini-thoracotomy was planned.
In the operating room, standard vital signs (pulse oximetry, end-tidal carbon dioxide, electrocardiogram, and non-invasive blood pressure) were monitored. The left radial artery was catheterized for continuous arterial blood pressure monitoring. After 3 min of 100% pre-oxygenation, general anesthesia was induced with midazolam (3 mg) followed by continuous infusion of propofol with remifentanil, and bolus administration of rocuronium (50 mg). The patient was intubated with a 35 Fr left-sided double-lumen tube for one-lung ventilation. A central venous catheter was inserted via the right subclavian vein because the right internal jugular vein was reserved for superior vena cava cannulation for cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). A TEE probe was inserted to permit close observation.
Right anterolateral mini-thoracotomy was done via 4th Intercostal space. Following full anticoagulation with heparin given at a dose of 300 IU/kg, CPB was instituted using femoral artery, femoral vein and right internal jugular vein cannulation. Next, the aortic Detachable Glauber clamp (Cardiomedical GmbH, Germany) was deployed for aortic cross-clamp, and 2000 mL of Custodiol® HTK (Koehler Chemie, Bensheim, Germany) solution was infused through aortic root cannula for myocardial protection. Moderate Hypothermia of 31.5 °C was permitted as measured by nasopharyngeal and rectal probes. Subsequently, right atrium was opened and ASD was closed with a trimmed bovine pericardial patch. Tricuspid ring annuloplasty and right atrium reduction plasty were also conducted. After completion of the operation, right atrium was closed and CPB was weaned.
Intra-operative TEE showed that ASD was closed with no remnant inter-atrial shunt. There was no tricuspid regurgitation and left ventricular ejection fraction was 55%. Newly developed Grade II MR with end-diastolic rightward deviated inter-ventricular septum was detected which was not found in pre-operative echocardiography . We notified the surgeon of the newly developed MR. Because no abnormal findings, such as mitral valve prolapse, perforation, or chordae rupture, were observed in the mitral valve leaflets, it was determined that the surgery should proceed. No further adverse surgical events occurred throughout the remainder of the surgical procedure. The surgery lasted for 345 min with the CPB time of 190 min and aortic cross-clamp time of 140 min. The estimated blood loss of 800 ml. After surgery, the patient was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit. Bilateral lung haziness due to acute MR was observed in the immediate post-operative chest x-ray. Otherwise, the vital signs were stable without complaint of any symptoms. The patient was extubated after 3 h on arrival of the intensive care unit and transferred to general ward on postoperative day (POD) 1.
Transesophageal echocardiography on POD 3 confirmed that the ASD patch was intact without shunt flow or remnant tricuspid regurgitation. Both left and right ventricular function was well preserved with left ventricular ejection fraction of 69%. However, LV diastolic dysfunction (E/E’ = 26) and aggravated pulmonary hypertension which was not observed in the preoperative TEE was found. The MR was shown to have deteriorated to severe level without evidence of vegetation or chordae rupture . Because the patient was asymptomatic, conservative treatment using diuretics and close monitoring was determined to be the best course of action. Daily follow-up chest x-ray showed gradual improvement in pulmonary edema. On POD 6, the patient was discharged and attend follow-up outpatient appointments. On POD 10, TTE was evaluated. MR disappeared to trivial level and the LV chamber size and deviated septum became normalized .