This 43-year-old woman was previously in good health. She visited the emergent department of Taichung Veterans general hospital in Taichung city of Taiwan due to fever with chills and left flank pain on 14th September 2015. Post-void dribbling with difficulty in emptying bladder and decreased urinary amount for each micturition were also noted during the two-day period prior to admission. Physical examination revealed left flank knocking pain and abdominal dullness over suprapublic area. Laboratory data revealed 22000/cumm of white blood cell, 10 mg/dL of C-reactive protein, 2.1 meq/L of serum potassium, 2.35 mg/dL of serum creatinine, and pyuria (10-20/high power field). Abdominal computed tomography (Philips diamond select brilliance CT 64-slice) showed solitary left kidney with mild hydronephrosis. The patient also complained about severe nausea and vomiting for one week. She was then admitted to the department of nephrology. All data are summarized in . Soon after administration of 1st generation of cephalosporin and Foley insertion, she became afebrile. The urinary culture yielded Proteus. The hypokalemia was deemed to be most likely vomiting-related. Pyelonephritis and hypokalemia are commonly diagnosed and treated. However, to our surprise, only the left kidney was observed , and two uteruses were found (uterus didelphys) . The urinary bladder was compressed by the two uteruses , which caused left mild hydronephrosis and compensated hypertrophy. In addition, right cervico-vaginal partial obstruction (obstructed hemivagina-communicant) was identified . After meticulous tracing of her medical history, she claimed she had seven spontaneous abortions (G9P2SA7), and she never experienced any surgical interventions except two caesarean sections. She had chronic pelvic pain, recurrent severe dysmenorrhea, spotting, and intermenstrual bleeding since her menarche. All manifestations of OHVIRA syndrome (uterus didelphys, obstructed hemivagina, and ipsilateral renal agenesis) were found in this patient. Family history was checked but she did not have any family history regarding this congenital abnormality. We treated her by antibiotics and the insertion of Foley. There was not any surgery for her because of well response for medical treatments and stable vital signs. Soon, she was discharged after one-week intravenous antibioitics and received one-week oral antiobiotics at outpatient department, too. After this episode, she was under regular follow-up and there was no more UTI within one year. This study had been approved by patient herself and she signed the informed consent.