A 74-year-old man was intubated in emergency for acute ischemic stroke, and then referred to Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Unit of our hospital. The patient’s medical history included cardiac disease and COPD. PDT was then performed, and patient returned to spontaneous breathing 15 days later. Despite systemic administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics (Vancomycin, Cefepime, and Azithromycin), he developed APF following necrotizing pneumonia that complicated with pneumothorax, empyema and subcutaneous emphysema . A 32 French tube was placed at the 5th intercostal space anterior axillar line with drainage of 1.500 l of brownish, putrid, and foul-swelling fluid. A negative suction (− 20 mmHg) was applied to chest drainage and daily chest X-ray showed the expansion of upper and middle lobe, but a loculated pneumothorax within lower lobe was seen on chest CT scan performed 15 days . A second 28 French chest tube was then placed using ultrasound as guide at the 8th intercostal space posterior axillar line with drainage of 500 mL of purulent material. The microbiological cultures of pleural fluid showed the presence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa; thus, ofloxacin (400 mg every 12 h) and ceftazidime (2 g every 8 h) were intravenously administered, in addition to clindamycin to provide empiric coverage against anaerobes and gram-positive cocci bacteria. The pleural space was also irrigated with 0.1% povidone-iodine solution (Betadine; 40 mL/h) until the eradication of pleural infection was obtained. However, the formation of dense adhesions trapped the lower lobe, and prevented its expansion ; yet, the persistence of large bubbles in the drainage suspected the presence of APF. Methylene blue (1 ampoule diluted in 1-l saline solution) was injected via chest drainage into the pleural cavity, and was bronchoscopically identified within RB9 segment . The resolution of air leaks obtained by occluding the RB9 segment with an inflated-balloon catheter confirmed it to be the culprit segment. Thus, a Zephyr 5.5 EBV (Zephyr, PulmonX Corporation-Redwood City, CA, USA) was placed within RB9 segment with temporary resolution of air leaks that recurred 4 days later due to valve dislocation. The valve was removed and the RB9 segment closed by intrabronchial injection of 10 mL of FG (Tisseel: Baxter Healthcare Corp, Deerfield, IL, USA) . The procedure was repeated twice at 1-week interval, but in both cases the fibrin clot dislocated.
Finally, fiber bronchoscopy, introduced through the chest drainage, explored the pleural cavity and showed a small APF that was marked by methylene blue following intrabronchial injection of the blue solution within RB9 segment . The APF was filled by 20 mL of FG using a dedicated double-lumen catheter introduced through the working channel of fiber bronchoscopy . Furthermore, the RB9 segment was occluded by intrabronchial injection of 10 mL of FG. The chest drainage was then clamped, and a bronchial blocker was left with the balloon inflated within intermedius bronchus to prevent the intrapleural, and intrabronchial dislocation of fibrin clot, respectively. Two days later, the bronchial blocker was deflated, and the chest drainage opened. No recurrence of air-leaks occurred; drainage of non-purulent fluid was < 100 mL/24 h; chest CT scan showed no evidence of worsening pneumothorax, and of progressive subcutaneous emphysema; thus, chest tube was removed . Patient was then transferred to a rehabilitation center. He died 11 months later for cardiac failure. The entire procedure was summarized in Additional file 1: Video S1.