54-year-old male patient with pain and stiffness in the dorsal and medial aspect of the hallux metatarsophalangeal joint of the right hallux that started four years ago. Pain worsens with walking and decreases with rest. No history of trauma to that foot. His personal medical history is hypothyroidism and dyslipidemia and his surgical history is a release of the trigger finger of the right and left hand and a resection of the synovial cyst of the left wrist. After the physical examination of the right foot, he has pain on the dorsal and medial aspect of the hallux metatarsophalangeal joint, skin without alterations. His range of motion of the hallux metatarsophalangeal joint is dorsiflexion of 25° with pain and plantar flexion of 20°, distal neurovascular examination without alterations with a two-second distal capillary refill. Physical examination of the rest of the foot was normal. Dorsal and lateral radiographs were taken with support of the right foot, which showed a decreased joint space of the hallux metatarsophalangeal joint predominantly of the lateral aspect, subchondral sclerosis and cysts with a dorsal osteophyte on the head of the first metatarsal, as well as the presence of small osteophytes on the head of the first metatarsal and the base of the proximal phalanx of the hallux. Based on the radiographic findings, the diagnosis of hallux rigidus Coughlin and Shurnas stage 3 was made. The patient tried conservative treatment with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and modifications in the type of footwear for six months with no improvement, so surgical treatment was proposed. Under general anaesthesia and using a tourniquet, a 4 cm incision was made on the dorsal aspect of the hallux metatarsophalangeal joint. Dissection was performed and the hallucis longus extensor was identified and retracted. A dorsal capsulotomy was performed and the joint was exposed. A large dorsal osteophyte was observed on the head of the metatarsal. A dorsal exostectomy was performed with a saw and a gouge. In addition, a cheilectomy and a medial buniectomy were performed with a saw. The sesamoids were exposed and released. There was no articular cartilage on the lateral aspect of the head of the first metatarsal. The cartilage on the medial aspect was intact. The hallucis longus extensor (EHB) was located and released from its insertion. A transosseous perforation was performed in the head of the metatarsal, the EHB was interposed in the medial aspect of the hallux metatarsophalangeal joint and fixed with vicryl. The wound was washed, capsulorrhapy was performed and the wound was closed in layers. The skin was covered with gauze, elastic bandage and a rehabilitation shoe was placed.

The preoperative Foot Function Index was 27% and the postoperative was 8%; the preoperative American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society Hallux Metatarsophalangeal-Interphalangeal Rating System (AOFAS-HMI) was 77% and the postoperative was 90%; the preoperative subscale of activities of daily living Foot and Ankle Ability Measure (FAAM) was 76% and postoperative 95% and the preoperative sports subscale was 75% and postoperative 97%.

At 1.7 years after surgery, his postoperative range of motion was 60° active dorsiflexion and 40° active plantar flexion. The patient denied pain, discomfort or weakness in the metatarsophalangeal joint. He performed his daily activities without limitations and was satisfied with the postoperative results.
