A 51-year-old Caucasian female with a history of heart failure with mid-range ejection fraction (41%) due to EM, cerebrovascular accident, residual right-sided lower extremity weakness, asthma, recurrent bronchitis, ventricular tachycardia, right ventricular thrombus, and peripheral eosinophilia with concern for HES was referred for advanced therapies. Her complaints centered around fatigue and dyspnea with minimal exertion, confusion, poor appetite, and orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea – all consistent with NYHA class 3b functional status. At presentation, her temperature was 35.8°C, with a blood pressure of 94/67 (76) mmHg, a heart rate of 61 bpm, with SpO2 of 94% on room air. Physical examination was notable for a distended abdomen with hepatomegaly (liver edge palpable 2 cm below costal margin) and cool extremities to touch, consistent with Stevenson profile C. We attempted to optimize the patient’s guideline-directed medical therapy, salt, and fluid balance, as an outpatient. However, she was intolerant. Her refractoriness resulted in progressive hypotension and confusion. One month after her initial visit, she was admitted to managing and treating acute decompensated heart failure.

During her admission, laboratory workup demonstrated a peripheral eosinophil count of 1.77(NR 0.01 - 0.08 cells/uL), total eosinophils of 15.4% (NR 1.0-3.0%), absolute eosinophil count of 4.18 (0.03 to 0.48 cells/ul) and NT-Pro B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-Pro BNP) of 1723 pg/mL (NR <144 pg/mL). There was no significant troponin elevation (<.01). Electrocardiogram (EKG) showed sinus rhythm with 1st-degree A-V block, right atrial enlargement, nonspecific T wave abnormality, and prolonged QT and PR intervals, unchanged from outside hospital records.

Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated left ventricular wall motion abnormalities with an ejection fraction of 41%, moderately enlarged right ventricular chamber size with reduced systolic function, severe tricuspid valve regurgitation, and biventricular apical thrombi.

Given her intolerance to medical therapy, a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) was utilized to obtain a central mixed venous saturation (ScVO2) of 42%, yielding a Fick cardiac output of 1.80 L/min and an index of 1.01 L/min/m2. Given the evidence of NYHA 3b, AHA D, Stevenson profile C cardiogenic shock, she was started on dobutamine 2.5 mcg/kg/min and Bumex IV 2.5 mg BID.

Cardiac MRI (CMR) with and without contrast showed diffuse mid to apical left ventricular subendocardial abnormal late gadolinium enhancement, patchy mid-wall enhancement, and areas of focal enhancement of the mid-anterior and inferior/inferolateral walls consistent with fibrosis.

A bone marrow biopsy was performed, which showed hypocellular marrow (~25%) with trilineage hematopoiesis and hypereosinophilia with 50% increase of eosinophils with no evidence of dysplasia. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis was negative for BCR-ABL, F GFR 1. FISH analysis also produced negative results for abnormalities related to PDGFRA, PDGFRB, FGFR1, and t (9:22). Peripheral blood flow cytometry also returned negative findings, ruling out leukemia/lymphoma. Autoimmune serology was negative. Viral research, stool test for strongyloides and parasites were negative too.

Immunohistochemical stains for CD34 and CD117 showed no increase in blasts. MPO highlighted granulopoiesis. CD3 demonstrated a normal complement of T-cells, while PAX-5 showed a normal complement of B-cells. The reticulin stain was focally borderline. Flow cytometry detected no increase in blasts, no monotypic B-cell populations, and no phenotypically aberrant T-cell populations.

The evaluation of blasts revealed no increase in their numbers. Analysis of B-cells showed no presence of monotypic populations and exhibited a normal expression pattern of CD19, CD10, surface kappa, and lambda. T-cells/NK-cells did not display any aberrant phenotype based on CD3 and CD16 markers. The bone marrow biopsy indicated normocellular morphology, with a 50% increase in eosinophils. Importantly, no signs of lymphoma or mass disease were observed. Flow cytometry results were consistently negative, indicating no increase in plasma cells. Further testing through FISH analysis produced negative results for abnormalities related to PDGFRA, PDGFRB, FGFR1, and t(9:22). Peripheral blood flow cytometry also returned negative findings, ruling out leukemia/lymphoma.

The patient was started on Solu-Medrol 1000 mg IV daily x 3 days to treat HES and heparin infusion for ventricular thrombi. Subsequently, her condition improved, and the patient was weaned from dobutamine based on daily ScVO2 and Fick calculations and successfully transitioned to oral therapies.

EMB was initially not performed because of elevated risk of complications. Given the long- term complications and risk of death with EM the patient was started on steroids as an outpatient after clinical suspicion was noted, and biopsy was scheduled to be done thereafter. She had a cardiac MRI which demonstrated findings consistent with eosinophilic myocarditis and did have peripheral eosinophilia.

An endomyocardial biopsy was performed after steroids were given and was negative for lymphocytic or eosinophilic infiltration or granuloma formation. Congo red stain was negative for amyloid. The iron stain was negative for abnormal iron accumulation, and the trichrome stain was negative for significant interstitial fibrosis.

Clinical history, in combination with imaging data from echocardiography and CMR, was highly suggestive of eosinophilic myocarditis. Her autoimmune serology, including the ANA test, has previously showed negative results. Testing for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and HIV has also been negative in the past. Additionally, stool tests for strongyloides and ova and parasites were negative. Therefore, our case was diagnosed as Idiopathic Hypereosinophilia, indicating elevated eosinophil levels without a known cause associated with end-organ damage.

The best clinical treatment of HES depends on disease etiology and subtypes. However, even in the absence of a known cause, HES must be promptly treated in order to reduce potential morbidity that can result from organ damage.

This patient was treated with pulse steroids and heparin infusion for ventricular thrombi. Clinical condition improved and discharged with therapy with steroid, bumetanide and apixaban.

The patient was discharged on oral prednisone taper, Bumex orally 2mg daily, and Eliquis 5mg twice daily. She started on Mepolizumab (Nucala, GlaxoSmithKline LLC) 300 mg subcutaneously every four weeks. Since discharge, unfortunately, the patient had refractory heart failure off Dobutamine and required readmission. She was urgently listed for heart transplantation. The donor was identified as an increased risk for transmitting blood-borne illnesses. Serologies indicated that the donor was positive for CMV and EBV, matching the recipient’s positive status for both. The ischemic time for the transplant was 3 hours and 34 minutes. Intraoperatively, the patient received 1 unit of PRBC, 1 unit of FFP, 1 unit via Cell Saver, IV Solu-Medrol and IV CellCept.

Post- transplant care
The patient was extubated by postoperative day 1. The postoperative course was uncomplicated. Upon discharge, the patient’s immunosuppressive regimen included: Prednisone taper at 20 mg daily, oral CellCept (Mycophenolate Mofetil) at a dose of 1000 mg twice a day. Tacrolimus (Prograf) was initiated on day 2, with a target level of 9-12. At discharge, the patient’s Tacrolimus level was 6.9, and she was discharged on Prograf 5 mg twice a day.

On a 12-week follow-up she remains stable with no evidence of rejection on EMB and had no recent hospitalizations with an LVEF of 60%. Hematology felt that steroids and immunotherapy would control bone marrow eosinophilia and continue to follow her.