A 24-year-old female presented with a massive fungating mass over the left upper back and shoulder. The patient gave a history of swelling over the left upper back, which was insidious in onset and gradually progressed over the past 2 years. Incisional biopsy over the most prominent aspect of the swelling was performed elsewhere about 1 year ago, a provisional diagnosis of ES of the left scapula was made and the patient was started on chemotherapy and operated following 3months of chemotherapy. The wound following surgery did not heal and an ulcer developed over the operated site which rapidly increased in size. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy was started and the regimen was changed multiple times over the next 9months as the tumor did not respond and swelling continued to progress in size. In view of the size and nature of the lesion, wound, and associated complications, the patient was advised forequarter amputation of the left upper limb at multiple centers in her country, which she refused and was finally referred to our hospital for further management. On presentation, a huge fungating mass was noticed over the left upper back and shoulder region with active bleeding and foul-smelling discharge from the ulcer . The patient was febrile and unable to use the left upper limb due to the size of the lesion and excruciating pain. Magnetic resonance imaging of the shoulder and upper back showed a T1 isointense and T2 heterogeneous high-signal intensity lesion which measured 18 cm ×27cm × 26cmin size, with multiple fluid levels, degenerative cystic changes, hemorrhage, areas of necrosis, and infiltration of periscapular musculature . On computed tomography (CT) scan, tumor was ill defined with heterogeneous attenuation, multiple areas of cystic changes, and gross osteolysis of the scapula. However, the shoulder joint, chest wall, and the brachial plexus were not involved, axillary vascular bundle was displaced anteriorly without signs of infiltration. Whole body positron emission tomography-CT scan showed no signs of pulmonary or distant metastasis. Diagnosis of Ewing’s sarcoma was made by histopathological examination of needle biopsy sample from the swelling, which showed sheets of small, round, and uniform cells with scanty cytoplasm, separated by fibrous strands with few mitosis and minimal stroma . CD99 was positive on immunohistochemistry. In view of the clinical condition of the patientupfront surgery was performed, following antibiotics to control infection, blood transfusions to correct anemia, and selective arterial embolization of feeding vessels. The patient underwent enbloc excision of the tumor mass bytotal scapulectomy. The ulcer was covered with an adhesive sterile surgical drape; circumferential incision was made around the tumor mass including 3cm of pinchable uninvolved skin. Axillary vascular bundle and the brachial plexus were dissected and isolated from the tumor mass. Arthrotomy of the left shoulder was performed as a layer of the capsule of the joint was also removed. Periscapular musculature was also removed along with the tumor mass. Frozen section from the surrounding soft tissue and chest wall was negative for residual tumor cells. The humeral head was secured to the lateral end of the clavicle , and the defect over the back following resection was closed by negative pressure dressing and subsequentlycovered2days later with latissimus dorsi free pedicle flap. The humeral head was plain radiograph of the left shoulder region following resection. Diagnosis of ES was confirmed by histopathological examination of the resected specimen and all the resected surgical margins were free of tumor . 3 weeks after surgery, concomitant radiotherapy and adjuvant chemotherapy (6 cycles of vincristine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide alternating with if osfamide and etoposide) were started. The patient also underwent autologous stem cell transplantation following adjuvant chemotherapy. There were no neurological or vascular deficits in the operated limb following the procedure and the patient on follow-up had good functional range of motion of the left shoulder and full range of motion of the left elbow, wrist, and fingers. On final follow-up of 3years, the patient showed no signs of local recurrence (LR) or metastasis and had returned to her prior vocational status .