A 53-year-old caucasian G1P1 otherwise healthy female patient was known for a long history of diffuse right and left colonic diverticular disease, with repeated episodes of abdominal pain due to recurrent diverticulitis.
She presented to the emergency department at our institution with severe left-lower-quadrant abdominal pain, cramping and anorexia. Physical examination revealed a soft abdomen, with localized left lower quadrant sharp tenderness, guarding and moderate rebound on examination. Abdominal Computed Tomography (CT) scan showed bowel wall thickening and contrast-enhancement along a 45 mm portion of the medium-to-distal sigmoid colon. A marked increase in soft tissue density was also observed within the pericolonic fat, with evidence of a 23 mm paramedian fluid collection in the pre-sacral area. The patient was admitted to the surgical ward and antibiotic coverage was started together with analgesics. Symptoms resolved quickly, she was discharged home a week later with a diagnosis of self-limited diverticular microperforation, and an outpatient follow-up was scheduled for elective surgical planning.
Four months later, she underwent a laparoscopic sigmoidectomy with a double-stapled colo-rectal transanal anastomosis. Surgery was successful, but on post-operative day 2, the patient developed signs of peritonitis, with pain, fever, and elevated markers of inflammation. After close clinical observation, and careful re-evaluation of the case, on post-operative day-6 a second exploratory laparoscopy was performed. The procedure ruled out an anastomotic leak, as well as no abnormalities were observed at any level within the abdominal cavity. Patient improved post-operatively and was discharged home a week later.
Nine days after hospital discharge, she presented to the outpatient clinic for a scheduled follow up. A control abdominal plain X-ray was obtained, confirming the stability of her condition. However, looking at the X-ray, the staff surgeon noted a filiform metallic object projected around the midline at the upper abdominal quadrant level (T11-T12). Considering patient’s history, a retained surgical item was strongly suspected, with the wire-like image being potentially consistent with the radiopaque marker of a surgical sponge. In order to clearly establish the nature of this foreign body, at first the surgical dressing was removed, but no superficial radio-opaque material was present. The patient’s medical record was then carefully reviewed. According to her chart, no epidural were ever placed at our institution. Preoperative available x-rays were also analyzed. Focusing on the area where the metallic image was expected, we surprisingly discovered it was visible in every exam including the interested region . At further questioning, the patient recalled an epidural catheter being placed twelve years before, at an outside hospital, during the last trimester of pregnancy. Apparently, at the time, the device was placed to provide analgesia for a painful-rib-syndrome . Particularly, she was experiencing excruciating pain in the upper abdomen-lower chest region, both anteriorly and posteriorly. As the patient’s pain was unresponsive to oral analgesics, the epidural catheter was placed (hence the low-thoracic location), and several cycles of analgesia were provided for about a month prior to labor through an elastomeric pump. The patient described the intervention as beneficial. Interestingly, she also recalled the catheter to be subcutaneously tunneled. After delivery, the pain immediately disappeared, thereby suggesting an association with pregnancy-related changes of the musculoskeletal structure. The epidural was removed in the immediate postpartum.
After discussion of the case between the anesthesia and surgical teams, including neurosurgical consultation, and considering the will of the patient, the patient was scheduled for urgent surgical removal of the fragment.
In the operating room, inspecting the skin of the right paravertebral region, a small scar could be observed, with a fibrotic reaction attributable to a foreign body lying just underneath. A looped radio-opaque object with its tip at the T12 level was then seen on intraoperative fluoroscopy. Examining lateral projections, showing most of the catheter to be superficially located, the attending neurosurgeon excluded the need for laminectomy. Under sterile conditions and with the patient in the prone position, local anesthesia was administered and incision of the skin and fascia was performed at the level of the scar. The proximal end of the catheter fragment was isolated about 1 cm below the incision and then carefully removed by slow constant traction.
A 15 cm fragment of a Flextip Plus 19G wire-reinforced epidural catheter (Arrow-Teleflex, Limerick, PA) was retrieved, with a large uncoiled portion close to its proximal end . The operator verified the black terminal marker indicating tip integrity was present. Surgery was performed without any complication. A fluoroscopic control showed the absence of any metallic residual foreign body, and direct visualization during dissection of the skin confirmed that no portion of the uncoiled portion was left behind.