A 4-month-old boy, weighing 6.3 kg, presented to the local hospital 18 days before the consultation with no apparent cause of dyspnea, cough, and sputum. Imaging revealed an anterior mediastinal occupancy, possible abnormal enlargement of the thymus, and bilateral pneumonia. No improvement was seen after antibiotic treatment was given. To clarify the etiology, an ultrasound-guided fine needle biopsy was performed, which showed normal thymic tissue with no evidence of malignancy. The patient was seen at our hospital for a significant worsening of symptoms, and the parents denied any other previous symptoms or comorbidities of the patient. On admission, body temperature was 37.1°C, blood pressure was 93/51 mmHg, pulse rate was 147 beats/min, and respiratory rate was 35 breaths/min. He had cyanotic lips, diminished breath sounds in both lungs, positive three concave sign, no fever, and ptosis. The peripheral blood leukocyte count was 10.38 × 109/L, with 12.8% neutrophils and 81% lymphocytes. Blood gas analysis data were pH 7.403, pCO2 40.7 mmHg, pO2 51.8 mmHg, ctHb 13.9 g/dl, sO2 85.4%, BE 0.7 mmol/L, cHCO3- 24.7 mmol/L. The ultrasound showed a significantly enlarged thymus with a soft texture and fair echogenicity. Chest radiographs showed large soft tissue shadows in the bilateral thoracic cavity .
After admission, he received non-invasive ventilation, which relieved his breathing difficulties to some extent. Enhanced computed tomography scan of the chest revealed that the thymus was significantly enlarged, it had smooth margins, regular morphology, and mild uniform enhancement, both lungs were compressed, solid, and non-distended, and the distal segments of the left and right main bronchi and their branches were thinned, and the superior vena cava, right subclavian vein, and left cephalic brachial vein were thickened, which was considered as thymic hyperplasia . Further, the tumor markers alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) in peripheral blood were checked within normal limits. Combining the patient's clinical features, imaging, and biopsy findings, TTH was considered. On the third day of admission, the patient's dyspnea further worsened and he underwent tracheal intubation. To relieve the compression of the lungs and heart and great vessels, exploratory thoracoscopic surgery was performed on the third day of admission.
The patient entered the operating room with a tracheal tube, awake and sedated, with pulse oximetry of 85%, a blood pressure of 55/40 mmHg, a heart rate of 101 beats/min, and an airway pressure of 26 cm H2O. After induction of anesthesia, the tracheal tube was removed and an Arndt5F bronchial blocker was placed in the right bronchus, followed by the insertion of a normal tracheal tube. To prevent airway collapse, muscle relaxants were not administered during anesthesia. Due to the patient's low blood pressure and slow heart rate, intraoperative blood pressure was maintained at 55–80/35–52 mmHg after pumping a small dose of dobutamine, and the heart rate fluctuated from 98 to 142 beats/min. Intraoperative blood oxygen fluctuated from 70%–100%.
The patient was placed in the left lateral recumbent position and a 5 mm Trocar was placed in the 8th intercostal space/midaxillary line, 5th intercostal space/anterior axillary line, and 6th intercostal space/posterior axillary line, respectively. Artificial pneumothorax was established at 6–8 mmHg pressure. We observed giant thymus-like tissue occupying the bilateral thoracic cavity, up to the roof of the pleura and down to the diaphragm. It had an intact envelope, a yellowish-white solid lobulated shape, and a soft texture, and these were consistent with the normal thymus appearance . It compressed but did not invade the surrounding structures and measured approximately 12 × 10 × 5 cm , with the phrenic nerve traveling at its margin. We used an electric scalpel to first free dissect and removed the mass occupying the right side of the thorax in its entirety, followed by freeing and removing most of the mass occupying the left side of the thorax, preserving part of the thymus in the left lobe and the volume of the preserved thymus is about 1/3 of the normal unilateral thymus in the age cohorts . And we carefully protected the phrenic nerves bilaterally during the operation. Finally, we enlarged one of the trocar holes to 2 cm and removed the tissue using a retrieval bag, and the weight of the resected mass was approximately 308 g . We placed one silicone drainage tube, with intraoperative bleeding of approximately 2 ml and an operative time of 90 min. The patient had his drainage tube removed 5 days after surgery and was discharged 7 days after surgery. Postoperative pathological histology showed enlarged lobular structures, clear corticomedullary demarcation, and visible thymic vesicles. Combined with the immunohistochemical staining results, it was considered consistent with true thymic hyperplasia . At the 2-month postoperative follow-up, the patient had no new symptoms or related complications. The routine blood test showed WBC 12.46*1012/L, LYMPH# 8.92*109/L, LYMPH% 71.6%. No recurrence was detected on chest x-ray and both lungs were well dilated .