In 2001, a 58-year-old Caucasian man had radical nephrectomy for pT3N0 ccRCC, Fuhrman grade III. In 2009, lung metastasis was histologically proven. The patient had a favorable risk metastatic ccRCC, according to the IMDC (International Metastatic RCC Database Consortium). He was enrolled in a clinical trial and received a combination of sunitinib and trebananib (AMG 386) – a recombinant fusion protein which neutralizes interaction between angiopoietin-1/2 and its receptor . Trebananib was stopped in 2012 for toxicity, and sunitinb was maintained until progression in 2013. The patient was then included in the Checkmate 025 trial (NCT01668784) which compared second line treatment by nivolumab versus everolimus, and received nivolumab.
In April 2014, he presented a single lung injury treated by stereotactic radiation and nivolumab continuation. In 2017, after four years of well-tolerated nivolumab administration, the patient developed pruriginous skin lesions. The histologic analysis of the cutaneous biopsy was compatible with BP. This hypothesis was reinforced by the presence of anti-basal membrane antibodies in the patient’s serum. Oral corticosteroid therapy with prednisone was introduced and then progressively decreased. In May 2020, after seven years of nivolumab administration and perfect disease stability, nivolumab was discontinued and surveillance was proposed. In October 2020, as systemic corticosteroids had been decreased to 10 mg per day, the patient presented new pruriginous skin lesions associated with cutaneous blisters, which biopsy and direct immunofluorescence revealed a junctional bullous auto-immune dermatitis, concordant with the BP diagnosis that had previously been established . Serum analysis revealed anti basal membrane (>80 UR/mL), antiBP180 (27 UR/mL, N <20) and anti BP230 (50 UR/mL, N < 20) antibodies, consistent with this diagnosis. Oral corticosteroid therapy was thus increased, and then very progressively decreased. In October 2021, as anti PD1 had been stopped for more than one year, the patient presented a new BP exacerbation, and oral corticosteroid therapy was reintroduced (60 mg per day), and then replaced by Methotrexate in December 2021. In the meantime, regular follow up of the ccRCC was continued, and computed tomography scan continued to show perfect stability of the disease at the last follow-up in August 2022. BP is relatively controlled by Methotrexate, even if he still presents pruritis than requires prolonged symptomatic treatment .