After having developed fever and fatigue, a 72-year-old male patient (body mass index 29.2) was diagnosed with COVID-19 and put in quarantine at home. Clinical worsening resulted in delirium. After 6 days, emergency medical services found the patient severely hypoxic (SpO2 65%) despite his not complaining about dyspnoea. Oxygen was administered and the patient was transported to a designated COVID-19 pulmonary intensive care unit (ICU).
History revealed a non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus type 2 (recent Hba1c 6.4%), aortic dissection type B (stable over time in various CTs), persistent AF, a smoking history (cessation 20 years ago), and chronic obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (no therapy). Chronic medication consisted of apixaban (5 mg twice daily), gabapentin (150 mg twice daily), bisoprolol (5 mg twice daily), and metformin (500 mg twice daily), and did not include angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers.
Upon arrival, the patient was normotensive with an irregular heart rhythm, appearing exhausted and perspiring, but not subjectively dyspnoeic. Auscultation revealed bilateral medium to coarse crackle sounds. He was intubated due to severe hypoxaemia [Horovitz index 111, positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) 18 cmH2O, pressure control max. 32 cmH2O, FiO2 80%]. Sufficient oxygenation and normocapnia (pO2 89 mmHg, pCO2 45 mmHg) were achieved. Tachycardic AF up to 180 b.p.m. was successfully electrically cardioverted. However, bedside echocardiography showed globally reduced left ventricular systolic function (LVSF) and ejection fraction (EF, 30%), necessitating noradrenaline and dobutamine support (initial dosages 0.32 μg/kg/min and 6.67 μg/kg/min, respectively). Pulse contour cardiac output monitoring was established (initial values: cardiac index 1.6 L/min/m2, cardiac function index 2.2 L/min, global end-diastolic volume index 791 mL/m2, pulse pressure variation 14%, extra-vasal lung water index 35.3 mL/kg, pulmonary–vascular permeability index 7.2) to guide further treatment, including careful volume resuscitation, argipressin (1.8 IU/h), hydrocortisone (8 mg/h), and continuous landiolol (initial dose 8 μg/kg/min) for control of reoccurring tachycardic AF.
A chest X-ray showed bilateral consolidations compatible with ARDS . Laboratory results showed AKI. Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was established and upgraded with an immunoadsorbant filter (Cytosorb®) for 48 h to counteract a suspected cytokine storm mirrored by rising interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels. The initial pro-brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) was 1612 ng/L, ultimately reaching 10-fold levels. High sensitivity troponin T (hs-TnT) values were undulant during the entire stay, with maximum levels of 200 ng/L. For the development of laboratory values over time, see . Due to organizational reasons and potential cardiac side effects, it was chosen not to administer experimental therapeutics such as hydroxychloroquine, tocilizumab, or antiviral agents.
More frequent tachycardic AF episodes did not respond to electrical cardioversion, escalation of landiolol (up to 40 μg/kg/min without effect of further escalation), or addition of amiodarone (300 mg in 30 min and 38 mg/h over 24 h thereafter). Also, digitoxin (0.25 mg daily) and ivabradine (5 mg twice daily)—initially showing promising results—ultimately proved ineffective. Progressing heart failure seemed to be mainly dependent on tachycardic AF. Levosimendan (10 μg/kg/min for 10 min and 0.2 μg/kg/min for 24 h thereafter) led to a transient positive effect that only lasted ∼24 h. In echocardiographic controls, pericardial effusion (circumference, 2–3 cm, ) developed in 48 h, leading to pericardial tamponade that was successfully drained (a SARS-CoV-2 test from the fluid was negative). After pericardiocentesis, haemodynamics improved only transiently, and LVSF/EF deteriorated rapidly. At this stage, an ultima ratio treatment option would have been veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO). However, existing literature surrounding the role of VA-ECMO in the treatment of COVID-19-associated cardiogenic shock is scarce. Due to the multiple comorbidities, resource availability, and the perceived risk–benefit ratio, a decision against ECMO was made. In a multidisciplinary way, a do not resuscitate order was agreed on. Nine days after ICU admission, the patient died from multiorgan failure. gives an overview of the entire case.