A 68-year-old male patient, a former farm laborer, presented with low-back pain that had started four months earlier. Over the preceding two years, he had had three episodes of pneumonia and lost 20 kg. He had systemic arterial hypertension, which was controlled through use of antihypertensive drugs. There was no diabetes, thyroid diseases or any other metabolic cause for weight loss. He was a smoker (50 pack-years) and moderate alcohol user.
The symptoms became worse during trunk flexion and there was painful low-back muscle palpation. There were no abnormalities on neurological examination, no fever and no night pain. No signs of consumptive syndrome were noted.
Laboratory tests revealed increased levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) of 118.5 mg/dl (normal, 0.05 mg/dl) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 53 mm/h (normal < 15 mm/h). The white blood cell count was 6-7 k/mm3 (normal, 4.0-11.0 k/mm3). A sputum culture was negative for tuberculosis. Chest radiography and computed tomography (CT) scan did not reveal any signs of tumor or infection.
Radiography of the lumbosacral spine showed diffuse degenerative changes, irregular vertebral endplates of L4 and L5, and reduction of disc spaces L4-L5 and L5-S1 .
Lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated spondylodiscitis of L4-L5, with subligamentous abscess anterior to the vertebral bodies, reduced disc height of L4-L5 and L5-S1 and spinal stenosis from L2 to S1 ( and ).
After analyzing MRI data, main hypotheses for this case were the presence of a tumor, tuberculosis or pyogenic spondylodiscitis. However, transpedicular biopsy of L4 revealed infection with Paracoccidioides brasiliensis .
Since the patient was not presenting any mechanical or neurological instability, clinical treatment was implemented. Therapy with itraconazole (200 mg/day) was started, but the patient presented an adverse reaction to this drug (worsening of liver function), and therefore this was replaced with sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim (20 mg/kg) for the rest of the treatment. After 36 months of treatment with sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim (20 mg/kg), the patient became asymptomatic and the inflammatory blood tests (CRP and ESR) returned to normal.
A control radiograph showed ligament ossification of L4-L5, subchondral sclerosis and reduction of disc space. Control MRI demonstrated reduction of edema and abscess in the paraspinal soft tissues .