A healthy 79-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our hospital with a diagnosis of stage III immunoglobulin A-lambda MM with numerous osteolytic areas (bilateral iliac wings, T3 to T4) and cardiologic symptoms of pulmonary embolism. Computed tomography (CT) of her chest documented the presence of a right atrial mass (42mm × 53mm), confirmed by subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (F18-FDG PET). A transesophageal echocardiogram revealed a large pericardial effusion with evidence of cardiac tamponade and a large right atrial mass encasing her interatrial septum and extending into her left atrium. Histologic specimens of a bone marrow biopsy demonstrated the presence of tiny aggregates of atypical plasma cells with asynchronous morphology, positive for cluster of differentiation 138.
Our patient was treated with four cycles of bortezomib, four cycles of melphalan and prednisone and another four cycles of bortezomib, achieving a lessening of the symptoms and a stability of the cardiac disease. Pharmacological toxicity was not significant.
Nine months later, our patient developed a painful bone relapse. The pain was severe, constant and localized primarily in her sacrum and the right iliac wing. The pain increased to some extent with movement. Our patient received local radiotherapy on both sites (2000cGy/5 fractions), achieving a reduction in symptoms and an improvement of her performance status.
One year after the initial diagnosis, our patient presented to our emergency department because of the new appearance of signs and symptoms of congestive heart failure: dyspnea, hypotension, cyanosis and facial edema.
CT of her chest revealed an increase in the size of the mass (78mm × 84mm), which appeared to infiltrate her right pulmonary vein and superior vena cava for approximately 21mm, causing neoplastic thrombosis of her right subclavian vein . These findings were confirmed by echocardiography and F18-FDG PET .
Restaging examinations documented stable bone disease.
Our patient was evaluated by a surgeon for possible surgery on her right atrium, but she was considered inoperable due to the extent of the disease. The diagnosis of atrial localization of malignant plasmacytoma was confirmed via examination of a biopsy specimen. In order to obtain rapid control of the intracardiac disease, radiation to the cardiac mass was started.
External-beam radiation, totaling 3000cGy in 10 daily fractions of 300cGy, each with 6mV photons, was delivered using the intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) technique.
Our patient was immobilized in the supine position with a wing board and target localization was accomplished using CT simulation. The volumes of interest were identified on each axial CT slice. The gross tumor volume was defined as the gross extent of the tumor shown by imaging (CT, MRI and PET); the clinical target volume was defined as the gross tumor volume plus a margin for potential microscopic spread (5mm); and, in order to account for organ motion and patient setup errors, the planning target volume was defined by adding a 1 cm margin to the clinical target volume. Treatment planning was performed using an inverse planning algorithm in a tomotherapy planning system and our patient was treated with an IMRT delivered with tomotherapy.
The treatment was generally well tolerated; our patient showed no symptoms suggestive of radiation-induced toxicity. Her symptoms immediately improved with a decrease in generalized edema and improved performance status. A transesophageal echocardiogram performed three weeks from the end of the radiotherapy confirmed a significant decrease in tumor size in her right atrium.
Due to our patient’s age and good condition, the medical staff chose a ‘wait and see’ approach. Three months later, repeat chest and abdominal CT scans showed complete remission of the cardiac disease, but progressive bone disease.
The worsening of the general conditions of our patient, due to other causes, meant that she was subjected to supportive care for two months. After the improvement of her health status, our patient started maintenance chemotherapy with lenalidomide and she is currently tolerating it well.
In a new CT scan of her chest done eighteen months after the end of the radiotherapy , complete remission of the cardiac disease was confirmed.
Currently, our patient is generally in good condition and shows no significant cardiac symptoms. Recently performed chest and abdominal CT documented stability of the disease in known locations, but highlighted the emergence of an axillary mass, for which we are programming a new radiation treatment in view of her good response to previous radiotherapy.