A 93-year old man was brought to the emergency room for recent neurological deterioration. His past medical history was relevant for hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, coronary artery disease, chronic atrial fibrillation and mild memory loss. He had no history of kidney disease. His chronic medication included clopidogrel, acenocoumarol, amlodipine, atorvastatin, molsidomine and furosemide; he was on levofloxacin since two weeks for pneumonia. On admission, the patient’s physical examination revealed obnubilation with episodes of agitation, a blood pressure of 160/80 mmHg, an irregular heart rate of 50 beats per minute (bpm), jugular venous distention, decreased bilateral basal breath sounds, no fever and no leg edema. He was not obese. Initial abnormal serum laboratory results included: white blood cell (WBC) count of 12630/mm3 (84 % neutrophils), international normalized ratio (INR) of 4.5, creatinine of 2.3 mg/dL (203 μmol/L), blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 80 mg/dL (28.5 mmol/L), albumin of 3.2 g/dL (32 g/L), phosphorus of 5.9 mg/dL (1.96 mmol/L) and gamma glutamyl transferase of 275 UI/L. He had a positive troponin I of 0.27 ng/mL but normal CPK and CPK-MB. C-reactive protein was 19 mg/L. He had no electrolytes’ disturbance (potassium 4.9 mmol/L, sodium 144 mmol/L, chloride 110 mmol/L, bicarbonate 23 mmol/L), no hypocalcemia (corrected calcium 8.9 mg/dL) nor anemia (hemoglobin 13.4 g/dL, hematocrit 42 %). Urinalysis showed 3+ protein.
Further investigations revealed left lung basal consolidation with bilateral effusion on chest X-ray. The arterial blood gas (ABG) showed: pH 7.27, PaO2 91 mmHg, PaCO2 52 mmHg, HCO3ˉ 23 mmol/L. Electrocardiogram (ECG) on admission showed a slow atrial fibrillation of 55 bpm . Brain computed tomography (CT) scanning ruled out possible ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). An echocardiography showed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 40 %, ventricular hypertrophy, pulmonary arterial pressure of 40 mmHg, dilated right ventricle and slightly enlarged left atrium. Renal ultrasound was normal.
Empiric antibiotics were started combining ceftriaxone and levofloxacin; fluconazole was added at day 2 after sputum cultures grew Candida albicans. Urine culture was sterile.
During cardiac monitoring in the ICU, episodes of extreme bradycardia were noticed as low as 32 bpm with maintained systolic blood pressure at 100–120 mmHg and very low diastolic blood pressure of 30–40 mmHg.
On day 3, the patient became unconscious and developed severe respiratory acidosis with ABG showing: pH 7.16, PaCO2 64 mmHg, PaO2 75 mmHg, HCO3ˉ 22 mmol/L and he was intubated. He concomitantly became oligoanuric and serum creatinine started to increase. A spot urine test revealed a sodium (Na) of 22 mmol/L and potassium (K) of 34 mmol/L with a ratio Na/K <1. He received sodium bicarbonate whenever his bicarbonate level was less than 22.
Complete AV block was then identified on ECG. A temporary pacemaker was implanted on day 5 and the patient was extubated. Serum creatinine decreased and urine output improved considerably. Table illustrates the heart rate (HR), urine output, systolic and diastolic blood pressure values, serum creatinine and potassium variations before and after the pacemaker insertion.
The patient finally got a permanent single chamber pacemaker VVIR and improved considerably his consciousness and renal function. At discharge he had a serum creatinine of 1.6 mg/dL and he was conscious, alert and well oriented.