A 43-year-old male was implanted with a dual-chamber implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) for primary prevention. The patient presented with dyspnoea and had a family history of sudden cardiac death (SCD), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and mild LV systolic impairment (Class IIB recommendation for an ICD with a 5% risk of SCD at 5 years). No other abnormalities were detected. The underlying rhythm was sinus with first-degree AV Block (PR interval 340 ms) and a QRS duration of 90 ms. The ICD (AUTOGEN EL, Boston Scientific) was programmed to DDDR mode with rates of 70–120 b.p.m., and sensed and paced AV delays of 80 ms and 110 ms, respectively. Subsequent device follow-ups demonstrated normal device function and measurements, >95% atrial and ventricular pacing, and patient was symptomatically improving.
Seven years after the initial presentation, patient presented with symptoms of progressive dyspnoea and a follow-up echocardiogram demonstrated moderate LV systolic impairment . As a result, RYTHMIQ™ and AV Search+ device features were enabled to minimize RV pacing. A device check 7 months later verified normal device and lead parameters . Atrial and ventricular pacing were 100% and 1%, respectively. As patient’s symptoms were improving, no changes to the device settings were made. The following day, the patient experienced a single episode of appropriate device (shock) therapy for ventricular fibrillation. Interrogation of device electrograms demonstrated initiation of ventricular arrhythmia due to R on T pacing.
The alert demonstrated an episode of shock delivered for ventricular arrhythmia. The trace begins with atrial pacing and ventricular sensing (VS) at the sensor indicated rate (SIR) (120 ppm) (1,2). As the RYTHMIQ™’s criteria were met (VS within A-A + 150 ms), the device remained in AAIR mode. In the presence of AV block and subsequent ventricular beats falling in the atrial blanking period , the device failed to detect the intrinsic ventricular events: [VS] (3). This initiated mode switch to backup VVI pacing [lower rate limit (LRL) set at 70 ppm, therefore, VVI backup is 55 ppm (1090 ms)], with ventricular paced beats on the 3rd, 6th, and 9th beats (4). We believe the closely coupled V-V timing resulted in R on T pacing (5), initiating ventricular fibrillation.