A 43-year-old man with HF secondary to dyspnea was admitted to our hospital. The patient's height was 160 cm, body weight was 109 kg, and body mass index was 42.5 kg/m2. Past medical history included diabetes mellitus and sleep apnea. Upon admission, the patient experienced orthopnea and whole-body edema. Laboratory data indicated a creatinine of 1.3 mg/dl, an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 49 ml/min/1.73 m2 and an N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide level of 4,177 pg/ml. Electrocardiography revealed sinus tachycardia and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 20% with diffuse left ventricular hypokinesis. Plain chest radiography revealed a cardiothoracic ratio of 66% and a costophrenic obtuse angle. The patient was diagnosed with AHF and was treated with intravenous furosemide and oxygen inhalation. However, the patient developed respiratory failure and low-output syndrome on the 7th hospital day. The patient was transferred to the cardiac care unit (CCU), and treatment with noradrenaline, dobutamine, and noninvasive positive pressure ventilation was initiated. On the 19th hospital day, right heart catheterization indicated Forrester subset IV (pulmonary artery wedge pressure, 27 mmHg; cardiac index: 1.6 L/min/m2), and coronary angiography revealed no significant stenosis. Based on the clinical course and endomyocardial biopsy of the right ventricular septum, the patient was diagnosed with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy on the 23rd hospital day. Because the patient was young and had developed catecholamine-dependent HF, heart transplantation was considered. However, severe obesity was an obstacle to registration. We started B-SES (G-TES; Homer Ion Laboratory, Tokyo, Japan) in parallel with normal cardiac rehabilitation and performed gradual withdrawal of catecholamines and titration of bisoprolol. On the 48th day of hospitalization, the patient was withdrawn from noradrenaline. The patient was transferred from the CCU to the general ward on the 92nd day. The patient's symptoms improved to NYHA II with titration of bisoprolol, ivabradine, valsartan, spironolactone, dapagliflozin and furosemide, along with cardiac rehabilitation. In addition, we provided life modification program to the patient because eating habits and sedentary life style had contributed to his obesity. The patient was discharged with a body weight of 75.6 kg on the 113th hospital day. This case report has anonymized patient information, and photographs including parts of the body (including the face) have been processed to ensure that the individual cannot be identified. We obtained written informed consent from the patient for publication.