A 43-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our clinic with a mild itching sensation in her arms and legs. She was referred by her physician for contact eczema. A physical examination revealed erythematous papular lesions over her metacarpophalangeal and proximal interphalangeal joints together with a periungual involvement with redness, hyperkeratosis, and capillary telangiectasia along the distal nailfolds on both her hands . No other skin findings such as heliotrope rash or erythema on the extensor surface of her extremity joints were present.
She complained about pain and weakness in the muscles of her proximal extremities and neck flexor muscles with difficulty raising her arms and climbing stairs. At the same time she experienced swallowing difficulties and reported an uncharacteristic weight loss of 10 kg in the last 3 months. She had a 30 pack-year history of cigarette smoking with persistent nicotine use at the time of presentation in our clinic. A neurological examination showed symmetrical mild proximal muscle weakness. The rest of her physical examination including auscultation of her lungs, body temperature and lymph nodes status was normal.
The laboratory findings revealed elevated serum levels of myoglobin 397 μg/l (normal range 25 to 58), creatine phosphokinase (CK) 881 IU/L (normal range 0 to 145 IU/L) and aldolase 11.8 U/l (normal range up to 7.6 U/l). Her liver enzymes were slightly elevated as were aspartate transaminase (AST) 69 U/l (normal range up to 31 U/l) and alanine transaminase (ALT) 50 U/l (normal range up to 34 U/l). Antinuclear antibody (ANA 1/160) was weakly positive while extractable nuclear antigens (ENAs) including anti-Jo-1 antibody were negative. Other laboratory parameters such as C-reactive protein (CRP) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were normal. A histopathologic examination of the skin/muscle biopsy showed vacuolar degeneration of the basal membrane with perivascular inflammatory infiltration together with a lymphohistiocytic infiltration. In addition, an extensive mucin deposition in her dermis and linear atrophy of her muscle layer were detected. The morphologic features were compatible with dermatomyositis. An electromyogram and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the muscles of her extremities showed a symmetric moderate myopathy mainly of proximal muscles which confirmed the diagnosis of dermatomyositis. A chest X-ray showed an unspecific pulmonary nodule in the upper field of her right lung. Computed tomography (CT) of her chest revealed a nodule of 20×22 mm in her right upper pulmonary field without mediastinal or axillar lymphadenopathy . A CT-guided biopsy of the lung nodule revealed a lung adenocarcinoma of moderate differentiation. After diagnosis of the lung tumor was made, she underwent a thorough screening including CT of her abdomen and MRI of her head/neck in order to exclude other tumors, lymph metastases or organ metastases. Furthermore we performed an endoscopy of her upper digestive tract and a gynecological control to exclude any other types of cancer. All of them were negative. Her pulmonary function tests and echocardiography were normal as well.
She was given a presumed diagnosis of a lung adenocarcinoma with clinical manifestations of paraneoplastic dermatomyositis. No metastatic lesions were found, and there were no abdominal or cerebral abnormalities. A corticosteroid treatment with prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day was administered. In the absence of cardiologic or anesthesiologic contraindications she was assessed to be eligible for surgery. She underwent a right upper lobectomy. The histopathology showed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma that was pathologically staged as T1b N0 M0. In the postoperative period, she presented partial improvement of her skin lesions, muscle weakness and dysphagia.