A 67-year-old lady was admitted with confusion, right sided weakness and right arm shaking.

Comorbidities included a duodenal ulcer, diabetes mellitus and hypertension, but importantly no prior personal or family history of neurological disorders or cerebrovascular events. Medications included Metformin, Ramipril and Lansoprazole.

She was also suffering from a non-healing ulcer on her left 5th toe. Bone fragments grew Enterococcus and Proteus. Skin swabs grew Staphylococcus Aureus. Osteomyelitis of the 4th and 5th metatarsals was suspected. As co-existing cellulitis not responded to co-amoxiclav, the patient was switched to Linezolid 600 mg twice daily was commenced for four weeks. Full Blood Count after 3 weeks of treatment with Linezolid showed Hb 104 g/L, WCC 6.1 ×10 9/L, platelets 119 ×10 9/L and MCV 85 fL. Her platelet count was last checked three years prior and was within normal range at 245 ×10 9/L. She finished her full five-week course of linezolid to which her osteomyelitis responded well.

Two days after the last dose of Linezolid she noticed right arm shaking and weakness.

Admission blood pressure was 189/63. Her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 14/15 (E3, V5, M6). She had mild global weakness and was unable to finger count. However, she had power of 4/4 in all limbs, normal tone and plantar responses were flexor. There was evidence of right sided neglect.

CT head was unremarkable. Her haemoglobin (Hb) was 69 g/L, but white cell count (WCC) and platelets were within normal limits. On admission, aspirin was given while a MRI Head was requested to investigate the considered differentials, including progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, Posterior Reversible Encephalopathy Syndrome, and encephalitis.

She developed a progressive decline in consciousness in the next 24 h. MRI Head revealed bilateral alteration of signal seen within the deep white matter of the posterior frontal and parietal lobes. These areas showed some mild diffusion restriction. The altered signal extended into the midbrain on the left side and there was also some involvement of the cortex in the right parietal lobe. Normal flow was seen in the basilar artery. Differential diagnoses of bilateral ischaemia, and progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy were suggested. Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome was less likely due to the restricted diffusion. In the following 36 h, Hb had improved to 88 g/L, WCC remained at 5.0 × 10 9/L but Platelets had dropped to 1 × 10 9/L. Twelve hours later, her Hb was 78 g/L and platelets remained at 2 × 10 9/L. The blood film showed a few left shifted neutrophils but with a lack of red cell fragments. During this period, the CRP rose from 22 mg/L to 132 mg/L. Reticulocyte count was 146. Bilirubin was normal. Direct antiglobulin test was negative. Lactate dehydrogenase sample unfortunately haemolysed. A Heparin-induced Thrombocytopenia Antibody assay was not done as the patient was not on anticoagulants on admission and had not been prior to admission.

Bone marrow biopsy or a therapeutic intravenous infusion of immunoglobulin was not indicated so instead she was transferred to a tertiary centre for urgent plasma exchange due to the strong suspicion of TTP. This suspicion was suggested by neurological symptoms, anaemia, unexplained thrombocytopenia. Her PLASMIC score was 6 (high-risk; however, please note that the INR component missing).

Cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed negative viral polymerase chain reaction testing, white cell count 12, red cell count 14, no organisms seen on microscopy, protein 0.53, and cytology acellular.

Electroencephalogram suggested an encephalopathic pattern with anterior sub-cortical slowing present. ADAMTS13 was normal and vWF cleaving protease was 106. Reticulocyte count was 3.98% and Fibrinogen 2.12 g/L. CT Thorax, Abdomen and Pelvis showed no abnormality.

A diagnosis of Linezolid induced Leukoencephalopathy was made.

She was discharged 8 weeks following presentation; making a complete recovery by 4 months.

MRI Head repeated at 9 months showed gradually reducing signal intensity in abnormal areas described earlier consistent with leukoencephalopathy. In addition her platelet count improved to 219 × 10 9/L upon discharge.