A 30-year-old Persian woman presented weakness, stress, low blood pressure, and low-grade fever. On the tenth day after the onset of the symptoms, she complained of chest pain, cough, and tachycardia.
A chest computerized tomography (CT) scan revealed the presence of unilateral ground-glass opacities . Following gastrointestinal complications, including diarrhea, vomiting, and 78% oxygen saturation, the patient was hospitalized and moved to the intensive care unit for invasive ventilation. She was treated with hydroxychloroquine, antiviral therapy (remdesivir), and tocilizumab. After partial recovery, the patient was discharged home. However, 30 days after the onset of symptoms, the patient manifested neurological complications . She developed acute weakness in the lower limb, numbness and tingling, loss of touch and vibration sensation in the feet and, a few days later, in the upper limb and the hands. She also developed gait disorder and loss of balance. Subsequently, muscle stretch reflex examination revealed absent deep tendon reflexes in the upper and lower limbs. The patient also showed acute onset of unilateral eyelid ptosis (right), blurred vision (right), areflexia, dysphagia, vomiting, urinary incontinence (UI), and unilateral numbness of the chin and lower lip [numb chin syndrome (NCS)]. Electroneurography revealed severe sensory-motor axonal polyneuropathy with relative sparing of conduction velocities. The nerve conduction studies showed reduced or absent compound muscle action potentials (CMAP) and sensory nerve action potentials in the lower and upper limbs. Brain and spinal cord magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not reveal any abnormal and pathological findings. SARS-Cov-2 RNA was not tested in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
The patient received intravenous immunoglobulin (IG) (0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days). The patient was highly responsive to treatment with the rapid clinical response on swallowing, strength, and eyelid ptosis. Also, the patient performed physical therapy successfully at her rehabilitation facility.