The patient was a 78-year-old male smoker (half-pack per day for 50 years) who presented with progressive cough, dyspnea, and hemoptysis. Computed tomography (CT) and whole-body positron emission tomography (PET) imaging revealed 4.6 × 4.8 cm right lower lobe (RLL) and 4.8 × 2.7 cm left lower lobe (LLL) spiculated masses with increased avidity. Axillary and mediastinal lymph nodes, including subcarinal nodes, were normal in size and avidity. CT-guided percutaneous core needle biopsy of the RLL mass was performed. Histopathological examination revealed an invasive adenocarcinoma composed of acini lined with tall columnar epithelium with focal cribiforming and luminal necrosis. These cells were strongly reactive with CK-20 and CDX-2, moderately reactive with CK-7, and nonreactive with thyroid transcription factor (TTF)-1/napsin-A, which was concerning for gastrointestinal metastasis. Further evaluation with esophagogastroduodenoscopy, colonoscopy, and whole-body PET was unrevealing for gastrointestinal primary. Special AT-rich sequence-binding protein 2 (SATB2) staining of the RLL mass was also nonreactive.

Endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) was subsequently performed to complete mediastinal staging, which demonstrated a concerning level 7 subcarinal lymph node that had previously been undetected on CT/PET imaging. Transbronchial needle aspiration was performed on the LLL mass and the level 7 lymph node. Histopathological examination of both specimens revealed neoplastic cells with abundant cytoplasm and large hyperchromatic nuclei with prominent nucleoli. In contrast to the RLL, these cells were immunoreactive to TTF-1/napsin-A, and nonreactive to p40 and p63 antibodies, indicating a primary conventional lung adenocarcinoma. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) also revealed discordant profiles. The RLL mass had an intermediate tumor mutational burden (19 mutations/Mb), programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1) tumor proportion score of 0%, KRAS wild type, and mutations in CDKN2A, NOTCH1, and TP53. NGS of the LLL adenocarcinoma demonstrated EGFR amplification, an intermediate tumor mutational burden (11 mutations/Mb), loss of CDKN2A/B, and mutations in RBM10 and TP53.

After completion of mediastinal staging, the patient was diagnosed with pulmonary enteric adenocarcinoma of the right lobe (T2bN0M0) and conventional adenocarcinoma of the left lobe (T2bN2M0). He received palliative intent chemoimmunotherapy with carboplatin, pemetrexed, and pembrolizumab leading to complete response of the RLL PEAC and a partial response of the LLL adenocarcinoma at 6 months post-diagnosis.