A 56-year-old woman reported to our orthopedic hospital with a complaint of severe pain in the left hip and inability to stand or walk. The family reported that the patient had a fall on the same day. Routine investigation revealed a fracture in the neck region of the left femur. There was no history of any comorbid condition. The patient was taken up for a surgical intervention following standard of care compression fixation. The patient’s condition on day 3 post-surgery was satisfactory and the patient was discharged, with recommendation for regular follow-up.
After about 8-month post-discharge, the patient visited our unit complaining of recurring severe pain in the left hip. Radiological investigation revealed a non-union of the previous fracture.
Treatment using a novel bone cell therapy product (OSSGROW®) that is available in the India was considered given the age and lifestyle of the patient. The patient and her family were counseled about the cell therapy option and an appropriate consent was taken.
Osteoblast cell therapy is a two-step process. The first step involves bone marrow harvest and the second step involves implantation of the ex vivo cultured autologous osteoblast cells from the bone marrow. First, an adequate quantity (4–5 ml) of bone marrow from the patient’s iliac crest was aspirated and collected in transport media containing an anticoagulant. The collection kit was transported under temperature-monitored conditions and the collected bone marrow was processed at the GMP-certified cell processing facility (Regrow Biosciences Pvt. Ltd.). Mesenchymal progenitor cells were isolated from the bone marrow of the patient. These progenitor cells were differentiated into bone forming cells or osteoblasts . Immunophenotypic characterization was done to ensure that the cultured cells test positive for osteoblast biomarkers. Osteoblasts were expanded for approximately 4 weeks under stringent laboratory conditions and multiplied to more than 50 million osteoblasts. The personalized autologous osteoblast product OSSGROW® was made available by the 5th week and the cell implantation was planned. In a short surgery, a small incision was made on the lateral cortex of femur shaft to expose the non-union region and the cultured osteoblast cells mixed with a gel (Tisseel kit from Baxter) was injected into the region of non-union.
The patient was advised a rehabilitation protocol to be followed for about 6 weeks. With initial 48 h of immobilization, the patient started with non-weight-bearing exercises; with gradual partial weight-bearing followed by full weight-bearing exercises.
At week 10 post-OSSGROW® treatment, radiological evaluation of the patient showed completely united femoral neck. shows radiological evidence of non-union of the fracture in the left hip and shows post-operative at 10 weeks with united bone at the femoral neck. The patient had no pain and other symptoms. At 10 months post-implantation, the patient can perform all routine chores, walks without support, and is experiencing very good quality of life.