A 22-year-old white Caucasian man came to our office complaining of blurred vision in his left eye (LE) with night blindness and difficulty in driving. A flu-like illness was reported 2 weeks before the ocular symptoms began. His best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in his right eye (RE) and 20/20 in his LE. A fundus examination showed the healthy condition of his RE, while his LE showed only a scattered mottling of the fundus pigment on the temporal side of the optic nerve. We performed B-scan optical coherence tomography (OCT) around the optic nerve head that showed hyperreflectivity in the outer retina with interruption of the ellipsoid layers in the juxtapapillary region . An en face scan showed diffuse hyperreflective spots in the RPE slab . After performing autofluorescence (FAF), FA, indocyanine green angiography (ICG), and OCTA, MEWDS was diagnosed . FAF showed diffuse hyperautofluorescent areas around the optic disc that extended into the macula region . The en face scan showed small hyperreflective dots at the posterior pole. The FA revealed juxtapapillary hyperfluorescent dots of leakage similar to the ICG early and late phase . Furthermore, the late frames of ICG showed diffuse dots of hypocyanescence at the posterior pole. OCTA showed anomalous neovascularization as an arcuate flow vascular net on the disc temporal side. The vascular net was formed by thin tangled capillaries . The neovascular tangled net area was outlined in the assessment . Although it is known that MEWDS is often self-limiting, to reduce the possible inflammatory reaction, we preferred to administer prednisolone orally with an initial prescription of 50 mg/day for 7 days, followed by 25 mg/day for 7 days, 12.5 mg/day for 7 days, and 5 mg/day for the last 7 days. After 1 month of therapy, significant regression of juxtapapillary neovascularization was observed. Small capillaries regressed almost completely, leaving only wide and straight main vessels . Our patient’s symptoms resolved. Figure shows the evolution over a 4-year observation period. A steady situation was observed after 4 years with an absence of symptoms, and BCVA was 20/20.