An 8-year-old male patient presented to the emergency department after a history of falling from height (3 m). On examination, the patient was well with mild abdominal pain and contusions in the upper and lower extremities. A focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) was negative and serial complete blood counts (CBC) showed no drop in hemoglobin. The abdominal ultrasound performed the following day showed no intraabdominal fluid collections and the abdominal pain disappeared, so he was discharged in a good condition.
Six weeks later, the patient presented to the emergency department complaining of pain in the right lower abdomen for two days’ duration. The pain increased gradually and was associated with fever (38.5 °C), anorexia, nausea, and vomiting; however, he had no trouble in passing stools and flatus. Otherwise, the vital signs were within normal. On examination, the patient looked ill and irritable. The abdomen was flat on shape with localized tenderness in the right iliac fossa. Rebound tenderness in the right lower quadrant was positive. Rigidity and guarding were not found, and examination of the genitalia was normal. The patient and his family don’t have any history of a bleeding disorder, and he is free of medications.
Laboratory investigations showed leukocytosis of 13,000 cells/mm3 with a neutrophil predominance (73 %), normal Hb level (13.8 g/dl), and normal urine analysis. Abdominal ultrasound showed a poorly visualized appendix.
At this point, the clinical differential diagnosis was acute appendicitis, and the patient was prepared for urgent appendectomy through a Gridiron incision. Intraoperatively, a subserosal cecal hematoma 10 × 8 cm extending from the antimesenteric to the mesenteric border of the cecum was found . The hematoma was not expandable or pulsatile and there was no extension to the ascending colon with the appendix grossly appeared normal. Appendectomy was performed and the cecal hematoma was evacuated, which showed dark blood with, many clots . After ensuring that there was no oozing following the evacuation, interrupted repair of the cecal seromuscular layer by vicryl 3-0 was executed and a pelvic drain was applied.
Postoperatively, the patient was kept NPO for three days; so, intravenous fluid, parenteral ciprofloxacin, and metronidazole were given and also Pethidine when needed. On a postoperative day 2 (POD-2), the patient passed flatus. At POD-3, he was given sips of water and he tolerated them well, so oral intake was started gradually. At POD-5, the patient passed stool and the abdominal ultrasound was normal with no fluid collection. Then, he was discharged with no symptoms. Follow-up for the patient at POD 10 with history, exam, and abdominal ultrasound was normal. The patient had several follow-ups for two years and he was in good condition, without complications or recurrence.