A 42-year-old man presented with cough that had started 1 wk earlier and chest pain that had begun 2 d earlier.
The patient presented with cough that had started 1 wk earlier; he was treated with azithromycin (500 mg, qd, i.v.) for a common cold at a private clinic. His symptoms were alleviated after treatment. However, 2 d later, the patient experienced chest pain radiating to the right arm while walking in a cold wind. He was evaluated at another hospital, where his hypersensitive troponin T level was found to be 34.34 pg/mL (normal range: 3-14 pg/mL). He also exhibited increased white blood cell and platelet counts and an increased neutrophil percentage. His ECG was normal. Echocardiography showed that the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 59%, with mild regional abnormalities in the ventricular and apical septa and a dilated left atrium. The patient’s hypersensitive troponin T was 685.30 pg/mL and the creatine kinase isozyme (CK-MB) level was 11.85 ng/mL (normal range: 0.1-4.94 ng/mL) after 8 h. Based on these findings, the patient was admitted to our hospital.
The patient had a 2-year history of hypertension and a smoking history for 20 years.
No specific personal or family history of disease was recorded.
The patient's temperature was 37.8 °C, his body mass was 78 kg, his blood pressure was 164/114 mmHg, and there were no positive signs on a physical examination.
Laboratory testing showed the following on admission: serum TnI, 2.57 ng/mL (normal range: 0-0.034 ng/mL); hypersensitive C-reactive protein, 4.95 mg/L (normal range: 0-2.87 mg/L); erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 45 mm/h; brain natriuretic peptide, 168 pg/mL; white blood cell count, 13.30 × 109/L; neutrophil percentage, 0.735; and platelet count, 312 × 109/L. His liver function, kidney function, thyroid function, D-dimer, electrolytes, blood lipids, and blood glucose levels showed no significant abnormalities; however, his rubella virus immunoglobulin G (IgG) and immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody levels were elevated on admission.
The patient’s ECG showed II, III, and aVF T-wave inversions, and a wide range of precordial segment T-wave inversions that exhibited dynamic changes compared with the previous ECG. Electrocardiography revealed the abovementioned segment T-wave inversion after 20 h. Coronary angiography was performed on day 5 after admission. There was no obvious coronary stenosis during the operation. Cine CMR imaging showed wall motion abnormalities (mid septal, apical septal, and apical anterior), and the anterior walls were obviously thicker than the normal walls , with the thickest part of the ventricular wall being approximately 20 mm. Fat suppressed T2-weighted imaging showed the edema of the mid septal, apical septal, and apical anterior walls . We observed the myocardial edema more specifically on T1 mapping . The endocardium and middle myocardium of the mid septal and apical septal walls showed patchy late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) . The high signal area was smaller than the area of edema.