A 9.3-kg 7-month-old girl with congenital biliary atresia presented for living-donor liver transplantation. At 6 months of age, she developed hepatic dysfunction and was treated with symptomatic therapy. Her preoperative hemoglobin (Hb) was 77 g/L, albumin was 30.7 g/L, total bilirubin was 430.4 μmol/L, and prothrombin time was 17.3 s, with no electrocardiograph (ECG) abnormality or prominent heart murmur. Her preoperative blood pressure was 90/50 mmHg and the heart rate was 130 bpm.
On arrival in the operating room, ECG leads and a pulse oximeter were placed and continuously monitored. General anesthesia was induced by inhalation of sevoflurane 8% (vol) with transvenous midazolam 1 mg, sufentanyl 5 μg, and rocuronium 10 mg, followed by intubation with an endotracheal tube. Subsequently, a 24G left radial arterial catheter was inserted for continuous invasive arterial blood pressure (IABP) monitoring. A 4F double-lumen intravenous catheter was placed in the right internal jugular vein for continuous central venous pressure (CVP) monitoring. Anesthesia was maintained with expiratory sevoflurane 2% (vol), sufentanyl 10 μg/h, and rocuronium 5 mg/h. Arterial blood gas values after intubation were pH 7.300, arterial oxygen pressure (PaO2) 154 mmHg, Hb 5.5 g/L, and potassium 2.6 mmol/L during intermittent positive-pressure ventilation with a fraction of inspired oxygen 0.6. The patient received 20% human serum albumin 50 ml and red blood cells 1U. Vital signs were stable at 25 min of the hepatic-free stage, and arterial blood gas values 20 min after portal occlusion were pH 7.310, base excess −6.8 mmol/L, Hb 8.8 g/L, and potassium 3.4 mmol/L, while core body temperature was maintained at 37°C. She received 5% sodium bicarbonate 30 ml.
Immediately after reperfusion, IABP, especially systolic blood pressure, steeply decreased to 64/45 mmHg, followed by a heart rate decrease to 117 bpm. IABP quickly returned to 80/50 mmHg without treatment. However, the ST segment began to increase to 3.0 mm and gradually reached 13.2 mm within 45 min . The patient's blood pressure (BP), heart rate (HR), and SpO2 were in the normal range during this period.
For further diagnostic workup, the respiratory circuit, tracheal tube, and anesthesia machine were also checked as soon as possible to confirm that all processes were normal. A full-lead ECG was monitored at the surgical bedside, showing the ST-segment elevation (STE) in II, III, and Augmented Voltage Foot (EKG lead) (aVF) leads, and ST-segment depression in I and Augmented Voltage Left Arm (EKG lead) (aVL) leads, consistent with subendocardial and inferior subepicardial myocardial injuries . Arterial blood gas was detected, and values were in normal range except for potassium 3.1 mmol/L. Myocardial infarction markers were also detected, which showed that cardiac troponin (cTnl), creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB), and myoglobin (MYO) had all increased to more than 2 times the normal values. After 2 h of nitroglycerin infusion at a dosage of 2 μg/kg/min and potassium chloride at a dosage of 0.5 mg/kg/min, STE gradually reduced to 1.6 mm .
The procedure was completed 3 h after reperfusion, with consistently stable vital signs. A full-lead ECG was monitored immediately after admission to the transplantation intensive care unit, showing slight ST-segment elevation in II, III, and aVF leads . Markers of myocardial infarction gradually decreased to almost normal levels during the first few days after the procedure . The patient was successfully discharged from the hospital 12 days after surgery. An echocardiogram showed a patent foramen ovale with a left-to-right shunt tract width of 2.7 mm. No sequela related to air embolism was identified postoperatively.