A 54-year-old female patient was evaluated in the FOB Speech Pathology Clinic for complaints of sudden deafness. She had sought the doctor in 2014 for loss of vision and hearing, when the diagnosis of SVKH and hearing loss was made at the age of 49. In the same year, the patient presented with the onset of glaucoma and cataract, when treatment was initiated by the doctor with prednisone, which is still ongoing. The patient reported that in 2015, after 1 year of the medical diagnosis of the syndrome, her vision partially recovered in the left eye and her hearing improved compared to the previous year. She reported no family history of the syndrome and no parental consanguinity.

She reported not understanding what was said on the phone and turning up the television to watch. She had worked in manufacturing for about a year. The patient also reported a continuous high-pitched ringing in both ears and vestibular symptoms such as attacks of postural vertigo and imbalance when walking, with a tendency to lean to the right.

Liminal Tonal and Vocal Audiometry
The threshold audiometry test showed a severe sensorineural hearing loss in the right ear and a moderate sensorineural hearing loss in the left ear. In relation to logoaudiometry, the Percentage Index of Speech Recognition (IPRF) indicated good recognition and the Speech Recognition Threshold (SRT) was compatible with the threshold audiometry.

Acoustic Impedance Measurements
Acoustic impedance measurements showed type A tympanogram and ipsilateral and contralateral acoustic stapedial reflexes present bilaterally.

Evoked otoacoustic emissions (EOA) and TEPAs
Transient Evoked Otoacoustic Emissions (EOAT) and distortion product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAE) were absent in both ears. The PEATE showed integrity of the auditory pathways to bilateral stimuli.

Selection and Adaptation of Personal Sound Amplification Hearing Aids (PSAHA)
In 2017, the patient was fitted in another health system with individual sound amplification hearing aids (AASI), behind the ear, using the devices for less than a year, as they broke.

In 2018, given the hearing loss that she still had, a new bilateral AASI, micro-channels (CIC), with omnidirectional microphone, automatic volume control, WDRC compression and under the calculation of the NAL-NL2 prescriptive rule was performed. The measurements were performed with a probe microphone and adjusted according to the target and the patient's needs, and the patient makes effective use of the device, as verified by the datalogging, reporting that she is well adapted to the moment. In the same year, the Client Oriented Scale of Improvement (COSITM) was also applied, which allowed the speech therapist to know about the most important listening situations for the patient.
