A 59-year-old morbidly obese, African-American female had a history of Stage IIIc recurrent endometrial carcinosarcoma with para-aortic and pelvic lymph node involvement. Over several years, after initial surgery, she required repeated bouts of chemotherapy and radiation therapy. She now, however, newly presented with a 1-month history of numbness of the left vulva, worsening left lower extremity pain/numbness, and episodic urinary incontinence. The thoracic/lumbar MR revealed a 1.4 × 1.8 cm enhancing intradural extramedullary mass inferior to the conus at the L1 and L4-L5 levels. In addition, there was abnormal enhancement of the left-sided intradural nerve roots, and the bilateral, perihilar lung metastases .
The patient underwent a T12-L2 laminectomy for gross total resection of the L1 intradural/extramedullary mass; the main aim of surgery was to provide neurological symptomatic relief. Intraoperatively, diffuse carcinomatosis of the cauda equina was observed along with a large lesion located anteroinferior to the conus. Grossly, the tumor appeared vascular and involved multiple, swollen, engorged nerve roots. Dissection ceased (e.g., subtotal resection) once intraoperative electromyographic monitoring showed significant changes while dissecting tumor away from tumor infiltrated, matted nerve roots (e.g., gastrocnemius in particular). The permanent pathology showed a mesenchymal malignant Mullerian mixed tumor (carcinosarcoma) without an epithelial component.
Although the postoperative MR revealed residual intradural extramedullary tumor, the pain and numbness improved in her left lower extremity . Nevertheless, she returned to the hospital 2 weeks later complaining of increased lower extremity symptoms and the new onset of right-sided facial weakness, numbness, and blurry vision. Imaging of the brain and spinal cord revealed leptomeningeal spread of her disease accompanied by hydrocephalus and multiple, new intracranial metastases. Two months later, she succumbed to her metastatic disease.