A 64-year-old Chinese man with weekly BCG instillation visited our center in January 2022 for routinely examination of bladder cancer complaining of rising total PSA level (9.14 ng/mL) and decreasing free PSA/total PSA (0.09) with no symptom.
The patient was diagnosed with high-grade NMIBC in March 2020 and scheduled for gemcitabine intravesical chemotherapy. Owing to a pathologically T1G3 bladder carcinoma on histopathology, TURBT was repeated 3 mo later. Cystoscopy showed necrosis attached to the surface of the scar, and pathology suggested inflammatory necrosis with no tumor. Two months after the second TURBT, weekly BCG instillations were recommended to replace the gemcitabine intravesical chemotherapy. Three days after the first BCG instillation, the patient experienced fever up to 39 °C, gross hematuria, lower abdomen pain, and perineal pain. The physical examination and scrotal B-ultrasound indicated left hydrocele testis and epididymitis. Routine laboratory blood results indicated that total leukocyte counts were elevated to 18.25 × 109/L with increasing neutrophil granulocyte count (10.62 × 109/L) and decreasing hemoglobin levels (114 g/L). In addition, urinary testing revealed pyuria, hematuria, and bacteriuria. The patient was diagnosed with a urinary tract infection and received piperacillin and tazobactam as anti-infective therapy for 6 d until his temperature returned to normal. His urinary testing also became normal 1 wk later. He stopped BCG instillation and restarted gemcitabine intravesical chemotherapy. Following the second TURBT, cystoscopies and urinary B-ultrasounds were performed every 3 mo. The results showed no evidence of tumor recurrence. Sixteen months after the second TURBT, BCG intravesical immunotherapy was restarted.
The patient had no history of tuberculosis.
The patient and his family had no history of prostate cancer.
Digital rectal examination revealed a moderately enlarged, non-painful prostate gland with shallow central sulcus and normal density.
Laboratory tests revealed a rising serum total PSA level (9.14 ng/mL) and a decreasing serum ratio of free PSA/total PSA (0.09).
MP-MRI was performed. Axial T2-weighted images showed a 28 mm × 20 mm low-signal, diffuse abnormality in the right peripheral zone . On diffusion-weighted MRI with a b-value at 1500, the lesion was seen as a markedly hyperintense focus , which was consistent with a lesion with a Prostate Imaging Reporting and Data System (PI-RADS) score of 5, with hypointense signal on an apparent diffusion coefficient map image .
Considering the increasing PSA results and abnormal focus in MP-MRI, the patient was primarily diagnosed with prostate cancer. A transperineal prostate needle biopsy was conducted. Levofloxacin was used as antibiotic prophylaxis. However, the histopathological findings showed benign prostate tissue with typical features of granulomatous prostatitis with multinucleated giant cells, epithelioid cells, fibroblasts, and infiltration lymphocytes . A nucleic acid test of tuberculosis was subsequently performed and the result was positive (Ct = 37.18).